
The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler Volume 2
Journal Articles: 1898-1909 
A Study of Organ Inferiority: 1907 
Alfred Adler 
The 
Mind-Body 
Connection 
Social 
Activism 
&
Sexuality
New Translations by Gerald L. Liebenau Edited by
Henry T. Stein, Ph.D. 
Classical Adlerian Translation Project
© 2002 by Henry T. Stein, Ph.D.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or
any information storage and retrieval system, without prior permission in writing
from the editor. All inquiries should be sent to Henry T. Stein, Ph.D., at Alfred
Adler Institute of San Francisco. E-mail: htstein@att.net . Web Site:
www.Adlerian.us .
Published 2002 by:
The Classical Adlerian Translation Project Alfred Adler Institute of
Northwestern Washington 2565 Mayflower Lane
Bellingham, WA 98226 
(360) 647-5670
First Printing 2002 
Second Printing 2003, revised 
Printed in the United States of America
ISBN 0-9715645-1-5
Table of Contents
Editor’s 
Preface 
– 
2002
......................................................................................... iii About the Translator

.............................................................................................. vi An Introduction by
Sophia de Vries - 1990 .......................................................... vii Table of
Abstracts
Part I – Journal Articles [1809-1909] ........................................................ ix Part
II – A Study of Organ Inferiority [1907].......................................... xiii
Chapter I: Chapter II: Chapter III: Chapter IV:
Chapter V:

Chapter VI: Chapter VII:
Part I – Journal Articles 1898-1909
Health Manual for the Tailoring Trade [1898] ...............................1 
The Penetration of Social Forces into Medicine [1902] ...............15 
An Academic Chair for Social Medicine [1902] ..........................19 
Town and Country (Part 1) [1903]................................................22 
Town and Country (Part 2 - Continuation) ....................................24 
Town and Country (Part 3 - Conclusion).......................................26 
State Aid or Self Help (Part 1) [1903] ...........................................28 
State Aid or Self Help (Part 2 - Conclusion) .................................30 
The Physician as Educator [1904] ................................................32 
Hygiene and Sex (Part 1) [1904] ...................................................39 
Hygiene and Sex (Part 2 – Conclusion).........................................41 
Chapter VIII: The Problem of Sex in Upbringing [1905] ...................................44
Chapter IX: Chapter X. Chapter XI: The Aggression Drive in Life and in the
Neurosis [1908]............62 
Chapter XII: Inheritance of Diseases [1908]......................................................69 
Chapter XIII: The Child’s Need for Affection [1908] ........................................75
Chapter XIV: The Theory of Organ Inferiority and Its Philosophical and
Psychological Meaning [1908] .....................................................78 
Chapter XV: A Prostitute’s Two Dreams [1908] ...............................................86
Chapter 
XVI: 
On 
the 
Neurotic 
Disposition
[1909]...............................................89 
Chapter 
XVII: 
Myelodysplasia 
(Organ 
Inferiority) 
[1909]
................................104 
Three PsychoAnalyses Concerning Inspired Numbers [1905]....49 
Developmental Defects in Children [1907] ..................................56
(Continued on page ii) i
Table of Contents - Continued
Part II – A Study of Organ Inferiority and Its Psychical
Compensation [1907]
Adler’s 
Preface 
to 
the 
1907
Edition.....................................................................115 
Introduction

......................................................................................................117 Chapter I:
Chapter II: Chapter III: Chapter IV: Chapter V: Chapter VI: Chapter VII: The
Part Played by the Central nervous System in the
Theory of Organ Inferiority—Psychogenesis and Foundations of Neuroses
and Psychoneuroses .................................................166 
Chapter VIII: Biological Viewpoint in the Organ Inferiority Theory
................175 
Appendix: The Inferiority of the Urinary Apparatus – Fate of Enuretics and
Their Families .......................................................................178 Glossary of
Medical Terms..................................................................................192 
Outline of a Theory of Inferiority ................................................121 
Heredity........................................................................................130 
Anamnestic Demonstration..........................................................137 
Morphologic Indications..............................................................141 
Reflex Anomalies as Indications of Inferiority............................152 
Manifold Organ Inferiorities........................................................161
Index 
of 
Parts 
I 
& 
II
.............................................................................................202
“A 
Psychology 
for 
Democracy”
..........................................................................222 ii
Editor’s Preface – 2002
Editor’s Preface – 2002
1936, document the sequence of his conceptual development. By reading the
complete series of his clinical writings in chronological order, we can appreciate
the gradual emergence of Adler’s remarkably integrated model of the
personality, theory of psychopathology, principles of prevention, technique of
psychotherapy, and philosophy of living. His ground-breaking odyssey of
psychological exploration and refinement creates a uniquely unified vision of
man.
We can gain a macrocosmic view of his work by first tracking his early
sense of a physician’s social responsibility, then his brief engagement with the
psychoanalytic circle, including the stimulation of Freud and Jung, and finally
the gradual maturation of his own theory. It is interesting to follow the early
emphasis on the aggression drive, to the later prominence of the striving for
significance, and eventually the emergence of the feeling of community.
His very first publication, Health Manual for The Tailoring Trade,

published in 1898, is remarkably vivid and moving. Rich in illuminating detail,
it provides a powerful impression of the hellish life of tailors in Vienna during
the late 1890’s, and the devastating impact of their work, economic situation,
and living conditions on their health. Eventually, when we discover that the life
expectancy of tailors at that time was only 33-48 years, we are appalled, but not
surprised.
In his next two articles, The Penetration of Social Forces into Medicine and
An Academic Chair for Social Medicine, published in 1902, Adler argues for
expanding state health care and prevention programs. He amplifies this message
in his 1903 article State Aid or Self Help. His eloquent appeal for effective
medical insurance, nearly a century ago, seems remarkably fresh and timely
today in the midst of our managed care crisis.
Adler’s early interest in child guidance and education is expressed in The
Physician as Educator, published in 1904. From 1905-1909, Adler deals with
sexuality, dreams, the aggression drive, organ inferiority, the child’s need for
affection, and the neurotic disposition. We can trace his journey from a
physician’s awareness of the human body, through an emerging social
consciousness, to a fascination with the interconnectedness of intellect,
emotions, and body.
Although it can be a formidable reading challenge, the highly medical Study
of Organ Inferiority and Its Psychical Compensations has been included in this
volume. For the convenience of the reader, a medical glossary has been added to
clarify the terminology. I find the material a stimulating and informative
refresher course in physiology, and helpful in examining the roots of Adler’s
thinking about organ dialect and organ jargon.
A few of Adler’s early comments about sexuality may strike some readers as
“politically incorrect.” I have chosen to retain all of the text intact, without
iii eliminating or modifying controversial material. I hope that in the
interest of scholarship and historical accuracy, the reader will appreciate the
range and completeness of these articles, and understand that some of the early
opinions that were typical in Adler’s time and place are no longer consistent
with the current assumptions of Classical Adlerian Psychology. Adler’s respect
and compassion for all people transcends his occasional blunt and penetrating
comments about the social meaning and impact of diverse attitudes.
Some of Adler’s early articles, like Three PsychoAnalyses Concerning
Inspired Numbers and A Prostitutes Two Dreams, are rather esoteric and may
not interest everyone, but I decided to include these and a few other articles of
somewhat limited contemporary value so that researchers would have access to
them.

Adlerian psychology eventually matured as a psychology of values. With
razor sharp perception he “called a spade a spade,” exposing the social viruses of
self-indulgence, arrogance, depreciation, and the addiction to power over others.
His penetrating critique of selfishness and his appraisal of Freud’s theory as “the
psychology of the spoiled child” have understandably made a number of people
uncomfortable. Yet Adler’s frankness and simplicity are refreshing in a field too
often saturated with technical jargon and disguised rationalizations for
egocentricity.
The publication of The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler would not
have been possible without the painstaking scholarship of Heinz and Rowena
Ansbacher. Their comprehensive bibliographies in The Individual Psychology of
Alfred Adler and Superiority and Social Interest provided the blueprint for
gathering all of the material that needed to be translated or re-translated. Their
books provide a well-organized overview of Adlerian psychology, with selected
excerpts from his works, organized by topics. The Collected Clinical Works of
Alfred Adler represents an expansion of Adler’s writings by providing the
complete text of his journal articles arranged in chronological order
Sophia de Vries, who studied with Alfred Adler, Alexander Mueller, and
Lydia Sicher, served as my mentor for over twenty-five years. In 1990, she
began translating some of Adler’s journal articles and authored the introduction
included in this volume. Her spark ignited the Classical Adlerian translation
project. Several of her first draft translations served as reference documents. She
always emphasized the importance of reading Adler’s original writings for a
deeper understanding of Individual Psychology.
My invaluable collaboration with Gerald L. Liebenau, the superb, primary
translator of these articles, spans many years, starting with his insightful
translations of the works of Alexander Mueller, a psychiatrist who studied with
Adler and then practiced in Holland and Switzerland. Translating Mueller’s very
profound and subtle writings about Adlerian theory, philosophy, and practice
provided an effective “warm-up” for tackling Adler’s clinical writings. Gerald
has been a joy to work with over the years—his progressively deeper
understanding of Adler as well as his passion for accuracy have done great
justice to Adler’s clinical writings. Early in our work, Kurt Adler, Adler’s son
and an outstanding Adlerian psychiatrist, offered to check, edit, and guide us in
our efforts to reflect Adler’s ideas and style of expression as faithfully as
possible. Gradually, Gerald, Kurt, and I synchronized in an understanding of
Adler’s deeper meanings and unique, complex writing style. Kurt assisted us for
several years until his failing health made it too difficult to continue. His
significant contribution and encouragement provided a great stimulus to

complete a formidable task.
Jim Wolf, who has contributed to this project for many years as an editor,
has created a Table of Abstracts that offers a convenient, brief summary of each
article. Dyanne Pienkowski provided extremely valuable editing and proofing.
One possible consequence of presenting Adler’s work chronologically,
from 1898 –1936, is that the reader may question his relevance to our time. In
order to counterbalance this possibility and respond to the question, “A
Psychology for Democracy” has been included in the appendix. The paper
explores the thesis that a genuinely democratic society can only be achieved by
fostering democratic character in individuals, who are then capable of creating
democratic relationships in their marriages, families, and work. More than any
other psychological approach, Adler provided us with the child guidance,
educational, and therapeutic tools for achieving this ideal.
Volume 1, The Neurotic Character, published in 1907, complements the
material in this volume covering the period 1898-1909. Adler’s magnum opus
offers remarkable insight into the human soul gone astray. Reading both
volumes will give the reader a superb perspective on the first stage of Adler’s
conceptual development.
It is time for The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler to finally be
placed in the spotlight beside the writings of Freud and Jung. His wisdom and
optimism about human nature shine through the pages, lighting the way to a
more hopeful future.
v About theTranslator
About the Translator Gerald L. Liebenau
Gerald L. Liebenau was born in Berlin, Germany. During World War II he
served with the Office of Strategic Services as an interpreter and translator. He
graduated from Yale University and embarked on a career with the Central
Intelligence Agency. He is the translator of Nicholas Gonner's Luxemburgers in
the New World, and Janusz Piekalkiewicz's World History of Espionage. He
currently resides in Arlington, Virginia.
An Introduction by Sophia de Vries1 - 1990
"The repeated rendering of an oral tradition over many generations
inevitably leads to errors in transmission and the gradual loss of the original
content, a degradation of information that occurs more slowly with the

successive reprinting of written accounts." -- Carl Sagan, "The Dragons of
Eden".
To those of us who have had the privilege of learning Individual
Psychology from Alfred Adler himself, before his death on May 28th, 1937 in
Aberdeen, and who have worked together with his closest followers afterwards,
it is very satisfying that Individual Psychology has become known as an
important discipline in psychology. However, there is also a concern that certain
aspects of what goes under the name of Individual Psychology would not readily
be recognized by its originator.
There was a time when music meant compositions by Bach, Beethoven,
Brahms and the like. There also was "entertainment" music. Nowadays, anyone
who can put his finger on an instrument and at the same time abuse his vocal
chords, makes music. Creating art by means of painting was done by people like
Michelangelo, Rembrandt, Renoir, etc. Today, four-years-olds do "art" work in
finger-painting. Popularization can have its drawbacks.
When I introduced Adler for the last lecture to his audience in Holland
before he left for England, his topic was "responsibility." To this day I recall his
penetrating look, when he finished his talk with: "Those of you who really
understand Individual Psychology and have learned to apply it, carry a heavy
responsibility." In the following years we experienced this and still do. For that
reason I have presented Adler's original Individual Psychology the way he taught
it himself, and have added translations of some lectures and articles by Adler as
published in the "Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie."
There have been composers who used another composer's theme, calling it
"variations on a theme" by the other's name. Others just used the theme and
published the composition under their own name. Painters have copied great
masters and called it a copy, while some have copied the style of the master,
putting the master's name on the fraud. Art and science can be interpreted in
different ways, except when the originator has been explicit in his interpretation.
Toscanini interpreted Beethoven the way Beethoven had written his music.
Alfred Adler was an originator who was outspoken in his interpretations, if one
only listened and made an effort to comprehend.
1 Sophia J. de Vries, who studied with Alfred Adler, Lydia Sicher, and
Alexander Mueller, wrote this introduction in 1990 to a series of journal articles
by Alfred Adler that she had translated. At the time, she was living in Oakland,
California and was a consultant and senior training analyst for the Alfred Adler
Institute of San Francisco. Her work served as an incentive to carry on the
translation of Adler’s clinical works and as reference documents for later
translations.

vii
The reader should not forget that Adler still got a “lot of flack” from the
existing (early) group of Freudians. In some articles he clearly denounces his
opponents. In others he warns his own followers who did not understand him or
thought they could do better. Most of these passages have been included,
because they will always remain valid.
During World War II Individual Psychology was dormant. Hitler had
decreed that Adler's and Freud's theories should not be learned, as both men
were born Jewish. Only Jung's psychology could openly be practiced. Practicing
Adlerians had to be extremely cautious. Many got out of Austria, Germany, and
the occupied countries.
In Holland Individual Psychology owes its rebirth in a large part to Dr.
Alexander Müller, who had been a close co-worker of Adler, Dr. Ronge, and
others. Later Müller established himself in Zürich, Switzerland, where his name
is still mentioned in the Individual Psychology group he helped to form. During
his years in Holland, we had worked closely together and later I visited him in
Zürich. On my last visit, before his death in July, 1960, we discussed the inroads
Individual Psychology had made. Müller's conclusion was: "Adler has not yet
been fully understood. He has to be rediscovered from the roots up.”
viii
Table of Abstracts
Developed by Jim Wolf
Part I – Journal Articles: 1898 - 1908
Chapter I: Health Manual for the Tailoring Trade [1898]
Adler describes the relationship between the economic conditions of
workers in the tailoring trade and the resulting illnesses and medical issues
common among those workers. This is not a psychologically focused paper, but
is important in that it shows Adler’s interest in the plight of the common man,
and his early insights into environmental, economic, and social forces which
influence health issues.
Chapter II: The Penetration of Social Forces into Medicine [1902]
This first article written in 1902, traces the influence of social forces on
medicine and healing that lead to public health, prevention, and the eventual
confrontation of “social misery,” as well as other social issues that impact the
public health. Adler also comments on the government’s role, it’s relationship

with physicians, and on the role of physicians in the area of public health.
Chapter III: An Academic Chair for Social Medicine [1902]
This article, also written in 1902, expresses the need for a state health care
system, and asserts that the politically powerful do not truly have the health care
interests of the common people as a priority. In a very strong political statement,
Adler calls for a “central organization” for health care, an academic chair, and a
seminar for social medicine to investigate health related and social needs.
Chapter IV: Town and Country (3 parts) [1903]
In 1903, Adler wrote Part I of this article challenging the common notion
that country living is (currently) healthier than city living, due to the
improvement of health conditions in the city, resulting from public health
measures, social progress and the growing political power of greater population
centers.
In Part II, he offers a description of village conditions: the positive
consequences of sun and cleaner air; as well as a description of the negative
health influences of dirt and uncleanliness. Adler comments on the issue of
poverty and the social conditions of villagers and country people. He concludes
that villages and cities are interconnected – the health and sanitation conditions
of one affect the other.
Part III focuses on the interdependence of the country and the city,
sanitation, the quality of food, water and the spread of disease. Adler emphasizes
the role of physicians and social medicine, and the need to expand an adequate
health care system to those living in the country.
Chapter V: State Aid or Self Help [1903]
Part I of this article addresses the relationship between the medical
profession, the state, the ruling elite and the political forces that negatively affect
the equitable distribution of healthcare in Austria.
In Part II, Adler discusses the decline of medicine and medical training in
Austria as due to the political forces, the system, that holds the medical
profession in low regard and which only begrudgingly addresses social issues
while attending more to the needs of the ruling elites. He calls on the medical
profession to shape it’s own future.
Chapter VI: The Physician as Educator [1904]
Adler identifies the problem inherent in educating the child. He identifies
the goals and traits of an educator and also the traits and educational power of a
good physician. He makes reference to Freud’s emphasis on children and the
importance of and knowledge of the child’s psyche. Aspects of the child’s
education are mentioned as well as the importance of love and affection, the role
of the parents and others in the child’s life. He comments on punishment,

spanking, and other forms of discipline, positive and negative, related to specific
problem areas. He identifies typical issues with children and important points the
physician-educator should be aware of. (This article reveals Adler’s early
interest in child guidance and education).
Chapter VII: Hygiene and Sex [1904]
Part I of this article is a commentary on the work of Professor Max Gruber.
Discussed here are the importance of sexual hygiene, prevention of venereal
disease, related sexual behavior, and the issue of sexual gratification.
In Part II, Adler emphasizes the role of attitude vs. glandular function as of
importance to the physician. Adler disagrees with Gruber about the
consequences of “immoderation” in sex. He comments on birth control,
homosexuality, masturbation, and control of the sex drive.
Chapter VIII: The Problem of Sex in Upbringing [1905]
In this article Adler discusses childhood sexuality, the purpose of sexuality
and sensuousness, and cautions regarding too much early sensual gratification
and stimulation. He comments on pathological developments, sexual
prematurity, seduction in childhood, and other influences related to the child’s
parents. He examines issues around shame and disgust, cultural adjustment and
the submerging of sexuality. He comments on normally developing children, the
inappropriateness of punishment to counter sexual abnormalities and the need
for a trained pedagogue.
Chapter IX: Three PsychoAnalyses Concerning Inspired Numbers
[1905] Adler analyzes, comments on and confirms the validity of Freud’s work 
about the deeper meaning of the choice of numbers in three specific cases: the
x first two cases are the self-analysis’ of two people, the third case is
Adler’s own analysis.
Chapter X. Developmental Defects in Children [1907]
Adler begins this article with a statement about the importance of children
and attending to their needs for the future of society. He moves on to discuss
various childhood physical abnormalities and conditions that cause suffering in
children and affect their performance and functioning. He mentions “bad habits”
that develop (thumb sucking, etc.). He expresses optimism that with modern
science, early recognition and intervention, attitudes of prejudice and
hopelessness will be overcome.
Chapter XI: The Aggression Drive in Life and in the Neurosis [1908]
This important paper is a major step for Adler in the development of his
psychology. Still in the camp of drive theory, he presents a theory of drives and
their interactions. He emphasizes the aggression drive over the sexual and other
drives as the primary determiner, organizer and director, of the other drives in

forming the person’s attitude to the world. He discusses the “innate feeling of
community”, “social feeling”, as restraint to the drives, their most important
“regulatory mechanism”.
Chapter XII: Inheritance of Diseases [1908]
Adler discusses the inheritance of disease, what was believed in his day,
and what questions remained. He addresses health, environmental, social and
psychological forces that may influence genetic transmission and development.
Chapter XIII: The Child’s Need for Affection [1908]
Adler discusses the child’s need for affection and the importance for a
certain amount of gratification of that need. He explains how the need for
affection extends to those outside of the immediate family, it’s importance in the
development of social feeling, and how “cultural exposure” is important in
directing the need. Lack of cultural exposure, for example, has a negative effect,
leading to the seeking of too much immediate gratification, self-centeredness
and other difficulties. He addresses the consequences of denying the child’s need
for affection and it’s gratification: the assumption of an aggressive posture to the
world and the impairment in the development of social feeling.
Chapter XIV: The Theory of Organ Inferiority and Its Philosophical and
Psychological Meaning [1908]
Here, Adler explains his theory of organ inferiority, psychological
compensation, and overcompensation. He begins with an explanation of the
meaning of the word “inferiority” and how it is used in relation to the body’s
organs. He goes on to explore the compensatory relationships between the
body’s organs and it’s systems, heredity, the striving for compensation and
various kinds of organ anomalies. He connects environmental pressures, organ
inferiority, thought, psychology and the development of philosophy as
interrelated processes. He illustrates cases of organ inferiority and psychological
compensation.
Chapter XV: A Prostitute’s Two Dreams [1908] 
Adler interprets two dreams of a prostitute using Freud’s principles of
dream interpretation–wish fulfillment and repression. He also discusses some 
impressions of the psychology of prostitutes.
Chapter XVI: On the Neurotic Disposition [1909]
Adler elaborates on what he sees as the roots of the neurotic disposition:
among which are hypersensitivity, organ inferiority, the aggression drive,
influences of gender roles or uncertainty about gender role He mentions various
personality characteristics resulting from these influences. Adler moves on to
discuss hypersensitivity, the aggression drive and inferiority feelings in more
depth as well as the impairment of self confidence and independence, the inner

world (thinking and feeling) of the child, the expectations and fears of the child.
He discusses the beginning of “protective measures” the child develops around
his hypersensitivity, and to achieve the “fixed final goal”, and the child’s
philosophy of life. The child develops suspicion and mistrust–“unreconcilability
with people” which collides with the social feeling. Birth order and sexual
influences are discussed. Adler then discusses the case of a seven year old girl.
He concludes with a description of “a pattern of neurosis,” its’ symptoms and
related comments.
Chapter XVII: Myeldysplasia (Organ Inferiority) [1909] 
Adler concludes that all neurosis can be traced to some degree of organ 
inferiority and psychological compensation.
(continued on page xiii) xii
Part II – A Study of Organ Inferiority and Its Psychical
Compensation - 1907
On November 6, 1905 Alfred Adler gave a talk to Freud’s Psychoanalytic
Circle titled "On the Organic Bases of Neuroses." This was apparently a
followup of his earlier reported research into the "Physiology and Pathology of
the Erotogenic Zones." His lecture previewed ideas that would later be
developed in A Study of Organ Inferiority. The book profusely illustrated the
nature of overcompensation and was appreciated by his Viennese medical
colleagues and members of the Wednesday Psychological Society, who
considered it a major contribution toward understanding the biological forces
affecting neurotic development.
With a keen physician’s insight, Adler takes us on a tour of the human
body, offering the equivalent of a short course in physiology. He makes us aware
of the interconnectedness of the body’s organs and the internal and external
conditions that may lead to disease. Consequently, there is an abundance of
medical terms throughout the chapters. As a convenience to the reader, a
glossary has been added.
Later in his writings, Adler shifted away from the idea of an organic root of
neurosis, but his early insights and speculations about the interplay of organs, the
environment, and the mind, are fascinating to explore.
xiii Part I: Journal Articles 1898-1909

Part I 
Journal Articles: 1898-1909
xv
Chapter I
Health Manual for the Tailoring Trade1 2
[1898]

Introduction
This short article represents my effort to describe the relationship between
economic conditions and illnesses that occur in one trade. I shall also address the
danger to the national health arising from a low standard of living. Such an
examination of human ailments, not from the perspective of one individual but
as a social product, can no longer be ignored by a physician. Even if a
physician’s education, attitude, and position give little consideration to this
viewpoint a physician cannot ignore that modern circumstances create new
problems in medicine as well.
The bounds of medical science are expanding. We no longer regard the
causes of diseases as the confluence of illnesses and humans, but search the
battlefields for the wounded and the corpses whose numbers are determined by
weighty economic laws. This is how the field of etiology expands producing
fruits totally unexpected in light of the skepticism that pervades medical schools.
Thus the area of etiology expands and produces results that the skepticism
pervading in medical schools prevents from being considered.
In the realm of social hygiene, demands are being heard from physicians
that meet the wishes of workers and state officials. It is only in this arena where
auspicious therapies for widespread illnesses are becoming apparent.
In any examination of this subject a portrayal of the living conditions in one
field or in one particular trade obviously would require considerable space. This
would also apply to the following treatment of the men’s clothing industry,
particularly since that trade also illuminates the hygienic conditions in the
cottage industry. In describing the economic structure and conditions in the tailor
trade the following sources have been employed: Schmoller’s “Geschichte der
Gewerbe” (The History of Trades); “die Lage des Handwerks in Oesterreich”
(The Situation of Crafts in Austria) (taken from publications of the Society for
Social Politics); surveys, and trade union reports; and trade publications. In my
discussion of the medical aspects I made use of Popper’s “Arbeitskrankheiten”
(Work-related illnesses), and Hirt’s “Gewerbekrankheiten” (Illnesses in Trades).
In citing insurance company reports and Austrian and German commercial
statistics I believe I have given full protection to proprietary rights.
1 Originally published as Gesundheitsbuch für Schneidergewerbe, by Carl
Heymanns Publisher, Berlin, 1898. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
The industrial boom also caused many changes in the tailor trade. The times

no longer exist when a pathetic little man appeared in his customers’ homes to
take their measure, or when local guilds used textiles provided by the customer
for tailoring. The leveling tendency of the large industries also had an effect on
the tailor trade. Next to family tradition, thousands of other fortuitous
circumstances made for deciding this trade so that now the pathetic little fellow
of yesteryears stands alongside the powerful worker. Status symbols have
blurred and have been replaced by the common ways of the workingman.
These changes occurred during the last decades. New occupations crowded
out old ones. A growing population, increasing demands for goods, and extended
trade relations forced all trades to relinquish obsolete forms of production. The
consumer began to favor large-scale industrial production. The modest shop
entered a critical state. The small craftsman, who had to withstand competition
from big industry, would become the economic opponent of large-scale
producers, or their employee.
In places where machines had victoriously advanced, the work now takes
place in large industrial plants. This improved production method gave
lawmakers an opportunity to pass equitable regulations advantageous to all
workers. The accessibility of factories and the concentration of labor made
oversight by the government possible. Government authorities today have
recognized their responsibility to respond to demands for hygienic conditions in
factories, and at the very least in the small shops.
The worker in a large industrial plant learns quickly that he shares a
common interest with his fellow workers. The same experiences and pains
attract him to form organizations that can help him in confronting the
wretchedness of his economic situation. Out of discussions with others about
existing adverse conditions comes a common demand for relief and
recommendations for appropriate means to alleviate the situation. The demands
made by these organizations usually are to improve the workers’ conditions.
However, there are establishments where developments run in another
direction. Although such factories also operate as big businesses, they lack at the
outset the possibility for developing technical support facilities, which means
that they also lack large production plants where workers are under the
protection of the law, and where the organizations can exert some influence. The
common concern of workers living alone and isolated from one another is for
their own personal welfare. Yet, their striving for a higher standard of living is
constantly frustrated. Goods in such plants are produced in a highly unregulated
manner and the market is flooded periodically and haphazardly. As a result of
constant overproduction the manufacturers are overwhelmed with goods. In the
absence of large shop facilities and equipment, which the owners have no

incentive to acquire, the worker is forced to produce in his wretched home, or in
the living quarters of a small shop owner. There he lives, eats, drinks, sleeps and
eventually dies at his workplace and among his machines.
Good times with good pay are followed by bad times, meager pay and
unemployment because the overloaded market forces a production stop. Then,
when the market finally recovers, the cycle starts all over again with deeply
mortgaged homes leaving masters, journeymen, and apprentices excluded from
the cultural advantages and untouched by regulations governing hygiene. It is a
sad existence, in short, a sweatshop system.
This essentially is the character of the cottage industry which is still found
in many trades and in some it represents the primary manufacturing form. This
situation is to no one’s advantage, neither to the worker nor to the consumer, and
the role it plays in endangering life and health is seriously underestimated. Given
such wretched conditions, unhygienic, resulting from economic need, there is
only one solution: to hold the employers legally responsible for the sanitary
conditions of the workplaces.
_____________
The tailor trade is prominently represented in the cottage industry. The
cause and effect of this obsolete form of production becomes easily apparent.
The technical progress in the clothing industry is painfully slow. Although it
makes use of the sewing machine, an invention of the Viennese tailor
Madersberger at the start of the century, it seems only to have promoted the
cottage industry. There are also cutting-, button hole-, and button sewing-
machines as well as presses, but the low wages paid for cottage work does not
always make their use profitable. This equipment also does not of itself force the
establishment of large industrial plants since such machinery is much more
advantageous in the readymade clothing industry that wholesales goods for less
demanding buyers. The textile manufacturer, on the other hand, must still take
into account the skill and discrimination of the tailor.
The customer’s desire to make a selection of textiles opened the way for
large scale tailoring establishments, and for the textile manufacturer to allow for
greater discrimination in the selection of materials. This made the large clothing
manufacturer both a purchaser as well as producer and as such an easy
competitor in the market place for the small tailor. The manufacturer sells
clothing not only on the local market, where he has no significant competitor in
either Austria or Germany, but can also sell abroad. Certainly, Austria with some
effort can compete with England and France in large exports to the Balkans and
to Egypt. Germany can find willing customers in England, Switzerland,
Denmark and other countries. The clothing manufacturer is in fact an

entrepreneur who can ignore the “annoyance” of labor laws and the wishes of
the guilds. His concern is only with the world market; he has but one desire, a
compliant trade policy.
The situation is quite different for the small shop owner. The approximately
200,000 shops in Germany, and no fewer by many in Austria, can no longer
justly be called independent enterprises. They are indebted to the large industrial
establishments and their economic standing is subject to the vagaries of the local
and world markets. Added to this is the great calamity of seasonal work which,
because of seasonal changes and the dictates of fashion, give the tailor trade its
characteristic imprint. During a season, two or four times a year, the demand
rises sharply. All the work forces are mobilized, the work intensifies and labor
laws move into the background. Sunday rest days are eliminated; overtime
increases, and laws protecting women and children are sacrificed. Apprentices,
journeymen, and masters, doing piecework, or working for daily wages are far
removed from their customers and are stressed to work 16 to 18 hours a day and
even a 24 hour workday is not rare. The pay attracts workers; the laborers pay
off their debts to landlords, storeowners, and tax collectors, or put something
aside for themselves. They call this their good season.
These abnormal conditions continue for five to six months a year. During
that period the market is swamped with goods, which are warehoused to cover
the demand during the slow season. The earnings of the masters are reduced as is
the pay of the workers, many of whom lose their jobs altogether. The few
savings are eaten up and debts grow until the high season commences again and
the madness starts all over again.
The tailor trade is composed of two groups: The textile manufacturing
branch and the clothing-manufacturing branch. The first has to satisfy the
demanding consumer who wears tailor-made clothing. It is, in effect, an art
industry that sells material to the larger and middle-sized businesses. The
manufacturing branch, which is constantly expanding, delivers readymade
clothes to fill the needs of the majority of the local population and to export
abroad. This branch had its origin among secondhand clothing dealers who made
such a profit with their goods that it seemed profitable to replenish their fast
selling merchandise with cheap, readymade clothing. In time, the large
secondhand merchant emancipated himself from dealing in used clothing and
entered the retail branch. Today, the retail business is such an integrated part of
the tailor trade that many retailers are occasionally forced to offer custom-
tailored clothing as well.
The small custom tailors, who usually employ workers by the week, share
with them their modest homes and food. During the season they work with their

employees 16 to 18 hours a day, and often through the night, and reduce their
personnel during the off-season. When the work load is particularly heavy they,
of course, call on the master piece workers who, with a few journeymen and
with as many apprentices as permitted by the guild, work at starvation wages.
Clothing stores use custom tailors who, on their own premises, employ
workers paid by the week, except in the larger establishments, such as in Berlin
where they are paid on a different scale. In terms of wages and working
conditions these weekly workers represent perhaps the most suppressed labor
force in the tailor trade. They actually are outside all trade laws and their fate is
dependent on the master pieceworker. Like the latter, they also produce mostly
small clothing items such as trousers or vests, forfeiting skills for making other
clothing. This also limits the training apprentices receive in such shops and will
eventually cause them to suffer as journeymen.
The production of piecework is constantly disrupted by business crises and
by the influx of large industries. Also troubling is the small investment required
to become a masterpiece worker and the opening of a small shop. This increases
competition among the pieceworkers as well among the journeymen.
Wage reduction for masters, who are intermediary entrepreneurs, as well as
for journeymen, are the order of the day. The worker lives from one day to the
next which explains the resistance of small-shop masters to any social reform.
The intolerable “sweatshop” system for piecework-pay makes it possible for the
small shops to exist.
Since the master pieceworker dominates the tailor trade it becomes obvious
that only a small proportion of journeymen are employed in the larger stores
where they enjoy good pay and restricted hours. It is just as clear that on the job
training for apprentices in these economically depressing piece workshops is
minimal, and that their homes and board make sport of hygienic requirements.
The misery experienced in the home of the master pieceworker becomes
even worse and more devastating through the institution of the home
pieceworker and the “irregular worker”. The home-worker has his shop in his
home and is paid by the piece. Often his wife and children join him in his work.
This type of work is legal and the home-worker can advance to journeyman
when he is able to pay cash for a guild certificate. He is not permitted to employ
apprentices and, in order to make a living, has to underbid every other
pieceworker.
The “irregular worker” is a home pieceworker who illegally employs
journeymen or apprentices. These employees are ineligible for health insurance
and his apprentices cannot be released to work on their own even after their
apprenticeship commitment has been satisfied. The most extensive regulations

and threats of punishment have thus far been unable to eliminate such
malpractice in the trade.
Women are not significantly represented in the men’s tailor trade but are
increasing in number each year. They also have to endure the absence of any
organization in the tailor trade, which adds new misery to the plight from which
women already suffer.
Complaints that were raised some time ago about competition from prison
work is becoming muted. Even prison administrators complain that because of
low wages in the cottage industry prison work no longer is profitable.
Under such adverse conditions in one trade the struggle to require
certification for qualification and to institute guild reform is powerless. It is an
ancient battle that has been raging here for the barest means for existence. The
constant, fruitless worry about making a living undermines the health of this
segment of the population. Their homes, which also serve as workshops, are
located in the poorest and unhealthiest sections of the city. The rooms are small
with low ceilings and often are dank, dark, and overcrowded. The homes are
dirty because housework has to be neglected for time on the job. The quarters
are poorly ventilated and overheated which contributes hugely to the germ
population. Unhealthy conditions are further exacerbated by long hours of work.
The crowding together of healthy and sick workers leads to widespread sickness,
turning cottage home areas into grounds for epidemics.
Germs are spread as finished clothes leave the shops where the master and
his family suffer from infectious illnesses. The innocent purchaser then carries
the germ-infected clothing into his home.
Since the time that these conditions were investigated and publicized they
are constantly debated in our government and by parliament. However, except
for a few North American states, no country has undertaken to control the
terrible excesses of the home industries, or at least place them under the laws
that govern factories. Half-way measures cannot succeed. Hygienic conditions
can only be instituted when irregular workers disappear and factory shops are
established.
___________________
When we examine the causes of the illnesses that occur in the tailor trade
we must keep firmly in mind the conditions described above. They provide the
ground on which widespread illnesses thrive among the population at large.
They also support and promote most of the unhealthy conditions that are
associated with the tailor trade. As a result physicians are of the opinion that the
field of etiology has become so vast that they are unable to control it.
If one adds to the low standard of living among tailors that, next to healthy

and strong workers, there also is a segment of physically weak workers, the
statistics for illnesses would then be expected to be highly unfavorable for the
tailor trade.
This, in fact, is the case. Ever since statistics have been collected for health
conditions for the various trades it has been taken for granted that the tailor trade
is swamped with diseases. In the beginning there was a tendency to relate all
illnesses among tailors to the low esteem in which the trade itself was held. This
view had to be discarded once the terrible hardships in the tailor trade became
known from statistics, surveys, and association and trade reports. Rather, an
objective examination showed us that the trade itself engenders a special danger
to its worker’s health. That danger is aside from the tailors’ economic conditions
leading to poor nourishment, inadequate living conditions, and excessive
working hours. These conditions are exposing workers to a variety of illness at a
relatively much higher extent than is found in any other trade. The unique
situation affecting this particular trade brings the dangers to the tailors’ health
into much sharper focus.
This is the case for lung diseases that rage among tailors. Neumann (Berlin
1854) discovered that 60% of tailors suffer from tuberculosis as against 23-49%
in other occupations. Among 2072 tailors at Hirt’s:
22.7% suffered from consumption 
15.6% had chronic trachea catarrh 
7.6% were ill with pneumonia 
4.3% had emphysema 
This means that 50.2% of the workers were ill with some form of respiratory
disease. In France, according to Neufville (1855), of 1000 deaths an average of
256 were caused by consumption. Statistics for trades show that tailors had the
highest mortality rate with 399 deaths. Popper (Prague) estimates that the
number of tailors who die from tuberculosis is on the average almost twice that
of workers in other trades. The last report issued by the Vienna workers’ health
insurance company for the clothing industry attributes the causes of death in
72% of the cases to lung diseases. 
There is no denying that those engaged in the tailor trade are afflicted with
illnesses that occur in that trade, something that must be considered in any
explanation for such striking statistics. Specifically, the fact that those engaged
in tailoring are always seated and their bodies constantly stooped over must be
taken into account. The effect is that the gaseous exchange in the lungs is
deficient and that lung ventilation is impeded. Added to this is that workers exert
a minimum of physical effort and are confined to closed quarters. The result is
that they are, therefore, exposed to consumption to a higher degree than those

who work outdoors and are required to exert moderate physical effort. All this,
however, does not explain the large number of workers in the tailor trade
suffering from lung diseases. There are trades where work is conducted under
more favorable conditions but where workers also maintain a similar bodily
posture and engage in work not unlike those of tailors, but where the disease
statistics are much lower. 
Breathing dust from clothes that fills the small room must be regarded as an
additional harmful factor. It can contribute to developing lung diseases,
particularly tuberculosis. Yet, even the dust cannot explain our high statistics.
Constantly being indoors also contributes to aggravating the situation and, with
regard to tuberculosis, places the tailor in a more vulnerable position than
workers in other trades who enjoy fresh air. 
However, an understanding of these frightful statistics can only be gained with
knowing how tailors live. They endure a low standard of living, are
undernourished, and abide in crowded, small and dirty quarters that lack
ventilation. In addition, they share this environment with the tailor’s family.
Often there is no sunlight with its disinfecting power. These adverse conditions,
and the workers’ often debilitated organism from years of work, easily make
them prey to the microscopic enemies of the human race. It is the confluence of
all these factors that has this devastating effect. 
The significance of an unhealthy stooped posture makes itself felt in other ways
as well. The blood flow from the heart into the arteries is somewhat impeded
when the peripheral body parts are sharply bent from the trunk. There is no
doubt that prevailing heart ailments are adversely influenced by such an
impediment to the blood flow.
More important is that this posture hampers the blood flow from the veins to
the heart and that as a result the stomach blood vessels will constantly contain
large amounts of blood. The overflow of stomach blood vessels has detrimental
consequences for nourishing the stomach organs, in particular the walls of the
intestines. Many physicians attribute this phenomenon to the large number of
stomach and intestinal diseases, as well as bowel movement irregularities, found
in their patients. The same phenomenon causes a swelling of the veins in the
feet, varicose veins, and hemorrhoids. The latter, through ulceration, can cause
rectal fistulas which is an affliction often noted among tailors.
We would do well to recognize a predisposition for stomach and intestinal
illnesses as a result of an unhealthy posture. Particular importance should be
given to any extended period of time spent in one position. Of no lesser
importance is the often inadequate and unhealthy food eaten by these workers.
These conditions are foremost in explaining the 30 and higher percentage of

stomach and intestinal illnesses among tailors.
A disfigurement that has long been noted among tailors and which,
depending on custom and fair mindedness of the population, has been cause for
derision, is a curvature of the spine or scoliosis. Long periods of sitting as well
as their poor posture must be seen as leading to scoliosis. Scoliosis is found
primarily among tailors who, having suffered from poor nourishment in their
youth, and in light of their hard work, had to pay with their bodies’ inability to
ward off such afflictions.
A frequent finding among tailors are calluses and bursae on the two bones
carrying the weight of the body when sitting with one leg crossed over the other.
Given this distinct posture of tailors the legs often become numb and lose
feeling. Also related to that posture is a swelling of the buttocks.
Noticeable is the frequency with which scabies occurs among tailors. This
skin disease is caused by mites penetrating under the skin. Initially affected are
the skin folds between the fingers and the back of the hands. Small blisters in
which mites house are formed. With warmth, when the carrier of mites goes to
sleep, they begin their work and dig a path. This process is accompanied by
agonizing itching that causes the sufferer to scratch himself, robbing him of his
sleep. Eventually the under-arm areas, the chest, and stomach, as well as the
sexual organs and buttocks, are affected. It is often said that scabies are a
particular affliction among tailors and in fact one quarter of all tailors suffer
from it. Currently the shoemakers have a higher incident rate of scabies in that
one half of them suffer from this ailment. It is hard to say what causes this;
however, many physicians treating patients under medical insurance can provide
evidence to the effect that scabies occurs in the homes of a number of tailors and
shoemakers. The pervasiveness of scabies among tailors must be attributed to
their crowded work conditions, along with their poor living and work places, and
to the lack of cleanliness of their bedding and clothing. The itching of their
hands and fingers, the eczema and edematous swellings of the face, are the
consequence of toxic substances in certain textiles.
Hand stitching often causes infection of the nail bed resulting from needle
punctures. The pressure applied to scissors causes calluses on the right index
finger and thumb, as well as the occasional dislocation of the right thumb.
Nail bed infection on the left thumb and the loss of the use of the joint
caused by injuries resulting from forcing a needle into stiff material also are
common afflictions in the tailor trade. Pulling a needle from the cloth when
sewing has also been known to have caused injuries to the eyes.
Calluses on the side of the middle and index fingers and at the outer edge of
the little finger are caused by pressure from pulling thread. Occasionally the skin

of the little finger swells.
Tailors can be poisoned by breathing toxic colors and metal dust released
from the cloth and thread in sewing. 
The bad habit of biting off thread that often is poisonous, or chewing it, causes
an infection of gums, nausea, stomach aches, and colitis. 
Well known is the detrimental effect of needlework on the eyes. In nearsighted
persons the degree of nearsightedness increases. Those with normal eyesight
and those who are farsighted often develop disturbingly painful conditions,
cramps in the eye muscles, and eye fatigue to the point where work becomes
impossible. In the case of this “trade illness” the cause also lies in the extended
time devoted to needlework, and to the poor light by which work is done. 
The same applies to cramps experienced by tailors. When certain muscles and
muscle groups are heavily used painful cramps, lasting for shorter or longer
periods of time, often result. Primarily endangered are the muscles of the hands
and the forearm. The main cause is the constant extended hours of work during
the high season that are so common in the tailor trade.
We have already mentioned that infectious diseases are carried from the tailor
workshops to the outside world. In the same way infectious diseases find their
way to their shops in clothing brought for alterations and repairs.
Rheumatism and gout in the arms are prominent in this trade and it would not be
wrong to attribute these ailments to the workers’ unhealthy living quarters and
poor nutrition.
___________________
Although the number of accidents that occur in the clothing industry is not
significant it is still considerably higher than is commonly believed to be the
case. Accidental burnings, falling, and injuries from machinery and equipment
often cause tailors enormous grief. The extension of accident insurance to the
tailor trade is essential and necessary for the sake of health conditions in general.
Particular accidents were mentioned earlier in the context of illnesses related to
this trade. The following is some additional commentary:
Most of the puncture wounds are suffered by machine operators in the tailor
trade; fewer are found among those who sew by hand. These injuries are caused
mainly from the use of needles, scissors, and knives. Their significance is often
underrated. Not unusual are injuries that become infected and fester because
wounds are not disinfected. Puncture wounds on the left thumb and left index
finger understandably are more frequent since these are the fingers held close to
the needle. Additional data is found in the following tables.
Further, frequent dental problems and tooth decay has been observed
among tailors. The habit of biting off thread is believed to have been the cause of

such injuries. It is quite possible that given the dismal living conditions among
tailors the care of their teeth is not given a high priority, a situation that probably
contributes as much to their dental problems as does biting off thread.
This then is a representation of a significant number of illnesses that are
seen among the tailor. This also would explain the high incident rate of illnesses
in general. In relative terms it probably is the highest number found in any one
trade. Statistical surveys show that 12% to 27% of tailors are ill. The tailor trade
is deeply engulfed in misery and illnesses constantly generate new misery.
The average life expectancy of a tailor is not high. The figures vary
between 33 and 48 years. Wherever surveys are conducted regarding life
expectancy in particular occupations, the tailors are found to have the lowest life
expectancy.
The incidents of disabled tailors in the cottage industry also is reflected in these
statistics.
______________
There are no current statistics for accidents in the tailor trade. The fact that
such a large number of tailors are occupied in the cottage industry explains our
inability to collect statistics for that trade. We must, therefore, satisfy ourselves
with statistics for trade associations in the clothing industry which we discovered
in the German Imperial Insurance Bureau for the year 1890.
All tables3 contain the statistics for the trade associations for the year 1890.
For comparison purposes, I have added statistics for 1897 in Table I. From that it
can be seen that the accident rate rose significantly, almost doubled, during the
seven year period even though the number of insured persons did not rise as
sharply. 
Table II provides an overview of the number and size of the plants in which
accidents covered by insurance occurred. 
Table III reflects the type of injuries and the parts of the body affected. Of
interest is that most of the injuries were to the upper part of the body. 
Table IV contains the severity of the injuries and their consequences. 
This collection of data shows that accidents do not play a significant role in the
tailor trade. On the other hand, the danger from illnesses and their consequences
is that much more significant.
3 Editors note: all tables are at the end of the article.
If this ugly situation is to be improved then the social structure of the tailor
trade must be considered. What in other trades is achieved with machinery or by
organizing workers is totally lacking here. The situation in the tailor trade cries
out for an extension of the laws governing trades. Only state intervention can

prevent generations falling prey to the backwardness of the shops.
What of the small-shop master? How can qualification certification change
these conditions? What good are association statutes that regulate the number of
apprentices that can be employed and their term of apprenticeship? What can be
done to monitor the irregular worker? What about a law against dishonest
competition? What use are the few textile associations, cooperatives, and
production associations when unbridled competition in the world market forces
the masters to seasonal work producing piecework cheaply and at enormous cost
to their workers?
The backwardness of the shops damns the worker to produce under the
lowest standards, work in the unhealthy quarters of the small-shop master, and
under conditions that threaten the workers’ health. The alternative is being
condemned to work in a miserable shop, enslaved as an illegal apprentice. The
increasing number of intermediate masters depresses wages to the lowest level,
forces the violation of laws, and promotes a system that constantly undercuts pay
and supports wage reductions.
The progress made in social legislation has helped tailors to obtain an
obligatory health insurance. However, the few workers being registered by their
masters, and the frequent periods of unemployment, prevent many from these
benefits.
It is also necessary to point out that our current medical system is not
adequate to combat widespread illnesses. A successful fight against tuberculosis,
for example, is unthinkable if the physician is limited to the care of the afflicted
patient whom he provides with the name of his disease, prescribes medication or
offers medical advice, and then sends him back to where death awaits him.
Mostly excluded from accident insurance, which is restricted to businesses
with at least 20 workers, are the tailors, for reasons that we stated earlier. 
The inspection of industries also applies only to large enterprises, yet it is the
small shops that have a far greater need for inspections. 
The lack of pensions, or their insufficiency, threatens workers either with an
early death or degradation in old age. 
Every demand made for hygienic improvements that would improve workers’
and apprentices’ conditions are heatedly opposed by the small shops. This is
understandable and perhaps even excusable if one considers the dependency of
the small masters on the large entrepreneur and their critical situation. However,
this only proves the dominance of a culture that is opposed to the tailor trade.
This situation in which an obsolete and wrong-headed industry is maintained at
the cost of their workers’ health cannot be allowed to continue. 
For that reason all tailor associations make their priority the establishment of

independent industrial enterprises that are located outside the homes of the
masters. This would also bring to an end the illegal worker, and a start could be
made to eliminate the sweatshop system. From the standpoint of public health
these demands are clearly supportive. 
No less important is the introduction of an appropriate workday, the extension of
factory inspections to cover all businesses, the expansion of accident insurance
to cover the tailor trade, the establishment of unemployment insurance, and
provisions for old age pension. 
Medically trained factory inspectors, who can be expected in the near future,
would have to revise factories to make them hygienically acceptable. The
regulations that must be passed cannot be so vague and general that they can be
interpreted in favor of the factory owners but must be specific and based on
hygienic principles that would eliminate the innumerable unhealthy situations
that now exist. With the establishment of workplaces that have sufficient
ventilation and good lighting, with regulations governing the workday, with
instructions for workers on the dangers of their trade and how to prevent them,
the detrimental conditions of the workplace could be successfully overcome. 
The evil, however, is seated much deeper. The living quarters of the tailor
assistants, and for the most part also of the masters, are located in the most
wretched parts of town. These are unhealthy and dirty neighborhoods where
hosts of germs reside. The rehabilitation of these houses is of the greatest
importance for the health of the population. This can only be achieved by
government authorized physicians and with regulations for the building and
maintenance of houses. The construction of workers’ housing should be given all
possible governmental and community support in order to bring relief to the
housing problem. 
The same attention must be paid to food. Low wages force the majority of tailors
to purchase cheap food whether at work in the master’s shop or at home. That
such nourishment is insufficient in most cases to supply needed energy has
already been mentioned. More disastrous is that the worker is often forced to eat
spoiled food sold by often immoral private speculators. For that reason it is most
welcome when workers find refuge in consumer associations or eat in common
eating facilities. Here we can also see an important task for physicians: The
elimination of the deplorable conditions in the food industry. 
The cottage industry has given Austrian and German goods a worldwide
reputation. The low wages paid its workers ensures entrepreneurs a primary
share in the world market for years to come. However, large regions have taken
on the despondent physiognomy of sinking wages and a mute submission to
constant wage reductions. Where such conditions become known preference for

trading will be given to those countries that protect the health and strength of its
people.
Table I. Injured Persons Who Received Compensation During the
Accounting Year
Trade Avg. No. Insured
A. No. Age, Sex of Persons Insured
Adults Under 16 Total Per 1000 Male Female Male Female 
1890 Clothing 96180 72 16 4 1 93 0.97
Industry 
1897 Clothing 125246 180 64 9 4 267 2.05 Industry
B. Causes/Circumstances of Injuries
Trade Motors, Elevator Machine Lifts, Belts Cranes Boilers, Combust. Collapses Steam Hot & &
Falling Pipes, Acid Objects Expl., Objects 
etc.
Falls From Man Vehicles, Animals, Tools, Other Ladders, Loading, Run Pushed, Hammer, Causes Steps,
Unloading Over by Hit, Axe, 
Openings in Lifting, Carts, Bitten, Spade, Excavations Carrying Wagons and Hoes
While 
Riding 
1890 
Clothing Industry 1897 
Clothing Industry 66 1 0 3 3 8 5 1 1 3 2
173 2 1 5 4 32 8 3 2 8 19 
Trade Deaths Permanent Injuries 
C. Results of Injuries 
Temporary Comp. Eligible Survivors of Deceased
Total Partial Incapacity Widows Children Total Total of No. Injuries Reported per 1000 Injuries
During Year
1890 5 1 83 4 4 2 6 419 4.36 Clothing 
Industry 
1897 5 4 204 44 5 9 14 1040 8.3 Clothing 
Industry
Table II. Year and Size of Plants Where Compensation Qualifying
Accidents Occurred
Trade 
Associations
Col. 1 
Garment
Industry (GI) No. Plants Where 
Accidents Occured
Col. 2 60 6,520 2.26% 7.56% No. Plants 
Insured in Under Col. These 3 
Plants Represent
% of All Garment Plants
Col. 3 Col. 4 Insured 
Persons 
Under Col. 3 

Represent
% of All Insured in GI 
Col. 5 
No./Gender of Accident Insured Persons
Col. 6 Col. 7 Col. 8 M. F. Total No. No. 
Insurance Covered Accidents
Col. 9 Average for Each Plant in the Garment Industry
Col. 10
Insured Persons 32.51 .00 Col. 11 
Compensated Insured
48 20 68
Table III. Causes of Injuries and Specific Wounds
Trade 1. Burns Assoc
iations 
2. Wounds, Bruises, & Fractures 
Several A. Arm/Hand B. Legs/Feet C. Head/Neck D. Trunk Injuries
Body of Col. Parts/ 2-4 Whole 
Body
Rt. Lt. Tot. Rt. Lt. Tot. Both Eyes Total Pelvis Hernia Other Total Not Col. /Hips and Cols. Eyes 14 &
Multiple 17-23
15 Injuries Col. 1 2 5 6 7 9 10 11 13 14 15 16 21 22 23 24 Garment 1 1 30 Industries 
21 51 4 2 6 2 1 3 1 2
Several Total ConcurBody Cols. rent 6-26 Injuries
A-D 
Total Cols. 2-30
Col. 1 25 26 27 28 
Garment 2 2 67 69 
Industries 
(Colums 3, 4, 8, 12, 17-20, 28, 29, & 30 of the official record had to be omitted.) 
-- 3
Table IV. Injuries According to Seriousness and Consequences
Fatal Injuries
Trade Fatal PercenAssocInjurtages per iation ies Col. 12
Col. 1 2 3 Garment 3 4.41% 9 13.24% 54 79.41% 2 2.94% 65 95.59% 69 Industry 
(Continued)
Insured Comp. Of Eliglble Survivors of Fatal Injuries Col 2 
Trade Fatal Injured Col Widows Children AscendTotal Col.
Assoc-ities 12 ants 15-17 iation Col
2 
Col. 1 13 14 15 16 17 18 Garment
Industry
Non-Fatal Injuries 
Work Incapacitated for 6 Months and Upward Incapacity 13 Weeks – 6 Months Fully
Incapac
itated 
PercenPartial 
tage per Incapac

Col. 12 ity
PercenIncapacPercenTotal tage per ity 13 tage per Cols. Col. 12 wks. To Col. 12 4, 6, &
6 months 8 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 PercenTotal tage per Injured Col. 12 Col. 12
10 
11 12
Chapter II The Penetration of Social Forces into Medicine1 2
[1902]
The art of healing has always been a field of knowledge open to all possible
influences that periodically dominated it until replaced by another. Beside the
empirical and practical, over time chemistry, physics, technical and
philosophical considerations forced themselves on every aspect of medicine.
Every advancement in any science filled medicine with new ideas and the
enormous amount of material that is before us today reveals, in addition to
justified influences of other sciences, traces of antiquated and unfounded views.
Many of these traces can be found in medical terminology and can on occasion
have a disastrous influence on a physician's judgment, adversely shape laymen's
opinions, distort people's views, and adversely affect common sense. Medicine's
open borders attract a whole host of fantastic notions and not too infrequently
make the art of healing into a playground for religious, philosophical,
astrological and alchemistical games.
In more enriching ways, the benefits of intellectual progress poured over
medicine's open borders. These remained and made our discipline more fruitful.
Today, we see the innumerable treasures of this synthesis that have permeated
every strand of medical science. Etiological research as well as symptomatology
have drawn into their service physics, chemistry, ethnology, and anthropology.
Medical diagnosis has become a true work of wonders in which all theorems,
achievements and inventions in all branches of science are playing a role. The
colossal treasure of therapy encompasses all fields of science and holds the
elementary keys to human understanding, as well as the most artful creations in
the fields of optics, mechanics, chemistry, electricity, and technology, while
constantly drawing from philosophy and practical experience.
From this synthesis of medicine and other sciences the most significant for
our time is the coming together of medicine and optics. The instrument which
here came to the aid of medicine was the microscope. Our entire field of
medicine gives proof of the fruitfulness of this synthesis. The most important
problems in medicine are now seen in a new light; truths that lasted thousands of
years, as well as more recent truths, have been dethroned and cast into the trash

heap. More respectable and unshakable dogmas of cytology and pathology arose
and are valid to this day. If this demolished the reigning theory and if dogmas
and superstitions were barred from medicine by the theory of monism, there then
followed in short order the equally pernicious crisis and revision in the etiology
of diseases. Clearly, a powerful impulse was given to applied bacteriology, to
hygiene, and now, something that had never occurred before, the path toward
improved public health lay open. If, before, causal therapy had always been the
goal of medicine, there now has appeared a common causal principle for fighting
many illnesses. It is the struggle against possibly the last cause of illnesses,
parasites.
1 From "Aerztliche Standeszeitung" (Physician's Professional Publication) a
bi-weekly paper representing the interest of Austria's physicians. First issue,
dated Vienna, 15 July
1902. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
This is the foundation on which the primary structure of public health has
been built. It brought about what the greatest minds in medicine had never
dreamed possible, -- not healing, but prevention.
Along this path, which revealed the necessary conditions for parasites to
exist, hygiene also came upon a principle common to all illnesses, social misery.
Thus, medical science progressed to where it had to confront social misery
which it was forced to take into consideration in combating illnesses.
The fruits of these efforts were not only an improvement in public medical
care, but also an advance in hygiene to better the standard of living for the
impoverished classes, shorten the work day, provide work-free Sundays,
increase hospitals, establish health insurance, provide old age care, offer
accident insurance, child care centers, expanded and improved public schools,
etc. In short, hygiene opened a whole new world, including that of medical
science. In that field there followed quickly the growth of etiology and in
therapy a recognition of the path to follow.
True, this did not yet open the way. Raising the nation's standard of living
encountered such huge resistance that it had to be presented as causal medicine.
However, because of the difficulty faced in immediately attaining this end other
valuable palliating means became indispensable.
Another line of development that intersected at this point is the so-called
care for the poor. The state, which regarded poverty in a large part of the
population not as an accidental phenomenon but as a necessity, itself assumed
the task of eliminating the most grievous conditions of poverty. The industrial

state was forced to be concerned about the military, its need for trained workers
and, not least of all, its fear of epidemics breaking out among the downtrodden
that could spread to the affluent parts of the population or, to put it less crassly,
but also less aptly, it showed concern for the public good. Signs of these efforts
are relief, physicians for the poor, and over the past years, health insurance,
public welfare organizations, better living and working conditions, etc.
As much progress as had been made in this area, the state would have been
unable to garner the fruits of this new awareness had it not been for socially
minded physicians, who, for little money, and by providing free service for the
most important needs, had assumed the entire burden of social welfare. Every
day proves how successful physicians have been in this endeavor.
The third line of development that relates to the other two resulted from the
natural ascendance of the working class. The greater intelligence of workers,
their progress in organizing and their greater awareness of a common interest led
to a struggle against the deprivation of their rights or property, and just as
naturally called for demands for improved hygienic conditions. Thus came calls
for shorter workdays, their own health and accident insurance organizations, care
for the disabled, even demands for voting and citizenship rights.
There is still more that can be said in this context . I should have to
describe how each of these developments brought about the growth of medicine.
From health insurance evolved sanatoriums and convalescent homes; from
orphanages came nurseries and childrens’ homes. Even the milk supply is slowly
being incorporated into the area of hygiene. Insurance companies, which
approach medicine from a different perspective than the physician, gave impetus
to enlightenment about the dangers of alcohol and venereal diseases, and
casualty insurance companies, through their premiums, promoted first aid
stations that physicians still do not fully appreciate.
Thus medicine today plays a role in every government activity. It is also
government regulations and health measures that attack pending problems of
therapy. Medicine has become a public problem that occupies lawyers and
technicians perhaps to a greater degree than physicians. Over the heads of
physicians the burning questions of workers' health, as well as extensive public
health problems such as tuberculosis, venereal disease, and infectious diseases of
all sorts are being attacked. This actually is due in large measure to medicine's,
above all the physicians', willingness to allow themselves to be taken in tow by
the government instead of taking the lead in these developments. There was a
time when these problems were in the limelight, but burdened by every day
problems, and false hopes in the success of their routine physical examinations,
physicians have lost a broader perspective. Once a young Virchow and like-

minded people vehemently pushed social solutions for dealing with illnesses.
When the state later also went in that direction it practiced caution and care so as
not to succumb too far to a demanding public. However, it is not accidental that
the bold founder of cellular pathology, who regarded the body as a cellular
social organization, was the first to daringly call for a social therapy.
Let us not be fooled ! The last, and perhaps the most fruitful result of
orthodox medicine, the decline of a diphtheria mortality rate to about 15%, can
only give satisfaction to the physician who had become accustomed to the earlier
high mortality rate, but it will never assuage the people nor tireless striving
science. And the question that now should be asked is so obvious: Why should it
not also be possible to do here what was done with other infectious diseases like
cholera, pestilence, leprosy, and smallpox?
Currently, tuberculosis, infant deaths, and health care for students are in the
forefront of medicine. However, we, the practical physicians, are not in a
position to advance recommendations that are in our best interest and in those of
the people. Nor do most of our colleagues have the confidence to judge the
technical aspects of these problems, which will explain in part that the solution
to these problems will go astray in harmful directions. Yet, it would be so simple
to assume command over these problems and, as Spencer said, to become the
leaders of mankind!
I should also discuss a fourth line that concerns the course the medical
profession will take. Here again we shall find those social-like tendencies that
will be brought about by a uniting of those with power. I cannot ignore this line
of development in this short discourse. Only when this line melds with the others
can there be a beginning of confident and goal oriented action in medicine. Only
then can mankind deal with the worldwide problem of disease and leave behind
the era of uncertain, difficult, and often hopeless therapy to enter a period of
successful prevention, leave behind the era of impotence and marginal cures, and
enter the age of conscious acting.
Chapter III
An Academic Chair for Social Medicine1 2
[1902]
The most valuable fruit of its efforts that medicine has offered the nation is
in the form of preventive medicine. Wherever preventive measures have been
applied they met all expectations. Preventive medicine saved us from a whole
host of European diseases, kept us free of exotic diseases, and is busy pursuing

constantly arising epidemics in order to keep them in check. Wherever
preventive medicine has been widely practiced its rewards have not
disappointed. Its success has been marginal only where it was used sparingly and
where, instead of social medicine and extensive cooperative efforts, useless
bureaucratic or political rules were dispersed, and the spirit of medicine was
abandoned for sterile, bureaucractic paperwork.
We would be happy to believe that those called upon to perform public
health service carry out their tasks dutifully. Altogether, medical statistics have
become such an essential instrument that only a fool would want to reject them.
The question that remains, however, is whether conclusions drawn from such
statistics and from the findings of medical personnel are responsive to the needs
of the people. The question is whether the highest authorities would accept
objective findings and whether the proper attention is paid by the state to its
most important task, the health of the people. Here, given the current situation,
are the rocks on which state healthcare will founder. The people in this matter
have been incapacitated from exerting any influence while the government,
whoever they claim to represent, is, as always, a toy in the hands of the mighty.
Until the people are able to create their own health care system untold
numbers of victims will be sacrificed. Does the current state of hygiene in the
homes protect us from tuberculosis? Does current school hygiene protect our
children from scarlet fever and diphtheria? Do orphanages, nurseries, milk and
market sanitary measures diminish the massive illnesses among infants? Do
police measures stem venereal diseases that poison the country?
The ruling parties crush every incentive for improving sanitary conditions.
All demands for hygienic conditions, all demands made to ease the life of the
poor receive the same answer: We have no money! Millions of our people are
ailing and dying, but the elected representatives in the parliament, state houses,
and on community boards have no money! Let pestilence continue; they are
protected but have no money for the others!
1 According to Heinz Ansbacher, although the author was listed as
“Alladin,” it was probably a disguise for Adler. Originally published in
Aerztliche Standeszeitung, No. 7, Vienna, 15 October 1902. 
2New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
Or, they are moved to tears and start talking glibly. They use big words but
again have no money! Then come enactments in small measures, a little bit here
and a little bit there. It is surprising how they can come up with such
shenanigans that make up our health regulations. A lot of rules but no uniform
health code!

On the one hand are statesmen and community preachers who, with no
understanding of public health, reject all urgent demands or minimize them to
nothing. On the other hand there is a case-by-case medical policy. No wonder
that in our country sickness sprouts and medical science shrinks. Partly there are
unknown authorities who watch over our health, partly there is a minimal health
care system that hobbles after bad situations. The truth is that today neither
science nor the knowledgeable segment of the population, the physicians, can
participate in any discussion on hygiene.
If this abysmal situation is to end it requires above all a central organization
that is authorized to act by both the state and the experts. Also needed are an
academic chair and a seminar for social medicine. These would investigate the
applicability of health measures to social needs, thoroughly explore questions of
social hygiene, and arrive at a uniform solution. Theoretical studies and practical
work would thus be combined tocreate a staff of experienced physicians who
could successfully address healthcare authorities. Social medicine would have
found a place where it could arm itself for a serious struggle with the enemies of
the people’s welfare. Hygienics, statistics, and the national economy in alliance
with medicine could then point the way toward more worthy goals for the nation.
There will be objections. What can research, the ideal science, accomplish
in a country where even laws are only on paper? Well, we also do not expect the
solution for what ails social medicine from an academic chair. However, a chair
and the method of its workings would at least provide the basis for a system to
untangle the mess, which is our health care. The lights that would be lit would
not only shine into the minds and hearts of those who pay attention but would
continue to enlighten the people themselves. Give us ten years of public health
instruction, liberate hygienics from the bonds of politics and graft, and then let
us discuss epidemics.
Such an academic chair would be of immeasurable value for the medical
profession. The time has finally passed when it was thought that the more
illnesses abound the better for the physicians. Exactly the opposite is true. A
high incidence of illness is an indication of a people impoverished and without
any feeling for the value of good health. Not only are such people unable to pay
physicians their fees but they also rob the medical profession of its esteem and
respect. The fewer illnesses in a nation the greater the appreciation for good
health and respect for physicians. If it were only possible for the medical
profession by means of a chair for social medicine to eliminate from public
health dilettantish behavior and chance and replace it with professionalism and a
system of preventive medicine it would be a blessed gift for the nation and for
physicians. We believe that every program meant to serve physicians must above

all insist on creating a chair for social medicine.
Chapter IV Town and Country (Part 1)1 2
[1903]
However one examines the structure and development of our social life the
picture is always the same. The arduous struggle of the individual for health and
a livelihood seldom leads to the shortest path to healing. Hardly has someone
somehow found the right path then circumstances and outside influences crowd
the seeker onto another path. The extent to which expanded commerce and
industrial development changed the relationship of town to country will be more
closely discussed in what follows. The problems regarding this relationship seem
to have recently grown in interest. Two good publications by physicians should
serve to stimulate and inform those concerned with this subject. These are E.
Roth’s “Die Wechselbeziehungen zwischen Stadt und Land in gesunheitlicher
Beziehung und die Sanirung des Landes“ [The Interrelationship Between Town
and Country from a Health Perspective and the Rehabilitation of the Country],
Braunschweig, Friedrich Vieweg & Son, 1903, and the earlier appearing book by
Wilhelm Ebstein “Dorf-und Stadthygiene” [Village and Town Hygienics],
Stuttgart, Ferdinand Enke, 1902.
It is high time to revise the opinion of those who still maintain that living in
the country is idyllic and that from a health standpoint there can be no
comparison with those living in the city. As justified as that opinion might have
been in earlier times it no longer can be held today because of the improved
sanitary conditions in the growing cities, and the ignorance in villages on the
subject of hygiene. Still to be found are the landowners and large farmers who
boast about health conditions but the great mass of the country population is less
protected against sickness and suffers from a higher mortality rate than city
people. Not infrequently health conditions in the same province and in the same
county are significantly better in the towns than in the surrounding villages.
When the entire European country population is compared with city dwellers
then, despite disagreements in some quarters, one must come to the conclusion
that the level of good health in both is at almost the same level. However, what
must be taken into serious consideration is that the improvement of health
among the city population is at a faster pace than in the villages.
It is clear from the outset that the progress made toward better health in the
cities is due to the health care facilities made possible by the greater means
available and the pressure of real need. The greater prospects for passing and

executing uniform laws in clearly defined and controllable cities, in spite of
continued shortcomings, has helped to establish the massive task of creating
better health conditions in the cities. A greater intimacy with the culture and a
growing desire by the people pressing for an improved “standard of living” are
primary factors in the hygienic cleansing process. Furthermore, not to be
forgotten is the higher level of education and receptivity of the city dweller who,
if he does not succumb to the burden of poverty, will open his heart more
willingly to matters of health.
1 Originally published in Aerztliche Standeszeitung, Vienna, 15 September
1903, Vol 2, No. 18. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
Another factor must also be taken into consideration. In all civilized
European states there is a tendency toward a greater population growth in the
cities than in the country. In Germany the cities swallow up entire new
generations from the country. The consequences of industrial growth slowly give
cities a clear political advantage. Whatever the government offers in terms of
health reforms and whatever powerful political parties can win by passing
measures to protect the health of the population, fall into the lap of the cities.
Workers’ protection laws, accident and health insurance, laws for the protection
of women, children, and the pregnant have little validity in the country.
Added to these advantages for city dwellers are the many hygienic
improvements that have taken place over the last decades in all cities. Their
shortcomings will not be glossed over here. In Austria, in particular, the
authorities managed the feat of keeping healthcare in the cities at village levels.
The “Prague typhus”, an Austrian specialty, can claim its potency because of
obvious and clearly avoidable failures and mistakes. Not only Prague but the
entire country and countries abroad had a responsibility to eliminate this sad
export article as soon as possible. When we, at this point, therefore, give
preference to the cities, we only do so with the fatal reservation that in this
country proof to the contrary unfortunately can easily be shown. However, as a
whole it cannot be denied that the most significant achievements in sanitation so
far has taken place mainly in the cities. The concern for clean drinking water,
canalization, road construction, practical homes, and healthy food can actually
only be found in cities.
There are still enough disadvantages to be found in cities. The lack of good
air and its air pollution, the density of living quarters which exposes everyone to
any infectious disease, the growing perils of traffic, the dangers found in the
workplace, the cunning way food is adulterated, and the colossal increase of

people chronically undernourished makes any progress in social medicine less
apparent. Nevertheless, with regard to the cities the direction is clear: The
medical needs are known and have partially been satisfied. Their total fulfillment
can no longer be stopped and is increasingly becoming a question of the social
elevation of the working class. How much can be achieved within the limited
current framework can be seen in several well run cities. Ebstein published a
mortality table for the city of Göttingen based on 1000 inhabitants:
For the years 1866-1875 ......20 
“ ” “ 1876-1885 ......18.2 “ ” “ 1886-1895 ......16.6 “ ” “ 1869-1899 ......14.5 “ ” “
1901 ................14.6
While the mortality rate during the first year for live births in the German
empire amounted to over 20%, in Göttingen the mortality rate is as follows: 
For the years 1880-1889 ......16.7% 
“ 1890-1899 ......14.8% 
“ 1901 .......11.7%
Town and Country (Part 2 - Continuation)3
From these and other disadvantages found in the cities, to which alcoholism
and prostitution must be added as most important, the village dweller, because of
the constraints and confines of country life, is protected as long as these dangers
do not invade his country home. At the moment, the most important health factor
for the country dweller is clean air, which is what first comes to mind when
praising the health advantages of living in the country. It is free of the pollution
caused by the many chimneys and of the effluvia of thousands of homes and the
hundreds of thousands of people in the cities. The good air that emanates from
forests, plains, and fields unquestionably is fundamental for good health. Added
to this is the sun which cleanses and energizes everything and which invigorates
young and old village dwellers. Actually, work in the country is conducted out
of doors and does not force the active population into unhealthy quarters. In
addition, the country dweller is required periodically to rest from work which is
far more agreeable than working in an industry. However, village life suffers
from two brutal oppressors: poverty and ignorance. Most authorities, including
our two sources, wish instead to promote the “conservatism” of the country
dweller, as if they could, or knew how to improve their situation. This concerns,
above all, the dirty houses, farms, and village streets, manure piles, puddles, and
dunghills which so often contaminate wells or kitchens. The disgusting primitive
privies or their absence, the proximity of stables and living quarters, the crowded

rooms, mostly without floors, covered with decades-old dirt, dirty kitchen
utilities, and homes lacking in air and light present a picture of a civilization that
was left behind. These conditions, of course, go along with poor personal
cleanliness and represent an ensemble that Erismann had correctly dubbed
village squalor.
3 Originally published in Aerztliche Standeszeitung, Vienna, 1 October 1903,
Vol. 2, No. 19.
It is no wonder that under such conditions the health of villagers must
suffer. Furthermore, it should not be surprising that despite all the advantages
that nature provides the country population the danger to their health continues.
As we shall discuss later, it also endangers the cities and explains the large
number of epidemics in the countryside. The tendency not to counteract these
dangers cannot be dismissed by pointing to the conservatism and indolence of
country people. Only too obvious to us is the deteriorating condition of villagers,
their growing debts, and their painful struggle for life’s necessities which often
is not worth it. If such a poverty stricken population must maintain their own
schools when they must improve their economic conditions alone then schools
and progress are not in the best of hands.
Consider the extensive damage done to village populations by an
insufficient water supply! Just as vital as water regulations is the necessity to
institute sanitary measures for buildings, homes and villages, and regulations by
the state for the care of streets, sewers, and village ponds. Also lacking are state
regulations for schools, for extending hospital and accident insurance to farm
workers, for limiting work requirements for pregnant women and for protecting
children, for supervising the cottage industry, for controls over food, and for the
organization of nursing care.
The uniform enforcement of sanitary protective measures in towns and
villages is becoming an increasingly greater necessity. The growing commerce
in culturally advanced countries touches so many aspects of daily life that a
unilateral effort to improve sanitation in the cities while ignoring the villages is
no longer possible. One need only think of daily expanding giant cities right next
to villages where, totally unaffected by the enormous expenditures of funds by
the cities, potable drinking water is lacking and no sewers exist. Yet, these rural
communities with underdeveloped health care systems are in a close relationship
with cities with which they only share hygienic disadvantages. Not infrequently
such villages become the place for dumping refuse, bringing thousands of
diseases into the countryside only to be reintroduced into the city by way of
laborers, tourists, or food supplies. At other times the effluence from the city
flows into a river that serves a village down-river with drinking water. Dust,

soot, and bacteria can be blown by the wind into the country, or factories are
moved into poor neighborhoods where they vent their health threatening
effluence.
No village market police can prevent the consumption of spoiled food or
the butchering, often by necessity, done stealthily or under improper supervision.
When an epidemic breaks out not only is there precarious medical help in
villages but days go by before medical intervention is possible, thus leaving
enough time to infect an entire village which is then followed by the
contamination of the city.
Town and Country (Part 3 - Conclusion)4
Even the hygienic condition of villages located far from cities should not be
neglected when it comes to ensuring the sanitary conditions of cities. It is, after
all, the country that provides the city with food. It is, therefore, only right that in
the interest of the city attention is paid to the sources of food. Furthermore, if
one considers the large number of people who periodically travel to the country
for their health, and who reside there for months, it would be well to be
concerned about the quality of village water for drinking and washing. Added to
these are the large number of people who take excursions into the country, the
bicyclists and tourists who not infrequently have their fun spoiled by the dangers
that could be avoided by better hygienic conditions in the villages. Then there is
the increasingly close contact between country and city dwellers because of the
recruitment in villages of men for military service who are then stationed in city
barracks, or when on maneuvers are quartered in villages. Furthermore, there are
commercial relations between city and country dwellers resulting from business,
and contacts when sick villagers are transported to the city and whose hygienic
condition should be important to city residents.
The significant harm done to country residents, and with that also to those
living in cities, is probably due to an inadequate supply of water for drinking and
washing in rurual areas. The role played by contaminated water in spreading
typhus and cholera has long been known. The fact that it causes gastritis and
gastroenteritis and that dysentery and possibly also perityphlitis are caused at
times by polluted water has been supported by much research. City authorities,
which can barely provide their population with clean drinking water, are
confronted at the outset by insurmountable barriers in fighting these diseases. A
city becomes powerless the moment that an epidemic breaks out in a village
within its territory. It cannot prevent an epidemic that breaks out in a village

from spreading and gaining a firm foothold. The authorities are helpless when
such a disease is brought into their cities by travelers and the sick by
ambulances. They often cannot prevent the infection of city water when its
source lies in the water main or the pumping station. Because of the peculiar
situation that arises when a village has sole authority over where it obtains its
water the city has lost any say in that matter. In such cases only what benefits the
entire population should come under consideration. Only a general state law on
water supply and state support can protect the city from the drawbacks found in
the country.
Not any less are the dangers that face the cities that depend upon food coming
from poorly run villages. Foremost among the foods which can cause
4 Originally published in Aerztliche Standeszeitung, Vienna, Vol. 2, No. 20.
harm are milk and milk products, such as butter, and cheese. The most
recent observations of Behring show us this danger most glaringly. Bovine
tuberculosis has spread enormously. Koch’s theory about the difference between
human and animal tuberculosis are based on considerable experience supported
by powerful evidence. The tuberculosis problem in cities and in the country
urgently requires an early solution. The police supervision over markets is totally
inadequate and cannot stop the consumption of infected milk. Rightfully
hygienists demand that the supervision over milk must be where milk is
produced, and that precaution must be taken with regard to storage and
transportation. Above all it is clear that only large-scale producers or
cooperatives are economically able, either freely or with state laws, to achieve a
level where technical and sanitary progress can be achieved. The vanishing of
individual or small plant milk producers would be most welcomed.
Judged against the health damage caused by impurities, contamination, and
the infection of milk with tuberculosis germs, other ways that milk could be
harmful, although still significant, are not as serious. It may suffice merely to
heat milk to give protection from those dangers. It has been established that
scarlet fever, typhus, and diphtheria can be caused by drinking infected milk. In
those cases, in contrast to tuberculosis, milk was improperly stored or
transported. Occasionally infection is caused by anthrax and the transmission of
hoof and mouth disease to humans. Serious infections can result with milk from
septic cows, particularly from those with hemorrhaging enteritis. Spoiled milk
can cause toxic symptoms, milk poisoning, and very often is the cause of fatal
intestinal illnesses in infants.
Other dangers stem from unsanitary country bakeries and from a lack of
supervision of village butchers. There is a need in these areas also to enforce
strict sanitary conditions. Only at hygienically administered large-scale plants

and under the strict supervision of slaughterhouses, in tandem with the growth of
consumers unions which can ensure unadulterated food, can the dangers that
threaten from these quarters be eliminated.
As becomes apparent, people living in cities have a great interest in raising
the health standards in the country. This, however, is not possible without
significant help from social medicine. It is for that reason that all the experts
demand that the authority of our country physicians be greatly expanded. This
must be accompanied by extending, or better said, instituting adequate medical
care so that those living in the country have available to them physicians, nurses,
medical equipment, and facilities whenever the need arises.
Chapter V State Aid or Self Help (Part 1)1 2
[1903]
A basic problem for the medical profession that can no longer be ignored
concerns the question who will respond to the demands of the medical
organization. If the various political efforts by the medical profession in this
regard were to be examined in that light it would leave our ruling circles in the
dark. Many of the weapons that the physicians thought to employ undoubtedly
stem from the arsenal of self help. The medical profession’s tactics made clear
that its effort was meant only to reach a certain point at which the government,
the state, was to take over the leadership from the physicians.
If we ask ourselves, however, what interest the government has in
stemming at any cost the decline of the medical profession’s standing the answer
will not be simple. At times, one hopes for the appearance of quaint visionaries
who believe that the state has the responsibility for dealing with all kinds of
problems and interests, that it must have an ethical and humane character, that it
looks to the future, acts with a social conscience, and listens not only to the
wishes of the mighty, but also to those of the little people. Given our political
sophistication, we in Austria will certainly not distinguish ourselves. Our
government structure does not lend itself to generous policies but rather to
putting to shame the most talented people. What we have seen year after year
based on the intentions of our quick changing governments, and what we register
by their nakedness, is that no government can set into motion anything other
than the business of the politically influential segments of the population, and
show concern for their interests.
Are the social measures passed by various governments to protect the weak
an exception to this point of view, or do they present contrary evidence? They do

not. Those familiar with the history of our government’s social policies know
that the minimal demands for the protection of the poor represent only the
shabbiest progress in worker protection laws wrestled and wrung from the ruling
circles in face of the massive weight of the working class. Therefore, whatever
the responsible heads of government agencies for regions and communities in
this respect had achieved does not deserve special recognition, not to speak of
praise, any more so than the work of a machinist who with oil reduces friction.
The challenge to the medical profession, those physicians chosen for this task, is
to reduce friction. The status of the profession at one time was much
1 Originally published in Aertliche Standeszeitung, No. 21, Vienna, 1 November
1903. 2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
higher and even continued to be politically more influential as long as the
entire medical profession clearly presented itself as being essential to the state.
As long as the whole country was infested with a whole host of diseases that
favored neither the poor nor the rich and could not be held in check without the
artistry of physicians there was no problem in upholding and advancing
physicians. It can even be said that the entire tradition, yes, even the regard for
our profession, stems from that time. However, the ties of the medical profession
to the entire population were cut as medicine in its further development
introduced modern hygiene. After having accomplished outstanding medical
preparatory work, that effort was passed into the hands of technicians, who
under their own authority assumed the task of guarding the health of the
population. Then, under the pretense of meeting the needs of the poor for
medical care, barely less than one half of that part of the population was
provided medical insurance.
The medical needs of the ruling circles were provided by physicians
employed in the regions and communities to serve them. These circles evaded
even the most reasonable constraints by placing the medical practice under a
bureaucracy. Tied hand and foot and bereft of their inalienable right to free
initiative these colleagues of ours carry out their thankless tasks under the
dictates of lawyers and politicians. They search to no avail for influence or
meaning among the population and in no way do they increase respect for the
practicing physician.
What remains are the physician functioning under a health insurance plan.
They perform in an area where the physician is an essential requirement. The
law specifically recognizes his indispensability. We just want to ask ourselves:
Did this insurance plan raise the prestige of physicians in the eyes of the people?
Unfortunately, we have to note that this is not the case. The work of these

physicians is looked at askance and the physicians themselves are often at the
command, and even the slaves, of the insurance organization. The organization’s
leadership is bound by its profits and keeps both physician and patient as much
in check as possible. This is not to argue against self-governing! It is a term
associated with the political influence of the workers’ union and as such must be
respected. However, no fiendish mind could have fashioned this three cornered
relationship of administration by an insurance plan, physician, and patient in a
more ugly manner than it appears under this scheme. In order not to lose any
ground gained all progress is resisted, leaving health care, the sweet fruit of what
social work has accomplished, at a standstill. Instead of improving health care,
the most essential care, and instead of promoting fruitful mutual trust there has
been nothing but destructive mistrust. Had physicians won back the people with
consideration and by diligent involvement with them, and had they documented
their essential role in lifting them up, with regard to this and similar problems,
their importance would undoubtedly be recognized again. Just as certain, raising
the standing of physicians would have had a beneficial impact on social
legislation.
Does anyone believe that any member of the ruling circles has the slightest
interest in all this? That by lifting the standing of the medical profession they
would set aside the whip to goad physicians on? Our rulers are in the fortunate
position where they can calmly postpone any social progress. Would they
without any reason, and the decline of the medical profession in its current state
can give them no reason, agree to diminish their powers with new social
initiatives? The state, consisting of the leaders of the politically influential
classes, has given the medical profession all the help it was required to provide
and did so begrudgingly. What is left of the physicians’ standing no longer is
absolutely essential and, therefore, is of no importance.
State Aid or Self Help (Part 2 - Conclusion)3
With what had been happening over the last few days we could actually
save ourselves the effort to continue with the observations that follow. The
debate in the Landtag and the address by the representative from Lower Austria
clearly manifest the standing of the medical profession among the leading
circles, and the low regard in which the need for physicians is held. Even more,
the cited passages reflect the attempt by laughable means to debase even further
the skills of physicians in the eyes of the population. As said at the outset, we
could actually conclude at this point and instead of further discussion write: The

medical profession under current conditions cannot hope for anything from the
governing circles, nor is there any use in asking. It would be self-deluding to
count on state support for the medical profession.
However, in order to continue our theme we should still mention the
military medics who, by their order, the military, unquestionably are regarded a
necessity. They are subordinated to a particular discipline, are separate from the
medical profession, and fall outside the scope of our observations.
Insofar as the state is now employing permanent staff physicians for its
most essential functions, such as for the police and the military, it could not
resist placing under its authority medical research and the teaching of medicine.
Since medical science has the potential for enormous development it seemed
advisable to the ruling factions to keep their hands on the brakes. For that reason
medical research is not to develop unbridled but is to keep pace with the
floundering social measures of our time. For the same reason the authorities
appoint teachers, limit the growth of our schools, and begrudge the teaching of
essential subjects in hygiene and social medicine. The government justifies such
reactionary measures on the grounds of preventing reactionary striving and the
possible development of
3 Originally published in Aerztliche Standeszeitung, No. 22, 15 November 1903.
friction. We pay, however, dearly with the reputation and renown of our medical
schools.
Since a medical faculty unquestionably is one of a country’s necessities the
government sees to it that not too many clinics are without a staff. The teachers’
task is to train a necessary staff of medical administrators without which the
function of the state to supervise the medical profession would be impossible.
Since the population in cases of illness still seeks the counsel and help of the
practical physician it behooves the state to provide training for this profession.
Finally the well to-do circles would also want to enjoy the advantages of being
able to use the teachers of this science as practical physicians and as specialists.
Enough of that. As unsuitable as this system is for furthering the
development of the science of medicine it nevertheless suffices to satisfy the
most essential needs of the state. However, it can achieve nothing more. The
decline of Vienna’s medical schools is in the first instance due to our ruling
classes.
We would of course not ignore the importance of independently practicing
physicians who serve a part of our population. Their importance is due solely to
their competence, compliance, and character, qualities that are acquired over
many worrisome years. However, throughout a physician’s career reasonable
recognition of his work is contested by an increasing competition offering plenty

of advice, but lacking any understanding for the need of improving preventive
and health measures. Added to this is the systematic undermining of the
physician’s esteem by the leaders of the ruling parties. A passive reaction to this
by the medical profession will certainly further diminish the physician’s worth in
the eyes of knowledgeable people. This may be a way of evading the problem
facing doctors and perhaps eventually the call for community physicians in the
countryside will slowly subside.
As cozy as this system might appear to the ruling circles the inherent
contradictions in the performance of the medical profession and the problems
created by the state are so enormous that time alone must destroy that system.
However, even the most modest progress that the medical profession can forge
will always be countered by that system. To expect help from the state would be
utopian, if not foolish. The medical profession can shape its future only by its
own powers.
Chapter VI The Physician as Educator1 2
[1904]
The problem of rearing as encountered by parents and teachers is easily
underestimated. It would seem after centuries of civilization that the
controversial questions surrounding the raising of children would have been
resolved. It would also seem that everyone having learned this could pass it on to
others and with a clear understanding of an individual’s potential and goals
function effectively and fruitfully. What a fallacy that is! No other experience
could impress upon us as clearly the subjectiveness of our views and our
thinking and the extent to which the way we lead our lives is animated by our
will. There is an almost insurmountable force that guides every step of those
raising children to force them to follow their paths and make them like
themselves not only in the way they act but also in their view of life and
temperament. Bringing up a child according to a pattern, or educating the child
toward a particular pattern, was often, and still is, the guiding star of parents.
Unjustified, of course! However, everyone who does not consciously resist it
follows that star.
A fleeting glance shows us the multifariousness of personal traits. No child
is like any other and in each child there are traces of his traits that can be
observed into old age. Yes, everything that we can see in a human being, admire,
or hate is nothing but the sum of his characteristics and the manner in which he
makes himself known to the outside world. With this view of the relationship of

characteristics to personality it should be clear that there can be no discussion of
a total eradication of original traits, whether or not they suit the educator. What
is possible in the art of education can be stated concisely as our ability either to
further traits or to stem their development, or, and this is more practicable, to
guide specific traits toward social goals that cannot be attained without
education or with the wrong methods.
From this can also be derived the precept that the role of educator is not for
everyone. Disposition and development are significant for the educator when
judged in terms of the impact he makes. He must be exemplary in making
deliberate judgments. He must know the heights and depths of the human soul.
He must be able to scrutinize his own qualities and their development as well as
those of others. He must have the strength to overcome his own personal
tendencies and to immerse himself into the personality of another and to scoop
out of the shaft of another's soul whatever is lacking for growth. If among
1 Originally published as "Der Artz als Erzieher" in Heilen und Bilden. 2 New
translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
thousands there is one individual endowed with such natural resources, that
person is an educator. 
Our verdict will be no different when we judge the characteristics and
capabilities of a good physician. He also must be exceptionally endowed with
the ability to make deliberate judgments. The human soul must become a
familiar instrument and, like the educator, he must avoid wasting his strength on
superficial manifestations. With an ever alert interest he must work on the roots
and drives of every anomaly and must understand how to reach the path that
leads from the symptom to the source of an illness. He must be free from being
overwhelmed by self-delusion for he, like the educator, must know and be able
to master himself and uncover with clear logic and intuition the healing forces in
the patient, awaken them, and nurture them.
The educational power of physicians and of medical science is enormous. It
leaves in all areas of prophylaxis imperishable traces and moves the best people
to work actively in this field. We are the first line of defense in the struggle
against alcoholism and infectious diseases. Physicians initiated the cry for help
against the sexual diseases' crushing effect on the vitality of the individual. Until
an effective cure is available, the assault of tuberculosis has been withstood only
through constant education and warnings by physicians. The horror of infant
death that for decades has been accepted as sacrosanct murder and barbarity has
now been illuminated by science and become a focal point in the battle for
eradication. School hygiene eagerly awaits the start of seeing fruition from its
efforts and looking forward toward freeing itself from the brazen grip of miserly

administrators. A wealth of generous and valuable advice inundates the people
day after day and if not much of that comes to fruition it is because the
educational services and welfare are not in the hands of physicians.
In the area of children's physical education the physician's dominant
position is unquestioned. The amount and type of nourishment, the
apportionment of work to recreation and play, training and physical development
should, and, in cases of need, must be regulated by the physician. The
overseeing of the child's physical development, the immediate relief in cases of
sudden distress, is one of the physician's most important professional duties. Not
the treating and healing of sick children, but the protection of children from
illness is medical science's most consequent and loftiest objective.
The development of the body cannot be separated from training the mind.
Participation in the latter is not too frequently afforded the physician even
though with his objectivity and thoroughness he is particularly well equipped to
draw on valuable treasures from his rich lore of experience. Preyer's work on Die
Seele des Kindes -- The Soul of the Child3 -- provides a mass of fundamental
data that should be known to every educator. The work is far from having
exhausted the subject but offers material for judging and examining one's own
experiences. The same is true for Karl Grooss' book, Ueber das Seelenleben des
Kindes 4 -- On the
3 4th edition, Leipzig, Th. Griebens publisher 4 Berlin, Reuther & Reichardt
Inner Life of the Child , which is of greater interest to the psychologist.
Neither book strives to influence public education and for a number of reasons is
unable to do so. Perhaps it took Freud's forceful emphasis on children5 and the
description of the tragic conflicts that flow from anomalies in childhood
experiences for us to understand clearly the importance of early childhood
education.
In light of the total anarchy under which the development of children takes
place in their parents' home, we might understand that many noteworthy people
prefer the lack of any education over the forms of education available today.
Yet, there are a number of problems which, without the knowledge of a child's
psyche, cannot be resolved. Some of these constantly arising problems will be
discussed in what follows since we believe that the physician above all is called
upon to raise his voice.
As is well known, the education of the child is said to begin in the mother's
womb. The physician is obligated to advise the parents that only healthy people
are fit for propagation. His duty is to to point out that where there is alcoholism,
venereal disease, psychoses, epilepsy, tuberculosis, etc. the marriage is

endangered, and that there are harmful effects for posterity. The physical and
psychological care of the pregnant woman cannot be neglected; the importance
of nursing must be communicated.
Of greatest importance for the upbringing of the infant is diligence and
cleanliness. Nothing is easier than to foster a selfish cry-baby by constantly
catering to his need for nourishment. He will be unable to endure later not
having his wishes satisfied without becoming very upset. Education toward
cleanliness must above all serve as a powerful lever to further culture. A child
who has become used to keeping his body clean will later not be comfortable
with dirty things.
The neglect of physical education, as is commonly the practice in our time,
is certain to have adverse effects on the physical and mental health of the
individual. A good physical condition goes hand in hand with mental
development. Weak and sickly children easily lose the best support for their
mental progress: confidence in their own powers. The same can be found in
pampered children and those who have been overly protected by fearful parents.
They avoid all physical and mental demands and like to escape by simulating
illness. For that reason physical exercise like gymnastics, jumping, swimming,
and outside play must not be overlooked by the educator. Such activities give the
child selfconfidence and will later be manifested in personal courage and
strength, which, nourished by surplus sources of strength, will protect the child
from depravity.
Where the physician has to deal with children who are mentally retarded,
deaf, blind, or afflicted by cretinism his task will be to ascertain the extent of the
problem, estimate chances for curing or improving the condition and
5 S. Freud, Traumdeutung, (dream analysis), Deuticke, Vienna
recommending an appropriate, and at most times an individualized, treatment
and educational program.
The most important aid in education is love. Education can occur only with
love and affection for the child. We have observed time and again how children
pay attention to those they love and how they try to imitate them in their
movements, expression, and language. Such love cannot be overestimated since
it is the best insurance for making education possible. This love should be
divided equally between mother and father and everything must be done to avoid
excluding one or the other. Conflicts between parents and any criticism of
measures applied by one or the other should be kept secret from the child.
Preferring one child over another should be concealed since it would
immediately create bitter jealousy. As it is, it is difficult to dampen an older
child's jealousy -- exhibited in many ways -- of a newborn. On the other hand,

excessive love and effusiveness should be avoided. As comforting to parents it
may be, such excessiveness hampers the development of the child. Directing
love and affection toward ethically worthy striving, work, and diligence would
guarantee the right middle course.
When outsiders are in charge of the upbringing or educating of the child
such as a nurse, private teacher, governess, or a retired person, the parents must
be aware of the dangers inherent in transferring such a responsibility. Aside from
catching infectious diseases or exposure to obvious vices, one must question the
capability of a governess to replace a parent's love. Intimidated, bitter, and in
demeaning situations their entire life, such unfortunate creatures often are not
capable of seeing to a child's intellectual development.
Punishment cannot be avoided in upbringing. In such instances, however,
the only consideration must be improvement. Since beating a child no longer is
legal it must appear barbaric for children to be spanked. Whoever believes that a
child cannot be brought up without spanking admits to his or her incompetence
and should not become involved in bringing up a child. When punishment
cannot be avoided it should only be to demonstrate to the child the wrong done,
to show and teach the limits of the child's powers, and by depriving the child of
things that will not harm and will help him concentrate on what is better. Not
allowing the child to sit at the table with the parents, a short, serious warning, a
sharp glance should be sufficient. Denying the child food, which at the most
should only be fruits and candies, should only be done in extreme cases, such as
when the child stubbornly refuses to eat, and then only for short periods of time,
and to serve as severe punishment. We regard locking up a child to be just as
barbaric as beatings. We suspect that this kind of punishment has the same
adverse impact on the child's character as would the first jail sentence for a
youthful criminal. However, even light punishment, if applied too frequently,
can easily lead to repetition and harm the individual's self-respect. Swearing and
unusually harsh censure impedes chances for a successful upbringing. As with
all educational measures applied to the extreme it is easy for the child to become
used to them and then readily endure them later in life. Praise and reward, on the
other hand, can be accepted by the child in surprisingly large measure. Here also,
however, it is possible to do harm by exaggeration; the child then begins to
believe that all his actions are praiseworthy and starts looking for immediate
rewards. The upbringing of a child must be guided by far-seeing educators.
Education is not for the next day, but for the distant future. Above all,
consideration should be given that the child grows up with a clear knowledge
that the parents always are fair judges and, at the same time, loving protectors.
Among the normally punishable misdeeds of children, childish obstinacy

and lying are particularly noteworthy. Obstinacy in early childhood should be
carefully censured with friendly warnings. In the early years it means nothing
but a desire for independence. It is thus a positive symptom, that can turn bad
only when constantly praised. When older or in adulthood, however, constant
obstinacy is almost an impairment of the person's further development and can
then actually be deterred only by pointing to the harmful consequences and
calmly noting when they occur. In following this course, all references to a
supernatural intercession, such as God's punishment, must be avoided since that
would hide from the child the connection between cause and punishment. From
that aspect, even where children are obstinate the development of their
independence is threatened. Next to "yes" sayers there are an equal number of
"no" sayers, neither differs from the other in attitude and weakness in character.
The greatest confusion exists in cases of children lying. Since our whole
life is permeated by lies it should not be surprising to find that young children
lie. In fact, the very young lie in the most harmless ways. It begins with words
that lack any bad intent. Later, fantasies entail lies. These also should not be
taken seriously. They often are fed by too many fantastic tales and books and are
the result of an increasingly prevalent craving for status and dominance. Pointing
out the reality of things, substituting for fantasies true stories, nature stories, and
travel stories, and instituting physical activity makes a quick end to lying. In
later years the motives become much clearer. The most important reasons are
lying out of vanity, selfishness, and from fear. If the motives can be countered
effectively the lying also will stop. When fear or embarrassment are the cause of
lying, the blame falls on education. Under no condition should the child fear the
upbringer or educator. One would be ill advised letting a child participate in
lying or distorting of others and one should avoid in particular such expressions
as "Wait, I'll tell your father!" to make a child apologize. This increases the
tendency to lie and to say nothing. Confessions can become a natural crutch
when carelessly employed by parents and can lead to a tendency to keep secrets
and to avoid the truth. Good examples are a sure guarantee that lying will not
become rooted in the individual and bode well for the entire educational process.
On the other hand every sort of confrontation and inquisition will have a harmful
effect. The same applies to forcing apologies which should always come only
voluntarily. A highly effective means against lying is building a courageous
character that would reject lying as an intolerable disparagement.
Obedience by a child should not be forced but should be a natural result of
upbringing. The child must be allowed a freedom of choice. Nothing is more
egregious than continuous warnings, as so often is practiced. Since in some
instances it becomes unavoidable that the child obey, obedience should be

gained through understanding. Thus every directive should be understandable
and every unjust demand avoided since it shakes confidence in the parents.
Similarly, all useless, unfeasible, and constant threats should be avoided.
Unfairness toward the child by siblings or friends can be useful when applied to
demonstrate the value of fairness toward everyone.
In general, the educator is obligated to play the important role of being an
advocate for the orienting conscience of the child. He is responsible for leading
the child toward an understanding of how the forces and expressions of the
child's inner life relate, so as to prevent the child from going astray or being
misled by others. An all too frequently encountered type is the child who is
exceedingly fearful, overly shy and highly sensitive. These characteristics are
not useful for either work or play. Every loud noise scares such "scatter-brained"
children out of their dream world and when looking at them, they turn their eyes
away. Their humiliation in social settings, in school, and with physicians (fear of
doctors), always puts them to flight into loneliness. Serious admonitions
disappear without a trace, the humiliation remains, becomes more severe, and in
time the child becomes incapable of further development. There is no greater
anti-social element than withdrawal or cowardliness, particularly when it seems
to have been forced on the person. If necessary, I would feel confident making a
useful butcher, hunter, insect collector, or even surgeon, out of the most horrible
boy. The coward will always be culturally inferior. If one succeeds in
uncovering the roots of shyness, we can save that child from ruin and self-
righteousness. Usually such a child had gone through a period of the most bitter
feeling of inferiority. In their ignorance of the world and because of an
upbringing that lacked in understanding, such children constantly expect their
incompetence to be unmasked.
A cause of such manifestations is an inferiority of organs, which often
already found ways of compensating, or, just as serious, the consequences of a
strict or pampered upbringing. It deludes the child into seeing life's problems as
fearful, to regard others as hostile, and to think first and foremost of oneself.
At this point we cannot suppress several important comments. First of all,
under no circumstances, even where there have been sexual offenses, should a
child be made to be scared. This will never help attain one's goal. It takes
selfconfidence away from the child and brings him into horrible confusion.
Children who have been filled with fear regularly flee from life's problems and
will follow the same course when in adulthood confronted by distress from any
direction. Second, a child's selfconfidence, his personal courage, is his greatest
asset. Later in life courageous children will not expect their fate to be effected by
outside forces but will effect a change in their fortunes from inner strength.

Third, the child's natural drive for knowledge should not be thwarted. Most
children will pass through a stage where they will always ask questions. One
should never see this merely as bothersome. With these questions the child
reveals being puzzled by matters concerning his own existence and that all this
questioning really comes down to this: From where did I come? and where am I
going? As many of these questions should be answered as possible, and when
the child asks silly or foolish question, he should be told so. When it finally
comes to the one important question of conception it should be answered relative
to the child's development, beginning with plants or lower animals as an
explanation. This will lay the groundwork for the germ of an understanding of
the cosmic relativity and the unity of organic life.
On the other hand early sexual awakening should be delayed as long as
possible. What we know now is that sexuality exists in the earliest childhood
years. It can easily be heightened by careless or malicious treatment,
unseemliness, changes resulting from illness, by permitting coarseness, games,
also by common children’s games. The child likes to observe and is inquisitive.
The parents' bedroom should always be separate from that of the child. We can
speak of co-education, but must warn of carelessness and surprises that would
upset the child. Becoming aware of marital relations has a particularly
devastating effect on children. Jealousy of the mother or father should be
detected early and corrective measures should be taken.
A peculiar falling out with one's parents occurs mostly during puberty, and
not only with parents but with everything surrounding the child. Skepticism and
misgivings arise and boys in particular become prone to questioning any
authority. There is hardly any doubt that these manifestations appear with the
full recognition of sexual problems, with the awakening of the sexual drives,
with self-assertion and masculinity, and that often these developments become
excessive. This also is the time for sexual enlightenment which is carried out
best by the father, mother, older friend, or physician. The counselor, turned
educator, has the important task of using this time of doubt to nurture resistance
against incompetent authority and to augment negative feelings with
unvarnished information.
The child must be educated toward becoming a member of the community.
The family and school automatically turn in that direction, even if resisted. Any
diversion from that line threatens the child later with problems in adjusting for
work, love, and society. Therefore, only those are suitable as teachers and
educators who themselves have developed a social sense. Those who are
obdurate, individualistic, egotistic, or fatalistic, especially if they believe in
inherited qualities that cannot be changed, only cause harm. The same applies to

single-minded dogmatists who only want to educate according to a scheme of
their own and not in accordance with what society needs for its benefit.
Chapter VII Hygiene and Sex1 2(Part 1)
[1904]
In general we are not against listening to an objective discussion on the
subject of sex. The prudishness that sought to hold an entire generation in
harmful partial ignorance seems to have come to an end and parents as well as
educators are becoming aware of their responsibility in this area. Many parents
already know that children cannot be left to face in ignorance the blind urge of
the sexual drive. With diverted eyes and with words that hide more than they
reveal fathers and mothers throw out hints and leave it at that. Let the kids find
out the rest among themselves.
And they do and, naturally, in most inappropriate ways. Fantasies, hunches,
misunderstandings, lust, and sickly distorted ideas confuse the young minds.
They drive the youngsters to early sexual activity but at the same time create fear
and disgust. Often an entire classroom of children, not only in the middle
schools but also in the primary grades, is engaged in masturbation but the school
does not notice, or does not want to notice. What good would it do? Teachers
would not only be troubled but would certainly not be confident in being able to
steer away this vice. What should teachers do? What should they ignore? Which
is the right way?
Is there such a thing today as hygiene and sex? The literature gaudily
displayed in bookstore windows, so popular for its “advice” or for providing
“guidelines,” and read so eagerly by young and old, does not deserve to be taken
seriously here. Altogether, the shameful cultural abuses that flood the field of
sexual hygiene add even more to the harm being done. There is hardly a
neurasthenic among whose treasure of books such publications cannot be found.
Occasionally a genuine physician will make himself heard but until now a
complete clarification on this subject has been missing. This also applies to the
problems of “preventing the all too rich blessing of children,” prostitution, and
the prevention of venereal diseases.
A distinguished personage now has raised his voice. “In this short paper,
subjects that have usually been left unmentioned from fearful shame will be
discussed without holding back.” With these words, Professor Max Gruber,
whose memory we Vienna physicians hold dear, introduced his publication on
Hygiene des Geschlechtslebens [Hygiene of Sex] (Stuttgart, Ernst Heinrich

Moritz, 1904). Written for the male layman it must also be of value to physicians
for its organization of themes, its personal tone, and for the masculine language
employed by a prominent ethical and intellectual person. The starting point of
Gruber’s observations seems to reside in the current strongly developing efforts
by physicians to prevent sexual diseases. Because of the close interrelationship
of problems concerning sexuality and venereal diseases the subject of sexual
hygiene takes on a character of submissiveness, flattery, and undue cleverness.
On the other hand, it is easy to understand that insight into the extensive harm
done by sexual activity tempts our author into opportunism. We thus, owe our
gratitude to Gruber not only for a work that teaches us how to clear our way
from a present harm and open it to a healthy unfolding of sexuality, but also for
a very thin thread leading us in our apprehensive and arduous struggle out of a
labyrinth filled with dangers.
1 Originally published in Aerztliche Standeszeitung, 15, September 1904,
Vienna, Vol. 3, No. 18. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
In the first three chapters that cover fertilization, heredity, selective
breeding, anatomy, and physiology of the sexual organs, Gruber succinctly
presents the most important scientific facts concerning this subject. This
introduction is essential since ignorance about these matters often creates much
confusion. However, in the next section, ”concerning the sexual drive and the
presumed need to satisfy it,” the author already treads on controversial grounds
in his assertion that the sexual drive also expresses “a demand for offspring.”
The “cry for a child,” which currently rages through the literature, can hardly be
taken as anything other than an appealing metaphor, or as some form of
moderation and disappointment.
The fact that the author denies the need for sexual gratification is contained
in this section’s title. However, he does see gratification as natural and marriage
as the only appropriate way. Yet, with seemingly good reason he finds
unjustified and dismisses the voices raised and the arguments posed for the
necessity of gratification. Only one argument is left untouched and that seems to
us the most trivial. On the response to that argument depends the practical
implementation of abstinence: How is it possible to prove to a person that the
gratification of his strongest feelings for pleasure is unnecessary? To assert that
he will stay alive is not enough. However, as a number of cases, albeit rare and
rarely unimpeachable, have shown such abstinence deters the development of
the individual toward full masculinity. In most cases masturbation, autoeroticism
takes the place of heterosexuality accompanied by all kinds of harm. More on

that point later. Or, as a consequence, there develops a peculiar harmful variation
of sexuality replete with abnormalities and even with pathological
manifestations. The possibility of an eventual reversal also is not guaranteed in
all cases since potency undoubtedly has been affected. Only the type of person
who from the outset is endowed with a limited sexuality can tolerate abstinence
well. Obviously, such a person could more easily be persuaded to practice
abstinence.

Hygiene and Sex3 (Part 2 - Conclusion)
Nevertheless, in this context and addressing this subject in general, one
must agree with Guber when he attributes the greatest importance to controlling
the sexual drive. What is questionable is the role played by hypothetical sexual
matters, products of an inner secretion of sexual glands. These are not the sole
consideration for a physician and above all not the most important. Much more
important is to examine the individual’s attitude and development, his ability to
adjust and apply otherwise his psychic powers to attain and strengthen an inner
equilibrium. If Gruber’s solution for people in general is abstinence we find
when we look at cases individually much more complicated conditions that are
rarely resolved through abstinence. In this regard it must be remembered that a
physician deals with that portion of humanity which suffers.
In another chapter, “Consequences of Immoderation and Rules for Marital
Intercourse,” the author goes much too far. He describes consequences of
immoderation that we encounter regularly as occurring under other
circumstances, “Pressure in the lumbar region, nervous arousal, feeling of
pressure in the head, sleep deprivation, ringing of the ears, light-headedness,
trembling, sweating, heart palpitations, muscle weakening, disinclination to
work, memory failures, ...” He goes on with such symptoms as “Bad moods,
tiredness, weakness of legs. …” Even neurasthenia and melancholy are derived,
according to Gruber from immoderation. As far as these symptoms are
concerned they are well known as related to neurasthenia. There we can find no
evidence in etiology of harm arising from immoderate natural sexual activities.
In general, it would be difficult to prove any harm that could be attributed to
immoderation or even find immoderation frequently. It is exactly that which
Gruber assumes and for that reason moderation in normal marital relations can
also be attributed to him. Aside from that, this chapter contains a rich assortment
of uncontroversial hygienic advice that could only spring from Gruber’s
extensive knowledge. While we must relegate the individual treatment of the
sick to the physician and allocate to him general sexual hygiene, we must object
in this case of having a presented to us a healthy person as sick.
Gruber will find total agreement when he expresses his views on artificial
means to prevent pregnancy. The social importance of procreating new
generations for the state cannot be overemphasized. Also, in matters of
restricting the number of children the people of a devleoped country will respond
with arguing difficulties making a living. The same argument applies to all

developed countries. The ways of birth control change. Since this is not a matter
of indifference to the health of the husband good hygienic sexual relations are
more than justified. The fact that birth control is not restricted to isolated cases
but is widely practiced is best evidenced by the fact that families with an annual
addition of children, as should be expected with healthy parents, is one of the
great rarities. Advice from physicians is desperately needed. The most harmful
means of birth control is coitus interruptus which can only rarely be tolerated for
long. After a certain period of time this practice will not only harm the health of
the husband (Freud’s fear neurosis) but also the peace and tranquility in
marriage. Mechanical means of birth control (condom and diaphragm)
undoubtedly are safer and less harmful. As an aside, we should note that in
certain rare cases these means can lead to the same harmful effects. However,
when Gruber at the end of the chapter warns about all artificial means to prevent
conception it seems to us that such a warning cannot be taken seriously. Our
author himself sees a significant danger to the mother in multiple births and a
significant detriment to the health and lives of children. Or is he possibly of the
opinion that even the most extreme restrictions in sexual relations would effect
the number of children born in wedlock?
3 Originally published in Aerztliche Standeszeitung, 15, 1 October 1904, Vienna,
Vol. 3, No. 19.
Among the “aberrations of the sexual drive” homosexuality is given too
short shrift. Gruber dismisses the old viewpoint that perversity is inherent and
accepts the new concept of it being acquired. He defends the position of having
the state and society condemn them. In fact most countries have laws without
that having improved anything. According to Hirschfeld’s research the number
of perverts is enormous. We must agree with those who want to eliminate
punishment as long as the rights of another person are not infringed and the
protection of minors is not constrained. The evil is rooted in social conditions
and to a considerable extent in a lack of sexual freedom and slavery. Much space
is devoted to masturbation. According to Gruber it is not any more harmful than
natural intercourse. And, since he regards it of a lesser evil than venereal disease
it is understandable that he considers it as bad and unnecessary to scare and
torture those who have fallen prey to this vice. Gruber sees the harm in such
sexual activity in an enormous increase in temptation toward immoderation and
in early sexual relations. This view in some aspects seems quite untenable to us.
It lacks in a finding that masturbation between the ages of 14 and 18 years is
almost normal behavior and quite harmless during that time. However, to extend
this finding to where such autoeroticism is cleared of all harm if practiced during
the maturing years would be going too far. The harm can often be discovered by

a physician and is manifested in an upsetting of the neural equilibrium
(neurosis), as well as in limiting, mostly retarding, a person’s psychological
development. If these are the vulnerabilities we find the reasons for them in the
following: 1) Masturbation as a rule does not provide complete sexual
gratification. 2) Its psychological effect cannot replace the protective influence
of bi-sexuality on the development of complete masculinity and femininity. 3)
The always present possibility of gratifying even the most craving sexual
arousals makes the masturbator unable to tolerate abstinence. Weighing these
disadvantages against venereal diseases seems improper to us. The
reprehensibleness and destructive power of a method for creating fear for
allaying masturbation was thankfully advanced by Gruber.
This is followed by a chapter on “Venereal diseases and their prevention”
which describes the horrible consequences of gonorrhea and lues. The author on
this subject comes to the same conclusion that he had proclaimed in a warning to
Vienna’s student body some years ago: “Everyone who values life and health,
everyone who wishes for a healthy progeny should avoid this danger (sexual
diseases) because of prostitution and sexual relations outside of wedlock.”
This warning will sound hollow as a general statement. It suffices if in
individual cases it becomes a social necessity. As much as physicians
individually may raise minor objection to this book it is by all means the best of
all that has been written on this subject. Its tenor is above all what physicians
demand: That all learn to control their sexual drive!
Chapter VIII The Problem of Sex in Upbringing1 2
[1905]
It is customary to excuse oneself when discussing sexual problems in
public. This reticence has deep roots. It conveys to us the sense that we are faced
with a complex, carefully guarded psychological construct that does not allow
itself to be revealed without a struggle. While this might make society's loathing
of anyone trying to enlighten us on this subject understandable, it is at the same
time deplorable that with such opposition the practical and theoretical treatment
of sexual questions will be inhibited. The same picture emerges whether it
concerns an entire nation or an individual: An awareness of sexual problems
arises only with puberty. It is only the urban culture that forces society to take
stock of this problem. Similarly, only the individual's heightened consciousness
transforms the "primitive sexuality" into a culture-subordinated drive.
Generally, the onset of sexuality in human beings is surmised to be at a far

too advanced an age, while no heed is paid to the question where sexuality
originated. Pedagogical experience and increased knowledge of child
psychology force us to assume that sexuality can be shown to exist in the first
days of a child's life.3 Anyone observing infants cannot fail to suspect that the
act of sucking at the mother's breast in particular, which the infant craves eagerly
and with great excitement, does not occur without sensuous and erotic feelings.
Nothing is more soothing to the child, nor evokes more clearly feelings of
satisfaction, even when fully satiated and obviously sufficiently fed, than when
an infant is placed at the mother's breast. Even when placed at an empty breast,
or with a pacifier in his mouth, the crying child is calmed for some time, even
when hungry, ill, or suffering. What is unique about early sexuality is that it is
dispersed over the entire body, its adhesion to every cell, and wherever it is
purposefully aroused in the infant it releases a sensuous feeling of well-being.
This is particularly the case with the skin, which by stroking or in a warm bath is
pleasingly stimulated. The same is also true with slight pressure on the infants
eyes or ears to which the child already in its earliest days responds cheerfully
and happily. Particularly noteworthy is the continuum of such sensuousness. It
can normally persist throughout a person's life. The mouth and mucous
membranes retain for life their, albeit restricted, erotic meaning. I refer to the
quite general practice of
1 First published in "Die neue Gesellschaft," a weekly publication devoted
to social criticism, published by H. Braun, pages 360-362, Berlin, 1905.
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002. 
3 Anyone interested in the theoretical basis of this work and its interpretation can
find it in Freud's Die Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie, Leipzig and Vienna,
1905.
thumb sucking which parents can prevent only with great effort. I need
hardly point out that the kiss receives its erotic meaning from the original
sensuousness of the mouth. The skin also never totally loses its sensuousness,
especially in places where it has not been significantly stretched by growth; thus
the armpits, the neck, and the soles of the feet. The sensuousness associated with
the face and with hearing deserves further discussion.
Before that, however, we must address the question: What purpose does
nature pursue when it instills sexuality into a child at birth? The sense and
meaning of this attribute, as well as the distribution of sensuousness over the
entire body and its conspicuous allocation to all the sensuous organs--the
olfactory organ is not excluded by any means--can obviously be explained by the
way sensuousness and passion force the individual to make contact with the

outside world, making the person use all his organs, so as to gather impressions
and find nourishment. The sexual mainspring, the sensuous mechanism of the
cell, is to align the child with everything in the world outside and to introduce
social interactions. It is for this purpose--but only for this!--that sexuality must
assist us in raising children. Seen in that light, the development of the eyes and
ears will become central when raising a child because these organs most quickly
become attuned to sensuousness and most easily serve cultural needs.
Lacking understanding on this matter when raising a child can cause great
damage right at the outset. The cultivation of the child stands and falls with the
successful transference of capabilities driven by sensory impulses to those driven
by the demands of his culture. If the sensitivity to arousal in a child for easy
gratification is significantly heightened, thereby becoming an end in itself,
transference is impeded and progress in cultivating the child is hindered.
Such artificial heightening of natural sensuousness, which can lead to
sexual precociousness but can also cause perversion in later life, is also
associated with further grievances. A prerequisite of our culture is the capacity
to endure unfulfilled, or momentarily unfulfilled, wishes with equanimity until
every psychological and physical effort has been expended to attain a
satisfactory goal. The surest sign of the capacity to manage the challenges of our
culture is not to be deterred by the trials and tribulations entailed in a goal
oriented venture. It is not at all daring to maintain that such a cultural
prerequisite must be established in earliest childhood. If the desires of an infant,
as well as the child in later years, are assuaged with all sorts of sensuous
enthusiasm, with an eagerness to nourish the child, rocking, and romping,
instead of providing the child with only what is necessary, then the ability to
contain sensuous desires psychologically will be far below the norm.
However, this barely covers the range of a child's sexual encounters with
the outside world. The movement of limbs, walking, hopping, jumping and later
altercations and sports, particularly climbing, no less than swinging, rocking, and
riding, are all equally prone to trigger sensuous arousal. In all such activities,
particularly where the erotic aspect obviously is an end in itself and is not simply
a physical function, steps must be taken to suppress obvious excess.
The infant's sexual organs also have the capacity to be sensuously
stimulated. Similarly, the elimination functions of the body are under a sensuous
direction. The effects of these parts of the body can be evidenced in later
childhood years. The infant touching himself in these areas is not rare and is
accompanied by sensuous expression of pleasure. Women experienced with
children know and practice the art of calming crying babies and making them
fall asleep by touching their sexual organs. Such experiences often lead to early

sexual development and close off the path to cultivated behavior, as noted above.
The inception of early sexual maturity is actually accompanied by a deterioration
of morality. The caregiver literally loses the reigns. Suspicion of early sexual
maturity is raised in experienced teachers when there is serious unruliness, and
also in later school years when they see a tendency to lying, stealing, a rapid
deterioration in school work, inattentiveness, loss of shame, a tendency toward
repulsive acts, arson, and in somewhat older children a fear of people,
depression, and dreaminess. Often the only clues raising suspicions are constant
nail-biting and nose-picking.
Closely related to childhood sexuality is the pleasure taken from excreting
bodily wastes. Here also residues can be found in later years in normally
developed children. Relatively harmless is frequent toilet use and the pleasure
gained from relieving oneself out of doors, or in the company of friends.
Another type of child, who comes close to the need of medical intervention,
however, is one with a pallid complexion who uses toilet facilities infrequently,
particularly in school. At school such a child often is confused, complains about
headaches and fails to go to the toilet until the last moment. A fairly positive
sign of early sexual maturity, when epilepsy is not a cause, is bedwetting. In
connection with the earlier mentioned deterioration of morality in early matured
children the large number of bed-wetters found among juvenile offenders and in
neurotics needs also to be mentioned. Signs of inner distress, and a defense
against the onslaught of sexuality, are crying out at night, anxiety attacks,
fearfulness, facial ticks, and eye fluttering.
Sexual prematurity is mostly the result of an intended or unintended
seduction. A number of popular children's games, such as playing at doctor, are
particularly blameworthy. Next to these are matters that take place within the
family, such as lues, alcoholism, or a marriage between relatives. Most culpable
is the lack of discretion in the conduct of marital relations. Insufficient living
space and alcoholic transgressions also are significant factors. Uncommonly
pernicious are quarrels, particularly when children are forced to side with one
parent or another.
This is the progression of an abnormal, at times pathological, development
of sexuality. Quite different is a normal evolutionary course. After the second or
third year we can see sexuality paling. In its place the child exchanged for it a
feeling of shame, initially confined to undressing and toilet use, disgust with
bowel movements, and things that young children usually put in their mouth,
loving one parent, and, less frequently, loving both. True, if we examine this
more closely we shall find that it is this love of parents for whose sake--where
there is smoke there is fire--the child turns from sensuous pleasure to shame and

disgust. The early clearly noticeable sensuous tendency of the child is seen to
diminish and is replaced by the love of mother or father, which then becomes the
guide for embracing the prevailing culture. Mostly it is girls who at first tend to
be closer to their father, and boys to their mother; as they grow older, the girls
frequently tend to grow closer to their mother and boys to their father. It then
becomes apparent how the child imitates the preferred parent. Obvious
preference of the father or mother should be energetically countered, something
not often done because the exclusive attachment of the child to one parent is too
flattering. On this point, the warning applies: do not allow this love to become an
end in itself because, fated by its origin, under certain circumstances it will take
on an erotic character. Coddling, smothering caresses, or the bad habit of taking
the child into the parent's bed, can release normally repressed sexuality.
Otherwise, sexuality, except for faint traces, submerges to make room for a
growing cultural adjustment. Occasionally unmistakable stirrings, particularly at
the age of eight, clearly show that sexuality had not completely been
extinguished but had undergone a long period of repression and transformation.
The public school student has now entered an age at which, in overcrowded
schools and out of sight of the teacher, the seduction to masturbate takes over.
No little contribution in areas where Catholics reside is the practice of
confession which disturbs the normal course of sensuous impulses. This is not
unlike the masterful way that the Catholic Church has learned to exploit
childhood sexuality to further its own goals. This also is the time of growing
friendships among children, bringing them closer together, a tendency that
obviously is in the same erotic vein as the feeling toward parents, teachers, and
caregivers.
Should one of these early-matured children reach the stage of masturbation
or, as is often the case in closed institutions and boarding schools, perversions, it
becomes enormously difficult to dissuade them from such practices. Certainly,
such a child will not be dissuaded with spankings or excessive discipline but
more likely with love and with friendly supervision. When we pursue the course
of early masturbation we shall actually find that it will come to a halt with love,
at the child's first experience with love.
Clearly, many children who mature early are adversely affected, whether by
some failure in their character development in the sense of a loss of
independence and courage, or through a cessation of their intellectual
development, or the later appearance of neuroses. Others, some earlier than
others, have the strength to overcome this state of early maturing. Such children
are likely to become intellectually exceptional or turn into artists.
Normally developing children usually do not display excessive sexuality

until they are about 14 years of age. For that reason, with few exceptions, an
often short period of masturbation sets in which, given our times and social
conditions, is not to be regarded as a disorder. Nevertheless, this rising sexuality,
which appears to be triggered by the growth of sexual glands, is associated with
a strong shock to the psyche's equilibrium. This is a time in which boys become
exceedingly critical, and have aggressive and negative relations with their
parents and teachers. Only those pedagogues can deal with their charges during
this fragmenting period who deservedly had won their unquestioned confidence.
However, one quality comes to fruition during this stressful period which is
destined to ameliorate an expanding psychic need: the formation of a way to see
the world from a philosophical and political standpoint, and the shaping of a
maturing person's definitive world view.
The period after the age of 14 is also the most appropriate time for sexual
enlightenment. No threats, no punishment, no fears should inhibit the youngster's
courage to face life. The youngster should become aware of the great importance
of being able to control one's sexuality, a recognition that will produce better
results than banishment and fear.
When abnormal conditions appear, I have found it better to place the patient
under the care of a medically trained pedagogue, still a rare specialty. I find it
most deplorable to counter sexual bewilderment with beatings, intimidation,
threats of present or eternal punishment, or of an impending sickness as is
currently found in popular literature. The blame never rests with the child but
always lies in the upbringing, which is the reason that it must be improved. It
fails, admittedly, often for a want of knowledge, but just as often for a lack of
time or money, inadequate housing, an underestimated needy student population,
and insufficient supervision.
Chapter 
IX 
Three 
PsychoAnalyses 
Concerning 
Inspired
Numbers1 2 3
[1905]
Among other factors, Freud, In his "Psychopathologie des Alltagsleben" -
the psychopathology of everyday life -, revealed that even one "thoughtlessly
thrown out" number proves to be determinative. The example provided as
evidence shows how deeply an analysis of such a number penetrates the psyche.
Freud's observations related to this finding are as follows: (1) the confidence
with which the analysis progresses, and (2) the tendency toward superstition
which can easily be discerned behind the unconscious number operations. I have

not discovered any other analyses of seemingly arbitrary numbers.
I have no knowledge of any other analyses of seemingly arbitrarily chosen
numbers. I was able to note, however, that this was among Freud's most disputed
points of his message. I am now able to increase the material pertaining to this
subject with the following three analyses. I am grateful to have found in two
cases persons who are mentally sound and who, independently and without using
any method, conducted an auto-analysis related to a self-selected arbitrary
number. Despite the fact that the thought process in these cases flows
"effortlessly," a predominantly genetic grouping cannot be denied. Also obvious
is the two forms that resistance to the analysis takes, becoming apparent as it
progresses. In one form it is compelling and tangible so so that the person
spinning these ideas can easily recognize and reject them. In the other form
resistance is cloaked in a theoretical objection that shakes a listener’s belief in a
real connection between a number and an interpretation. In the end, undoubtedly,
the wealth and meaning of the revealed material overwhelm all critical
considerations and the attention of the person on whom the experiment is carried
out is drawn fully to himself.
Undeniably, this "playing around" has some value. What is revealed about a
person's psyche is considerable by itself. In two of the following cases
expectations are justified that the helpless playthings of bad moods and
disgruntlement consciously rise up to become either combatants or sufferers of
an imposed fate. The third case demonstrates vividly the value of number
analysis which presents us with a person suffering from hysterical fear neurosis
accompanied by a number phobia. Despite a most favorable improvement,
despite the disappearance of torturing, fearful nervous feelings, the phobia about
a particular number remained until I clarified its meaning through analysis and
recognized it to be overlaying the same unconscious impulses that, along a
different path, led to the above cited nervous reactions and fears. I shall now
recount the two self-analysis cases as they came to my attention while not
recording the third case in which I initiated analysis:
1 First published in Psychiat. Neurol. Wschr., 1905, 7, 263-266. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002. 
3 Trans. note: The title "Drei Psycho-Analysen von Zahleneinfällen und
obsedierenden Zahlen" includes a term for which I can find no translation:
"obsedirende Zahlen". The word "obsediren" is nowhere to be found, Zahlen
means numbers. It possibly means numbers that have a mystical effect.
FirstCase
A. wrote to me the following:

Last night I started reading the "Psychopathologie des Alltags" - the
psychopathology of every day life - and I would have finished reading the book
immediately had not a peculiar incident kept me from doing so. As I was reading
that every number that is arbitrarily thought of has a specific purpose, I decided
to make an experiment. The number 1734 came to mind and suddenly I was
overcome by a flood of ideas: 1734 divided by 17 equals 102 and 102 divided by
17 equals 6. I then separated the number into 17 and 34. I am 34 years old and,
as I once told you, I regard 34 to be the last year of youth and I felt miserable on
my last birthday. A beautiful and interesting period in growing up began toward
the end of my 17th year. I divide my life into periods of 17 years. What then is
the meaning of dividing these numbers? The number 102 reminded me that it
lists the book in the Reclamische Universalbibliothek 
- Universal Library - that contains the article by Kotzebuesch entitled
"Menschenhass und Reue" - misanthropy and remorse.
My current psychological state is hatred of people and remorse. The book
listed No. 6 in the library (I know a considerable number by heart) is Muellner's
"Schuld" - guilt. I am tortured by the thought that because of my guilt I did not
accomplish all that I am capable of doing. I also remember that the book listed
No. 34 in the library is a story by the same Muellner entitled "Der Kaliber."
When I divide up the word into "Ka" and "liber," I recall the word "Ali" and
"Kali." That reminds me that I once made up rhyming words with my son Ali. I
had asked him to rhyme the word Ali. He could think of none and I told him
then: "Ali reinigt den Mund mit hypermangansauren Kali" - Ali rinses his mouth
with hyper sour potash. We both laughed out loud and I loved Ali very much.
Regretfully, over the last few days, it seemed to me "dass er 'ka (kein) lieber' Ali
sei” - that he no longer is a loveable person.
I now ask myself: What about the book listed under No. 17 in the Library? I
was certain that I had once known its title as listed under that number and must
assume that I now had reason to forget it. Every effort to recall the title was
fruitless. I tried to continue reading but could do so only mechanically; I couldn't
understand a single word, being bothered so much by No. 17. I turned off the
light and continued searching my mind. Finally I recalled that No. 17 must be a
piece by Shakespeare, but which? Then I remembered: "Hero and Leander."
Obviously, my mind made a crazy attempt at trying to distract me. I finally got
up and looked for the Library catalogue and saw that "Macbeth" is listed under
No. 17. To my surprise I discovered that I knew practically nothing about that
play, although I had worked on it no less than on every other Shakespearian
drama. I only remembered that it contained murder, Lady Macbeth, witches,
"what's fair is foul," and that I then enjoyed Schiller's work on Macbeth.

Undoubtedly, I also wanted to forget that play. I further remembered that when
17 and 34 are divided by 17 the result is 1 and 2. Listed under No. 1 in the
Library is Goethe's "Faust." I once had discovered many characteristics of Faust
in myself.
This portion of A.'s letter, which I shall skip, was followed by some
theoretical arguments opposing the assumption of a determinative quality in
number 1734. The reader, in spite of the author's keen intellect, would
immediately find these arguments beside the point. A. then continues with his
discussion which, in its construction and classical formulation, is reminiscent of
Cicero.
This morning, to be sure, I had an experience that speaks loudly for the
correctness of Freud's interpretation. My wife, whom I had awakened during the
night when I got up, asked me what I was looking for in the Library catalogue. I
told her the story, which she saw as sophistry -- very interesting -- except for
Macbeth, which I tried so hard to fend off, but which she considered valid. She
then said that she could think of nothing when a number came to mind. I
answered: 'Let's make a test.' She mentioned the number 117. I immediately
responded: '17 relates to what I told you. Furthermore, I told you yesterday that
when a woman is 82 and a man is 35 the result is serious incompatibility.' I had
been kidding my wife for several days about acting like an old woman of 82
years. 82 plus 35 equals 117.
A. then added several comments that in general were to attest to Freud's
interpretation. Unfortunately, A. could not synthesize his argument. However,
the attentive reader can imagine the outcome. A., after having reached the age of
34, obviously is concerned with discomfiting thoughts about the quick passage
of time, and even more so with his wife getting older. This theory appears to us
supported by his quick resolution of the number 117. His wife was probably
plagued by similar thoughts which A. attacked so directly because he shared
similar concerns. In this context it seems quite probable that the number 17 when
related to “Hero and Leander,” which he rejected as “crazy,” concerns his
preference for 17 years of age over being older (see A’s own words). He feels
that this is also the case for women and may thus reflect a suppressed wish on
his part.

II
We now turn to the second analysis. B. writes:
I think of a number, 22, and immediately start to write down what comes to
mind. Today is the 22nd, my birthday. 2x2=2+2, which means that whatever I
undertake the result will turn out to be the same; I cannot fight fate. Or, 'nothing
can happen to you.' Later I remembered my father and, after a long pause, my
mother. This led me to the thought that all my capabilities are determined by my
parents. Then I remember my brother who, I tell myself, was born in 1882. I
immediately recognize the wish not to be so distant in years from my older
brother who, actually, was born in 1881. I love my mother more than my father;
he comes to mind immediately since, when needed, he is the one I blame for
whatever happens to me. My brother was my role model: that is how I should
have turned out! (An earlier wish was for me to be like my older brother). I
remembered my mother only after some hesitation. She is quite remote from
things and I don't cast any blame on her.
I am reminded that self-analyses arrive at the same point; and at that
moment a number of experiences from my youth appeared quite clearly which I
had often vividly recalled. For a long time as a child I slept in my parents'
bedroom and overheard their sexual activities. Several times I listened to my
mother objecting and already then began to take her side against my father. A
similar scene might have taken place before my birth and for that reason my
father carries the primary responsibility for my 'fate.'
A second recollection from my youth occurred when I was seven years old.
Then a fellow school mate introduced me to the mysteries of procreation. With
that explanation I understood what took place in the bedroom.
That same boy once persuaded me to assist him in masturbating. A second
time I watched him. On those occasions we were 2x2 (the two of us were present
twice). It was like a normal intercourse with the only difference being the wife
objected. That is how I had to become a masturbator, a process that like coitus
arrives at the same result, 2x2=2+2. The process differs, however, in that
multiplication is an intimate operation; addition is more like stringing together.
There follows an explanation why B. became a masturbator. He then continued:
If my brother was born in 1882 he might not have been friends with the
fellow who led me to masturbation. 
My name, Otto, spells the same forwards and backwards. It is made up of 4
(2x2=2+2) letters, each of which appears twice. The two syllables are the same,

they are a couple and there is no room for a wife on the outside. I know that I
was already able to write my name when I was very young, i.e., I masturbated
when I was very young. The name 'Otto' is a strong reminder of the expression
2x2=2+2; I was fated to be called that. 
I now recall a girl in whom I was interested and who at times wanted to give me
another name. Our wishes were unfulfilled. I kept the name Otto and continued
masturbating. A short time later I arrived at the heart of the analysis. When I was
younger, I had often decided to give up masturbating on certain important dates,
most often on birthdays. On the day I recalled the number (22) it was again my
birthday and the reproach that I had not stopped years ago became a reality. The
number is an answer to my reproaches, an apology that says: 1). Masturbating is
the same as coitus (2x2=2+2); 2). Even if this were not the case, if it were
something harmful or objectionable, I am not responsible for it since I was
destined to do it by impressions acquired as a youngster; it was my fate
(2x2=2+2).

III
I was forced to conduct the third analysis with a patient, C., who came to
me because his psychological condition had worsened. He complained about
irritability, fear, strong heart palpitations, fear of apoplexy, and a terrible
choking feeling that had been occurring regularly for some time while brushing
his teeth, and also outside of his home and in certain places, making his life
miserable. In addition, for years he recalled almost compulsively the number 39
which he associated with every misfortune, even with his death. He encountered
that number everywhere. He saw it on streetcars and trains, on price tickets on
various items and on art pieces. He avoided it whenever he could, would not
enter a house displaying that number, nor would he occupy a theater seat with
that number. However much he tried to avoid that number it appeared before his
eyes like an unlucky happenstance.
At first I disregarded the number 39 and in the absence of any objective
findings attacked the other symptoms. The peculiar etiology of these symptoms
based on hysteria could be established by analysis and were derived from the
patient's unconscious perverse impulses, never carried out, for oral sex. This
perversion is traceable to an impairment of normal sexuality associated with a
heightened libido. Therapy consisted of attempting to eliminate the impairment
of normal sexuality, highlighting these perverse impulses, and mobilizing the
patient's consciousness against this perversion. My expectations for an
improvement were immediately realized. The patient spontaneously admitted
that his condition had improved, and that the choking feeling had disappeared
for some time.
I now wanted to go into an analysis of the number 39 in hopes of
uncovering new sources of the patient's neurotic symptoms. C., who had some
training in analysis, could offer no suggestions. He said only after some time and
some resistance that he remembered having originally feared the number 69, a
fear that first arose when he planned to visit an exquisitely beautiful woman. I
realized that I had been disappointed in my desire to find something new and
was no less surprised to find in this a parallel to the other symptoms of the
illness which confirmed my earlier views. When I asked whether there was
anything significant about number 69, he said he did not know anything. When I
asked him to translate the number into French he acknowledged knowing about
mutual oral perversion but raised several objections. He said that he never felt
any inclination for the passive but only the active form of this type of perversion

and never feared the number 69, only 39. I pointed out to him that there was a
contradiction in what he said; his perverse impulse shows the same mutation as
the number 39 from 69. Additional recollections by the patient provided further
confirmation. He "descended slowly" from the number 69 first to 59 and then 49,
both of which he found useless. Only the number 39 gave him enough room to
postulate fearful ideas. He was 39 years old and expected some imminent
misfortune. On the other hand the number 39 divides into 3x13 (a bad luck
number).
Within the limits of these three analyses there is hardly any point that was
not forced and not the result of all sorts of associations. I was unable to find
anything "accidental" and not in context. Instead, there is confirmation that every
idea that occurred during analysis, in particular the selected number, was
supported by several psychological forces that in the main were quite
understandable. Undeniable is that number perception is significantly
determinative, whether the number was seemingly freely chosen or a
pathological fixation.
The meaning and purpose of "number reduction" apparently is a
psychological need for compromise. In none of the analyses mentioned do we
find the total suppression of psychic material from consciousness, but we also
find no conscious tolerance for what was imagined. In none of the cases does the
arithmetic symbol exhaust the resisting forces; nowhere does it attain an
equilibrium, such as hysterical muteness, or the usual repression. The only result
was a partial disarmament of the psyche while the struggle continued along side.
The determinative nature of the surfacing number arises from the unconscious
and from a continuous and often conscious avoidance of resistance. All three
analyses easily demonstrate that what is conscious and not repressed plays a
considerable part in creating a number which has a modifying effect on the
unconscious driving force (suppressed desires, repressed impulses). The latter is
the actual carrier of the number-choice and provides it with an argument that is
logical on its surface.
Chapter X Developmental Defects in Children1 2
[1907]
In our children lies the future of our people! All the efforts of nations, all
progress and the breaking down of old barriers and prejudices are carried out on
behalf of the next generation and done primarily for their benefit. If we struggle
today for intellectual freedom, if we rattle the pillars of superstition and slavery

then tomorrow our children will bathe in the serene light of freedom and will sip
at the well of pure knowledge unconcerned with threats from more modern
beliefs. If all that is old and rotten is collapsing today, has lost its right to exist,
then more proud and bolder than we can fathom the cathedral of true humanity is
created before which all lies and deceit are ground to dust. This will be for our
children! They shall enjoy and relish all that we yearn and strive for: Air, light,
and nourishment which our people still are being denied. We fight for proper
homes, adequate pay, for dignified work, for solid knowledge so that they shall
be secure in all this. Our sweat, that is their peace; their health, that is our
struggle.
In our children we enjoy our youth! The unforgettable, joyful days of our
childhood rise up in our mind as we look at our youngsters, and our pains are
lessened when our toil serves to chase the shadow from their young lives. Our
most gratifying incentive is to work so that our children will avoid the worries
and afflictions that might have embittered those golden years for us. Many
defects from which we suffered while growing up should be spared them, and
what we have lost in hope and desire should be recovered for them for a new
life. Grow fair, you likeness of our youth and delight in your joy, be better
prepared for struggle and for victory than are we!
If, therefore, the parents' greatest fortune is the thriving of their children and
their future prosperity, then recognizing and providing for their needs requires
all the powers of the state, the parents, and society. Two areas in particular are
vulnerable to hostile attacks: adverse social conditions and a lack of
understanding for the physical and mental health of the child. One must also
keep in mind that the sins committed against the child which can go back several
generations, can often not be easily reconciled. We mention here only parents
who are undernourished, pregnant woman who are overworked, sick or inferior
providers, child labor that affects growth, the undernourished child, and poor
living conditions. All of these conditions have social roots the consequences of
which often will stay with the growing organism. The symptoms, which we shall
discuss below, can be recognized either at birth, or shortly thereafter. Disabilities
that are life threatening shall be passed over since a practical interest in these is
minimal, even though they deserve a very great scientific interest. Often these
are only aggravated defects that other children can live with.
1 Originally published as "Entwicklungfehler des Kindes" in Heilen und Bilden,
1907. 2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
The most easily recognizable developmental defects are those that affect a
part of the body that cause suffering in a child who feels ugly as a result. Often

in such cases the organs themselves are afflicted because of the defect. For
example a harelip, a cleft in the upper lip, can cause a partial or total hardening
or softening of the gums. Aside from disfigurement, if the child is unable to take
nourishment because of this condition, it would force a quick decision to
operate. Frequently there are similar problems with nursing when the ligament at
the bottom of the tongue adheres abnormally strongly, something that can easily
be rectified. Of great importance is the development of infant teeth. A retarded
development--at times a too early development--probably can be traced to
rickets. Normally, the two lower middle incisors break through between the sixth
and ninth month. They are followed in about two months by the middle upper
teeth. By the end of the first year the upper and lower side incisors appear. The
front molars break through in about the eighteenth month, followed by the
canine teeth. The back molars appear at the beginning of the third year which
then completes the first set of teeth. Not infrequently gaps appear between teeth
as well as teeth growing on top of one another. When the child is four and one
half to six years old the second set of teeth begin to form, starting with the first
permanent molars followed by the loss of the baby teeth. The permanent teeth
can exhibit a number of defects that partly affect looks, but also affect
performance. Protruding upper or lower teeth, crooked growth, abnormal
surfaces, etc. can at times be repaired. However, the effective functioning of
such teeth must also be given more or less consideration.
Of great importance for the development of children, particularly their
throats and lungs are the passageways of the nose. Swelling of nose mucous
membranes hinders the infant in drinking. If a thickening of the mucous
membranes persists, breathing through the nose will be impaired, or if the
mucous membranes constrict the nose passages, as would also be the case with
polyps, the child will breathe through the mouth. Such children often look pale,
often suffer from other infirmities, frequently of the larynx, the nose, and ears,
and can be recognized by snoring when asleep. Restoring breathing through the
nose brings many advantages to the child. At times an improvement in mental
capacity can be seen after such a no-risk operation. Similar problems stemming
from abnormally enlarged tonsils can be seen in defect in the throat, the larynx,
and the lungs.
Disfigured ears are still only of theoretical interest. Attached ear lobes,
pointed ears, and flared ears are taken as signs of a degeneration. There is the
impression that such growth betrays a hearing inferiority that does not
necessarily impair normal functioning.
This perception that a physical abnormality is a sign of a degeneration also
applies to skin formation around the edges of the eyes making them appear as

slit eyes, as well as to flecks on the iris. These signs are found in mongoloid
cases close to a profound subnormality.
More important in evaluating children is their performance. This is
particularly the case in judging speech development. Aside from isolated speech
impediments, children acquire a large part of their speaking ability in the third
year. If the child lags behind this schedule significantly the possibility of a
hearing or speech defect should be suspected. Longer lasting speech
impediments, such as stuttering, stammering, lisping, and the inability to
pronounce certain letters correctly should be subjected to mild treatment. The
same can be said for a refusal to eat, which occurs at about the same time.
We frequently observe developmental flaws in the eyes; their improvement
should be initiated vigorously. Blinking often is associated with an inflammation
of the mucous membrane in the eye. This is regularly the case with albinos
(people without a skin pigmentation) who have an aversion to light.3 Regular
trembling of the eyeball at times can be a symptom of a neural disorder. It is
important not to neglect cross-eyedness and increasing near and farsightedness.
The first often is associated with the other two, but is insignificant if it occurs
during the first months of infancy. Near and farsightedness relates to the
structure of the eyeball, as does astigmatism which causes distorted vision.
Insufficient light and poor writing posture can worsen the condition so that
vision constantly remains poor. These developmental defects must be dealt with
at the earliest opportunity. Poor eyesight in one or both eyes from birth is not
uncommon and requires consultation with a physician. The fact that a person can
be born totally blind is recognized. Common causes for poor vision are
cataracts/glaucoma and clouding of the lens, which also can be innate, and which
can be corrected by an operation. Wherever possible, early correction should be
undertaken.
Ear infections and hearing impairment in one or both ears are frequently
overlooked and often are the cause of a child's slow mental progress. Here also
the physician can take some steps.
The shape of the head can in many respects be regarded as an impaired
development. Many of its forms are the result of rickets, such as the fontanelle
remaining open beyond the second year, the thickening and protruding of parts
of the skull, especially of the frontal bones. Frequent are early-deformed sagittal
sutures and the resulting head shapes. Neurosis or abnormal mental development
can occur with all these defects, as well as with asymmetrical skulls, in
particular in hydrocephaliacs. However, a person’s ability to perform
outstandingly is not precluded in such cases.
One organ to which much attention is now being paid is the thyroid gland at

the front of the neck. It can appear as a goiter at birth, or can develop into a
goiter growth later, sometimes sporadically, but most often in the thyroid gland
area. Certain swellings of the thyroid gland as well as a scant growth of the
gland are associated with changes in the growth of the child. This is particularly
the case with the thickening of the skin as well as with myxedema. A normal
condition or significant improvement can be obtained by giving an animal
thyroid substance.
3 See Mutschmann, Der andere Milton (The Other Milton), 1919.
A congenital or acquired crooked neck caused by the shortening of the neck
muscles on one side requires an operation, unless caused by a neurological
problem.
A child's chest can be contorted in various ways as a result of rickets. An
early indicator of rickets is a thickening in the rib case region. Chicken-breasts
as well as sunken chests, which can be rectified by orthopedic measures or
breathing exercises, should also be mentioned. More important than these
deformities is the retarded growth of the chest and shoulders. This is identified
by a weakness in the muscle structure, concavity, cavities above and below the
collarbone, and wide gaps between the ribs. Persons with such afflictions have a
tendency for tuberculosis. Again, early intercession can improve many of these
conditions.
The child's spine deserves much attention. A crooked shoulder posture,
protruding shoulder blades, a forward leaning gait, side-leaning body, in
particular the lack of, or an exaggerated "waist triangle" (the gap between
slacked arms and the waist), or "high" hips, require a physical examination and
eventual treatment.
In such cases the spine bows away from a straight line. In most instances
this is inborn or the result of early rickets in the spinal cord. When this occurs
during a child’s school years it would be further aggravated by a poor posture
while writing or by poorly designed desks. In some cases rickets, a weak muscle
structure, and tuberculosis causing a backward bowing spine cause it.
A forward curvature of the lumbar spinal cord can regularly be observed in
advanced cases of muscular degeneracy in children. This illness has as another
important indicator, a protruding stomach, a waddling walk, and an inability to
lift oneself from the floor without use of the hands, which a patient usually
employs to "climb up his own legs."
At times a child is born deficient in some long bones in the arms and hands.
The use of such limbs, for example club-hands, must be attained by artificial
means. More frequently seen are crooked and broken bones, particularly in the
forearm, resulting from rickets.

Developmental impediments in the lower extremities are seen in children
born with a hip displacement which the parents notice as soon as the child begins
to walk. Suspicious in such cases is a duck-walk, falling on one of the legs,
protruding underbellies, and broad hips. Congenital bone deficiencies can lead to
clubfootedness. Particularly important are changes caused by rickets in the
female pelvic area which could later lead to complications in childbirth and
could cause leg and foot problems impeding the use of these limbs. Knock-knees
and bowlegs develop as a result of rickets between the ages of 2 and 4. Bowlegs
can also become predominant at age 14 when a person is required by his
employment to be on his feet for long periods of time. This would apply to
waiter and baker apprentices. Complaints and pains are frequently found in such
cases. The same is true for flat feet, which occur regularly in persons with
knock-knees, but also in those suffering from rickets and in frail persons on
assuming new jobs that require them to stand for long periods of time. If the
inner sole touching the floor characterizes flat feet, then the congenital clubfoot
is characterized by an abnormally high inner sole and the foot pointing inward.
Sweaty hands and feet should be treated early. The claim that such treatment
would be harmful is nothing more than a fable.
Hernia is the protrusion of intestines or other parts of the stomach from
under the skin that can be felt on examination. These occur quite frequently and
most often are seen in the navel region, in the upper thigh region, and near the
groin. In the last instance, if the internal parts continue to push along the
spermatic cord it can reach the scrotum. Since this presents a constant danger,
the individual should undergo an operation as soon as possible. The danger lies
in the tissue surrounding the intestine some day constricting passage in the
intestines. Pain, vomiting, an absence of stool, and writhing are the immediate
threatening symptoms and require quick treatment.
Finally, we mention briefly the failure of testes to drop from the stomach
region, an abnormal outflow through the urethra and rectum and their congenital
fusing. We shall also turn our attention briefly to the expansion of the intestines,
rectal polyps causing bleeding, and hermaphroditism where male and female
sexual parts are found at one and the same time.
Among developmental defects in the internal organs congenital heart
damage should ranks predominantly. In newborn infants this is characterized by
a constantly bluish skin color and a constricted blood vessel system in frail,
impaired, and poorly developed children. Brain damage can be seen in
imbecility and epilepsy.
Large categories of developmental defects are found among children
assumed to have “behavioral problems.” Often these are merely the innermost

expression of the nature of a person reflecting also his character. Such
manifestations appear in the histories of healthy as well as neurotic children, in
the exceptional as well as the inferior person. If such behavior is countered with
strictness it becomes a failed undertaking, but the situation must always be
watched. I include in this category thumb-sucking, sucking one's lips, gulping,
nail-biting, picking one's nose, bedwetting, and soiling. These also become
apparent in children who tend to mature sexually early. The impression is one of
ill manners; the cause lies in unbridled drives accompanied by contrariness and
an absence of social feeling.
Many more examples could be cited of dangers threatening the young, the
causes of their suffering, and what mars them. Even the skin shows
developmental defects with symptoms that cause itching or scales, neither of
which can easily be cured. But enough of this. Let us be happy with the many
possibilities that modern science presents us to ease such children's lot, to
improve their condition and to make their lives bearable. As parents we should
be aware that early recognition of developmental defects could spare pain. Let us
not fail to help these children, who will endure many more problems caused by
the social demands made on them, and ease them through their youth with love
and care.
Overcoming death is only possible through the next generation.
Alcoholism, syphilis, and tuberculosis, as well as inappropriate family
intermarriage, prepare for the demise of the family. The worthiness of the organs
in the next generation can ensure us in general as well as in the particular of the
steadfastness of coming generations, the nation and the family. Evidently there is
a constant weeding out of harmful material demonstrating the attempt by nature
to resist the development of defects in children, or to introduce more suitable
manifestations.
There is a temptation with regard to physical defects in children to go
through life unreconciled and irreconcilable, that is, as a hostile combatant.
Richard III is a good example of that. As Shakespeare had Richard III say: "I am
determined to prove a villain." Surely, prejudice, which exacerbates defects
finally should vanish as should such hurtful expressions as “Beware the marked
person” that seek to pay homage to false eugenics. Caring parents must not
discourage children with defects with hopelessness. Helen Keller's courageous
attitude, and her reconciliation with life, points to a glowing example for a better
way.
Chapter XI The Aggression Drive in Life and in the Neurosis1

[1908]
After several groping attempts I have arrived at the viewpoint that what is
determining in the life of the child, and in that of the adult, is the attitude toward
tasks they must face. The way a person deals with these tasks is what identifies
him. This attitude always provides a starting point. Only as the individual
develops further will tendencies toward patience or avoidance come into play. I
named the sum of these manifestations the "aggression drive" to indicate that
this is an effort to overcome or to come to grips with something. This treatise
should be seen as an attempt at a programmatic presentation of the aggression
drive, its fate, and its phases; I must maintain that this drive is based on
indicators of cruelty, imperiousness, and sadism.
Until now, every examination of sadism and masochism started from sexual
manifestations which were mixed with tendencies toward cruelty. In healthy,
perverted, and neurotic (see below) individuals, however, the driving force
obviously stems from two originally separate drives which later crossed over so
that the sadistic-masochistic result represents two drives at one and the same
time, the sexual and the aggression drive. Similar cross-overs are commonly
found in the drives of adults. Thus, the eating drive is linked with the seeing
drive and with the smelling drive (see Pavlovian results). The hearing drive is
connected with the seeing drive. In short every recognizable drive is connected
with one or more of the other drives, a confluence in which the bladder
discharge and bowel movement at times become involved. In this context,
"drive" should mean no more than an abstraction, a sum of elementary functions
of the particular organ and its related nerves which were created and developed
by force of the outside world and by its demands. The goal of the "drive" is
governed by the needs of the organ for gratification, and the attainment of
pleasure from the environment. In all evident character forms, whose total
physiognomy always is the result of a drive confluence wherein one or more of
the drives constitute the primary axis of the psyche, the sexual drive plays an
eminent role. The following is the result of a large number of examinations of
healthy, neurotic, and perverse artists and writers, living as well as deceased,
with regard to their drives and how these manifest themselves:
1. The continuity of every drive and its correlation to every other drive can be
established during the lifetime of an individual and beyond that person's life to
the lives of
1 Originally published as "Der Aggressionstreib im Leben und in der
Neurose" in Heilen und Bilden, 1908. This new translation by Gerald L.
Liebenau (2002) is based on the 1922 second edition of Heilen und Bilden,
wherein, according to the editor Erwin Wexberg, many articles had been

thoroughly reworked. This accounts for the mention of a 1915 publication later
in this article. All of the introductions to the first and second editions, by Adler,
Wexberg, and Furtmueller, will be published as article 1922x in a later volume
of The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler.
his or her descendants. This viewpoint has great significance for many
questions regarding character formation and character inheritance, family and
race problems, for the psychogenesis of neurosis, for artistic achievements, for
making occupational choices, and in the field of criminology.
2. Whatever penetrates into consciousness from drives, whether as
inspiration, desire, expression of will, and whatever in one's surroundings takes
meaning in terms of words or action, can emanate either directly or indirectly
from one or more drives. Therefore, the drive can have undergone cultural
changes, refinements and specializations (Neitzsche’s and Freud's sublimation).
The drive will be restrained in its tendency to expand by the innate social feeling
or by the barrier created by a second drive. (Restraint of the exhibition drive
could be instigated by a revulsion, for example, of feces; restraint of the eating
drive by the odor of spoiled food; restraint of the exhibition drive may come
from a struggle with the sexual drive). These drive-constraints should be
regarded as an active psychological performance and, in cases of strong drives,
result in very characteristic manifestations which become even more pronounced
as the drive force has to be constrained by the constant exertion of psychological
energy. Drive-constraints in the subconscious, however, correlate in the
conscious with characteristic manifestations which include in particular those
revealed by Individual Psychology:
a. Reversing a drive direction (e.g. the eating drive in the subconscious
correlates with a conscious rejection of food. Almost analogous with that is
avariciousness or food craving which correlates with generosity). The child has
learned to understand the significance of satisfying these drives in order to
placate the parents and, in purposeful ways, and by varying the direction of his
drives, starts to bargain from a sense of power.
b. Shifting the drive toward another goal (the love of the father is succeeded
by an affection for the teacher, for the doctor, the friend or for mankind. If the
sexual drive is involved the resulting alleged perversions actually amount to a
shift toward another goal by eliminating the norm, as in the case of
homosexuality.)
c. Directing the drive toward oneself, which becomes a more highly valued
person by reinforcing the sense of personality. (The drive to admire becomes the
drive seeking admiration. It is the source of every kind of exhibitionism, as well
as the yearning to be noticed, megalomania, and the persecution complex. The

child does not feel comfortable in our situation and begins to suffer from fear.)
An important variation of the drive directed toward oneself is retreating into
oneself with memories, fantasies, intuition, introspection, intuitiveness, illusions,
hallucinations, and fear. When this becomes more pronounced it always is a sign
of an impediment for associating with the outside world, and a lack of social
feeling. The development of the latter is impeded by self-love. Avoiding certain
normal bonding follows this. Then come such signs as timidity, job
apprehension, anxiety about love and marriage, and an intense secondary
preoccupation with nature, science, money, office, job, and idiosyncrasies. Such
preoccupation serves to exclude normally expected aggression. Jung, Pfister and
others accepted these findings later and named them "introversions." In 1915,2
Freud similarly characterized the nature of drives.
2 See footnote 1.
d. Changing the emphasis to a second, stronger drive, which often is
expressed in the form described under Paragraph 1. (It occurs when ambition
and vanity are not satisfied. The drive for knowledge is diverted by unfulfilled
ambition for adventure and carefree living.)
3. Individual Psychology makes it possible for us to trace every drive to a
primary organ function. These primary organ functions include the unbridled
performance of sensory organs, the digestive tract, the pulmonary apparatus, the
urinary organs, the motor apparatus, and the sexual organs. The function of the
organs is related to the feeling of pleasure and the avoidance of displeasure. The
concept of "sexual pleasure" can only be attributed to the senses of the sexual
organs; later every organ sensation can be connected with the erotic through the
earlier mentioned "drive cross-over." The psychological superstructure3 is
created by cultural restraints and the insufficiency of organs which allow for
only specific directions for pleasure, life support, and growth. In this
superstructure, whose organic substrata is composed of partial nerve fibers and
nerve cells connected to the organ, lie the possibilities and capabilities for the
healthy as well as the neurotic person to perform in certain ways. This apparatus,
which is capable of developing up to a certain level and age, normally develops
to where it is somehow able to gratify the need of the organ, i.e. to comply with
the organ drive. Thereby the organ has the tendency to grow in response to the
life-task vitalized drive so as to attain gratification. In the organ's performance,
the technique for adapting to the culture arises from egotistical or altruistic
motives, greatly facilitated by the selection process and the extensive mixing of
blood through heredity. At any rate, the central nervous system, the psychic
superstructure of the organ, in that sense has substituted for the failure of the

primary organ which could not meet the demands of nature made on the
individual.
The stronger the drive the greater also is the tendency toward the formation
and development of the corresponding organ superstructure. I have described in
my Studie über Minderwertigkeit von Organen (Study of Organ Inferiority), how
this superdevelopment comes about, what it gains in struggling with the outside
world, and how suppressing essential constellations (ambition, social feeling
against the eating drive, for example) results in compensation disturbance
(psychosis). Similarly, how outside pressure necessitates taking new directions, a
new, often increasing activity, either because of the need to satisfy the strong
drive, or the appropriate organ. This is how artistic minds and geniuses are
created, and also how neurosis develops when the compensation is not capable
of dealing with the demands made, and when compensation is unable to bypass
demands successfully.4
However, the inherited organ quality and the related inherited drive
strength, both of which are a given, would allow for the presumption that over a
long line of ancestors a considerable struggle for supremacy of the organ has
been in progress. Also that this struggle was not without causing damage, and
that the organ damaged over the course of several generations caused a certain
disposition in the genes of the descendants which on the one hand is seen in
traces of such damage [hypoplasia, infantilism, eunuchoidism (Tandler, Grosz),
dysglandular type5 {Kretschmer}, etc.], and on the other hand in tendencies
toward compensation (hyperplasia), which can be biologically inferred as well as
causally. Today, after ages of mankind's struggle, we are faced with such genetic
changes creating certain dispositions, and every organ will carry the stamp of the
dangers and damages of its ancestors. (Fundamentals of physiognomy6). Since
the tension between organ and drive has been determined by the outside world
and the relative organ quality, the greater damage in the line of ancestors
(illness, overexertion, excess, defect) causes the organ to be inferior, i.e. an
organ in which the traces of that struggle are very significant. I have followed
these traces and have been able to show in the organ tendencies toward illness,
illnesses in the family tree, signs of degeneration and stigmata, hypoplastic and
hyperplastic growth, childhood anomalies and reflex anomalies. Thus, the
examination of organs is an important way for us to uncover drive strength. The
inferior eye has the stronger seeing drive, the inferior digestive tract a stronger
eating and drinking drive, the inferior sexual organ has a stronger sex drive.
3 See Alfred Adler, Studie über Minderwertigkeit von Organen (Study of
Organ Inferiority). Urban & Schwarzenberg, Berlin, Vienna, 1907, page 61 and

following. 
4 A valuable contribution to the thoughts being developed here was made by
Observator in an article: "Die Nervosität Deutschlands seit Gründung des
Reichs,"-- Germany's Nervousness since the Creation of the Reich, 1922.
These drives pressing for gratification, as well as their strength, determine
the attitude of the child toward the outside world. The child's entire
psychological world and psychological progress are derived from this reciprocal
relationship and very soon we can see the flowering of increased psychological
phenomena in the child's inner life connected with this tension. The drive to
exhibitionism (and the drive to hear) lead to curiosity and inquisitiveness. When
directed toward one's own person it leads to vanity and childish megalomania,
and when reversed to its opposite leads to a sense of modesty and bashfulness;
the drive for food creates food envy, avariciousness and parsimoniousness, and
when directed toward one's own person causes unpretentiousness, and when
reversed to generosity, etc. This becomes more evident and more manifold the
stronger the drive has developed so that the inferior organ for the most part
depletes all the possibilities for functioning and goes through all the phases of
change. Even the clash with the outside world, whether from unpleasant
experiences, or from an increasing desire for culturally valuable goods, has a
definite effect on the inferior organ, forcing a change in the drive. The
significance of infantile experiences (Freud) for the neurosis should be reduced
because it makes the strong drive and its limitations (as a desire and its
restraints) most apparent. Then the mostly forgotten experience, like a watchman
residing in the unconscious, prevents the further necessary expansion of the
drive demands on the outside world (infantile psyche of the neurotic) and avoids
an all too excessive drive change (Askese). In short, the fate of the individual as
well as a predestination for neurosis, given a normal, steady cultural
environment, and cultural demands, is reflected in the inferiority of the organs.7
5 Editors note: This is probably an archaic medical term used by
Kretschmer that may have something to do with glands or lymph nodes--perhaps
glandular fever. 
6 Recently, Kretschmer in Charakter und Temperament has successfully pursued
this branch of science. 
7 See Adler, Uber den nervösen Charakter, (The Neurotic Character), 3rd
edition, 1922, and Praxis und Theorie der Individualpsychology, 1921 same
publisher.
We find that the child assumes an attitude toward the outside world
beginning on its first day (the first cry), an attitude that cannot be described in

any other way but hostile. If one looks for an explanation then one will find that
this attitude is determined by the difficulty in gratifying the organ. This
circumstance, as well as other interactions of the hostile, aggressive attitude of
the individual toward his environment, make it possible to recognize that the
drive to struggle for gratification, which I shall name "aggression drive," is not
directly attached to the organ with its tendency to gain pleasure. It is a part of the
entire superstructure and represents a superior psychological, drive-connected
field. Into this, the most common case of affection-diversion, streams the
unfulfilled emotion as soon as one of the primary drives is denied gratification.
The stronger drive, that of the inferior organ, also normally corresponds to the
stronger aggression drive. It means for us the sum of feelings, arousals, and their
releases whose organic and functional substrata were inborn. As in the case of
primary drives, the arousal of the aggression drive is initiated by the relationship
of drive strength and by the demands of the outside world. Its goal is attained
through the gratification of the primary drive and by social adjustment. The
unstable psyche is constantly stabilized by the gratification of the primary drive
through arousal and release of the aggression drive, a feat in which one normally
sees both drives at work (for example, the food drive and the aggression drive:
the hunt). The aggression drive is most strongly aroused by primary drives that
will not wait too long for gratification, such as the food and drink drive, at times
the sexual drive, and the selfexhibition drive (because of vanity and striving for
power), in particular when these drives have been invigorated by organ
inferiority. The same applies to physical and mental pains of which a large part,
indirectly (drive restraints) or directly (stimulation of displeasure), prevent the
primary pleasure function of the organ. The goal and fate of the aggression
drive, as in the case of primary drives, is governed by restraints on the social
feeling; we also see in the aggression drive the same changes and phases as in
the primary drives. If the aggression drive in its purest form is manifested in
fighting, beating, biting, and adverse behavior, then its refinements and
specialization lead to sports, competition, duels, war, power struggle, religion,
and also to social, national, and racial conflicts. (Lichtenberg says something
like: "It is peculiar how people rarely and unwillingly live in accordance with
their religious laws, and how eager they are to fight for them.) Reversing the
aggression drive against one's own person results in humility, subservience and
submissiveness, resignation, subordination, flagellation, and masochism. I need
only point out that tied to these are dominant cultural characteristics such as
educatability, authoritarianism, as well as suggestibility, and being prone to
hypnotic influence. The most extreme form is suicide.
It is clearly evident that the aggression drive dominates the entire motility.

That, like any other drive, it also controls the course of the conscious (for
example, anger) and that even attention, interest, feeling, perception, memory,
fantasy, production and reproduction lead into the paths of pure or transmuted
aggression. Where there are somewhat strong drives one can see that the
aggression drives calls for help from the other drives, in particular from those of
the inferior organs which are based in the primary psychological axes, thereby
exploring the entire world of possibilities for aggression. In such cases, I have
always observed among others telepathic abilities and tendencies. Based on my
examinations I can trace back whatever is tenable in telepathy to the greater
aggression drive which is better able to come to terms with a world of danger
and which expands intuitiveness significantly, as well as the art of prognosis and
diagnosis.
Just as there is terror in the world and fear in individuals, so does the
aroused and suppressed aggression drive create the most horrible characters in
the arts and in fantasy? The psyches of painters, sculptors, and in particular of
tragic poets, who seek to create fear and sympathy with their creations, show us
the confluence of originally strong drives, the seeing, hearing, and tasting drives,
which assert themselves in highly cultivated forms by a circuitous route via the
aggression drive and which, at the same time, present us with a graphic picture
of drive transformation. Many professions, not to mention criminals and
revolutionary heroes, create and select the stronger aggression drive. The careers
of judges, policemen, teachers, clergy (presenting visions of hell), healers, and
many others are chosen by people with a stronger aggression drive, often
continuing, analogously, children's games. The fact that mainly drive
transformation often is sufficient for them (reversing to the opposite, for
example) is as understandable as is the flight of the artist into the idyll.
Particularly suitable for the aggression drive are children's games, the world of
fables with their popular characters, folk myths, and the numerous children's
stories and schoolbooks replete with gruesome tales based on the aggression
drive8. Another reservoir for the aggression drive is found in politics, which
presents abundant possibilities for involvement and presents logical versions for
assaults. Where the favorite hero is Napoleon, being preoccupied with funeral
processions, cemeteries, and death notices, being superstitious, fearing sickness
and infections, as well as fearing being buried alive, these cover, in what
otherwise is a suppression of the aggression drive, the secret game of lusting
after the horrors of a terrible egoistical striving for power.
If the aggression drive withdraws by reversing against one's own person, or
through refinement and specialization, as we often find, then the transformation
turns into its opposite, the antithesis of the aggression drive, almost becoming a

picture puzzle. Compassion, sympathy, altruism, a genuine concern for the
wretched, these represent new gratifications on which the drive, originally
tending toward cruelty, feeds. If this seems surprising it should be easy to
recognize that only those have a true understanding for suffering and pain who
originally were preoccupied with the world of suffering, the penitent sinners.
This cultural transformation will be even more apparent the greater the
aggression drive (Tolstoy, St. Augustine). Thus, the alarmist becomes the
protector from danger; Cassandra issues warnings and becomes a prophet. These
are pure forms of aggression. Reversing against one's own person, transforming
into the opposite with outwardly visible manifestations of aggression restraint
(Abulie; psychological impotence) are seen again in neuroses and psychoses. I
mention only bouts of anger and attacks of hysteria, epilepsy, and paranoia as
pure expressions of the drive. I see as phases of the transformation of the
aggression drive against one's own person hypochondria, neurasthenic and
hysteria pains, yes, the entire field of neurasthenic illnesses, hysteria, accident
neuroses, delusion of being under observation, persecution ideas, mutilation, and
suicide. I regard occurrences of milder manifestations and the messianic ideas of
hysterics and psychotics as a reversal to the opposite.
8 The damaging effect of war poetry and war games played by children provides
a better current insight.
In addition to what has been said about the forms of transformation against
one's own person, I must add fear as another phenomenon which is given great
importance in the structure of neurosis. It represents one phase of the aggression
drive against one's own person and can only be compared with the hallucinatory
phase of other drives. The various forms of fear arise because the fear based
aggression drive usurps various systems. Thus it can stimulate the motor system
(tremors, shakes, strong cramps, catatonic appearances, functional paralysis to
inhibit aggression), or stimulate the vasomotor (palpitation of the heart,
blanching, blushing), or follow other channels causing sweat, bowel movement,
urinating, vomiting, or preventing secretion as a factor of inhibition (dry throat).
If the aggression drive radiates into the conscious it creates coordinated, and
appropriate for the inferior channels, awareness phenomena such as fear and
obsessive ideas, sensory-based hallucinations, aura, and visions. However, the
direction will always be toward the inferior organ as well as toward its
superstructure, toward the bladder, intestines, larynx, motor apparatus,
respiratory organs (asthma), and circulatory system so that in an attack, the
patient's psychic primary axis will again become evident. (In sleep, in the state
of unconsciousness, and in the absence of hysteria and epilepsy, we see the
highest degree of aggression inhibition.) The hostile character of the fearful

person is thereby uncovered. His meager social feeling did not permit him to
take roots in this world.9
Aside from the primary drives, pain also is capable of stimulating the
aggression drive. As can be seen in the ways it is expressed, the aggression drive
when directed toward oneself can take control of the channels of pain and,
depending on the degree of organ inferiority, cause migraines, clavus, trigeminal
neuralgia, nervous pains in the stomach, the liver, kidneys, and in the appendix
region (also hiccups, yawning, burping, vomiting, screaming fits). Under
psychological analysis the triggering cause can always be seen in the drive
inhibitors10. Similarly, an aggression dream with or without fear either precedes
or follows an attack of pain. Alternatively, the picture is varied by temporary or
constant sleeplessness, the origin of which most immediately lies in an
ungratified aggression drive.
The motor-like radiation of the aggression drive is most prominent during
the childhood years. Screaming, fidgeting, throwing oneself on the floor, biting,
gnashing, etc. are simple forms of this drive, often found again in neurotic
attacks, particularly in hysteria.
The most important regulatory mechanism for the aggression drive is the
innate social feeling. It is basic to every relationship of the child to other people,
to animals, plants, and toward objects in general. It signifies the bonding with
life, the affirmation, and reconciliation with life. The concurrence of the social
feeling with its rich variations (love of parents, love of children, sexual love,
love of country, love of nature, the arts, science, and of mankind) with the
aggression drive produces the attitude, which actually amounts to the inner life
of the human being.
9 Richard Wagner: "Denn Unheil fürchtet, wer unhold ist."-- He fears harm who
is heinous. 10 See, "Das Problem der Distanz," (The Problem in Distance), in
Praxis und Theorie.
Chapter XII Inheritance of Diseases1 2
[1908]
The question of transferring physical characteristics from parents to
children is probably one of the most difficult and most thoroughly treated in the
entire study of life. In part it relates to our understanding of the constancy of
animal and plant species, their mutation and thriving, the maintaining of
beneficial characteristics and the vanishing of useless qualities, including those
of human beings, the unity of nature, and its advancing creative power. The

power of heredity fixes the animal and plant species and allows for only the
same type to descend. The same power, however, at other times creates new
forms and, under certain circumstances, transmits to the progeny acquired
variances.
Thus mankind's ancient riddles appear increasingly more urgent,
demanding solutions. What is inherited? How is inheritance carried out? How
can inherited characteristics be transmitted to offspring? Can mental
characteristics be transmitted? How far does the influence of the father reach? Of
the mother? The forbears? Are we approaching an improvement of the human
race by means of selecting better material or a worsening by a greater weakening
of genetic material? How and by what process can diseases be inherited?
Darwin's theories point to a struggle for survival which mercilessly discards
worthless material and thus forces eternal progress of an integrated organic
world. Weismann called for accepting an eternally unchanged genetic material
that can be subtly changed only through massive outside influences. DeVries and
neo-Lamarckism emphasize the significance and meaning of greater, more
volatile organic changes and regard these as significant in the development of
the species. Finally, Gregor Mendel shows us the dependency of change on the
distinctness of the parents and also the principles governing inheritance. They
and their closer as well as more distant followers have answered a good number
of questions. However, much is still unknown and in dispute leaving open many
natural philosophical speculations in the field of genetics.
Single organisms contain in their cells all the potency necessary for their
existence and reproduction. Their store of cell substance is sufficient to obtain
and gestate nourishment, to breathe, to move, and to reproduce by cutting off
some of the body's substance. However, the next higher levels already show an
often considerable differentiation in their cell substances and properties. As we
move up in the organic world we soon encounter higher organ cells and organ
organizations which no longer are as all-encompassing. Some serve the total
individual as a nurturing mechanism, and others as a breathing organ; one group
of cells serves mobility, others are a protective mantel such as sensing organs
which at a higher level are the eyes, ears, and nose. Reproduction no longer is
achieved by the division of individual cells but through a sexual organ, and at
the next level through two separate sexual organs. This progressive
differentiation and division of labor owes its existence to highly qualified
organs, nerve systems, circulatory apparatuses, etc.
1 Originally published as "”Ueber die Vererbung von Krankheiten" in
Heilen und Bilden, 
1908. 

2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
The study of nature, justifiably, has focused primarily on this perfect
mechanism that is contained within the individual. It has, however, enough room
to include and become accustomed to take into consideration the atrophying, the
cell impairment, on which progress in the organic world is also built.
It has always been pressure from the external environment that effected the
restructuring of cells and cell groups, the forming of chemical and physical
forces. The mere cell capacity to absorb no longer sufficed--thus a singular
growth-thrust formed the first mouth and intestine. The sensing by cells seeking
to reach greater distances formed the vision and hearing organs. Thus,
development in the organic world results from a draining and restructuring all
the cell's internal capacities responding to external stimulants. The organ
represents the physical attitude of the individual toward the outside world.
The beginning of sex-based reproduction, in particular by two different
sexes, meant the safeguarding of the most variously thriving cell groups, the
organs. Whatever the distinctive single cell no longer was capable of
accomplishing, to create other forms out of itself, now was carried out by the sex
cells which combined within themselves the original cell's capability for further
development, and the striving for further development of the organs and tissues.
Pressure created the configuration of the organs; it is pressure from the
outside and the sources of stimulation that come from living that create a tension
in organs that the organism throughout its lifespan strives to satisfy. Whatever
the organism hears, tastes, feels, and smells of the outside world is internalized
into its "world view." And just as its organs are subjected to pressures from the
outside world, shaping themselves accordingly, the organ strives to perceive the
world and reshape itself in accordance with its needs. The upward development
of the nervous system, especially the brain in the higher organisms, serves to tie
together and form the needs and abilities of the organ and its relationship to the
outside world.
Clearly, this development occurred only with considerable struggle and
under great danger and with the organ responding to each new problem that
survival demanded. What results is governed by the kind and degree of tension
and dependent on the condition of the affected organ. Under the most favorable
circumstances the result is a a balancing of tension, quality, and function of the
organ in order to maintain the equilibrium of the organism. The same
harmonious growth also applies to the reproductive organs and guarantees the
offspring ample genetic material for a development appropriate to the world
outside.
This picture of an all-around harmonious development does not measure up

to real conditions. This is particularly true with regard to the cell composition in
the highest developed organism, the human being, where unresolved tensions
arising from the past, the present, and the future result from the deficient
performance of organs and tissues that fail to respond to social conditions. If life
is to function smoothly, if the demands of the environment are to be met
satisfactorily, then an organ's inner tensions must often experience an unusual
increase. We regard a disturbance of such an often laboriously maintained
harmony a disease which we see ultimately caused primarily by external
assaults, such as injuries, bacterial infections and other substances hostile to the
body, hunger, excessive and indiscriminate eating, a lack of life-essential air,
light, warmth, sleep, and physical and mental overexertion.
If we thus see development, tension, and the impairment of our organs as
interrelated with the economic situation, and if we recognize a correlation
between a healthy and ailing human organism with the production of goods, we
must then also accept the same relationship for the state of health of the
reproductive organs which provide the genetic material in the struggling
organism.
It is easy to understand that the fate of the completed organs and those of
the growing cells subjected to pressures need not be the same, and as a rule are
not. Here, a final product of growth that experienced only a few reactions given
the multitude of possible reactions of which the germ cell is capable, and there,
an enormous push for growth to structure the pressing organism. The manner of
attack also is not a matter of indifference. The completed organ, in a last gasp
effort, may come out victorious with no apparent impairment. The cell, however,
may have suffered some damage that will, to some extent, impede its growth,
while an apparent organ disease may not be sufficiently serious to affect the life
force of the cell. In most instances, however, a disease impairs an organ already
damaged in the cell and thus continues the cell deterioration in the next
generations.
Of great significance for the theory of impaired organs and their
inheritability is that the transmitted cell damage appears in different
manifestations depending on when it emerged during cell development; it can
cause dysfunction depending on the interaction among the growing organs and
on their impact on one another and in the end can impede the development of an
embryo. It can also cause damage in the structures of the embryo that show
traces of an earlier embryonic period not corresponding to the newborn child.
These series of cell damages that are known in their harmless states as
"variations" is so manifold that the organs from which they stemmed seem in no
way faulty or ineffective. In many cases, because of their greater--due to their

closeness to the embryo--growth energy, they are more adaptable to overcoming
social barriers than are the parent organs which in their struggle for survival
came close to being annihilated. Even the "reaction to resistance," the
toughening against extreme hardship, continues in the life of the embryo and can
only there gain the dimensions needed to succeed, which has been proven in the
ability to adjust to changes in climate.
In addition, the two-gender lineage in humans can often blur cell damage in
one parent with the cells of the other, if not fully eliminating the damage.
Certainly, if the impairment is in both parents it can be reinforced, which causes
us to be suspicious, particularly where marriages are between blood relatives.
This is not the case where familial cell damage can be eliminated. In such cases,
inbreeding can lead to the posterity inheriting certain benefits in greater measure.
Then in individual cases the descendants of blood relatives can range far above
others. Mixed marriages face fewer dangers with regard to inheritance, and over
time tend to produce an organic equilibrium.
We need not be concerned today with the origin of cell damage. As long as
we are dealing with the external causes of diseases in healthy organs and
individuals with a strong resistance--especially where poison and epidemics
caused the disease--we can identify the connection between the organ and
whatever caused damage as a relative inferiority of the organ. Albeit, cell
damage and a resulting absolute inferiority of the descended organ can ensue.
For the most part, however, evidence exists today that prior to the breakout of
any disease one or more of the organs are inferior in our sense, that is, they
passed through cell damage the cause of which is to be sought in prior
generations. Among the great causes of cell-material damage physicians usually
name three: alcohol, syphilis, and tuberculosis. We can add with the same
justification all offenses of a social nature to which we alluded briefly above. We
must add that all of these in the first instance threaten the organ that is inferior
by nature.
However, regarding these organs, unique because of some developmental
cell damage, we must maintain that they were inherited as inferior. This does not
yet establish the final outcome. Certainly an enormous number of people died
who suffered from an increasing inferiority of individual organs to where the
organism expired. Many become ill or die from causes that they could otherwise
have endured. Others found good health by dint of their strength or beneficial
social situations and are thus able to pass to their offsprings favorably developed
genetic material. Many are helped by an over achieving nervous system and
brain that consciously or unconsciously manifests itself in ways that can appear
as an inherited intellectual capacity. However, we always see the inferior organ,

if not impeded by extreme weakness, wrestling with the external forces to assert
itself either directly by increasing growth, or indirectly by a heightened anxiety
and superior psychological performance. The adequacy of an organism does not
lend itself to change; a physical and mental standstill is the cause and
consequence. New physical and intellectual growth comes into existence only
when the organism awakened by intensive social demands is forced to become
inferior, and when the thereby inherited inferior genetic material discharges its
embryonically related force. Or--since there are barriers in the way of organic
growth--the power of the inferior organ unfolds in its psychological
superstructure and attains standing in new ways, through inventiveness, artistry,
and by defending against social dangers.
Medical science, a social consciousness, but also our culture demanding
that every individual be capable of working, have deepened the interest in the
infirm. An increase in interest will certainly ensue when mankind is forced to
regard the problems of a future society as binding on the present. All these
factors raise the need to pursue vigorously the problems of inheritance in the
study of diseases. Our presentation shows that inborn dispositions for illness
have an enormous influence which too often is misunderstood because the
disposition so often is unrecognized and the outbreak of an illness is not avoided.
The more medicine advances the more it teaches us to consider the contribution
of inheritance where there is illness. However, there is more to that. With careful
observation we are capable today of tracing genetic impairments to suspect
certain threatening diseases. Albeit, it is still only a suspicion since one can
never disregard the part played by competing causes of diseases. Such would
include in particular the position of the individual and the hard to alter demands
of our culture, which must of necessity be considered as further causes. The
economic condition, for example, controls genetic material, leads to the
inferiority of the organs, and thereby causes a greater disposition toward disease.
A vague understanding of an illness causes a clear differentiation between an
inherited disposition and an inherited disease to founder. The necessary organ's
effort to perform and its state of health decide between life and death, and
between health and sickness.
A faulty organ structure, often in the most subtle ways, and any failings in
functioning, are generally the signs of an inherited inferiority, and as such can
frequently be passed on. This cannot always be proven, despite the presence of a
disposition toward diseases, nor does this necessarily appear in other branches of
the family tree. Whatever then relates to a disease can vary considerably. It is
therefore possible that various impairments of an organ and its related parts can
emerge in descendants. It is then possible that illness and good health take turns,

that a predisposition and good health is followed by illness and a predisposition.
The multifariousness can even become more extreme because the seat of the
"lesser resistance" in the organ can change. What follows is that the the
inferiority in offspring can appear not only in different parts of the organ and in
parts of different significance, as well as in different forms, but can also appear
in related cell groups of the nervous system attacking the circulatory and lymph
systems and thus giving shape to an onsetting disease. On the other hand, it
should not be surprising to find in some offspring a uniformity in diseases, or
even the identical diseases in the same stage of development.
All excessive demands on the organism, attacks that exceed a certain
measure, also limitations that impede the development of an organ, have
damaging effects in the following generations. Abusing the individual, for
example, by chronic starvation, constantly poor nutrition, overwork, excessive
emotional excitement and worries, and child labor have their repercussions in
subsequent generations. They affect first of all the overexerted organ, taint it and
create weak digestive organs, weak muscle systems, weak nerves, mental
incompetence, etc. by impairing the germinal development of the organs, i.e. the
germ structure. When life's usual causes of disease, such as poisoning,
infections, etc. are added, the impairment then can attain a degree that becomes
apparent as a disease when it was not recognized as such before. An enormous
number of defects that continue in the organs arise from the way we live. The
deficit in clean air in cities, homes, and in poorly ventilated dust and smoke-
filled work places exposes the breathing apparatuses of the population to a
constant onslaught. The eradication of the tuberculosis bacillus, which has its
main locus in innately weak lungs, is a pious wish; the innate inferior breathing
organs and their related nerve, lymph, and circulatory systems predestine the
outbreak and course of the disease. Germ-producing unsanitary conditions, the
lack of hygiene in cities and in the country increase the onslaught and
significantly reduce the protection provided by the skin. Other damage ensues
from excessive demands made on the eyes, in particular by poor lighting, on the
ears, and on hearing because of the particular demands made by our culture. The
heart and related organs suffer from constant worries, overwork, insufficient
blood cells, and poor nutrition. All these impediments increase the intensity of
disease in following generations some of which, such as tuberculosis, syphilis,
alcohol poisoning, lead poisoning, etc. damage cell substances significantly.
Excessive overexertion of the brain from excessive demands on the organs,
worries, constant dissatisfaction, unbearable conflict between a dream and the
reality of life produces a tendency for neuroticism that can be transferred in the
germ and intensified through increased assaults from the internal and external

world. Added to this is the interrelationship, often internal, between organs and
organ parts, the condition of the internally secreting glands, the relationship of
the latter to the body's ways of reacting, the striving of the total organism to
attain an equilibrium with external demands by striving to compensate or
substitute, and the frequent failures because of too much or too little. The
succeeding generations can assume these strivings to compensate for better or
worse results. The increase in neuroticism and mental illnesses in our time
clearly demonstrates the extent of resistance to a harmonious processing of a
cultural life by the human mind. The inheritance of inferior brain cells and the
greater tendency toward psychosomatic diseases are inauspicious signs on the
path that should lead to expanded and stronger minds in the next generations.
Stronger minds, however, free from the ballast of superstition, and no longer so
closely tethered to unconscious feelings, adjusted to life's problems and
strengthened through struggle, also are the product and the creation of
progress.
Chapter XIII The Child's Need for Affection1 2
[1908]
The study of neurotic children and adults over the last several years has
brought to light the most rewarding information about the inner life. After
having dealt with the seemingly important preliminary question whether the
inner life of healthy and neurotic people differed qualitatively--a question that is
answered today by asserting that the psychological phenomenon of both can be
traced back to the same sources3--the attempt could then be made confidently to
measure the Individual Psychological results of neurotic persons against
"normal" people. What will then be seen in equal measure is the fundamental
meaning of drives for structuring and composing the psyche as well as the large
part played by unconscious thinking and acting. Furthermore, the connection
between the organic and the psyche as well as the apparent continuity and
hereditability of character traits will emerge, as will the complete interpretation
of dreams and their meaning. Such a study also will reveal the significant role of
the sexual drive and its transformation as it relates to the child’s personal
relationships and culture. Above all, however, it will expose social feeling and
the striving for power as the factors that will determine the fate of the individual.
Among the outwardly discerable psychological phenomena in the child's
life, the need for affection becomes apparent quite early. This should not be
understood as a circumscribed psychological structure that might be localized in

the psychomotor part of the brain. Instead, we perceive the reflection of multiple
emotions of the social feeling, of evident and unconscious desires, instinctive
expressions that at times solidify to a conscious intensity. Split off components
of the sensing drive, the exhibition drive, the hearing drive, and of sexuality,
deliver in unique combinations of whatever is to be selected. The goal lies in the
child's gratified attitude toward his environment. Thus, the first of our
conclusions would be that a strong desire of the child for affection allows us to
assume that under otherwise similar circumstances there exists a strong social
feeling, but also a strong striving for power. As a rule, and reasonably so,
gratifying the desire for affection is not to be attained without anything in return.
Thus, the need for affection becomes a lever for upbringing. An embrace, a kiss,
a friendly countenance, a pleasant sounding word can only be gained when the
child subjects himself to the caretaker, that is along a a detour that includes the
child’s culture. In the same way as the child seeks gratification from the parents
it seeks the same from teachers and later from society. The need for affection
thereby becomes a significant part of social feeling. The intensity of the feeling
for affection, the psychological apparatus that the child can set in motion in
order to attain gratification and the manner in which it can endure being denied
gratification form a significant component of the child's character. The original
expressions of a need for gratification are quite apparent and are commonly
known. Children love to be pampered, praised; they love to snuggle up to
someone they love, ask to be taken into bed, etc. Later the desire for a loving
relationship extends to relatives, friends, special community feelings, and love,
each dependent on the enticement from those to whom the child was exposed in
his striving for power.
1 Originally published as "Das Zärtlichkeitsbedürfnis des Kindes" in Heilen
und Bilden, 
1908. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002. 
3 Adler "Ueber den nervösen Charakter" 3rd edition, 1922 and "Praxis und
Theorie der Individualpsychologie," 1920, J.F. Bergman publisher, Munich.
Understandably, a considerable part of the child's development depends on
the right guidance this complex of feelings is given. In studying this, it becomes
clear how a partial gratification of this drive is an indispensable factor in a
culture, just as the remaining ungratified portion of the drive becomes an eternal
direct impulse for progress. The wrong directions that the need for affection
might take can also be recognized easily. Before this impulse is gratified, it
should be contained by directing it into a bypass so that the impulse drives the

culture of the child. As soon as the child admits a substitute, as soon as the place
of the father is taken by the teacher, by the friend, by the comrade in arms, then
the diverted pure social feelings in the child's psyche will be awakened and will
raise the means and goals of the need for affection to a higher level. The
endurance of the drive, the tolerance for tension, must be closely allied with that
development. The deprivation of gratification should not destroy the
psychological equilibrium. It is meant only to arouse the energy and create a
cultured aggressive posture. If the child avoids the detour via the culture he then
attains only an immediate primitive kind of gratification. As a result his desires
will always be directed toward sensual pleasures. His drives will always be
unbridled, ill mannered. This is given further support by parents whose tendency
is to find pleasure in being surrounded by fondling, caressing children recalling
traces of their own childhood. Children who were brought up in this way will
always show a preference for one of the original forms of gratification. The
development of independence, initiative, and self-discipline will also be lagging.
The ideal situation for such children will be to lean on and depend upon a loved
one, to exhibit inhibitions that, accompanied by a host of related characteristics,
will dominate that person's life. Soon, nervousness and fearfulness will give
signs of an inability to adjust to life and a persistence to live in a world of ideas
and dreams. Female traits in the worst sense will gain the upper hand and, in
extreme cases, the psyche will be misshapen to the point where a dispirited,
masochistic, and neurotic character betrays irreconcilability with life.
The opposite way of upbringing denies the need for affection and provides
the child not even with gratification derived from the culture. This leaves the
child by himself with a yearning for love. Cut-off from all objects for affection,
the child is left with only his own person as a goal for his yearnings. The social
feelings remain rudimentary and tendencies for gratification have the upper hand
to maintain self-love in every form. Alternatively, the child assumes an
aggressive posture. Every ungratified drive directs the organism in ways to meet
the outside world aggressively. The rough characters, the unbridled, unteachable
child can give us lessons in how the constantly ungratified need for affection
arouses aggression. An understanding for the juvenile criminal will, in our
opinion, be significantly advanced when seen from this viewpoint. However, the
reaction to the child’s environment does not always become outwardly
discernable. The tendency toward aggression can be subjected to restraints
which originally might have come from a sense of, or being pressured by, the
culture, but which eventually reaches further and even makes cultural
aggressiveness (activism, study, cultural striving) impossible, having been
replaced by "the pallor of doubts." Where there are such anomalies in the child’s

development we find, in place of drive gratification, or where there is a
listlessness toward cultural aggressiveness, a dearth of self confidence and fear
stemming from having responded incorrectly to the teacher, as a sign of a lack of
social feeling. It should not surprise us that many of these children will later
become neurotic, or that many as geniuses will wander through life as unique
character types or as possessors of an uncommon individuality.
This is concurred in by many pedagogical studies against which everyone
bringing up children should measure himself. Care should be taken, however, to
guard against injecting one’s own desires and feelings to confirm one’s own
thesis, as is often done unconsciously when working on material to which we
apply traces of our own memories. One must also remember that nature does not
trivialize. It would be a shame if every mistake in upbringing had its
consequences. In general, however, the following is valid: a child's need for
affection should be gratified not for pleasure alone but above all for a culturally
effective purpose. The child will not be denied gratification when it can be
attained at a cultural level because the child's drive for affection is rooted in the
organic ground of social feeling and aims at self-assertion.
However, it is not only the actual shortcomings that are of primary concern
in gratifying the need for affection. More significant is the degree to which the
child's expectations are satisfied or denied. This essential factor encompasses all
the sources of human errors and every possibility for doing wrong. If this is
understood then one will find that a particularly strong need and demand for
affection can stem from a lack, as well as a surfeit, of gratification. An
irreconcilable attitude toward others then comes about in the same way it does in
children with inborn organ inferiorities.
Chapter XIV The Theory of Organ Inferiority and its
Philosophical and Psychological Meaning1 2
[1908]
The concept of inferiority has long been used in medicine as well as in law.
It is commonly understood to be primarily a condition displaying mental defects
without necessarily implying a mental illness. This concept thus entails a
judgment and a deprecating criticism with regard to the psyche as a whole. The
inferiority of which I speak concerns an organ unfinished, developmentally
retarded, in part or in whole inhibited, or changed during growth. The fate of
such inferior organs, sensory organs, digestive organs, organs associated with
breathing, the glands, the urinary tract, genitals, the circulatory system and the

nervous system, is enormously variable. While an inferiority is present at the
outset of life, it can be established and detected often only in infancy. The
individual's development and the causes of his irritation press toward
overcoming the manifestations of these inferiorities so that the outcome passes
through approximately the following stages with all possible intermediary steps:
problems of coping with life, physical and functional anomalies, weakend
immunity and sickliness, compensation (equalizing) within the organ,
compensation by a second organ by means of psychic overstructuring, organic,
or psychological overcompensation.
Evidence of the inferiority of an organ can most easily be established when
an organ in its morphological structure deviates in part or in whole from the
average shape, a deviation that can be traced to its embryonic state or to the
infant growth period. Function failures or changes in elimination also provide
dependable evidence, one being structural in nature, the other an alteration in
operations, both often occurring together.
A further indication can be deduced from inferior organs of the blood
relatives of a person whose own organ inferiority has not become perceptible. 
At this point I must introduce a biological phenomenon that occurs in inferior
organs wanting in shape or function when a disturbance takes place that upsets
its essential equilibrium. The pressures that cause the individual to become upset
escalate until the failure in growth of the organ is compensated for in its
symmetry or in another organ which then partially or fully replaces the inferior
organ. This tendency to compensate for the defect through increased growth or
functions, 
can, 
under 
favorable 
circumstances, 
reach 
a 
point 
of
overcompensation and in most instances also will include in its heightened
development the central nervous system. 
Given the innumerable ways that the inferior organ can manifest itself, a specific
orientation is difficult to establish. However, there are a number of indicators
that can easily be associated so that even when they occur in isolation, they can
help significantly in identifying them. 
Thus, localizing the disease in an organ displaying signs of organ inferiority
whenever the inferior organ reacts to so-called "illness-stimulants" within its
environment. The following formulation is meant to replace the ambiguous
notion of "disposition:" "The illness is the result of an organ inferiority and an
external attack." One component of that statement, the need for an external
intercession, is limited in duration and confined to a specific cultural group. The
changes that are made within those limits represents cultural progress, initiating
a change in life style, effecting social improvement, i.e. the result of ideas
directed toward reducing excessive organ stress. They relate to the possibilities

for the organ and its nervous superstructure to develop and work toward the
development of all organs equally. However, they are conditions for the relative
inferiority as soon as their demands exceed a certain measure. In all our
observations we have established that chance is not a factor in correcting an
adverse development. An example that demonstrates this very clearly is derived
from observations of Professor Habermann and relates to people in very noisy
occupations, i.e. smiths, artillery gunners, etc., who suffer from hearing
afflictions. It becomes apparent that not every ear is suitable for such
occupations, that hearing injuries provide the impetus to make changes in the
factory, that holding certain types of jobs for longer periods of time would
change the organ affected, and that there are certain dangers to one's health. 
In summary, we can say about hygiene and preventive medicine that they follow
these conditions for compensating and that, in the same way, all our methods for
healing are oriented toward compensating for an apparent organ inferiority. 
A separate examination of the organ damaged by illness, the second of the two
components mentioned above, is done in light of pathological research findings
and in light of preconditions for inherited inferior organs, discussed below. The
inherited organ anomalies are arrayed ranging from one extreme, the innate
deformity, to the other, the slowly maturing and otherwise normal organs. In
between are clearly compensated and overcompensated inferiorities. The
question regarding the initial start of the organ inferiority certainly is of
profound biological significance. Today, however, we are dealing with
pronounced variations which, in my opinion should be interpreted as innate
inferiorities. This connection between a diseased and an embryonic inferior
organ leads to the conclusion that the origin of the inferiority rested in the family
and that it is being passed to future generations, i.e. it is in the family tree,
signifying that the inferiority of the organ is innate. 
Given the close connection between inferiority and illness it should not be
surprising that often an innate inferiority corresponds to the inherited disposition
toward illness. Thus the illness in one link in the family tree becomes an
indicator for organ inferiority in immediate ancestors as well as immediate
descendants, even if these were healthy. Coinciding with the organ inferiority, or
the tendency toward such, the tendency toward overcoming (the striving toward
compensation) is infused into the genes, which in turn create new and more
efficient variations, more efficient because they draw their stamina from having
met outside demands. 
As for other indicators of organ inferiority I can confine myself to emphasizing
summarily that among themselves these indicators have the same relationships to
illnesses, inheritability, and compensation as do morphologically innate

anomalies, signs of degeneracy, birthmarks, or stigmata. I maintain about all
these that they often are the visible signs exposing an inferiority of the organ
with which they are associated, such as the eyes, ears, respiratory and digestive
systems. Until now, such anomalies were regarded as meaningless, or,
unjustifiably, as signs of a general degeneration or inferiority. In the broadest
sense they furnish the material making up the personal physiognomy.3
I can comment briefly on Reflexanomalia4. In such cases, the reflexes of an
organ's mucous membrane, as the source of a nervous action of the organ, could
give a clue to the organ's inferiority where such reflexes appear to be failing or
heightening. 
In light of the embryonic origin of organ inferiority it seems appropriate to direct
attention to the beginnings of its development after birth, anticipating that the
onset of compensation would not come about without noticeable problems. On
the other hand, the picture of organ inferiority would be blurred with the process
of compensation having been completed. As it turned out, this assumption is
correct. The inferior organ requires more time to attain normal function and
creates in the process a number of disturbances which are overcome with
increased mental activity. Instead of presenting a wide ranging description of
this functional anomaly, I point to noticeable manifestations in the life of the
child which pedagogues describe as being part of “childhood defects.” These are
children who have difficulty learning to speak, have speech defects, stutter,
blink, are cross-eyed, have hearing problems, problems with elimination, vomit,
suck their thumb, have eating disorders, etc.5 At times there are only traces of
such childhood defects. Most of the time, however, they are very obvious and
appear in conjunction with other signs of organ inferiority, signs of
degeneration, reflex anomalies, and illnesses. Otherwise, the indicators cited are
widely distributed throughout the family tree and thereby give evidence of the
inheritability of organ inferiority. Childhood defects themselves are often
inheritable. 
I must note in this context that observations have shown innumerable childhood
defects which, however, only correspond to the large number of inferior organs.
Thus far there has been no uniform explanation for childhood defects. The
following insight is derived from the study of organ inferiority: Childhood
defects are the discernible expression of a change in the workings of the inferior
organ, the visible manifestation next to which there also are more or less hidden
phenomena corresponding to every degree of inferiority. 
Adapting to life burdened by an inferior organ brings with it corresponding
psychological problems. In struggling with a psychological attitude created to

overcome this problem there arise noticeably unusual character traits and forms
of expression that could either be advantageous or disadvantageous. It is at this
stage that it is possible to understand the transition from physical to
psychological manifestations. 
If a close psychological connection has been established in the case of mucous
membrane reflex anomalies then this is even more so the case with childhood
defects. Mostly it seems that for normal nerve system development simple
growth compensation is sufficient to attain normal functioning. In that case,
however, an organ anomaly remains unchanged and when we test and observe
this more carefully we often find indelible remains for the entire life span. Or the
defect was rectified in terms of the norm. However, when psychological tension
arises the defect reverts immediately to its former state so that one has to speak
of a continuation of the condition that was assuaged for only a period of time.
Examples of such hidden weaknesses can be found frequently: blinking in bright
lights, cross-eyedness when doing close work, stuttering when excited,6
vomiting when emotionally upset, etc. This confirms the assumption, which we
arrived at from another aspect, that compensation results from over achievement
and a growth spurt in the brain. That such a reinforcement of the psychic
superstructure is possible is shown by successful results; that there is a
connection between these results and constant practice can be easily guessed. In
light of analogous situations we can only presume that there is an anatomic
precondition: the greater the accomplishments, the greater the number of nerve
elements. Thus, the same relationship of inferiority and compensation governs
the central nervous system, just as the parallel pathological effect becomes
apparent at times. There are a number of indications, such as those presented by
v. Hansemann, of innate pathological changes in the brains of notable men. 
If brain compensation correlates with organ inferiority then clearly we must find
a psychological correlation with certain organs that related to the outside world.
This would mean that originally inferior eyes would psychologically provide
greater insight. 
If one follows this line of thought one arrives at the assumption that in favorable
cases the inferior organ has the psychologically more efficient superstructure
whose psychological phenomena--pertaining to drives, feelings, attention span,
memory, personal opinion, empathy, conscience--would be more ample and
more highly developed. An inferior digestive system, in favorable cases, will
attain a greater psychological capability in all aspects of nourishment, and, since
its superstructure governs and pulls into its domain the other psychological
systems, this also applies to all other ways of attaining food. The drive for
sustenance will be so dominant that it will find expression in all personal and

social relationships,--as a gourmet, as industriousness, being thrifty, avaricious,
etc. The same holds true for other inferior organs which will attain a more
extensive, more nuanced sensitivity and ability to evaluate the outside world
insofar as it pertains to a particular organ. 
This process creates psychic axes toward which the individual is directed,
always subject to one or more inferior organs. In dreams as well as in fantasy, in
the choice of occupation and in disposition, the intensive striving of a particular
organ to master its task becomes apparent. The primitive organ activity (drive),
particularly of inferior organs, frequently is associated with pleasure. Many
childhood defects make this so obvious that they often are seen unjustly as
sexual activity. If the primitive drive of the organ keeps returning, as in dreams,
in games, and fantasy, then we must continue to look here also (among other
causes) to an urge to gain pleasure. If this thought is carried through one arrives
at the presumption that the psychic organ superstructure is primarily a
compensatory function for the failed organ so that as it concerns the outside
world it can fulfill the organ's tasks. 
At that point organ inferiority touches on problems of philosophy. Thus, in
mental development where a continuity becomes apparent there is a similarity
with drives and characteristics. This applies to the individual as well as to
mankind as a whole. If philosophy is the scientific summation of all
psychological acts then it becomes understandable that the prevailing step in the
thought process is subject to the prevailing state of philosophy caused by
changes in the organs and by brain compensation. Its development and any
changes in principles is explained by the development and changes in the
superstructures of various organs. Since the latter suffer the impulse of their
inferiority from the outside world, changes in the outside world cause organ
inferiority and, with reciprocal influence, correspond to improved brain
compensation. 
This viewpoint seems to me also applicable to the genesis of highly cultivated
psychomotor activities, the origins and development of language, the arts in
terms of the nature of genius, and the creation of philosophical systems and
philosophies of life. I hope that they also will prove themselves with the
discovery of new tasks and ways to deal with them. It forces us, probably like no
other viewpoint, to avoid the cliffs of abstraction and to observe manifestations
in context and within the stream. I have followed this viewpoint in medicine, and
I like to hope that my modest proposition will be accepted elsewhere. 
The world view formed through brain compensation cannot unfold without
restrictions. It is not free either in its conscious or unconscious parts. Its
expressions are limited by the social milieu, the culture, which, by means of the

drive for self-preservation and the personality ideal, allows the psyche to unfold
and express itself only when it can adapt within the cultural framework. In such
a case also, the reinforced superstructure of the inferior organ often assumes new
and valuable functions. However, often there also arise illnesses such as
neuroses. 
A young man from a wealthy home came to me for treatment because of fear
and obsessive thoughts. In addition, he suffered from a lack of appetite and
digestion problems for which no organic causes were evident. Primarily the
alimentary canal was found to be inferior. In line with my theory of organ
inferiority that I presented at the outset, the following information can be
recorded: 1). The patient suffered from stomach and intestinal problems of a
threatening nature at age one and two. 2). Heredity. His paternal grandfather
died of stomach cancer. His father, a heavy eater, is very avaricious. He attained
great wealth because of his intensive acquisitiveness.7 The mother suffered from
hysterical intestinal problems. The siblings show traits of avariciousness and are
healthy eaters without exception. They frequently succumb to intestinal
illnesses. 3). Peripheral signs of degeneration: Markedly crooked teeth,
prognathism. 4). Childhood defects: thumb sucking until late into childhood. 
One detail of his Individual Psychology will show us the basic mental character
of the patient and the change he had undergone. One day the patient made a
contribution of 200 Kronen to a charity organization in Mariahilf. He said this to
me after telling me that he was again feeling particularly poorly that day. He
then continued: "Perhaps I felt so poorly because I was already hungry when I
made the contribution at Mariahilf. It was already past noon and I had not yet
eaten. I had a luncheon engagement for 12 o'clock in a restaurant (note: a very
expensive restaurant), and was beginning to make the (long) way into town."
The explanation for the nervous discomfort was easy to see. On hearing this
story it is as if dissonant sounds strike the ear. A wealthy man who makes
expensive gifts, who eats in a fancy restaurant, is very hungry and takes a long
walk, therein lies a considerable discomfort which can be rationalized when we
presume the patient is just as avaricious as his father; however, being highly
refined does not permit him to be avaricious. It is possible for him to act this
way only if it would not be a violatation of his culture, i.e. the saving of a few
pennies which, if necessary, he could justify on health grounds. Otherwise he is
very magnanimous, albeit not without paying for his magnanimity with a
nervous attack. 
This case can teach us something about the limits of psychological and motor
manifestations of compensation that were set by others, by social feeling. At the
same time it shows us the (seeming) inheritability of psychological

characteristics based on inferior organs. Furthermore, I can show on the basis of
this case what Freud in Vienna meant by "repression mechanism." As the theory
of organ inferiority postulates, the repression mechanism aims at a restriction in
the superstructure of the inferior organ and its manifestations. At the same time
it is a brake mechanism against the development of unnecessary or immature
practices stemming from overcompensation. That this causes a disposition, a
drive, a desire, an idea to assume a contrary stand, expressing itself
antithetically, is a special case and reminiscent somewhat of Hegel's dialectics. 
If overcompensation seeks to express itself in cultural ways, it forges new if
more difficult and often more limiting paths. It then arrives at great
psychological manifestations such as those we ascribe to genius. Lombroso in
his genius theory followed heterogeneous cases and thereby had a wrong
perception of pathological geniuses. According to our exposition, the inferior
organ is not a pathological creation even though it entails the basic pathological
requirements. The motivation for brain compensation can end in favorable
outcomes with overcompensation that is an absence of any signs of illness. 
The outcome of overcompensation is subject to several conditions. We have
learned to know one of these to be cultural barriers, social feeling. Another
determining factor is linking the dominant superstructure to other psychic areas,
the visual superstructure to the acoustical and the vocal superstructure. These
manifold compensations, their crossing over and mutual inhibitions provide the
actual picture of the psyche. Its analysis further allows us to recognize the grades
of compensation, sensitivity, and contradiction in their linkages and the limiting
influences of the culture. I have found that there is a particular vulnerability for
accidents where there are strong linkages with a tendency to exceptional
activism (note: a workaholic). My research has shown that such a tendency
develops in conjunction with the superstructure of primary drives, as do
domineering influences of ambition and striving for power. The latter, however,
under favorable circumstances and suffering, lead to the most outstanding
achievements. 
A third condition determining the fate of overcompensation is its capability to
resist or, alternatively, its frailty. Quite frequently nature fails to correct the
inferior organ and creates compensations that are vulnerable to attacks, opening
the possibility for disabilities, neuroses, psychological illnesses, in short,
pathological results. A brief section from the Analysis of Paranoia may provide a
picture. The overcompensation of the optical system next to the other systems
plays an eminent role. For example, the visual drive in a large number of cases
of paranoia reaches a state of high development exhausting everything that can
possibly be seen in this world. Then an unfavorable set of circumstances arises, a

set-back, and the flaws of overcompensation is manifested in hallucinations,
visual apparitions. The constituent powers of the mind begin to show similar
flaws and the patient sees himself the object of what others see which then leads
to the beginning of megalomania and persecution mania linked with aggression
tendencies. 
The opposite case is taken from a tiny section describing the psyche of a poet,
for which I am grateful to the Viennese writer Rank, who is familiar with my
viewpoint. I must state at the outset that I believe this dramatic poet has
particularly sharp and uniquely overcompensated visual organ which accounts
for his powers for conjuring scenes, and for discerning the selection and
structuring of his material. In the drama of Schützen Tell8 we see many
indications of an overcompensated eye apparatus, individual turns and similes
that relate to the eye function. (Since time immemorial the same is found in folk
lore where such an inferior apparatus in its overcompensation comes to the fore,
as in the blind marksman who never fails to hit his target. This could relate to the
Tell legend.) 
In addition to the connection between the dramatist Schiller and the eye
apparatus and its function, I also should like to point to the blinding of Melchthal
and the hymn in Tell on the light in the eyes. Regarding the poet's eyesight, I can
state that he had weak eyes, suffered from eye infections, and as a result of a
childhood defect was constantly blinking , a condition that lasted until
adulthood. He was an avid hunter. Weltrich said, and this is notable in terms of
heredity, that the family name, Schiller, was derived from "schielen," cross-
eyedness. I mention this minor concluding detail to draw attention to the
connection between the artist and an inferior organ. 
It should not be surprising that the indications of inferior eyesight play a very
important role particularly in the case of painters9. I have reported variously on
this in my writings.10 Guercino da Centa, who lived in the 15th Century, was
given his name because he was cross-eyed. Piero de la Francesca was said to
have gone blind in old age. He was famous particularly for the art of drawing in
perspectives. More recently, mention should be made of Lenbach, who was
oneeyed, Mateyko, who was very nearsighted, Manet, who had an astigmatism,
etc. Research conducted in art institutes showed that approximately 70% of the
students suffered from eye anomalies. 
I have frequently found that speakers, actors, and singers have organ
inferiorities. The Bible relates that Moses suffered from a heavy tongue and his
brother had the gift of speech. Demosthenes, who stuttered, became Greece's
most renowned speaker, and the speech given by Camille Demoulin, who

normally stuttered, was reported by his contemporaries to have flowed like
liquid gold. 
The same applies to musicians who quite often suffer from ear illnesses.
Beethoven, Robert Franz, Smetana, all of whom lost their hearing, are offered as
well known examples. Klara Schumann, speaking about her life, reported having
had lapses in being able to hear and speak during childhood. 
Far from trying to present these details as evidence, their purpose is merely to
draw the reader's attention to the theory of organ inferiority's broad spectrum and
its relationship to philosophy, psychology, and aesthetics.
1 Originally published as "Die Theorie der Organminderwertigkeit und ihre
Beduetung für Philosophie und Psychologie" in Univ. Wein, Phil. Gesellschaft,
Wiss., Beil., 21, p. 11-26. Based on a Lecture at the Philosophical Society, the
University of Vienna (1907). 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002. 
3 Jüngst on this point provided valuable evidence to Kretschmer. 
4 Editor’s note: A mechanistic, behavioristic point of view that argues that all
psychological processes may be represented as reflexes and combination of
reflexes. 
5 Regarding the inheritability of such manifestations see Friedjung,
Ernährungsstörungen und Konstitution (Eating Problems and the Constitution),
No.7, Kinderheilkunde, 1913. 
6 Also the opposite: to stop stuttering when emotionally aroused. 
7 People such as these (who have stomach problems or are noticeably heavy
eaters, have clearly avaricious traits, are selfish and have an enormous capability
for making money) represent a frequently found type. They are reminders, if one
may compare small with great, of Napoleon in whose family stomach cancer
was hereditary. 
8 Also found in Schiller's poems. 
9 Also see the essay "Kunst und Auge" (Art and the Eye) by J. Reich,
Oesterreichische Rundschau, Vienna, 1908. Additionally: Mutschmann, "Der
andere Milton"--The Other Milton. 10 Studie über die Minderwertigkeit von
Organen, publishers Urban & Schwarzenberg, Vienna, 1907.
Chapter XV A Prostitute's Two Dreams 1 2
[1908]
One of my patients, who knew of my interest in dream interpretation and at

times had shared correct interpretations with me, recently asked for my opinion
about two dreams of a prostitute that were told to him.
First dream. "I saw a man who had a comb conspicuously stuck in his hair.
I became increasingly frightened when I noted that this creature had horns and a
tail."
As can easily be recognized, this dream concerns something that is in the
inventory of all religions, the devil, which, obviously, does not reveal much
about the nature of this dream. It does not require a dream to conjure up the
image of the devil. Freud, whose concept of dreams I can fully verify on all
points, insists that as proof of a properly carried out dream interpretation a wish
to be fulfilled by the dream must be uncovered. At the same time we are warned
by the fear accompanying the telling of the dream that the sought after wish to
be fulfilled had to pierce considerable psychological resistance, a resistance that
in a waking state could not have easily been surmounted. In dreaming, the
technique of the dream must have succeeded in overcoming such an obstacle.
The persistent fear must be interpreted in that context as a wish that resides with
maximum intensity in the unconscious. We need one more hint in order at least
to approach the nature of this wish. The expressed fear can only partially inform
us in a summary fashion that the repressed wish is in the area of sex. We must
reach back to the unusual piece of information that the apparition that appeared
in the dream wore a comb. This is a female attribute which makes that figure not
a male, but a female devil. The resolution of a "female devil" is arrived at easily.
In all probability, the figure in the dream represents a repressed lesbian drive and
the wish that is to be fulfilled is for the male to be replaced by a female. The
demonic attributes point to the dreamer's childhood when all sexual impulses
were regarded as emanating from the devil (religion, confession). It is interesting
to note the pairing of piety with perversion which here raises the suspicion that
one can be replaced by the other.
A few days later the second dream was reported: "It seemed as if I were on
a boat that took me across a river. Along with me in the boat was a young fellow
whose face was covered with pustules. When we landed I hastened up a hill and
saw a cemetery. I ran up to a statue which was that of Saint Mary. I embraced
her, kissed, and finally bit off her nose. All the while I was afraid."
1 Originally published as “Zwei Träume einer Prostituierten” in Z.
Sexualwiss, Vol.1, pages 103-106. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
A proper dream interpretation must not disregard a dreamer's later
recollections that amplify details of the dream. It is not my intent in any way to

present a complete interpretation of these two dreams. Instead, in light of the
relative transparency of both dreams in which one underscores the interpretation
of the other, as well as the outright predictability of the wishes of such a coarse
woman, which are reflected in the same way in both dreams, I undertake this
analysis on my own. With this as a premise, I shall interpret the second dream.
Numerous pustules in the face of a young man is seen by every prostitute,
and not only by such a woman, as a sign of syphilis. Often enough a physician is
able to explain to the elation of a patient that he had only acne, and that he did
not fall victim to a venereal disease. Many times the patient pleads with the
doctor to cure him quickly since everyone had voiced their opinion to him that
he had syphilis. The cemetery, where the trip ends, indicates a fear of dying from
a venereal disease. The loss of a nose is easily understood when one remembers
that this is a specter of those suffering from lues and a not too infrequent
consequence of tertiary syphilis. Again we encounter a religion-derived imagery
in the Mary statue and also find again the combination of a woman and religion.
The lesbian trait appears here to have been totally submerged in the religious
aspect and the dream, therefore, represents what the awakened person is keeping
strongly suppressed. If we were to synthesize what in the psychological process
we found to represent a fulfilled wish, the result would be as follows: If I were a
lesbian I would be better protected from catching a venereal disease, and the
worst that could happen is that, out of love, I would bite off my companion's
nose.
The two trains of thought underlying both dreams not only agree with one
another, but also are in full accord with what we now know about the
psychology of prostitutes. The trend toward piety that makes an “old nun out of
a young whore” is clearly apparent in the dream life of this still young girl. I
have noted repeatedly the extraordinary penchant of prostitutes for
homosexuality. I should like to add that, given all other causes for prostitution,
especially economic factors, one of the most prevalent determining factors, if not
the most important, is the absence of a normal libido, which results from a
limited appreciation for sex. That, together with the other factors, makes it
possible for a girl to take up prostitution. In the given case I was able to
demonstrate the lesbian character in both dreams, but must emphasize again that
it is latent. Whether the lesbian character will ever surface and become real is a
matter of fate. There is no doubt in my mind that the flight into religion could be
a precursor to a homosexual development.
A third significant thought process in the imagination of this girl, possibly
forced into the dream world so as not to be revealed blatantly, is the fear of a
venereal infection and its consequences, disfigurement and death. It will

probably manifest itself in similar ways in all prostitutes. This thought process is
strongly manifested in the psychological array of the second dream. I need
hardly have to convince those familiar with the dream world with what I have
presented here. It is further supported by a second detail. The river that the
dreamer had to pass on the way to the cemetery shows us in its secondary
meaning (vaginal discharge) that the dreamer is thinking of possibly catching a
venereal disease.
Chapter XVI On The Neurotic Disposition 1 2
Concurrently an article on the etiology and choice of neuroses.
[1909]
Individual Psychology has provided us with satisfactory explanations for
the nature of neurosis, with the unfolding of its symptoms, and with ways for
superior therapy. The seemingly senseless behavior of neurasthenia, of psychosis
degeneration, of obsessive compulsive neurosis, hysteria, paranoia, etc. now has
become understandable and presumably is determined. The accomplishments of
geniuses, the actions of criminals, and the ways a national psyche is formed can
be subjected to analysis and seem in their psychological structure analogous with
the development of neurotic symptoms. This comparability of psychological
results and their surprising similarity provide the researcher with such
confidence in this difficult field of neuroses that even against strong opposition
by competent critics he can hold his own. So much the better can he withstand
unjustified criticisms or judgments from incompetents!
The firm positions held in the study of neuroses can clearly be traced back
to the ontogenetic Individual Psychological approach. This approach considers
the symptom as well as the neurotic character not only as a pathological
phenomenon but above all as a sign of a particular development which it
attempts to understand based on the experiences and fantasies of the individual.
The mysterious picture of neurosis and its many forms have attracted the
attention of observers since time immemorial. It was not until Individual
Psychology, however, that the first step was taken toward a solution which
considered the individual's impressions and his worldview, the attitude of the
patient, in order to gain an understanding of this mystery. Medication and
physical treatments proved to be superfluous stopgaps. Their occasional
effective results were due to psychological influences and were mostly of short
duration and not very successful. Not to be mentioned is time as the "healer of
all wounds" regardless of medication and cold water cures, sometimes

compensating for psychological damages, just as life itself can cure injury it has
caused an individual. Innumerable people exhibit neurotic preconditions without
becoming neurotic because they avert triggering causes and are able to maintain
their psychological equilibrium, often with great difficulty.
We are prompted to make the comparison with a healthy psyche in order to
approach more closely the question of what makes a person neurotic. Initially it
seemed to us, as it probably does to everyone else, that particular experience or
fantasies during childhood years gave the impetus for the development of the
disorder. Actually the first to investigate psychoanalysis, in particular Freud and
Breuer, stressed that among the various causes, the primary role causing a
neurosis is the traumatic influence of a sexual experience with its direct and
indirect consequences of repression and displacement. The expansion of this
theory made the "sexual etiology" the determinant for all neuroses. It rebutted
the view that the influence of sexual development generally also occurs in
normal people with the argument that the "sexual constitution," i.e. a biological
nuance of the sexual drive, formed the last root in a neurosis which is activated
by childhood sexual impressions, the influence of an abnormal distribution of
libido, and by the emergence of a triggering confluence of circumstances.
1 Originally published as "Über Neurotische Disposition: zugleich ein
Beitrag zur Ätiologie und zur Frage der Neurosenwahl" in Heilen und Bilden.
1909.
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2002.
However, the sexual and other childhood impressions brought to light by an
examination of neurotics differ by not much from those of normal people.
Sometimes they may differ in degree and at other times in extent, but always to a
point that can also be seen in a healthy person. What has stayed hidden was due
to a dearth of childhood research, and particularly by a lack of analytical training
for sharpening the mind to uncover the secrets. I should like to reinforce this
viewpoint with two cases of recent experience.
A four and one half year old boy, who was physically and mentally well
developed, and whose behavior betrayed no preference for either parent, once
asked his mother to allow him to sleep in his father's bed. The father, he said,
could sleep in the youth bed. The mother, an excellent observer of her child,
found this suspicious and tried to understand the deeper meaning of the child's
request. "That's not going to work," she said to the boy, "your father always
comes home from his office late at night and is tired. He then wants to rest in his
own bed. But, I shall let you sleep in my bed and I shall take the youth bed." The
boy shook his head and said: "I don't want that. However, if Dad must sleep in

his bed, then I can lie with you in your bed."
I need hardly add that the two beds of the parents were side-by-side. We
can furthermore discern from this case the boy's boldness, his quiet initiative to
gain gratification for his need for affection, and the masculine courage with
which he sought to take his father's place. I am reminded here of my work on the
"Aggression Drive in Life and in the Neuroses," (Trans. note: see 1908b) in
which I presented "aggression inhibitions" as the neurosis' mechanism. In this
case of a normal person there is no trace of inhibition, instead the boy, goal
oriented, tries to sleep with the mother but easily gets over his failure to do so
and then makes other wishes. By the way, he remained good friends with his
father and harbors no vengeful feelings against him.
However, a short time later, the mother ascertained that her young boy was
already working on solving the sex problem. It seemed that Fritz had become
obsessed with asking questions that began regularly in his fourth year and lasted
until he was five. Freud pointed out and stressed that hidden behind these
questions is the one about one's own origin, the origin of children. I gave the
parents some instructions and when the boy again began to ask questions starting
with the origin of a desk and then switching to wood, to trees, to seeds, and
finally to the first seed, he was told that his interest obviously lay in trying to
find out where he and other children came from. He was encouraged to keep
asking questions and was told that eventually he would find out everything. At
first the child denied his inquisitiveness, but not with much conviction. Thus,
there was some aggression-inhibition as would normally be found, but certainly
at a tolerable level. In fact, the boy remained masculine and bold and his
behavior showed no signs of sensitivity, resentfulness, or desires for revenge.
There is, however, one more important aspect that in such cases can clearly
be established. The child already is a captive of causality. A child who sees
parents and grandparents and who is aware of children being born normally will
question how they came about. If childish ambitions are added as a factor then
the child's imagination and fantasies will arrive at the desire to become a father
himself, and he will act as if preparing for that goal. Such concrete experiences,
augmented by the memories of healthy as well as neurotic persons, lead to the
firm conclusion that every child capable of reasoning will encounter the question
of birth at the age of about four.
In this particular case we also find that we have a boy who already is fully
aware of his male role as opposed to a female role. For him there exists no doubt
or indecision.3 In such a person, affection for a man can never cross the line of
normal friendship. The possibility that such a person will become homosexual
seems out of the question because by excluding all other relationships the child

is preparing for a heterosexual goal.
The second case which I should like to describe shows the start of a
neurotic development. 
A seven yearold, pallid faced girl with a poorly developed muscular system had
suffered for two years from frequent headaches that developed in unusual places
around her head. She felt pain in her brow and around her eyes that radiated into
her forehead and into the back of her head and then, after several hours, would
disappear. She had no stomach problems and experienced no eye flickering. No
organic disorders were discovered. She was said to have always been pale and
weakly. According to her mother she is very clever and is one of the best
students in her class. Medication and hydrotherapy treatments were
unsuccessful. 
I have come to the conclusion that the neurotic psyche betrays itself most easily
where there is a psychological hypersensitivity. Clinics for neurotics have
depended on this phenomenon for a long time without, it seems to me, having
dignified the psychological causes sufficiently, or without trying to understand
this particular condition and eliminate it. I can actually name only two
authorities that have written about the enormous consequences of this
phenomenon. The historian Lamprecht explained the meaning of this
"irritability" in popular terms. Bleuler4 places "emotionality" [“Affektivität”] at
the center of neuroses, particularly for paranoia. 
As a rule, this hypersensitivity can easily be seen in all neurotics where it
manifests itself in similar ways. Most of the time when asked, patients admit
themselves that they feel too easily offended by one word or expression.
However, when patients deny being hypersensitive, those close to them had long
discovered it and usually had made strenuous efforts not to irritate them. At
times hypersensitivity must be shown and proven to the patient. The fact that this
same sensitivity can also be found in healthy individuals does not prove anything
considering the numerous neurotic borderline cases. 
The ways that hypersensitivity is expressed are quite interesting in themselves.
They appear precisely in situations in which the patient feels himself neglected
or injured, inferior or dirtied, and often the person will arbitrarily invent such a
situation based on irrelevancies. Often with considerable acumen he tries to
attribute a logic to his situation which only the practiced psychotherapist can
penetrate. Or the patient comes up with a delusionary thought--as is the case in
paranoia but also in other neuroses--to help him fathom the irrationality of his
behavior and, by fixing on his delusion, avoid the real danger zone which is the
reality that causes injury to his sensibilities. What becomes very noticeable in
such cases is the surprising degree of disparagement and debasement to which

such patients are subjected, until one discovers that they had been pursuing such
abuses for some time.5 This trend stems from the unconscious and often, allied
with other masochistic arousals, exposes the masochistic character of the
neurosis showing the patient as a hypochondriac, as the injured party, the
persecuted, demeaned, unrecognized person for whom there exists only
suffering, misfortune, and bad luck. The inability to take any pleasure from life,
the constant anticipation of calamities, missed situations, unlucky enterprises,
and failures can be discerned in the patient's face. Furthermore, the superstitious
fear of numbers, having unlucky days, the telepathic inclination which always
anticipates something bad, the mistrust in one’s own powers and mistrusting
everyone else has adverse social effects and destroys every community, -- this
then is the picture of the hypersensitive patient. All degrees of aggression
inhibitions, reticence, timidity, fear, excitability when faced with new and
unaccustomed situations that extend as far as physical and psychological
paralysis further color that picture. It is the picture of a person who feels himself
living in a hostile world, for whom this world is too awful, a person who only
thinks of himself, his misfortunes, his needs, and never of what he might be
capable of giving. 
If this hypersensitivity can be regarded as a "pre-sensitivity" we also see, on the
other hand, neurosis manifestations that can be characterized as "postsensitivity."
Patients with such affliction cannot overcome a painful impression and thus
become incapable of relieving their psyche of dissatisfaction, reconciling
themselves with life and its trappings, and with people. The impression they
make is one of obstinacy and defiance. They are incapable of finding a substitute
through cultural aggression, and rigidly and firmly insist for their entire life on
their way of doing things. These traits are always found in zealots for justice and
in complainers. We merely wish to highlight that these characteristics apply
uniformly to all neurotics and are intimately associated with "hypersensitivity." 
The beginnings of hypersensitivity often are associated with an organic normal
hypersensitivity and can be traced back to early childhood. It differs from
normal sensitivity in various degrees. One often finds an increased sensitivity to
light, hyperesthesia of the ear and the skin, greater sensitivity to pain in various
degrees, increased stimulation of the vasomotor, higher sensitivity to tickling,
greater muscle stimulation,6 and altitude dizziness. I have already revealed the
relationship of these organ inferiorities to neurosis in my "Studie über
Minderwertigkeit der Organe"--Study of the Inferiority of Organs--and can also
establish after many examinations that the hypersensitivity of organs can be
included among manifestations of inferiority. 

The same is true for lacking in sensitivity as it can frequently be observed in the
profoundly mentally retarded, criminals, the morally insane, and in neurotics if
they lack or have no feeling of pain, do not react to tickling, and suffer from a
restriction of skin vasomotor activities. A lacking in sensitivity shows us--
something we had learned from observing organ inferiority,--the inherited
defect. Hypersensitivity uncovers the tendency for compensation that resulted
from the struggle by earlier generations, or by the carrier, to stabilize the organ.
We also always find distributed around the patient's family tree other indications
of organ inferiority such as signs of degeneration, mucous membrane and skin
reflex anomalies, child defects, and impairments of the concerned organ or organ
system. 
Basic psychological research thus acquires a phylogenetic moment that reaches
back to the organic roots of the neurosis and to the problem of heredity.
Hypersensitivity along with its psychological substrata cause the organ
originating drive tendencies to remain somewhat uncurbed, thus placing the
aggression drive in a constant state of irritation.7 Increased irritability,
irascibility, envy, defiance, and fearfulness are not left out and fill the child's
mind early on with thoughts that oppose the culture that is forced on him, and
which quickly takes umbrage at the child’s slightest resistance. Even the wisest
upbringing cannot easily dismiss the basic principle to which it is pledged, the
pattern of "guilt - punishment."8 This and the way things are done, which
frequently follow the same principle, fill the minds especially of those children
who early in life confront the inner contradiction with expectations of an
ominous outcome of forbidden desires and acts. 
On the other hand, hypersensitivity as well as the child's secondarily reinforced
drive-intensity and drive-extension have the effect of directing the child's excited
aggression tendency against those closest to the child and also against those most
cherished, the father, the mother, and the sibling. If it is a boy, he will usually
demand the prerogatives of the father, a girl those of the mother. If children are
uncertain of their gender role they will vacillate and doubt will take early roots.
Sometimes the child's hostile aggression tendency will unfold and he will harbor
hostile ideas and emotions against members of his family. Normally, such
reactions are countered by feelings of tenderness, love, or appreciation limiting
the aggression or weakening it making it difficult to locate its source or it betrays
itself in dreams. Even later in life the aggression can become apparent in the
individual’s character by the pattern of his relationship with other people. 
Already at this stage of development various pictures of the state of the
individual’s psychological condition become apparent. Their number increases

significantly when we take into account the impact of concurring or successive
psychological effects and emotions. Thus the partial emancipation of the child
from his stool and urinary drive has progressed and, in conjunction with the
development of the exhibition and olfactory drive, as well as the developing
social feeling, has left the child with a permanent reaction against dirt and
offensive smells. 
On this point I must also stress how much this outcome depends on the fitness
and sensitivity of the eyes and nose so that toilet training also depends on organ
inferiority. Therefore, the organ and its drive, as well as their varied capabilities,
sensitivity, etc. at the primitive level have a psychological expression and
character. The consequent constraints and reactions are in the category of
psychological phenomenon and are manifested as fear, idiosyncrasies, loathing,
and shame. Hypersensitivity, has thus become totally psychological. In serving
the struggle for power and depending upon the individual, i.e. depending upon
the influence of the inferior organs on the psyche, this hypersensitivity seizes on
all conflicting relationships seeking to eliminate them from experience.9 From
this emotional position, which is charged with hypersensitivity and capable of
strong reactions, and might be said to be the psyche’s sore point, there rises a
sometimes passive and sometimes active confluence. At times this confluence
outweighs avoiding harm to the sensitivity, at other times it aggressively takes
precautions against, or anticipates abuse, sometimes doing both. 
The strength of the original aggression drive as well as the capacity for
aggression is partly inherited and should be seen as an expression of the
biological tendency to compensate. Physiologically seen, it expresses the
capacity of the cortical-muscular pathway, one of its indicators of inborn
inferiority being a "physical weakness," that is, primarily, a muscular
insufficiency. In fact, almost regularly the case histories of neurotic patients
show that they were weaklings as children. Or, one learns that these patients as
children were noticeably inept and clumsy {left-handed (?)} [Trans. note: the
German term used here is "linkisch," literally a lefty in the sense of being
awkward. The author's question mark would indicate that he associates left-
handedness with awkwardness.] which brought them much humiliation and
punishment. At this point I must refer to the fact that many "child defects," such
as enuresis, stool incontinence, stuttering, stammering, speech defects, etc, that I
have presented as organ inferiorities, aside from being primarily a
hypersensitivity, also give the impression of clumsiness, which also is proof of
the struggle certain organ systems must endure in their domestication, i.e. in
their adaption to the cultural milieu. 
Traces of such clumsiness as well as what remains of child defects can often be

recognized in adult neurotics.10 Frequently there remains a psychological
clumsiness that later often contrasts with great intellectual sharpness, but can
also appear as an intellectual inferiority. Mostly, however, the result is a
condition of perplexity, timidity, and faintheartedness that sets in long before the
onset of the neurosis. The development of selfconfidence and independence is
lagging; the need to lean on someone and for affection increases immeasurably
to where it becomes impossible to satisfy the child's desires. This then is how an
already existing strong sensitivity that began in the home is considerably
exacerbated and grows into hypersensitivity that will always be cause for
entanglements and conflicts. Initially there is the feeling of being set back, of
being neglected, of being the stepchild in the home. Associated with these
feelings are ideas and fantasies manifested in the child's life as estrangement,
mistrust, and a burning ambition to show others that they are better, more
beautiful, stronger, taller, and more intelligent. There is no doubt that these
constant desires give a powerful psychological impetus, and that they in fact lead
many of these children to overestimate themselves. 
Often, however, the opposite arises from such a constellation of factors making
such people unpopular. This, in turn, seems to them a vindication of their fears
and being resented and a justification of their belief that people in general are
bad and hateful. In this context certain character traits always intensify and we
find hate and envy, which otherwise play no major role in the psyche of the
child, but to which we can attest specifically in the fully blown neurosis. These
impulses as they develop further fertilize in the most audacious manner
children’s thoughts, fantasies, as well as psychological hypersensitivity. It is
through these that children not only feel blame and punishment much more
severely, but which they at times, for no reason, also anticipate. These impulses
resolve into a continuous inner conflict in the psyche of the child, a conflict that
only rarely becomes apparent to others. It is because of hypersensitivity that
children have learned to dissemble and keep silent for fear of punishment or
being demeaned, and are depressed because of the voices of their social feeling. 
This silence, however, the child's secret, reveals to us that stimulations in his
conscience became effective, and that the child does not wish for us to know
that. The child feels justified in holding on to the idea of keeping silent, not only
with regard to others, but also to fend off his own ideas about certain desires and
emotions. The child also believes that if these feelings penetrate his
consciousness he will dirty himself, demean himself, and feel foolish, or, and
this is already a success of his prescience, because he expects anticipates and
fears them. This, on the one hand, is an indication of the unfolding of the child’s
world view, which can be reconstructed or recognized only in bits and pieces.

Out of it springs an expectation such as: “I shall be punished,” or “I will be
ridiculed.” This in turn is reinforced by a deeply felt conviction that: “Truly, I
am bad, sinful,” or “ I am too plump and awkward.” The hypersensitivity tries
from whatever resources at hand, most often starting with the most vulnerable
trait, to develop the opposite characteristics or attributes. In such cases
tendencies will become apparent that point to inhibitions of primary drives (of
the mouth, the eyes, the excretion organs), or which make them capable of
feeling the distressing symptoms of inferiority, or other such weaknesses, more
deeply (blushing, sensitivity to pain, puniness, incomprehension, being small).11
Closely associated with these feelings are the first clearly recognizable signs of
psychological protective measures, security measures, called upon to protect
against a reversal into old errors, to hedge against injuring the hypersensitivity,
and to attain the already fixed final goal. This includes all the traits of pedantry
that have only the purpose of defending the existing condition and, as I learned
later, exerting pressure on the environment. At the same time, superstition or a
strong dependency come to the fore which, like security measures, must
guarantee the newly won moral heights or aesthetic culture (prayers, signs and
number symbols, a belief in charms, etc.12) 
Again, alongside and stemming from the same philosophy of life spring self-
punishment, penance, aesthetic impulses to endure pain, privation, or imposing
demanding tasks on oneself13, and we also see the withdrawal from games and
pleasures.14 In all this, the child is busy with carefully protecting his secret and
in doing so can go so far as to suspect everyone, especially his doctor, of trying
to uncover his secret.15 The child develops mistrust and suspicion that something
is about to be done to him which serves above all as proof of his own importance
which, in his mind, ought to concern every person, fate, and God. This assembly
of factors induces what I described as forms of aggression inhibitors (see "Der
Aggressionstrieb"), and I must further maintain that aggression inhibition comes
about through competition from other organ inferiority symptoms, particularly
psychological hypersensitivity, which does not allow for injured ambition to be
compensated for by other means. 
Viewed from the moral standpoint, the psychological development process of
organ inferiority along with its presumptions flows into an enlarged sense of
guilt regarding the social feeling, and joins with hypersensitivity against
selfreproach and reproaches from others.16 This oppressive constellation of
factors has the effect of significantly increasing psychological accomplishments,
since whatever lies in the person's future is under pressure of hypersensitivity,
which, like an always-ready motor, modifies drives, impedes their direction, and

has an influence on them. On the other hand, there is a constantly burdensome
and pressing feeling of past guilt, or an effort at preventing future guilt17 that has
become an abstract which constantly is searching for content. At times this
searching by the guilt laden for content, for the punishable act, is especially
accentuated (later this will correlate with compulsive actions and compulsive
thoughts to discover "vice" in whatever form). The feeling of being a "criminal,"
an "outcast" begins to dominate and increases hypersensitivity specifically to
reproach and other slights. The feeling of inferiority stemming from an organ
inferiority actually leads to an egoistical, hostile aggressive posture. The ensuing
irreconcilability with people, however, collides with the social feeling. 
It seems that certain stages of development can increase inner tension, heighten
the primary inner conflict and totally fill it with its contents. Among the most
important of these stages are the birth order and the initial contact with sexual
problems, beginning at about the fifth year, and also matters concerning work
and adult love relationships. This creates the belief that all the subsequent
conflicts could lead to neuroses once there exists a primary discord stemming
from an organ inferiority. Then, all those disposed to neurosis can said to be in a
state of “psychological anaphylaxis,” which is analogous to a bacterial disease
where, after being inoculated against it, a hypersensitivity against the original
infection results. 
The first sexual realization that a child experiences enters into his life by devious
means and severely injures an existing hypersensitivity. The child can feel
himself cheated, hoaxed, and excluded from all knowledge. The child can gain
the impression that a comedy was being played out before him and regard
himself as excluded from a secret pact by others, particularly where there are
inferior sexual organs frequently accompanied by greater sensitivity which
places the child in an even more difficult situation with his precociously
heightened sexual drive. "Sexual trauma" as well as early masturbation will then
naturally become the "cause." More important, however, are the early thoughts
and fantasies which on occasion can become incestuous18 and in the absence of
significant counseling can lead to perverse traits, or enormously increase the
child's vacillations and doubts.19 Hovering threateningly above all the child's
emotions is the now deep-seated feeling of guilt inhibiting every aggression,
penance, expectations of punishment, and an unhappy ending. Similar
developments lengthen the period of masturbation. It then becomes a matter of
the individual's fate, but above all the particular constellation of factors from
which, and at what point in its development, the neurosis is forced to shape
itself. 

Following these introductory remarks, I should like to present the
psychotherapeutic results of a case involving a seven yearold girl with "nervous
headaches." My first question pertained to the child's sensitivities. The mother
reported that the girl is very sensitive to pain, the cold, and heat. Regarding her
psychological state, her sensitivity is outright pathological. She studies very hard
and comes home totally unnerved when unable to answer a question in school.
3 As a result of a large number of examinations it develops that doubt in
neurotic individuals is associated with this early childhood vacillating between a
male or female role. Sexual inexperience in such cases causes the confusion. 
4 Bleuler, "Suggestibilität, Affektivität and Paranoia." 
5 One of many cases: A 36 year old patient significantly risked his success by
becoming embroiled in fights soon after assuming a new position. Under
analysis it developed that he had a secret desire to have his father mistreat him.
He remembered from his childhood and puberty years that whenever he was
disparaged by his family he began fights elsewhere so as to get spanked. He also
remembered having sound teeth pulled "to calm him down." The desire to be
mistreated by the father reflected trying to prove his father's hatred and show his
superiority over him and others so as to maintain the masochistic, "female," line,
to harden himself, to escape his tasks, and to render himself impossible for the
masculine role of bread-winner and for love.
6 A certain type of excitability of nerves is known to be dependent on anomalies
of the parathyroid glands so that we should be able to recognize as the starting
point for certain hypersensitivities the innate inferiority of certain glands such as
the thyroid gland, the pancreas, the pituitary gland, suprarenal glands, also the
prostate, testes, and ovaries, etc. In many cases, the triggering effect does not
begin in the original inferior gland but comes about as a result of the
overcompensation by individual parts or by other organs which failed in
replacing either qualitatively or quantitatively. This also can occur through the
central nervous system or via particular neurological pathways when these are
forced into overcompensation. For a detailed discussion see Adler's Studie über
Minderwertigkeit der Organe.
7 See the "Aggressionstrieb im Leben und in der Neurose" (The Aggression
Drive in Life and in the Neurosis). [Trans. note: see 1908b]
8 Asnaourow, Sadismus und Masochismus in Erziehung und Kultur, (Sadism and
Masochism in Education and Culture), E. Reinhardt, Munich, 1913. 
9 A three yearold girl had indicated over time a lack of interest in eating. The
finding was negative. During the examination the child repeatedly called out: "It
smells!" The parents explained that for some time the child had expressed herself

in the same way at every opportunity. Further examination showed that the child
had an extremely sensitive sense of smell, which was also found in other
members of the family, and that she also exhibited defecation anomalies. The
nose used its idiosyncrasy as a way of defying the power of the parents. The
olfactory tolerance had become so low that there was an adverse reaction even to
normal smells. The negligible interest in eating stemmed from a lowered
tolerance. Special attention must be given to the goal of attaining a feeling of
superiority through negativism. 
10 I emphasized in my "Studie" (ibid) that this ineptness often crosses over to
become a noticeable aptitude, artistry, or an artistic person, which occurs by way
of psychological overcompensation. I am of the opinion that the frequency of
left-handedness in artists (see Fliess), but also in neurotics fundamentally is
evidence of the same as an inferiority of the cortico-muscular system. 
11 Erythrophoby (Trans. note: possibly erothropsia), stuttering hypochondria,
and related traits in neurosis make it possible to recognize this mechanism.
12 These traits become particularly apparent in obsessive compulsive neuroses. 
13 One of my patients when bathing had to keep his head under water until the
count of 49 to prove especially his superiority over himself, the impulse by
which he wanted to overcome difficulties. 
14 Manifestations such as we find in hysteria, hypochondria, and melancholy,
actually in every type of neurosis. Here also, "to make virtue out of necessity," to
be "a big fish in a small pond," not to play along. 
15 Where this tendency has progressed especially far then paranoia becomes
apparent. Hysteria also displays these traits. 
16 The meaning of "tragic guilt" in drama almost corresponds to the position of
the sense of guilt in the neurosis. Many writers, in particular Dostoyevsky,
masterfully portrayed the various correlations of the sense of guilt in the psyche.
Later findings suggest to me to regard the sense of guilt as a way of inhibiting
aggression, as a way of gaining security, to which, however, the feeling of
superiority over others often attaches itself, or from which it stems. 
17 The usual counterpart is original sin in religious belief.
18 See Ueber den nervösen Charakter how these emotions later proved to me to
be an "incestuous like" deception of a nervous tendentious tendency. 
19 For the case of extreme doubt and paralyzing perplexity, Vienna dialect has
the expression: "Now I don't know whether I am a man or a woman."
"How does she get along with her classmates?"
"She does not quarrel, does not fight, but really has no girl friends. She also

thinks she always knows better and can do better than the others."
"Can you say whether she prefers her father?"
"The father often is on trips. She is very devoted to him. I would like to think
that she prefers me."
"How do you arrive at that conclusion?"
"She constantly says that when she grows up she will also own a hat, a dress, etc.
like mother."
"Do you also suffer from headaches?"
"Oh, I have had terrible headaches for years."
"The little one now has headaches just like her mother."
It may seem bold to make the above assumptions. However, some
experience in Individual Psychology justifies this approach and may even seem
necessary. At this point after a short acquaintance it appears that this girl has
made an intense effort to think of herself in the role of the mother. From this we
can gather that she is undoubtedly certain about her role as girl and future
woman. Whatever the mother regards as signs of being preferred by the daughter
cannot be so readily accepted. It seems more likely that the girl chose as a
starting point for her behavior the relationship of the mother to the father,
whereby she endeavors to be as much like the mother as possible. This tendency
as well as the girl's unmistakable ambition, her irritable hypersensitivity when
she has to take a back seat with her friends, must by necessity contain the
apparent signs of envy. When questioned along that line the mother admitted
that in her daughter's case it was primarily an envy regarding food particularly
fruits and candies. Her father suffers from cholelithiasis (inferiority of the
digestive tract) and the daughter had diarrhea during the first two years of her
life. Since then she suffered from obstipation. Is the girl jealous of her mother
and showing early signs of envy (preparing for her future role)?
Further investigation showed that for some time the child had displayed a
tendency to masturbate by touching, that since birth she had slept in her parents'
room, that she flirts, and that she likes to dress up and admire herself in the
mirror. When I told the mother of what I suspected to be the cause of the child's
headaches, she exclaimed: "Oh, no wonder the little rascal keeps asking me from
where children come!" The mother then told me that she had told her daughter
that children come from a pond. Since then, the girl has been coming back to
that point in conversations. One day she asked: "Why is a midwife necessary?"
The mother responded by saying that the midwife brings the baby from the pond.
After some time the girl asked: "You say that children come from the pond, but
what happens in the winter when it is frozen?" The mother could only give an
evasive answer.

It is clear from this how sexual curiosity expands the child's astuteness and
generally increases inquisitiveness.20 There are no indications of fits of anger or
irascibility. The aggression drive apparently avoids taking this active course
when the girl's hypersensitivity is injured. Except for the questions directed at
the mother, which were very carefully formed, there are no signs of an outward
aggression. Therefore, it can be assumed that the stormy urge for knowledge that
raged in the child was diverted toward pain (imitating the mother), seizing on an
inherited locus minoris resistentiae to create symptoms of headaches.
There still remains the question of what triggers the nervous mechanism? I asked
the mother when the last attack occurred:
"Yesterday afternoon on the street!"
"Can you think of any reason?"
"No, I wanted to order a dress for myself."
"Did you order the dress?"
"No, the little one wailed so much that I had no choice but to go home with
nothing accomplished."
This meant that, for the time being, the child with her headache had
prevented her mother from buying a dress. Then, however, as we had assumed, a
significant role must be played by envy (originally envy concerning food, later,
by crossing over, envy of what is seen [Augenneid], to envy of knowledge
[Wissensneid]). We recall the child saying: "When I grow up I shall also have a
hat and dresses like mother." The girl's hypersensitivity, therefore, was directed
against everything that would seem to give the mother an advantage and excel
over her, including acquiring new clothes, knowing more about the origin of
children, and it would not be surprising if this precocious girl did not also direct
her hypersensitivity toward the affection expressed by the father toward the
mother. It seemed a likely presumption that the father's affection for the mother
became particularly noticeable at the same time the headaches appeared, with
which the mother smilingly agreed. The child's symptoms thus were directed
toward a rivalry with the mother. The somewhat anxious father, as well as the
mother, then began to coddle the child.
20 In pedagogical terms, I wish to draw from this that sexual enlightenment
should not take place until inquisitiveness has reached this point. (Additionally:
Today I would see this case somewhat differently. Since she could not become a
man, the girl obviously made strenuous efforts to overtake the mother in the
female role. For the purpose of being superior the headaches proved useful.)
This saved the child from the many possible ways her hypersensitivity
might have been threatened. However, in the distance there lurked a danger

threatening the child. She had no friends, avoided company, became bashful and
cowardly, was excited when visitors were expected; in short, she began to make
a switch in order to assert herself. There is not doubt but that her "cultural
aggression" was inhibited.
What then is the power that is capable of creating such strong inhibitions
that make it impossible for a child freely to select ways of gratifying her drives?
In my experience, the answer seldom comes from the child, except under the
most auspicious conditions where a child still has unbroken courage and the
child's full confidence has been won. This leaves little choice but to depend on
advice from experience gained from Individual Psychology about neurotics,
from which also stem the above observations. Confidence in the correctness and
applicability of the connection will be established by the applicability of and the
understanding gained from Individual Psychology about many or all of the
symptoms of the child's psyche. This is true for this case as well. The inner
contradiction that led to the primary conflict and to an unstable and timid child
had to come from a collision of drives and a situation in which they were found
offensive, creating some minor embarrassing experience (organ sensitivity,
disgrace, punishment) and resulting in an intolerance for disparagement. This
resolved into a powerful impulse for envy and the start of a stormy ambition to
be the equal of a better, more experienced mother. The crossing with a
precociously awakened sex drive could inject into this ensemble of emotions a
hostile, offending quality against the mother. The result is a protecting sense of
guilt, the basis and substance of which is cast out of consciousness. One might
say that an abstract feeling of guilt developed that can substantively connect with
everything, but which, because it is incongruent, becomes easily apparent. This
feeling of guilt causes aggression inhibition. "Thus, conscience makes cowards
out of all of us," and a situation develops for which there is no possibility of
compensation. It is a confluence of pathways along which symptoms of neurosis
develop which, however, gratify the child's ambitious goal to be superior to
everyone.
Accordingly, in every case the development of a neurosis will manifest
indicators that can be reduced to this confluence of events the outcome of which
depends upon the degree of innate aggression. From this stage onward these
manifestation allow for the case to be understood and cured. A pattern of a
neurosis and how it manifests itself, which can not claim to be complete or
perfect, has to consider the following:
I. Manifestations that correspond to the original drive impulses as well to the
characteristics of the organ inferiority.
II. Hypersensitivity against disparagement, soiling 

Psychological and punishment. 
Indicators of III. Anticipation of disparagement, soiling, and punishment
Insecurity (see II); precautions taken against these. Fear. 
And Guilt-IV. Self incrimination, selfreproach. 
Feelings V. Self-punishment, penance, asceticism.21
VI. Causes of guilt feeling: Always a tendentious lapse because of retained
organ inferiority and hostile aggression against the same sex parent (the latter
can be absent where the child is uncertain about his or her sexual orientation),
masturbation. All other causes of guilt feeling can be recognized as having come
from evasion. Such an accentuating by the neurotic later showed up as a
purposeful tendentious means to an end.
VII. The result of one of the possible confluence of factors leading to an
aggression inhibition that is seized upon as a useful arrangement.
Taking all this together indicates first of all the uniform structure of certain
neuroses, among which I must include hysteria, obsessive-compulsive neurosis,
paranoia, neurasthenia, and fear neurosis. All of these illnesses22 affect only
those individuals who became egotists because being afflicted with organ
inferiorities they had more serious problems adjusting to their culture.
These problems, which I treated in my " Studie" and which I discussed
above, are the basis for a disposition for neurosis and are identical with it. There
is, of course, the possibility of smoothly overcoming these problems by
compensating and over compensating, and above all with Individual
Psychological therapy. Often, however, new problems arise in the context of the
family. The influence of today's upbringing must be evaluated in each case, but
deserves a separate discussion. Since the underlying principle of upbringing
generally is to engender cowardice toward life, it often reinforces the feeling of
guilt.
21 At times symptoms come to light here that appear simultaneously with
those under #1: self-soiling, self-debasing (obsessive masturbation) or as a
psychological shift toward awkwardness, contrived disgrace and pain, a
preference for harlots, etc., and "the salaciousness of the aesthetic." Masochists
also belong into this category. The first symptoms should be seen as originally
having been real and then later as tendentious means. 
22 Perhaps more experience will allow the inclusion in this scheme of dementia
praecox, melancholia, manic depression, insanity, and mania.
Those who favor the unity and uniform development of the psychoneurosis
have a natural duty to explain its uniqueness. In that respect, this presentation
has taken a position on a number of points. The picture of a neurosis will be

formed by the type, development, and interaction of existing organ inferiorities.
Also important is the capacity, transformability, and stamina of the innate
aggression drives, since these are the factors that make the child "feel guilty,"
but also provide the possibility for redirecting guilt either totally or partially
toward a lesser culpability. Also of great significance for the neurosis disposed
child is the place in the family, in particular the birth order. It is from this
circumstance that the outline of the neurosis takes shape. In that state already are
all the indicators for whatever pathological symptoms the finished neurosis will
produce, and will bring to light the causes of the disease’s pathological
character. The neurosis disposed traumatic situation is generally dominant in the
area of the seven basic points presented above. It creates the condition for a
particular psychological anaphylaxis with corresponding similar psychological
damage, or evokes the exacerbated condition caused by challenges later in life
which then forms the unique individual neurosis.
Chapter XVII Myelodysplasia1(Organ Inferiority)
[1909]
In my Studie uber Minderwertigkeit von Organen I was able to show in
connection with the study of the urinary apparatus that all pathological changes
whether functional or morphological are associated with an hereditary inferiority
of the organ and the nerve superstructures. This inferiority frequently remains
latent and the resulting deficiency is compensated for in some way. Very often
the inferiority discloses itself at one point of the organism and dominates the
whole picture of the disease.
I pointed out there that the most definite manifestations were the
inheritance of the disease and its occurrence in families; childlessness; signs of
degeneration; and anomalies of the reflexes. In conclusion starting from one of
the signs of inferiority, enuresis, I was able to show that others were connected
with it. In my statistics, consisting at that time of fifty cases but which since then
have been considerably augmented, I succeeded in proving the unified and
exclusive nature of the symptoms of organ inferiority.
An important part was shown there to be played by the segment inferiority,
which in cases of enuresis is expressed in the inherited anomalies of the lower
extremities and in the arrangement of the naevi, neurofibromata and angiomata
found in the affected area.
What I was most concerned with was to substitute for the concept of
“disposition”, a hypoplastic and dysplastic predisposition of organs and their

nerve superstructures so as to strengthen our case by a clinical demonstration of
the inferiority symptoms mentioned above.
Since my work covered the anomalies and the diseases of the whole
organism, my conclusions, summed up in my theory of organ inferiority, and
which I tried to prove held for the whole organic system should on account of
their fundamental importance, be given a more prominent place. It was possible
to show repeatedly that the organ inferiority developed genetically affecting the
whole organ and its nerve superstructure yet manifesting itself only in certain
places. I refer to pages 7, 10, 22, 25, 30, 31, 47, 53, 57, and 61 of my book
where I said: “We must insist that the already described synchronous occurrence
of
1 Originally published as “Myelodysplasie oder Organminderwertigkeit?” in
Wien. med. Wschr., vol. 45, pages 2631-2636. Translated by P. Radin, and
published in 1926 as chapter XXV in The Practice and Theory of Individual
Psychology. (Myelodysplasia is the defective development of the spinal cord.)
This edition includes a modest number of changes in punctution for improved
readabilty. The page numbers that Adler refers to in the Studie relate to the
original edition.
multiple organ inferiority extends to individual parts and to the nerve tracts
of the central nervous system, that frequently the efficiency of an organ
corresponds proportionally to the efficiency given by nature to those particular
nerve tracts that are connected with its associated organ, from which it receives
stimulation and to which it carries impulses.” - Adler. CF. Also the appendix,
page 75 (On the inferiority of the Urinary Apparatus, the history of individuals
afflicted with enuresis, their family-tree etc.): I said: “I must here confine myself
to showing how the focusing of the inferiority manifestations by means of
enuresis comes about and to prove by specific cases the synchronous inferiority
of the central nervous system and the sexual apparatus.” On p. 78 of the same
book I state that “an originally inferior psychomotor superstructure is found
associated with that organ which inadequately responds to its environment,
namely the bladder...” The foregoing quotations as well as the whole aim of my
book was to prove that inferiority might manifest itself morphologically and
functionally (cf. Pages 5-17 of my book) at certain definite places in the
organism and its “nervous superstructure.”
Alfred Fuchs propounds the following view in his study of Myelodysplasia
(Wiener Med. Wochenschr., 37, 38, 1919): - “There is a possibility that the
picture shown by a few perhaps even by many diseases which seemed up to the
present to imply a functional neurosis will turn out to be due to a neurosis that
can be traced back to a congenital hypoplasia or dysplasia of the lower sections

of the spinal cord.” His work, which called attention, in the main, to
interrelations already described by me from the study of which the same
conclusions were drawn as those I had reached from an examination of the very
extensive body of facts in my possession, induced Fuchs to postulate six
groupings of the factors belonging to the symptom-complex of myelodysplasia:
1. Sphincter debility particularly enuresis nocturna in adults. 
2. Syndactyly. In discussing it Fuchs mentions some additional symptoms such
as congenital pigmentation arranged in mechanical order extending from the
sixth dorsal vertebra to the middle of the os sacrum; hypertrichosis lumbalis and
pes planus. 
3. Disturbances of sensibility. 
4. Defects in the lower portion of the spinal column and the os sacrum;
rudimentary development of a spina bifida occulta and presumably the presence
of supernumerary sacral vertebrae and changes in shape of the lower lumbar
vertebrae, etc. 
5. Anomalies of the reflexes. 
6. Deformities of the bone structure of the foot and trophic and vasomotor
disturbances of the toes.
The first symptom I have discussed together with a number of other
childhood defects in my previously mentioned book, where a whole section is
devoted to them (II. Anamnestic References). There I regarded these defects as
significant indications belonging to inferior organic systems and came to
the conclusion “that hereditary defects of children, their existence in the parents,
their brothers and sisters and subsequently their own children, must be looked
upon as suspicious suggestions of inferiority in the organ connected with the
particular defect”. Since Fuchs regards as of equal value both the enuresis of
adults and of children I am saved the trouble of proving the similarity of our
views on this point. That my conclusions go further need not be considered. But
as an example take my suggestion that other parts of the system and not merely
the associated nerve tracts may be the indication and the result of inferiority. In a
study of nephrolithiasis (Wiener Klinische Wochenscrift, no. 49, XX.) I was able
to show its connection with enuresis and thus justify that statement in my book
where I claimed that a large proportion of the diseases of the urinary apparatus
were connected with an hereditary inferiority of the organism which then
expressed itself in the form of enuresis. Other signs of inferiority are also present
such as anomalies of the lumbar vertebrae subsequently proved by Jehle and
other scientists to hold for “lordotic albuminuria”, a disease in which
anamnesitic enuresis always plays an important part. My suggested connection
of enuresis and other indications of inferiority of the same type with tabes, I was

subsequently able to confirm in other cases. I had previously pointed out the
similar observations made by H. Schlesinger (a combination of nephrolithiasis
with syringomyelia and tabes) and by Israel (dystopia of the kidneys, and
hydrocephalus).
The questions that I would now like to ask is whether myelodysplasia really
constitutes “an etiological element of importance,” as Fuchs believes and
whether enuresis can actually be traced back “in all probability to a congenital
hypoplasia or dysplasia of the lower sections of the spinal cord”; or whether on
the other had as I first emphasized it cannot be shown to belong to a defective
embryonic functioning of a urinary apparatus and nerve superstructure inferior
as a whole. As this question contains the only fundamental deviation from my
views I feel constrained to enter upon it briefly although the main points can be
found in my earlier articles. In favor of the independence of the therapeutic
effects obtained through psychic influences is to be mentioned2 first the actual
success obtained by its employment, a fact that Fuchs also mentions. Equally
corroborative is the fact that despite marked uniformity, the course of the disease
is variable, and that very often transitions occur into pollakiuria, dysuria, a
greater retentive capacity caused by overcompensation (cf. my Studie), and
finally anomalies in the bladder-discharge. The appearance of all these
manifestations, one following the other, are due to psychic causes. For the facts
to fit into Fuchs’ theory it would be necessary to regard the clear-cut picture
presented by an illness as common as enuresis as due to some anomaly of the
spinal marrow which would always produce the same effect, an assumption
disproven by the one circumstance that enuresis is not even invariably found in
hydromyelia. That it could be invariably caused by the manifold and abortive
anomalies that I and Fuchs subsequently assumed, is consequently an
unwarranted hypothesis. More justifiable is the view flowing from the doctrine
of inferiority according to which enuresis indicates a functional arrest at an early
stage of development and an inferiority of the organic system. Other
morphological signs of inferiority both in the organ itself and in the afferent and
efferent nerve tracts and the central nervous superstructure may likewise be
found to be associated with it. Every one of these additional anomalies can,
under suitable conditions, themselves become active causes and create
symptoms but cannot call into existence an enuretic complex. “The organic
nerve diseases are however according to our premises only special instances
where a localized inferiority has led to inflammatory or degenerative changes.”
2 Paul Federn was able to observe, in a large number of cases, how enuresis was
arrested by a change of environment.

With regard to the second point syndactylism I, like Fuchs, see in it only the
bringing into prominence of one of the many peripheral degenerative signs from
which the inferiority of the lower extremities is to be inferred. Its connection
with the inferiority of the urinary system (as well as with the sexual and
excretory systems), I have stressed in my Studie, etc., where I explained it as due
to the participation of adjacent segments. In chapter three of my Studie I took the
attitude that the peripheral degenerative stigmata like the defects of children,
indicate inferiority of the organ and the superstructure with which it is
connected. “If any trace of this embryonic arrest (in the organic system) extends
to the body extremities and is there detected by the scientist, it takes the form of
well-known degenerative stigmata.” It is Fuchs’ merit to have discovered what
according to him is one of the most frequent signs of degeneration. Though we
are justified in speaking in this case of a coordination as I mentioned in
connection with Fuchs’ first point, we have no right nevertheless to speak of
“coincidence” as Fuchs does in his summary or to regard syndactylism as a
“symptom” of myelodysplasia. If however, it really is coincidence then Fuchs’
view that degenerative indications and stigmata are to be interpreted as
peripheral signs of inferiority of the organ to which these signs belong is in
accord with my own, the latter being then indeed strengthened by this discovery
of the role of syndactylism.
The appearance of degenerative signs in the lower extremities together with
enuresis, I myself pointed out and I shall return to the subject briefly again. 
In my Studie a prominent position is assigned to a view emphasizing the
importance of the naevus and other anomalies of the blood vessels as signs of
inferiority of the organs connected with them segmentally (cf. P. 40 of my
Studie).
According to this naevus theory, a number of external stigmata such as naevi,
angiomata, teleangiectasies and neurofibromata exhibit “connections” with the
segments of the respective internal organs so that their presence indicates an
inferiority of the segment (“a segmental deficiency”). This is not to be taken in
Fuchs’ sense as signifying that the naevus is dependent upon anomalies of the
spinal marrow but as indicating a peripheral coordinated inferiority symptom.
That these stigmata are frequently found within the area of inferior or diseased
organs, occasionally longitudinally displaced, I was able to observe in a
considerable number of cases. I was also able to confirm my belief that these
connections hold true in the case of inferiority of the urinary apparatus.
Following me Robert Frank3 called attention to the signs of pulmonary
tuberculosis found in these cases but interpreted them differently. Josef

Uhrbach4 mentions the “naevus theory” in his study of tabic bone and
articulation due to the presence of inferiority signs (naevi on the back and the
belly, genua vara and vein ectasia). Sigmund Steiner has been re-examining my
conclusions on the basis of his very extensive material and has corroborated my
statement that for the majority of the anomalies of the spinal column a naevus
can to be shown to exist, a fact that certainly speaks in favor of an inherited
inferiority of the spinal column in cases of curvature. 
In my book I also recognized and mentioned other signs of inferiority of the
enuretic complex such as anomalies of the spinal column, pes planus, lordosis
hypertrichosis and suggestions of spina bifida. The frequency of the enlarged
hiatus sacralis and its demonstration by Roetgen rays I regard as a valuable
contribution to our knowledge of inferiority signs. In this case neither can the
coincidence be denied nor the independence be rejected. It would to be just as
correct to call myelodysplasia a symptom of the naevus as the reverse. 
I have barely touched on the third point, the disturbances of sensibility in organ
inferiority. A reference was made to the connection with the zones of Head and
an attempt made to connect meralgia paraesthetica with the inferiority of the
urinary apparatus (Pals’ earlier discovery of the coincidence of the meralgis
paraesthetica made it possible for us to draw this disease definitely into our
discussion). This is all the information that I can at present furnish on this point.
The description of a “feeling of dullness” in the lower extremities, a condition
that according to Fuchs is to be brought into close relation with the enuretic
complex certainly constitutes a notable extension to our knowledge in this
thorny field. To interpret this as an “organic spinal symptom” merely reflects the
author’s standpoint. This dullness may just as well to be an expression of
cerebral as of peripheral inferiority and represents either a qualitative, or on the
analogy of bone and skin anomalies, a morphological variety. The results
obtained from such sensibility tests will always depend as much upon the
training of the brain and the course of the childhood defect as upon enuresis. The
final decision always rests upon the compensation made by the brain, and it is
always justifiable to assume that brain inferiority is at the basis of all inferiority
manifestations and consequently of any coordinated enuresis. In the discussion
of the inferiority of the sense organs given in my book I showed that the
inferiority symptoms are disclosed in the absence of partial perceptions, by
“dissociated sensation stoppages” as well as often by an intensified capacity for
perception. The latter is to be interpreted as a compensation tendency from
which occasionally hypercompensation arises and at times artistic abilities take
their origin.5 These explanations render any direct dependence upon

myelodysplasia of even the sensibility disturbances doubtful for the majority of
cases and justify the attempt to include this “symptom” as coordinate with the
others. It should to be placed on a level with toxic, neurotic and the extensive
hyper-aesthesia symptoms found in moral insanity. 
Point 4 the persistence of an opening in the canalis sacralis etc.--I called them
suggestions of spina bifida in my Studie--really represent the cardinal point of
Fuchs’ presentations. According to my theory they fall in the category of signs
of segmental inferiority and retain their individual justification and are
independent of the inferiority of the spinal marrow. Anomalies and personal
carriage associated with the lumbar vertebrae are frequently met with and are, at
times, found connected with diseases of the kidneys such as nephrolithiasis. We
would have to go as far back as Gall in the history of medicine if we wished to
be really fair in the question of the origin of the concept of the coincidence of the
framework of the spinal column with the efficiency of the spinal marrow. Fuchs’
observation about the frequency of hiatus anomalies thus constitutes an increase
in the number of inferiority signs even if not in his sense. 
With regard to the fifth point let me refer to the fourth chapter in my Studie
(Reflex Anomalies as Indications of Inferiority), where I came to the conclusion
(page 44) that the absence of certain manifestations in the case of an inferior
system of organs, represents “motor insufficiency, deficient production of the
respective gland secretions and above all a more deficient development or, even
an absence of reflex actions of all kinds. They may however also mean just the
opposite, namely motor hyper-activity, hypersecretion and intensification of the
reflexes.” Let me again at this point call attention to the question of a defective
reflex mechanism with an inferior organ and childhood defects, such as enuresis,
blinking, stuttering, vomiting, etc. Connected with enuresis we find sphincter
cramp, “an additional sphincter reflex” (defective reflex) and the not uncommon
Freudian adductor phenomenon that represents a partial myotonia. The non-
appearance of the inherited reflex mechanism is dependent upon the extension of
the peripheral tracts, those of the spinal marrow and of the brain. Toxic
influences (of the thyroid gland and the epithelial cells) as accessories of
manifold inferiority can no more be summarily dismissed than can the
symmetrical or unsymmetrical compensation of the spinal marrow and brain.
Morphological changes may consequently be looked upon as originally
coordinated stigmata capable under certain circumstances of giving rise to
“symptoms”. Apart from this an embryonic character is predominant in the
reflex anomalies, as I have tried to show in the case of changes in the palatal
reflexes connected with organ inferiority.
3 Munchemer Med. Wochenschrift, 1908. 

4 Wiener Klin. Rundschau, nos. 31 and 32, 1919. 
5 Color-blind individuals may be taken as examples, for some of them, “the
Daltonists,” are prominent painters. This perceptive symptom, color-blindness, is
based on peripheral inferiority. Similar peripheral stigmata can be shown to
exist in the other sense organs.
With regard to the sixth point, the inferiority signs in the lower extremities,
in addition to what I have already stated let me mention disproportionate size of
the legs. The deformities that Fuchs mentions--pes planus, varus valgus, are no
more to be brought into relation with the “spinal marrow symptoms” than are the
above-mentioned inferiorities.
The remarks made in my Studie in connection with the summary of the
traits of the enuretic-complex I would like to quote briefly not only to show their
identity with Fuchs’ conclusion but also to indicate their divergences (p. 76):
The segmental inferiority found among people afflicted with enuresis must
be greatly stressed. I should not so much emphasize the skin anomalies
frequently found in the form of naevi or neurofibromata above the kidneys, in
the bladder area or in the groin, but the inferiority that affects the whole dorsal
side of the rump expressing itself as a primary weakness of urine, stool and
semen discharge, that frequently can to be overcome and hypercompensated, and
clearly is connected with an inferiority of the spinal marrow in the region of the
lumbar vertebrae. Frequently the lower extremities are embraced in this
inferiority. This question is of importance for tabes, ischias, stool incontinence
and in the history of enuretic families. The spinal column participates therein
with the suggestion of spina bifida or deformity, the lower extremities by
developing deformities such as unequal length of the legs or diseases of the
joints.
Incidentally Fuchs disposes of the “neurotic” theory of neurosis. I myself
had passed through the same stage before and believed firmly in the organic
basis of enuresis and other defects of childhood. My findings however led me
further and impelled me to take into consideration likewise the synchronous
inferiority of the brain. The childhood defects thus were shown to be “signals
indicating the as yet unsuccessful conquest of the inferiority of the peripheral
nerves and the central nervous system.” In pursuance of this thought and
following up my discoveries among neurotics I came to the conclusion that “all
manifestations of neuroses and psychoneuroses are to be traced back to organ
inferiority, to the degree and the nature of the central compensation that has not
yet become successful and to the appearance of compensation disturbances.”
Thus I came to the conclusion that enuresis was due, in every case, to an

inferiority of the organ and its nerve superstructure and that the compensation
developing induces in the inferior brain a “condition of high psychic tension out
of which there springs the predisposition of neurosis.”6 That these conclusions
have met with some acceptance is, among other things, shown in the very
readable work of Otto Gross7 who starting from a more limited viewpoint and
following up the work of Anton comes to the conclusion “that in the
psychopathic constitution is to be found the direct expression of a disturbance in
compensatory regulations, that indeed there may even be a lack of relation
between the compensatory appropriation of the whole brain and its capacity to
perform compensatory superactivity.”
6 F. also Adler, “Die Disposition zur Neurose” in Heilen und Bilden. 7 Ueber
Psychopahtische Minderwerthigkeiten (Bramuller, Vienna).
I would like again to emphasize the fact that the neurotic symptoms
preferably attack the area of the inferior organ and its psychic superstructure,8
that they revive childhood defects or are involved in the assumption shared also
so far as I can see by the psychoanalytic school. The insistence that enuresis is to
be included entirely among neuroses, a view combated by me, is in the main an
achievement of the Breslau school. It certainly cannot be claimed that this school
“belongs to a certain speculative tendency.”9
8 Cf. Adler, “Der Aggressionstriel im Leben und in der Neurose,” in Heilen
und Bilden. 
9 Since then, a number of scientists, notably J. Zappert (Wien. Klin.
Wochenschr., 1920, No. 22), have supported my interpretations against that of
Fuchs who disagrees on a few details.
Part II: A Study of Organ Inferiority and Its Psychical Compensation

Part II 
A Study of Organ Inferiority and Its Psychical
Compensation1
A Contribution to Clinical Medicine
1907
1 Originally published as Studie über Minderwertigkeit von Organen in
1907. Translated into English by Smith Ely Jelliffe, M.D. and published in 1917.
This 2002 edition is based on the 1917 translation and has been minimally edited
for readability by Henry T. Stein, Ph.D.
Adler”s Preface to the 1907 Edition
Adler’s Preface to the 1907 Edition
The purpose of this book is to add to clinical medicine a further principle of
research. From the completeness and the import of these early results I am sure
that I have come upon very fruitful territory.
To me, moreover, it was an attractive task to see our benumbered and
thwarted conceptions of disease completely dissolved; to be able to observe
human pathology in its making.
Many a valuable bit of knowledge has supported my theory of the
inferiority of organs. I have been unable to give acknowledgment to all at the
proper place, as I should have liked. In this paper, in addition to the authors
named, the range of thought of Martius, Rosenbach, Exner, Hering, Obersteiner,
Haeckel, Schwalbe, and many another has played a large part.
This work is to count as a beginning. Perhaps, at some future time, I shall
be permitted to make the connection with clinical medicine, with psychology,
and pedagogy still closer by bringing together all previous works on the subject1.
1 The author has advanced this purpose in his monograph The Neurotic
Character.

Introduction
An examination of the diseases of the urinary apparatus can be very
extensively carried on so far as their symptomatology is concerned. In renal
pathology, as in all other diseases, the schema of symptoms is built up
empirically, and accordingly rests on a firm basis. It is richly enough equipped to
lead the diagnostics of renal diseases along safe paths. The compass is at once
reduced, however, when the examination is directed towards etiology. The
theories of the causes of renal diseases read like a short collection of truisms, in
which terms such as predisposition, chill, poisons, infection, disturbance of the
circulation appear and reappear and play their part, just as they do in other
organic diseases.
The fact that a definition of these causal factors themselves is notably
lacking ought not even to be particularly emphasized. More important is the fact
that there: is so little positive material available to decide the question
concerning the localization of disease in the kidney. What has been emphasized,
the sickening of the kidneys through poisoning; or infection as well as through
the progressive changes in (functions) affections of the circulatory system, all
this is in line with the basal (primary, basic ) concepts of pathology, for the
urinary organs are affected like all others proportionately to their relation to the
disease centres.
The conditions in those cases which one is forced to designate as "genuine,"
or "primary" diseases of the kidney are less clear. A long list of diseases falls
under these heads. They all have this in common, namely, that the final cause of
their pathologic form cannot be traced beyond the kidney, and that a more
remote or even an exogenous etiology--from the very name--seems out of the
question. Here may be reckoned, if all other distinguishing indications are put
aside, true contracted kidney, renal tumors, localized (syphilis) lues and
tuberculosis, cystic degeneration, nephrolithiasis, nephralgie hematurique, renal
hematuria, floating kidney, imperfect development and hypoplasia and
analogous diseases in the pelvis of the kidney and ureter. I must add also that the
genetic course of development in secondary diseases must not under any
consideration be deemed exhausted by reference to the causa movens, but,
rather, in these cases too, the selection of the kidney is determined in a hitherto
unexplained manner.
If one turns aside from an explanatory attempt which limits itself to causes
of disease which are purely local and situated in the kidney, one can divide the

notions on localization of disease in the kidney synoptically into three groups, of
which each one has reference to secondary as well as primary diseases. The one
hypothesis tries to make the selection of the kidney as center of the disease
tenable on the ground of "nephrotoxic" action of a number of poisons. The
strength of this hypothesis lies in experimentation, as well as in a number of
recorded cases which bring to mind a noxa especially harmful to the kidney,
such as is present in scarlet fever, diphtheria and other infections. On the other
hand it is inapplicable to a great number of renal affections, does not offer an
explanation for the kidney's remaining unaffected upon the appearance of renal
poisons, and should only be generalized with the utmost caution on the basis of
animal experimentation. At any rate we know of no poison at present that
invariably harms the kidneys, and at the same time, only the kidneys. A second
conception sees the cause of the greater number of renal diseases in the exposed
position of the kidney as an organ of excretion through which the waste material
of the body is constantly passing. This hypothesis is supposed to serve as a
sufficient explanation for most of the renal affections. Its application is surely
greater and its bearing unquestionable, since it has to do, not only with true
toxins, but also with the increase of waste products and with heightened external
demands upon the kidney. But even with this conception we are not in a position
to give satisfactory explanations. It also leaves us in the lurch when we ask why,
with the admission of the premises, that is, the presence of bacteria in the blood,
of toxins and poisons, of chronic metabolic anomalies, of alcoholism, pregnancy
or chill (?), the kidneys are so often found healthy. It also fails us in attempting
to explain one-sided disease of the kidneys, as in cases of tuberculosis, lues, and
tumors. These and other inadequacies force us to a third view, which will be
championed, and with good cause, I believe, in this book, a conception
according to which most renal diseases are caused by a fundamental inferiority
of the urineexcreting apparatus.
That such a condition may be accepted for many cases, and plays its part in
renal pathology is probably universally recognized. The appearance of true renal
diseases can not be sufficiently explained by the acceptance of hypothetical
poisons of metabolism. Above all, the pathological findings, as well as the
clinical course, both contradict chronic poisoning. This view is refuted almost as
strongly by the frequently long duration and by the numerous hereditary
appearances. In the same way, albuminuria of puberty, renal hemophilia, cystic
kidney, the pregnancy kidney, orthostatic albuminuria, and albuminuria
connected with constipation are all indications, which one can hardly overlook.
But one of the strongest arguments for inferiority of the urineexcreting apparatus
as the cause of renal diseases, is heredity, which is so often found in renal

pathology. At most it is still questionable whether certain of these cases of
albuminuria should be considered diseases. The difficulties in determining this
question will not be denied, for the transition from mild anomalies in the
condition of the urine, to severe forms of renal diseases, has not yet been
sufficiently studied. But even cessation for a number of years or improvement of
the phenomena, whether under medical treatment or not, has no conclusive
force. One can, however, justly emphasize that the acceptance of inferiority of
the kidney as the cause of renal diseases, regarded from the pathological
viewpoint, has many probabilities in its favor, that the transition from abnormal
development and functional anomalies to disease can be brought about in the
shortest time, and that in many cases it becomes questionable just where the
aspect of the disease begins for us. The "physiological" albuminurias play the
same part there as, say, the cystic kidney, which can formally appear overnight
as a severe illness, after it has existed for some time without any symptoms.
By means of an examination of this sort, from the standpoint of an
inferiority theory, these previously mentioned affections of the urinary apparatus
attain their proper place in pathology for the first time. Their significance in the
field of renal pathology comes out more clearly through the demonstration of a
fundamental inferiority. At the same time it seems necessary to conduct more
searchingly the examination of constitutional organic anomalies as the
foundation of many, perhaps of most diseases, so that the diagnostician may
draw strong support from the facts of the inferiority theory. The value of this
view, however, extends to the study of the symptoms also, and to experimental
pathology. In regard to the latter, it determines once for all the differences
between inferior and normal organs and thus interferes with the unlimited
transference of results of animal experimentation to human beings, and of
experiences with well people to sick ones. In regard to the first, it seeks to
establish a still closer bond between the empirically determined symptoms, and
the diseased organ, and makes related organs responsible for symptoms of a
more widespread organic disease. There will be particular stress laid on personal
prophylaxis in all those cases where it is possible to deduce organic inferiority,
where signs of disease have not been already proved. Just as is the case at
present, when diseases in the parents arouse suspicions in regard to the children.
We must determine first of all for therapy whether the inferior organ should be
and can be, by means of any sort of a course of treatment, aroused to sufficient
function and eventually to additional development, a question to which one can
often answer yes, in the case of young people, but which with older patients
must frequently be answered by no. The answering of this question will,
however, usually call for a deeper knowledge of the nature of the inferiority in

question, and its significance nificance for the patient concerned. If one is
obliged to give up an active cure, or training, then the laws of a protective plan
of treatment--rest, relief--come to the fore. Finally, in making the prognosis,
quoad vitam, or sanationem, the inferiority theory, likewise, guarantees valuable
aid. From the point of view now resorted to, not only the sum of the phenomena
presenting themselves, the phases, so to speak, of the contest, will have to be
taken into consideration, but the valuation of the organ has also to be effected,
and we must fix our eyes upon the relation of this value to the disease-exciting
force.
These explanations will serve to substantiate the fact that a study of the
inferiority of organs is at the foundation of some of the most important problems
of pathology. In the following pages I shall try to establish that this theory may
claim to be considered as a valuable "heuristic" method on the basis of the
characters or conditions that underlie it.
Chapter I Outline of A Theory of Organ Inferiority
After having attempted in the previous pages to sketch the great
significance of a study of organ inferiority in renal pathology, to which we will
add a few special additional illustrations in the supplement, we find ourselves
called upon to enlarge the domain of our research and to take into consideration
all of the organs. We must do this so much the more, as, on the one hand, the
argument which gave us the authority for declaring the inferiority of the
urinesecreting apparatus one of the fundamentals of renal pathology, can be
made to apply to all other organic diseases, and on the other hand, the
pathological phenomena of the diseased kidney can, in an analogous manner, be
demonstrated in the whole field of pathology. Chronic transformation of the
parenchyma, pathological form of the supporting tissue, cystic degeneration,
formation of concretions, localization of inflammatory and neoplastic tumors,
malformation, imperfect development, diminished development in the whole
apparatus or in parts of it recur in all or several of the organic diseases, and the
theory of inferiority always seems called upon to complete the otherwise
insufficient etiology.
We find analogous transformations in the liver, in the pancreas, in the
thyroid gland, in the genital tract, in parts of the digestive tract, the respiratory
and circulatory systems, and in the central nervous system. A great number of
these diseases are marked by characteristics which are emphasized in renal
diseases, such as heredity, chronic course of the disease, typical localization
within the organ, an insufficient etiology supported neither by poisons nor

bacteria, but they can easily be put into a framework of a theory of inferiority.
This is the case in the pathology of the thyroid gland, the etiology of which has
proved itself quite insufficient, but which corresponds to all the heretofore
mentioned conditions of an inferiority theory, particularly that of heredity. The
macroscopic as well as the microscopic pathological changes of the liver show
phenomena analogous to those seen in almost every case of renal disease, for
which reason the primary diseases naturally interest us most.
It seems superfluous to us, further, to point out in detail how certain
transformations may be found in every individual organ, since this is really a
problem clearly enough set forth in general pathology. Only the lack of
satisfactory etiology will be emphasized in this connection. On the other hand,
the question which is raised in this paper, and which we are trying to solve, asks
rather, what reasons there are for the fact that certain diseases attack just a
certain organ. The solution accepted by us, which takes a primary inferiority of
this organ as a basis of the disease, is at one with the opinions and researches of
many authors. In this question we can; perchance, only claim to have undertaken
the study of organ inferiority more comprehensively, and to have considered its
significance of greater import. A greater objection might however be raised
against the further declaration that other diseases, too, not considered true
diseases, such as infectious diseases, and "adventitious" diseases, often require,
or at least are dependent upon the assumption of organ inferiority in their course.
A still greater number of diseases might be mentioned at this point, as, for
instance, tuberculosis, which is probably always localized in the inferior organ,
an assumption which, if conclusively established would bring many of the
doubtful questions relating to heredity, place of entry, and paths of infection,
immunity and therapy, nearer to a solution. The colonization of Loffler's bacillus
and other microorganisms in the pharyngeal space, of the Frankl-Weichselbaum
diplococci in the lungs, the agents of typhoid, cholera and dysentery at definite
spots in the intestine, and many other infections, likewise, fall under this head.
At the same time the part that bacterial invasion has played should not be denied.
But the acceptance of an inferiority of the diseased organs seems particularly
assured, since the presence of many pathogenic microorganisms can be
demonstrated in well people. To be sure, one can often expect only obscure signs
of inferiority, in fact in a number of these diseases the illness itself and its course
must be considered, for the time being, as evidence of inferiority. This causes us
to drop the conception of "absolute" inferiority for these widely spread diseases,
and to introduce the term "relative" inferiority, which is of value, be it
temporarily or only in regard to certain causes of disease. As regards
tuberculosis, to be sure, the proofs of primary inferiority of the lung, or of other

attacked organs, seem to be abundantly present. The very appearance of heredity
makes this more easily acceptable. Likewise the frequently typical localization
in the lungs, kidneys, joints and brain. As a matter of fact, citations may be
quoted which give information in regard to certain arrests of development, as
those of Frankl, Schick and Sorgo, statements which we can without further ado
classify with the signs of degeneration which are emphasized later on.
With reference to diabetes, epilepsy, tumors, chronic alcoholism, obesity,
cretinism, and a few other diseases, I undertake to determine, after looking
through a considerable amount of material, their position with reference to the
study of organ inferiority. A little series of observations has suggested to me to
consider these diseases, , also, as built upon a foundation of organ inferiority.
The role of chance in diseases of inferior organs is surely not as great as is
commonly thought. One comes in contact, at least, with cases that strike one so
remarkably that a greater number of them succeed in convincing one that their
determination has been differently and more strictly given than by mere chance.
One of these cases I will present in the following. Ladislaus F., 8 years old, was
injured in August of the year 1905, by a pen which went into the outer upper
quadrant of the left eyeball, and reached through the conjuctiva bulbi into the
sclera. The patient had come too close to a schoolmate who was brandishing a
pen, yet neither of the boys could be accused of malevolence or particular
inattention. The wound healed with slight reactions. In October of the year 1905,
the boy again presented himself with a coal-splinter, which a gust of wind had
blown into his eye, imbedded in the cornea of his left eye. After extracting the
foreign body the wound soon healed. In January, 1906, the patient again
received a prick in the left eye, which was caused, just as on the first occasion,
by a schoolmate with a pen he was using, and which was about I cm. below and
inside the first punctured wound. This wound also healed like the first, in a short
time, leaving an ink-tinged scar. One might think that all this was purely bad
luck. I was able to ascertain the following: The maternal grandfather suffered
from diabetic iritis and was for a long time under the care of an oculist. The
mother had convergent strabismus, likewise the patient's younger brother, and
both had hypermetropia and diminished acuteness of vision, which could not be
accurately demonstrated owing to the inattention and lack of intelligence of the
boy. One of the mother's brothers was troubled by numerous recurrences of
conjunctival eczema, and had convergent strabismus. Our patient had full
acuteness of vision, hypermetropia to a slight degree, but showed a lack of the
conjunctival reflex in both eyes.
I do not wish to deduce too much from this case. Nevertheless it seems
certain to me that one must accept an inferiority of the organ of vision in this

boy, which is pretty well established by heredity, the different varieties of illness
in his relatives, partly of inflammatory, partly of functional nature, and the
deficiency of the reflex function of the conjunctiva and the poor protection of the
eyes, a fact which seems to me to be related in some not yet wholly explained
way to the deficient reflex action. At this point I must also add that under
adequate psychical conditions, by means of greater activity on the part of the
psyche, the above mentioned inferiority of the eyes may be made good. The boy
can learn by experience and can hide the partly organic defect by psychical
exertion. The transition between organic inferiority and psychical compensation
becomes comprehensible in such cases. But there can also be no question that
from the nature of the psychical compensation the traces of the redeemed
organic inferiority remain unobliterated, and that, for example, in the above-
mentioned case, the protection of the eyes must have moved into the field of
conscious awareness, and in this manner the visual character of the individual
experienced a particular strengthening. But more of this later.
Meanwhile permit me to add, in this connection, the following about the
nature of organ inferiority, which seems already to have been elucidated here
and there: For the purpose of a simple and distinct arrangement, we shall name
only two forms in which the inferiority of an organ expresses itself, morphologic
and functional inferiority. Both are present at the same time in the majority of
cases. I should like to designate as "relative" inferiority, a third form, upon
which I shall lay little stress. This declares itself only in the case of illness and
becomes recognizable only under increased demands or following upon
systematic tests.
I. Morphologic Inferiority: One can point out as deficient the
development of the shape of an organ, its size, its individual portions of tissue,
individual cell complexes, of the whole apparatus or of limited parts of the same.
A certain probability, which is in accord with biological conditions, would have
it appear that fundamentally just the most highly developed, differentiated cells
and cell complexes have come out the worst, while the tissues of lesser capacity,
which owe their development to an earlier embryologic epoch, may be normally
or even super-normally developed. The deficiency will concern first of all those
portions of tissue which as secretory, nervous elements, protective tissue,
excretory ducts or supply channels, guarantee the full development of the
function. When life activity begins and with it the innumerable sources of
stimulus of energy and metabolism, the remaining fetal or postembryonic tissues
will experience a great demand and a sufficient sudden impulse to growth. Their
final formation will, to be sure, not be that of normal fetal development, but will
be enough to insure the functions necessary to life. In relation to the life and

health of the individual, the consideration is, that one of his organs has to
perform the functions necessary to the economy of the organism with a lesser
stock of tissues or one less capable of resistance. With satisfactory structural
material and sufficient provisions it is often possible to master the work. But just
as often, perhaps, the hour comes when the insufficiency of the organ is
revealed, when the external and internal hindrances can no longer be controlled.
The normal structure and wear and tear of the organ give place to regressive
phenomena, which are just as much determined in their nature by the
morphologic inferiority of the organ, as by the special causes setting the disease
in action. The moment at which the function necessary to life fails is relative. It
is accordingly not at all surprising to find that at times inferior organs suffice for
a complete lifetime.
From the conditions of morphologic inferiority of an organ the cause of
which is always fetal defect of development, the following conclusions may be
positively drawn:
1. Since the fetal defect in development is brought about by inherited or
acquired properties of the spermatozoon or ovum the hereditary character of
organ inferiority must stand out in a particular fashion. The heredity may not
always be exhausted in the morphologic inferiority of one and the same organ, it
can, as will be later shown, be proved by functional deficiency, by inferiority of
a second organ, as was pointed out before, or by cases of illness ["relative"
inferiority] among relatives.
2. Since the greater number of organs are withdrawn from direct
observation we are often compelled to infer possible inferiorities from anomalies
in their size, form, and position. An extremely important makeshift is presented
in the functional anomalies which should be considered in conjunction with
other characteristics of organ inferiority as authorized signs of inferiority.
Directly perceivable to the eye and sense of touch are the organic inferiorities
lying close to the outer integument and often standing in relation to it. These
have passed up to the present day under the name of external signs of
degeneration, or stigmata. They represent for the greater part nothing more than
the visible expression of the inferiority of the related organ, whereupon in the
individual cases, at all events, the question always arises as to how far into the
deeper part of the organ the inferiority extends.
3. From the fetal character of the morphologic organ inferiority, from the
embryonic lack of material which we think causes this, it follows that frequently
manifold organ inferiority must occur which can be explained either by local
difficulties or by deficiency of material extending through several organs. The
relation of different organs to each other has to play a part in this, a part which

began likewise in the embryonic stage. In these cases also, a fact which is
confirmed by experience, a morphologic anomaly can be replaced by a
functional defect.
2. Functional Inferiority. Perhaps this is the chief group, since through
some functional defect the morphologic anomaly becomes perceived. Its
characteristic quality is, briefly stated, a quantity or quality of work insufficient
to satisfy a standard of required effectiveness. The compensations, which in
many cases endure for some time, consist in the vicarious replacement by a
symmetrically placed organ, in the compensating aid of a portion of an organ
related to it, in the use of another organ, or in the heightened use of the inferior
organ itself. The provisional outcome depends on the actual reserve strength.
The pathology of these conditions exhausts itself in all conceivable
anomalies of execution, secretion, and growth. The work of the organs or
portions of organs on which greater demand is made, is performed under
heightened external and internal pressure, so that at a certain point of the
organism an increased condition of irritation must be relieved in order to
guarantee even unstable equilibrium. Shock of any sort, infections, conditions of
exhaustion, overwork of a bodily or psychical nature, disturbances in
temperature will usually show their effects in this exposed place. It is easy to
understand that even the usual demands of life, of civilization, at this critical
point also, the "locus minoris resistentiae," may be frequently followed by harm.
The observations on the vicariousness of symmetrical organs are old and
have to do with inherent differences of form and function, as well as with
differences acquired during life. Here we can cite: Compensation of one cerebral
half for the other, just as with the halves of the thyroid gland, of the lungs, or
kidneys, the ovaries, the testicles. If we put aside the certainly determined cases
of inferiority which are but rarely found, we find ourselves forced to make a
diagnosis of organic inferiority upon the establishment of the phenomena of
vicariousness in cases that occur. This condition, and the so often observed
increased tendency of inferior organs to grow, which I will mention later on, and
the condition, not at all rare, of equal and uniformly divided anomalies in both
sides, as are found one-sidedly in vicarious forms, and analogous conditions in
asymmetric organs on the basis of primary inferiority lead to the assumption that
just the primary inferior organs seem predestined under certain conditions to
take upon themselves for a shorter or longer time an increased functional
activity. In addition to the well-known types, emphysema in functional
inferiority of the other lung, struma parenchymatosa lateralis in atrophy of the
other side, renal hypertrophy in atrophic processes of the second kidney, etc.,
may be cited. I should also like to mention here left-handedness, partial situs

viscerum inversus, and the vicariousness of the halves of the central nervous
system. If in all these phenomena there is also no doubt of inferiority, they surely
represent merely a lesser degree. There can be no doubt that the primary inferior
organ which frequently suffers in its deficient development in size and which is
functionally not up to the level of the normally developed organ, if it is not
forced to be vicarious, often has only to do a very small amount of work. This is
apparently the reason why it is at times found healthy while the vicarious organ
is diseased. This condition was found in the following case:
Miss Fanny H. , 23 years of age, comes of a tuberculous family. Her mother
died early of pulmonary phthisis, a sister is also suffering from a pulmonary
disease. Except for children's diseases, the patient has not had any notable
sickness. For some time there has been a strong tendency to constipation; pallor
of the skin and of the mucous membranes; palatal and pharyngeal reflexes
lacking. In the spring of the year 1905 the patient began spitting blood. A long
sojourn in the South brought a slight improvement. In May, 1906, in the region
of the apex of the right lung, diminution of sound and a slight rattling during
expiration could be heard. The distance from the spinous process of the 7th
cervical vertebra to the processus coracoideus was 18 cm. on the right, on the
left 16 cm. The patient said that since her childhood the right half of the thorax
had been noticeably more developed than the left. Even the breathing on the
right exceeded that on the left side. We find the focus of disease in this case at a
point where the fundamental inferiority of the respiratory organs, which evinced
itself clearly enough in the heredity, had made good functionally, as well as
morphologically. But in these and similar cases it seems plausible that the
increase in function and of growth in an inferior organ can also give opportunity
for increased predisposition to disease, if certain definite relations are disturbed
at the same time. Sorgo and Schick recently pointed out that with tuberculosis
there is often a smaller nipple or a smaller areola on the side of the disease
center, but at times this is true of the other side. We believe that we have
indicated the connection and the explanation for this.
There surely are a number of pure cases of inferiority in which we do not
find vicariousness, just as an asymmetric organ can remain without
compensation. My impression is that in the asymmetric organs which may be
called inferior in the majority of cases, there are also partial compensation
phenomena. And, for this reason, that general inferiority of an organ or an
apparatus represents a certain degree of inability to live, which gives sufficient
cause for early death. One can find support for this conception in families where
the infant mortality is high. There need be no doubt at all of the frightful weight
of social conditions, but, as in all other attacks of disease, the bulk is

concentrated on the inferior organ. Most frequently we find these compensation
phenomena in the circulatory system and in the gastrointestinal tract, where they
occur, in accordance with the ruling theory, above all, to act as a temporary
balance of mechanical disproportions and conditions. Meanwhile the organ's
feebleness alone makes it suspicious. One really ought to accept the fact that a
training, more conformable to nature, as on the part of the organ to overcome a
usually slowly arising stenosis is scarcely feasible. And yet in many cases we
find such a complete lack of compensation in a more or less short time. The
notion of an inferiority in the compensating segment also, of which the energy of
growth is used up only the more quickly, explains this weakness a great deal.
Add to this, that we are forced to see an inferiority of the attacked part of the
organ, according to this exposition, in the establishment and the development of
the centers of disease, an inferiority from which we cannot without further
question exclude the adjoining portions. We should like to extend similar
demonstrations to the urinary strictures and to lithiasis as well as to the
compensatory occurrences in the central nervous system.
I can summarize briefly in regard to compensation of an inferior organ by
means of a second organ. In this line we are accustomed to think of cardiac
hypertrophy, by which a deficiency in the kidney or the lung is compensated.
There is no doubt as to the facts. I will only add, as above, that in such cases
many things lead one to call the heart an inferior organ too. I should like to say,
besides, that this group surely deserves much more attention than it gets at
present. The frequent compensatory intervention of the brain in deficient organic
functions is undoubted. But the glands with excretory ducts also and the ones
with internal secretions can often be made to compensate. The disease
phenomena as a whole are often governed by the disease of the compensating
organ. The results of the pathologic anatomy do not always cover the disease
phenomena that have been found, since they indicate changes, whereas the clinic
often has to judge the expression of relationships. Many diagnostic errors, many
failures in therapy, are rooted in this not wholly clear connection. To be sure an
individual inferiority, as for instance of the kidney, can arise and provide a
symptomatology on the grounds of a mechanical, or some such sort of
correlation of organs. Above all we must think in this connection of the
consecutive disease of the heart, the skin, the eye and the digestive tract, for the
relation of which to kidney affections, pathology offers sufficient authority. On
the other hand, however, we must emphasize the fact that many of these
consecutive seizures are compensation phenomena on inferior ground or
"reactionary diseases" in other inferior organs, as in the case of L. Z. in the
appendix. From the whole ensemble of inferiority this idea comes strongly to the

fore, that normal organs are compensated less by hypertrophy and more by
hyperfunction. On the other hand the more inferior the formation of an organ is,
the less it has succeeded in functional development, and the sooner it will react
with excessive growth to stimuli of all sorts.
It is only a step from the fact of excessive growth in inferior organs to the
acceptance of the origin of neoplasm in such organs. This seems to us justified if
we regard properly the familiar occurrence, the anamnestic particulars, their
appearance in or near primary inferior organs. Whether parasites come into
consideration for individual neoplasms, I must leave undecided, but do not
consider their part very important. The anamnestic data, particularly, speak for
the acceptance of the fact that neoplasms originate only in inferior organs. I
could always be sure in my cases, and literature offers enough proofs, that the
development of the carcinomas are preceded by a number of years of functional
disturbances, or further disease of the organs, frequently of a neurotic nature.
The conception of a fundamental connection of lupus, chronic catarrh,
inflammation, hemorrhages or microorganisms with the forming of a carcinoma,
regularly leaves the causal factor unexplained. According to our conception, all
these presumed "etiologic" affections are characterized in like manner as the
neoplasms, as manifestations of the inferiority of the diseased organ. The same is
true for the origin of neoplasms from nevus, in which case the nevus
pigmentosus often betrays in unpleasant fashion inferior and diseased organs. At
least, I have learned to watch for it in my cases, and have frequently found it
near the diseased organ in pulmonary tuberculosis, renal affections and
appendicitis. Since the embryonic origin of nevus pigmentosus and its familiar
occurrence has been determined, furthermore, since the facts which lead to
Cohnheim's carcinoma theory of the scattered embryonic germ, seem
undisturbed, a confirmation of this theory of mine can also be drawn from his
point of view. Only, in place of the scattered embryonic germ, which has not up
to the present been established, the fetal character of the inferior organ enters
completely or in one of its parts.
It will not do at all, however, to make the proof of the inferiority of an
organ depend exclusively on its disease. Only the layman will refuse to admit
that a long life is quite compatible with a long illness. Even an inferiority does
not of necessity lead to an early death. To be sure, the outcome is determined by
the concurrence of deficient fetal development, conditions of irritation, and
material reserve under stationary external requirements. One will find changes of
atrophic nature, opposed to them those of hypertrophic character, decreased or
increased ability, the most varied anomalies of external and internal secretion,
deficiency and excess. If in addition we try to take into consideration the

external conditions, the demands of exertion, infections, domestication
[Hansemann] and surroundings, the diseases of overpressure and consumption
[Edinger] which have just attained importance, localized infectious disease,
neoplasms, appendicitis, ulcus rotundum, hypertrophy of prostate, etc., neuroses,
nervous diseases of peripheral and central type, racial and family diseases, tabes
and paresis, all come within the field of our calculations.
The amount of material to be worked over is accordingly overwhelming. In
single cases, the organized points of view suffice to give a survey, and to point
out the inferior organ. The determination of the localization of the disease is, and
will be, under all conditions, of tremendous importance. The framework of the
present clinical medicine is not overstepped. But it is evident at once that our
point of view leads further, and puts us into the position to make possible further
understanding of the above-mentioned process, since in connection with the
knowledge of sickness in many cases there is established also an organ
inferiority, from the nature and intensity of which results are obtained which are
of value in the realm of etiology, symptomatology, and therapy. It is moreover
clear that new resources are opened up for the individual observation at the sick
bed, that is today very hazardous, and which are particularly of value in
infectious diseases. I can not permit the endemic and epidemic diffusion of
infection to count as a serious argument against the theory of organ inferiority.
Instead it only shows the relative inferiority of our extant organ cells in the
struggle with the microorganisms. On the other hand the prognosis, therapy, and
above all the theory of complications of disease, secondary diseases and
sequelae in these cases also fall into line with the norms of the inferiority theory.
The regard for organ inferiority will attain greater surety in all these questions,
the better we are able to understand the relations of the inferiority. The course of
a case of diphtheria surely depends primarily on the antitoxic power of the
organism, on the active or passive immunizing power, but the value of the heart,
kidney and respiratory apparatus also comes into consideration for the crisis.
Besides the inferiority of an organ does not need to reveal itself throughout
a whole lifetime, or the expression may remain so insignificant that one scarcely
thinks that one has an inferior organ before one, or else it expresses itself in
morphologic anomaly and even then at times so slightly that the condition of the
individual is not affected. Slight deviations also, at times in the most primitive
functions, may represent the whole of the inferiority, which at other times may
lead to disease and death in the victim. A significant light is thrown on the nature
of organ inferiority by the frequent phenomenon of manifold inferiority in the
organs of a person and the part played by the brain and spinal cord in connection
with it, which frequently act compensatingly and cover the existing defect or

else shape it to useful ends. In the following pages then we shall discuss: 
I. Heredity. 
II. Anamnestic demonstration. 
III. Morphologic characteristics. 
IV. Reflex anomalies as indications of inferiority. 
V. Manifold organ inferiorities. 
VI. The part played by the central nervous system in the theory of organ
inferiority. Psychogenesis and foundations of neuroses and psychoneuroses.

Chapter II Heredity
Here we find ourselves on familiar ground. The significance of heredity
however is esteemed differently by different investigators. Some bring forward
the family anamnesis, refer every exact conclusion back to that and want, at best,
to deduce from it greater or lesser predisposition to disease. Others, particularly
more recent writers find very nearly similar hereditary conditions in healthy as in
sick individuals, and they put aside all deeper meanings of the problem of
heredity. For the most part, the conception of the ability to inherit a temperament
which under suitable conditions leads to hereditary disease is prevalent. As far as
we can determine French students have always inclined to place sharper
emphasis on heredity than German students.
There have also been contradictions, which we think can, without very
great difficulty, be put aside. In the foreground of our assertions regarding
heredity belongs this sentence: Heredity consists in inheriting one or more
inferior organs.
A survey of the diseases regarded as hereditary supports this assertion,
which contradicts the conception of hereditary degeneration of the whole
organism. Even that which is called mixed heredity, as in epilepsy, mental
disturbances, hysteria, chronic alcoholism, etc., may be classified according to
individual inferior organs, wherein the influence and development of the central
nervous system is strikingly noticeable. We will have now, at this point, to lay
down a fact which is of the greatest importance for the whole conception of our
work.. The inferiority of an organ may reveal itself in the descendants in the
most diverse parts of the organ. With this statement a great number of
contradictions to the theory of heredity are removed. Above all "mixed heredity"
is reduced to a simple hereditary inferiority of the nervous system. But those
investigators are in the right too, who attribute, regardless of seeming
contradiction, the greatest significance to the heredity problem, despite the fact
that sick children may come from healthy parents or individual healthy children
from diseased parents. For from the most different sorts of localization of
inferiority in the organ and its appertaining parts there naturally arise widely
differing degrees of vitality and predisposition to disease. We must however
consider that there are a great number of forms of inferiority which plainly injure
neither health nor duration of life, such, particularly, as mild functional or
peripherally situated inferiorities.
In our work we recognize, not the heredity of the disease but the heredity of

the inferior organ, a conception which has not yet made a way for itself in all
pathology, but has probably been accepted for individual pathologic phenomena.
We wish to try to defend our idea and to introduce further support than that
which has hitherto belonged to it in a series of diseases which have usually been
considered hereditary.
The introduction of heredity in cases of genuine epilepsy seems
comparatively free from objections. The anomalies of form in the brain
emphasized by Meynert and others coincide with our morphologic inferiorities.
We shall have to lay claim to the epileptic equivalent, the imbecility which
occurs, as a functional inferiority of the brain. The etiological importance of
polioencephalitis discussed by Freud and Rie is found in its appearance as a
form of disease of an inferior organ, namely the brain. In our opinion other
diseases which have been emphasized are connected with a similar inferiority of
other organs. This is the case in the frequent anamnestic determination of
nocturnal enuresis, a functional inferiority of the urinary apparatus, which, in
favorable cases, may be counterbalanced by compensation of the central nervous
system. The anomalies of the circulatory organs, also, which are on many sides
connected with the question of epilepsy, may be thus compensated. Asymmetry
of the base of the skull, ocular anomalies, signs of degeneration in the head
continually direct our attention to the inferiority of the brain, and are to be
counted as peripheral expressions of this inferiority. Changes in the reflexes of
the mucous membranes and the skin, as Redlich recently indicated, rest upon
similar inferiority of other organs. Moral deterioration, criminality, chronic
alcoholism, may arise from this cerebral inferiority, but not epilepsy. Decided
mental predisposition, genius which Lombroso has brought to the foreground,
may be considered as overcompensation in an inferior brain. It is this inferior
brain which may be inherited. In order to lead to epilepsy, there must be further
determinations. Criminals, drinkers, imbeciles, inventive people, geniuses,
apparently healthy people, who however frequently reveal peripheral or partial
forms of inferiority, have to alternate in such families till this stock is destroyed
by external circumstances or until an equilibrium is reached which guarantees
better vitality.
Take for example the L. family: The father died of carcinoma of the
bladder, the mother was mentally inferior. There were two sons, of whom one
was feeble-minded with asymmetry of the skull, the other normal. Of five
daughters the oldest is afflicted with renal calculus, one of her children wets his
bed. The second suffered during her childhood from enuresis and catarrh of the
bladder, later in each pregnancy--three times--from pregnancy pyelitis. The third
is an epileptic, the fourth an imbecile, the fifth normal. Of the children of the

second daughter, the first shows slight symptoms of enuresis, the second has
deformities of the skull, the third suffered from spasm of the glottis. In this
family accordingly, a combination of inferiority of the urinary apparatus and of
the brain plays an unfortunate part.
The analysis of the conditions of heredity in tuberculous cases proves itself
equally fruitful. The justification of the problems of heredity in the tuberculosis
question is pretty well recognized. It becomes still more clear on accepting our
viewpoint, as long as one does not seek in the ascendancy only tuberculosis of
the lungs but lays greater stress on the inferiority of the whole respiratory tract,
and takes the same attitude toward diseases of this apparatus. Then bronchial
asthma, emphysema, diseases of the larynx, of the pharynx, of the nose, also fall
into the range of the anamnesis. For just as the inferior brain in epilepsy is
transmitted so it is the inferior respiratory organ in tuberculosis, which reveals
deficiencies at the most diverse places, and in the most widely different forms.
We may not leave the complicating diseases unmentioned either. The connection
between gastrointestinal affections, hysteria, goiter, alcoholism, and albuminuria
is sufficiently clear. It would lead us too far afield to give a complete
explanation of this connection at this point.
As a result of my investigations, I can allege, that in all these cases, to
which we must also add smallness of the heart and of the arteries, it is not a
question of pure connection of a causal nature, but has to do with inferiority in a
second organ appearing at the same time. Localization in the apex of the lung is
particularly interesting. It may be best explained, in our opinion, by accepting a
particular inferiority at this point. The Frankel constriction of the tipper thoracic
opening, the prominent angulus ludovica, the phthisic constitution, the deficient
development of the areola of the nipple on the diseased side, emphasized by
Sorgo and Schick, are nothing more than peripheral indications of the inferiority
of the respiratory organs, and are surely not to be valued etiologically, any more
than the diminished exchange of air at the apex. All these signs are not found in
phthisis subjects only, but are none the less suspicious factors. The striking size
of the lung in phthisis gives emphasis to that factor of growth tendency in
inferior organs of which we have already spoken. One can not avoid a similar
impression in watching the growth of giant cells. On the other hand the part of
the tubercle bacilli as well as the social conditions are assured to be determining
factors.
E. family : The father has emphysema and chronic bronchitis, the mother
died of hemorrhage, in a premature birth. Of the sons, the elder is healthy; the
younger in his twenty-third year became ill with pleuritis on the left side,
affection of the apex on the left side and albuminuria. He suffered from chronic

coryza, swelling of the pharyngeal tonsil and of the turbinates. The older sister
suffered from spasmodic sneezing (unfortunately we can get no report about it)
and in her thirty-fifth year underwent an operation for myoma. The younger
sister in her childhood suffered from enuresis and frequently had nasal catarrh
and recurring laryngitis. The older sister is childless, the younger had three
difficult births, in which hydramnios was present with extraordinarily large
children. There were no noteworthy change in the pelvic measurements. In this
family may be listed, inferiority of the respiratory organs in different places and,
in different forms, also inferiority of the sexual organs of the female members. If
I add that the father and paternal grandfather suffer from catarrh of the bladder
owing to hypertrophy of the prostate [prostats = uterus masculinus?], we will
have to grant inferiority of the urinary apparatus also, considering bedwetting
and albuminuria of the younger children at the same time, an inferiority which
like the others is of account in heredity.
There is a whole list of diseases which can be passed down by heredity,
which I can either omit or else mention briefly because they have little weight
for the material which is to be demonstrated in this chapter, or else can not be
verified by me with sufficient material. Such is the case in diabetes, the
hereditary significance of which is universally recognized. The assumption of an
inferiority of the pancreas, also, regarding its nervous connection with the
medulla oblongata would meet with only slight opposition. The principle
determination seems more important to me, namely that in diabetic families the
alimentary tract is inferior, a fact which may, in the individual family members,
not always come to light in the pancreas, but in various parts and with varying
strength in this apparatus and its appertaining portions, in the mouth, teeth,
pharynx, stomach, liver, intestine, and rectum. In this connection I consider it
necessary to call attention to the numerous gastrointestinal complaints found in
diabetic cases, and particularly, to the frequent lack of palatal reflex which
indicates a deep-seated change in the whole alimentary tract. The connections
between diabetes and obesity, gout and formation of gallstones, and the
alternating appearance of these diseases in individual families can only rest on
the common foundation of inferiority of the gastrointestinal apparatus. Other
groupings, such as tuberculosis, disease of the vessels, skin affections, renal
changes, Basedow's disease neuroses, which are often found in diabetic subjects,
we shall regard as an expression of the simultaneous inferiority of a second
organ, which may be more or less burdened by the diabetic disturbance of
metabolism.
For example in his thirteenth year, O. C. became ill with severe diabetes. In
his early childhood up until his fifth year he suffered from involuntary

defecation, later from constipation and diarrhea. In his twelfth year severe
furunculosis set in, which aroused suspicions of diabetes. The father suffered
from gallstones in his youth, was inclined to obesity, and has for many years
been tormented by stubborn constipation. The mother shows numerous
recurrences of urticaria. A sister has hysteria. The analysis of the case follows
from the previous one. The inferiority of the intestinal apparatus comes from the
paternal side, which is distinguished everywhere by obesity. To this the mother
adds the inferior skin, which furnishes the ground for furunculosis. Not one of
the four members of the family shows a palatal reflex and the pharyngeal reflex
can only be obtained with difficulty.
A theory of diabetes must rest on the acceptance of an inferior pancreas.
The deficient pathologic reports in this disease make for a preponderating
functional inferiority, which might make itself felt in anomalies of secretion. Yet
at times a morphologic inferiority (of the parenchyma, abnormal smallness of the
islands of Langerhans) can be definitely proved. Thirdly the inferiority may be
situated in the nerve connections of the pancreas.
Case of Dr. G.: The father suffered from exophthalmic goiter. The son has
been afflicted since his childhood with severe diabetes. Thyroid gland intact.
Here we find inferiority of two organs at the same time, without being able to
say anything about their mutual influence. This case requires us not so much to
connect exclusively the sugar secretion with the thyroid in the not at all rare
glycosuria in cases of exophthalmic goiter, but rather to accept a simultaneous
inferiority of the pancreas.
In regard to obesity, I must emphasize at this point that it has been
emphatically proved to be hereditary. This, as well as its connection with other
diseases, namely with simultaneous inferiority of other organs, is sufficiently
well known.
Diseases of the lymphatic glands are not considered hereditary as far as I
know. The reason for this is in the following: As soon as tuberculosis has been
determined in an organ, in many cases all further interest seems at once to die
out in the investigator or else is directed to the modes and means of spreading
the infection. We are however interested above all in the fact that tuberculosis
may attack every inferior organ under certain conditions. The inferiority of the
lymphatic glands, which is surely of the greatest importance in the further
advance of tuberculosis, is inborn and hereditary. Two cases will serve as
support for this view.
I. Alfred B. in his sixteenth year became ill with numerous swellings of
lymphatic glands of the neck, all of which showed softened, puslike,
disintegrated material and which healed with the well-known scrofulous scars.

Neither the patient nor any one else in the family showed signs of tuberculosis.
But the mother in her fifteenth year had also had swellings of the lymphatic
glands of the neck and showed a few scrofulous scars.
II. Frieda H., fifteen years old, had always been well up to the winter of
1905. At that time she suffered from countless tumors of the lymphatic glands
which particularly filled out and caused the supraclavicular depressions to bulge.
To this pleuritis on the left side, and later, swellings of the lymphatic glands
under the left axilla were added. Her parents and brothers and sisters are healthy,
and have never suffered from swellings of the lymphatic glands. But an uncle on
the mother's side did have them. The patient's older sister has a nevus
pigmentosus (see previously) in the left supraclavicular hollow. The mother also.
In such cases we can only speak of inherited inferiority of the lymphatic
glands, not of hereditary tuberculosis. Following this conception we find
ourselves forced to draw the following important conclusions, which have a
bearing on tuberculosis as well as on all other infectious diseases.
1. All infections which may be overcome by the natural protective power of
the organism threaten most of all that organ which has least of this protective
power and which in the majority of cases is the inferior organ.
2. In tuberculosis especially a therapeutic result is only to be hoped for in so
far as it is possible to promote the inferior organ far enough for it by its own
strength to overcome the infection. As far as therapy with sera is concerned, the
greater chances fall to active immunization. Only in passive immunization can
individual parasites remain viable, and the inferior organ again falls a sacrifice to
the next spread of infective material.
We do not wish to close this chapter without taking into consideration the
question of carcinoma in so far as it belongs here. In this it is of little importance
whether we pursue the question according to the parasitic or non-parasitic
etiology. We only remove the etiologic moment a layer deeper. Carcinoma can
only be developed in an inferior organ. Further conditions are unknown so far. A
list of facts supports our conception which is most closely allied to Billroth's
work on carcinomatous predisposition. There is also the development of
carcinoma in the previous history of the diseases of the organ. The present
conception regards previous diseases as of importance etiologically; we,
however, according to our discussions consider them as of historic importance.
All the changes of the organs in the anamnesis of the carcinoma, whether of
catarrhal, inflammatoryinfectious nature, of hypertrophic or atrophic character,
all prove this organ to be primarily inferior. I have spoken of that in this chapter.
Furthermore I call attention to the remarkable variability and growth energy of
carcinoma cells, which reveal a capacity similar to embryonic growth. Of the

same sort is the condition of giant cells and also embryologic tissue. I have
already emphasized the significance of nevus. I consider its relation to inferiority
to be quite definite. Its relation to carcinoma has long been a well-known one.
Besides I can introduce here the whole Cohnhein argument and the collection of
illustrative cases connected with it, with the exception, that I have to drop the
idea of "scattered embryonic germs" and substitute in its place organ inferiority,
with its very nearly embryonic character. The hereditary significance of
carcinoma also I think can be proved, to be sure, in another sense from that
which other authors give it. The inferiority of the organ, not the carcinoma, may
be inherited. There are other things required for the origin of a carcinoma. The
inferiority of the organ can however be proved from the geneaology.
Mrs. A. B. was taken sick in her fifty-eighth year with carcinoma of the left
breast. Her daughter, Mrs. L. T., showed deficient development of the nipples on
both sides and was incapable of suckling in spite of all efforts. As a striking
feature, note that a fairly thick circle of hair surrounds both nipples, a condition
which reminds us of the hairiness in spina bifida, another morphologic
inferiority.
Mrs. Theresa S. died in her forty-sixth year during an operation for
carcinoma of the uterus. Her son as well as her daughter's son suffered from
enuresis. The daughter has attacks of vomiting and diarrheal stools whenever she
is the slightest bit excited. This case offers proof only for those who accept with
me the law of manifold inferiority of organs and follow my view still further,
according to which enuresis as well as stomach and intestinal neuroses rest on
functional inferiority of the related organs.
The case of L. (see above) might also be quoted here. 
Case of J. K.: Sensibility to pressure in the gastric region, radiating pains to the
left as far as the region of the left shoulder blade, heightened spontaneous pains
after taking nourishment, vomiting. A pale person, a cook. No palatal reflex,
pharyngeal reflex positive. Father died of cancer of the stomach. Here also the
inheriting of an inferior organ reveals itself, but also the choice of profession,
influenced by the fundamental inferiority of the digestive organ, all of which is
to be discussed later (V), and the deficiency of the palatal reflex, a sign of the
inferiority of the alimentary tract which we still have to discuss (IV). 
Case of Mrs. Nadja J.: For four years she suffered from hysterical attacks, which
were accompanied by unconsciousness. On her right cheek, at the height of the
nostril and about 2 cm. sideways from the nose, we find a nevus pigmentosus.
Her mother had been operated on two months before for carcinoma of the left
superior maxilla. Here it is evidently a question of segmentary (of which more
later) inferiority in the region of the upper jaw, the presence of which in the

family is revealed in the mother and daughter. 
To conclude, I will briefly point out that the great majority of carcinomas are
found in such positions as have been specially named by Freud erogenous zones
and which he has brought into close connection with the neuroses. Such zones
are mouth, anus, breast, genital region, etc. The connection between neuroses
and inferior organs is discussed in another place. 
The other branches of the heredity theory may be classified in a similar manner.
I have myself found myomas in mother and daughter, and in sisters. If one holds
to the ideas already outlined the inferiority of organs can often be traced in the
genealogy. 
I pass over the whole list of diseases conceded to be hereditary, but must point
out briefly that in a great number of these, not only just in the center of the
disease but in the region of apparently healthy organs, trustworthy observers
have indicated changes of atrophic or hypertrophic nature. One can not challenge
such a report unconditionally. But it is in the nature of the thing that in an organ
inferiority subject to inheritance, not only do individual portions of the organ
predestined as a center of disease show the character of the inferiority, whether it
is pure or especially functional or morphological which last phenomenon is to be
considered as a reaction of the inferior material under the relatively greater vital
irritation, but also adjacent or more remote elements of the inferior organ. Now
there would be nothing more out of the way than to insist upon finding again all
the anomalies of the ancestors to the same extent in one of the descendants, in an
investigation on the nature and compass of heredity. Just as heredity can appear
at different parts of the organ, where it is found in the form of functional or
morphological inferiority, which gives footing for any sort of disease of a
parasitic or non-parasitic nature, so the fact has to be reckoned with that in later
life, under the influence of the manner of living, inferiority unconcealed or
revealed by illness, will not always be found. Perhaps it happens just as often
that in place of the expected inferiority, nothing abnormal or directly an excess,
or even an exaggerated peculiarity is found.

Chapter III Anamnestic Demonstration
In the above we have repeatedly thought of the difficulties which at times
stand in the way of classifying an organ as inferior. As we use it the idea of full
normality on the part of an organ is not at all the same thing as the term health
and for the following reasons. There may have been, either by reason of
appropriation of reserve growth power at the place of the inferiority itself or
more remote from it, in a second organ or in the nerve track, compensation,
which has hidden the deficiency, and even conceals it from the medical
investigator. Or else the inferiority reveals itself in one member of the family in
a place where there is little or no disturbance in the healthy functioning of the
organ. In another member the inferiority may appear as a disturbance of health.
Or else the favorableness of external conditions, public and private hygiene,
enable the individual burdened with an inferiority to escape dangers to health,
which present themselves at once when the social position, working time, home
or nourishment, become worse. To be sure here it is a question of a lesser degree
of inferiority. The higher degrees condition either incapacity for life or else are
actually hidden by the so-called "diseased" organ.
I wonder whether there are any criteria for distinguishing "healthy" organs
from inferior ones. We have already shown how the theory of heredity may
serve its as a clue. According to our conception an organ may be found to be
quite healthy, but inferior owing to its heredity. In such cases it is absolutely
necessary to get the history of youth, or perhaps, better still, the childhood
history of the organ, because at times it is possible to determine the inferiority
which escapes the perception the moment compensation sets in. As soon as the
inferiority of an organ comes into account, before compensation in early
childhood, it appears preponderatingly as a functional deficiency or as a
deficiency in functional control on the part of the child. Besides the diseases
from which the child has recovered, the anamnestic significance of which is
recognized, the same attention is due to the development of the sensory
functions and the vegetative organs, to learning to walk and talk, to the control
of childish errors. Even with very little material the significance of this
anamnesis in childhood seems determined. And in a special example of childish
fault, namely bedwetting, we will furnish at the close, proof of its significance
and a few illustrative cases given which show the relation to organ inferiority. If
we add the conception maintained in the discussion of problems of heredity, we
have, as further basis of investigation, the principle that a fault of childhood in

the inheritance, in parents, children, brothers and sisters of the patient should be
regarded as a suspicious sign of the inferiority of the organ relating to the fault.
The same is true of compensation or overcompensation which can he proved in
heredity.
Of the anomalies of childhood development which are found in the history
constipation, vomiting, blinking, squinting, stuttering, sucking the thumb, and
lack of control of the bowels or of the urine should be particularly emphasized.
Furthermore it seems of importance to emphasize the fact that the infantile trace
of organ inferiority frequently impresses itself as a functional failure of the organ
in domestication. This demands the control of organ activities and at the same
time the giving up of the pleasurable sensation which unhindered organ activity
brings. The limitation of organic sensory pleasure for the benefit of cultural
progress becomes the test of organic normality. At other times the domestication
[Hansemann] requires functioning under limiting conditions, with insufficient
air, unsuitable food, poor light. The harm which this does the child affects
primarily the inferior organs, which are not equal to such a strain on their
function. Deficient growth of bones, of the organs of respiration and circulation,
the digestive apparatus. the central nervous system, of the blood organ, are
caused thereby.
In other, more fortunately situated cases, a functionally superior formation
gets the patient out of difficulty. A particular viewpoint has taught me how often
a morphologic or functional deficiency of an organ is converted to a higher
development of that organ. The stuttering boy Demosthenes becomes the
greatest orator of Greece, and up to the present day we seldom find any such
heaping up of defects of speech and signs of degeneration of the mouth, as are
observed in orators, actors and singers.
The anamnestic significance of childish faults in neuroses has already been
emphasized, and accentuated in its full importance by Freud. It yet remains for
us here to refer to the tendency to greater sensory development, found in the
peripheral part of the inferior organ especially, portions of which are exposed
near the skin surface. In part this increased sensibility, the starting point of many
child-faults, surely comes from the impotence of the inferior organ which can
not of itself follow the safe pathway of cultural functioning; for it is the cause of
every organic activity, while the cultural organic function draws its strength
from repressed sensory pleasure. How closely this raising of the sensory
component is related to the embryonic nature of the inferior organ I can not
determine definitely. But it is true that the ensemble of phenomena of organ
inferiority is reflected on the psyche in such a manner, that its whole structure
has a peculiar impression. The psychical structure thus obtained becomes a

foundation for neuroses and psychoses.
Whereas scarcely a single case of neurosis is without such a history from
childhood, to which Freud has already made specific reference, I can only offer
scant material, aside from the illustrative cases following in the conclusion. Yet
in a number of cases, for instance in diabetic subjects, I could be sure, that since
earliest childhood, intestinal function was not what it should have been. I often
found constipation present, more rarely involuntary defecation. The frequency of
gastrointestinal disturbances in developed diabetes justifies the theory that this
disease depends upon a hereditary inferiority of the gastrointestinal apparatus,
which appears predominantly in the function of the related gland, the pancreas
and at times in the liver also. A few cases to justify this assumption.
Margit B. , 25 years old, complains of headache and chronic constipation.
Eight clays previously, as had often happened before following excitement, she
had an attack of diarrhea, which after two days changed to constipation. The
constipation has now lasted for six days. The patient feels miserable, suffers
from nausea, agitation, frequent attacks of fear and violent strangury. The patient
declares that she has been in the same condition several times before. The
examination gives us a relatively scanty result: the abdomen shows slight
meteorism; no sensitiveness to pressure, no rise of temperature. The analysis of
the urine is negative. The patient never had any spontaneous pains, no vomiting.
The internal organs are healthy. The lack of palatal reflex and of the abdominal
reflex is very striking. The pharyngeal reflex is weak, the conjunctivas reflex
normal. The anamnesis gives the solution. As a child the patient was very unruly
and had often suffered from headache and constipation. When she was fifteen
she had violent attacks of singultus. The patient lisps. The father died of
diabetes, one brother was an enuretic and suffered from this as well as
incontinence of the bowels till his twelfth year. One sister was unfortunate in her
marriage and at times has attacks of coma. From the analysis of this case we
would like to emphasize the hereditary organ inferiority in father, brother and
patient and the distinct indication of the early history, constipation in the patient,
incontinence of the bowel in the brother as well as lisping in talking, which
according to the report of the patient was particularly evident in childhood. The
condition of the patient, who accordingly shows a startling intestinal inferiority,
belongs, in the present day nomenclature in the realm of hysteria, the
development of which is however very slight. In the sister this side of the aspect
of the disease seems more clearly developed.
Richard v. R. , a healthy man of 30 years of age, suffered in his fifth and
sixth years from violent blinking. Later this very prevalent defect of childhood
vanished without leaving any traces. No eye diseases in the family. One brother,

Julius v. R. is a well known, very skilled painter, who told me that he had had
exceptionally sensitive eyes as a child, and especially, he had not been able to
stand a bright light. In his seventh year he had a lengthy attack of lymphatic
conjunctivitis. This case is interesting in two respects. It shows that an organ
inferiority may be present in a family without any particular disease. On the
other hand we find here the high degree of development of the inferior organ in
the eye of the artist.
Mrs. Elsa S. , 24 years old, suffered till late in her childhood from violent
blinking. One brother of this woman is myopic to a very high degree, the father
towards the end of his life was almost totally blind. Here also we find scattered
throughout the family, in different forms, the indications of inferiority.
Alexandra E. , 5 years old, is being treated for recurring catarrhal
conjunctivitis and blepharitis squamosa. For two years there has been
blepharospasm, lasting for some time and then disappearing for a long time,
appearing at intervals which have no time relation to the state of irritation of the
eyes. The mother had been operated on as a child for convergent strabismus, and
has astigmatism on both sides and a slight degree of myopia.

Chapter IV Morphologic Indications
Our consideration of the inferiority of organs places the beginnings of the
inferiority in the period of embryonic growth. Thus the significance of heredity
and "childish faults" is comprehensible in the widest sense of the word and their
connection clear. The determination of organic disease, heredity and childish
anomalies, makes possible a proof of organ inferiority in many cases, and in
other cases permits one at least to express a suspicion. A further diagnostic aid,
whose significance is connected with that of the other three, lies in the discovery
of morphologic arrest of development, malformation, "signs of degeneration"
which we have already designated everywhere as morphologic inferiorities.
The organ inferiority usually enforces itself genetically in the individual
and hinders embryonic or functionally related parts from fully developing.
Usually one can conclude an insufficiency in a second or third organ at the same
time, which seems comprehensible since the cause of organ inferiorities can be
referred to an extended deficiency of formative substance. Pathology reckons
with degeneration of the internal organs in certain cases. Outside of these cases
of disease we have found a peripheral expression of organ inferiority in childish
defects. If now a trace of this embryonic check comes to the outer portions of
the. body and reveals itself in this manner to the investigator this happens in the
form of the universally known signs of degeneration, about which there is to-day
a great number of observations and interpretations. Their value is not uniform.
As far as I can see, however, the conclusions which follow upon the nature of
the signs of degeneration, are entirely too general or else limit themselves to
emphasizing the degenerative tendency of the whole person, the inferiority of his
total organism, above all his psyche. This precipitancy has brought a great deal
of discredit to the theory of degeneration, and recently people have been trying
to prove statistically its indefensibility, in this form. To prove less would prove
more. What we can affirm with greater surety in regard to signs of degeneration,
is, that they represent the external traces of the organ inferiority, which may be
found in a similar manner in the whole organ or in single parts of it. If we add
besides that some of these external traces may fail in spite of organ inferiority,
that the degenerative tendency may extend to another organ, that the stigmata of
inferiority may belong to the internal organism or may consist of decrease of
function, and, as shall be pointed out later, of the related reflexes, we can
consider the limits of a "degeneration theory" as known today, as sufficiently
outlined.

The significance of the discoverable, external signs of degeneration is
undeniable in this outline. Their relation to the organ in question and the
necessity resulting from this of assuming further signs of inferiority in the whole
organ, appears to be sufficiently justified and will be illustrated in the following
by individual examples. The probability arises that in such cases there had not
been enough formative material to finish the organic development in complete
harmony and with sufficient tectonic. And the suspicion can quite rightly be
directed on the central portions of the organ, and one can ask whether the deeper
or related parts have remained morphologically or functionally backward, in
which case the functional deficiency would be considered in general the lowest
grade of primary organic check, the morphologic hypoplasias or aplasias as the
highest degree. The injuries growing on thus weakened ground cannot, to be
sure, be graduated in a like manner, in the first place, because functional and
morphological deficiencies may combine in different degrees, in the second
place, because exogenous disadvantages, such as infection, determine in a
marked degree the severity of the disease. To this is added the fact, to which we
have already referred several times, that under favorable external circumstances,
or as a result of compensation, the inferiority of the organ may be hidden or even
overcome. As to functional checks we must expect above all, in addition to
motor weakness, scanty development and failing of reflex actions, microreflexes,
and quantitative as well as qualitative changes in glandular secretions.
The frequent report of external signs of degeneration in apparently normal
people shows us then nothing at all surprising from this point of view. The
external stigma can, we think--by itself--signify a unique deficiency in the
development of the organ. But even when the related organs participate in the
inferiority the deficiency, in so far as it is compensated to a lesser degree or
appears compensated by means of other aids, can be endured fairly well. Only
one must not conclude from this, as individual authors sometimes do, that one
should deny a value of orientation to the signs of degeneration. On the contrary!
The physician will learn to deduce from them the lesser capability of resisting of
the hitherto still functionally capable organs, and to guard against sudden
injuries. And just as in the discussion of functional inferiority we must
emphasize here too, how often organs of slight inferiority may develop greater
functional capacity than normal organs. The cause lies its the compulsion of a
constant training in the capacity for adaptation and variability often adhering to
inferior organs and surely also in the development of the related nervous and
psychical complexes heightened by inner attention and mental concentration
upon the weaker organ. The last named compensatory development of the nerve
track comprises also, among other things, the development of reflexes, of a

special protective arrangement and mobilization of the organ.
This is not the place to give an extended representation of signs of
degeneration as I see them, as peripheral stigmata of organ inferiority. My own
collection of illustrative cases would be too slight. Literature at all events gives
as sufficient authority for this conception. I shall only refer to a few of the most
important stigmata as they presented themselves to me in connection with organ
inferiority. Congenital or hereditary abnormal development of the eyes, the
eyelids, pigmentary anomalies of the iris (Fuchs), lamellar cataract, congenital
constriction of one palpebral fissure, myopia, hypermetropia, strabismus are
often found in people who contract other affections of the eye, retinitis,
choroiditis, detachment of the retina. Functional defects are often accompanied
by morphologic anomalies. An affection in one eye is frequently followed by
another in the other eye, the heredity of anomalies of the visual apparatus and of
affections of the eye is undoubted. The early history is almost always faulty.
Very striking is the fact that so many suckling infants show strabismus for a
shorter or longer time, and some time after birth. It would not be surprising, in
cases of striking functional or artistic capacity of the eyes, to find functional or
morphologic anomalies of the outer eye in the individual or in his family.
A similar thing may be asserted of the affections of the auditory apparatus
in connection with anomalies of the outer ear. Here also heredity plays a
notorious part, and can be considered a certainty, for example in regard to
deafmutism and otosclerosis. At all events, from my point of view only, it is the
inheritance of an organ inferiority which manifests itself in different forms and
in different places. This was the case in the S. family, which I have had under
observation, in which three of the children suffered from otosclerosis while the
other two showed marked musical ability. The last may be explained by the
oftrepeated reference to the overcompensation in an inferior organ. One of the
brothers had a frequently recurring herpes of the auricle, which, as soon as I saw
him, took on importance as an indication of organ inferiority (of the mouth,
nose, urinary or sexual organs). Musicians frequently suffer from ear affections,
or else have suffered from such in their childhood. Beethoven is the classic
example. Mozart is supposed to have had a deformed ear. Veterinary surgeons
have abundant opportunity to prove affections of the ear in dogs with hanging
ears.
In a like manner the stigmata of the nose, hypertrophy of the mucous
membrane, polypi, adenoid growths and the anomalies of the mouth, tongue,
teeth, of the hard and soft palate, of the tonsils, are connected with inferiorities
of the respiratory apparatus and the inclination to disease in the same. Individual
authors have, without going into the details of the connection, emphasized this

relation. Perhaps the opinion most respected is that in which is stressed the
connection between the anomalies of the nose and bronchial asthma, and
between adenoid growths or hypertrophy of the tonsils with a lesser degree of
development of the thorax and the lungs. I do not need to explain minutely that
primarily only the condition of coordination is admitted; but later when the
function or the hygiene of deeper lying parts of the breathing organs are
encroached upon by certain conditions of growth, the peripheral stigmata also
appear to be etiologically conditioned. Deviations of the septum, arrests of
development in the formation of the mouth such as cleft palate; long frenulum
linguae, poor teeth, anomalies of the teeth, inferior, easily bleeding gums, and a
high palate are often the visible expression of an inferiority in the respiratory
tract, which does not always of course appear as a special disease form. Heredity
and childish anomalies are however often perceivable, among the latter of which
are particularly, stuttering, sucking of the thumb, sucking the lips and all sorts of
defects of speech. Likewise with such children catarrh of the air passages, false
croup and sore throats are often found as Gutzmann and others have already
pointed out. An accumulation of these peripheral stigmata is not rare. In
anticipation I must say that the palatal reflex also very often undergoes changes
in which it shows itself as lacking, very weak, or increased, whereas the
pharyngeal reflex according to my examinations shows this connection more
rarely. In a like manner these stigmata are found very noticeably in neuroses,
with singers, speakers, and in connection with severe diseases of the respiratory
tract, be it in the patient examined or among his relatives, and along this line I
might especially emphasize pulmonary tuberculosis.
Miss L . shows on her upper lip, in the position of the left embryonic palatal
cleft, a small ridge-shaped thickening which seems to be colored bluish by
dilated blood vessels. The ridge is congenital. The anamnesis tells us that the
young lady often suffers from laryngeal catarrh and bronchitis, whereas the
father, mother, and one brother died of pulmonary tuberculosis. Palatal reflex
lacking. The patient shows slight neuropathic characteristics, which have to do
with the digestive tract, and often suffers from palpitation of the heart,
sleeplessness and lack of appetite. She is an excellent singer (soprano). One
sister has attacks of anxiety and at 42 years of age still shows a defect in speech
in the form of lisping. In regard to this case I should only like to emphasize that
to me the impression of the connection between a beautiful singing voice and the
organ inferiority which I have outlined is a definite one, and that I have
considerable material to support it.
Marie B ., 12 years old, came under medical supervision on account of
stuttering and lisping. Her father died of pulmonary tuberculosis. As a child the

brother stuttered also, and was at that time being treated for cervical vertebral
caries. Mother apparently healthy. The patient shows strikingly poor teeth,
hypertrophy of the mucous membrane of the nose and adenoids. Progress at
school poor. Palatal reflex deficient in the patient and her brother.
Josef S ., 50 years old, suffers from follicular tonsillitis which frequently
recurs. Since his fifth year, the patient has had numerous attacks of bronchial
asthma, against which he has hitherto fought in vain. Polypi of the mucous
membrane in the nose, adenoids and hypertrophic tonsils had been removed by
operation. Of the other stigmata only prognathism was found. In his seventh year
the patient had pneumonia and costal pleurisy. The thorax of this strikingly large
man is narrow and only slightly arched. At the height of the posterior, left-hand
end of the lung there is an angioma as big as a hemp seed. The patient's father
had suffered from nasal polypus and once had pneumonia. A brother who also
showed prognathism died of pneumonia. The patient's twelve-year-old daughter
recently had pneumonia and costal pleurisy, a son had to he tracheotomized in
the course of an attack of diphtheria, a second son was operated on a short while
ago for hypertrophy of the tonsils. The analysis of this case accordingly shows as
a foundation for asthma, a very well substantiated hereditary inferiority of the
respiratory apparatus, which also expresses itself peripherally in individual
members of the family in the appearance of congenital stigmata. I should like
also to add briefly that just as in the case of nevus a well-deserved place should
be accorded to telangiectasis and angiomas in the ensemble of organ inferiority.
Years ago some one declared that there was a connection between angiomas of
the skin and carcinomas of the internal organs. The connection is this, namely,
that an organ inferiority is the basis of them both. The author in question went
too far. The complete denial, however, with which his statements were met
seems unjustifiable to us. The position of the nevi, telangiectasis, angiomas, in
short all the congenital anomalies in the question of inferiority will be touched
upon again at the end of this chapter.
In the above I have tried to picture the connection between the stigmata of
the mouth and the inferiority of the respiratory apparatus. But there is no doubt
that they are in just as close connection with the inferiority of the digestive
apparatus; the common peripheral orifice of two organs will preserve the power
of one of the two, or of both. My experience now leads me to think that all these
stigmata of the oral portions may often serve as clues for the discovery of
inferiorities of individual components of the gastrointestinal apparatus, just as is
frequently found in diseases of related sections of organs. This study of the
matter cannot give a complete picture of the relation. It must however be pointed
out that diseases such as appendicitis, diabetes, obesity, alcoholism, ulcus

rotundum, diseases of the liver, according to my experience belong in this
outline, and that the same argument must hold for carcinomata and tumors of the
nutritive tract. A few of these connections have already become truisms in
medicine, even if their significance, in my opinion, is incomplete and must first
be borrowed from the inferiority theory. The same is true of the connection
between bad teeth and gastrointestinal disturbances, as the relation between
angina and appendicitis, recently stressed by Krets, which are regarded as
diseases coordinated in one inferior organ. A coated tongue likewise has
significance in gastrointestinal affections.
Hernias and stigmata which are grouped about the anus, such as
hemorrhoids, fissures, prolapse, have the same significance, the connection of
which with organ inferiority may often be proved in oral stigmas, childish
defects, reflex anomalies, and neuroses in the family, the connection of which
with diseases in the stigmatized organ often may be recognized in the family, at
least, in the above mentioned manner.
Albert F ., 32 years old, singer of comic opera songs, acquired lues four
years ago and since then has been troubled by hypochondriacal moods. His
father suffered for many years from gallstone colic, his mother died of
carcinoma of the stomach. The patient had always been well before and once
only was in the care of a specialist on account of a "singer's nodule." At present
there is a herpes on the upper lip, which, as the patient says, often recurs. Palatal
reflex lacking, pharyngeal reflex diminished. All the patient's incisor teeth are
crooked, two upper incisors lacking. These tooth anomalies must be considered
as external signs of degeneration, corresponding to an inferiority of the digestive
tract in the family; father and mother suffered from severe diseases of this
apparatus. The significance of the herpes has already been touched upon, the
pharyngeal reflex anomalies point to the similar inferiority of the respiratory
apparatus, to which is added as further evidence of inferiority, singer's nodule
and deficient palatal reflex. The patient's profession leads us to the same
conclusion. We must regard the " singer's nodule " as analogous to many other
anomalies in its role as stigma, which betrays to us the inferior organ, the same
organ which forces its possessor into the profession of a singer or speaker.
The following case seems typical to me: Ignaz C., a merchant 50 years old,
has for many years suffered from obstinate constipation. He belongs to a
corpulent family in which, as it happens, constipation is not predominant. Ever
since his youth the patient has been bothered by anal fissures, which have
hitherto defied all conservative treatment. One son showed epignathy, and died
when he was fifteen in diabetic coma. The childhood anamnesis of the son
showed incontinentia alvi up to his fifth year and lisping as a defect in speech. In

the father there is deficient palatal reflex, the same in the daughter, who is ill
with severe hysteria and who shows a shortening of the upper lip. In this case we
find in addition to oral stigmas in the son and daughter, with which this chapter
deals, connections, which are mentioned quite often in works on this subject, but
which have not been explained. We mean the relation of diabetes to obesity, to
neurosis and to dental defects. An inferiority of the nutritive apparatus may lie at
the bottom of all three, which I have often proved to my own satisfaction, and
which in the first case compensates within itself, and appears to be
overcompensated and in the second case (of which more later) involves the
related nerve track and manifests itself undisguised only in the third case. The
deficient palatal reflex found with it suggests to us an inexact development of
the related reflex apparatus, a check which can be further indicated in diabetes
by a deficiency in the patellar reflex.
The peripheral stigmata do not have to be of a particular sort at all. Any
other conclusion but that of inferiority of the nutritive tract is, as has already
been emphasized, inadmissible, and complete knowledge can only be won from
the great number of symptoms of inferiority, which in general is not so very
difficult. The following case is an example.
Kathe H ., 24 years old, lost almost all the teeth in her upper jaw five years
ago, and now uses a set of false teeth. The patient has come under our care on
account of loss of appetite, which has already lasted for 6 months. There are
neither spontaneous pains nor sensibility to pressure. During the six month
period of want of appetite, vomiting has occurred three times, and this also
without pain preceding. The patient says that once, four years ago, she vomited
blood. As a child she suffered with frequent vomiting and at times would faint
from nausea. The present sickness is supposed to he related to violent
excitement. The report on the internal organs was negative. From the
symptontatology of this want of appetite we must still emphasize a particular
distaste for meat. The emaciation during the sickness is given as a loss of weight
of about 6 lbs. Palatal and pharyngeal reflexes were heightened. The case had
the appearance of a gastroneurosis, and ran along with slight improvement till
suddenly, two months later, intestinal colic, violent vomiting, and intense
sensibility to pressure in the region of the appendix set in with fever. After the
diseased appendix was removed by operation, there was complete recovery.
Now there is vomiting only at times and in conjunction with migraine.
The analysis again shows us the peripheral findings, reflex anomalies of the
palate, such as I hate-! occasionally found in ulcus rotundum and
appendicitisusually heightening, rarely deficiency, in the palatal reflexes, the
anamnesis reaching into early childhood and--a fact which explains the relative

rarity of the case-disease in different parts, in the teeth, the stomach, the
appendix. In the literature we find references to gastric hemorrhages in
appendicitis, which, as in the above case, in which the periods of sickness were
separated, we must lead back to the unity of a gastrointestinal inferiority. But the
connection of neurosis also with appendicitis makes this case remarkable. The
anamnesis at least portrays childish hysteria and the loss of appetite preceding
the appendicitis looks like a neurosis. The distaste for meat is very striking, a
sort of psychical defense of the inferior organ, which we also recognize from the
symptomatology of carcinoma of the stomach, another disease on the organ
inferiority basis. Here I should like to emphasize the fact that this psychical
defense arises from a compensation in the central nervous system, which may be
put on a level with the increased palatal reflex.
In general the dental formation and its deficiency is an important index of
the inferiority of the nutritive tract. Even in rachitic children the coincidence of
poor or late dentition and gastrointestinal disturbances is a fact, the pursuit of
which promises interesting results. In connection with this I shall only mention
the frequently occurring obesity, which seems to me to be a result of the
overcompensation of the inferior stomach, intestine and its dependencies, and
not only in rachitic children but in grown-ups as well. I have repeatedly found in
higher degrees of adiposity all the indications such as I should expect in
intestinal inferiority or at least various signs of it. The same is true in heredity
and in the corresponding stigmas in heredity, or diseases, which had occurred in
the gastrointestinal tract. Likewise constipation or involuntary evacuation of the
bowels in early childhood. In my small collection of cases illustrative of diabetes
there is a great deal of material touching this, for the connection between
diabetes and obesity is well known on all sides. Furthermore one can also
frequently find palatal reflex anomalies which I shall discuss later.
The following case shows many of the connections of which I have spoken:
Friederike U., 6 years old, a child of healthy parents-father is obese and belongs
to a family inclined to adiposity--fell ill while out in the country with often
recurring diarrhea, accompanied by violent pain. In her second year the patient
had had a long drawn out attack of intestinal catarrh. She was being treated by a
dentist for prognathism which only appeared in the family in one other case, in
the eldest, her eleven-year-old sister, when again, with colic, the intestinal
affection now under discussion revealed itself as appendicitis, which the
operation proved to exist. Two years ago she had an operation for adenoids and
still speaks nasally and with a thick tongue. The palatal reflex in this child as
well as in both her sisters was excessively increased. Later on I learned that the
father, who had always been a healthy man, had suffered until puberty from

nocturnal enuresis and involuntary defecation just as had several of his now very
corpulent brothers and sisters. The patient's older sister had suffered from
earliest childhood from constipation and promptly shows loss of appetite after
excitement at home or at school. She is a nervous child and frequently suffers
from headache, and at times complains of colic, without causing a suspicion of
appendicitis to be justified. Anal fissures and sciatic pains often occur and
vanish after a short time. The second sister is healthy. 
The analysis of this case is simple after what I have said. I must add though, how
closely related appendicitis and the so-called pseudo-appendicitis are, a fact
which I can prove from other cases. It is: the same relation as that existing
between neuroses of the stomach and, say, ulcus ventriculi. Both are at times
found in one family, and can even pass into each other in individual cases. The
proof of the inferior ground is however always found in the way I have
suggested. 
At the close of the chapter I must mention a phenomenon which apparently does
not fit into the scheme hitherto outlined. For my assumption is to establish the
meaning of external stigmata as signs of the inferiority of the related organ. Now
there are a great number of external stigmata in which perhaps the acceptance
of an inferiority of the organ to which they belong, the skin, might be proved but
which, however, unquestionably show a closer relation to their segmentally
related internal organs, so that their presence shows an inferiority of the
segment, a "segmental insufficiency." 
I have often referred to them in the previous pages. As far as I can lay stress on
their part, it is a question of nevi of all sorts, of angiomas of the skin, of
externally visible telangiectasis and of neurofibromas. Their hereditary
occurrence can scarcely be doubted. The significance of an occasional
transformation of a nevus to a carcinoma has already been emphasized in my
remarks on the causation of carcinomata on the basis of the inferiority theory.1
Furthermore I must introduce Virchow's discussions of the fissural angiotna as
fetal arrest of development and perceive in them a stage in my conception of the
indications of segmental inferiority. One can find an abundance of material in
the literature which may be interpreted according to my views. I must however
put off this fascinating task for some later time. I can not dwell upon the theories
of Head either, the connection of which with the conception under discussion
becomes clear at once if one accepts with me segmental disease, for which the
ground is prepared by segmental inferiority. 
I shall now introduce a few striking facts which one can very often find in
following carefully the ideas which I have sketched here. I must emphasize first
of all that nevi in pulmonary tuberculosis, in the patient or his family, are

uncommonly frequent. They are situated in the most varied places on the thorax,
on the healthy side, on the diseased side, and are frequently as high up as the
zone of the disease or even somewhat higher. One often finds cases like the
following: 
Wladimir T., 23 years old, a student, has complained for two months of a cough
and pressure in his chest, perspires a great deal at night and declares that he has
grown very thin. The thorax is only slightly arched, greatest circumference in
this man of medium size is 82 cm. Pulmonary sound RHO somewhat retracted.
Auscultation shows RHO to RHM soft vesicular rattling in inspiration, and the
same, only not as loud, inward from the right shoulder blade. Teeth sound, palate
rather highly arched, palatal reflex very much heightened. If the soft palate is
touched, the uvula disappears without causing any particular inclination to
vomit. Over the middle of the right shoulder blade there is a nevus pigmentosus
and it is just about in the projection of the lower rim of the perceivable center of
disease. The patient's mother as a girl of 18 suffered from catarrh of the apex of
the lung and was finally cured after a long climatic treatment. She is now forty-
three years of age and has always been well since then. One of the patient's
brothers is now in a hospital at Davos for catarrh of the apex of the lung on the
right side. 
Johann K., 25 years old, a student, had spitting of blood 6 years ago. A little
while ago he fell ill of dry, left-sided pleuritis. Palatal reflex heightened. In the
thorax in back and in front there were scattered naevi. This is a very frequent
condition. 
Hans S., 5 years old, is being treated for intestinal autointoxication. Close up
under Poupart's ligament there is a nevus the size of a grain of hemp. In the same
place on the right his father who was once an enuretic has a testicle which did
not descend normally. 
I have already referred in the remarks on the carcinoma theory to the case of
Nadja J.--nevus on the right above the level of the nostril, and whose mother
suffered from carcinoma of the upper jaw on the left side. 
David K., 82 years old, before only suffered from constipation (intestinal
inferiority) and occasional attacks of colic in the region of the gallbladder. For a
year there has been a high degree of emaciation and loss of appetite. After
repeated tests the palatal and pharyngeal reflexes were found to be wanting. In
the region of the gallbladder one can feel a roundish hard tumor about the size of
a walnut. The liver is enlarged, a rough structure and painful upon pressure.
There is 5 per cent. sugar, no acetone, no diacetic acid in the urine, the quantity
of which has increased. Somnolence after a few days, from which the patient
again recovered, then increasing jaundice and after a month, death. Diagnosis:

carcinoma of the gallbladder. A little beneath and to the side from the tumor is a
nevus pigmentosus as big as a lentil and a small skin hemangioma. Two of the
patient's daughters show the above mentioned stigmata of organ inferiority,
epignathism and faulty position of the upper incisor teeth and are burdened with
defects of speech. Similar conditions are not found in the parents. 
It would be easy to prove that the diseases of the thyroid gland also originate in
the form of an inferiority. We give the following case because of its relation to
segmental inferiority. 
Mrs. Rosalie G., 46 years old, has had since her youth a cystic struma of the size
of a walnut on the right side which has been punctured several times. On the
right in the throat and neck there are numerous pigmented nevi, only a few on
the left. The patient, who complains of long-standing hoarseness and frequent
coughs, shows greatly heightened palatal reflex. General adiposity. 
Josef Sch., a broker, 55 years old, complains of constipation and bleeding from
hemorrhoids. Complete absence of teeth since his twenty-fifth year. At the left
above the open inguinal ring there is a pigmented nevus. No hernia. His son,
Paul, 19 years old, has a defect in speech, and suffers from left-sided inguinal
hernia. 
Albert K., a private, 42 years old, complains of attacks of violent pains in the
region of the heart, "as though something were being distended," pains which
radiate into the left shoulder joint and into the left arm. The patient had always
been healthy. Syphilis is denied, mild drinking admitted. The patient's father was
a healthy man till an advanced age, the mother died at thirty-one of pericarditis.
Diagnosis: angina pectoris as a result of arteriosclerosis. On the level of the apex
of the heart there are numerous telangiectases, which encircle the front left side
of the thorax like a ribbon. On the back, at the height of the angulus scapula:, on
the left and the right there are several nevi. 
Anton E., a mechanic, 48 years old, had always been well. His father, a well-
known physician, died at 62 of a gastric hemorrhage. In the region of the
stomach, about a finger's breadth beneath the edge of the thorax, there is an
angioma as big as a grain of hemp, and at the same level to the right there are
two smaller angiomata. 
Wolfgang St., manufacturer, 56 years old, is suffering from beginning
arteriosclerosis. In the thirties he lost most of the teeth in his upper jaw, and has
worn a false set since then. Palatal reflex in the patient as well as in his two sons
is greatly heightened. Patient's father died of pneumonia, his mother of
carcinoma of the stomach. Just under the edge of the thorax about on a vertical
line through the left nipple there is pigmented nevus as big as a pea. On the left
half of the back there are two little neurofibromata, the larger about the size of a

pea, a finger's breadth under the angle of the scapula, the smaller one under the
scapular spine. After our discussion the idea seems justified that of the two
neurofibromata the lower one is an inheritance from the mother, the upper one
from the father. 
Whoever knew the composer Bruckner will remember that he had a nevus under
the zygomatic arch at the height of the lobule of the ear. In this case I might also
discover an expression of the inferiority of hearing, which has developed in
segmental arrangement. Bruckner as well as apparently all great composers has
attained such a remarkable artistic height in striving to conquer the auditory
inferiority and transforming it into inventive, creative hearing. 
Before we close this chapter, we wish in a certain degree to make the connection
with the results of pathology already at hand. As I have already pointed out
several times Schick and Sorgo have indicated the connection between certain
definite modifications of mammary glands and pulmonary tuberculosis. This
condition as well as Frankel's emphasis on the narrowness of the chest and
Rothschild's on the angle of the sternum in pulmonary tuberculosis seem to me,
even if not as distinct as my reports, to be founded on the character of segmental
inferiority. Only in these cases a segment, not yet diseased, may declare its
inferiority, whereas the disease is localized in an adjoining, or nearby segment. I
myself have seen one-sided or two-sided diminution of the areola, but also have
seen retraction of the mamillae in women who have had to stop nursing because
of lack of milk. I have also seen lack of milk when the areola was hairy (in the
case of Mrs. Lina T., whose mother died of carcinoma of the nipple).
1 As I learn from a report at the time of writing my study, it seems that my
conception of carcinoma is very like that of Borst (Wurzburger Alhandlungen).
Chapter V Reflex Anomalies As Indications of Inferiority
We have already often emphasized the fact that inferiority does not make
itself felt under all conditions. I should like to add besides that the determination
of a deficiency becomes possible, and attracts our attention, only when the
inferiority comes into prominence in some shortcoming of a function, in a failure
in execution. For it is at this point first, whether during good health or in the
course of disease, that it becomes perceptible and forces us to a consideration of
the circumstances. Whatever we can expect from the nature of the matter, from
defect phenomena, will appear as motor insufficiency, as deficient production of
related glandular secretions and above all, as more inadequate development or
lack of reflex actions of all sorts, but also as the opposite of this, such things as
motor over-activity, as hypersecretion and as increase in the reflexes.

Virchow's hypoplasia of the vascular system might be considered as a prize
case of motor weakness. We meet with deficient production, for example, in
certain diseases of the thyroid gland or in chlorosis (Kahane). We wish to direct
our attention at this point particularly to the deficiency and the exaggeration of
reflexes, particularly the reflexes of the mucous membranes, because there is a
certain amount of material available for this, and its coincidence with other
tokens of inferiority seems warranted to me. Thus it happens that the state of
these anomalies of reflexes is wonderfully fitted to disclose an organ inferiority.
The following investigation by no means extends to the great number of
well-known skin and mucous membrane reflexes. I had to be satisfied with
putting only a minority through a systematic examination, and of these shall
emphasize only the palatal and conjunctival reflexes. First, however, we must
touch upon a class of reflexes whose presence escapes immediate recognition
but can scarcely be denied. There is no doubt, that in the inner part of the organs,
particularly from the tubular formation of the mucous membrane out, reflex
actions might perhaps be incited at every point, and by all sorts of stimulation,
reflex actions which are of the utmost importance for the continuation of
secretion and excretion. If I may draw conclusions from the analogy with the
phenomena to be mentioned later, it seems certain to me that certain diseases,
such as, for example, cholelithiasis, nephrolithiasis, cylindruria, Curschmann's
spirals, are connected with a decreased reflex capacity in the related part of the
organ, without perhaps being exclusively determined by it. 
The lack of palatal and conjunctival reflexes is an occurrence well known to all
but which has hitherto played a small role in medicine. Still less frequently
observation found increase in these reflexes. The universally conventional view,
which is connected with such cases particularly with weakening, consists mostly
in the reference to its relation to hysteria, which is in turn questioned on other
sides. If, for simplicity's sake, we waive organic nerve affections, I must make
the declaration that the lack as well as the striking strengthening of these reflexes
should be considered as attributes of organ inferiority.
I offer the following as proof: (1) These reflex anomalies are found very
frequently in heredity, or else occur where diseases of the related organ can be
proved in the heredity; (2) they stand in the same relation to childish defects as
stigmata; (3) they are found in connection with stigmata of the oral region or
when such stigmata occur in the heredity; (4) they are found in connection with
diseases of the related organs or when such diseases exist in the family.
Before we take into consideration the proofs and references from the list of
illustrative cases, we must bring in a few details which deserve attention in later
examinations. Thus with regard to the testing of the reflexes. Authors leave no

doubt as to the connection between reflex activity and the psyche. A few things
should be added here. If, for example, one makes a test of the palatal reflexes
one can easily find that the results vary accordingly as the patient is influenced
by the test. Thus it can happen that a second examination by means of touching
the palate at the height of the insertion of the uvula results in a greater reaction--
the sense of a choking reflex--or a smaller one. In the first case we must suppose
that through the initial unsuspected tests which were made a feeling of nausea
arose in the patient which on second touching was ready to manifest itself. It is
clear that in this case we no longer have to do with the normally present reflex
activity in the soft palate, but with a psychically established and deepened
radiation, which at times is capable of heightening and is related to an affect
phenomenon. In this conclusion I am supported by the following results: the test
for vomiting reflex by touching the pharynx, or the back pharyngeal wall, is
often positive, whereas touching the soft palate gives no result; in these cases the
soft palate seems to be outside the reflex zone. This condition is found quite
often in children up to their second or third year. In addition to that, it struck me,
that in little children by touching the back pharyngeal wall there is no vomiting
reflex, but frequently coughing results, a fact which strengthens my conception
that reflex anomalies of the palate and pharynx, as well as stigmata in these parts
discussed before may also originate from an inferiority of the respiratory
apparatus. The spreading of the vomiting reflex zone to the soft palate may be
brought about by repeated tests or sudden contacts expected beforehand by the
patient, and the result is then no longer free from objections. My conception
derives further proof from the fairly frequent cases which show the vomiting
reflex even before touching the soft palate. Thus I could call forth an increased
vomiting reflex in a four-year-old girl when I put a thin little rod back of the
teeth, without touching the palate or the tongue, which was all the more striking,
as the child in consequence of a cleft of the hard palate showed a defect of the
central back portion of the soft palate. In three cases it was impossible for me
even to succeed in opening the mouth. The inspection was always denied with
laughing, anxiety and indications of choking movements. Two of the cases had
to do with cooks who had been in service in Vienna for some time and who were
not at all unintelligent. Injuries of the mouth, of which they might have been
somewhat ashamed, were not present. The third case was that of a cultured
woman who had been suffering from recurring abscesses of the tonsils for many
years. The incision had to be given up each time on account of the impossibility
of getting a probe or a knife into the patient's mouth. I found the same state of
affairs at times when no abscesses had formed. Two of the patient's sons acted
similarly which gave one the impression that the vomiting reflex zone had

extended to the eyes and was irritated by the very expectation of touching the
pharynx. The touching of the palate may occur once and without having the
person examined expect it, but in contrast to touching the back pharyngeal wall
it exhibits the more delicate reagent to the reflex activity of the pharynx.
Still easier to comprehend is the control of this reflex activity by the will.
And yet I think that a certain degree of heightened choking reflex can not be
completely checked by the will.
These reflections and the impression which I obtained from a great number
of nursing infants and little children,1 that the pharyngeal reflex is a product of
the psychomotor sphere in the post embryonic period, permit me to classify all
anomalies of the reflexes of the mucous membranes as defective functioning of
an inferior organ. The pure type of this deficient performance which shows a
strong relationship to the infantile anomalies, spoken of earlier, is the lack of the
reflex, while the increase is to be considered in the light of overcompensation.
The occurrences which lead to the heightening of the reflex are openly related to
inferior, but functionally capable nerve material, increase their energy and
influence over the reflex zones and thus attain the higher reflex technic. As we
shall show later, the inferior organ with its psychical superstructure almost
always is in the focus of its bearer's interest. It is the unsuccessful but indulged
organ which keeps the psyche in a state of continual irritation on account of
conscious or unconscious attention. Newly arriving stimuli-for the way to the
brain is usually undisturbed in spite of deficient reflexlittle by little come into a
realm of higher psychical tension, which grows greater the less motor reflexes
lead from it. This condition may last through the whole lifetime. Very frequently
however and evidently as a sort of compensation a heightening of reflex capacity
appears to take place in childhood, which bears witness in the same manner to
the fundamental inferiority of the related organ, and at times of the segment also.
As to the results of my investigations in regard to the palatal reflex, they fit
in very well with my former representations just as did the experiments with the
conjunctival reflex. We find a lack or a heightening of the palatal reflex in the
most varied diseases of the nutritive and respiratory tracts, above all in angina,
pulmonary tuberculosis, diseases of the nose and larynx and in certain
professions, in following which the compliance of an inferior or
overcompensated organ is necessary, as in singers, speakers and players of wind
instruments. In all these cases, I could be sure of a predominance of reflex
deficiency. The objection that there exists no coordination here, but an anomaly
conditioned by the disease, or the profession, I can set aside merely with
reference to the heredity of the reflex anomaly; the extraordinary or deficient
palatal reflex is almost always met with again in closely related members of the

family, and without having any connection between the anomaly and disease or
profession. But on the other hand my conception gives an explanation of the
fact, that so frequently members of the same family have the same disease or
repeatedly follow the same, usually artistic, profession. A third fact can not be
overlooked, namely, that the anomaly may be present, without being connected
with the disease or profession, and reflex capacity may appear normal in spite of
disease or profession, for reasons, which we have already introduced several
times, particularly that the inferiority of the organ may manifest itself in other
ways or at another point. Perhaps still more often is the connection between
palatal reflex anomalies and gastrointestinal diseases established. Above all it
seems to me that the lack of the palatal reflex, the rarely important heightening,
up to the disappearance of the uvula, is almost regularly connected with
hysterical manifestations of the gastrointestinal apparatus, and at times of the
respiratory tract. Hysterical eructation, vomiting, singultus, crying fits, aphonin,
the many-sided picture of intestinal and gastric neuroses almost always show
palatal reflex anomalies. If the ruling conception regards the lack of palatal
reflex as a ground for suspicions of hysteria, those who follow this concept are
right to a certain degree, but their opponents are just as much in the right
because, as we shall see later, the hysterical manifestations may take their
starting point from other inferior organs so that the oral zone then appears as
normal. As regards organic diseases, I could be sure that between appendicitis,
pseudo-appendicitis, ulcus rotundum, gallstone diseases, diabetes, carcinoma of
the gallbladder, chronic constipation, obesity, perhaps even chronic alcoholism,
and our reflex anomalies, the same connections had weight, as could be proved
between disease and childish defects, or between disease and stigma.
1 I am indebted to the kindness of Dr. Rie for a portion of this material.
I can not forbear to show at this point how great is the relationship between
reflex anomalies and childish defects. Both are functional anomalies of the
inferior organ which may last until an end is made by the compensatory
intervention of the central nervous system, the psyche. Furthermore the manner
of manifestation of many children's defects is nothing else than an unusually
continuing heightened reflex. This is the case in blepharospasm, more rarely
nystagmus, thumb sucking and lip sucking (see the sucking reflex), stuttering,
vomiting, enuresis, incontinentia alvi. All of these are aroused, not from the
outside, but from within and are under the impulse of the central nervous system.
They are transformed methods of function of the inferior organ, which come to
light in infantile errors as well as in the reflex anomalies and these obey the
compensating and overcompensating power of the portion of the psychomotor
sphere which has now attained super-value.

In the following I will trace the relationship of childish defects and reflex
anomalies to enuresis still further. I can scarcely expect a serious objection if I
place this affection among the number of functional inferiorities. The opinions of
individual authors who think that organic hypoplasias may be found in the
bladder or in the central nervous system, can change nothing in this conception,
and moreover, are in harmony with my ideas concerning external and internal
stigmata. Now in the symptomatology of enuresis there is a characterizing sign,
according to which a direct division into two forms was attempted: namely the
behavior of the sphincter in catheterization, which appears now as atony (lack of
reflex), again as strengthened tonicity, as a spasm (heightened reflex). In this
opposed behavior we can recognize the already familiar reflex anomalies of the
inferior organ and we would be in a position from this reflex anomaly
aloneenuresis, this childish defect, need not always appear in spite of inferiority
of the urinary apparatus-to infer the state of things, namely to surmise the
inferiority of the urinary apparatus or the sexual apparatus in the family.
If we have to do with reflex paralyses following upon organic nervous
diseases, we must not forget at the same time that according to the established
principles the organic disease is localized in the inferior channels. We must think
particularly of the phenomena of segmental inferiority, which surely plays a part
in tabes, in occupational diseases, writer's cramp, etc., in pseudohypertrophy and
Erb's disease.
The brother of a physician fell ill of tabes dorsalis, which for some time
manifested itself as atrophy of the optic nerve. The doctor himself and several of
his brothers and sisters had in their childhood suffered from blepharospasm. The
conditions might be similar in tabetic bladder and rectal disturbances, in ataxia,
girdle sensation, larynx and gastric crises, whereas in paresis a fundamentally
inferior brain may be surmised.
I should like to introduce the following case in regard to the significance of
the palatal reflex anomalies in connection with diseases of the air passages and
the nutritive tract.
Heinrich R ., merchant, 52 years old (already mentioned), has for many
years suffered from frequent tenesmus with diarrheal evacuation. Ten years
previously he had a violent attack of gallstones which was completely cured at
Karlsbad. One of the patient's brothers, a doctor, was operated on by Kehr for
the same affection. The mother suffered from enlargement of the liver. Palatal
reflex in the patient negative. His son, Herbert, sixteen years old had
appendicitis four years ago, which was completely cured after internal treatment.
At that time there was obstinate constipation. No palatal reflex, slight defect of
speech, slight degree of epignathia. One the patient's daughters has very

stubborn constipation. No palatal reflex. The youngest son, 11 years old, shows
epignathia to a slight degree, has a defect in speech like his brother, no palatal
reflex. In this case I wish to emphasize the inheriting of the lack of palatal reflex
and the fairly radical intestinal inferiority in the family which reveals itself in
different diseases, as well as in a decided tendency towards obesity.
Mrs. Amalie B ., 61 years old was, as a child, very weak and thin and is
supposed at times to have suffered from hemoptysis. Since her twentieth year
she has gained a great deal of weight in spite of continually practiced self-denial
in diet. No palatal reflex. Of her five sons, in three I could find the same lack of
palatal reflex, the fourth had died in diabetic coma. I never examined this one or
the fifth son. Nevertheless I point to my cases of diabetes in which also the
palatal reflex was wanting. The oldest son is apparently healthy, the second of
the three whom I examined is obese, inclines to constipation and is troubled by
recurring anal fissures and by anal eczema. The third was operated on a year ago
for appendicitis, after numerous feverish attacks in the region of the cecum had
been occurring for four years. With the operation came exudative pleuritis on the
right side and double infiltration into the apex of the lung, which turned out
favorably. Heredity of reflex anomalies such as in the first case, demonstrable
hereditary inferiorities of the nutritive and respiratory tract, and at the same time
variations in the diseases of the nutritive tract (appendicitis, diabetes, anal
fissures), and at times only adiposity are found in reviewing the family. In
addition to this we find at the same time inferiority of the respiratory tract, which
reveals itself in disease in the mother and one of the sons. Further on there will
be some facts in regard to the connection between palatal reflex anomalies and
pulmonary tuberculosis.
Kathe H . (see III), governess, 24 years old, was operated on 6 months ago
for appendicitis. Four years ago there was hematemesis. Teeth lacking in the
upper jaw, palatal reflex heightened.
In Friederike U. (see III) and both her sisters we also find heightening of
the palatal reflex up to the point of disappearance of the uvula, while in
Friederike there was appendicitis, prognathia, adenoid growth, defects of speech,
and in her oldest sister, prognathia, gastric neuroses and anal fissures.
Hugo R ., writer, 34 years old, was stricken at the beginning of his twentieth
year, with pulmonary tuberculosis which appeared rather serious and was
accompanied by frequent hemoptysis. After spending about two years at the
sanatorium at Alland, he took up his profession again three years ago much
improved and since then has been uninterruptedly active. He shows complete
lack of the palatal reflex. The patient comes from a family which has given us
several prominent actors (oral inferiority). His sister also, who died of

pulmonary tuberculosis, was active for a time as an actress.
Maria A ., 24 years old, a governess, is being treated for hemoptysis.
Leftsided infiltration into the apex. A sister also has for some time had
pulmonary tuberculosis which apparently ran a light course. In both of them
conjunctival and palatal reflexes are lacking. The patient suffered for some time
from frequent loud eructations and singultus and as a child vomited easily and
very often. Even at the present time she feels a provocation to vomit when she is
brushing her teeth. In spite of deficient palatal reflex sensation of a globus often
occurs as well as headaches. Individual members of the family, particularly the
father (civil engineer), show ability to draw (lack of conjunctival reflex,
inferiority of the organs of vision, psychical overcompensation). The lack of the
palatal reflex here is related not only to an inferiority of the respiratory
apparatus, the missing pharyngeal reflex is evidently connected with the
hysterical manifestations of the nutritive apparatus. I often find nausea as an
affect and inclination to vomit in children and older people connected with
deficient palatal reflex.
In order not to weary with enumerations and descriptions, I will only
present briefly a few more cases and will emphasize their characteristic features.
The analysis of each case is easy to make after what has gone before.
Therese M ., 27 years old, chambermaid, apex infiltration on the left side,
coughs a great deal, and has in the last 3 months become greatly emaciated and
suffers from night-sweats. Palatal reflex greatly heightened.
In this group belong the cases already mentioned in other connections
Johann K., 25 years old, a student, tuberculosis of the left superior lobe, dry
pleurisy on the left side, and hemoptysis 6 years ago, nevi pigmentosi on the
thorax. No palatal reflex. 
Fanny H., a teacher, 23 years old, began spitting of blood; apex infiltration on
the left side, constipation of long standing. The mother died of consumption, the
sister has a lung disease. The right half of the thorax is better developed than the
left. No palatal reflex, no pharyngeal reflex. The lack of the latter evidently has
to do with the constipation. 
Wladimir T., 23 years old, a student, has been coughing for two months;
resonance RHO contracted, and gentle rattling in inspiration which only
disappears at the spina scapulae. Nevus pigmentosus over the middle of the right
shoulder blade. In her youth, the mother had suffered from catarrh of the apex of
the lung, and a brother is being treated at Davos for infiltration into the apex of
the right lung. Heightened palatal reflex, and on touching the soft palate the
uvula disappears almost entirely. 
Further cases are the following: 

Berta Sp., 23 years old, a cook. Hemoptysis for the last two months; the patient
continued with her work. Infiltration of the left upper lobe of the lung. There is a
nevus pigmentosus in the region of the spinous process of the seventh cervical
vertebra. The teeth of the upper jaw have fallen out, while the lower incisor teeth
are horizontally notched. Chronic constipation. The father died young of
pulmonary phthisis. No palatal reflex. No pharyngeal reflex. 
Josephine Sch., 21 years old, is suffering from loss of appetite and frequent
vomiting. As a child she was chronically constipated and often vomited,
particularly when angry. Since puberty vomiting occurs regularly during her
period. In the last three years she has had, somewhat periodically, violent pains,
colic, in the ileocecal region. There is also great sensibility to pressure. The
appendix may be felt as a thickened cord. Diarrhea as reported rare, vomiting
latterly more frequent. Rales in the upper right superior lobe, night-sweats, no
palatal reflex, do pharyngeal reflex. 
Siegfried M., 33 years old, a merchant; apex infiltration on both aides, great
emaciation. No palatal reflex. 
Anna R., 28 years old, landlady, every year has several attacks of angina
tonsillaris. A brother died of tuberculosis, the father has emphysema. The patient
has sound lungs. There is a nevus pigmentosus over the left clavicle. One of the
patient's uncles on her father's side is a formidable orator, an obstructionist
speaker, who speaks very often in assemblies. The patient shows lack of palatal
reflex. Pharyngeal reflex normal. 
I have repeatedly referred to the fact that I have been obliged to consider
diabetes mellitus as well as most of the glycosurias as diseases of an inferior
nutritive apparatus, particularly of an inferior pancreas and liver. I once more
call attention to heredity in these affections, to the connection with intestinal
diseases in the patient and his relatives, to the appearance of psychoses and
neuroses in diabetic cases and members of their families, to external stigmata
and children's anomalies in the anatnnesis. I can add at this point, too, that from
a small number of cases I became convinced that the reflex capacity of the palate
in glycosuria and diabetes shows the same anomalies as in other diseases of the
inferior gastrointestinal tract; the palatal reflex has usually disappeared and this
defect must serve as a token of organ inferiority. The deficiency of the patellar
reflex in cases of diabetes has, to be sure, another significance, namely that of an
indication of the segmental inferiority. 
Here are the diabetic cases just as I have met with them recently 
David W., 25 years old, a student, suffered in his youth from obstinate
constipation. Four years ago his diabetes was discovered, during the
development of which a great deal of sugar was excreted, with petiodic

acetonuria and excretion of diabetic acid. Tolerance very slight. No further cases
of diabetes in the family. The father suffered from attacks which lasted for
months when he could not walk or speak. One sister suffered from a temporary
psychosis. The patient lisps very noticeably still. The patellar reflexes are greatly
diminished on both sides, and palatal and pharyngeal reflexes are lacking. 
Margit B., mentioned in II; constipation extending to her earliest childhood,
defects of speech, attacks of singultus in puberty, hysterical anxiety. No palatal
reflex and a very weak pharyngeal reflex. The father died of diabetes. A brother
suffered up to his twelfth year from incontinentia alvi, a sister had hysterical
attacks of unconsciousness. Here also we find the connection between reflex
anomalies and diabetes, neurosis and infantile defects, distributed at any rate
among the individual members of the family. 
Otto C., already mentioned. Died in diabetic coma. As a child had suffered
greatly from incontinentia alvi. His father has been constipated all his life. His
sister also suffered for a long time from constipation and fell ill very early with
violent hysteria. Both father and sister show lack of palatal reflex. 
Josef A., 37 years old, a furrier, complains of impotence and ejaculatio precox.
Examination shows a great deal of sugar in the urine. No palatal reflex. No
patellar reflex. 
Regina D., 38 years old, the wife of a lawyer, complains of pruritus vulvae and
many nervous troubles. A great deal of sugar and acetone in the urine. Patient's
father died in diabetic coma. Two sisters have hysterical' affections. In all three
sisters there is a lack of palatal and pharyngeal reflexes. Patellar reflex normal.
One sister sucked her thumb for a long time. 
Anton M., 40 years old, a caterer, shows a slight defect in speech and lacks
palatal reflex. Pharyngeal reflex present. Patient's mother has diabetes. 
David K., whom I mentioned earlier, belongs in this group. Carcinoma of the
gallbladder glycosuria. His difficulties began with loss of appetite and
emaciation two years before his death. No palatal and no pharyngeal reflex.
Patellar reflex not tried. Two daughters show epignathia; one of them suffers
from hysterical coughing and loss of appetite. 
As I have already stated, we almost always find lack of palatal reflex in people
who frequently have sore throats. I also found the same condition in a case of
herpes pharyngis in a man who had suffered for some time from flatulence and
from an umbilical hernia. The case of a hysterical patient, Dr. Heinrich O., in
whom there were indications of spina bifida sacralis and adenoid growths, seems
worthy of mention. The patient very often made a grunting noise and one day
presented himself with aphthae of the palate and pharynx. I also saw reflex
anomalies in several cases of ulcus rotundum and in relatives of these patients.

In chronic alcoholics one usually finds heightening, but also lack of the palatal
reflex. These anomalies are surely not to be considered as conditions resulting
from alcoholism. They show rather that chronic alcoholism is dependent upon an
organic cooperation as a foundation of an inferior gastrointestinal tract. I also
saw a case of diabetes insipidus with palatal and pharyngeal reflexes lacking. I
have already emphasized the relation of obesity to the inferiority of the nutritive
tract. The reflex anomalies which have been discussed are often met with under
this condition. 
I introduced a case in regard to lack of conjunctival reflex as evidence of
inferiority of the eye in Chapter I. At this point I have a second to offer. 
Elsa R., 22 years old, was treated for a foreign body in the right eye. The blue
colored iris of the right eye is colored brownish at a point in the upper outer
quadrant. Normal sharpness of vision. No conjunctival reflex. The coincidence
of stigmas, reflex anomalies and foreign bodies here also raises a suspicion of
inferiority. 
I have already mentioned the painter Karl v. R.--photophobia, conjunctivitis
lymphatica in youth, thin eyelashes, blinking in the brother. I must add that in
this case also the conjunctival reflex is wanting. 
In a similar manner reflex anomalies are found, usually lack of palatal reflex, in
people who have attained to higher sorts of work; by conquering the
fundamental inferiority of their respiratory tract or nutritive apparatus. I have
already emphasized three categories of these several times in other connections,
singers, speakers, and cooks; I must still mention gourmands in whom I have
almost always found the palatal reflex has become extinct, and in fact in a large
number of cases. To these categories I can still add: an oboe player, a trumpeter
and a heavy smoker.

Chapter VI Manifold Organ Inferiorities
Even though the fundamental principles of a theory of inferiority, which I
have just laid down, are confirmed (of which I have no doubt), nevertheless it is
rather striking that their relation to pathology has not hitherto been clearly
recognized. The final reason for this seems to me to lie in the fact that the picture
of organ inferiority has been only too often obscured by the intrusion of further
organ inferiorities and has been made unrecognizable. Discernment is still more
difficult in this connection, when one is forced to determine the inferiority in the
family from the statements of one patient alone. Usually available reports are of
diseases in members of the family, obtained during their lives or about affections
which led to their deaths. A test for other organ inferiorities which may have
been unnoticed, but which are particularly noticeable in the patient examined,
often cannot be carried out. On the other hand there is fortunately such a lot of
explicable material, particularly in the family physician's practice, that in spite of
individual gaps, owing to the difficulty of producing the material, the foundation
of a theory of organ inferiority may be considered as fully established.
A second phenomenon, which is closely connected with this, is still more
highly adapted to conceal the existing circumstances. For very often organic
diseases can be found in almost every individual member of a family, but they
concern entirely different organs, and, accordingly, seem to gainsay the claims
based on the inheritance of organ inferiority. But in such cases also the
connection may often be discovered and the proof of multiple organ inferiority
may be secured by information concerning childish defects or reflex anomalies.
The following is such a case, one which I have already used in the carcinoma
theory and which I discuss more at length here:
Therese S . died at 46 years of age after an operation for carcinoma of the
uterus. Her husband, Samuel S., at that time 51 years old, has suffered since his
40th year from rare attacks which are accompanied by sudden collapse and a
short period of unconsciousness. Injuries frequently occur in this way.
Difficulties in recollecting after the attack, amnesia and stammering afterward,
speak for the epileptic nature of the affection. It is impossible to make a
psychical analysis of these attacks which occur about twice a year. The patient
has chronic constipation. A son, Alexander S., 23 years old, suffered until his
sixth year from involuntary micturition and defecation, had scarlet fever in his
twenty-first year, which was followed by nephritis. Occasionally, a year later,
there are still traces of albumin, and quite often excess of phosphates too. Sexual

abstinence, even for a short time, calls forth the most violent conditions of
excitement, fear of beginning insanity and violent and lasting palpitation of the
heart: Ejaculatio precox. The daughter suffers from vomiting on the slightest
provocation, abdominal colic and diarrheal evacuation. From time to time anal
fissures appear. Painful menses, protracted labor. Her six year old son is an
enuretic. All four survivors show lack of palatal reflex. The inferiority of the
intestinal tract and of the central nervous system inherited from the father reveals
itself characteristically in the daughter in the same manner: psychical
insufficiency toward external impressions and motor defect in the inferior
gastrointestinal tract, which is stigmatized, besides, by the lack of palatal reflex
and by the anal fissures. The mother's inheritance, inferiority of the sexual
apparatus, reappears in dysmenorrhea and the protracted labor. Even the son
shows in the accompanying psychical phenomena of his sexual abstinence: and
in his involuntary defecation the inferiority of the same organs that we have
noticed in his father. Enuresis and the same trouble in his nephew, points,
however, just as did the nephritis, to an inferiority of the urinary apparatus,
which, as we shall show later, is, perhaps, regularly connected with the
inferiority of the sexual apparatus (ejaculatio precox in the son, carcinoma of the
uterus in the mother). That frequently, adjoining organs, and also those at a
greater distance, take part more or less in the inferiority, gives us evidence in the
first place, of reciprocal embryonic influence, and also arises from the
embryonic connection of many an organ, while more distant organs may be
influenced by hereditarily conditioned degeneration of the germ-plasma in
numerous places, by early correlation of certain organs, but also by a
superimposed inferiority of the circulatory or of the central nervous system. In
the last case, particularly, it would not surprise us to see aggregated organ
inferiority appear, in case the vital capacity of the embryo seems assured.
Our assertions have been mightily supported hitherto by the conceptions
and reports of clinical medicine which has long been familiar with the
connection of many organic diseases. If we compare our results in regard to
manifold inferiority, and if we consider them in those cases in which the diseases
reveal them most clearly, it becomes evident that we can speak of simultaneous,
coordinate inferiority, where the former conception had usually determined
diseases as dependent upon each other. This is the case in regard to two pairs of
organs, whose belonging together is also proved by the common terminal issue,
in respect to the respiratory, digestive and the urino-genital tracts. For each of
these pairs we have already found common stigmata and reflex anomalies as
indications that inferiority is present. We can draw new evidence from clinical
medicine. Gastrointestinal affections in diseases of the lungs, in emphysema and

particularly in tuberculosis are sufficiently known, and yet their dependence
upon a primary lung disease seems to be too strongly stressed. We find that it is
oftener the case for them to be entirely lacking, or to precede the lung disease by
some time, and that they even extend back to the earliest childhood. We uphold
the same conception also in regard to the connection of diseases in the urinary
and genital tracts. Aside from the frequency of simultaneous structural
anomalies in both organs, similar reasoning respecting simultaneous inferiority
is entirely in place. Frequent miscarriage in venal affections is universally
considered the result of the latter. All justification is lacking for this conviction,
since normal parturition occurs in venal diseases and manifold miscarriages
without pathologic conditions are not at all rare. The same thing is true in
pyelitis of pregnancy. Nevertheless I wish to stress emphatically, that neither a
one-sided nor mutual influence is ruled out through inferior organs. But the
simultaneousness of organ inferiority deserves special consideration, since
through it, it would be possible to obtain greater insight into pathology. The
influencing of the circulatory apparatus, particularly of the heart, in a renal
disease is certainly plausible according to the material at hand. By accepting a
simultaneous inferiority of the vascular system, the hypertrophic heart becomes
move comprehensible in such cases, particularly with contracted kidney. To my
mind, we shall have to follow the connection of nephritis with diseases of the
eye in the same manner. In one of my cases, at any rate, in which the patient
acquired inflammation of the choroid and retina in the course of nephritis, the
simultaneous inferiority of the visual apparatus seems to be determined by
congenital lamellar cataract.
In a like manner I think the acceptance of simultaneous inferiority justified,
where urinary organs and digestive apparatus side by side show themselves to be
diseased. Here we could mention albuminuria in intestinal affections, nephritis in
diabetes, simultaneous formation of stones in the bile duct and urinary passage,
etc.
In affections accompanying pulmonary tuberculosis, phenomena of
simultaneous inferiority also appear. The same is true in albuminurias,
glycosurias, strumas, the gastrointestinal diseases mentioned before, affections
of the heart, lymphadenitis and certain skin diseases. If we accept with this,
primary inferiority of the urinary and intestinal apparatus, of the skin and so
forth, it becomes easily comprehensible that under certain conditions these
organs also may succumb to tuberculosis, as soon as an opportunity for infection
is given.
This coordination plays a large part in relation to the sexual apparatus and
other organs, in which the inferiority of both is often only little apparent but is so

often present that I should like to state that, there is no organ inferiority without
accompanying inferiority of the sexual apparatus. This view is made probable
from the outset, by the appearance of heredity in the study of inferiority. Since
now the hereditary weakness must exist in the spermatozoa and ovule, we must
understand that the place of development of both, in a wider sense the whole
sexual apparatus, participates in the inferiority. This seems to me to be a
fundamental law of the theory of organ inferiority, namely, that every organ
inferiority carries its heredity through, and makes itself felt by reason of an
accompanying inferiority in the sexual apparatus. For the present the historic
origin of organ inferiority does not concern us, the hereditary significance of
which could evidently first appear in connection with the sexual sphere. The
acceptance of an internal secretion of the genital glands scarcely touches our
argument. If there should be failure of secretion or hyperfunction, they could
only act on other organs, according to the degree of inferiority of these organs,
which have shown themselves as inferior. One can only get an unobscured
picture of such organs working upon each other by postulating simultaneous
inferiority. The investigations in this group will have an enormous field to
compass. Previous researches which are not directed toward our point of view of
simultaneous inferiority, exist in numbers and usually only require further
interpretation in our sense. This is the case in the connection of anomalies of
position, flexions, infantilism, menstruation, pregnancy, climacteric with
diseases of the digestive apparatus, of the blood, the kidney, the heart and the
lungs. This is also the case in the obstinate and severe course of diseases of the
sexual organs, particularly of gonorrhea and its complications, in connection
with the inferiority, which can be demonstrated, of the sexual apparatus, but also
of the urinary organ, the lung and of the blood. Our conception, which
essentially declares the frequency of simultaneous inferiority of the sexual
organs, is only reinforced by the frequency of stigmata and of tumor formations
in the genitals. And finally the whole outcome of function and growth of the
sexual organs, the late, but then too full development, the early promise of
growth and function, as is found in no other organ, the colossal growth energy
and power of regeneration in the descendants, gives in dazzling light the picture
of the phenomena in the inferior organ, just as we have previously shown it. We
can state directly that a lesser degree of inferiority adheres to the human sexual
organ in all cases, but can easily take on larger dimensions. In such a case those
characters also are not lacking which are found in other inferior organs, such as
heredity, disease, stigma, childish defects (early masturbation) and reflex
anomalies.
Further inferiorities, which are associated with sexual inferiority, have to do

with the nose (Fliess), the heart, etc. 
The strongest opposition which our conception can encounter seems to me to be
offered by the simultaneous falling ill of two inferior organs. In order to answer
this question accurately a vast amount of material and long years of activity in
that experimental field which nature has formed for itself in the enormous
number of inferior organs, are needed. In part of these cases, a disturbance of the
inner secretion, presumably, in case of disease of the one organ and
corresponding weakening and disease of the other inferior organ, can be
accepted. One will quarrel just as little with the reflex influence which the
disease of one inferior organ transfers to the other, particularly if one remembers
that to the inferior apparatus there corresponds a fundamentally inferior portion
of the central nervous system, which later becomes greatly overcompensated,
and thus holds a dominating position both physically as well as psychically.
However that may be, I should like to touch very forcibly upon the fact that the
simultaneously inferior organs seem to he bound up together in a secret alliance. 
This and that secret bond can be shown nowhere else with such ease, as where
an inferiority of the related portion of the central nervous system is associated
with an organ inferiority. This is the case in hypochondria, hysteria, anxiety and
compulsion neuroses, as we shall try to show in the next chapter. It would be
more difficult to penetrate into the relation of both inferiorities when it is a case
of epilepsy or psychic disease, paranoia, dementia, mania, etc. Psychoses which
begin coupled with intoxications, pyretic diseases, diabetes, nephritis, or
tuberculosis, surely belong in the framework of this investigation, just as do the
often emphasized relations between epilepsy on the one hand and diseases of the
intestinal apparatus, circulatory or urinary organs on the other. 
And finally I should like to say that the discovery of one organ inferiority,
considering the frequency of numerous insufficiencies, makes it our duty to seek
for further inferior organs.
Chapter VII The Part Played By The Central Nervous System in
the Theory of Organ Inferiority—Psychogenesis and Foundations
of Neuroses and Psychoneuroses
Here I wish to add a few considerations which are almost self evident from
our studies. We shall grasp the meaning of our former conception only if we
exclude neither the spinal cord nor the brain from the investigations of the
inferior organ. Indeed it must be emphasized that the simultaneous, manifold,
organ inferiority, already characterized, extends itself to sectors of the nerve

tracts of the central nervous system, and that very often there corresponds to the
value of each organ a naturally proportionate value of those nerve tracts that
conduct to them their stimulation and lead from them their impulses. To be sure,
one cannot expect entirely conformable behavior. The inferiority may remain for
a long time at an unchanged level, and may also be confined only to the organ or
parts of it, or else the requirements of life, domestication, culture produce an
overcompensation, which if sufficient will make its way particularly in the
central nervous system. The quantitative differences which show themselves by
the degree of inferiority, by the localization, by the degree of compensation, can
only be perceived as qualitative when looked at from the psychological
standpoint, a fact which becomes comprehensible at once when one compares
the three most important constellations from the organic and nerve inferiority
field with their results: degeneration, neurosis, genius. The inferior organs
incapable of compensation fall victims, under the influence of the outside world,
to more rapid or slower destruction. On the other hand nature forms from
inferior organs, under the influence of compensation, apparatuses of more
variable function and morphology, which show themselves in many cases to be
quite capable functionally and even at times somewhat better adapted to external
circumstances, since they have derived their increase in strength in overcoming
these external obstacles and have consequently stood the test. Between these
extremes there are still mixed formations and such as have not been completely
compensated, whether because of lack of reserve strength or because of
premature exhaustion of this strength, result in disturbance of compensation.
Under definite conditions the cases of neuroses and psychoneuroses develop
from this group. Some important facts will be touched upon in the following.
Functional and morphologic formation of the organ and its nerve tracks will
make the inferior material functionally capable, as in normal development, partly
as a result of stimulus, partly owing to continued effort. Ordinarily the central
nervous system will play the largest part in this compensation. And not only
physically, say by particular development of the nerve tracks, associative fibers,
by the transformation of a hereditary lack of reflex to an increase of reflex
capability, but above all in a psychical manner, for the reason that a particular
interest seeks to protect the inferior organ and endeavors to ward off the harm by
constant attention, and the psyche on a small scale, perhaps, gives the impulse to
awaken the attention, to increase it and to connect it with that organ. This
psychical impulse receives further support as soon as the inferior organ no
longer follows its own bent but has to bow beneath the yoke of civilization.
How, in this process, organ instincts are changed, ennobled, psychically molded,
and often transformed to their polar opposites--occurrences which are grouped

by Freud as " organic repression"--shall still be elucidated.
Now this is undoubtedly overwork as compared with the manner of work of
a normally valent organ and will clearly appear as such in childhood. We have to
do in all these cases with the great number of shy, pale, timid children whose
development and future can only be considered assured when they have learned
to manage the inferior organ without injury, in other words when they have
carried out the compensation and can function without effort. In the other case, if
the performances of the organs are not brought about by a surplus from the
central nervous system, but at the expense of the latter, the overwork will be
lastingly felt and on suitable occasions, chance causes will produce a disturbance
of compensation, which will result, according to the degree of disturbance and
the psychical constellation present at the time in neurasthenia, anxiety and
compulsion neuroses, and hysteria.
In the infantile anomalies, which play such a large part in our work, and in
their course, inferiority and compensatory efforts must be clearly estimated.
Every free activity of the infant and child is connected with pleasure, or is
calculated for obtaining pleasure, as for instance, playing, jumping, running,
seeing, hearing, sucking, evacuation of feces and emptying the bladder. The
pleasurable sensations derived therefrom form properly the bond by means of
which the child is connected with his surroundings, socially with the outside
world. They are directly perceivable, adhere to the organic activity, and their
traces are often readily discoverable in later life. The accentuation of pleasure is
also often the cause of the stubbornness of children's faults, so that frequently the
strengthening of the child's will, or the suggestive effect of some therapeutic
treatment is sufficient to do away with the fault. In the psychoanalysis of the
neuroses Freud has demonstrated this primary pleasure principle, and I, too,
could always find it in my cases. This fact, moreover, seems convincing to me,
namely that I found again in the dreams of healthy grown people, who in their
childhood had suffered from such faults, the remembrance of such pleasurable
sensations in the form of wish-fulfillment by means of a dream. This was the
case in dreams of such people who had suffered from enuresis in their childhood,
and now at intervals dreamed of water, of swimming or of fire.
Approximately normal organs with a corresponding central nervous system
sufficiently capable of assimilation, adjust themselves without delay to the
requirements of surrounding culture. No wonder, since they themselves have
helped in building up and directing this civilization. On the other hand, changed.
and increased external requirements, disappointments, cares, traumatic
influences, diseases, change of surroundings may show up an organ and at the
same time its central superstructure as inferior and may disturb its compensation

which is with difficulty maintained for the inferior organs meet with difficulties
and dangers everywhere, a fact which corresponds to their natural relation to
their surroundings, and which shows the real basis of Darwin's theory of natural
selection. If it is to be mastered, this must be done with heightened expenditure
of strength. Even the normal organ has the task of subordinating its unrestricted,
pleasure-seeking disposition to the compulsion of education. The nutritive
apparatus may only find satisfaction in so far as the social organization and the
great aversions of civilization permit it. Thus the superior psychic realm is
forced to do certain tasks, which in the beginning are not easy, but which on the
average undoubtedly succeed by reason of the heightening of the functional
capability. In the case of the inferiority of the organ, however, and the
corresponding insufficiency of the related portions of the nervous system, the
participation of the organ and its activity in the demands of culture remain
behind. The function then does not follow the required specified cultural paths
but is predominantly engaged with seeking pleasure. We accordingly find in the
development of the normal organ a certain subordination of the pleasure
component to the activities called forth by the environment--let us call them the
"moral" activities--the final success of which ensures the child's cultural
development. The harmony of physical and psychical functional capability, a
psychophysical parallelism in the true sense of the word, characterizes the
development of the normal child. In the inferior organ it is different. If there is a
particular retardation of the development of the organs, as well as of the related
nerve tracks, all attempts at culture are unsuccessful and conditions such as
idiocy and imbecility result. But in milder cases also, the inferior organ turns
spontaneously to gaining its desire, averse to the psychical interference, and
therefore indulges the more, the longer it has to wait for the moral redemption--
Freud's repression. Since in the meantime the organ has become accustomed to
the wanton activity, it will now accomplish the later repression against greater
organic opposition, and introduce a lasting struggle which will be felt as a
torturing compulsion. These conditions may be most clearly seen in the cultural
development of emptying the bladder and evacuation of the feces. Left entirely
alone these functions go on purely wantonly in the infant and are consequently
connected with sensory gratification as befits every instinctive organic function.
The influence of the surroundings is sufficient to place the function of the
bladder and of the rectum on a "moral" basis in normal organs and in normal
psychomotor superstructures. But the thing which I must add to these important
observations of Freud's is as follows: The childish faults are only the externally
perceptible phenomena, arising from the disturbed psyche and mark the lack of
an adequate compensation in the psychomotor superstructure of the organ.

Under normal conditions this superstructure is influenced by the peripheral
stimulus of the bladder, of the rectum and likewise of the eye, the ear, the skin,
the nutritive and respiratory organs, and is impelled to continued organic growth,
and to this there corresponds in normally developed nerve paths--a psychic
development suited to the environment. Touching the inferior organ, however,
the parallelism in the psychophysical development very often gives way here to
a psychophysical contrast. The psychomotor superstructure of the inferior organ
carries on a continual battle against the pleasure activity and for the sake of the
"moral mission" of the organ. The result depends on the capability of
development of the fundamentally inferior superstructure, on the congenital
growth energy of the related cerebral cells and on the peripheral stimuli reacting
on the same. If progress is to result, the fundamental inferiority of the
psychomotor substance must be compensated. In another place we have pointed
out that this compensation often leads to over-value of the organ, and finally
conclude that this must be by means of over-valuation of the psychomotor
superstructure.
The compensatory, over-valuation may be complete, and then the increased
psychic and physical relations and their associations will enrich the psyche as a
whole, but at the same time characterize it. From this point of view an
understanding of distinguished and genius like activities is possible, and at the
same time a conception of the prerequisites which very often lay the foundation
for a choice of profession or a particular hobby and peculiarity. I have already
referred to the degenerative predisposition of Mozart's ears, to Beethoven's
otosclerosis, to the stigmatizing of Bruckner's ear by a nevus. I have also spoken
of the infantile defect in Demosthenes's development of speech. It is said of
Moses, the orator and leader of the nations, that he had a "heavy tongue." The
hallucinatory phenomena in Schumann's psychosis show us the increase and
overcompensation in the psychic superstructure of the ear, but show us at the
same time. even as every hallucination does, the miscarriage of a psychic victory
and of psychophysic harmony. Clara Schumann (B. Litzmann, "An Artist's Life
From Diaries and Letters"), tells of her childhood; "This woman [the maid in
whose care she was] simply wasn't talkative, and it was probably for that reason
that I only began to say disconnected words when I was between four and five,
and at that time understood just as little." And in another extract: "... Since I
heard so little talking and showed so little interest in it myself ... my parents
often complained, particularly as I began to speak, that I did not hear well; and I
did not get over this difficulty until about my eighth year, although it improved
at once, the more I began to talk myself and the more I noticed what was
happening around me and to me." Add to this her father's remark: "This is the

opening chord of an artist's life, which in its course, by the fullness of pure
melody which it bestowed is a bringer of joy of a rare sort to countless people,
yes even more than this, it even was to become almost a model of complete and
purified harmony of art and life. It begins with a harsh discord." One of our best-
known piano virtuosos, R. B., suffered in his childhood from purulent otilis
media and perforation of the ear drum in both ears.
I have already mentioned the tokens of degeneration, childish defects,
reflex anomalies, in speakers, singers, and actors. These tokens, as well as the
frequent diseases of the respiratory tract of such persons or in their families, lead
us to conclude definitely a fundamental inferiority of the respiratory apparatus
and consecutive overcompensation in the related psychic field. The same is true
of cooks and gourmands, a fact which I have emphasized in another place. I
must, however, call your attention to the fact that in these people the frequent
gastrointestinal diseases as well as the poor teeth, surely do not originate from
hot or biting food, but rest upon the inferiority of the nutritive organs. Thus for
instance the ulcus rotundum, whose tendency to recurring and carcinomatous
transformation can be first understood from this point of view. We find similar
conditions in painters as in musicians. I shall not speak of individual cases, such
as Lenbach and several artists whom I know. But the optical examinations
recently instituted in schools of art show optical anomalies in 70 percent of the
students.
These are the results, when considering the successful cases of
overcompensation, which are evidently sufficient to explain and correct
Lombroso's mistakes. But what happens when the compensation is not
successful, when the psychic impulse arising from physical need-on the one
hand insufficiency of the organ, on the other pressure of life and culture-meets
with more unserviceable brain material, when the compensatory activities only
get half way? A condition of high psychic tension must naturally arise from
these psychophysical relations, which causes those persons who undergo such
tension to be no longer capable of contending with any sort of heightened
requirements. They suffer incontinence of urine and involuntary defecation at
the slightest difficulties in human life, at tests, with fright and excitement, and
return to one of those infantile anomalies which they have with difficulty
conquered and which, as I have already shown, represent continuations and
further developments of heightened reflex manifestations. They stammer, vomit,
laugh, cry, scratch themselves, tear their hair, start, blink or have violent attacks
of spasmodic sneezing upon seeing a bright light, squint when looking at
anything close at hand, etc. All these phenomena are too well known
individually for me to have to prove them by means of illustrative cases.

The mastering of children's defects then, and all the difficulties which arise
from the inferior organ, point to compensatory activities in the superstructure
and if hitherto the childish defects were external tokens of organ inferiority, it
now appears that they really represent--like Chladny's tone figureslines of
direction from the life of the psyche, and are signals which indicate the
peripheral and central inferiority which has not yet been successfully overcome.
In regard to reflex anomalies in the inferior organ I can still add that the
deficient reflex may get its psychic contrast by reason of the compensatory
growth of the related psychomotor zone, so that if, for instance, the palatal reflex
is lacking, an excitement will, however, bring retching and vomiting with it. This
state of affairs is not rare; I shall cite a few cases, because it seems hitherto to
have escaped the notice of neurologists.
Eugenie I ., 46 years old, a teacher, unmarried, was one day addressed in
cutting terms by her brother. At night she dreams that her brother is burning out
her throat with a candle, awakens in terror, bathed in perspiration, feels violent
pressure and burning in the pharynx, in the larynx and in her mouth. She
struggles for breath, thinks she has lost her mind, and tries to determine whether
gas has been escaping in the room. At the same time she vomits a greenish
colored watery fluid several times. Admits that she almost always vomits when
excited. The examination shows normal conditions, except for a small umbilical
hernia, which has always been the cause of hypochondriacal paroxysms, and
complete lack of palatal and pharyngeal reflexes. The tongue is not coated, no
nausea in the morning, stomach not sensitive to pressure, appetite normal. From
the early history we only find that the patient was a weakly child who did not eat
well, who suffered a great deal from heartburn, singultus and vomiting during
puberty. According to this material we find it to be a case of inferiority of the
nutritive tract (umbilical hernia, reflex anomalies, anamnesis), which is adjusted
by overcompensation in the psychomotor superstructure--vomiting only appears
now upon a psychic disturbance of equilibrium. The patient has been inclined to
corpulence since her twentieth year.
Julius P ., a merchant, 45 years old, vomits if he sees a hair or a fly near
any food, and at times even if he thinks of it; occasionally also in consequence of
a vexatious occurrence. In his youth he was almost free from feelings of nausea,
and would, without thinking, put the most atrocious things into his mouth. Later
he became an epicure and heavy eater and transformed himself from a slender
youth into a corpulent man (230 lbs.). Very characteristic is a dream which
keeps recurring in the same form, in which some one keeps constantly stuffing a
loathsome mass into his mouth, so that he is in danger of choking and awakens
in terror. One of his sons had enuresis and involuntary defecation until he was 15

years old. Palatal reflex lacking, pharyngeal reflex greatly diminished. Here also
we find overcompensated inferiority of the nutritive tract with diminished
peripheral and increased central reflex ability.
Anna W., 28 years old, married, vomits at the slightest excitement. No
palatal reflex. One brother was an enuretic until his eighth year and suffered
from involuntary evacuation of feces. The patient's father, 54 years old, has,
ostensibly, always suffered from constipation. Here also we find the inferiority
of the nutritive tract stamped in a different manner upon the family, while in the
patient herself there is heightened central reflex as a token of the
overcompensation.
The phenomenology of the successful as well as the unsuccessful
overcompensation will show the same fundamental traits, the same internal
structure, even though it differs externally from that of the normal cerebral
development. We can always find among the achievements of the central
superstructure related to the organ the following: Attentiveness, proportionately
distributed and in correspondence with the organic relation with the outer world
directed upon the surroundings on the part of the normal organ,
disproportionately distributed and increased according to the organic
overcompensation in the inferior organ, more easily aroused, but less productive
by reason of unsuccessful compensation, insufficient or else not present at all in
cases of lasting central inferiority. Even in this psychical phenomenon we again
find the differences which have for long been considered as determinative in
judging the normal brain and the neurosis or psychoneurosis, the establishment
of which, however, can only occur with the acceptance of the theory of organ
inferiority. In anticipation we will emphasize at this point the fact that this work
aims to refer all phenomena of neuroses and psychoneuroses back to organ
inferiority, to the degree and nature of the not quite successful. central
compensation and to compensatory disturbances which enter into the matter.
Organic nerve diseases, however, are according to our premises only
special cases in which the localized inferiority is inclined to inflammatory or
degenerative transformations; the combinations of organic and functional
affections, typical of many clinical pictures, appears as a necessary coordination.
The influence of psychic and hypnotic therapy can accordingly be easily
understood. A few further citations, relating to the difference between normal
psychic development and that resting upon overcompensation, have to do with
recollection and memory. One can not however at the same time lose sight of the
fact that these conceptions characterize for us the symbolic in the web of the
psyche and that the occurrences at its basis have a psychic continuity and
psychic connection with other occurrences, such as perception, judgment and

volitional processes. But their connection is just as certain with the external
perceiving and executive organs, the relation of which to the surroundings
determines the manner and content of all central occurrences. Thus one can
declare that every organ has a right to its recollection, its memory in the central
psychomotor superstructure, as a function of this psychical field. In regard to the
inferior organ, functional increases are found upon the entrance of central
compensation or overcompensation, one of which may become noticeable as
increased recollection ability. Among the number of memory pictures those will
predominate in strength and number which belong to the inferior organ in
respect to its overcompensated psychic field.
It corresponds only to the special form of our civilization and its reflection
in the human psyche, that the eye, ear and organs of speech are held to special
activities and according to this acquire very special development of their psychic
superstructure even in the normal. Wherever compensation or overcompensation
enters, the memory activities belonging to the organic superstructure are
heightened, but are also subject to all the dangers which threaten the increased
growth of inferior portions of an organ, such as disturbances of compensation in
the form of weakness of memory, amnesia, an increase in particularly stressed
memories, associative strengthening, etc.
I can not go any further into detail at this point. A similar point of view is at
the basis of the development of critical ability in the superstructure of the
inferior organ, increased power of introspection, inspiration, intuition and the
comprehension of the genius, the building up of hallucinatory characters in the
psyche, the development of the abnormal idea on the basis of compensatory
activity, which also affects the function of the will and the perception of pleasure
and displeasure, etc. From the motor portion of the compensating superstructure
arise all phenomena of the neuroses, which are of importance as motor
discharges, such as tic, forms of paralysis and hysterical cramps and paralysis,
epilepsy, etc., whose whole clinical picture owes its origin to the actual
constellation in the psychomotor superstructure, and which is less connected
with the compensatory advancement of the reflex mechanism. The occupational
cramps, writer's cramp, etc., may be classed here as compensatory disturbances.
In the infantile anomalies to which are ascribed masturbation
characteristics, sucking the thumb, sucking the lips, tickling the skin, touching
the anus and actual early masturbation, we can again observe the wanton
inclination aimed at the obtaining of pleasure, which is peculiar to the inferior
organ, the mouth, intestine, genitals. The same thing is true of nocturnal
enuresis. If we now remember that all inferior organs are perhaps regularly
accompanied by inferior sexual organs, in which the inclination for pleasure is

likewise present in a marked degree, if we admit that almost all the children
burdened with childish defects also engage in masturbatory touching of the
genitals, we must establish as a result of this consideration the fact that the
possession of inferior organs can very easily lead to sexual precocity, to early
masturbation.
If this distinguishing feature has appeared, there are at least two dominating
cerebral portions which undergo heightened growth stimulus and heightened
psychic impulsion, and one of these builds itself up over the inferior sexual
apparatus. It is quite comprehensible that both the psychic fields should be
associatively connected, very like the audition coloree which also owes its origin
to the compensatory superstructure of two inferior organs. In this manner
psychic groupings arise very early, groupings which have been formed
fundamentally, of two sorts of impressions: on the one hand from the world of
sexual sensibility and ideas, on the other from the psychic superstructure of the
eye, ear, mouth, excretory organs, skin, nose. In all these cases the fate of the
psyche as a whole depends upon the complete or incomplete mastery and
balancing of the two corresponding inferiorities, the central and peripheral
inferiorities; the fate of the patient, then, is at the mercy of the complete or
incomplete compensation, of the lasting or interrupted compensation. But the
prospect becomes much more difficult as soon as the sexual components enter
the question and touch upon and influence the other psychic superstructure. The
compensation may then be a universal one; it may however only have developed
in one or in neither of the psychomotor fields. We can not dwell here on how it
affects individual cases, in the various psychoneuroses. Only, I must state that
the interesting psychic phenomena of repression, substitution, conversion, which
Freud demonstrated in his psychoanalyses and which I also found to be the most
important constituents of the psychoneuroses, develop upon the above-described
formation of the psyche in the case of inferior organs. In a like manner the usual
statement of "sexual basis" of psychoneuroses is cleared up by the above.
Complete compensation such as we find in artists, geniuses, a few professional
people, has a great many psychic functional characteristics in common with the
psychoneuroses, and has with many, especially with hysteria, a common
culmination point, the hallucinatory character of the psyche.
The following quotations from Grimm's German Mythology bears witness
how closely our conception of the compensation and overcompensation of the
inferior organ corresponds to the popular feeling:
"We find in the heroes as well as in the Gods want of limbs: Orin is
oneeyed, Try one-handed, Loki [?=Haphaestus] lame, Hoeder blind, Vidar
dumb, Hagano also oneeyed, Walkeri one handed, Gunther and Wieland lame;

and there are a goodly number of blind and dumb heroes. But it seems heroic
that while a defect disfigures childhood and early youth suddenly from out such
gloom appears the radiant presence as well as the power long curbed. To these
belong the blind birth of the Guelph and the folk-tradition birth of the Hessian
and the Suabian."
Chapter VIII Biological Viewpoint in The Organ Inferiority
Theory
The inferior organ gets its most distinct imprint in the phenomenon of
congenital deformity. The nature of the inferiority is shown almost as clearly in
the external stigmata. The connections of other tokens of inferiority with both of
these have been so clearly pointed out, in this work, that the conclusion is
evident: The inferiority of the organ is embryonic in origin.
The variability, the growth energy, and compensatory ability have likewise
been strongly enough emphasized. These are what guarantee the possibility of an
adjustment, provided that the vital capacity and duration of life do not seem to
be threatened by the fundamental check in growth,--provided, furthermore, that
the drawing in of reserve strength does not meet with too great a hindrance. The
final result of the struggle for the existence of the organ arises from the relation
between the existing, structurally capable material, and the required work. The
efforts at growth which come to light in this process and the results are not to be
compared with those of normal organs. They bring before our eyes, rather, a
portion of that strength which expresses itself in the liveliness and variability of
embryonic growth. A second assumption is justified by this: Namely, that the
inferior organ bears with it in morphology and function, its embryonic
characteristics.
By analogy from the causes of deformities, the following outline of the
causes of organ inferiority can be drawn up: 
I. Primary lack of formative material. In this we can observe particularly well the
familiar appearance, or can find exhausting diseases, lues, alcoholism, poisoning
of the parents at the time of procreation. In the latter case, nevertheless, the
selection of the organ will frequently be further determined by its own primary
inferiority. 
2. Inflammatory processes during the embryonic development, by which again
the selection of the organ can not occur without determination. 
3. Disturbing influence of a neighboring organ in the fetal period. In this case
also a dispositional cause must be sought for the injurious cooperation. 
If we wish, from the point of view now won, to attain a uniform perspective of

the inferiority of organs, we must turn our attention to the embryonic formative
material and its destiny. The inferiority which we are discussing here never
occurs as a result, but always as a preliminary condition, and is the one which
people have usually tried to class with the confused idea of disposition. The
incompleteness in this type of organs, the cessation of development which can
often be found in them, the lack of development in a histologic or functional
direction, the functional deficiency in the post fetal stage, and on the other hand
the increase in its growth tendency owing to compulsion of compensation, and
possibility of compensation, the frequent success in gaining greater functional
ability, force us to accept the fact that all inferior organs have a part of the fetal
characteristics. With the breaking away from the maternal organism the struggle
with the outer world begins for these organs and organic systems, a struggle
which must of necessity be kindled, and which begins with greater violence than
in a normally developed apparatus. Higher rates of disease and mortality
accompany this struggle. Nevertheless the fetal character supplies at the same
time the heightened possibility of compensation and overcompensation,
increases the ability of adaptation to usual and unusual resistance and assures the
formation of new and higher forms, of new and higher execution. One easily
gets the impression that the organism has economized in the fetal development,
that it arrested the embryonic maturity at a certain place, in order to give the
organ a means of maintaining itself for life, a heightened formative power. And
one can scarcely dispose of the conception that this new formative attempt is
undertaken in those organs in which a series of ancestors, owing to external
causes, to changed living conditions, have suffered injury during their lives.
Thus the inferior organ presents the inexhaustible trial material, by means of the
constant working over, repudiation, improvement of which, the organism seeks
to come into harmony with the changed conditions of living. 
The struggle with the hostile influences of life very often threaten the possessors
of inferior organs with disease and death, even if they can enter the world as
viable. Terrible and terrifying as are the demands of this hecatomb, it
nevertheless hinders the unrestricted spread of inferior formative material of
humanity, if one considers a fairly long stretch of time. If, however, on the one
hand inferior organs incapable of compensation meet with more rapid or slower
destruction under the pressure of the outside world, nature, on the other hand, by
the creation of a compensation, forms apparatuses of variable function and
morphology, which prove themselves in many cases to be quite functionally
capable and somewhat better adapted to external conditions, since they have
drawn their additional strength from the overcoming of these external obstacles.
The organ's abnormality is deeply rooted in the constraint of fixed training, in

the variability and greater tendency to growth which often adhere to an inferior
organ, and in the development of the related nervous and psychic complexes
heightened by the inner attention and concentration. The adaptation to altered
conditions of living takes place preeminently, not in a struggle for existence by
the survival of the accidentally stronger, but on the basis of variability and
heightened growth tendency of inferior organs. 
We have proposed heredity as one of the most important indications of inferior
organs and have tried to make this relation comprehensible through the
phenomenon of simultaneous inferiority of the sexual apparatus. Among the
possibilities of explanation of this phenomenon, the foremost place might be
given to one which reckons with the additional work to be accomplished by the
inferior organ, so that a vigorous demand on the organ would correspond to a
check on the embryonic equivalents in the genital glands. Besides not everything
which is classed as an acquired characteristic is entirely unconnected with the
inferior organ. On the contrary we can assume that the most effective changes
and injuries take place in the inferior organ, the heredity of which, their
embryonic plasticity and variable character, is beyond doubt. 
The reference to the whole organic world follows of itself. And in this the theory
of organ inferiority seems to broaden and support the theory of heredity in its
most important features.

Appendix The Inferiority of the Urinary Apparatus--Fate of
Enuretics and Their Families
At the beginning of this work there are a few considerations concerning
diseases of the urinary organs, in the pursuance and expansion of which cases,
we were led to establish the organ inferiority theory as the basis of a particular
conception of pathology. If at the end an attempt is to be made from the
illustrative cases of a single organ, again the urinary apparatus, to make clear the
value and extent of the theory of inferiority, to confirm already known
connections, to uncover new ones, I believe that I can best overcome the great
difficulties of such a task if I only choose cases which can be arranged according
to a single, and at all events distinct, point of view, those that have one symptom
of inferiority in common either themselves or in the family, the symptom of the
childish defect, namely, enuresis.
A vast amount of material, but only partly valuable, may be found in the
literature about enuresis, its nature and its pathogenic position. I, myself have
emphasized a few of its important facts in this study.1 At this point I must
confine myself to carrying through the centering of the phenomena of inferiority
of the urinary apparatus upon enuresis, and to emphasizing the simultaneous
inferiority of the central nervous system and of the sexual apparatus and to
illustrate this with cases. In this I shall follow the schematic outline of my study
and I hope that the reader will find the general conformity to tradition which was
followed there, again in this.
This will be the case in diseases of the urinary apparatus, whether it is in the
enuretic himself or in his family. We may expect all the genuine diseases, in the
prostate, the bladder, the ureters, the kidneys and the urethra. We will however
also find localization of disease, congenital anomalies, a particular and usually
difficult course of infection and functional affections. I should like to stress as
particularly interesting facts in my material, carcinoma of the urinary apparatus,
contracted kidney, scarlet fever nephritis and a difficult course of gonorrhea in
enuretics or in their families.
The second indication of inferiority, heredity, is already strikingly
noticeable in enuresis itself. No less noticeable however is its appearance in
every imaginable affection, anomalies and stigmata in any portion of the urinary
apparatus, as has already been emphasized in the preceding pages.
We shall frequently meet with signs of the degenerations also quite often
falsely called the causes of enuresis, as peripheral phenomena of inferiority of

the urinary apparatus. At any rate we find it in the sexual organ, which is almost
always found to be included in the inferiority.
1 I shall give a short exposition on these child errors in the Illustrierten
medizinischen Handlexikon [edited by Dr. Max Kahane, Urban &
Schwarzenberg, publishers, ViennaBerlin), which is coming out shortly.
In regard to reflex anomalies we must refer to spasm of the sphincter, which
one often meets with in people who have been enuretics. Almost as often do we
find, on sounding the urethra, a relaxed, unreacting sphincter externus, both of
which are anomalies, as we have emphasized in the discussion of the palatal
reflex. Freud's symptom in many cases of enuresis, adductor cramp of the thigh
on suddenly pulling the latter out, arises from the extension of the reflex zone of
the sphincter and is analogous to the movement of choking in cases of increased
pharyngeal reflex, which in some cases sometimes even takes place by pushing
the spatula back of the teeth. Here we must mention also inability to urinate in
the presence of others, shivering and rigor while urinating, functional dysuria,
retention of the urine and polyuric, which one often finds in those who have
been enuretics, or in their families.
I must lay very great stress on segmental inferiority in enuretics. Not so
much the skin anomalies, which are often found as nevi or neurofibrontata at
about the height of the kidney, in the region of the bladder or in the groin, but an
inferiority which often has to do with the whole rear portion of the body and
comes into consideration as primary weakness in voiding of the urine,
evacuation of the bowels and emission of the semen, which can often be
overcome, and even overcompensated and is evidently connected with an
inferiority of the spinal cord from the lumbar vertebrae downwards. It is not a
rare thing to find the lower extremities also involved in this inferiority. This
relation is of importance in regard to the problem of tabes, sciatica, and
incontinence of the bowels in the families of enuretics. The spinal column also
takes part in it with indications of spina bifida or deformity, and the lower
extremities with deformities, disproportionate legs or diseases of the joints.
As to what concerns the simultaneous inferiority of other organs,
particularly of the sexual organs, the material prescribed will evidence. In the
literature we find congenital displacement of the testicles mentioned most often,
which I also often found, and then perhaps, phimosis, hypospadia and adhesion
of prepuce and glans penis, if one wishes to consider these as tokens of
inferiority of the sexual organs. More significant for my assumptions are the
cases of formation of tumors in the sexual organs, such as an enuretic family
shows, and the almost invariably demonstrable anomalies in sexual intercourse,
above all ejaculatio precox. Strikingly often the mothers in enuretic families die

during or after a birth, and one often finds enuretics as step-children. From my
material it appears that inferiority diseases of the sexual organs or of the kidneys
may occasion such early death, while other such mothers, by reason of a difficult
birth (pelvic anomalies, as segmental inferiority), or by reason of injuries during
one of the first pregnancies guard themselves from danger to their lives in case
of another pregnancy. In other cases conception does not take place or else
repeated miscarriages prevent maternity. One then usually finds as a cause
uterine myoma, renal disease, or infantilism of the uterus (narrowness of the
orifice).
The relation of enuresis to the central nervous system and to the psyche is
adhered to to a certain degree in the literature, without much weight given to the
relations which have here been revealed. Freud, who has advanced the furthest,
emphasized the significance of infantile enuresis in dream and neurosis. The
Breslau School and many others with it consider, on the contrary, that enuresis is
an hysterical symptom. Desire for urination and incontinence from excessive
psychic strain, in laughing and crying (Bechterew), in fright, on seeing water and
fire and other things have been observed by many authors, but without
connecting them as Freud has done to conquered enuresis. H. Ellis emphasizes
the fact that music may call forth a desire for urination in children and animals,
which was even known to Shakespeare, for he has Shylock say: "And others,
when the bagpipe sings i' the nose cannot contain their wine": In regard to our
standpoint, we shall have to indicate that which has been said in the
corresponding place and once more emphasize that enuresis, just like every other
infantile defect, represents the functional side of organ inferiority. A
fundamentally inferior psychomotor superstructure is placed over the organ
which responds deficiently to its surroundings, a superstructure which, with
every psychical overexertion even as in playing or learning, may fail, and which
will only suffice as a cultural control of the organ for a time, if a lasting interest,
an inner attention, watches over the ordinarily wanton activity of the organ.
Release from the childish defect may be obtained through compensation in the
related psychomotor superstructure and its channels which may lead to
considerable strengthening of the psyche as a whole, but may also lead to all
sorts of disturbances, which are present in the nature of the compensation. The
psyche, however, always carries the traces of the enuretic constitution in itself
and in cases, too, where the constitution is not revealed in childish faults, but
only in the other tokens of organ inferiority. To the exaggerated increased
extention of the reflex channels, the jerking of the feet, inability to urinate in the
presence of others, dysuria, retention of the urine, involuntary evacuation of the
bowels, in children is due, phenomena which we find again in hysteria, in so far

as it owes its origin to inferiority of the urinary organs, while at times astasia and
abasia in hysterical cases reveal the motor weakness of the segment, which is
fundamentally connected with the function of the bladder. The enuresis of idiots
shows us the entire incapability of compensation of their inferior central nervous
system.
The one-sided overcompensation in the whole central reflex mechanism,
which derives from the impulsion of compensation in consequence of manifold
organ inferiority, may be at the bottom of the connection between enuresis and
epilepsy. The great need of sleep, the particular soundness of the enuretic's sleep,
only correspond to the increased consumption of psychic strength, while the
normal work of school or of life may often make itself felt as overpressure.
Pavor nocturnes in childhood, which very frequently occurs in enuretic
constitutions, arises from the over great necessity for tenderness in such children
which finds its outlet at night by sleep and in the dark by fright and screaming.
The fearfulness which burdens almost every enuretic in childhood is a universal
expression of his helplessness in regard to the inferior organ and often burdens
even grown people. In later life, in addition to the usual characteristics, fear of
water and fire, fear of the night, is frequently added. At times the neurotic is able
to conquer the terror in every form and to achieve the contrast, extreme bravery
and courage. Many of the things which we are here writing down in dry form,
Jean Paul has interestingly revealed in Schmelzle's Journey, the hero of which, as
can readily be seen, show a compulsion neurosis on the basis of inferiority of the
urinary organs. Walking in the sleep, which like talking, involuntary micturition
and evacuation of the bowels in the sleep, represents a wanton, pleasurable
organic activity, we shall often find in enuretics corresponding to the frequent
segmental inferiority. The dream of the enuretic, connected during childhood
with bedwetting, very often contains the act of urination, and later, after the time
of enuresis, the idea of swimming, bathing, boating, and definitely permits the
diagnosis of conquered enuresis and appears particularly in childhood as
primitive wish-fulfillment after unrestrained organic activity (Freud). Although
some retain their fear of water all their lives, others nevertheless attain
remarkable proficiency in swimming and boating sports.
It is, before all, the simultaneous inferiority of the sexual organs and the
lasting interest in emptying the bladder which in addition to enuresis almost
regularly permit a second childish fault to arise, namely early masturbation,
autoerotic touching of the genitals. With this, new opportunities are given for
going astray in the psychical development. The early awakened autoeroticism
makes the child more unfitted for bringing up, the prevention of bad uncivilized
impulses becomes difficult from the outside for the same reason, the child does

not adapt itself to cultural life and becomes evil and unamenable. At the same
time there arises in him further supports for his cowardice, shyness and anxiety
and he seeks for comfort and protection from the understanding which he has of
the sin, in "childish" superstitions and religious fantasies with unfortunate
results. In the psychoanalysis of neurotic persons we find both in the ideological
sexual superstructure. Physiologically viewed, it is compensation of the sexual
organs in the psychomotor field, strengthening and check. How often these
happenings become the foundations of psychoneuroses, as soon as compensatory
interruptions and reciprocal effects of two inferior psychomotor fields occur,
Freud has irrefutably shown in his psychoanalytic material. In my list of
illustrative cases, also, there are a number of proofs which rest on firm ground
by reason of their certain relation to organ inferiority and its consequences.
The accentuated autoerotic trait which the enuretic shows and the
heightened interest in his own sexual phenomena makes it seem comprehensible
that in case there is no other adjustment, above all, the similar sexual organ in
other persons attracts him. In a few cases I could determine this connection so
that homosexuality and exhibitionism as phenomena in people with inferior
sexual organs, often in connection with the enuretic constitution, becomes
comprehensible.
I must still emphasize in closing that the great frequency of enuresis in the
juvenile and habitual criminal is not difficult to understand. Both, function of the
bladder as well as impulses, are at time, without compensatory limit in extended
inferiority of the central nervous system, and follow their course without any
attention to cultural requirements.
The signs of more intense conscious effort which leads to the compensation
of the central nervous system, we will miss completely only in idiots, and partly
in juvenile delinquents. They appear in a distinct, though abnormal form in
neuresthenia, hypochondria, hysteria, epilepsy, paranoia, compulsion, and
anxiety neuroses. Under favorable conditions, however, they may fall to the lot
of another category of people, strikingly functionally capable brains, highly
gifted and genius-like natures, in the consideration of which we must recognize
that the psychic activity has given occasion for restraining enuresis together with
powerful training of the psychomotor sphere to psychical and spiritual
superiority. Very often in not wholly successful overcompensation, we find
borderline and mixed cases.
I now briefly present the material to which I owe my report on the
inferiority of the urinary organs; the choice was made according to the
occurrence of the childish defect, enuresis, in the family.
1. Siegfried H.,2 34 years old, a merchant, complains of temporarily

occurring states of excitement, pressure in the region of the heart, feelings of
anxiety and impotence. Since his childhood he has suffered from constipation
and has several times had violent attacks of abdominal colic. In the course of a
severe posterior urethritis there was for a few days retention of urine. Thyroid
gland considerably enlarged. General condition as well as analysis of urine
normal. Tendency to exhibitionism. The father died of nephritis, three sisters
died in confinement. The patient says that he suffered from enuresis until his 9th
year.
2. Oskar C., 12 years old, a student, complains of inability to learn, pressure
in the head and nervous irritability. Lately there have been spontaneously
occurring pains in the right testicle. Normal condition, except for thickening of
the head of the right epididymis. There are two little knot-like thickenings along
the spermatic cord, which raise a suspicion of tuberculosis. Two analogous
cases, in which the thickening had gone away led us to assume coitus protractes
as a cause, while one of the cases had for a time ejaculated bloody semen
[rupture of the vessel ?]. In the case under consideration protracted coitus was
admitted. Otherwise ejaculateo precox. The patient says that he only wet the bed
a few times when he was 9 years old. An older brother suffered till he was 16
from enuresis. The analysis of the urine of the father, who is suffering from a
mild form of epilepsy, shows for the time being, albumin, hyaline and granular
cylinders. The paternal grandfather and grandmother died of cerebral apoplexy
(contracted kidney?), one of their daughters died of uremia. A second brother of
the patient suffered from acute hallucinatory paranoia and showed adhesion of
the prepuce to the glans.
2 The names are greatly changed and the bearers of the same are fairly
unrecognizable.
3. Ignaz W., 52 years old, an official, has been complaining for a year of
vague pains in his back and in the region of the kidneys. Condition of the urine:
specific gravity tool, slight traces of albumin, permanently increased quantity,
polyuria, tension of pulse raised above normal, second aortic sound accentuated.
The heart was hypertrophic. Enuresis denied. One brother of the patient and one
dull have suffered from it. His mother died at 26 during parturition.
4. Dolly A., 7 Years old, a timid, delicate, pale child who has suffered from
enuresis since her birth. Her mother was also an enuretic, and her maternal
grandmother died of uremia.
5. Elisabeth D., 3 years old, nocturnal and diurnal enuresis. A timid child
who is afraid to stay alone in the room, does not go out without having some one
lead her by the hand, and who shows other great needs for tenderness, and desire
for support. Pavor nocturnes. She talks of "making water" almost all day long. In

the father's family there is enuresis, the material grandmother is suffering from
contracted kidney. When the patient and her sister fell ill of scarlet fever, the
sister who was not an enuretic, showed hematuria. (Spieler has published similar
cases without establishing our relation to enuresis.)
6. Friedrich V., 42 years old, a merchant, was a bedwetter, as were several
of his brothers and sisters. At that time showed temporary albuminuria to a slight
degree and slight cardiac hypertrophy. On the occasion of syphilis, violent
intolerance of iodine appears. Chronic excess of phosphates in the urine of the
mother and one sister, which I have frequently found to be the case in enuretic
families.
7. Alexander S., 28 years old. Abulia. In response to questions he says that
the libido sexualis is lacking. Erection inadequate. Ejaculatio precox. On the left
side severe varicocele, on the right hydrocele. The patient was very fond of
rowing and swimming. Frequent swimming dreams. Only a year ago he dreamed
that he was attending to the calls of nature and urinated in his bed at the same
time. Enuresis up to his tenth year. His father died of a renal affection.
8. Albert K., 45 years old, railroad official. Had had painful retention of the
urine for twelve hours. Went through the same thing 20 years ago. Analysis
negative. The catheter passed the sphincter without finding any opposition.
Ejaculatio precox. Enuresis up to his seventh year. Says he has had no
swimming dreams, but he was a swimming teacher in the army. Seven of his
nine brothers and sisters died prematurely. He thinks that the retention may have
arisen through delay in urinating. Normal behavior after the next day.
9. Eugen M., 26 years old, a bookkeeper, complains of pressure in the head
and weakness. Phosphaturia. Of his 23 brothers and sisters 17 died of unknown
diseases, one with the symptom of dropsy. Enuresis up to his twelfth year.
Eagerly carries on rowing sports.
10. Julius S., 39 years old, a writer, is suffering from nervous gastric
troubles. His mother died at a ripe old age showing uremic phenomena. One
brother has chronic nephritis, a second neurasthenic complaints and excess of
phosphates in urine. The patient himself went through a severe gonorrhea and
also shows excess of phosphates in urine. Enuresis during childhood, hypospadia
and para-urethral opening,
11. Sophie B. (already cited), went through parturition three times. Pyelitis
during the first pregnancy with fever phenomena and pain, likewise during the
second and third. Normal condition of urine directly after birth. Four months
after the last delivery there were pains in the region of the right kidney. Shortly
after this, chill and connected with this intermittent fever, for eight days.
Afterwards lytic fall to subnormal temperature, and convalescence. There have

been no further phenomena for almost a year. The analysis of the urine showed,
at the time of the fever, pus concretions, red and white blood corpuscles, hyaline
and granular cylinders. We must consider the last attack as the last relapse of a
pregnancy pyclitis (without pregnancy?). At the beginning of the sickness I
declared that the patient must come from an enuretic family. After denying at
first the patient admitted the following: namely that she had suffered up to
twelve years of age from bedwetting, as had several of her brothers and sisters
too. The father died of carcinoma of the bladder, one sister is an idiot, one died
in status epilepticus. The patient herself had always been very timid. Two of her
children showed enuresis up to the third year, later pavor nocturnes.
12. Fritz C., a merchant, 26 years old, fell ill three years ago with pains in
the hypochondrium on both sides, which radiated out toward the bladder. At the
same time a moderate fever is supposed to have set in. Analysis of the urine then
showed: Specific gravity 1020, acid, normal quantity, turbid. Albumin 0.08
percent, and in the sediment there were contained and extracted red blood
corpuscles, hyaline, finely and coarsely granular casts, isolated epithelial and red
blood corpuscle casts, and a few white blood corpuscles. This state has
continued with slight improvement up to the present. The pains also occur still,
although not very often. Differential diagnosis took into consideration
nephrolithiasis, tuberculosis, neoplasm and nephralgie hematurique, among
which the latter diagnosis seems most probable. When one day the patient
showed me a burn on his finger which he had got at night when he got out of bed
walking in his sleep as he had already done a number of times and lit a candle in
his sleep, I advanced the suggestion that he had been an enuretic, which the
patient admitted at once. On further observation the patient showed himself to be
homosexual; at times he suffered from retention of the urine for long periods of
time which was always connected with a fright. The catheter easily passed the
sphincter. His brothers and sisters had also suffered from enuresis, and a
grandmother had died of uremia. The patient at the same time since his earliest
childhood had suffered from constipation, and had always been accustomed to
use the syringe every day. (Second component of homosexuality.)
13. Dr. 1.. Z., lawyer, 32 years old, neurasthenic. Fell ill eight years ago of
inflammation of the choroid and retina on a hereditary syphilitic basis. In the
right eye there is a lamellar cataract (inferiority of the eye of an openly
embryonic nature). In the urine there is regularly nucleo-albumin, at times
hyaline and granulated casts as well as white blood corpuscles. Complains of
sexual weakness, which improved after the removal of an exaggerated phimosis.
Ejaculatio precox. Enuresis until his fourteenth year, early masturbation,
inclination to exhibitionism. The father suffered from paresis, the mother died of

nephritis in her fiftieth year. One of his brothers showed compulsive ideas after
an attack of scarlet fever at the age of twenty-six. The patient is justly considered
as a strikingly capable, highly gifted individual.
14. Hugo R., 11 years old, a delicate pale boy, suffers, as do all his brothers,
from enuresis. According to his relatives he is shy, timid, absentminded and does
not get on very well in school. His mother died in her thirtyeighth year of tabes.
15, Fritz Sch., 17 years old, shopkeeper's apprentice, had two attacks of
unconsciousness in the course of a month, which are supposed to have been
connected with anxiety on account of the sickness of his mother. Weakness after
the attacks, stammering, amnesia, no biting of the tongue. The physician who
was called came after the attack which only lasted five minutes and which was
without convulsions. Physical condition normal. He is said to have always been
an unmanageable child; admits early masturbation and enuresis up to his tenth
year. One of his brothers also had enuresis, another a neurasthenic affection
since puberty, a third suffered for a long time from gonorrheal arthritis in the
knee and ankle joints and has a congenital constriction of the anterior urethra.
His mother had an ovarian cyst and had to have an operation.
16. Sophie K., 29 years old, accountant, has suffered since puberty from
dysmenorrhea. Half a year ago violent pains in the lumbar and sacral regions
began. The examination per rectum showed an intramuscularly myoma as big as
a fist. Enuresis up to her ninth year. Her mother died during a delivery.
17. Rosa E., 32 years old, complains of pains which extend from the sacral
region on both sides over the back surface of the thigh to the popliteal space.
Strong sensibility to pressure of the sciatic. State of abdomen normal. She went
through two uncommonly protracted births. Both times hydramnlon and retarded
first stage of labor. Slight rachitic constriction of pelvis. Frigidity. Strikingly
short, plump legs with very slight traces of rachitis. Contrasting with this a
slender upper part of the trunk.. Enuresis up to 14 years. Urine and later
swimming dreams. Was never timid as a child, liked to play with fire, and
occasionally "accidentally" (part played by chance!) burned up household
utensils. Her mother died at 27 from a hemorrhage during parturition. One sister
was operated on for myoma. She had never suffered from enuresis, but was a
precocious child and suffered from a washing compulsion neurosis. A younger
brother suffered from mild enuresis, which was soon outgrown, from pavor
nocturnus, and as a child showed a highly developed condition of anxiety. A
medical examination could probably have found in the urine of the now 22-
yearold man nucleo-albumin, a condition which like excess of phosphates is very
frequent in families of enuretics.
18. Hugo K., 30 years old, a merchant, complains of headache. conditions

of excitement and sleeplessness. Querulous behavior and on the basis of a dream
accuses a woman of his acquaintance of criminal intercourse. Corrects himself
very soon and sees his mistake. Earlier he had often had violent attacks of rage.
Striking antipathy for his father. Homosexual inclinations and a morbid fear of
dirt. Early masturbation. Ejaculatio precox. The catheter easily passes the
sphincter. Nucleo-albumin in the urine. Suffered from enuresis up to his fifteenth
year. His father and grandfather had hypertrophy of prostate.
I9. Alois W., 3I years old, engine fitter. For two years he has had posterior
urethritis. Indications of hypospadias, operation for phimosis, para-urethral
meatus. His father died at 43 with dropsical phenomena. The mother has
prolapse of the uterus. The older brother was an enuretic up to his sixteenth year.
20. Artur S., 28 years old, a merchant. Three months after a severe attack of
scarlet fever he still showed distinct traces of albumin. He has the history of a
long continued gonorrhea. Since then ejaculatio precox. Intolerance of sexual
abstinence, during which he is troubled by sleeplessness, violent excitement,
conditions of anxiety and fear of insanity. He admits early masturbation.
Enuresis and incontinence of the bowels for some time. He had been an
extremely delicate child, who only began to walk at the age of three. Only slight
traces of rachitis at that time. His mother died at an operation for carcinoma of
the uterus. His father has suffered since his fortieth year from rarely occurring
typical epileptic attacks and an equivalent in the form of aphasia.
21. Julius M., a merchant, 38 years old, complains of deficient sexual
power. Relaxed sphincter. Enuresis tip to his twelfth year. His mother died at an
early age.
22. Georg A., I6 years old, commercial student, has had posterior urethritis
for half a year. Enuresis up to his eighth year and admits early masturbation. His
father has suffered for twenty years from temporarily occurring lancinating pains
in his legs, shows lack of PSR, positive Romberg, slight ataxia and Argyll
Robertson pupil. No bladder disturbance, no impotence. His mother has had
recently to have an operation for myoma, and has for two years suffered from
pains in the lumbar and sacral regions. (The parents both show segmental
inferiority of the lumbar and sacral regions.)
23. Dr. M. L., an author, 41 years old, has for years suffered from
frequently recurring severe sciatica. Sexual precocity and enuresis in the family
is admitted. Syphilophobia. Inability to urinate in the presence of others and
dysuric difficulties without analysis.
24. Josef S., merchant, 42 years old, complains of a state of anxiety, chronic
constipation, depression and eructation. He says that in himself as well as in his
brothers there was greatly delayed ejaculation. Chronic posterior urethritis with

complications occurring repeatedly. Relaxed sphincter. Between his eighth and
ninth year he had a painless paralysis of both legs and was confined to his bed
for more than half a year (hysterical astasia-abasia or else cured poliomyelitis?).
His gait, reflexes, motor power and development of the legs since that time have
been excellent. On the other hand, in the lumbar portion of the spine there is a
lordotic deformity. The patient suffers with anxiety, hypochondria, inclined to
all sorts of complaints about his heart, lungs and digestive apparatus, and has
lived with a healthy wife in childless wedlock for 7 years. Examination of the
semen is refused. He admits early masturbation and enuresis into the fourteenth
year, and incontinence of the bowels for almost as long. (His mother died of
diabetes!) Bedwetting just a short time ago after excessive alcoholic indulgence.
25. Johann R., 39 years old, an official, complains of feelings of anxiety
and swelling of the knee joints occurring almost every two weeks, preceded by
pollution and diarrheal evacuation of the bowels. The condition lasts twelve days
and began probably in connection with selfreproaches for the death of his father.
Ejaculatio precox since then. Excessive masturbation even in early childhood,
later increased pollutions. Enuresis and incontinence of the bowels up to the
tenth year. At present there is morbid sleepiness and unusually heavy sleep.
(Inferiority of the cerebrum.) Complains of continual violent pains in the lumbar
portion of the spine and in the sacrum. The lower extremities are remarkably
short in comparison to the trunk. The case was under my observation for some
time. It had to do with intermittent dropsy of the knee joints. The swelling
appeared regularly with rare exceptions every fourteen days just above the
patella, soon attacked the knee joint and led to intraarticular effusion. In four
days every trace of swelling has disappeared. It was easy to invoke a suspicion
of tabes. Prostate normal. The patient is a passionate tourist.
26. Marta C., 17 years old, has suffered from her earliest childhood from
enuresis and incontinence of the bowels which still appear quite frequently up to
the present, but which can however be checked for a time by psychic influence.
Has always been an unmanageable child inclined to outbursts of fury, but is
unimpaired in her psychic functional capability. Often has catarrh of the bladder.
Defect in speech. In her early childhood she learned to speak very slowly and
with great difficulty. At that time she longed to go to the theatre. No palatal
reflex. Mild rachitic scoliosis. Constipation, loss of appetite occurs frequently.
Has had appendicitis and typhoid fever. She is a courageous girl who knows no
timidity. First period at the age of 15, since then they have been regular and
painless. A great deal of enuresis in the family.
27. Wilhelm N., 30 years old, bookkeeper. Has had gonorrhea for eight
months. Excess of phosphates in the urine. Complains of chronic constipation,

which he has had since his childhood. His lather died early of pulmonary
tuberculosis. Patient was an enuretic up to his seventh year, his younger brother
suffered for some time with enuresis and incontinence of the bowels. (A very
frequent condition is to have incontinence of the bowels at first, then in later life,
constipation. This often occurs in the domestication of dogs.)
28. Fritz R., 27 years old, a merchant, complains of temporary impotence
and regular ejaculalio precox. Adhesion of the inner preputial sac to the glans. In
regard to his childhood he tells us that he was shy, was very much afraid of
being alone and in dark rooms, long persistent biting of the nails and tic of the
left shoulder, clonic blepharospasm. Early masturbation. Enuresis until his
seventh year. Enuresis and ejaculalio precox occur quite frequently in the father's
family. In addition to these the patient also has slight struma parenchymatosa, at
times cramps in his calves and cramps in the toes and fingers, no Trousseau,
Chvostek's symptom positive. Varicose veins in the lower leg. Constipation and,
quite frequently, headache. (Inferiority of the legs? Long lower extremities. Is
very fond of touring, skating and skiing.)
29. Dr. Robert S., lawyer, 32 years old, complains of psychic impotence
and ejaculalio precox. Shows a morbid fear of dirt and suffers from headache
and conditions of anxiety. Enuresis up to the twelfth year, a family trait. Nevus
pigmentosus over the top of the bladder.
30. Leopold M., 23 years old, complains of anxiety arising without any
cause, inability to work and headache. Ejaculatio precox and spermatorrhea.
Relaxed sphincter. No gonorrheal infection (just as little in the above cases, if it
is not mentioned). Denies early masturbation and enuresis, but says that the latter
is a family trait.
31. Leo T., an official, 34 years old, complains of frequently occurring
pains in the region of the left ankle joint (rheumatic in character), of irritability,
exhaustion and violent outbreaks of perspiration. Repeated analysis of the urine
shows only an excess of phosphates. The question in regard to ejaculalio precox
is answered in the affirmative. Likewise the one in regard to enuresis in the past.
32. Martin R., a merchant, 33 years old, complains of frequent sense of
pressure in the stomach, eructation, loss of appetite and heightened irritability.
The examination gives no positive results. Sexual intercourse very rarely.
Ejaculatio precox at that time. Frequent masturbation (in causal relation to the
neurosis of the stomach) and pollutions. Enuresis up to his eighth year. The same
childish defect was present in all the brothers and in the only sister. The latter
has remained childless after ten years of married life.
33. Max S., 26 years old, an author, complains of severe states of anxiety
and palpitation of the heart as well as of painful sensations in the genital region.

Two years ago he had a severe urethritis. Objective condition negative. The
patient says that he suffers from frequent pollutions and ejaculatio precox.
Spasm of the sphincter when the sound is introduced. After long hesitation
admits enuresis until his eighth year. His father died of cardiac paralysis, in his
fortyeighth year, while in the best of health (nephritis?).
34. Dr. Rudolf S., 38 years old, refers his cured ejaculatio precox back to
gonorrheal infection. Enuresis admitted. Urine games in childhood,
extinguishing fire, etc.
35. Rudolf W., manufacturer, 26 years old, complains of exhaustion,
dizziness and pressure in the head. Objective state negative. The examination
brought an admission of sexual weakness, psychic impotence alternating with
ejaculatio precox. Overheated sexual fantasy. Denies enuresis for himself, but
admits it for his brother. In the frequent pollution dreams he dreams of urinating.
36. Max B., an official, 33 years old; swelling of the lymphatic gland as big
as a hen's egg, quite apart from these numerous small swellings in the left groin.
Syphilis a year previously. Since then there has been no ulcer, no peripheral
lesion. Abdominal organs and vertebral column intact. Catarrh of the apex of
each lung, state of urine normal. Neurofibroma in the region of the left kidney.
My question about enuresis was answered affirmatively as well as the one in
regard to ejaculatio precox. (Inferiority of the lower segment, localization of
tubercle bacilli in the inguinal gland?) Extremely long legs, short trunk. Often
dreams of fire and water.
37. Max Sch., official, 38 year old, complains of conditions of fear, anxiety,
palpitation of the heart, temporary attacks of unconsciousness. Frequent
swimming dreams. Question in regard to enuresis is answered in the affirmative.
38. Paula D., 37 years old, a merchant's wife, during an attack of typhoid
had the hallucination that the house was burning and that the children must be
saved. Usually she is a courageous woman but always shows tremendous anxiety
as soon as she hears the fire alarm. Enuresis in the family.
39. Sophie L., 32 years old, office holder, has suffered since her twelfth
year from ideas of fear, agoraphobia, terrified screaming at night. She often
dreams of fire and rain which soaks her through and through. Enuresis up to her
eleventh year.
40. Alexander H., 22 years old, has suffered since childhood from
headache, weariness, dizziness, stuttering and anxiety and compulsive ideas.
One of his compulsive acts often consists in lying down on the bed with dirty
shoes, "in spite of the fact" that he comprehended that he would soil the clean
bed upon which his mother laid much stress. This compulsive act occurred when
he had conquered the enuresis (around his tenth year) and at a time when he was

in strong opposition to his mother. Likes to look into the fire for hours at a time.
Swimming dreams. Premature sexuality.
41. Johanna H., 44 years old, climacteric difficulties. Has for some time
suffered from anxiety and compulsive ideas and agoraphobia. In the course of
the analysis of a compulsive act the suspicion of infantile enuresis arose, which
the patient denies for herself, but admits for her brother.
42. Dr. Max P., 27 years old, complains of anxiety and excitement which
always attacks him after sexual intercourse. When he tries abstinence it drives
him out of the house, through the alleys and streets, until he again flees to
prostitutes (migratory neurosis?). Frequent pollutions. Ejaculatio precox.
Numerous symptoms of inferiority. Enuresis tip to his twelfth year. He is an
uncommonly ambitious and talented person. Indications of spina bifida sacralis,
nevus pigmentostis in the right groin, several hemangionias below the region of
the right kidney. Segmental inferiority. The patient tried to help his troubles by
strenuous "touring." Also note above the instinctive running through the streets.
The maternal line shows a number of psychoses.
43. Alexander E., 33 years old, with hypochondriacal attacks since puberty,
complains of suddenly arising attacks of anxiety and fear of a threatening
misfortune. Forgetfulness, disinclination and inability for work. Early
masturbation which has continued until recently. Bacteriuria. Relaxed sphincter.
Enuresis up to his eighth year.
44. Julius N., brass-founder, 33 years old: Attacks of suicidal ideas, ideas of
injury, inability to work on account of headaches and dizziness, which set in.
Sexual impotence for a year. The patient was precocious and suffered from
enuresis up to his twelfth year. A strong inclination to religious ideas comes in
relation to sexual motives from his childhood. Homosexual inclinations.
45. Moritz Sch., 40 years old, a merchant complains of suddenly arising
states of anxiety at home, in business, in busy streets. At the same time a feeling
of weakness in the legs and pains in the sacral region. Is afraid of an apoplectic
seizure and tabes. Admits temporary impotence. Partial adhesion of the glans
with the inner preputial membrane. Enuresis up to his twelfth year. Occasional
traces of albumin in the urine. His father died at 50 of cardiac paralysis.
Neuroses in several of his brothers and sisters. Eagerly pursued rowing and
swimming sports. His legs are too short for the tremendously developed body.
46. Otto St., 13 years old, collegian, had numerous attacks in connection
with pertussis in which he sprang about in bed, or in the room, panting, kicking
about, and with his features distorted by fear, pulled himself loose if any one
tried to hold him, until after about ten minutes he calmed down. His recollection
of the attack was not wholly wiped out, he knew that "something had happened

to him." Usually a connection could be found between these attacks and
unfulfilled wishes. He had always been a wild boy, who lived with his
stepmother in a state of continual wrangling. Enuresis up to the present and at
times pavor nocturnus.
47. Lenore B., 20 years old, began to "kick about" at the age of 7, that is she
had attacks in which she made motions of the legs such as children make when
they have a full bladder. In addition to this she swung her arms and twisted her
body. Finally she hurried to the toilet and locked the door. Later there were
attacks of unconsciousness, of which there was apparently complete amnesia.
Since these attacks also occurred in her sleep, and were at times connected with
passing of the urine, and since, moreover, dilation and loss of reaction of the
pupils were noticed during an attack, the patient was usually regarded as an
epileptic and treated accordingly, and at all events without success, with
bromids. It was only by means of psychoanalysis that the psychic conditioning
of the attacks could be indicated, which showed a continuity with the
occurrences of the day, and revealed particularly a tendency hostile to the
mother and in the mental impressions their translation uncovered many
references to the toilet. In her earliest mental development the enuresis of her
brothers and sisters played a part, which she, in spite of a like tendency--she also
had suffered shipwreck sometimes--escaped through the rivalry with her brother
and the iron severity of her mother, only that later by reason of the entrance of
sexual precocity the fundamental inferiority might be recognized in the neurosis.
The father shows inability to urinate in the presence of others and nucleo-
albuminuria; the mother comes from an enuretic family. The patient has distinct
homosexual inclinations and shows a slight scoliosis in the lower section of the
thoracic portion of the spine.
48. Johann E., 13 years old. became subject to punishment when he one
night, in a somnambulistic condition, took a knife and attacked his sleeping
father Enuresis up to the present. As a child he was very timid and was afraid of
being alone, and of the dark. Often cried out in his sleep, often walked in his
sleep without remembering it after he woke up. Drowsiness on waking, great
difficulty in arousing him. He was seduced to masturbation at the age of 6 and to
coitus at the age of 10. Strongly religious temperament. Often ran away from
home, was very fond of Indian stories and could not adjust himself to the
coercion of school.
49. Jakob K., 16 years old, an apprentice, became punishable for stealing
from his master. Enuresis up to two years ago. Precocious. Already had to his
account a great number of robberies as a servant, and had bolted innumerable
times, to wander about the alleys without shelter.

50. Leopold W., 14 years old, a musician, was accused of the theft of
instruments, the money for which he used in a senseless manner. Enuresis up to
the age of 10 and incontinence of the bowels for which reason he was severely
beaten. In his eleventh year he was run over by a trolley-car and since then has
often suffered from suddenly arising dizziness which usually attacks him in the
street. Since that time also he has had occasional attacks of unconsciousness
which did not show a psychic origin. No attack was observed by a physician
however. During the trial, throughout which he was at liberty, he was tempted to
a second theft and was condemned. After he left the prison--during his stay there
he had had further attacks--he soon appropriated others' belongings again. Quite
according to the whole scheme of the person--lack of sufficient compensation in
the inferior brain, which can be proved by the apparently epileptic attacks, by the
senseless use of the stolen instruments, by the deficient mental development and
the ease with which he can be tempted to steal--it was all too easy, after the first
theft, to recognize in him the future habitual thief into which he soon developed.
Glossary of Medical Terms
adventitious: Of or belonging to a structure that develops in an unusual place.
albuminuria: The presence of albumin in the urine, sometimes indicating
kidney disease.
alimentary: Concerned with food, nutrition, or digestion.
anamnestic : Of/or relating to a second rapid increased production of
antibodies in response to an immunogenic substance after serum antibodies from
a first response can no longer be detected in the blood
angulus ludovica: (angulus Ludovici) The sternal angle of the lateral border of
the sternum.
anomalies: Abnormalities or deviations.
appendicitis: Inflammation of the vermiform appendix.
areola: A small ring of color around a center portion, as about the nipple of the
breast or the part of the iris surrounding the pupil of the eye.
atrophic: A wasting or decrease in size of a bodily organ, tissue, or part owing
to disease, injury, or lack of use.
bacteria : (plural of bactrium) Any of the unicellular, prokaryotic
microorganisms of the class Schizomycetes, which vary in terms of morphology,
oxygen and nutritional requirements, and motility, and may be free-living,
saprophytic, or pathogenic, the latter causing disease in plants or animals.
Basedow's disease neuroses : Basedow’s goiter--an enlarged thyroid
gland, characterized by oversecretion of thyroid hormone. It occurs after iodine

therapy. (The neurosis may be an accompanying symptom.)
bronchitis: Chronic or acute inflammation of the mucous membrane of the
bronchial tubes.
carcinomas : An invasive malignant tumor derived from epithelial tissue
that tends to metastasize to other areas of the body. 
cardiac hypertrophy: A nontumorous enlargement of an organ or a tissue as a
result of an increase in the size rather than the number of constituent cells.
causa movens: A motive cause.
central nervous system: The portion of the vertebrate nervous system
consisting of the brain and spinal cord.
cervical vertebra: Of or relating to a neck or a cervix. Any of the bones or
cartilaginous segments forming the spinal column.
chill: A sensation of coldness, often accompanied by shivering and pallor of the
skin.
chlorosis: An iron-deficiency anemia, primarily of young women, characterized
by a greenish-yellow discoloration of the skin.
cholelithiasis: The presence or formation of gallstones in the gallbladder or bile
ducts.
cholera : An acute infectious disease of the small intestine, caused by the
bacterium Vibrio cholerae and characterized by profuse watery diarrhea,
vomiting, muscle cramps, severe dehydration, and depletion of electrolytes.
chronic catarrh: Inflammation of mucous membranes, especially of the nose
and throat.
circulatory system : The system of structures, consisting of the heart,
blood vessels, and lymphatics, by which blood and lymph are circulated
throughout the body.
conjuctiva bulbi : Two membranes in the eye. The palpebral conjunctiva
lines the inner surface of the eyelids. It is thick, dull, and supplied with blood
vessels. The bulbar conjunctiva covers the front part of the white of the eye
(sclera). It is thin and transparent.
conjunctiva: The mucous membrane that lines the inner surface of the eyelid
and the exposed surface of the eyeball.
conjunctival eczema : (eczema) Swelling of the outer skin of unknown
cause. In the early stage it may be itchy, red, have small blisters, and be swollen,
and weeping. Later it becomes crusted, scaly, and thickened. Eczema is not a
distinct disease. 
constipation: Difficult, incomplete, or infrequent evacuation of dry, hardened
feces from the bowels.
convergent strabismus : The coordinated turning of the eyes inward to

focus on an object at close range. A visual defect in which one eye cannot focus
with the other on an objective because of imbalance of the eye muscles. Also
called squint.
cornea: The transparent, convex, anterior portion of the outer fibrous coat of the
eyeball that covers the iris and the pupil and is continuous with the sclera.
coryza: (rhinitis) Inflammation of the mucous membranes of the nose, with a
nasal discharge. It may be seen with a sinus infection.
cretinism : A congenital condition caused by a deficiency of thyroid
hormone during prenatal development and characterized in childhood by
dwarfed stature, mental retardation, dystrophy of the bones, and a low basal
metabolism. Also called congenital myxedema.
cystic: Of, relating to, or involving the gallbladder or urinary bladder.
diabetes: Any of several metabolic disorders marked by excessive discharge of
urine and persistent thirst, especially one of the two types of diabetes mellitus.
diabetic iritis: Inflammation of the iris of the eye.
diarrhea: Excessive and frequent evacuation of watery feces, usually indicating
gastrointestinal distress or disorder.
diphtheria : An acute infectious disease caused by the bacillus
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, characterized by the production of a systemic
toxin and the formation of a false membrane on the lining of the mucous
membrane of the throat and other respiratory passages, causing difficulty in
breathing, high fever, and weakness. The toxin is particularly harmful to the
tissues of the heart and central nervous system.
dysentery : An inflammatory disorder of the lower intestinal tract, usually
caused by a bacterial, parasitic, or protozoan infection and resulting in pain,
fever, and severe diarrhea, often accompanied by the passage of blood and
mucus.
embryologic: The embryonic structure or development of a particular organism.
emphysema : A pathological condition of the lungs marked by an abnormal
increase in the size of the air spaces, resulting in labored breathing and an
increased susceptibility to infection. It can be caused by irreversible expansion
of the alveoli or by the destruction of alveolar walls.
epilepsy : Any of various neurological disorders characterized by sudden,
recurring attacks of motor, sensory, or psychic malfunction with or without loss
of consciousness or convulsive seizures.
etiology: The study of causes or origins. The branch of medicine that deals with
the causes or origins of disease.
exogenous: Having a cause external to the body. Used in reference to diseases.
feeble-minded: Exhibiting a marked lack of intelligent consideration and

forethought.
fetal: Of, relating to, characteristic of, or being a fetus.
Furunculosis: A skin condition characterized by the development of recurring
boils.
gallstone : A small, hard, pathological concretion, composed chiefly of
cholesterol, calcium salts, and bile pigments, formed in the gallbladder or in a
bile duct.
glottis: The opening between the vocal cords at the upper part of the larynx.
goiter: A noncancerous enlargement of the thyroid gland, visible as a swelling at
the front of the neck, that is often associated with iodine deficiency.
quoad vitam: Life quality.
hemophilia : Any of several hereditary blood-coagulation disorders in
which the blood fails to clot normally because of a deficiency or an abnormality
of one of the clotting factors. Hemophilia, a recessive trait associated with the
Xchromosome, is manifested almost exclusively in males.
hemorrhages: Excessive discharge of blood from the blood vessels; profuse
bleeding.
heuristic : Of or relating to a usually speculative formulation serving as a
guide in the investigation or solution of a problem. 
hydramnios: an abnormal condition of pregnancy known by an excess of fluid
surrounding the fetus. It occurs in less than 1% of pregnancies and is diagnosed
by feeling, ultrasound, or x-ray examination. It is linked to maternal disorders,
including blood poisoning of pregnancy and diabetes mellitus. Some fetal
disorders may interfere with normal exchange of amniotic fluid, resulting in
hydramnios. The chances of premature breaking of the water sac, premature
labor, and stillbirth are increased. Periodic drawing off of fluid may be
necessary.
hyperfunction: Increased function of any organ or system.
hypermetropia : (hyperopia) farsightedness. A state caused by an error of
refraction in which rays of light entering the eye are brought into focus behind
the retina.
hypertrophic: A nontumorous enlargement of an organ or a tissue as a result of
an increase in the size rather than the number of constituent cells:
hypertrophy: an increase in the size of an organ caused by an increase in the
size of the cells rather than the number of cells.
hypoplasia: Incomplete or arrested development of an organ or a part.
hysteria : A neurosis characterized by the presentation of a physical
ailment without an organic cause, sleepwalking, amnesia, episodes of
hallucinations, and other mental and behavioral aberrations.

imbecility: The state or condition of being an imbecile; moderate or severe
mental retardation.
immunizing: To produce immunity in, as by inoculation.
integument: A natural outer covering or coat, such as the skin of an animal or
the membrane enclosing an organ.
kidney : Either one of a pair of organs in the dorsal region of the vertebrate
abdominal cavity, functioning to maintain proper water and electrolyte balance,
regulate acid-base concentration, and filter the blood of metabolic wastes, which
are then excreted as urine.
laryngitis: Inflammation of the larynx.
lithiasis : Pathological formation of mineral concretions in the body. liver:
A large, reddish-brown, glandular vertebrate organ located in the upper right
portion of the abdominal cavity that secretes bile and is active in the formation
of certain blood proteins and in the metabolism of carbohydrates, fats, and
proteins.
locus minoris resistentiae: Latin meaning a place of less resistance. A locus
minoris resistentiae offers little resistance to microorganisms.
Loffler's bacillus: The bacillus that causes diphtheria.
Lombroso : Italian criminologist who suggested that some individuals are
born with criminal dispositions and can be identified by certain physical
characteristics.
lues: Syphilis.
lupus : Any of several diseases, especially systemic lupus erythematosus,
that principally affect the skin and joints but often also involve other systems of
the body.
macroscopic: Large enough to be perceived or examined by the unaided eye.
medulla oblongata : The lowermost portion of the vertebrate brain,
continuous with the spinal cord, responsible for the control of respiration,
circulation, and certain other bodily functions.
metabolic : (metabolism) The complex of physical and chemical processes
occurring within a living cell or organism that are necessary for the maintenance
of life. In metabolism some substances are broken down to yield energy for vital
processes while other substances, necessary for life, are synthesized.
Meynert : Dr. Theodor Meynert (1833-1898) was born in Germany. A few
years later the family moved to Vienna. After his medical training, he
immediately gravitated to neurology and to psychiatry. But his interest in
neuroanantomy permitted him to describe regional differences in the brain. He
wrote a book on psychiatry, considered a brilliant classification of mental illness
on a purely anatomical basis, that was not well received. Many came to learn

neuroanatomy with Meynert and there were mixed feelings about his teachings.
Yet Meynert contributed much to the science of neuroanatomy for others to
follow.
microscopic : Too small to be seen by the unaided eye but large enough to
be studied under a microscope. 
morphologic: The branch of biology that deals with the form and structure of
organisms without consideration of function.
mucous membranes : A membrane lining all body passages that
communicate with the air, such as the respiratory and alimentary tracts, and
having cells and associated glands that secrete mucus.
myoma: A tumor composed of muscle tissue.
nasal catarrh: Inflammation of mucous membranes, especially of the nose and
throat.
neoplasm: An abnormal new growth of tissue in animals or plants; a tumor.
nephritis: Any of various acute or chronic inflammations of the kidneys, such as
Bright's disease.
nephrolithiasis: Stones in the kidneys and the tubes that carry urine from the
kidney into the bladder (ureters)
nephrotoxic: Anything poisonous or destructive to a kidney.
nevus: A congenital growth or mark on the skin, such as a mole or birthmark.
obesity: The condition of being obese; increased body weight caused by
excessive accumulation of fat.
oculist: A physician who treats diseases of the eyes; an ophthalmologist.
orthostatic: Relating to or caused by standing upright.
ovaries: The usually paired female or hermaphroditic reproductive organ that
produces ova and, in vertebrates, estrogen and progesterone.
ovum: The female reproductive cell or gamete of animals; egg.
palatal: Of or relating to the palate.
pancreas : A long, irregularly shaped gland in vertebrates, lying behind the
stomach, that secretes pancreatic juice into the duodenum and insulin, glucagon,
and somatostatin into the bloodstream.
parasite : An organism that grows, feeds, and is sheltered on or in a
different organism while contributing nothing to the survival of its host. 
parenchyma: The tissue characteristic of an organ, as distinguished from
associated connective or supporting tissues.
paresis: Slight or partial paralysis.
pharyngeal reflex : (gag reflex) A normal reflex triggered by touching the
soft palate or back of the throat. The response raises the palate, retracts the
tongue, and contracts the throat muscles.

pharyngeal space: Open area in front of the pharyngeal wall permitting air
passage.
pharyngeal tonsil : One of two masses of spongy lymph tissue on the back
wall of the throat, behind the nasal space. During childhood these masses often
swell with infected material and block air passing from the nose to the throat,
preventing the child from breathing through the nose. Also called adenoid.
phthisic constitution: Archaic. Any illness of the lungs or throat, such as
asthma or a cough.
phthisis: A disease characterized by the wasting away or atrophy of the body or
a part of the body.
pigmentosus: Mole.
postembryonic: Following the embryonic stage of development.
processus coracoideus: (coracoid) A bony process projecting from the scapula
toward the sternum in mammals.
prognosis: A prediction of the probable course and outcome of a disease. The
likelihood of recovery from a disease.
prostate : A gland in men that surrounds the neck of the bladder and the
urethra. It releases a substance that makes semen into a liquid. It is a firm
structure about the size of a chestnut, and is made up of muscular and glandular
tissue. It is located in front of the rectum, through which it can be felt, especially
when enlarged. The ducts that control ejaculation pass on an angle through the
back part of the gland. The substance released by the prostate gland is made up
of alkaline phosphatase, citric acid, and various proteolytic enzymes.
psychogenesis : Development of a physical disorder or illness resulting
from psychic, rather than physiological, factors. 
puberty: The stage of adolescence in which an individual becomes
physiologically capable of sexual reproduction.
pulmonary phthisis: Of, relating to, or affecting the lungs (see above).
pyelitis: Acute inflammation of the pelvis of the kidney, caused by bacterial
infection.
rectum: The terminal portion of the large intestine, extending from the sigmoid
flexure to the anal canal.
renal: Of, relating to, or in the region of the kidneys.
respiratory system : The integrated system of organs involved in the
intake and exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between an organism and the
environment.
scarlet fever : An acute contagious disease caused by a hemolytic
streptococcus, occurring predominantly among children and characterized by a
scarlet skin eruption and high fever.

sclera: The tough, white, fibrous outer envelope of tissue covering all of the
eyeball except the cornea.
seizure: A sudden attack, spasm, or convulsion, as in epilepsy or another
disorder.
sequelae: A pathological condition resulting from a disease.
situs viscerum inversus : A congenital condition in which the organs of the
viscera are transposed through the sagittal plane so that the heart, for example, is
on the right side of the body.
spermatozoon : The mature fertilizing gamete of a male organism, usually
consisting of a round or cylindrical nucleated cell, a short neck, and a thin,
motile tail. Also called sperm cell, zoosperm.
spinous process : The long rearward projection from the arch of a vertebra
that provides a point of attachment for muscles and ligaments. The prominent
dorsal projection from each vertebra.
stigmata : A mark or spot on the skin that bleeds as a symptom of hysteria.
A mark or characteristic indicative of a history of a disease or abnormality.
synoptically: Of or constituting a synopsis; presenting a summary of the
principal parts or a general view of the whole.
tabes: Progressive bodily wasting or emaciation.
thorax: The part of the human body between the neck and the diaphragm,
partially encased by the ribs and containing the heart and lungs; the chest.
thyroid: The thyroid gland.
tuberculosis : An infectious disease of human beings and animals caused
by the tubercle bacillus and characterized by the formation of tubercles on the
lungs and other tissues of the body, often developing long after the initial
infection.
tuberculosis of the lungs: Characterized by the coughing up of mucus and
sputum, fever, weight loss, and chest pain.
tumors: An abnormal growth of tissue resulting from uncontrolled, progressive
multiplication of cells and serving no physiological function; a neoplasm.
turbinate: Of, relating to, or designating a small curved bone that extends
horizontally along the lateral wall of the nasal passage in higher vertebrates.
typhoid : (typhoid fever). An acute, highly infectious disease caused by a
bacillus (Salmonella typhi) transmitted chiefly by contaminated food or water
and characterized by high fever, headache, coughing, intestinal hemorrhaging,
and rose-colored spots on the skin. Also called enteric fever.
ureter: The long, narrow duct that conveys urine from the kidney to the urinary
bladder or cloaca.
urinary strictures: An abnormal narrowing of a urinary duct or passage.

urinary: Of or relating to the organs involved in the formation and excretion of
urine.
urticaria : A skin eruption marked by transient wheals of varying shapes
and sizes with clear margins and pale centers, caused by capillary dilation. The
capillary dilation is caused by vasoactive mediators, including histamine, kinin,
and the reactive substance of anaphylaxis found with antigen-antibody reaction.
Treatment includes antihistamines and removal of the stimulus or allergen.
Cholinergic urticaria appears as wheals surrounded by a large axon flare. It may
be caused by drugs, food, insect bites, inhalants, emotional stress, exposure to
heat or cold, and exercise. Also called hives.
Index

A
abnormality · 58, 176, 195, 200 
above · 6, 17, 20, 21, 24, 34, 41, 43, 46, 50, 59, 72, 77, 79, 89, 97, 98, 99, 101,
102, 103, 104, 109, 110, 123, 126, 127, 128, 134, 135, 137, 141, 142, 145, 147, 
149, 150, 152, 154, 166, 173, 179, 181, 183, 187, 188, 189, 200 abuse · vii, 95 
achievement · 81, 111 
activity · 17, 36, 39, 40, 42, 64, 80, 81, 109, 111, 123, 124, 125, 138, 152, 153, 
154, 164, 167, 168, 172, 180, 181, 182 
active · 24, 54, 63, 95, 100, 107, 119, 129, 134, 157, 197 
adapt · 82, 181 
adaptation · 142, 176 
addiction · iv 
adjustment · x, 47, 66, 175, 181 
adolescence · 200 
affect · ix, x, xi, 15, 57, 71, 74, 102, 153, 158, 197 
affection · iii, x, xi, 35, 63, 66, 75, 76, 77, 90, 91, 96, 101, 132, 143, 147, 155, 
156, 161, 178, 183, 185 
aggression · iii, xi, xii, 62, 63, 66, 67, 68, 77, 84, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 97, 98, 
100, 101, 102, 103 
agoraphobia · 189 
alcohol · 17, 72, 74 
alcoholism · 24, 33, 34, 46, 118, 122, 130, 131, 132, 145, 155, 160, 175 altruism
· 67 
ambition · 64, 84, 96, 97, 99, 101 
ambitious · 101, 189 
analogy · 108, 152, 175 
anger · 66, 67, 100 
anthropology · 15 
antithesis · 67 
Anton, Gabriel · 111, 150, 160 
anxiety · 46, 63, 72, 144, 153, 159, 164, 167, 181, 182, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 
190 
anxious · 101 
arrangement · 102, 104, 123, 142, 150 
arrogance · iv 
art · vii, 4, 15, 32, 46, 53, 67, 84, 169, 170 

artist · 67, 84, 139, 169 
artists · 47, 62, 95, 170, 173 
as if · 24, 83, 86, 91 
asceticism · 102 
Asnaourow, Felix · 94 
assertion · 40, 130 
association · 6, 11 
assumption · xi, 51, 80, 81, 106, 111, 122, 125, 133, 139, 148, 175 
assumptions · iv, 99, 179 
asthma · 68, 131, 143, 144, 199 
attention · 12, 19, 20, 26, 35, 49, 50, 58, 59, 60, 66, 80, 81, 84, 85, 89, 95, 105, 
108, 109, 127, 131, 133, 135, 137, 142, 152, 153, 154, 159, 167, 170, 175, 176, 
180, 182 
attitude · x, xi, 1, 36, 41, 61, 62, 65, 66, 68, 70, 75, 77, 80, 89, 107, 131 avoiding
· 95 
avoidance · 54, 62, 64 
awareness · iii, 16, 17, 44, 68, 123 
awkward · 95, 96 
awkwardness · 95, 102

B
bashfulness · 65 
becoming · 1, 5, 23, 25, 34, 38, 39, 45, 49, 67, 89, 92 
being · 1, 7, 11, 17, 29, 31, 32, 33, 37, 38, 39, 42, 44, 48, 51, 52, 56, 58, 64, 66,
67, 68, 71, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 83, 85, 91, 92, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100,
102, 
107, 122, 133, 139, 144, 147, 149, 150, 152, 155, 157, 158, 182, 187, 191, 195, 
196, 198 
belief · 49, 96, 97, 98, 108 
belonging · 105, 106, 162, 172, 192 
below · 45, 57, 59, 62, 79, 123, 189 
birth order · 98, 103 
biting · 9, 10, 46, 60, 66, 68, 170, 185, 187 
Bleuler, Eugen · 92 
blind · 34, 39, 58, 84, 109, 139 
blindness · 109 
blushing · 68, 97 
body · iii, xii, xiii, 7, 8, 10, 17, 33, 34, 43, 44, 45, 46, 57, 59, 69, 71, 74, 105,
107, 
118, 123, 141, 160, 179, 190, 192, 193, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201
Breuer, Josef · 90

C
case · xi, xii, 6, 9, 20, 29, 41, 44, 47, 49, 52, 53, 57, 58, 59, 63, 66, 72, 81,
82, 83, 
84, 87, 90, 91, 92, 95, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 107, 108, 109, 110, 119, 
121, 123, 126, 127, 128, 129, 131, 133, 135, 138, 139, 142, 143, 144, 146, 147, 
148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 155, 156, 157, 158, 160, 161, 162, 164, 167, 168, 
171, 173, 175, 178, 179, 181, 182, 183, 187 
cases · xi, xii, 7, 12, 26, 27, 31, 33, 35, 36, 40, 41, 42, 43, 49, 54, 57, 58, 59, 63,
66, 71, 72, 76, 80, 81, 84, 90, 91, 92, 93, 96, 104, 105, 106, 108, 109, 117, 118,
119, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 137, 138, 141,
142, 147, 148, 149, 151, 152, 153, 154, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 164, 166,
167, 168, 170, 171, 172, 173, 176, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 188 
catatonic · 68 
causality · 91 
caution · 17, 118 
central nervous system · 64, 78, 81, 93, 105, 110, 121, 126, 127, 129, 130, 131, 
138, 147, 155, 156, 162, 164, 166, 167, 178, 180, 182, 193, 194 change · 11, 37,
65, 69, 72, 73, 79, 80, 83, 106, 132, 133, 156, 168 character · v, 3, 28, 31, 35, 36,
40, 47, 60, 62, 63, 68, 75, 76, 77, 81, 83, 87, 89, 
92, 94, 96, 103, 109, 123, 124, 125, 128, 135, 136, 151, 174, 176, 177, 188
character traits · 75, 81, 96 
characteristics · xii, 32, 33, 37, 51, 66, 69, 76, 82, 83, 93, 96, 102, 121, 124, 129,
144, 173, 175, 176, 181, 197 
child · iii, iv, v, x, xi, xii, 16, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 52,
56, 57, 58, 59, 62, 63, 65, 66, 68, 71, 74, 75, 76, 77, 80, 90, 91, 94, 95, 96, 97, 
98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 137, 138, 139, 140, 144, 146, 147, 153, 156, 157, 
158, 159, 167, 168, 171, 178, 181, 183, 185, 186, 187, 191, 199 children · x, xi,
4, 5, 17, 19, 23, 25, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41, 45, 46, 47, 56, 57, 58, 59,
60, 61, 67, 68, 69, 75, 76, 77, 80, 90, 91, 94, 95, 96, 100, 101, 106, 107, 119,
126, 130, 131, 132, 137, 143, 147, 153, 154, 155, 158, 159, 167, 170, 173, 179,
180, 184, 189, 190, 200 
child guidance · iii, v, x 
choice · xi, 37, 55, 81, 89, 100, 101, 135, 169, 182 
Chvostek, Franz · 188 
clean · 23, 24, 26, 34, 74, 189 
cleanliness · 8, 24, 34 

climacteric · 164, 189 
colic · 145, 146, 147, 149, 158, 161, 182 
common sense · 15 
community · 12, 20, 31, 38, 76, 92 
community feeling · 76 
comparison · 10, 22, 89, 187 
compensation · xi, xii, 64, 65, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 93, 101, 106, 108, 109, 110,
123, 126, 127, 131, 137, 142, 143, 147, 154, 157, 166, 167, 168, 170, 171, 172, 
173, 174, 175, 176, 180, 181, 182, 191 
compensatory · xii, 82, 111, 127, 142, 155, 167, 169, 170, 172, 173, 175, 181,
182 
competition · 2, 5, 11, 31, 66, 97 
complex · v, 44, 46, 63, 76, 105, 107, 108, 110, 197 
compulsion · 142, 164, 167, 168, 175, 181, 182 
compulsive · 89, 98, 102, 185, 189 
concentrate · 35 
concentration · 2, 142, 176, 196 
concept · 42, 64, 78, 86, 104, 109, 155 
conception · 38, 42, 118, 122, 126, 128, 130, 134, 135, 137, 142, 148, 153, 155,
156, 162, 164, 166, 169, 174, 176, 178, 179 
conflict · 74, 96, 101 
conscience · 28, 37, 81, 96, 101 
conscious · 18, 54, 63, 66, 68, 75, 82, 123, 154, 182 
consciousness · iii, 44, 54, 63, 73, 96, 101, 195 
constitution · 90, 111, 132, 180, 181, 199 
contact · 26, 45, 98, 122 
contrariness · 60 
contribution · v, xiii, 47, 64, 73, 83, 108 
convulsion · 200 
convulsions · 185 
cooperate 
cooperation · 160, 175 
courage · 34, 37, 47, 48, 90, 101, 181 
courageous · 36, 37, 61, 187, 189 
coward · 37 
cowardice · 103, 181 
craving · 36, 42, 63 
creative · 69, 150 
creative power · 69 

crime 
criminal · 35, 77, 98, 182, 186, 197 
criminality · 131 
critical · 2, 11, 48, 49, 125, 172 
critique · iv 
cruel 
cruelty · 62, 67 
cry · 33, 34, 40, 66, 170 
crying · 44, 46, 155, 180 
culture · 11, 23, 34, 44, 45, 47, 64, 73, 74, 75, 76, 82, 83, 94, 97, 102, 166, 167, 
170 
cure · 33, 87, 89, 119
D Darwin, Charles · 69, 168 de Vries · iv, vii
deaf · 34, 143
deafmutism · 143 
death · vii, viii, 7, 11, 33, 53, 61, 67, 73, 87, 126, 128, 129, 149, 160, 176, 179, 
187 
defense · 33, 46, 147 
defiance · 93, 94 
deficiency · 104, 107, 123, 124, 125, 127, 128, 135, 137, 138, 141, 142, 146,
147, 
152, 154, 159, 175, 193, 194, 195 
degeneracy · 59, 80 
delusion · 33, 67, 92 
democracy 
democratic · v 
Demosthenes · 85, 138, 169 
dependence · 109, 162 
dependency · 11, 69, 97 
depreciation · iv 
depression · 46, 102, 186 
depressed · 96 
deprivation · 17, 41, 76 
depth · xii 
destruction · 166, 176, 195 
detour · 76 
development · iii, v, xi, xii, xiii, 16, 18, 22, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 
40, 41, 42, 45, 46, 47, 57, 58, 61, 63, 64, 69, 70, 71, 73, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 
82, 83, 84, 87, 89, 90, 91, 94, 96, 97, 98, 99, 102, 103, 104, 105, 107, 109, 117, 

118, 119, 121, 122, 123, 124, 126, 127, 128, 130, 132, 135, 137, 138, 139, 141, 
142, 143, 146, 148, 152, 159, 163, 166, 167, 168, 169, 171, 172, 175, 176, 181, 
186, 190, 191, 194, 195, 196, 199 
diagnosis · 15, 67, 125, 181, 184 
dialectics · 83 
difficulty · 16, 66, 80, 89, 130, 133, 138, 161, 168, 169, 170, 187, 191, 194 
difficulties · xi, 41, 97, 118, 125, 137, 160, 168, 170, 178, 186, 189 discipline ·
vii, x, 15, 30, 47, 76 
disease · ix, xi, xiii, 7, 8, 11, 18, 23, 26, 27, 71, 72, 73, 74, 79, 87, 98, 103, 104, 
106, 108, 115, 117, 118, 119, 121, 124, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 133, 136, 
138, 139, 141, 142, 143, 147, 148, 149, 151, 152, 155, 156, 157, 158, 162, 164, 
176, 178, 179, 192, 193, 194, 195, 198, 199, 200, 201 
disparage 
disparagement · 36, 92, 101, 102 
displace 
displacement · 59, 90, 179 
disposition · iii, xii, 65, 73, 79, 81, 83, 102, 104, 168, 175 
distance · 101, 126, 162 
division of labor · 70 
dog 
dogs · 143, 187 
dominance · 11, 36 
dominant · 33, 66, 81, 83, 103 
doubt · 7, 38, 87, 91, 94, 96, 98, 101, 126, 127, 145, 152, 153, 161, 177 
doubtful · 109, 122 
dream · xii, 34, 37, 68, 74, 86, 87, 167, 171, 180, 181, 186 
dreams · iii, xii, 75, 76, 81, 86, 87, 94, 167, 170, 183, 185, 188, 189 dreams · iii,
xii, 75, 76, 81, 86, 87, 94, 167, 170, 183, 185, 188, 189 drive · iii, x, xi, xii, 37,
39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 75, 76, 
77, 81, 82, 83, 84, 86, 90, 94, 95, 98, 100, 101, 102 
drives · xi, 33, 38, 60, 62, 63, 65, 66, 67, 68, 75, 76, 81, 82, 84, 96, 98, 101, 103,
189 
drug 
drugs · 201

E
eating · 12, 62, 63, 64, 65, 71, 80, 95 
eating disorder · 80 
economy · 20, 124 
economic · iii, ix, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 25, 71, 73, 87 
education · iii, x, 1, 23, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 38, 168 
educator · x, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38 
educators · 36, 38, 39 
ejaculatio precox · 159, 162, 179, 186, 188, 189 
emotion · 66 
emotional · 74, 95, 201 
empathy · 81 
encourage 
encouragement · v 
enemy 
enemies · 7, 20 
energy · 12, 63, 71, 76, 124, 127, 135, 154, 164, 169, 175, 197 
enuresis · 95, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 131, 132, 135, 148, 155,
167, 171, 173, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190 
environment · xiii, 7, 62, 65, 66, 70, 71, 75, 77, 79, 97, 105, 106, 168, 200 
envy · 65, 94, 96, 99, 101 
epileptic · 131, 161, 186, 190, 191 
epilepsy · 34, 46, 60, 67, 68, 122, 130, 131, 132, 164, 173, 180, 182, 195, 200 
epoch · 124 
equal · 36, 75, 101, 106, 125, 138 
equilibrium · 41, 42, 48, 54, 70, 72, 74, 76, 78, 89, 125, 131, 171 
error · 196 
escape · 34, 92, 137 
evil · 12, 42, 181 
examination · 1, 6, 59, 60, 62, 65, 79, 90, 95, 105, 117, 119, 139, 152, 153, 171,
185, 188, 196 
examinations · 17, 62, 67, 91, 93, 144, 153, 170 
excuse · 44 
exhibitionism · 63, 65, 181, 182, 185 
Exner, Sigmund · 115 
expectation · 96, 154 

experience · 15, 27, 32, 33, 44, 47, 51, 65, 71, 90, 95, 99, 101, 102, 123, 124,
125, 145

F
failure · 47, 60, 64, 78, 90, 138, 152, 163 
failures · 23, 41, 74, 78, 92, 127 
family · xi, 2, 6, 7, 38, 46, 61, 63, 65, 73, 79, 80, 82, 84, 92, 93, 94, 95, 103, 105,
126, 128, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 136, 137, 139, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148,
149, 153, 155, 156, 157, 159, 161, 171, 178, 179, 182, 183, 184, 186, 187, 188,
189, 190 
fantasy · 66, 67, 81, 188 
fate · 4, 37, 49, 52, 53, 62, 65, 66, 71, 75, 78, 84, 87, 97, 99, 173 
father · 35, 36, 38, 47, 52, 63, 69, 76, 82, 83, 90, 91, 92, 94, 99, 101, 131, 132,
133, 139, 144, 145, 146, 147, 149, 150, 157, 158, 159, 162, 169, 171, 182, 183,
184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 190, 191 
fatigue · 9 
fear · 16, 36, 37, 39, 42, 43, 46, 48, 49, 53, 54, 63, 67, 68, 77, 82, 86, 87, 92, 95,
96, 102, 139, 161, 181, 186, 188, 189, 190 
feeling · iii, xi, xii, 8, 20, 37, 41, 44, 46, 47, 53, 54, 60, 63, 64, 66, 68, 75, 77, 83,
93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 101, 102, 103, 108, 153, 174, 190, 196 
feeling of community · iii, xi 
feeling of inferiority · 37, 98 
feeling of superiority · 95, 97 
female · 59, 60, 86, 91, 92, 100, 132, 198 
flagellation · 66 
Fliess, Wilhelm · 95, 164 
forget · viii, 50, 156 
form · viii, 2, 3, 7, 19, 40, 49, 54, 57, 64, 66, 70, 76, 77, 98, 106, 107, 110, 117,
121, 123, 124, 125, 131, 136, 141, 143, 144, 150, 167, 171, 172, 181, 182, 186,
198 
freedom · 37, 42, 56 
Freud · iii, iv, v, viii, x, xi, xii, xiii, 34, 42, 44, 49, 51, 63, 65, 83, 86, 90, 131,
136, 138, 167, 168, 173, 179, 180, 181 
friendship · 91 
future · v, x, xi, 12, 28, 31, 36, 56, 71, 73, 79, 98, 99, 115, 167, 191

G
gait · 59, 186
game · 67
games · 15, 38, 46, 67, 82, 97, 188
genital · 121, 136, 162, 163, 176, 188 
genitals · 78, 164, 173, 181 
genius · 82, 83, 131, 166, 169, 172, 182 
glance · 32, 35 
glands · 41, 47, 65, 74, 78, 93, 127, 134, 151, 163, 176, 198 
globus · 157 
goal · xii, 16, 18, 37, 45, 62, 63, 66, 75, 77, 90, 91, 95, 97, 101 
God · 36, 97 
Goethe · 51 
grief · 9 
Gross, Otto · 110 
Grosz, Siegfried · 65 
group · viii, 70, 79, 125, 127, 158, 160, 163, 166 
guidance · 76 
guilt · 50, 94, 97, 98, 101, 102, 103

H
habit · 9, 10, 47
hallucination · 169, 189
hallucinations · 63, 68, 84, 196
happy · 19, 60 
hate · 32, 96, 147 
hate · 50, 92 
headache · 100, 139, 148, 186, 188, 189, 201
headaches · 46, 91, 99, 100, 101, 157, 190 
heart · 7, 8, 23, 41, 50, 53, 60, 68, 74, 127, 129, 132, 144, 150, 161, 163, 164,
182, 
183, 187, 188, 189, 193, 194, 200, 201 
heredity · xii, 40, 64, 69, 84, 94, 118, 121, 122, 123, 124, 126, 130, 131, 132,
136, 
137, 141, 143, 147, 153, 155, 159, 163, 176, 177, 178 
hero · 67, 181 
Hirschfeld, Magnus · 42 
homosexuality · x, 42, 63, 87, 181, 184 
homosexual · 87, 91, 184, 190 
hostility 
hostile · 37, 56, 61, 66, 68, 71, 93, 94, 98, 101, 102, 176, 190 
human · iii, v, xiii, 1, 7, 15, 27, 32, 33, 44, 68, 69, 71, 74, 77, 115, 119, 164, 170,
172, 201 
human nature · v 
humane · 28 
humiliation · 37, 95 
humility · 66 
hunger · 71 
hydrocephalus · 106 
hypersensitivity · xii, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101 
hypnotic · 66, 172 
hypothesis · 107, 117 
hysteria · 53, 67, 68, 89, 97, 102, 130, 132, 133, 139, 146, 147, 152, 155, 159, 
164, 167, 174, 180, 182, 196, 200

I
idea · xiii, 54, 83, 96, 127, 130, 135, 137, 150, 172, 175, 181 
ideal · v, 20, 76, 82 
illness · 6, 9, 20, 31, 33, 34, 38, 54, 59, 65, 73, 78, 79, 83, 106, 119, 122, 123,
124, 128, 136, 199 
image · 86 
imagination · 87, 91 
imperfection
imperfect · 117, 121 
impotence · 18, 67, 138, 159, 182, 186, 187, 188, 190 
inborn · 59, 66, 73, 77, 95, 134 
incomplete · 145, 173, 194 
incompleteness · 175 
incontinence · 95, 110, 139, 170, 179, 180, 186, 187, 191 
indecision · 91 
independence · xii, 36, 47, 76, 96, 106, 108
independent · 3, 11, 109 
Individual Psychology · iv, vii, viii, 63, 64, 83, 89, 99, 101, 104 
individuality · 77 
indolence · 25 
infantile · 65, 138, 154, 155, 159, 167, 169, 170, 173, 180, 189 
infantilism · 65, 164, 179 
inferiority · xii, 37, 57, 65, 72, 73, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 93, 95, 97, 98, 99, 104,
106,
107, 108, 109, 110, 115, 118, 119, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128,
129, 
130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 
147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 
164, 166, 167, 168, 170, 171, 172, 175, 176, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 184, 186, 
189, 190 
inferiority feeling · xii 
inhibition · 68, 90, 91, 97, 101, 102 
inner conflict · 96, 98 
insane · 93 
insight · v, xiii, 40, 67, 80, 81, 163 
intelligence · 16, 123 

intelligent · 96, 195 
intention 
intentions · 28 
interest · iii, iv, ix, x, 2, 10, 15, 17, 22, 26, 27, 28, 30, 33, 34, 57, 66, 73, 86, 91, 
95, 121, 134, 154, 167, 169, 180, 181 
intolerance · 101, 183 
introspection · 63, 172 
intuition · 33, 63, 172 
irritability · 53, 92, 94, 182, 188 
irritable · 99 
isolation · 79

J
jealousy · 35 
jealous · 100 
Jewish · viii 
Jew · viii 
joy · iv, 56, 169 
Jung,Carl Gustav · iii, v, viii, 63 
justice · iv, 93

K
Kahane, Max · 152, 178 Kretschmer · 65, 80

L
language · 35, 40, 82
law · 2, 11, 26, 29, 78, 135, 163
laws · 1, 3, 4, 6, 11, 20, 23, 27, 28, 42, 66, 119
leadership · 28, 29 
leader · 169 
learning · vii, 80, 137, 180 
left-handedness · 95, 125 
lesbian · 86, 87 
libido · 53, 87, 90, 183 
Lichtenberg, George · 66 
life style (see also style of life) · 79 
liveliness · 175 
logic · 33, 92 
Lombroso, Cesare · 83, 131, 170, 197 
love · x, 35, 38, 47, 52, 61, 63, 68, 76, 77, 87, 92, 94, 98 lying · 36, 46, 124, 143,
189, 198

M
male · 39, 60, 86, 91, 200
manic-depressive
mania · 84, 102, 164
mankind · 18, 63, 65, 68, 69, 73, 82 
marriage · 34, 40, 42, 46, 63, 139 
Martius, Friedrich · 115 
masculinity · 38, 40, 42
masculine · 40, 90, 91, 92 
masochism · 62, 66 
mastery · 173 
masturbation · x, 39, 40, 42, 47, 53, 98, 102, 164, 173, 181, 185, 186, 187, 188,
190, 191 
maturation · iii 
mature · 47, 60, 200 
maturity · x, 46, 176 
May, Karl · vii, 126 
megalomania · 63, 65, 84 
melancholia · 102 
melancholy · 41, 97 
memory · 39, 41, 66, 81, 172 
Mendel, Kurt · 69 
menstruation · 164 
mental health · 34, 56 
metaphor · 40 
migraine · 147 
mind · xiii, 6, 24, 29, 33, 50, 51, 52, 56, 74, 84, 87, 90, 94, 97, 117, 163, 171
mistrust · xii, 29, 92, 96, 97 
modesty · 65 
morality · 46 
mother · 34, 35, 38, 42, 44, 47, 52, 69, 82, 90, 91, 94, 99, 100, 101, 123, 126,
131,
132, 133, 134, 136, 140, 144, 145, 149, 150, 151, 156, 157, 158, 160, 162,
183, 
185, 186, 187, 189, 190 
motivation · 83 

motives · 36, 64, 190 
movement · 8, 45, 62, 68, 179 
Müller · viii 
murder · 33, 51 
muscles · 9, 59, 194, 199, 200 music · vii, 180 
musical · 143 
musician · 191 
Mutschmann, Heinrich · 58, 84 myths · 67

N
nation · 16, 19, 20, 44, 61 
national · 1, 20, 66, 89 
nausea · 9, 139, 146, 153, 158, 171 
need · iii, ix, x, xi, 3, 11, 16, 23, 25, 27, 30, 31, 33, 34, 40, 45, 46, 48, 54, 64, 66,
71, 72, 73, 75, 76, 77, 79, 86, 87, 90, 96, 106, 126, 129, 143, 156, 170, 180
negativism · 95 
neglect · 34, 58 
neuralgia · 68 
neurasthenia · 41, 89, 102, 167 
neurosis · xii, xiii, 42, 49, 63, 64, 65, 68, 89, 90, 92, 93, 94, 96, 97, 98, 99, 101,
102, 103, 105, 110, 138, 146, 147, 159, 166, 172, 180, 181, 185, 188, 189,
190, 
192, 196 
neuroses · 47, 67, 82, 84, 89, 90, 92, 97, 98, 102, 110, 111, 128, 129, 133, 135,
136, 138, 144, 145, 148, 155, 157, 159, 164, 166, 167, 172, 173, 182, 192
neurotic · iii, xii, xiii, 54, 60, 62, 64, 65, 68, 75, 76, 77, 89, 91, 92, 95, 102, 109,
110, 111, 128, 181 
normal · 9, 41, 42, 46, 47, 52, 53, 57, 59, 63, 65, 75, 79, 80, 81, 87, 90, 91, 93,
95, 
119, 124, 127, 131, 139, 142, 155, 159, 162, 166, 167, 171, 172, 175, 180, 182, 
183, 184, 185, 187, 189, 196, 199 
normality · 137, 138

O
obedience · 37 
objective · 6, 19, 33, 39, 53, 194 
obstacle · 86 
obstinacy · 36, 93 
obstipation · 100 
occupation · 81, 156, 173 
old age · 11, 12, 16, 32, 84, 183 
opinion · 6, 22, 42, 77, 79, 81, 86, 87, 95, 131, 132, 143, 145 opponent · 2 
optimism · v, xi 
oral · vii, 53, 54, 145, 146, 153, 155, 157 
orator · 138, 159, 169 
organ · iii, xi, xii, 45, 58, 62, 64, 65, 66, 68, 70, 71, 72, 73, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82,
83, 84, 85, 93, 94, 95, 97, 98, 101, 102, 103, 104, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110,
111, 
118, 119, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 
135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 152, 153, 
154, 155, 156, 159, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 170, 171, 172, 173, 
174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 192, 193, 196, 197, 198, 199 organ
dialect · iii 
organ inferiority · iii, xi, xii, 66, 68, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 85, 93, 94, 97, 98,
102, 104, 108, 109, 110, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 128, 129, 135, 136, 137, 138,
139, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 147, 149, 152, 153, 159, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165,
166, 170, 172, 175, 177, 178, 180, 181 
organ jargon · iii 
organic disorder · 91 
orientation · 79, 102, 142 
overcoming · 71, 78, 79, 86, 102, 166, 176 
oversensitivity 
overcompensation · xi, xiii, 78, 83, 84, 93, 95, 169, 171, 172

P
pain · 61, 67, 68, 91, 93, 97, 99, 100, 102, 146, 147, 184, 194, 201 painter ·
139, 160 
palpitation · 68, 144, 161, 188, 189
palpitations · 41, 53 
pampering 
pampered · 34, 37, 76 
paralysis · 68, 93, 173, 186, 188, 190, 199 
paranoia · 67, 84, 89, 92, 97, 102, 164, 182, 183 
parent · 35, 46, 71, 72, 90, 102 
parents · x, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 45, 47, 48, 52, 56, 59, 61, 63, 68, 69,
72, 76, 90, 91, 95, 100, 106, 119, 130, 134, 137, 147, 149, 169, 175, 186
passivity 
passive · 31, 54, 95, 129, 134 
patient · 11, 29, 33, 48, 53, 54, 59, 68, 82, 83, 84, 87, 89, 92, 93, 119, 122, 126, 
134, 137, 138, 139, 144, 145, 146, 147, 149, 150, 153, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 
161, 163, 171, 173, 182, 183, 184, 185, 187, 188, 189, 190 
pattern · xii, 32, 94, 102 
peace · 42, 56 
pedantry · 97 
penis · 179 
perception · iv, 54, 58, 66, 83, 108, 137, 172 
personality · iii, xii, 32, 63, 82 
perspective · v, 1, 17, 175 
pertussis · 190 
perverse · 53, 54, 62, 98 
perversion · 45, 53, 54, 86 
Pfister, Oskar Robert · 63 
philosophy · iii, iv, xii, 15, 82, 85, 97 
phobia · 50 
photophobia · 160 
physician · iii, x, xiii, 1, 11, 15, 17, 29, 31, 33, 34, 38, 39, 41, 42, 58, 87, 142,
150, 
156, 161, 185, 191, 198 
physics · 15 
play · 10, 33, 34, 37, 51, 62, 84, 96, 97, 117, 119, 125, 166, 167, 185 pleasure ·

40, 46, 47, 62, 64, 66, 76, 77, 82, 92, 138, 167, 168, 172, 173 poet · 84 
poetry · 67 
politics · 20, 67 
pollution · 23, 24, 187, 188 
possession · 105, 173 
poverty · ix, 16, 23, 24, 25 
power · iv, ix, x, 7, 18, 33, 43, 63, 66, 67, 69, 73, 75, 84, 95, 101, 129, 134, 137, 
145, 155, 164, 172, 174, 176, 186 
practical · 15, 17, 20, 23, 31, 40, 44, 57 
praise · 28 
precocious · 101, 185, 190 
precocity · 173, 186, 190 
predestination · 65 
prediction · 199 
pregnancy · 41, 118, 131, 163, 164, 179, 184, 196 
pregnant · 23, 25, 34, 56 
prejudice · xi, 61 
prestige · 29 
primitive · 24, 44, 76, 81, 94, 129, 181 
probability · 86, 106, 123, 141 
problem · x, 12, 17, 18, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 34, 44, 59, 70, 81, 90, 94, 121, 130, 
179, 195 
profession · x, 18, 20, 28, 30, 31, 135, 146, 155, 157, 169 
projection · 149, 200 
proof · 15, 23, 86, 95, 97, 128, 135, 137, 141, 148, 153, 161 
prosperity · 56 
prostitute · xii, 86, 87 
prostitution · 24, 39, 43, 87 
protection · 2, 23, 27, 28, 33, 42, 74, 123, 181 
provocation · 157, 161 
psyche · x, 34, 48, 49, 54, 62, 65, 66, 75, 76, 78, 82, 83, 84, 89, 91, 93, 95, 96,
97, 
101, 123, 138, 141, 153, 154, 155, 167, 168, 169, 170, 172, 173, 180 psychic ·
41, 48, 54, 64, 68, 78, 81, 83, 106, 110, 111, 164, 168, 169, 170, 171, 
172, 173, 176, 180, 182, 187, 188, 190, 191, 195, 199 
psychology · iv, vii, viii, xi, xii, 44, 85, 87, 115 
psychological · iii, v, xi, xii, 34, 42, 44, 45, 50, 53, 54, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 72,
75, 76, 78, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 86, 87, 89, 91, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 102, 103,
166 

psychosis · 64, 89, 159, 169 
psychosomatic · 74 
psychotherapist · 92 
punishment · x, 5, 35, 36, 42, 48, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 101, 102, 191 purpose · x,
45, 50, 54, 77, 85, 97, 100, 115, 123 
purposeful · 63, 102

Q
quantitative · 142, 166

R
race · 7, 63, 69 
rage · 6, 186 
reality · 36, 53, 74, 92 
reason · vii, 11, 12, 27, 30, 34, 40, 41, 47, 48, 50, 52, 96, 100, 121, 126, 134,
137,
161, 163, 166, 168, 169, 170, 171, 179, 181, 190, 191 
reasoning · 91, 162 
recollection · 52, 172, 190 
reflex · 65, 80, 81, 94, 109, 123, 126, 133, 135, 139, 142, 144, 145, 146, 147,
148,
149, 150, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 164, 166,
169, 
170, 171, 173, 179, 180, 187, 199 
reflexes · 80, 104, 105, 109, 131, 141, 142, 146, 147, 149, 152, 153, 154, 157, 
159, 160, 171, 186 
refraction · 196 
Reich, Julius · 64, 84 
rejection · 63 
religion · 66, 86, 87 
religious · 15, 66, 87, 98, 181, 190, 191 
remorse · 50 
repression · xii, 47, 54, 83, 90, 167, 168, 173 
repressed · 47, 54, 86, 138 
resistance · 5, 16, 38, 49, 54, 72, 73, 74, 86, 94, 124, 176, 197 
responsibility · iii, vii, 2, 23, 28, 35, 39, 52 
responsible · 3, 28, 37, 53, 119, 197 
retreating · 63 
revenge · 91 
revolutionary · 67 
role · ix, x, xii, 3, 10, 15, 17, 26, 29, 32, 37, 41, 52, 62, 75, 84, 90, 91, 92, 94, 96,
99, 100, 101, 107, 122, 146, 152 
rule · 42, 71, 75, 92 
rules · 19, 20

S
sadism · 62 
sadistic · 62 
safeguarding · 70 
schema · 117 
scheme · 29, 38, 102, 148, 191 
Schiller, Friedrich · 51, 84 
school · 1, 16, 19, 25, 30, 31, 37, 38, 39, 46, 47, 52, 59, 99, 111, 144, 148, 170,
180, 185, 191 
Schumann, Clara · 85, 169 
science · vii, xi, 1, 15, 16, 17, 20, 30, 31, 33, 61, 63, 65, 68, 73 
second child · 181 
security · 97 
seduction · x, 46, 47 
self · iv, xi, xii, 28, 29, 30, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 49, 50, 52, 63, 66, 76, 77, 82, 96,
97, 102, 156, 166, 187 
self-assertion · 38, 77 
self-centeredness · xi 
selfconfidence · 34, 37, 96 
self-preservation · 82 
selfreproach · 97, 102, 187 
sensation · 64, 108, 138, 156, 157, 193 
sense organ · 108, 109 
sensitive · 37, 95, 99, 139, 171 
sensitiveness · 139 
sex · x, 39, 53, 65, 70, 86, 87, 90, 101, 102 
sexual · x, xi, xii, 8, 33, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 52, 60, 62,
63, 64, 65, 66, 68, 70, 75, 82, 86, 90, 98, 100, 102, 105, 107, 132, 143, 156, 162,
163, 164, 173, 176, 178, 179, 181, 185, 186, 188, 189, 190, 200 
sexuality · iii, x, 38, 40, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 53, 75, 189 
Shakespeare · 51, 61, 180 
shame · x, 28, 39, 46, 77, 95 
shock · 48 
Shylock · 180 
shyness · 37, 181 
sickness · 6, 20, 22, 48, 67, 73, 126, 128, 146, 147, 184, 185 

significance · 7, 10, 63, 65, 69, 71, 73, 79, 103, 119, 121, 122, 130, 133, 135,
137, 138, 141, 145, 148, 156, 159, 163, 180 
significant · v, 3, 9, 10, 15, 23, 26, 27, 32, 42, 46, 54, 59, 65, 69, 75, 76, 77, 87,
98, 101, 106, 129, 179 
silence · 96 
simplicity · iv, 152 
sin · 98, 181 
skin · 8, 9, 44, 58, 59, 60, 74, 93, 108, 110, 126, 127, 131, 133, 138, 145, 148,
149, 152, 163, 168, 173, 179, 193, 195, 196, 197, 198, 200, 201 
sleep · 8, 41, 68, 71, 90, 180, 184, 187, 190, 191 
sleepiness · 187 
sleep · 191 
sleepsleeplessness · 68, 144, 186 
smell · 95 
social · iii, iv, ix, x, xi, xii, 1, 5, 11, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32,
37, 38, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 56, 60, 61, 63, 64, 66, 68, 71, 72, 73, 75, 76, 77,
79, 81, 82, 83, 92, 94, 96, 97, 126, 132, 137, 168 
society · v, xi, 38, 42, 44, 56, 73, 76 
soul · v, 32, 33 
speech · 58, 80, 85, 95, 138, 143, 144, 146, 149, 150, 156, 157, 159, 160, 169,
172, 187 
sperm · 200 
squinting · 138 
stammer · 170 
stammering · 58, 95, 161, 185 
stature · 194 
status · 28, 36, 184 
stealing · 46, 191 
stomach · 8, 9, 59, 60, 68, 82, 91, 133, 135, 145, 147, 148, 150, 171, 188, 198 
stress · 79, 94, 119, 123, 131, 148, 163, 178, 179, 189, 201 
striving · iii, xii, 2, 17, 30, 35, 66, 67, 70, 74, 75, 77, 79, 81, 84, 150 striving for
significance · iii 
stuttering · 58, 81, 95, 97, 109, 138, 143, 144, 155, 189 
sublimation · 63 
submission · 12 
submissiveness · 40, 66 
success · 17, 19, 92, 96, 106, 168, 175, 190 
sucking · xi, 44, 60, 83, 138, 143, 155, 167, 173 
suffering · xi, 7, 44, 49, 57, 60, 67, 84, 87, 92, 126, 150, 154, 158, 182, 183 

suggestibility · 66 
suggestion · 106, 110, 184 
suicide · 66, 68 
superiority · 92, 97, 182 
superior · 66, 72, 89, 100, 101, 136, 138, 158, 168 
superstition · 49, 56, 74, 97 
suspicion · xii, 73, 86, 97, 141, 142, 148, 160, 182, 187, 189 
syle · v, vii 
symbol · 54 
symbols · 2, 97 
sympathy · 67 
symptom · 33, 36, 58, 89, 105, 107, 108, 109, 178, 179, 180, 183, 188, 192, 200 
symptoms · xii, 27, 41, 53, 54, 56, 60, 89, 97, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 107,
108, 109, 110, 111, 117, 119, 131, 146, 189
T Tandler, Julius · 65
teacher · 35, 47, 63, 76, 77, 158, 170, 183
teachers · 30, 31, 32, 38, 39, 46, 47, 48, 67, 76
teeth · 10, 53, 57, 83, 92, 133, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 149, 150, 153, 157,
158, 170, 179 
telepathy · 67 
temperament · 32, 130, 191 
tenderness · 94, 180, 183 
tension · 65, 70, 71, 76, 81, 98, 110, 154, 170, 183 
the question · v, 17, 28, 44, 45, 89, 91, 100, 109, 117, 121, 124, 131, 134, 145,
173 
theoretical · 44, 49, 51, 57 
thinking · iii, xii, 32, 75, 88, 171 
thirst · 194 
thought · viii, xii, 20, 28, 49, 50, 52, 81, 82, 87, 92, 110, 115, 122, 137 
thrifty · 81 
thyroid · 58, 93, 109, 121, 125, 133, 150, 152, 192, 194, 195, 201 
time · iii, iv, v, vii, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 15, 17, 20, 22, 25, 28, 30, 31, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39,
42, 44, 47, 48, 51, 52, 53, 54, 58, 60, 62, 67, 72, 74, 79, 80, 81, 83, 84, 86, 89,
90, 91, 92, 95, 97, 100, 104, 115, 118, 119, 122, 123, 125, 126, 127, 132, 133,
134, 137, 138, 139, 141, 143, 144, 148, 153, 156, 157, 159, 160, 161, 162, 166,
167, 168, 169, 171, 172, 175, 176, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188,
189, 190, 191 
timidity · 63, 92, 96, 187 
Tolstoy, Nikolayevich · 67 

tooth · 10, 145 
training · vii, x, 5, 31, 33, 54, 90, 94, 108, 119, 126, 142, 176, 182 
trait · 87, 96, 181, 188, 195 
traits · x, 32, 76, 82, 93, 97, 98, 110, 171 
transference · 45, 119 
trauma · 98 
traumatic · 90, 103, 167 
treatment · 1, 35, 38, 41, 44, 58, 59, 60, 82, 118, 119, 146, 149, 156, 167 truth ·
20, 36

U
uncertainty · xii 
unconscious · 49, 50, 53, 54, 65, 74, 75, 82, 86, 92, 154 
understanding · iv, xiii, 7, 15, 20, 31, 32, 37, 38, 45, 56, 67, 69, 73, 77, 89, 101,
128, 169, 181 
unhappy · 98 
unique · v, 6, 44, 72, 75, 77, 103, 142 
uniqueness · 103 
unity · 38, 69, 103, 147 
unruliness · 46
V vain · 144
value · iv, 20, 37, 39, 49, 106, 119, 122, 128, 141, 142, 155, 166, 169, 178 values
· iv, 43
vanity · 36, 64, 65, 66 
venereal disease · x, 17, 19, 34, 39, 40, 42, 87, 88 
vertical · 150 
virtue · 97 
vomiting · 60, 68, 81, 109, 135, 138, 139, 146, 153, 155, 158, 161, 170, 171, 193

W
Wagner, Richard · 68 
war · 66, 67 
washing compulsion · 185 
weakness · 36, 41, 59, 72, 95, 110, 127, 142, 152, 163, 172, 179, 180, 183, 185,
188, 190, 194 
weeping · 193 
Wexberg, Erwin · 62 
Wild · 190 
wisdom · v 
wish · xii, 24, 52, 74, 86, 87, 93, 96, 100, 123, 130, 134, 151, 152, 156, 163, 166,
167, 175, 181 
withdrawal · 37, 97 
woman · 34, 51, 54, 56, 87, 98, 99, 139, 154, 169, 186, 189 
work · iii, iv, v, vii, x, xi, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 20, 24, 25, 28,
29,
31, 33, 35, 37, 38, 40, 41, 44, 46, 51, 56, 66, 74, 79, 81, 90, 98, 104, 105,
109, 
110, 115, 124, 125, 126, 130, 135, 158, 160, 167, 172, 175, 176, 178, 180, 188, 
190 
world · xi, xii, 3, 4, 9, 11, 12, 16, 32, 37, 45, 48, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69,
70, 
71, 74, 76, 77, 81, 82, 84, 87, 93, 96, 166, 167, 171, 173, 176, 177

Y
younger · 53, 123, 132, 185, 187 youngest · 156
Appendix: A Psychology for Democracy1
Henry T. Stein, Ph.D. 
Introduction
This paper reflects my passionate interest in the ideas and character of five
architects of democracy: Socrates, Thomas Jefferson, Frank Lloyd Wright,
Abraham Maslow, and Alfred Adler, and their potential impact on American
life.
In the United States, we live in a unique democratic political structure that
held great promise two centuries ago, but has eroded badly into unbridled
selfinterest. Instead of cooperative democratic families, schools, and businesses,
we find competitive, autocratic, or anarchic circles of conflict. Our stated
political ideals blatantly contradict our normal daily behavior.
Two political critics, William Greider and Philip Slater believe that our
vision and realization of democracy have deteriorated badly. They agree on one
fundamental solution to the revitalization of democracy. The democratic ideal
must start within the individual and gradually spread to family, friendships,
school, and the world of work. Only people who have developed a democratic
character structure can make democratic living a reality. It takes daily small-
scale practice of democratic principles to prepare a citizen for the wider
challenges of social responsibility.
How can we foster the development of democratic character in our citizens?
First, train parents to develop democratic parenting practices at home that will
give children an early experience of a democratic family life. Second, train
teachers to develop democratic practices in the classroom. They could extend or
correct the home climate. Subsequently, universities and businesses are further
opportunities for training in democratic living.
One of the last frontiers for developing democratic character, or correcting
an undemocratic one, is psychotherapy. Unfortunately, many value-free
therapeutic approaches relieve personal distress, but reinforce self-centeredness.
Classical Adlerian psychotherapy, with its emphasis on social equality, mutual
respect, cooperation, responsibility, and contribution, provides the means of
revitalizing democracy by addressing the core of the problem: correcting

undemocratic character structures. 
Classical Adlerian psychology offers hope in a time of widespread
disillusionment. The revitalization of democracy will not only have to come
from the top down. It will also have to come from the bottom up--a grass roots
movement of ordinary people living, loving, and working democratically every
day.
1 This paper was originally presented at the 21st International Congress of
Individual Psychology on August 26, 1999 in Oak Brook, Illinois. It has been
revised and expanded for this publication.
Role of Character in Our Political Ideal
The early American political ideal of democracy was tempered by an
awareness of the role of character. The framers of the Constitution understood
well that advancing the ideal of "liberty and justice for all" requires a virtuous
citizenry. Thomas Jefferson argued that democracy depends upon the cultivation
of "public-spiritedness" which will not flourish spontaneously, but must be
taught. Benjamin Franklin stated that "only a virtuous people are capable of
freedom" and Theodore Roosevelt claimed that "educating a person in mind and
not in morals is to educate a menace to society." When Alexis de Tocqueville
visited the United States in the 1830's, it was the Americans' propensity for civic
association and civic virtue that most impressed him as the key to their
unprecedented ability to make democracy work. Quoting Marvin Berkowitz, in
his article, "Educating for Character and Democracy:" "It is clear that moral
character is part of democratic functioning." Unfortunately, the development of
democratic character has been neglected for generations.
Contemporary Problems in Our Democracy
Today, many negative influences prevent or inhibit the actualization of our
democratic ideal; some of them are political. Vaclav Havel has warned that
democracy arouses mistrust in some parts of the world because it lacks a
"spiritual dimension that connects all cultures and, in fact, all humanity." For
many people, the concept of rights, with responsibility and obligation, has been
displaced by the idea of rights as the entitlements of individuals freed of "any
and all ties of reciprocal obligation and mutual interdependence." Philip Slater,
in A Dream Deferred, states: "most people see democracy as a merely political
phenomenon. Democracy does not stop at the borders of politics: it only begins
there. Most of our public and private organizations are still authoritarian in
structure--our corporations, professions, and educational institutions have yet to
feel more than the palest breath of democratic influence. Most Americans work
in settings that are resolutely authoritarian, especially the working class." Slater
believes that authoritarian rulers are antagonistic to anything that will help the

public "grow up"--such as the exposure of secrets or the expenditure of funds for
education. In a democracy, the fundamental goal of education is development.
For authoritarians it is obedience. An ignorant populace is more likely to be an
obedient one. Less money for education means larger classes--more time spent
keeping order--students learn how to take orders and be quiet. Finally, Slater
offers a scathing criticism of a powerful wealth addict: "It is impossible for a
billionaire to believe fully in democracy, for a feeling of community and
interdependence would make it impossible for him to continue to clutch with
such tenacity so disproportionate a share of the world's resources." In The
Betrayal of American Democracy, William Greider states: "Americans cannot
teach democracy to the world until they restore their own." Politically, our
democracy is still struggling through a troubled adolescence.
We have some serious economic problems that inhibit democratic living. In
"The New American Nationalism and the Fourth American Revolution,"
Michael Lind, the senior editor of the New Republic, describes our society:
"where the wealthy elites have been enabled, by a deft use of the tax system, the
international market and the relationship between trusts and education, to
arrange matters so that they live in a different country from their ostensible
fellow citizens. They have their own schools, resorts, banks and information
networks. They have their own private police and security systems. They have,
by virtue of the "wealth primary," to which all candidates must submit,their own
senators and Congressmen. To correct this plutocratic tendency, Mr. Lind
advocates a bracing dose of class consciousness among the hard-working saps
who, as the saying goes, "play by the rules" and are laid off or impoverished for
their pains." William Greider, in "One World, Ready or Not," states rather
succinctly: "Democracy itself will always be stunted by the exaggerated political
power exercised by concentrated wealth. The problem is not that capital is
privately owned, as Marx supposed. The problem is that most people don't own
any." About capitalism, Greider adds: "The capitalist process, by its nature,
encourages infantile responses from every quarter, as people are led to maximize
selfinterest and evade responsibility for the collateral consequences of their
activities, the damage to other people or society or the natural environment." Our
economic inequities cannot be ignored indefinitely.
The business world presents a host of conditions that deny democratic
functioning every day for many people. Judith Wyatt & Chauncey Hare, authors
of Work Abuse: How to Recognize and Survive It, describe the psychologically
damaging conditions that many workers experience daily. They claim: "Work
abuse is the flagrant mistreatment or silent abuse of people in the staggering
number of Western work organizations that remain authoritarian and overcontrol

employees. Ninety-five percent of work organizations are autocratic; they
sustain productivity losses and fail to meet their customers' or clients' needs
because most top-level managers refuse to share power with employees and
instead blame them for systems' problems for which managers themselves are
responsible. Most people in these abusive organizations, like children in abusive
families, stay blind to the abuse in order to survive it." In describing the massive
power of corporations, Charles Reich in Opposing the System, says: "What
primarily ails us is "economic government"--the uncontrolled power of
corporations, which operate outside of constitutional restraints." He continues
with: "The democratic model is losing out to the authoritarian model in our daily
lives here at home. Following the corporate lead, virtually all of our institutions,
from schools and colleges to Little League, are based on the top-down model."
In that model, the bottom line is economic efficiency, and the managerial system
is impatient with such inefficient concepts as constitutional limitations,
democratic dialogue, and dignity. Noam Chomsky, in his MIT lecture, "Class
War: The Attack on Working People," states: "The U.S. is a business-run
society, which means that human rights are subordinated to the overwhelming,
overriding need of profit for investors. Decisions are placed in the hands of
unaccountable private tyrannies, which means that even if formal democratic
practices exist, as they do, they're of peripheral significance." Business should
reflect, not contradict, our political ideology.
The media, in its various formats, promotes a host of negative influences.
For example, the tone of many video and computer games, as well as films, and
television programs, seems to be violence as entertainment, since they involve
killing people, power over others, revenge, and causing pain and suffering.
Scores of the games are usually based on the quantity and speed of destruction.
PC Magazine reviewed and praised an addictive computer game called Dungeon
Keeper, where, for $45, you can become a "nasty, evil villain." Quoting their
review: "The goal of the game is to build a dungeon and then defend it against
the do-gooder heroes who are out for your gold. " The player creates rooms,
including the treasure room, the torture chamber, and the graveyard. If your
workforce of "imps" are not working fast enough, you can speed them up by
"slapping them around." Are enterprising game developers feeling the pulse of
the growing number of greedy, aggressive, and indifferent people that Philip
Slater described in his book Wealth Addiction?
The Internet has launched a vast information economy that permits us to
access an astounding amount of information and exchange ideas or opinions.
However, the absence of feeling or connection neutralizes the quality of contact.
George Bond, the editor of Byte Magazine, in an editorial titled "Bosnia On-

Line" commented on the dream of democratic forums: "Once upon a time, some
of us slogging through the mud of the information cow path believed computer-
based communications would build cohesive, coherent communities. We saw
conferencing systems as the vehicle to bring people together in great democratic
forums. In our fantasies, we saw the realization of what the early Greek
philosophers had described and dreamed. Boy, were we wrong! Instead of
leading people to a golden age, the Internet and other conferencing systems are
simply reflecting the world at large. Instead of becoming a great gathering place
for the democratic exchange of ideas, the Internet in particular is becoming a
fragmented world riddled with enclaves of xenophobic, crabby egotists." The
Internet is also crammed with "get rich quick" e-mail spamming, news group
flaming, and pornography. An abundance of information should not be mistaken
for wisdom. Freedom without responsibility is anarchy, not democracy.
In the field of education, although there is significant interest in character
education, and education for democracy, there is widespread disagreement about
what constitutes character, how it is formed, and how to improve it. And in the
arena of psychology, we have seen a remarkable proliferation of value-free,
shortsighted psychologies that also promote the well-being of individuals, but
seem indifferent to the impact of those individuals on our democratic society.
Positive Influences and Solutions
To balance out the picture of the state of democratic functioning in this
country, I'll now turn to some positive influences and solutions proposed by a
variety of authors. On the political/philosophical level, Vaclav Havel has
suggested a wider sense of political responsibility: "Democracy is the unfinished
story of human aspirations. ... Man must discover again within himself, a deeper
sense of responsibility toward the world, which means responsibility toward
something higher than himself." Havel's call for self-transcendance to attain
political health echoes Adler's ideas about the necessity for overcoming
egocentricity to attain psychological health.
Economics can use an infusion of democratic thinking. In his book
Socioeconomic Democracy, Robley George has proposed some form of
universal guaranteed personal income, as well as a maximum allowable level of
personal wealth. In One World, Ready or Not, William Greider calls for a
democratization of capitalism, universalizing wealth, and a reform of the credit
system. On the aesthetic frontier, Frank Lloyd Wright, America's greatest
architect, in "An Architecture for Democracy," spoke eloquently for the rights of
every American to have a piece of land of his own and an affordable,
environmentally enriching home. Correcting our severe economic inequities will
be a difficult task, with an understandable resistance from those accustomed to

privilege and power. A dangerous climate of mutual contempt between rich and
poor must be overcome for us to feel united in a quest for "the common good."
Fortunately, business is making some forward-thinking, humanistic
movements. In Good Company: Caring as Fiercely as You Compete: Lessons
from America's Best Companies, Hal Rosenbluth and Diane McFerrin Peters
provide an abundance of ideas and examples of companies that put their people
first. They open their book with the following introduction: "Business can have
an overwhelming effect on our lives, perhaps more than anything else except our
family and loved ones. Business can contribute to our happiness, but it can also
make our lives miserable. Companies can not only positively influence lives,
they have an obligation to do so. Companies have every right to expect the very
best from their employees, but only when they create an environment worthy of
it." They conclude with the statement: "Companies can be built on friendship, a
company where people fight for success because they care so much about each
other." Their book reflects the ideas developed by fourteen American companies
that meet every year for a symposium.
As a contrast to the mean-spirited video and computer games, I have
wondered whether it would be possible to create positive games based on the
qualities of cooperation, love, affection, empathy, compassion, understanding,
and helping. Scoring could be based on the circle of community feeling one
might develop, radiating out in concentric circles from the self, to a parent,
sibling, spouse, family, neighborhood, community, city, state, nation, world, and
other species.
The Internet has provided an unprecedented opportunity to disseminate
information worldwide at a very reasonable cost, democratizing the availability
of information. Since September of 1996, the Alfred Adler Institute of San
Francisco has maintained a Classical Adlerian web site devoted to Adler's
original teachings and their relevance to democratic living. In five and a half
years, over 200,000 visits to the site have been logged in; 70,000 people have
visited the original discussion forum established on Behavior OnLine; and
55,000 people have visited the new Yahoo-sponsored discussion forum in past
three years. Now, about 300 people visit our site each day. Our mailing list helps
us correspond with people in seventy-seven countries. Adler's original teachings
and the contributions of other Classical Adlerians are finally becoming
accessible from almost anywhere in the world. This easy Internet access fulfills
Adler's wish to make his psychology available to everyone.
Education can provide one of the most fertile arenas for early positive
influence, especially in the areas of Character Education and Education for
Democracy. Democratically run schools, cooperative learning, and service

learning curriculums provide the unequaled experience of practicing democracy.
The family, however, can provide the most important early positive influence on
children. John Gastil, in Democracy in Small Groups, quotes Carole Patemen,
who believes that: "Democratic parenting should be viewed as a responsibility of
citizenship, on a par with other forms of public service." Our dedication to
parent and teacher education has been admirable, but a little shortsighted. It is
not enough to encourage cooperation within the family or classroom, the focus
must be extended to improving the community.
Psychology also offers a great opportunity for fostering democratic living.
Leo Rattner, an Adlerian, in his journal article "Individual Psychology and
Democracy," makes a solid connection between the two. "We suggest that in
order to be a good psychologist, one must be a good democrat, too. This is not
meant in a partisan sense. Rather, it means that every psychologist should
develop a personal philosophy, which is based on democratic principles.
However, such a personal philosophy would be meaningless if merely lip service
were paid to it. More than almost anyone else, the psychologist must make a
living reality of democracy in order to succeed in his professional work." I
would add that the credibility of any therapist or teacher depends on the
congruence of his character with his words.
Potential for Adlerian Contributions
In my opinion, as clinicians and educators we can do much more to
contribute effectively to the evolution of democracy. I believe that a synthesis of
three powerful sources could provide us with the inspiration and tools for this
formidable task; the sources are Socrates, Maslow, and Adler.
The Socratic style of questioning, of leading individuals to their own
conclusions, offers the most respectful avenue for discussing the merits and
mechanics of democracy as a political system; and democratic living as a way to
conduct our daily lives. It is appropriate for children, teenagers, and adults,
stimulating deeper, critical thinking, challenging undemocratic assumptions, and
eliciting useful conclusions. This style of respectful influence is inherently more
democratic than didactic indoctrination. The Socratic method is inherently
compatible with Adlerian principles and can be used effectively by both
therapists and educators.
Abraham Maslow provides us with a vigorous and challenging dose of
inspiration. His vision of the fully functioning, self-actualizing individual,
possessing a democratic character structure, reflects the ideal participant of the
truly democratic society. Too often, psychology and education get bogged down
in what people are, rather than what they can become. Many years ago, Maslow
wrote a book called Eupsychian Management about ideal people in an ideal

business environment. This suggests a new term, "Eupsychian Democracy,"
reflecting psychologically democratic people building an ideal, democratic
political structure.
Alfred Adler's Individual Psychology gives us a unique set of pedagogic
and therapeutic tools that can foster the development of democratic character in
a child, and correct the destructive capacity of undemocratic character in an
adult. His unity of philosophy, personality model, and treatment principles offers
unique and powerful resources that support the evolution of the democratic ideal.
I believe that Gemeinshaftsgefeuhl, the "feeling of community," provides the
essential emotional and spiritual backbone for the intellectually compelling
vision of democratic living.
This synthesis of Socrates, Maslow, and Adler suggests a dynamic role for
the Adlerian psychotherapist--as a "full-service facilitator of democratic living."
By including civic responsibility and social contribution as therapeutic goals, we
establish ourselves as a socially responsible psychology that benefits not only
the individual client, but the whole democratic society. A prerequisite for
assuming this responsibility is the correction of any undemocratic character
structure in ourselves. It is not enough to merely identify our own "style of life,"
or just call it counter-transference; we have to overcome such tendencies.
Consequently, I believe that an Adlerian psychotherapist has an obligation to
fully overcome any undemocratic tendencies in his style of life through a
personal study-analysis.
Becoming a "full service facilitator" means reaching out with a congruence
of democratic character as a psychotherapist, educator, and consultant to
improve the main arenas of daily living--home, school, and business. At the
core, individuals need to develop more democratic character structure that is
congruently reflected in their daily thinking, feeling, and behavior. The purpose
of work can be elevated from just "making a living" to self-realization and
creative social contribution. Couples needs to learn how to communicate
respectfully, and cooperate democratically for mutual benefit. Families need to
demonstrate democracy as a living, daily reality in the home. Schools need to
provide opportunities for practicing democracy in larger groups. Businesses need
to transform from autocratic, profit-driven, psychological liabilities into
democratic, people-driven social assets. Adlerians can help at all of these levels
by developing the knowledge and skill to do depth psychotherapy, couple
counseling, family therapy, career assessment and guidance, and organizational
consulting. In addition to providing parent and teacher education, we could offer
workshops on "psychology for democracy" to children and teenagers, as well as
adults. More than any other psychology, we have the philosophy, theory, and

practice to infuse each citizen with the ability and inspiration to transform daily
life into a democratic reality.
Nurturing Our Inner Life
The rich inner life of all human beings must be given a chance to grow and
blossom if we are to find creative solutions to the evolution of a democratic way
of life. Norman Lear, television producer, and founder of "People for the
American Way," adds an eloquent call for a nurturing of the spirit. In a 1990
address to the National Educational Association, he stated:
I have a deep concern about what I consider to be an unhealthy reticence in
our culture generally, and in education in particular to discuss what may be the
most distinctive trait of this remarkable creature. I'm talking about her
mysterious inner life, the fertile invisible realm that is the wellspring for our
species' creativity and morality. It is that portion of ourselves that impels us to
create art and literature, and study ethics, philosophy and history. It is that
portion of our being that gives rise to our sense of awe and wonder and longing
for truth, beauty and a higher order of meaning. For want of a better term, one
could call it the spiritual life of our species.
And yet, as a student of the American psyche, at no time in my life can I
remember our culture being so estranged from this essential part of itself. One
can see it in the loss of faith in leaders and institutions--the cynicism, selfishness
and erosion of civility-and the hunger for connectedness that stalks our nation
today.
Most Americans seem to be aware, I believe, that our society has seriously
lost its way. Our popular culture celebrates the material and largely ignores the
spiritual. Greed is the order of the day in a society preoccupied at all levels with
the pursuit of bottom-lines, a society which celebrates consumption, careerism,
and winning, and lives by the creed of "I've-got-mine-Jack." We have become a
number-oriented culture that puts more faith in what we can see, touch and hear,
and are suspicious of the unquantifiable, the intuitive, the mysterious.
Where we drift as a society is determined today more by the decisions of
corporate managers--and the values that dictate their decisions--than by any
other single influence. Short-term thinking, corrosive individualism, fixating on
"economic man"-these are some of the forces that now pervade our culture, at
the expense of the human spirit, since business became the fountainhead of
values in our society.
Our future is written in our children who are shockingly apathetic to the
world around them. This was affirmed recently in two studies by 'People for the
American Way' and the 'Times Mirror Center for People and the Press.' As the
study notes, 72% of young people consider career success their most important

life goal and the third most important goal was 'enjoying yourself and having a
good time.' 'Being involved and helping your community be a better place'
ranked dead last, the choice of only 24%. Only 12% saw voting as an important
part of being of a good citizen. We are talking about young people who are being
raised to believe that there is nothing between winning and losing.
Lear concludes with: "If we hope to penetrate to the spiritual quick of
today's youth--and spark their interest in the world, in social wrongs and
personal morality--the schools cannot avoid the teaching about the core values
that bind our society together. The inner life cannot be ignored."
Alfred Adler was a man before his time. He showed us how to awaken the
democratic spirit in every human being and harness that individual's creative
power for the common good. Today, more than ever, his psychology of values
can provide the solution to many of our social problems, an enrichment of our
inner life, and a revitalization of democracy.

Table of Contents
Part I Journal Articles: 1898-1909
Part II A Study of Organ Inferiority and Its Psychical Compensation1

