XXI
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
WE have come to the last stage of Greek mathematics; it
only remains to include in a last chapter references to com-
mentators of more or less note who contributed nothing
original but have preserved, among observations and explana-
tions obvious or trivial from a mathematical point of view,
valuable extracts from works which have perished, or
historical allusions which, in the absence of original docu-
ments, are precious in proportion to their rarity. Nor must
it be forgotten that in several cases we probably owe to the
commentators the fact that the masterpieces of the great
mathematicians have survived, wholly or partly, in the
original Greek or at all. This may have been the case even
with the works of Archimedes on which Eutocius wrote com-
mentaries. 
It was no doubt these commentaries which
aroused in the school of Isidorus of Miletus (the colleague
of Anthemius as architect of Saint Sophia at Constantinople)
a new interest in the works of Archimedes and caused them
to be sought out in the various libraries or wherever they had
lain hid. This revived interest apparently had the effect of
evoking new versions of the famous works commented upon
in a form more convenient for the student, with the Doric
dialect of the original eliminated; this translation of the
Doric into the more familiar dialect was systematically
carried out in those books only which Eutocius commented
on, and it is these versions which alone survive. Again,
Eutocius's commentary on ApoUonius's Conies is extant for
the first four Books, and it is probably owing to their having
been commented on by Eutocius, as well as to their being
more elementary than the rest, that these four Books alone
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

SERENUS 
519
survive in Greek. Tannery, as we have seen, conjectured
that, in like manner, the first six of the thirteen Books of
Diophantus's Arithmetica survive because Hypatia wrote
commentaries on these Books only and did not reach the
others.
The first writer who calls for notice in this chapter is one
who was rather more than a commentator in so far as he
wrote a couple of treatises to supplement the Conies of
Apollonius, I mean SEEENUS. Serenus came from Antinoeia
or Antinoupolis, a city in Egypt founded by Hadrian (A. D.
117-38). His date is uncertain, but he most probably be-
longed to the fourth century A.D., and came between Pappus
and Theon of Alexandria. He tells us himself that he wrote
a commentary on the Conies of Apollonius.1 
This has
perished and, apart from a certain proposition 'of Serenus
the philosopher, from the Lemmas' preserved in certain manu-
scripts of Theon of Smyrna (to the effect that, if a number of
rectilineal angles be subtended at a point on a diameter of a
circle which is not the centre, by equal arcs of that circle, the
angle nearer to the centre is always less than the angle more
remote), we have only the two small treatises by him entitled
On the Section of a Cylinder and On the Section of a Cone.
These works came to be connected, from the seventh century
onwards, with the Conies of Apollonius, on account of the
affinity of the subjects, and this no doubt accounts for their
survival. They were translated into Latin by Commandinus
in 1566; the first Greek text was brought out by Halley along
with his Apollonius (Oxford 1710), and we now have the
definitive text edited by Heiberg (Teubner 1896).
(a) On the Section of a Cylinder.
The occasion and the object of the tract On the Section of
a Cylinder are stated in the preface. Serenus observes that
many persons who were students of geometry were under the
erroneous impression that the oblique section of a cylinder
was different from the oblique section of a cone known as an
ellipse, whereas it is of course the same curve. Hence he
thinks it necessary to establish, by a regular geometrical
1 Serenus, Opuscula, ed. Heiberg, p. 52. 25-6.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

520 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
proof, that the said oblique sections cutting all the generators
are equally ellipses whether they are sections of a cylinder or
of a cone. He begins with ' a more general definition' of a
cylinder to include any oblique circular cylinder. ' If in two
equal and parallel circles which remain fixed the diameters,
while remaining parallel to one another throughout, are moved
round in the planes of the circles about the centres, which
remain fixed, and if they carry round with them the straight line
joining their extremities on the same side until they bring it
back again to the same place, let the surface described by the
straight line so carried round be called a cylindrical surface!
The cylinder is the figure contained by the parallel circles and
the cylindrical surface intercepted by them; the parallel
circles are the bases, the axis is the straight line drawn
through their centres; the generating straight line in any
position is a side. Thirty-three propositions follow. Of these
Prop. 6 proves the existence in an oblique cylinder of the
parallel circular sections subcontrary to the series of which
the bases are two, Prop. 9 that the section by any plane not
parallel to that of the bases or of one of the subcontrary
sections but cutting all the generators is not a circle ; the
next propositions lead up to the main results, namely those in
Props. 14 and 16, where the said section is proved to have the
property of the ellipse which we write in the form
QV2:PV.P'V=CD2:CP2,
and in Prop. 17, where the property is put in the Apollonian
form involving the latus rectum, QV2 = PV. VR (see figure
on p. 137 above), which is expressed by saying that the square
on the semi-ordinate is equal to the rectangle applied to the
latus rectum PL, having the abscissa PFas breadth and falling
short by a rectangle similar to the rectangle contained by the
diameter PP' and the latus rectum PL (which is determined
by the condition PL. PP'= Dlf2 and is drawn at right angles
to PV). Prop. 18 proves the corresponding property with
reference to the conjugate diameter DD' and the correspond-
ing latus rectum, and Prop. 19 gives the main property in the
form QV2:PV.P'V = Q'V'2:PV. P'V. 
Then comes the
proposition that' it is possible to exhibit a cone and a cylinder
which are alike cut in one and the same ellipse' (Prop. 20).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

SERENUS 
521
Serenus then solves such problems as these: Given a cone
(or cylinder) and an ellipse on it, to find the cylinder (cone)
which is cut in the same ellipse as the cone (cylinder)
(Props. 21, 22); given a cone (cylinder), to find a cylinder
(cone) and to cut both by one and the same plane so that the
sections thus made shall be similar ellipses (Props. 23, 24).
Props. 27, 28 deal with similar elliptic sections of a scalene
cylinder and cone ; there are two pairs of infinite sets of these
similar to any one given section, the first pair being those
which are parallel and subcontrary respectively to the given
section, the other pair subcontrary to one another but not to
either of the other sets and having the conjugate diameter
occupying the corresponding place to the transverse in the
other sets, and vice versa.
In the propositions (29-33) from this point to the end of
the book Serenus deals with what is really an optical pro-
blem. It is introduced by a remark about a certain geometer,
Peithon by name, who wrote a tract on the subject of
parallels. Peithon, not being satisfied with Euclid's treat-
ment of parallels, thought to define parallels by means of an
illustration, observing that parallels are such lines as are
shown on a wall or a roof by the shadow of a pillar with
a light behind it. This definition, it appears, was generally
ridiculed; and Serenus seeks to rehabilitate Peithon, who
was his friend, by showing that his statement is after all
mathematically sound. He therefore proves, with regard to
the cylinder, that, if any number of rays from a point outside
the cylinder are drawn touching it on both sides, all the rays
pass through the sides of a parallelogram (a section of the
cylinder parallel to the axis)—Prop. 29—and if they are
produced farther to meet any other plane parallel to that
of the parallelogram the points in which they meet the plane
will lie on two parallel lines (Prop. 30); he adds that the lines
will not seem parallel {vide Euclid's Optics, Prop. 6). The
problem about the rays touching the surface of a cylinder
suggests the similar one about any number of rays from an
external point touching the surface of a cone; these meet the
surface in points on a triangular section of the cone (Prop. 32)
and, if produced to meet a plane parallel to that of the
triangle, meet that plane in points forming a similar triangle
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

522 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
(Prop. 33). Prop. 31 preceding these propositions is a par-
tieular case of the constancy of the anharmonic ratio of a
pencil of four rays. If two sides AB, AG of a triangle meet
a transversal through D, an external point, in E, F&nd another
ray AG between AB and AC cuts DEF in a point G such
that ED : DF = EG: GF, then any other transversal through
D meeting AB} AG, AG in K, L, ikf is also divided harmoni-
cally, i.e. KD : DM = KL: LM. To prove the succeeding pro-
positions, 32 and 33; Serenus uses this proposition and a
reciprocal of it combined with the harmonic property of the
pole and polar with reference to an ellipse.
(/8) On the Section of a Gone.
The treatise On the Section of a Cone is even less important,
although Serenus claims originality for it. It deals mainly
with the areas of triangular sections of right or scalene cones
made by planes passing through the vertex and either through
the axis or not through the axis, showing when the area of
ascertain triangle of a particular class is a maximum, under
what conditions two triangles of a class may be equal in area,
and so on, and solving in some easy cases the problem of
finding triangular sections of given area. This sort of investi-
gation occupies Props. 1-57 of the work, these propositions
including various lemmas required for the proofs of the
substantive theorems. Props. 58-69 constitute a separate
section of the book dealing with the volumes of right cones
in relation to their .heights, their bases and the areas of the
triangular sections through the axis.
The essence of the first portion of the book up to Prop. 57
is best shown by means of modern notation. We will call h
the height of a right cone, r the radius of the base; in the
case of an oblique cone, let p be the perpendicular from the
vertex to the plane of the base, d the distance of the foot of
this perpendicular from the centre of the base, r the radius
of the base.
Consider first the right cone, and let 2 a? be the base of any
triangular section through the vertex, while of course 2r is
the base of the triangular section through the axis. Then, if
A be the area of the triangular section with base 2x,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

SERENUS 
523
Observing that the sum of x2 and r2 — x2 + h2 is constant, we
see that A2, and therefore A, is a maximum when
, or
and, since x is not greater than r, it follows that, for a real
value of x (other than r), h is less than r, or the cone is obtuse-
angled. When h is not less than r, the maximum triangle is
the triangle through the axis and vice versa (Props. 5, 8);
when h = r, the maximum triangle is also right-angled
(Prop. 13).
If the triangle with base 2 c is equal to the triangle through
the axis, h2r2 = c2 (r2-c2 + h2), or (r2-c2) (c2-h2) = 0, and,
since c<r, h =c, so that h<r (Prop. 10). If x lies between r
and c in this case, (r2 - x2) (x2 -h2)>0 
or x2 (r2 - x2 + h2) > h2r2,
and the triangle with base 2x is greater than either of the
equal triangles with bases 2r, 2 c, or 2h (Prop. 11).
In the case of the scalene cone Serenus compares individual
triangular sections belonging to one of three classes with other
sections of the same class as regards their area. The classes
are:
(1) axial triangles, including all sections through the axis;
(2) isosceles sections, i.e. the sections the bases of which are
perpendicular to the projection of the axis of the cone on the
plane of the base ;
(3) a set of triangular sections the bases of which are (a) the
diameter of the circular base which passes through the foot of
the perpendicular from the vertex to the plane of the base, and
(b) the chords of the circular base parallel to that diameter.
After two preliminary propositions (15, 16) and some
lemmas, Serenus compares the areas of the first class of
triangles through the axis. If, as we said, p is the perpen-
dicular from the vertex to the plane of the base, d the distance
of the foot of this perpendicular from the centre of the base,
and 6 the angle which the base of any axial triangle with area
A makes with the base of the axial triangle passing through
p the perpendicular,
A =
This area is a minimum when 0 = 0, and increases with 0
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

524 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
until 0 = \TT when it is a maximum, the triangle being then
isosceles (Prop. 24).
In Prop. 29 Serenus takes up the third class of sections with
bases parallel to d. If the base of such a section is 2x,
A = xV(<r>2-x2+p2)
and, as in the case of the right cone, we must have for a real
maximum value
x2 = \ (r2 -bp2), while x< r,
so that, for a real value of x other than r, p must be less than
r, and, if p is not less than r, the maximum triangle is that
which is perpendicular to the base of the cone and has-2r for
its base (Prop. 29). If p<r, the triangle in question is not
the maximum of the set of triangles (Prop. 30).
Coming now to the isosceles sections (2), we may suppose
2 0 to be the angle subtended at the centre of the base by the
base of the section in the direction away from the projection
of the vertex. Then
A = r sm0 V {p2 + {d + r cos0)2}.
If Ao be the area of the isosceles triangle through the axis,
we have
A2 - A2 = r2 (p2 + d2) - T2 sin2 6 (p2 + d2 + r2 cos2 6 + 2 dr cos 6)
= r2(p2 + d2) cos20-r*sin20cos20-2dr*cos0 
sin2 0.
If A = Ao, we must have for triangles on the side of the
centre of the base of the cone towards the vertex of the cone
(since cos 0 is negative for such triangles)
p2 + d2 < T2 sin2 0, and a fortiori p2 + d2< r2 (Prop. 35).
If p2 + d2^.r2, Ao is always greater than A, so that Ao is the
maximum isosceles triangle of the set (Props. 31, 32).
If A is the area of any one of the isosceles triangles with
bases on the side of the centre of the base of the cone away
from the projection of the vertex, cos 0 is positive and Ao is
proved to be neither the minimum nor the maximum triangle
of this set of triangles (Props. 36, 40-4).
In Prop. 45 Serenus returns to the set of triangular sections
through the axis, proving that the feet of the perpendiculars
from the vertex of the cone on their bases all lie on a circle
the diameter of which is the straight line joining the centre of
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

SERENUS 
525
the base of the cone to the projection of the vertex on its
plane; the areas of the axial triangles are therefore propor-
tional to the generators of the cone with the said circle as
base and the same vertex as the original cone. Prop. 50 is to
the effect that, if the axis of the cone is equal to the radius of
the base, the least axial triangle is a mean proportional
between the greatest axial triangle and the isosceles triangular
section perpendicular to the base; that is, with the above nota-
tion, if r = V(p2 + d2), then r / ( / + d2) :rp = rp:p V(f - <22),
which is indeed obvious.
Prop, 57 is interesting because of the lemmas leading to it.
It proves that the greater axial triangle in a scalene cone has
the greater perimeter, and conversely. 
This is proved by
means of the lemma (Prop. 54), applied to the variable sides
of axial triangles, that if a2+d2 = b2 + c2 and a>b ^ c>d,
then a + d<b + c (a,d are the sides other than the base of one
axial triangle, and b, c those of the other axial triangle com-
pared with it; and if ABC, ABE be two axial triangles and
0 the centre of the base, BA2 + AC2 = BA2 + AE2 because each
of these sums is equal to 2 A 02 + 2 BO2, Prop. 17). This proposi-
tion again depends on the lemma (Props. 52, 53) that, if
straight lines be 'inflected' from the ends of the base of
a segment of a circle to the curve (i. e. if we join the ends
of the base to any point on the curve) the line (i. e. the sum of
the chords) is greatest when the point taken is the middle
point of the arc, and diminishes as the point is taken farther
and farther from that point.
Let B be the middle point of the
arc of the segment ABC, D, E any
other points on the curve towards
0; I say that
AB + BC>AD + DC>AE+EC
With B as centre and BA as radius
describe a circle, and produce AB,
AD, AE to meet this circle in F, G,
H. Join FC, GC, HC.
Since AB = BC = BF, we have AF = AB + BC. Also the
angles BFC, BCF are equal, and each of them is half of
the angle ABC.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

526 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
Again 
IAGC = AAFO = ilABG = ilADC;
therefore the angles DGC, DCG are equal and DG = DC]
therefore 
A G = A D + DC.
Similarly 
EH = EC and AH = AE+ EC.
But, by Eucl. III. 7 or 15, AF>AG>AH, 
and so on;
therefore 
AB+BC>AD+DC>AE+ 
EC, and so on.
In the particular case where the segment ABC is a semi-
circle AB* + BC2 = AC2 = AD2 + DC2, &c, and the result of
Prop. 57 follows.
Props. 58-69 are propositions of this sort: In equal right
cones the triangular sections through the axis are reciprocally
proportional to their bases and conversely (Props. 58, 59);
right cones of equal height have to one another the ratio
duplicate of that of their axial triangles (Prop. 62); right
cones which are reciprocally proportional to their bases have
axial triangles which are to one another reciprocally in the
triplicate ratio of their bases and conversely (Props. 66, 67);
and so on.
THEON OF ALEXANDRIA lived towards the end of the fourth
century A.D. Suidas places him in the reign of Theodosius I
(379-95); he tells us himself that he observed a solar eclipse
at Alexandria in the year 365, and his notes on the chrono-
logical tables of Ptolemy extend down to 372.
Commentary on the Syntaxis.
We have already seen him as the author of a commentary
on Ptolemy's Syntaxis in eleven Books. This commentary is
not calculated to give us a very high opinion of Theon's
mathematical calibre, but it is valuable for several historical
notices that it gives, and we are indebted to it for a useful
account of the Greek method of operating with sexagesimal
fractions, which is illustrated by examples of multiplication,
division, and the extraction of the square root of a non-square
number by way of approximation. 
These illustrations of
numerical calculation have already been given above (vol. i,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEONOF ALEXANDRIA 
527
pp. 58-63). 
Of the historical notices we may mention the
following. (1) Theon mentions the treatise of Menelaus On
Chords in a Circle, i.e. Menelau&'s Table of Chords, which came
between the similar Tables of Hipparchus and Ptolemy. (2) A
quotation from Diophantus furnishes incidentally a lower limit
for the date of the Arithmetics 
(3) It is in the commentary
on Ptolemy that Theon tells us that the second part of Euclid
VI. 33 relating to sectors in equal circles was inserted by him-
self in his edition of the Elements, a notice which is of capital
importance in that it enables the Theonine manuscripts of
Euclid to be distinguished from the ante-Theonine, and is
therefore the key to the question how far the genuine text
of Euclid was altered in Theon's edition. (4) As we have
seen (pp. 207 sq.)5 Theon, k propos of an allusion of Ptolemy
to the theory of isoperimetric figures, has preserved for us
several propositions from the treatise by Zenodorus on th^t
subject.
Theon's edition of Euclid's Elements.
We are able to judge of the character of Theon's edition of
Euclid by a comparison between the Theonine manuscripts
and the famous Vatican MS. 190, which contains an earlier
edition than Theon's, together with certain fragments of
ancient papyri. It appears that, while Theon took some
trouble to follow older manuscripts, it was not so much his
object to get the most authoritative text as to make what he
considered improvements of one sort or other. (1) He made
alterations where he found, or thought he found, mistakes in
the original; while he tried to remove some real blots, he
altered other passages too hastily when a little more considera-
tion would have shown that Euclid's words are right or could
be excused, and offer no difficulty to an intelligent reader.
(2) He made emendations intended to improve the form or
diction of Euclid ; in general they were prompted by a desire
to eliminate anything which was out of the common in expres-
sion or in form, in order to reduce the language to one and the
same standard or norm. 
(3) He bestowed, however, most
attention upon additions designed to supplement or explain
the original; (a) he interpolated whole propositions where he
thought them necessary or useful, e.g. the addition to VI. 33
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

528 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
already referred to, a second case to VI. 27, a porism or corollary
to II. 4, a second porism to III. 16, the proposition VII. 22,
a lemma after X. 12, besides alternative proofs here and there;
(6) he added words for the purpose of making smoother and
clearer, or more precise, things which Euclid had expressed
with unusual brevity, harshness, or carelessness; (c) he sup-
plied intermediate steps where Euclid's argument seemed too
difficult to follow. In short, while making only inconsider-
able additions to the content of the Elements, he endeavoured
to remove difficulties that might be felt by learners in study-
ing the book, as a modern editor might do in editing a classical
text-book for use in schools; and there is no doubt that his
edition was approved by his pupils at Alexandria for whom it
was written, as well as by later Greeks, who used it almost
exclusively, with the result that the more ancient text is only
preserved complete in one manuscript.
Edition of the Optics of Euclid.
In addition to the Elements, Theon edited the Optics of
Euclid; Theon's recension as well as the genuine work is
included by Heiberg in his edition. It is possible that the
Catoptrica included by Heiberg in the same volume is also by
Theon.
Next to Theon should be mentioned his daughter HYPATIA,
who is mentioned by Theon himself as having assisted in the
revision of the commentary on Ptolemy. This learned lady
is said to have been mistress of the whole of pagan science,
especially of philosophy and medicine, and by her eloquence
and authority to have attained such influence that Christianity
considered itself threatened, and she was put to death by
a fanatical mob in March 415. According to Suidas she wrote
commentaries on Diophantus, on the Astronomical Canon (of
Ptolemy) and on the Conies of Apollonius. 
These works
have not survived, but it has been conjectured (by Tannery)
that the remarks of Psellus (eleventh century) at the begin-
ning of his letter about Diophantus, Anatolius, and the
Egyptian method of arithmetical reckoning were taken bodily
from some manuscript of Diophantus containing an ancient
and systematic commentary which may very well have been
that of Hypatia. Possibly her commentary may have extended
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HYPATIA. 
PORPHYRY 
529
only to the first six Books, in which case the fact that Hypatia
wrote a commentary on them may account for the survival of
these Books while the rest of the thirteen were first forgotten
and then lost.
It will be convenient to take next the series of Neo-
Platonist commentators. It does not appear that Ammonius
Saccas (about A.D. 175-250), the founder of Neo-Platonism, or
his pupil Plotinus (A.D. 204-69), who first expounded the
doctrines in systematic form, had any special connexion with
mathematics, but PORPHYRY (about 232-304), the disciple of
Plotinus and the reviser and editor of his works, appears to
have written a commentary on the Elements. This we gather
from Proclus, who quotes from Porphyry comments on Eucl.
I. 14 and 26 and alternative proofs of I. 18, 20. It is possible
that Porphyry's work may have been used later by Pappus in
writing his own commentary, and Proclus may have got his
references from Pappus, but the form of these references sug-
gests that he had direct access to the original commentary of
Porphyry.
IAMBLICHUS (died about A.D. 330) was the author of a com-
mentary on the Introductio arithmetica of Nicomachus, and
of other works which have already been mentioned. He was
a pupil of Porphyry as well as of Anatolius, also a disciple of
Porphyry.
But the most important of the Neo-Platonists to the his-
torian of mathematics is PROCLUS (A.D. 410-85). Proclus
received his early training at Alexandria, where Olympio-
dorus was his instructor in the works of Aristotle, and
mathematics was taught him by one Heron (of course a
different Heron from the ' mechanicus Hero' of the Metrica,
&c). He afterwards went to Athens, where he learnt the
Neo-Platonic philosophy from Plutarch, the grandson of Nes-
torius, and from his pupil Syrianus, and became one of its
most prominent exponents. He speaks everywhere with the
highest respect of his masters, and was in turn regarded with
extravagant veneration by his contemporaries, as we learn
from Marinus, his pupil and biographer. 
On the death of
Syrianus he was put at the head of the Neo-Platonic school.
He was a man of untiring industry, as is shown by the
1623.2 
M m
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

530 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
number of books which he wrote, including a large number of
commentaries, mostly on the dialogues of PJato (e.g. the
Timaeus, the Republic, the Parmenides, the Gratylus). He
was an acute dialectician and pre-eminent among his contem-
poraries in the range of his learning; he was a competent
mathematician; he was even a poet. At the same time he
was a believer in all sorts of myths and mysteries, and
a devout worshipper of divinities both Greek and Oriental.
He was much more a philosopher than a mathematician. In
his commentary on the Timaeus, when referring to the ques-
tion whether the sun occupies a middle place among the
planets, he speaks as no real mathematician could have
spoken, rejecting the view of Hipparchus and Ptolemy because
o Oeovpyos (sc. the Chaldean, says Zeller) thinks otherwise,
' whom it is not lawful to disbelieve \ 
Martin observes too,
rather neatly, that' for Proclus the Elements of Euclid had
the good fortune not to be contradicted either by the Chaldean
Oracles or by the speculations of Pythagoreans old and new'.
Commentary on Euclid, Book I.
For us the most important work of Proclus is his commen-
tary on Euclid, Book I, because it is one of the main sources
of our information as to the history of elementary geometry.
Its great value arises mainly from the fact that Proclus had
access to a number of historical and critical works which are
now lost except for fragments preserved by Proclus and
others.
(a) Sources of the Commentary.
The historical work the loss of which is most deeply to be
deplored is the History of Geometry by Eudemus. 
There
appears to be no reason to doubt that the work of Eudemus
was accessible to Proclus at first hand. For the later writers
Simplicius and Eutocius refer to it in terms such as leave no
doubt that they had it before them. 
Simplicius, quoting
Eudemus as the best authority on Hippocrates's quadratures
of lunes, says he will set out what Eudemus says 'word for
word', adding only a little explanation in the shape of refer-
ences to Euclid's Elements 'owing to the memorandum-like
style of Eudemus, who sets out his explanations in the abbre-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PROCLUS 
531
viated form usual with ancient writers. Now in the second
book of the history of geometry he writes as follows'} 
In
like manner Eutocius speaks of the paralogisms handed down
in connexion with the attempts of Hippocrates and Antiphon
to square the circle, 'with which I imagine that all persons
are accurately acquainted who have examined (ento-Kefjiiiii/ovs)
the geometrical history of Eudemus and know the Ceria
Aristotelica '.2
The references by Proclus to Eudemus by name are not
indeed numerous; they are five in number; but on the other
hand he gives at least as many other historical data which can
with great probability be attributed to Eudemus.
Proclus was even more indebted to Geminus, from whom
he borrows long extracts, often mentioning him by name—
there are some eighteen such references—but often omitting
to do so. We are able to form a tolerably certain judge-
ment as to the origin of the latter class of passages on the
strength of the similarity of the subjects treated and the views
expressed to those found in the acknowledged extracts. As
we have seen, the work of Geminus mainly cited seems to
have borne the title The Doctrine or Theory of the Mathematics,
which was a very comprehensive work dealing, in a portion of
it, with the ' classification of mathematics \
We have already discussed the question of the authorship
of the famous historical summary given by Proclus. It is
divided, as every one knows, into two distinct parts between
which comes the remark, ' Those who compiled histories
bring the development of this science up to this point. Not
much younger than these is Euclid, who', &c. The ultimate
source at any rate of the early part of the summary must
presumably have been the great work of Eudemus above
mentioned.
It is evident that Proclus had before him the original works
of Plato, Aristotle, Archimedes and Plotinus, the Sv/ifiLKra of
Porphyry and the works of his master Syrianus, as well as a
group of works representing the Pythagorean tradition on its
mystic, as distinct from its mathematical, side, from Philo-
laus downwards, and comprising the more or less apocryphal
1 Simplicius on Arist. Phys., p. 60. 28, Diels.
2 Archimedes, ed. Heib., vol. iii, p. 228. 17-19.
M m 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

532 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
Upbs Aoyo? of Pythagoras, the Oracles (\6yia) and Orphic
verses.
The following will be a convenient summary of the other
works used by Proclus, and will at the same time give an
indication of the historical value of his commentary on
Euclid, Book I:
Eudemus : History of Geometry.
Geminus: The Theory of the Mathematical Sciences.
Heron: Commentary on the Elements of Euclid,
Porphyry:
Pappus:
Apollonius of Perga: A work relating to elementary
geometry.
Ptolemy: On the parallel-iJostulate.
Posidonius : A book controverting Zeno of Sidon.
Carpus: Astronomy.
Syrianus: A discussion on the angle.
(/3) Character of the Commentary.
We know that in the Neo-Platonic school the pupils learnt
mathematics; and it is clear that Proclus taught this subject,
and that this was the origin of his commentary. Many
passages show him as a master speaking to scholars; in one
place he speaks of ' my hearers '-1 Further, the pupils whom
he was addressing were beginners in mathematics; thus in one
passage he says that he omits * for the present' to speak of the
discoveries of those who employed the curves of Nicomedes
and Hippias for trisecting an angle, and of those who used the
Archimedean spiral for dividing an angle in a given ratio,
because these things would be ' too difficult for beginners \2
But there are signs that the commentary was revised and
re-edited for a larger public; he speaks for instance in one
place of ' those who will come across his work \3 There are
also passages, e.g. passages about the cylindrical helix, con-
choids and cissoids, which would not have been understood by
the beginners to whom he lectured.
Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 210. 19. 
2 Ib., p. 272. 12.
3 Ib., p. 84. 9.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PROCLUS 
533
The commentary opens with two Prologues. The first is
on mathematics in general and its relation to, and use in,
philosophy, from which Proclus passes to the classification of
mathematics. Prologue II deals with geometry generally and
its subject-matter according to Plato, Aristotle and others.
After this section comes the famous summary (pp. 64-8)
ending with a eulogium of Euclid, with particular reference
to the admirable discretion shown in the selection of the pro-
positions which should constitute the Elements of geometry,
the ordering of the whole subject-matter, the exactness and
the conclusiveness of the demonstrations, and the power with
which every question is handled. Generalities follow, such as
the discussion of the nature of elements, the distinction between
theorems and problems according to different authorities, and
finally a division of Book I into three main sections, (1) the
construction and properties of triangles and their parts and
the comparison between triangles in respect of their angles
and sides, (2) the properties of parallels and parallelograms
and their construction from certain data, and (3) the bringing
of triangles and parallelograms into relation as regards area.
Coming to the Book itself, Proclus deals historically and
critically with all the definitions, postulates and axioms in
order. The notes on the postulates and axioms are preceded
by a general discussion of the principles of geometry, hypo-
theses, postulates and axioms, and their relation to one
another; here as usual Proclus quotes the opinions of all the
important authorities. Again, when he comes to Prop. 1, he
discusses once more the difference between theorems and
problems, then sets out and explains the formal divisions of
a proposition, the enunciation (TrpoTao-is), the setting-out
(tKOeais), the definition or specification (SiopurfjLos), the con-
struction (KctTacrKevrj), the proof (aTroSetgis), the conclusion
(<rvfi7ripao-/jia), and finally a number of other technical terms,
e.g. things said to be given, in the various senses of this term,
the lemma, the case, the porism in its two senses, the objection
{tvGTacns), the reduction of a problem, reductio ad absurdum,
analysis and synthesis.
In his comments on the separate propositions Proclus
generally proceeds in this way: first he gives explanations
regarding Euclid's proofs, secondly he gives a few different
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

534 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
cases, mainly for the sake of practice, and thirdly he addresses
himself to refuting objections which cavillers had taken or
might take to particular propositions or arguments. He does
not seem to have had any notion of correcting or improving
Euclid; only in one place does he propose anything of his
own to get over a difficulty which he finds in Euclid; this is
where he tries to prove the parallel-postulate, after giving
Ptolemy's attempt to prove it and pointing out objections to
Ptolemy's proof.
The book is evidently almost entirely a compilation, though
a compilation 'in the better sense of the term'. The onus
probandi is on any one who shall assert that anything in it is
Proclus's own; very few things can with certainty be said to
be so. Instances are (1) remarks on certain things which he
quotes from Pappus, since Pappus was the last of the com-
mentators whose works he seems to have used, (2) a defence
of Geminus against Carpus, who criticized Geminus's view of
the difference between theorems and problems, and perhaps
(3) criticisms of certain attempts by Apollonius to improve on
Euclid's proofs and constructions; but the only substantial
example is (4) the attempted proof of the parallel-postulate,
based on an ' axiom' to the effect that, ' if from one point two
straight lines forming an angle be produced ad infinitum, the
distance between them when so produced ad infinitum exceeds
any finite magnitude (i. e. length)', an assumption which
purports to be the equivalent of a statement in Aristotle.1
Philoponus says that Proclus as well as Ptolemy wrote a whole
book on the parallel-postulate.2
It is still not quite certain whether Proclus continued his
commentaries beyond Book I. He certainly intended to do so,
for, speaking of the trisection of an angle by means of certain
curves, he says, ' we may perhaps more appropriately examine
these things on the third Book, where the writer of the
Elements bisects a given circumference', and again, after
saying that of all parallelograms which have the same peri-
meter the square is the greatest ' and the rhomboid least of
all', he adds, ' But this we will prove in another place, for it
is more appropriate to the discussion of the hypotheses of the
1 De caelo, i. 5, 271 b 28-30.
2 Philoponus on Anal. Post. i. 10, p. 214 a 9-12, Brandis.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PROCLUS 
535
second Book'. But at the time when the commentary on
Book I was written he was evidently uncertain whether he
would be able to continue it, for at the end he says, ' For my
part, if I should be able to disctlss the other Books in the
same way, I should give thanks to the gods; but, if other
cares should draw me away, I beg those who are attracted by
this subject to complete the exposition of the other Books as
well, following the same method and addressing themselves
throughout to the deeper and more sharply defined questions
involved '.* Wachsmuth, finding a Vatican manuscript contain-
ing a collection of scholia on Books I,II, V, VI, X, headed Eh ra
EvKXetSou crrot)(€ta wpoXafifiai'OfjLeva €K TCOV IIpoKXov o-nopdSrji/
KCU KOLT* kTriTo\ir\v, and seeing that the scholia on Book I were
extracts from the extant commentary of Proclus, concluded
that those on the other Books were also from Proclus; but
the 777)0- in irpo\a^av6ii€va 
rather suggests that only the
scholia to Book I are from Proclus. 
Heiberg found and
published in 1903 a scholium to X. 9, in which Proclus is
expressly quoted as the authority, but he does not regard
this circumstance as conclusive. On the other hand, Heiberg
has noted two facts which go against the view that Proclus
wrote on the later Books: (1) the scholiast's copy of
Proclus was not much better than our manuscripts; in
particular, it had the same lacunae in the notes to I. 36,
37, and I. 41-3; this makes it improbable that the scholiast
had further commentaries of Proclus which have vanished
for us; (2) there is no trace in the scholia of the notes
which Proclus promised in the passages already referred to.
All, therefore, that we can say is that, while the Wachsmuth
scholia may be extracts from Proclus, it is on the whole
improbable.
Hypotyposis of Astronomical Hypotheses.
Another extant work of Proclus which should be referred
to is his Hypotyposis of Astronomical Hypotheses, a sort of
readable and easy introduction to the astronomical system
of Hipparchus and Ptolemy. It has been well edited by
Manitius (Teubner, 1909). Three things may be noted as
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 432. 9-15.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

536 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
regards this work. It contains1 a description of the method
of measuring the sun's apparent diameter by means of
Heron's water-clock, which, by comparison with the corre-
sponding description in Theon's commentary to the Syntaxis
of Ptolemy, is seen to have a common source with it. That
source is Pappus, and, inasmuch as Proclus has a figure (repro-
duced by Manitius in his text from one set of manuscripts)
corresponding to the description, while the text of Theon has
no figure, it is clear that Proclus drew directly on Pappus,
who doubtless gave, in his account of the procedure, a figure
taken from Heron's own work on water-clocks. A simple
proof of the equivalence of the epicycle and eccentric hypo-
theses is quoted by Proclus from one Hilarius of Antioch.2
An interesting passage is that in chap. 4 (p. 130, 18) where
Sosigenes the Peripatetic is said to have recorded in his work
' on reacting spheres' that an annular eclipse of the sun is
sometimes observed at times of perigee; this is, so far as
I know, the only allusion in ancient times to annular eclipses,
and Proclus himself questions the correctness of Sosigenes's
statement.
Commentary on the Republic.
The commentary of Proclus on the Republic contains some
passages of great interest to the historian of mathematics.
The most important is that3 in which Proclus indicates that
Props. 9, 10 of Euclid, Book II, are Pythagorean proposi-
tions invented for the purpose of proving geometrically the
fundamental property of the series of * side-' and ' diameter-'
numbers, giving successive approximations to the value of
>/2 (see vol. i, p. 93). The explanation4 of the passage in
Plato about the Geometrical Number is defective and dis-
appointing, but it contains an interesting reference to one
Paterius, of date presumably intermediate between Nestorius
and Proclus. Paterius is said to have made a calculation, in
units and submultiples, of the lengths of different segments of
1 Proclus, Hypotyposis, c. 4, pp. 120-22.
2 Ib., c. 3, pp. 76, 17 sq.
8 Prodi Diadochi in Platonis Rempublicam Commentarii, ed. Kroil,
vol. ii, p. 27.
4 /&., vol. ii, pp. 36-42.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PROCLUS. MARINUS 
537
straight lines in a figure formed by taking a triangle with
sides 3, 4, 5 as ABC, then drawing
BD from the right angle B perpen-
dicular to AC, and lastly drawing
perpendiculars DE, DF to AB, BG.
A diagram in the text with the
lengths of the segments shown along-
side them in the usual numerical
notation shows that Paterius obtained from the data AB = 3,
BO = 4, CA = 5 the following:
= 
7 € = 
3>-
[ = 24*
This is an example of the Egyptian method of stating frac-
tions preceding by some three or four centuries the exposition
of the same method in the papyrus of Akhmim.
MARINUS of Neapolis, the pupil and biographer of Proclus,
wrote a commentary or rather introduction to the Data of
Euclid.1 It is mainly taken up with a discussion of the
question ri TO SeSo/iivov, what is meant by given ? There
were apparently many different definitions of the term given
by earlier and later authorities. Of those who tried to define
it in the simplest way by means of a single differentia, three
are mentioned by name. Apollonius in his work on vsvo-eis
and his 'general treatise' (presumably that on elementary
geometry) described the given as assigned or fixed {reray-
fxhov), Diodorus called it known (yvGopi/jiov); others regarded
it as rational (prjTOi/) and Ptolemy is classed with these, rather
oddly, because ' he called those things given the measure of
which is given either exactly or approximately'. 
Others
1 See Heiberg and Menge's Euclid, vol. vi, pp. 234-56.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

538 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
combined two of these ideas and called it assigned or fixed
and procurable or capable of being found (wopi/jiov); others
' fixed and known \ and a third class ' known and procurable'
These various views are then discussed at length.
DOMNINUS of Larissa, a pupil of Syrianus at the same time
as Proclus, wrote a Manual of Introductory Arithmetic kyyzi-
piSiov dpi6firjTLKfjs elcrayooyrjs, which was edited by Boissonade1
and is the subject of two articles by Tannery,2 who also left
a translation of it, with prolegomena, which has since been
published.3 It is a sketch of the elements of the theory of
numbers, very concise and well arranged, and is interesting
because it indicates a serious attempt at a reaction against the
Introductio arithmetica of Nicomachus and a return to the
doctrine of Euclid. Besides Euclid, Nicomachus and Theon
of Smyrna, Domninus seems to have used another source,
now lost, which was also drawn upon by Iamblichus. At the
end of this work Domninus foreshadows a more complete
treatise on the theory of numbers under the title Elements of
Arithmetic 
(dpiOjirjTLKrj CTTOLX^ICOO-LS), but whether this was
ever written or not we do not know. 
Another tract
attributed to Domninus ncos eari Xdyov 4/c Xoyov d^eXeip
(how a ratio can be taken out of a ratio) has been published
with a translation by Ruelle4; if it is not by Domninus, it
probably belongs to the same period.
A most honourable place in our history must be reserved
for SIMPLICIUS, who has been rightly called 'the excellent
Simplicius, the Aristotle-commentator, to whom the world can
never be grateful enough for the preservation of the frag-
ments of Parmenides, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Melissus,
Theophrastus and others' (v. Wilamowitz-Mollendorff). He
lived in the first half of the sixth century and was a pupil,
first of Ammonius of' Alexandria, and then of Damascius,
the last head of the Platonic school at Athens. When in the
year 529 the Emperor Justinian, in his zeal to eradicate
paganism, issued an edict forbidding the teaching of philo-
1 Anecdota Graeca, vol. iv, pp. 413-29.
2 Mdmoires scientifiques, vol. ii, nos. 35, 40.
3 Revue des etudes grecques, 1906, pp. 359-82; Memoires sdentifiques^
vol. iii, pp. 256-81.
4 Uevue de Philologie, 1883, p. 83 sq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DOMNINUS. SIMPLICIUS 
539
sophy at Athens, the last members of the school, including
Damascius and Simplicius, migrated to Persia, but returned
about 533 to Athens, where Simplicius continued to teach for
some time though the school remained closed.
Extracts from Eudemus.
To Simplicius we owe two long extracts of capital impor-
tance for the history of mathematics and astronomy. The
first is his account, based upon and to a large extent quoted
textually from Eudemus's History of Geometry, of the attempt
by Antiphon to square the circle and of the quadratures of
lunes by Hippocrates of Chios. It is contained in Simplicius's
commentary on Aristotle's Physics,1 and has been the subject
of a considerable literature extending from 1870, the date
when Bretschneider first called attention to it, to the latest
critical edition with translation and notes by Rudio (Teubner,
1907). It has already been discussed (vol. i, pp. 183-99).
The second, and not less important, of the two passages is
that containing the elaborate and detailed account of the
system of concentric spheres, as first invented by Eudoxus for
explaining the apparent motion of the sun, moon, and planets,
and of the modifications made by Callippus and Aristotle. It
is contained in the commentary on Aristotle's De caelo2;
Simplicius quotes largely from Sosigenes the Peripatetic
(second century A.D.), observing that he in his turn drew
from Eudemus, who dealt with the subject in the second
book of his History of Astronomy. 
It is this passage of
Simplicius which, along with a passage in Aristotle's Meta-
physics? enabled Schiaparelli to reconstruct Eudoxus's system
(see vol. i, pp. 329-34). Nor must it be forgotten that it is in
Simplicius's commentary on the Physics^ that the extract
from Geminus's summary of the Meteorologica of Posidonius
occurs which was used by Schiaparelli to support his view
that it was Heraclides of Pontus, not Aristarchus of Samos,
who first propounded the heliocentric hypothesis.
Simplicius also wrote a commentary on Euclid's Elements,
Book I, from which an-Nairizi, the Arabian commentator,
1 Simpl. in Phijs., pp. 54-69, ed. Diels.
2 Simpl. on Arist. De caeio, p. 488. 18-24 and pp. 493-506, ed. Heiberg.
3 Metaph. A. 8, 1073 b 17-1074 a 14.
4 Simpl. in Phys., pp. 291-2, ed. Diels.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

540 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
made valuable extracts, including the account of the attempt of
'Aganis' to prove the parallel-postulate (see pp. 228-30 above).
Contemporary with Simplicius, or somewhat earlier, was
EUTOCIUS, the commentator on Archimedes and Apollonius.
As he dedicated the commentary on Book I On the Sphere
and Cylinder to Ammonius (a pupil of Proclus and teacher
of Simplicius), who can hardly have been alive after A.D. 510,
Eutocius was probably born about A.D. 480. His date used
to be put some fifty years later because, at the end of the com-
mentaries on Book II On the Sphere and Cylinder and on
the Measurement of a Circle^ there is a note to the effect that
' the edition was revised by Isidorus of Miletus, the mechanical
engineer, our teacher \ 
But, in view of the relation to Ammo-
nius, it is impossible that Eutocius can have been a pupil of
Isidorus, who was younger than Anthemius of Tralles, the
architect of Saint Sophia at Constantinople in 532, whose
work was continued by Isidorus after Anthemius's death
about A.D. 534. Moreover, it was to Anthemius that Eutocius
dedicated, separately, the commentaries on the first four
Books of Apollonius's Conies, addressing Anthemius as 'my
dear friend \ 
Hence we conclude that Eutocius was an elder
contemporary of Anthemius, and that the reference to Isidorus
is by an editor of Eutocius's commentaries who was a pupil of
Isidorus. For a like reason, the reference in the commentary
on Book II On the Sphere and Cylinder1 to a SiafirJTrj?
invented by Isidorus ' our teacher' for drawing a parabola
must be considered to be an interpolation by the same editor.
Eutocius's commentaries on Archimedes apparently ex-
tended only to the three works, On the Sphere and Cylinder,
Measurement of a Circle and Plane Equilibriums, and those
on the Conies of Apollonius to the first four Books only.
We are indebted to these commentaries for many valuable
historical notes. 
Those deserving special mention here are
(1) the account of the solutions of the problem of the duplica-
tion of the cube, or the finding of two mean proportionals,
by 'Plato', Heron, Philon, Apollonius, Diodes, Pappus,
Sporus, Menaechmus, Archytas, Eratosthenes, Nicomedes, (2)
the fragment discovered by Eutocius himself containing the
1 Archimedes, ed. Heiberg, vol. iii, p. 84. 8-11.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EUTOCIUS. ANTHEMIUS 
541
missing solution, promised by Archimedes in On the Sphere
and Cylinder, II. 4, of the auxiliary problem amounting
to the solution by means of conies of the cubic equation
(a — x)x2 = be2, (3) the solutions (a) by Diodes of the original
problem of II. 4 without bringing in the cubic, (b) by Diony-
sodorus of the auxiliary cubic equation.
ANTHEMIUS of Tralles, the architect, mentioned above, was
himself an able mathematician, as is seen from a fragment of
a work of his, On Burning-mirrors. 
This is a document of
'considerable importance for the history of conic sections.
Originally edited by L. Dupuy in 1777, it was reprinted in
Westermann's IlapaSogoypdcpoi (Scriptores reruvn mirabilium
Oraeci), 1839, pp. 149-58. The first and third portions of
the fragment are those which interest us.1 The first gives
a solution of the problem, To contrive that a ray of the sun
(admitted through a small hole or window) shall fall in a
given spot, without moving away at any hour and season.
This is contrived by constructing an elliptical mirror one focus
of which is at the point where the ray of the sun is admitted
while the other is at the point to which the ray is required
to be reflected at all times. Let B be the hole, A the point
to which reflection must always take place, BA being in the
meridian and parallel to the horizon. 
Let BG be at right
angles to BA, so that GB is an equinoctial ray; and let BD be
the ray at the summer solstice, BE a winter ray.
Take F at a convenient distance on BE and measure FQ
equal to FA. 
Draw HFG through F bisecting the angle
AFQ, and let BGhe the straight line bisecting the angle EBC
between the winter and the equinoctial rays. Then clearly}
since FG bisects the angle QFA, if we have a plane mirror in
the position HFG, the ray BFE entering at B will be reflected
to A
To get the equinoctial ray similarly reflected to A, join GA,
and with G as centre and GA as radius draw a circle meeting
BG in K. Bisect the angle KG A by the straight line GLM
meeting BK in L and terminated at M, a point on the bisector
of the angle GBD. Then LM bisects the angle KLA also, and
KL = LA, and KM = MA. 
If then GLM is a plane mirror,
the ray BL will be reflected to A.
1 See Bibliotheca mafhematica^ vii3, 1907, pp. 225-33.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

542 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
By taking the point N on BD such that MN = MA, and
bisecting the angle NMA by the straight line MOP meeting
BD in 0, we find that, if MOP is a plane mirror, the ray BO
is reflected to A.
Similarly, by continually bisecting angles and making more
mirrors, we can get any number of other points of impact. Mak-
ing the mirrors so short as to form a continuous curve, we get
the curve containing all points such that the sum of the distances
of each of them from A and B is constant and equal to BQ, BK,
or BN. ' If then\ says Anthemius,' we stretch a string passed
round the points A, By and through the first point taken on the
rays which are to be reflected, the said curve will be described,
which is part of the so-called " ellipse", with reference to
which (i.e. by the revolution of which round BA) the surface
of impact of the said mirror has to be constructed.'
We have here apparently the first mention of the construc-
tion of an ellipse by means of a string stretched tight round
the foci. Anthemius's construction depends upon two pro-
positions proved by Apollonius (1) that the sum of the focal
distances of any point on the ellipse is constant, (2) that the
focal distances of any point make equal angles with the
tangent at that point, and also (3) upon a proposition not
found in Apollonius, namely that the straight line joining
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANTHEMIUS 
543
the focus to the intersection o.f two tangents bisects the angle
between the straight lines joining the focus to the two points
of contact respectively.
In the third portion of the fragment Anthemius proves that
parallel rays can be reflected to one single point from a para-
bolic mirror of which the point is the focus. The directrix is
used in the construction, which follows, mutatis mutandis, the
same course as the above construction in the case of the ellipse.
As to the supposition of Heiberg that Anthemius may also
be the author of the Fragmentum mathematicum Bobiense, see
above (p. 203).
The Papyrus of Aklvmvm.
Next in chronological order must apparently be placed
the Papyrus of Akhmim, a manual of calculation written
in Greek, which was found in the metropolis of Akhmim,
the ancient Panopolis, and is now in the Mus^e du
Gizeh. 
It was edited by <L Baillet1 in 1892. Accord-
ing to the editor, it was written between the sixth and
ninth centuries by a Christian. 
It is interesting because
it preserves the Egyptian method of reckoning, with proper
fractions written as the sum of primary fractions or sub-
multiples, a method which survived alongside the Greek and
was employed, and even exclusively taught, in the East. The
advantage of this papyrus, as compared with Ahmes's, is that
we can gather the formulae used for the decomposition of
ordinary proper fractions into sums of submultiples. 
The
formulae for decomposing a proper fraction into the sum of
two submultiples may be shown thus:
a) ^ = - i - i 
l
be 
b + c 
7 b + c
c. 
b .
a 
a
_ 
,
2
1
1 
3 
1 1 
18 
1 1
Examples n = - - , 
_ 
= 
_ - , _ = _ _ .
(2) 
2L = 
; 
|_
- 
I
be 
b + mc 
7 6 + me 1
c. 
b.
a 
am
1 Memoires publics par Us membres de la Mission archeologique frangais^
Caire, vol. ix, part 1, pp. 1-89.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

544 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
Ex — = 
1 
1 
J_ 
J^
X" 176 ~ , /16 + 3.11\+ 
/16 + 3.1K 1~ 77 + 112'
n
; 
1
6
(
)
, /16 + 3.11\+ 
/16 + 3.1K 1
n\—7—; 
1 6 ( — 7 — ) s
, 
. 
3 _ 
1 
I 
J_J_
an 
again ) 1 2 
, 1 6 + 2 - 7 . 
/16 + 2 . 7\ 1 ~ 7080
H 
3~7 
1
6
(
^
— - 
X 
*
G' 
a 
'
Example.
28 _ 
28 
_ 
1 
1 
__ 1 1
T~320 ~~ 10.12. 11 = ~ 120 + 132 + 
120+132 ~ 90 99 '
'" 
28 
' 
28
The object is, of course, to choose the factors of the denomi-
nator, and the multiplier m in (2), in such a way as to make
the two denominators on the right-hand side integral.
When the fraction has to be decomposed into a sum of three
or more submultiples, we take out an obvious submultiple
first, then if necessary a second, until one of the formulae
will separate what remains into two submultiples. Or we
take out a part which is not a submultiple but which can be
divided into two submultiples by one of the formulae.
For example, to decompose ^3
T^. The factors of 616 are 8.77
or 7.88. Take out ^ , and •$& = ^ £fe = -J- ^ = -± ^ fa;
and fa = ^ 3s b v formula (1), so that $fe = eV TT W& #9 •
Take ^ . 
The factors of 6460 are 85.76 or 95.68. Take
out ^T, and ^^0 = A" wzwo • Again take out 3s > an(l w e have
FFsV^ffo o r -i-sws-is- The actual problem here is to find
•^f-^rd of H^-ITV^VJ which latter expression reduces to
•io - 2 3 9 -
The sort of problems solved in the book are (1) the division
of a number into parts in the proportion of certain given
numbers, (2) the solution of simple equations such as this:
From a certain treasure we take away TVth, then from the
remainder ^ t h of that remainder, and we find 150 units left;
what was the treasure 1 \\x 
x— T(%-— aA — ... f =•&
it 
a 
b\ 
a J 
) 
J
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE PAPYRUS OF AKHMIM. PSELLUS 
545
(3) subtractions such as: From § subtract r s r W o A s W *
•io it* TQ jit wo eV To TT sV so w§ TOo TT o • Answer, ^ -^.
The book ends with long tables of results obtained (1) by
multiplying successive numbers, tens, hundreds and thousands
up to 10,000 by | , ^, £, -I, | , &c, up to TV, (2) by multiplying
all the successive numbers 1, 2, 3. ..n b y - , where w, is succes-
n
sively 11, 12, ... and 20 ; the results are all arranged as the
sums of integers and submultiples.
The Geodaesia of a Byzantine author formerly called, with-
out any authority, ' Heron the Younger' was translated into
Latin by Barocius in 1572, and the Greek text was published
with a French translation by Vincent.1 
The place of the
author's observations was the hippodrome at Constantinople,
and the date apparently about 938. The treatise was modelled
on Heron of Alexandria, especially the Dioptra, while some
measurements of areas and volumes are taken from the
Metrica.
MICHAEL PSELLUS lived in the latter part of the eleventh
century, since his latest work bears the date 1092. Though
he was called {first of philosophers', it cannot be said that
what survives of his mathematics suits this title. Xylander
edited in 1556 the Greek text, with a Latin translation, of
a book purporting to be by Psellus on the four mathematical
sciences, arithmetic, music, geometry and astronomy, but it is
evident that it cannot be entirely Psellus's own work, since
the astronomical portion is dated 1008. The arithmetic con-
tains no more than the names and classification of numbers
and ratios. The geometry has the extraordinary remark that,
while opinions differed as to how to find the area of a circle,
the method which found most favour was to take the area as
the geometric mean between the inscribed and circumscribed
squares; this gives TT = </8 = 2-8284271 ! The only thing of
Psellus which has any value for us is the letter published by
Tannery in his edition of Diophantus.2 In this letter Psellus
says that both Diophantus and Anatolius (Bishop of Laodicea
about A.D. 280) wrote on the Egyptian method of reckoning,
1 Notices et extraits, xix, pt. 2, Paris, 1858.
2 Diophantus, vol. ii, pp. 37-42.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

546 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
and that Anatolius's account, which was different and more
Succinct, was dedicated to Diophantus (this enables us to
determine Diophantus's date approximately). He also notes
the difference between the Diophantine and Egyptian names
for the successive powers of dptO/xos: the next power after
the fourth (SvvafioSvvctfxis = x*), i.e. x6, the Egyptians called
1 the first undescribed' (aXoyos irpcoros) or the ' fifth number ';
the sixth, x6, they apparently (like Diophantus) called the
cube-cube; but with them the seventh, x1, was the ' second
undescribed' or the ' seventh number', the eighth (xs) was the
'quadruple square5 (TtrpcmXrj SvvafiLs), the ninth (x9) the
' extended cube1 (wfios egeXiKro?). Tannery conjectures that
all these remarks were taken direct from an old commentary
on Diophantus now lost, probably Hypatia's.
GEORGIUS PACHYMERES (1242-1310) was the author of a
work on the Quadrivium {XvvTCLy\id rcov Ttvcrdpo&v fiaOri fidrcov
or T€Tpd(3t,(3\oi'). The arithmetical portion contains, besides
excerpts from Nicomachus* and Euclid, a paraphrase of Dio-
phantus, Book I, which Tannery published in his edition of
DiophantusT; the musical section with part of the preface was
published by Vincent,2 and some fragments from Book IV by
Martin in his edition of the Astronomy of Theon of Smyrna.
MAXIMUS PLANUDES, a monk from Nicomedia, was the
envoy of the Emperor Andronicus II at Venice in the year
1297, and lived probably from about 1260 to 1310. He
wrote scholia on the first two Books of Diophantus, which
are extant and are included in Tannery's edition of Dio-
phantus.3 They contain nothing of particular interest except
a number of conspectuses of the working-out of problems of
Diophantus written in Diophantus's own notation but with
steps in separate lines, and with abbreviations on the left of
words indicating the operations (e.g. '{K6. = 'i/tOeo-i?, rtrp. =
TerpaycQVLo-fios, <rvvQ. = o-vv$ecn$, &c); the result is to make
the work almost as easy to follow as it is in our notation.
Another work of Planudes is called Wrjfocpiopia KOCT' 'IVSOVS,
or Arithmetic after the Indian method, and was edited as Das
1 Diophantus, vol. ii, pp. 78-122.
2 Notices et extraits, xvii, 1858, pp. 362-533.
3 Diophantus, vol. ii, pp. 125-255.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PSELLUS. PACHYMERES. PLANUDES 
547
Rechenbuch des Maximus Planudes in Greek by Gerhardt
(Halle, 1805) and in a German translation by H. Waeschke
(Halle, 1878). There was, however, an earlier book under the
similar title 'Apx*l Trjs fieydXrjs KOLI 'IVSIKTJS ylrrjfafopias (sic),
written in 1252, which is extant in the Paris MS. Suppl. Gr.
387; and Planudes seems to have raided this work. 
He
begins with an account of the symbols which, he says, were
' invented by certain distinguished astronomers for the most
convenient and accurate expression of numbers. There are
nine of these symbols (our 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9), to which is
added another called Tzifra (cypher), written 0 and denoting
zero. The nine signs as well as this one are Indian/
But this is, of course, not the first occurrence of the Indian
numerals; they were known, except the zero, to Gerbert
(Pope Sylvester II) in the tenth century, and were used by
Leonardo of Pisa in his Liber abaci (written in 1202 and
rewritten in 1228). Planudes used the Persian form of the
numerals, differing in this from the writer of the treatise of
1252 referred to, who used the form then current in Italy.
It scarcely belongs to Greek mathematics to give an account
of Planudes's methods of subtraction, multiplication, &c.
Extraction of the square root
As regards the extraction of the square root, he claims to
have invented a method different from the Indian method
and from that of Theon. It does not appear, however, that
there was anything new about it. Let us try to see in what
the supposed new method consisted.
Planudes describes fully the method of extracting the
square root of a number with several digits, a method which
is essentially the same as ours. This appears to be what he
refers to later on as ' the Indian method \ 
Then he tells us
how to find a first approximation to the root when the number
is not a complete square.
'Take the square root of the next lower actual square
number, and double it: then, from the number the square root
of which is required, subtract the next lower square number
so found, and to the remainder (as numerator) give as de-
nominator the double of the square root already found/
Nn 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

548 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
The example given is A/(18). Since 42= 16 is the next
2
274
2a
2
lower square, the approximate square root is 4 + — or
b
The formula used is, therefore, V(a* + b) = a+ r- approxi-
mately. (An example in larger numbers is
7(1690196789) = 41112 + g#ff 4 approximately.)
Planudes multiplies 4^ by itself and obtains 18^, which
shows that the value 4^ is not accurate. He adds that he will
explain later a method which is more exact and nearer the
truth, a method ' which I claim as a discovery made by me
with the help of God \ 
Then, coming to the method which he
claims to have discovered, Planudes applies it to >/6. The
object is to develop this in units and sexagesimal fractions.
Planudes begins by multiplying the 6 by 3600, making 21600
second-sixtieths, and finds the square root of 21600 to lie
between 146 and 147. Writing the 146' as 2 26', he proceeds
to find the rest of the approximate square root (2 26' 58" 9"')
by the same procedure as that used by Theon in extracting
the square root of 4500 and 2 28' respectively. The differ-
ence is that in neither of the latter cases does Theon multiply
by 3600 so as to reduce the units to second-sixtieths, but he
begins by taking the approximate square root of 2, viz. 1, just
as he does that of 4500 (viz. 67). It is, then, the multiplication
by 3600, or the reduction to second-sixtieths to start with, that
constitutes the difference from Theon's method, and this must
therefore be what Planudes takes credit for as a new dis-
covery. In such a case as V(2 28') or \/3, Theon's method
has the inconvenience that the number of minutes in the
second term (34' in the one case and 43' in the other) cannot
be found without some trouble, a difficulty which is avoided
by Planudes's expedient. Therefore the method of Planudes
had its advantage in such a case. But the discovery was not
new. For it will be remembered that Ptolemy (and doubtless
Hipparchus before him) expressed the chord in a circle sub-
tending an angle of 120° at the centre (in terms of 120th parts
of the diameter) as 103* 55' 23", which indicates that the first
step in calculating Vs was to multiply it by 3600, making
10800, the nearest square below which is 1032 (= 10609). In
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PLANUDES. MOSCHOPOULOS 
549
the scholia to Eucl., Book X, the same method is applied.
Examples have been given above (vol. i, p. 63). The supposed
new method was therefore not only already known to the
scholiast, but goes back, in all probability, to Hipparchus.
Two problems.
Two problems given at the end of the Manual of Planudes
are worth mention. The first is stated thus: ' A certain man
finding himself at the point of death had his desk or safe
brought to him and divided his money among his sons with
the following words, " I wish to x divide my money equally
between my sons: the first shall have one piece and ^th of the
rest, the second 2 and ^th of the remainder, the third 3 and
|th of the remainder." At this point the father died without
getting to the end. either of his money or the enumeration of
his sons. I wish to know how many sons he had and how
much money.' The solution is given as (n— I)2 for the number
of coins to be divided and (n—1) for the number of his sons;
or rather this is how it might be stated, for Planudes takes
n = 7 arbitrarily. 
Comparing the shares of the first two we
must clearly have
1+ -(05—1) = 2 + ! {^-(l + ~ 
+ 2)},
which gives x = {n — 1 )2; therefore each of (n — 1) sons received
(*-l).
The other problem is one which we have already met with,
that of finding two rectangles of equal perimeter such that
the area of one of them is a given multiple of the area of
the other. If n is the given multiple, the rectangles are
(n2 — 1, nz—n2) and (n — 1, n* — n) respectively. 
Planudes
states the solution correctly, but how he obtained it is not clear.
We find also in the Manual of Planudes the ' proof by nine'
(i.e. by casting out nines), with a statement that it was dis-
covered by the Indians and transmitted to us through the
Arabs.
MANUEL MOSCHOPOULOS, a pupil and friend of Maximus
Planudes, lived apparently under the Emperor Andronicus II
(1282-1328) and perhaps under his predecessor Michael VIII
(1261-82) also. 
A man of wide teaming, he wrote (at the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

550 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
instance of Nicolas Rhabdas, presently to be mentioned) a
treatise on magic squares; he showed, that is, how the num-
bers 1, 2, 3 ... n2 could be placed in the n2 compartments of
a square, divided like a chess-board into n2 small squares, in such
a way that the sum of the numbers in each horizontal and
each vertical row of compartments, as well as in the rows
forming the diagonals, is always the same, namely \n (n2+1).
Moschopoulos gives rules of procedure for the cases in which
n = 2 m + 1 and n = 4 m respectively, and these only, in the
treatise as we have it; he promises to give the case where
n = 4 m+2 also, but does not seem to have done so, as the
two manuscripts used by Tannery have after the first two cases
the words reAoy rod avrov. The treatise was translated by
De la Hire,1 edited by S. Giinther,2 and finally edited in an
improved text with translation by Tannery.3
The work of Moschopoulos was dedicated to- Nicolas Arta-
vasdus, called RHABDAS, a person of some importance in the
history of Greek arithmetic. He edited, with some additions
of his own, the Manual of Planudes; this edition exists in
the Paris MS. 2428. But he is also the author of two letters
which have been edited by Tannery in the Greek text with
French translation.4 The date of Rhabdas is roughly fixed
by means of a calculation of the date of Easter ' in the current
year' contained in one of the letters, which shows that its
date was 1341. It is remarkable that each of the two letters
has a preface which (except for the words TT\V 8rj\a)(ni> TG>V kv
roi9 dpiOfiois ^TrjjidTcov and the name or title of the person
to whom it is addressed) copies word for word the first thir-
teen lines of the preface to Diophantus's Arithmetica, a piece
of plagiarism which, if it does not say much for the literary
resource of Rhabdas, may indicate that he had studied Dio-
phantus. The first of the two letters has the heading ' A con-
cise and most clear exposition of the science of calculation
written at Byzantium of Constantine, by Nicolas Artavasdus
1 M4m. de VAcad. Roy ale des Sciences, 1705.
2 Vermischte ZJntersuchungen zur Gesch. d. Math., Leipzig, 1876.
3 *Le traite de Manuel Moschopoulos sur les carres magiques' in
Annuaire de VAssociation pour Vencouragement des etudes grecques, xx,
1886, pp. 88-118.
4 'Notices sur les deux lettres arithmetiques de Nicolas Rhabdas' in
Notices et extraits des manuscrits de la Bibliotheque Rationale, xxxii, pt. 1,
1886, pp. 121-252.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MOSCHOPOULOS. RHABDAS 
551
of Smyrna, arithmetician and geometer, TOV 'Pa^Sa, at the
instance of the most revered Master of Requests, Georgius
Chatzyces, and most easy for those who desire to study it/
A long passage, called eK^pacns TOV SUKTVXLKOV fiirpov, deals
with a method of finger-notation, in which the fingers of each
hand held in different positions are made to represent num-
bers.1 The fingers of the left hand serve to represent all the
units and tens, those of the right all the hundreds and
thousands up to 9000; 'for numbers above these it is neces-
sary to use writing, the hands not sufficing to represent such
numbers/ The numbers begin with the little fingers of each
hand; if we call the thumb and the fingers after it the 1st,
2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th fingers in the German style, the succes-
sive signs may be thus described, premising that, where fingers
are not either bent or ' half-closed' (KXivofievoi) or ' closed'
L), they are supposed to be held out straight
(a) On the left hand:
for 1, half-close the 5th finger only;
„ 2, 
„ 
„ 4th and 5th fingers only;
„ 3, 
„ 
,, 3rd, 4th an(J 5th fingers only;
„ 4, 
„ 
„ 3rd and 4th fingers only ;
„ 5, 
„ 
„ 3rd finger only;
;> 6, 
„ 
„ 4th 
„ 
„
„ 7, close the 5th finger only;
., 8, 
„ 
„ 4th and 5th fingers only;
„ 9, 
„. 
„ 3rd, 4th and 5th fingers only.
(b) The same operations on the right hand give the thou-
sands, from 1000 to 9000.
(c) On the left hand:
for 10, apply the tip of the forefinger to the first joint of
the thumb so that the resulting figure resembles a;
1 A similar description occurs in the works of the Venerable Bede
(' De computo vel loquela digitorum', forming chapter i of De temporum
ratione), where expressions are also quoted from St. Jerome (d. 420 A. D.)
as showing that he too was acquainted with the system (TheMiscellaneous
Works of the Venerable Bede, ed. J. A. Giles, vol. vi, 1843, pp. 141-3).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

552 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
for 20, stretch out the forefinger straight and vertical,
keep fingers 3, 4, 5 together but separate from it
and inclined slightly to the palm; in this position
touch the forefinger with the thumb;
„ 30, join the tips of the forefinger and thumb ;
„ 40, place the thumb on the knuckle of the forefinger
behind, making a figure like the letter f ;
„ 50, make a like figure with the thumb on the knuckle
of the forefinger inside;
„ 60, place the thumb inside the forefinger as for 50 and
bring the forefinger down over the thumb, touch-
ing the ball of it;
„ 70, rest the forefinger round the tip of the thumb,
making a curve like a spiral;
„ 80, fingers 3, 4, 5 being held together and inclined
at an angle to the palm, put the thumb across the
palm to touch the third phalanx of the middle
finger (3) and in this position bend the forefinger
above the first joint of the thumb;
„ 90, close the forefinger only as completely as possible.
(d) The same operations on the right hand give the hun-
dreds, from 100 to 900.
The first letter also contains tables for addition and sub-
traction and for multiplication and division; as these are said
to be the 'invention of Palamedes', we must suppose that
such tables were in use from a remote antiquity. Lastly, the
first letter contains a statement which,- though applied to
particular numbers, expresses a theorem to the effect that
(ao+ 10ax+ ... + 10™aJ (60+ 10^ + ... + 10w6w)
is not > iom+w+2,
where a0, ax... 60, bx... are any numbers from 0 to 9.
In the second letter of Rhabdas we find simple algebraical
problems of the same sort as those of the Anthologia Qraeca
and the Papyrus of Akhmim. Thus there are five problems
leading to equations of the type
x 
x
m 
n
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

RHABDAS 
553
Rhabdas solves the equation 
1— = a, practically as we
^ 
m 
n 
r 
J
should, by multiplying up to get rid of fractions, whence he
obtains x = mna/(m + n). Again he solves the simultaneous
equations x + y = a, mx = ny ; also the pair of equations
m 
* 
n
Of course, m, n, a... have particular numerical values in
all cases.
Rhabdas fs Rule for approximating to the square root of
a non-square number.
We find in Rhabdas the equivalent of the Heronian formula
for the approximation to the square root of a non-square
number A = a2 + b, namely
b
« = a+ra;
he further observes that, if oc be an approximation by excess,
then ocx = A/OL is an approximation by defect, and \ (oc + ocj)
is an approximation nearer than either. This last form is of
course exactly Heron's formula a = f (a H 
) • The formula
V 
a /
was also known to Barlaam (presently to be mentioned), who
also indicates that the procedure can be continued indefinitely.
It should here be added that there is interesting evidence
of the Greek methods of approximating to square roots in two
documents published by Heiberg in 1899.1 
The first of
these documents (from a manuscript of the fifteenth century
at Vienna) gives the approximate square root of certain non-
square numbers from 2 to 147 in integers and proper fractions.
The numerals are the Greek alphabetic numerals, but they are
given place-value like our numerals: thus <xrj = 18, oc8{= 147,
~ = —a and so on: 0 is indicated by i) or, sometimes, by .
pr) 
28
)
All these square foots, such as >/(21) = 4 | | , \/(35) =
^(112) = 10f|, and so on, can be obtained (either exactly or,
in a few cases, by neglecting or adding a small fraction in the
1 ' Byzantinische Analekten' in Abh. zur Gesch. d. Math. ix. Heft, 1899,
pp. 163 sqq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

554 
COMMENTATORS AND BYZANTINES
numerator of the fractional .part of the root) in one or other
of the following ways :
(1) by taking the nearest square to the given number A,
say a2, and using the Heronian formulae
)
(2) by using one or other of the following approximations,
where
2, and A = a2 + b =
namely, 
b 
b 
7
2a 
2a +
- —» a 4 
b
2a 
2a + —
2a
or a combination of two of these with
a 
c
(3) the formula that, if •=• < -?> then
a 
ma + nc 
c
b 
m6 + nd 
d
It is clear that it is impossible to deny to the Greeks the
knowledge of these simple formulae.
Three more names and we have done.
IOANNES PEDIASIMUS, also called Galenus, was Keeper of the
Seal to the Patriarch of Constantinople in the reign of
Andronicus III (1328-41). 
Besides literary works of his,
some notes on difficult points in arithmetic and a treatise on
the duplication of the cube by him are said to exist in manu-
scripts. His Geometry, which was edited by Friedlein in 1866,
follows very closely the mensuration of Heron.
B A EL A AM, a monk of Calabria, was abbot at Constantinople
and later Bishop of Geraci in the neighbourhood of Naples;
he died in 1348. He wrote, in Greek, arithmetical demon-
strations of propositions in Euclid, Book II,1 and a Logistic in
six Books, a laborious manual of calculation in whole numbers,
1 Edited with Latin translation by Dasypodius in 1564, and included
in Heiberg and Menge's Euclid, vol. v, ad Jin.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PEDIASIMUS. BARLAAM. ARGYRUS 
555
ordinary fractions and sexagesimal fractions (printed at
Strassburg in 1592 and at Paris in 1600). Barlaam, as we
have seen, knew the Heronian formulae for finding successive
approximations to square roots, and was aware that they could
be indefinitely continued.
ISAAC ARGYRUS, a monk, who lived before 1368, was one of
a number of Byzantine translators of Persian astronomical-
works. In mathematics he wrote a Geodaesia and scholia to
the first six Books of Euclid's Elements. The former is con-
tained in the Paris MS. 2428 and is called 'a method of
geodesy or the measurement of surfaces, exact and shortened';
the introductory letter addressed to one Colybos is followed
by a compilation of extracts from the Geometrica and Stereo-
metrica of Heron. He is apparently the author of some
further additions to Rhabdas's revision of the Manual of
Planudes contained in the same manuscript. A short tract
of his ' On the discovery of the square roots of non-rational
square numbers} is mentioned as contained in two other manu-
scripts at Venice and Rome respectively (Codd. Marcianus Gr.
333 and Vaticanus Gr. 1058), where it is followed by a table
of the square roots of all numbers from 1 to 102 in sexa-
gesimal fractions (e.g. </2 = 1 24' 51" 48"', / 3 = 1 43' 56" 0'").1
1 Heiberg, * Byzantinische Analekten', in Abh. zur Gesch. d. Math, ix,
pp. 169-70.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

