
,1 
.~ , 
1 i 
~ 
I l I 
1 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Conceptual Blending and the 
Mind's Hidden Complexities 
•• •••• 
~j 
•• •• •• 
GILLES FAUCONNIER 
MARK TURNER 
1002. 
B 
BOC4<S 
A Member of the Perseus Books Group 

l 
. ~ , 
1 
~ 
~ I 
\ i 
\ 
J 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Conceptual Blending and the 
Mind's Hidden Complexities 
•• •••• 
~j 
•• •• •• 
GILLES FAUCONNIER 
MARK TURNER 
8 
BOCKS 
A Member of the Perseus Books Group 
r 
• t 
1 

t' 
t 
; 
:Y 
r 
1 
J 
I , 
, 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Conceptual Blending and the 
Mind's Hidden Complexities 
•• •• •• 
•• •• •• 
GILLES FAUCONNIER 
MARK TU RN ER 
B 
BCXlKS 
A Member of the Perseus Books Group 

Copyright © 2002 by Gilles Fauconnier and Mark Turner 
Published by Basic Books, 
A Member of the Perseus Books Group 
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this book may be 
reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission except in the case of brief 
quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For information, address Basic Books, 
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022-5299. 
Designed by Trish Wilkinson 
Set in II -point AGaramond by the Perseus Books Group 
Fauconnier, Gilles. 
The way we think : conceptual blending and the mind's hidden complexities I Gilles 
Fauconruer, Mark Turner. 
p. 
cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-465-08785-X (alk. paper) 
l. Concepts. 2. Thought and thinking. I. Turner, Mark, 1954- II. Title. 
BF433 .F38 2002 
153.4-dc21 
02 03 04 05 I 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
2001052925 
I 
4 
; 
II PREFAC E 
FiFTY THOUSAND YEARS AGO, more or less, during the Upper Paleolithic 
Age, our ancestors began the most spectacular advance in human history. Before 
that age, human beings were a negligible group oflarge mammals. After, the hu-
man mind Was able to take over the world. What happened? 
The archeological record suggests that during the Upper Paleolithic, humans 
developed an unprecedented ability to innovate. They acquired a modern hu-
man imagination, which gave them the ability to invent new concepts and to as-
semble new and dynamic mental patterns. The results of this change were awe-
some: Human beings developed art, science, religion, culture, sophisticated 
tools, and language. How could we have invente'j these things? 
In this book, we focus on conceptual blending, a great mental capacity that, in 
its' most advanced "double-scope" form, gave our ancestors superiority and, for 
better and for worse, made us what we are today. We investigate the principles 
of conceptual blending, its fascinating dynamics, and its crucial role in how we 
think and live. 
Conceptual blending operates largely behind the scenes. We are not con-
sciously aware of its hidden complexities, any more than we are consciously 
aware of the complexities of perception involved in, for example, seeing a blue 
cup. Almost invisibly to consciousness, conceptual blending choreographs vast 
networks of conceptual meaning, yielding cognitive products that, at the con-
scious level, appear simple. The way we think is not the way we think we think. 
Everyday thought seems straightforward, but even our simplest thinking is as-
tonishingly complex. 
The products of conceptual blending are ubiquitous. S~dents of rhetoric, 
literature, painting, and scientific invention have noticed many specific prod-
ucts of blending, each one of which, in isolation, seemed remarkable at the 
time, in its strange and arresting way. These scholars, ranging from Arisrotle to 
Freud, took these speciflc instances to be exceptional, marginal eruptions of 
meaning, curious and suggestive. But none of them focused on the general 
mental capacity of blending or, as far as we can tell, even recognized that there is 
such a mental capacity. Attentive to the specific attraction-the painting, the 
poem, the dream, the scientific insight-they did not look for what all these bits 
and pieces have in common. The spectacular t"rees masked the forest. 
v 

vi 
t' 
Priface 
Our own work started with just such curious and suggestive examples. But 
by making precise their underlying principles, we began .to get glimpses of an 
entire forest behind the trees. We discovered that the same cognitive opera-
tion--:eonceptual blending-plays a decisive role in human thought and action 
and yields a boundless diversity of visible manifestations. 
. 
This was an exciting but also shocking discovery, running as it does against 
much conventional wisdom; We had certainly not set out to prove anything of 
the sort. Rather, like Aristotle and Freud, and others less illustrious in this tradi-
tion, we began by looking at striking and, we thought, exotic examples of cre-
ativity, such as analogical counterfactuals, poetic metaphors, and chimeras like 
talking donkeys. By 1993, we had amassed overwhelming evidence from many 
more fields-grammar, mathematics, inferencing, computer interfaces, action, 
and design. This launched a general research program into the nature of con-
ceptual blending as a basic mental operation, its structural and dynamic princi-
ples, and the constraints that govern it. 
Coming from a different angle and with very different kinds of data, several 
"creativity theorists" were speculating on the existence of a general mental ca-
pacity--:ealled "cognitive fluidity" by Stephen Mithen-that brings together el-
ements of different domains. Mithen and others linked the availability of this 
capacity to the explosion of creativity in tool-making, painting, and religious 
practice, dated by archaeologists to roughly 50,000 years ago. 
In this book, we argue that conceptual blending underlies and makes possi-
ble all these diverst'human accomplishments, that it is responsible for the ori-
gins of language, art, religion, science, and other singular human feats, and that 
it is as indispensable for basic everyday thought as it is for artistic and scientific 
abilities. Above all, it is our goal to do what has not been done before: to explain 
the principles and mechanisms of conceptual blending. 
II A C K NOW LED G MEN T S 
THE COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH PRESENTED in this book began in 
1992-1993 at the University of California, San Diego. Gilles Fauconnier was a 
member of the department of cognitive science, and Mark Turner was on leave 
from the University of Maryland. as a visiting scholar in the departments of cog-
nitive science and linguistics. Mark Turner is grateful to the John Simon 
Guggenheim Memorial Foundation for fellowship support provided during 
that year and to the departments of cognitive science and linguistics at the Uni-
versity of California, San Diego, for their hospitality. He is additionally grateful 
to the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences for a fellowship 
year during 1994-1995 and the Institute for Advanced Study for a fellowship 
year during 1996-1997, periods in which this collaboration was continued. 
The writing of this book was conducted principally during 1999-2000, on 
the campus of Stanford University. Gilles Fauconnier is grateful for fellowship 
support to the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation, the American 
Philosophical Society, the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sci-
ences, where he was a Fellow, and the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur 
Foundation, which provided grant number 95-32005-0 to the Center. During 
1999-2000, Mark Turner was a visiting scholar in the department of linguistics 
and the Center for the Study of Language and Information at Stanford Univer-
sity. He is grateful to them for their support and hospitality. He is additionally 
grateful to the University of Maryland for the many assignments to research 
leave it has granted during this collaboration. 
For exceptional overall support, encouragement, and the sharing of many in-
sights, we are deeply indebted to Tina Fauconnier and Megan Whalen Turner. 
Many friends and colleagues have helped us along the way and have made sig-
nificant contributions of their own to the conceptual blending research pro-
gram. They include Per Auge Brandt, Nannette Brenner, Marco Casonato, 
Seana Coulson, Margaret Freeman, Joseph Grady, Jennifer Harding, Masako 
Hiraga, Doug Hofstadter, Ed Hutchins, Michael Israel, George Lakoff, Nili 
Mandelblit, Shweta Narayan, Todd Oakley, Esther Pascual, Adrian Robert, Tim 
Rohrer, Vera Tobin, and Bob Williams. 
We jointly thank Jeff Elman and the Center for Research in Language at the 
University of California, San Diego, for technical support. We thank Wildlife 
vii 

VIII 
Acknowledgments 
Education, Limited, for permission to reprint the image of the dinosaur evolv-
ing into a bird from Dinosaurs, an issue of Zoobooks. We thank Michelle Moore 
of Wildlife Education, Limited, and Michael Gosnell of the UCSD Resources 
Center for their assistance. We thank the Education Excellence Partnership of 
the Business Roundtable for permission to reprint the image of the Bypass ad-
vertisement. 
We are especially grateful to William Frucht, our editor at Basic Bo~ks, for 
his guidance and insight. 
II CONTENTS 
Ov~rview by Chapt~r 
PART ONE: THE NETWORK MODEL 
1· 
The Age of Form and the Age of Imagination 
2 
The TIp of the Iceberg 
3 
The Elements of Blending 
4 
On the Way to Deeper Matters 
5 
Cause and Effect 
6 
Vital Relations and Their Compressions 
_I 
7 
Compressions and Clashes 
8 
Continuity Behind Diversity 
PART TWO: HOW CONCEPTUAL BLENDING 
MAKES HUMAN BEINGS WHAT THEY ARE, 
F" 0 R 
B E TT ERA N D 
F" 0 R 
W 0 R S E 
9 
The Origin of Language 
10 
Things 
11 
The Construction of the Unreal 
12 
Identity and Character 
13 
Category Metamorphosis 
14 
Multiple Blends 
15 
Multiple-Scope Creativity 
16 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
17 
Form and Meaning 
18 
The Way We Live 
Notes 
Refirenc~s 
Further Important Work on Conc~tua' Blending 
m~ 
J 
ix 
XI 
3 
17 
39 
59 
75 
89 
113 
139 
171 
195 
217 
249 
269 
279 
299 
309 
353 
389 
397 
405 
415 
423 

f' 
fll 
i. 
1: 
t 
i. 
~ I 
I 
~' 
t 
f 
.~ 
\ II 0 v E; R V lEW Bye H A PT E R 
PART ONE: THE NETWORK MODEL 
1 
The Age of Form and the Age of Imagination 
We evoke some of the twentieth century's most 
noteworthy achievements: the magic of computers, the 
discovery of the genetic code, the broad application of 
the axiomatic method in the formal sciences and of 
structuralism in the social sciences. This was the century 
of form approaches, w impressive array of methods for 
. discovering and manipulating meaning through 
. systematic analysis of form. Yet to achieve these 
remarkable results, formal manipulations needed to take 
for granted the operations of a brain evolved over three 
billion years and trained throughout several months of 
early individual life. Identity, integration, and 
imagination-basic, mysterious, powerful, complex, and 
mostly unconscious operations--are at the heart of even 
the simplest possible meanings. The value of the simplest 
forms lies in the complex emergent dynamics they trigger 
in the imaginative mind. These basic operations are the 
key to both the invention of everyday meaning and 
exceptional human creativity. 
3 
2 
The Tip of the Iceberg 
17 
Operations for the construction of meaning are powerful 
but for the most part invisible. Our theme is the basic 
mental operation we call conceptual blending. We begin by 
presenting some examples in which the blending is hard 
to miss. The first of these, in the section titled "The Iron 
Lady and the Rust Belt," illustrates a type of 
counterfactual reasoning that plays an important role in 
political science. This example---,.easy for humans to 
xi 

XII 
Overview by Chapter 
understand, but possessed of a hidden complexity that 
lies far beyond the capacities of today's most 'powerful 
computers-is a remarkable feat of the imaginative 
dynamics of conceptual blending. "The Skiing Waiter" 
shows how the same operations work to create emergent 
action. Other striking examples of conceptual blending 
include computer interrnces ("The Genie in the 
Computer"), complex numbers in mathematics ("Crazy 
Numbers"), sexual practices ("The Image Club"), and the 
ceremony of college graduation ("Graduation"). 
3 
The Elements of Blending 
Conceptual blending has constitutive principles, which we 
present in detail and illustrate by looking at the riddle of 
"The Buddhist Monk." 
4 
On the Way to Deeper Matters 
Some famous cases of conceptual blending in a variety of 
domains are "The Debate with Kant," "Regatta," and 
"The Bypass." 
5 
Cause and Effect 
A deeper understanding of blending comes from the 
study of remarkable compressions in conceptual 
integration networks, especially the compression of cause 
and effect. Humans must simultaneously control long 
diffuse chains of logical reasoning and grasp the global 
meaning of such chains. This is exactly what integration 
networks allow them to do. Rituals of birth and marriage 
depend on elegant and powerful compressions of cause 
and effect. Equally powerful compressions operate in 
billboard advertising, mathematical thought, and Dante's 
Divine Comedy. 
6 
Vital Relations and Their Compressions 
Just as the marvelous systematic products of chemistry-
acids and bases, colors from titration, metabolism, nuclear 
decay-
are not foretold in the principle that atoms 
combine to make molecules, so the marvelous systematic 
products of blending are not foretold in the principle that 
mental spaces blend to make new spaces with emergent 
meaning. There is an entire system of interacting 
39 
59 
75 
89 
Overview by Chapter 
7 
8 
principles behind the possibilities for conceptual 
blending, and we must grapple with that entire system to 
explain anyone of its products. 
Much of that system concerns conceptual compression. 
Compression in blending networks operates on a 
surprisingly small set of relations rooted in fundamental 
human neurobiology and shared social experience. These 
vital relations, which include Cause-Effect, Change, 
TIme, Identity, Intentionality, Representation, and Part-
Whole, not only apply across mental spaces but also 
define essential topology within mental spaces. Blending, 
. it turns out, is an instrument of compression par 
excellence. One of the overarching goals of compression 
. through blending is to achieve "human scale" in the 
blended space, where a great deal of conscious 
manipulation takes place. 
~ I 
CO,mpressions and Clashes 
Compression and decompression of vital relations can 
produce spectacular examples, such as the scientific 
explanation of the biological evolution of the American 
pronghorn and the cultural notions of metempsychosis 
and rein<:arnation expressed poetically in William Butler 
Yeats's "Fergus and the Druid." 
In an elaborate typology of networks, four kinds stand 
. out on a continuum of complexity: simplex, mirror, single-
scope, and double-scope. At the high end of the continuum 
of blending complexity, double-scope networks blend 
inputs with different (and often clashing) organizing 
'\ 
fr~es to produce creative emergent frame strUctute in a 
~ blended space. Double-scope blending is what.we 
typically find in scientific, artistic, and literary discoveries 
and inventions. Indeed, double-scope creativity is perhaps 
the most striking characteristic of our species. 
Continuity Behind Diversity 
Conceptual integration creates mental products that often 
seem completely different from one another. This apparent 
dissimilarity misled previous thinkers into assuming that 
these products must arise from different mental capacities, 
xiii 
.-<--
113 
139 

L 
xiv 
,. 
Overview by Chapter 
operations, or modules. But in fact they all arise from the 
same mental operation. There are systematic mapping 
schemes, and systematic ways of combining them, that 
underlie ostensibly different conceptions and expressions. 
Logic and metaphor, for example, equally deploy these 
systems of mapping and blending. 
PART TWO: HOW CONCEPTUAL BLENDING 
MAKES HUMAN BEINGS WHAT THEY ARE, 
FO R 
B ETTER AN D 
FO R WO RSE 
9 
The Origin of Language 
Human beings' are unique in having language, art, 
religion, culture. refined tool, use, fashions of dress. 
science. mathematics. and inventive forms of music and 
dance. The fact that these 'singularities 'came upon the 
scene during the Upper Paleolithic presents a major 
scientific riddle. We offer a solution to that riddle: All 
these singularities have the same source. the evolution of 
the capacity for double-scope blending. This explanation 
is supported by recent archeological. anthropological. and 
genetic evidence concerning the origin of cognitively 
moderri' human beings. 
10 
Things 
We make things, carry them, consult them, repair them, 
teach each other how to use them, adorn owselves with 
them, and make gifts of them. Why? Consider the everyday 
wristwatch. As a thing in itself. it is bizarre and pointless. 
yet the wristwatch is a material anchor for a fascinating 
conceptual blend. Drawing on work by Edwin Hutchin~ 
on conceptual blending and material anchors. we show 
how the things that populate human life are props for ow 
double-scope conceptual integration networks. Some of the 
examples we consider are timepieces; gauges of all kinds, 
money, souvenirs, tombs, graves, cathedrals. writing. 
speech. and sign. 
11 
The Construction of the Unreal 
Human beings pretend, imitate. lie. fantasize, deceive. 
delude, consider alternatives, simulate, make models, and 
propose hypotheses. Our mental life depends in every way 
171 
195 
217 
Overview by Chapter 
on counterfactual thinking, and the 'central engine of such 
thinking is conceptual integration. 
The conceptual blends of counterfactual thinking drive 
scientific thinking. We live in a counterfactual zoo of 
absent and negative things. 
12 
Identity and Character 
Ow notions of who and what we are depend upon 
conceptual iIitegration. Among our human mental tricks 
is the routine blending of two different identities, as in "If 
I were you, I would quit." Certain very powerful human 
concepts. such as personal redemption, regaining or 
restoring honor, vengeance, vendetta, and curse are actually 
blend structures. And some of the most influential people 
are nonpeople who come into our lives through 
conceptual bleri~ing. 
13 
Category Metamorphosis 
Human beings frequently transform categories. The 
new category, although linked to the old one, can have 
radically emergent structure. Same-sex marriage, complex 
numbers, and computer virus are all examples of category 
metamorphosis. 
14 
Multiple Blends 
Conceptual integration always involves a blended space 
and at least two inputs and a generic space. In fact, it can 
operate over any number of mental spaces as inputs. 
Blending can also apply repeatedly: The product of 
blending can become the input to a new operation of 
blending. The examples we consider here range from a 
newspaper column about the politics of health care (titled 
"Dracula and His Patients"). to an acrobatic political jeer 
("The stork dropped George Bush on third base with a 
silver spoon in his mouth"), to a letter to the editor about 
abortion ("As an Unwanted Child Myself ... "). 
15 
Multiple-Scope Creativity 
This chapter explores the remarkable conceptual creativity 
that arises in multiple-scope integration networks. In 
particular, we consider integration networks for anger, 
xv 
249 
269 
279 
299 

xvi 
Overvinu by Chapter 
.,. 
death. corporate feuds. two-edged swords. and trashcan 
basketball. 
-I 
16 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
309 
This is a theoretical chapter in which we examine how 
human mental powers for double-scope'creativity are 
limited and governed. Interestingly. these limitations 
provide power to the process. 
Cognitively modern human beings use conceptual 
integration to innovate--to create rich and diverse 
conceptual worlds that give meanings to our lives-
worlds with sexual fantasies. grammar, complex numbers. 
personal identity, redemption, lottery depression. But 
such a panorama of wildly different human ideas and 
behaviors raises a question: Does anything go? On the 
contrary. conceptual integration operates not only 
according to a clear set of constitutive principles but also 
according to an interacting set of governing principles. 
One set of governing principles has to do with Topology, 
Pattern Completion, Integration, Maximization of Vital 
Relations, Intensification of Vital Relations, maintenance 
ofithe Web of links in an integration network. the degree 
to which a blend prompts for its own Unpacking, and the 
ascription of Relevance to elements in a blend. Yet 
another set of governing principles has to do with the 
compression of complicated conceptual networks into a 
single blend at -human conceptual scale. In this chapter. 
we also review the overarching goals of conceptual 
integration. We then show how conventional kinds of 
conceptual integration networks-simplex, mirror, single-
scope, double-scope--arise repeatedly because they 
provide a packaged. all-at-once way to satisfy the 
governing principles. 
17 
Form and Meaning 
353 
Language and other complex human expressive abilities 
are consequences of the development, fifty thousand years 
ago. of the uniquely human capacity for advanced 
conceptual integration. Expressions are prompts for 
conceptual integration patterns. We use them to prompt 
Overview by Chapter 
other people to perform conceptual integrations. Once 
double-scope blending became available to human beings. 
language arose through cultural evolution in cultural time 
as opposed to evolutionary time. 
18 
The Way We Live 
We conclude with a consideration of the central role of 
conceptual blending in the way we learn. the way we 
think, and the way we live. 
xv 
38~ 

~ 
) 
-< 
~ 
(T1 
-i 
:I -Z 
~ 

-
~ . 
'-=-~-.~~ . ~- '-.~ .' 
. ----~~.'---------------
•• 
•• 
z -; 
~ 
f11 
I 
;t 
-; 
rr1 
~ 
C 
0 
~ 
f\ 
;;0 
~ 
~ 
0 
0 
f11 
r 

II 
I 
•• 
•• One 
THE AGE OF FORM AND 
THE AGE OF IMAGINATION 
It is far more useful to view computational science as 
part of the problem, rather than the solution. The prob-
lem is understanding how humans can have invented ex-
plicit, algorithmically driven machines when our brains 
do not operate in this way. The solution, if it ever comes, 
will be found by looking inside ourselves. 
-Merlin Donald 
/l 
WE LIVE IN THE age of the triumph of form. In mathematics, physics, mu-
sic" ,the arts"and the social sciences, human knowledge and its progress seem to 
have been reduce~ in startling and powerful ways to a matter of essential for-
mal structures and their transformations. The magic of computers is the speedy 
manipulation of Is and Os. If they just get faster at it, we hear, they might re-
place us . . .. Life in all its richness and complexity is said to be fundamentally 
explainable as combinations and recombinations of a finite genetic code. The 
axiomatic method rules, not only in mathematics but also in economics, lin-
guistics, sometimes even music. The heroes of this age have been Gottlob 
Frege, David Hilbert, Werner Heisenberg, John von Neumann, Alan Turing, 
Noam Chomsky, Norbert Wiener, Jacques Monod, Igor Stravinsky, Claude 
Levi-Strauss, Herbert Simon. 
The practical products of this triumph are now part of our daily life and cul-
ture. We eat genetically engineered corn; we announce births and send wedding 
congratulations and buy guns on the Internet. We buy groceries by having our 
credit cards scanned. Our taxes are determined by formulas invented by demog-
raphers and economists. We clone sheep. Serialist composers choose their notes 
according to mathematical principles. 
ACHILLES AND HIS ARMOR 
All of these wonders come from systematic manipulation of forms. By the 
magic of such transformations, the picture of y~ur newborn baby becomes a 
3 

.{ 
THE WAY WE THINK 
long string of Is and Os. They are transmitted electronically over thousands of 
miles and turned back into the same picture on the other end. The powerful 
and deeply meaningful image appears therefore to be the same as a bunch of Is 
and Os. Form carries meaning with no loss. A picture is worth a thousand Is and 
Os, and vice versa. 
A college student enrolled in economics, once a branch of ethics, will now 
spend considerable time manipulating formulas. If she studies language, once 
firmly the province of humanists and philologists, she will learn formal algo-
rithms. If she hopes to become a psychologist, she must become adept at con-
structing computational models. The manipulation of form is so powerful and 
useful that school is now often seen as largely a matter of learning how to do 
such manipulation. 
Formal approaches lead us not only to reconceive hard problems but also to 
ask new questions previously inconceivable or inexpressible. Systematic study 
by Zelig Harris, Noam Chomsky, and their students revealed that linguistic 
form is astonishingly complex and difficult to account for, thereby compelling 
psychologists to abandon simple associative modes of explanation. The Bour-
baki group and others, by the same kind of systematic analysis, revealed how 
shaky the foundations of mathematics had been for centuries. Most impressive, 
Kurt Godel, by recasting mathematical questions into purely formal schemes 
such as Godel numbering, showed inherent limits on proofs within axiomatic 
systems, thereby using form to analyze itsel£ 
Claude Uvi-St~auss showed how ostensibly different myths shared meaning 
in virtue of having a shared structure. Vladimir Propp gave formal structures ap-
plicable to all Russian folktales. Roman Jakobson and others used as their pri-
mary method of literary analysis the investigation of formal relationships among 
the sounds, rhythms, and orthography of the work. Abstract expressionism came 
to see the height of meaning as carried by the intersections and juxtapositions of 
form. Many of these efforts were controversial, but our century has seen enor: 
mous energy devoted to the discovery and manipulation of meaning through sys-
tematic analysis of form. 
These approaches could lead us to think that scientific knowledge is only a 
matter of finding deep hidden forms behind ostensible forms. On the other 
hand, common sense tells us that form is not substance: The blueprint is not the 
house, the recipe is not the dish, the computer simulation of weather does not 
rain on us. When Patroclos donned the armor of Achilles to battle the Trojans, 
what the Trojans first saw was the spectacular armor, and they naturally assumed 
it was Achilles, and were terrified, and so the armor by itself looked as if it was 
turning the battle. But it didn't take long for the Trojans to discover that it 
was just Achilles's armor, not Achilles' himself, and then they had no pity. In our 
century, we often look at form the way the Trojans looked at the armor, and in-
deed, the armor is indispensable--without it even Achilles would fail. The gods 
The Age of Form and the Age of Imagination 
5 
may put considerable effort into making superior armor for the mortals, but 
they take the power of the warrior for granted. Clearly the miracles accom-
plished by the armor depend on the invisible warrior inside. 
Like the Trojans, we in the twenty-first century have come to realize that the 
miracles of form harness the unconscious and usually invisible powers of human 
beings to construct meaning. Form is the armor, but meaning is the Achilles that 
makes the armor so formidable. Form does not present meaning but instead 
picks out regularities that run throughout meanings. Form prompts meaning 
and must be suited to its task, just as the armor of Achilles had to be made to his 
size and abilities. But having the armor is never having Achilles; having the 
form-and indeed even the intricate transformations of forms (all those Is and 
Os}-is never having the meaning to which the form has been suited. 
The famous computer program "Eliza" cleverly delivers canned responses on 
the basis of superficial word matches to questions and statements made by a real 
human being. For example, "Tell me more" is a catch-all production of rhe ma-
chine that easily fits into almost any real conversation. People who encounter 
Eliza are amazed to find that they cannot help feeling they are taking part in a 
rich human conversation. Even when they know the program's tricks, they can-
not suppress the urge to feel that Eliza is manipUlating meanings and that the 
meanings are causing the expressions it produces. Even when they know that 
Eliza is an empty suit of armor, they cannot help feeling that they are standing 
before the flesh-and-blood Achilles. 
When we see a picture of the newborn baby, we cannot suppress our feeling 
that we are seeing a baby. In fact, the two-dimensional arrangement of colors in 
the photograph has almost nothing in common with a baby, and it takes a brain 
evolved over three billion years and trained through several months of early life 
to construct the identity between the picture and the baby. Because the brain 
does this instantly and unconsciously, we take the construction of meaning for 
granted. Or rather, we tend to take the meaning as emanating from its formal 
representation, the picture, when in fact it is being actively constructed by stag-
geringly complex mental operations in the brain of the viewer. 
The illusion that meaning is transmitted when we send the digitized picture 
over the Internet is possible only because there is a brain on each end to handle 
the construction of meaning. This illusion takes nothing away from the techno-
logical feat of transmitting the picture--just as the Trojans took nothing away 
from the divine technological feat of constructing Achilles' armor-but the pic-
ture still needs the human brain just as the armor still needs the human warrior. 
Achilles got the best armor, made by Hephaestos, because he was the best 
warrior, and to be useful at all, the armor must be suited to the warrior. Just so, 
as we argue in this book, human beings have the most elaborate forms 
(language, math, music, art) because they have the most effective abilities for 
the construction of meaning. The forms are e1\Peciaily impressive because they 

6 
THE WAY WE THINK 
,. 
have been suited to the meanings they prompt, but on their own the forms are 
hollow. In particular, meaning. is not another kind of form. Inside the armor is 
not more armor. 
What is in the armor is not a thing at all but a potential force that, no matter 
the circumstances, can be unleashed dynamically and imaginatively upon the 
Trojans to lethal effect. Just so, what is behind form. is not a thing at all but 
rather the human power to construct meanings. It, too, no matter the circum-
stan~es, can be unleashed dynamically and imaginatively to make sense. 
The theme of this book is what the form approaches have assumed as given: 
the operations of identity, integration, and imagination. These operations-ba-
sic, mysterious, powerfUl, complex, and mostly unconscious-are at the heart of 
even the simplest possible meaning. We will show that they are the key to the 
invention of meaning and that ~e value of even the simplest forms lies in the 
complex emergent dynamics they trigger in the imaginative mind. We will ar-
gue that these basic operations are more generally the key to both everyday 
meaning and exceptional human creativity. Surprisingly-but, as it turns out, 
~rucially--even the most basic forms, the chestnuts of the form approaches, are 
prompts for massive imaginative integration. 
In investigating identity, integration, and imagination, we will return repeat-
edly to certain themes: 
• Identity. The recognition of identity, sameness, equivalence, A = A, which 
is taken for granted in form approaches, is in fact a spectacular product of 
complex, imaginative, unconscious work. Identity and opposition; same-
ness and difference, are apprehensible in consciousness and so have pro-
vided a natural beginning place for form approaches. But identity and op-
position are finished products provided to consciousness after elaborate 
work; they are not primitive starting points, cognitively,neurobiologically, 
or evolutionarily. 
• Integration. Finding identities and oppositions is part of a much more 
complicated process of conceptual integration, which has elaborate struc-
tural and dynamic properties and operational constraints, but which 
typically goes entirely unnoticed since it works fast in the backstage of 
cognition. 
• Imagination. Identity and integration cannot account for meaning and its 
development without the third I of the human mind-imagination. Even 
in the absence of external stimulus, the brain can run imaginative simula-
tions. Some of these are obvious: fictional stories, what-if scenarios, 
dreams, erotic fantasies. But the imaginative processes we detect in these 
seemingly exceptional cases are in fact always at work in even the simplest 
construction of meaning. The products of conceptual blending are always 
imaginative and creative. 
The Age a/Form and the Age a/Imagination 
7 
Identity, integration, and imagination-the rriind's three Is-are the subject 
of this book. 
CHINKS IN THE ARMOR 
The spectacular success of form approaches in many domains, combined with the 
Eliza effect, which leads us to see forms as carrying far more meaning than they 
actually do, naturally encouraged people to develop these approaches as far as 
they would go in fields like artificial intelligence, linguistics, cybernetics, and psy-
chology. Yet, invariably, form ran up against the mysteries of meaning. What 
looked simplest-seeing a line, picking up a cup, telling the difference between in 
and out, combining a noun and an adjective, making the analogy between your 
mommy and your mommy's mommy-turned out to be diabolically hard to 
model. Learning and development had looked like unfortunate primitive aspects 
of evolutionary systems, which the more powerful and precise instruments of for-
mal manipulation would simply leap over. But evolution turned out to be far 
more powerful than the logicians could conceive. Human babies, who looked in-
competent and bumbling, doomed to long and tedious processes of learning even 
that a shoe is a shoe, turned out to be incomparably more capable than anything 
form approaches could offer, on paper or silicon. It was natural to think that if 
form approaches could handle apparently hard things like chess and the Goldbach 
conjecture, it would be child's play for them to account for much more rudimen-
tary things like child speech or navigating a new room or seeing a simple analogy. 
But not so. 
As more and more effort and money were devoted to solving these problems, 
researchers developed not the expected solutions but a deep respect for their in-
tractability. Problems that were supposed to take a few years at most-machine 
translation, machine vision, machine locomotion-became entire fields. Al-
though brute-force statistics has often provided improved performance, many 
take the view that in such cases the form approaches have not improved our un-
derstanding of the conceptual processes at work. 
In fact, the situation is graver than this. Phenomena that were once not even 
perceived as problems at all have come to be regarded as central, extremely diffi-
cult questions in cognitive neuroscience. What could be simpler than recogniz-
ing that a tree is a tree? Yet when we look at works in cognitive neuroscience, we 
find this recognition problem listed under "conceptual categorization," already 
regarded as a higher-order problem, beyond the already difficult feat of "percep-
tual categorization." Apparently simpler still would be the simple recognition of 
a single entity, as when we look at a cup of coffee and perceive the cup of coffee. 
As neuroscience has shown, the many aspects of the cup of coffee-the color of 
the cup, the shape of the opening, the topology of the handle, the smell of the 
coffee, the texture of the surface of the cup, the dividing line between the coffee 

8 
THE WAY WE THINK 
and the cup, the taste of the coffee, the heavy feel of the cup in the hand, the 
reaching for the cup, and so on and on-are apprehended and processed differ-
ently in anatomically different locations, and there is no single site in the brain 
where these various apprehensions are brought together. How can the coffee 
cup, so obviously a single thing for us at the conscious level, be so many differ-
ent things and operations for the neuroscientist looking at the unconscious 
level? Somehow, the combination of three billion years of evolution and several 
months of early training have resulted in the apprehension of unities in con-
sciousness, but neuroscience does not know the details of that unification. How 
we apprehend one thing as on( thing has come to be regarded as a central prob-
lem of cognitive neuroscience, called the "binding problem." We do not ask 
ourselves how we can see one thing as one thing because we assume that the 
unity comes from the thing itself, not from our mental work, just as we assume 
that the meaning of the picture is in the picture rather than in our interpreta-
tion of its form. The generalized Eliza effect leads us to think the form is caus-
ing our perception of unity, but it is not. We see the coffee cup as one thing be-
cause our brains and bodies work to give it that status. We divide the world up 
into entities at human scale so that we can manipulate them in human lives, 
and this division of the world is an imaginative achievement. Frogs and bats, for 
example, divide the world up in ways quite different from our own. 
These chinks in the armor of form show us that elements of mental life that 
look like primitives for formal analysis turn out to be higher-order products of 
imaginative work. The next step in the study of mind is the scientific study 
of the nature and mechanisms of the imagination. Having investigated form 
with an array of irtstruments, we are now turning to the investigation of the 
fundamental nature of meaning on which form relies. Our own research, devel-
oped in this book, will focus on a wide array of ostensibly quite different phe-
nomena in the construction of meaning, in a number of different fields-art, 
mathematics, grammar, literature, counterfactuals, cartoons, and so on. Like the 
neuroscientist considering the perception of the coffee cup, we will show that 
these apparently simple mental events are the outcome of great imaginative. 
work at the cognitive level. 
BACK TO ARISTOTLE 
The view we take here-that form approaches are a special kind of capacity, as 
useful to the imaginative human being as armor is to the great warrior-has a 
long and honorable tradition. Aristotle, for example, in surveying the scope of 
human knowledge, including botany, the generation of species, and ethics, gave 
a sharp and influential analysis of special areas of human knowledge in which 
precise formal operations can be of some help. In particular, he noticed that 
there are certain patterns of language that preserve or change meanings in 
The Age' of Form and the Age of Imagination 
9 
systematic ways that depend on parts of speech but hot on the specific nouns or 
adjectives we pick. These language patterns are of course the famous syllcgisms 
of the type: 
• All men are mortal. 
• Socrates is a man. 
• Therefore, Socrates is mortal. 
Here, nothing depends on Socrates or man or mortal. Aristotle's syllogism is a 
for..mal, truth-preserving manipulation of meaning that we could also code as 
"All As are B, C is an A, therefore C is B." Aristotle's observation and systemati-
zation are the seed for all the approaches that we have been referring to as "form 
approaches." Their power lies in the reliability of symbolic or mechanical ma-
nipulations that preserve truth no matter how involved the manipulation. Nei-
ther Aristotle nor any of his successors in the analysis of form considered this a 
general solution to the problem of knowledge. Clearly, however, scientific and 
mathematical progress was accompanied by ever more formal sophistication. 
With the explosive development of the form approaches at the beginning of the 
twentieth century, ' advanced by thinkers like -Bertrand Russell and David 
Hilbert, the prevailing view is still that correlation of meaning and form is 
highly desirable but not found in so-called messy, soft, fuzzy, everyday, nontech-
nical natural systems like language. For example, Russell, a man known for ex-
pressing what he confidently viewed as truths about nearly every human sphere, 
including sex, war, and religion, nonetheless had a stark view of formal mathe-
matics: "Mathematics may be defined as the subject in which we never know 
what we are talking about, nor whether what we say is true." One fundamental 
goal of these approaches, then, is to construct artificial languages that have rig-
orous and reliable form-meaning correlations. The pursuit of this goal brought 
great success in mathematics as well as physics, chemistry, logic, and, later, com-
puter science. 
The same goal became important in philosophy and the social sciences, but 
the successes were not as clear. In these fields, pursuit of the goal again brought 
out great and often unperceived complexity of problems, but not effective solu-
tions. For example, Rudolph Carnap's herculean efforts to develop inductive 
logic were remarkably helpful in highlighting unexpected complexities of rea-
soning, but they did not lead to an ali-unifYing logic. 
The development of formal systems to leverage human invention and insight 
has been a painful, centuries-long process. Some forms assist meaning construc-
tion much more effectively than others. As Morris Kline writes, "The advance 
in algebra that proved far more significant for its development and for analysis 
than the technical progress of the sixteenth century was the introduction of bet-
ter symbolism. Indeed, this step made possibJe a science of algebra." It is a 

10 
t' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
commonplace that no one who wants to learn differential and integral calculus 
will try to learn it through Newton's nearly impenetrable notation; the notation 
developed by Leibniz is incomparably more perspicuous. Once the appropriate 
forms are invented, they are easily learnable. Schoolchildren everywhere have 
little trouble learning to manipulate simple equations like x + 7 = 15 or x = 15 -
7 or x = 8 or 8 = x, but developing this notation took the efforts of many math-
ematicians over centuries in many different cultures--Greek, Roman, Hindu, 
Arabic, and others. In the twelfth century, the Hindu mathematician Bhaskara 
said, "The root of the root of the quotient of the greater irrational divided by 
the lesser one being increased by one; the sum being squared and multiplied 
by the smaller irrational quantity is the sum of the two surd roots." This we 
would now express in the form of an equation, using the much more systemati-
cally manageable set of formal symbols shown below. This equation by itself 
looks no less opaque than Bhaskara's description, but the notation immediately 
connects it to a large system of such equations in ways that make it easy to 
manipulate. 
~ (11+ 1 r 
k '={k' + f;t', 
We can see the struggle involved in developing this formalism by looking at 
moments of partl;U progress. For example, Kline says of Hindu notation: 
There was no symbol for addition; a dot over the subtrahend indicated subtrac-
tion; other operations were called for by key words or abbreviations; thus ka from 
the word karana called for the square root of what followed. For the unknowns, 
when more than one was involved, they had words that denoted colors. The first 
one was called the unknown and the remaining ones black, blue, yellow, and so 
forth. The initial letter of each word was also used as a symbol. This symbolism, 
though not extensive, was enough to classify Hindu algebra as almost symbolic 
and certainly more so than Diophantus' syncopated algebra. Problems and solu-
tions were written in this quasi-symbolic style. 
Similarly, 
Cardan ... wrote x?- = 4x +32 as qdratu atqtur 4 rtbus p:32. 
Historically, the development of armor was a long and effortful process, in-
volving the discovery of metals, the invention of mining and refining, and the 
evolution of all of the techniques and tools of the smith. Just so, the development 
The Agt of Fonn and tht Agt of Imagination 
11 
of formal systems is an admirable tradition in the expansion of human knowl-
edge, and one that cultures do not get for free. 
In the evolutionary descent of our species, in the history of a science, and in 
the developmental history of an individual person, systems of form and systems 
of meaning COll$truction intertwine, so that it is not possible to view them as 
separable. As Kline points out, the advance in algebra in the sixteenth century 
was simuhaneously conceptual and formal, each aspect being necessary for the 
other. Formal systems are not the same kind of thing as meaning systems, nor 
are they small translation modules that sit on top of meaning systems to encode 
and decode work that is done independently by the meaning systems. Like the 
warrior and the armor, meaning sy~tems and formal systems are inseparable. 
They co-evolve in the species, the culcure, and the individual. 
Just as we have emphasized that the Eliza phenomenon involves seeing more 
in form than is there, so we emphasize that form is not an ancillary or illusory as-
pect of the human mind. Much of our effort in this book will go toward unravel-
ing the complex ways in which forms prompt largely unconscious and unnoticed 
constructions of the imagination. 
THE MIND'S THREE I'S-IDENTITY. 
INTEGRATION, IMAGINATION 
As we noted earlier, the binding problem-the problem of how we can percep-
tually apprehend one integrated thing-has its counterpart in neurally inspired 
computational modeling. Psychologists and cognitive scientists at the University 
of California-San Diego in the early 1980s developed the theory and imple-
mentations of parallel distributed processing (PDP), a remarkably successful ap-
proach to modeling cognitive phenomena. PDP was widely acclaimed as a ma-
jor advance in the understanding of cognition, and its merits were cqntrasted 
with shortcomings of the traditional symbolic approach, which used logic-like 
computer programming languages to try to represent cognitive phenomena. 
But, starclingly for anyone who thinks identity is simple or primitive, the major 
challenge for this new kind of modeling turned Out to be capturing identities 
and linking roles to values. For example, Zeus as a bull and Zeus as a god and 
Zeus as a swan are the same, and in turn, the Cloud-Gatherer (a role) is the 
"same" as Zeus (its value). But the sameness of the god, the bull, and the swan is 
not a matter of resemblance and shared features. Even now this problem is by 
no means resolved, and the exceptionally complex and technical solutions that 
have been proposed for it look nothing like an intuitive representation of iden-
tity. Paul Smolensky's approach uses tensor products, and Lokendra Shastri's de-
pends on temporal synchrony. In short, connectionist modeling, like neuro-
science, has come to recognize that identity, sameness, and difference, far from 

12 
THE WAY WE THINK 
being easy primitives, are the major and perhaps least tractable problems in-
volved in modeling the mind. 
A related area of research that has undergone tremendous development is the 
study of analogy. Here, too, what initially seemed easy and primitive, the ex-
plicit characterization of sameness, turned out to be extraordinarily complex. 
Matching and aligning the elements of two domains, finding the common 
schematic structure that motivates an analogy between them, are now recog-
nized as formidable feats of imaginative work to which the current state of com-
putational modeling cannot do justice. Yet the ability to perceive everyday 
analogies, like the ability to perceive everyday identities, is completely taken for 
granted by human beings at the conscious level. It seems like no work at all. In 
the common view, taking cube roots is hard but finding the door out of a room 
is no work at all. In fact, extracting cube roots is extremely easy to model com-
putationally, but present-day robots waste a lot of time trying to get out of 
rooms, and often fail. Understanding the room you are in by comparing it with 
rooms you already know is an everyday analogy. We find such an analogy trivial 
because the complex cognitive processes that provide the solution run outside of 
consciousness (and because "everybody can do it!"). Only the "obvious" solu-
tion to this analogy comes into consciousness, and quietly at that. Because we 
have no awareness of the imaginative work we have done, we hardly even recog-
nize that there was a problem to be solved. 
Why didn't the form approaches run up earlier against these extremely diffi-
cult problems of identity, sameness, and difference? The quick answer is that 
human beings who ran the procedures handled the problems unconsciously, so 
that no one noticed the difficulty. Consider, for example, a logical formula like 
\:Ix, p(x) => q(x). This logical form sets up a schema, according to which any-
thing with property p has property q. A human being who understands the for-
mula can then use it to discover particular truths by instantiating the properties 
p and q for a specific thing or individual. How does the human being know that 
the same individual who has property p also has property q? He knows it be-
cause the identical letter x has been used in the formula. But that formal iden-
tity itself is not itself a binding; it is only a prompt for real binding to occur in 
the mind of the interpreter of the form. What the real binding allows a real 
brain to do is to apply the general schema behind the logical formula to partiCu-
lar things and individuals and to keep track of when they count as the same and 
when they count as different. "Choose a point in.the plane such that x = 1" asks 
us to lump together, for the purpose of the direction, an entire set of points as 
equivalent. By binding all these points, we create an integrated object: the line. 
"Choose a point in the plane such that x = -1" asks us to do the same, and al-
though it uses the same x, it's a different line. The lumping together of points as 
the "same" is a mental achievement that creates an integrated object. 
The Agt of Form and the Agt of Imagination 
13 
Formal approaches, in prompting these integrations, take their cue from hu-
. man perceptual and conceptual systems. We are disposed to construct objects 
and preserve identities, so that although we hold and move and see and feel "the 
wine bottle" in many different situations, we effortlessly and unconsciously 
bind together all these events as involving a single wine bottle. Conversely, we 
are equally able to use the very same perceptual evidence to distinguish "two" 
"wine bottles," to all appearances identical and yet not the "same" object. 
"I was born in 1954" prompts us to bind an infant in 1954 with an adult liv-
ing many decades later as the "same," despite the manifest and pervasive differ-
ences. "Chaucer's London bore no resemblance to the London of today" allows 
us to construct and keep separate two cities that we know to be the "same" from 
another perspective. And "IfI were you, I would wear a black dress" prompts us 
to bind the "I" and the "you" with respect to some aspects but not others. This 
marvelous capacity for binding turns out to depend on very sophisticated cogni-
tive and neurobiological processes. 
In form approaches, identity is taken for granted; analogy, by contrast, is typi-
cally not even recognized. How can this be? The answer is that analogy is smug-
gled in as part of the formal system through a number of back doors. As an in-
stance of the smuggling in of analogy, consider~ the relationship between "Paul 
loves Mary" and "John kicks Joe." They share not a single word, so at least at the 
most obvious level, they have no identical parts. Yet we recognize instantly that 
they are similar in form. In production system approaches such as generative 
grammar, this similarity falls out not from an explicit analogical mapping between 
the two specific sentences but from their sharing a common part of a syntactic 
derivation. In such theories, there are typically hidden layers of structure, so that 
what looks like an analogy at one level is treated as a superficial by-product of 
structural identity at a deeper level. Analogical mapping per St is not part of the 
theoretical apparatus; nor is it viewed as part of the child's learning apparatus. So, 
paradoxically, although the child may be equipped with vast analogical capacities 
in all kinds of domains, the view of formal linguistics has been that the learning of 
grammar does not involve analogical mapping. Rather, to learn the grammar is to 
induce a production system (the formal grammar) on the basis of innate a priori 
constraints (the universal grammar). Perceived analogy will be a by-product of 
that system, not one of its theoretical concepts nor, surprisingly, a means for the 
child to apprehend that system. 
In form approaches, as we noted, analogies are replaced by structural identities 
at hidden levels. But because the form approaches take identities for granted, the 
apprehension of the structural identities is not seen as posing any problem. Anal-
ogy thus seems to be dispensable. In fact, the form approaches have been forced 
to smuggle in some analogy, even if unwittingly; in the guise of formal manipula-
tion, but have suffered from not being able to bring in yet more analogy. 
.I 

14 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
A powerful and, at first, highly promising feature of form approaches such as 
generative grammar was the possibility of postulating successive invisible levels 
of form (such as deep structure, or logical form) behind the superficial appear-
ances. Mysteries of formal organization at one level would thus be explained in 
terms of regularities at a higher one. This technique is what we described earlier 
as looking for more armor inside the armor. In itself it is not as absurd as it 
sounds-a warrior could have additional protection under his topsuit of armor, 
and hidden layers of form are a plausible explanatory technique. The absurdity 
would come from assuming that the only thing that can lie behind a form is yet 
another form. 
Analogy has traditionally been viewed as a powerful engine of discovery, for 
the scientist, the mathematician, the artist, and the child. In the age of form, 
however, it fell into disrepute. Analogy seemed to have none of the precision 
found in axiomatic systems, rule-based production systems, or algorithmic sys-
tems. When these new and powerful systems carne to be viewed as the incarna-
tion of scientific thinking, analogy was contemptuously reduced to the status of 
fuzzy thinking and mere intuition. The absence of formal mechanisms for anal-
ogy was mistakenly equated with a supposed absence of analogy itself as a fun-
damental cognitive operation. At the high point of the popularity of rule-based 
systems, analogy had lost status as an important scientific topic and was 
ridiculed as a method of discovery and explanation. But toward the end of the 
1970s, analogy and its disreputable companions-metonymy, mental images, 
t> 
narrative thinking, and, most unpalatable of all to the formally minded, affect 
and metaphor-made a roaring comeback. 
. 
There were many convergent reasons for this comeback. First, analogy came 
to be seriously studied by psychologists whose methodologies included both 
clinical experimentation and computer modeling. The results left little doubt 
that analogy, as a cognitive operation, was intricate, powerful, and fundamental. 
New modeling techniques, most notably connectionist systems, provided both 
better and more realistic models of analogical thinking and more precise in-
sights into its real complexities. Analogy became respectable again as a phenom-
enon, exactly because it could now be modeled along formal lines. But as the 
limits of the formal line became apparent, it was recognized that analogy posed 
a formidable challenge· to both the modeler and the experimental psychologist. 
Mental images made a comeback for similar reasons: Researchers like Roger 
Shepard and Stephen Kosslyn developed clever experimental techniques for in-
vestigating visual perception, visual imagination, and their relationship. Mental 
images were suddenly viewed as respectable scientific phenomena with surpris-
ing complexity. The same story began to be repeated: What was easiest for hu-
man beings to accomplish with no thought at all turned out to be far harder to 
model than chess and other seemingly difficult mental tasks. 
Thi Ag~ of Form and th~ Ag~ of Imagination 
15 
Linguists and philosophers made a powerful case for the centrality of 
metaphor in human cognition, and, again, clever methodologies were in-
vented-for investigating metaphoric thought in very young children, for dis-
covering regularities in metaphoric expression across families of languages, for 
teasing out complexities of metaphoric comprehension by human subjects, and 
for analyzing the role of metaphor in both sign language and nonverbal commu-
nication systems like gesture. Of course, traditional lines of inquiry before this 
century had often accepted, even gloated over, the powerful role of metaphor in 
scientific discovery, artistic creativity, and childhood learning, but that accept-
ance was entirely canceled during the ascendancy of form approaches. 
What analytic philosophers gloated over now was the complete exclusion of 
figurative thought from "core meaning." Core meaning is, as the formally 
minded philosopher sees it, the part of meaning that can be characterized for-
mally and truth-conditionally. Therefore, goes the logic, it must be the only im-
portant and fundamental part of meaning. Inevitably, these analytic approaches 
were blind to the imaginative operations of meaning construction that work at 
lightning speed, below the horizon of consciousness, and leave few formal traces 
of their complex dynamics. 
As we continue to see, work in a number of fields is converging toward the 
rehabilitation of imagination as a fundamental scientific topic, since it is the 
central engine of meaning behind the most ordinary mental events. The mind is 
not a Cyclops; it has more than one I; it has three--identity, integration, and 
imagination-and they all work inextricably together. Their complex interac-
tion and their mechanisms are the subject of this book. 
We will focus especially on the nature of integration, and we will see it at 
work as a basic mental operation in language, art, action, planning, reason, 
choice, judgment, decision, humor, mathematics, science, magic and ritual, and 
the simplest mental events in everyday life. Because conceptual integration pre-
sents so many different appearances in different domains, its unity as a general 
capacity had been missed. Now, however, the new disposition of cognitive sci-
entists to find connections across fields has revived interest in the basic mental 
powers underlying dramatically different products in different walks of life. 

•• 
•• Two 
THE TIP OF THE ICEBERG 
How can two ideas be merged to produce a new struc-
ture, which shows the influence of both ancestor ideas 
without being a mere "cut-and-paste" combination? 
-Margaret Boden 
COMMON SENSE SUGGESTS THAT people in different disciplines have difFer-
ent ways of thinking; that the adult and the chlfd do not think alike, that the 
mind of the genius differs from that of the average person, and that automatic 
thinking, of the sort we do when reading a simple sentence, is far beneath the 
imaginative thinking that goes on during the writing of a poem. These com-
monsense distinctions are unassailable, yet there exist general operations for the 
construction of meaning that cut across all these levels and make them possible. 
'These are the kinds of powerful but for the most part invisible operations we 
will be interested in. 
Commonalities across these divisions have been widely recognized. Analogi-
cal thinking, we saw, has lately become a hot topic in cognitive science. Concep-
tual framing has been shown to arise very early in the infant and to operate in 
every social and conceptual domain. Metaphoric thinking, regarded in the com-
monsense view as a special instrument of art and rhetoric, operates at every level 
of cognition and shows uniform str~ctural and dynamic principles, regardless of 
whether it is spectacular and noticeable or conventional and unremarkable. 
Aristotle says both that metaphor is "the hallmark of genius" and that "all 
people carry on their conversations with metaphors." He is not offering a para-
dox but instead recognizing the distinction between the existence of the general 
cognitive operation and the different levels of skill with which it is used by dif-
ferent people. The various schemes of form and meaning studied by rhetoricians 
can be used by the skilled orator, the everyday conversationalist, and the child. 
Similarly, modern language science has shown that there are universal cognitive 
abilities underlying all human languages and shared by the adult and the child. 
A further demonstration of commonality is olhe complexity of commonplace 
17 

18 
THE WAY WE THINK 
,. 
reasoning, discovered when researchers in artificial intelligence unexpectedly en-
countered extreme difficulty in their attempts to model it explicitly. This ex-
traordinary complexity, previously associated only with highly expert thought, 
turns out to cut across thinking at all levels and all ages. 
It might seem strange that the systematicity and intricacy of some of our 
most basic and common mental abilities could go unrecognized for so long. 
Perhaps the forming of these important mechanisms early in life makes them 
invisible to consciousness. Even more interestingly, it may be part of the evolu-
tionary adaptiveness of these mechanisms that they should be invisible to con-
sciousness, just as the backstage labor involved in putting on a play works best if 
it is unnoticed. Whatever the re;tSon, we ignore ,these common operations in 
everyday life and seem' reluctant to investigate them even as objects of scientific 
inquiry. Even after training, the mind seems to have only feeble abilities to rep-
resent to itself consciously what the unconscious mind does easily. This limit 
presents a difficulty to professional cognitive scientists, but it may be a desirable 
feature in the evolution of the species. One reason for the limit is that the oper-
ations we are talking about occur at lightning speed, presumably because they 
involve distributed spreading activation in the nervous system, and conscious 
attention would interrupt that flow. 
' 
These basic mental operations are highly imaginative and produce our con-
scious awareness of identity, sameness, and difference. Framing; analogy, 
metaphor, grammar, and commonsense reasoning all playa role in this uncon-
scious productiofilof apparently simple recognitions, and they cut across divi-
sions of discipline, age, social level, and degree of expertise. Conceptual integra-
tion, which we also call conceptual blending, is another basic mental operation, 
highly imaginative but crucial to even the simplest kinds of thought. It shows the 
expected properties of speed and invisibility. Our goal in this chapter is to convey 
a feel for how conceptual blending works, by walking through a few easy exam-
ples in which the blending is hard to miss. What is important in these examples 
is not so much their content as their manifestation' of the pro'cess,: It is crucial not 
to be misled by their exceptional appearance. We ' h~ve chosen them as opening 
displays exactly because they are striking; but, for the most part, blending is an 
invisible, unconscious activity involved in every aspect of human life. 
THE IRON LADY 
AND THE RUST BELT 
In the early 1990s, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher-known as the 
Iron Lady-had great popularity among certain factions in the United States. It 
was common to encounter claims that what the United States needed was a 
Margaret Thatcher. The response we are interested in is "Btit Margaret Thatcher 
would never get elected here because the labor unions can't stand her." 
The Tip of the Iceberg 
19 
Thinking about this requires bringing Margaret Thatcher together with U.S. 
electoral politics. We must imagine Thatcher running for president in the 
United States and develop enough structure to see the relevant barriers to her 
being elected. Crucially, the point of this reasoning has nothing to do with the 
objective fact that it is impossible for Margaret Thatcher to be elected, since in 
the real world she is already head of another state, she is not a citizen of the 
United States, and she has no apparent interest in running. The speaker's point, 
right or wrong, is that the United States and Great Britain, despite their obvious 
similarities, are quite different in their cultural and political institutions and will 
not choose the same kinds of leaders. This point is made by setting up a situa-
tion (the "blend") that has some characteristics of Great Britain, some charac-
teristics of the United States, and some properties of its own. For example, in 
the imaginative blended scenario, Thatcher, who is running for the office of 
president of the United States, is already hated by u.s. labor unions, but not by 
virtue of any experience connected with the United States or its unions. Rather, 
the hatred of Thatcher is projected into the imaginative blended scenario from 
the original British history in which (quite different) British labor unions hate 
her because she was head of state and dealt with them harshly. In the historical 
situation, Thatcher had to be elected before she could earn the labor unions' 
hatred. In the blend, they already hate her and therefore will prevent her elec-
tion, but not because of anything she has previously done to them. 
After we have understood all this, the analogy looks obvious: The British 
prime minister corresponds to the U.S. president; the labor unions correspond to 
the labor unions; the United Kingdom corresponds ro the United States; the 
British voters correspond to the U.S. voters. What could be simpler? But in fact 
these correspondences are imaginative achievements, as we can see by consider-
ing that in slightly different circumstances we would construe all these counter-
parts as strong oppositions. The British parliamentary system is, from one per-
spective, almost nothing like the American union of states with its electoral 
college. Entire books have been written on the radical differences between labor 
unions in the United States and those in Britain. In a different context, such as 
one in which a particular vice-president is viewed as having all the real power be-
hind a figurehead president, the queen of England might be the natural, obvious, 
immediate counterpart of the president of the United States, and Prime Minister 
Margaret Thatcher the equivalent of the vice-president. After a blend has ,been 
constructed, the correspondences-the identities, the similarities, the analo-
gies--seem to be objectively part of what we are considering, not something we 
have constructed mentally. Just as we feel that we see the coffee cup tor the 
simple reason that there is a coffee cup to be seen, so we feel that we see the anal-
ogy because there is an analogy to be seen-that is, to be perceived directly and 
immediately with no effort. But analogy theorists and modelers have discovered, 
to their dismay, that finding matches is an almost intractable problem, even 

20 
THE WAY WE THINK 
when, after the fact, the matches look as if they are straightforward. Nobody 
knows how people do it. The unconscious mind gives it, seemingly for free, to 
the thinking person. 
In fact, finding correspondences that look as if they are objectively there re-
quires the construction of new imaginative meaning that is indisputably not 
"there." Mere correspondences are based on inventive constructions. For example, 
neither the conceptual frame of the U.S. presidential election nor the history of 
Britain contains any prime minister campaigning in Michigan. That structure is 
not "there" in the analogues. But the blend has this novel invention, a Margaret 
Thatcher campaigning in Illinois and Michigan and hated by the U.S. labor 
unions. In that blend, Margaret Thatcher is defeated, an outcome not in any way 
contained in the two analogues. Because the imaginative blended scenario is con-
nected to the real U.S. situation on the one hand and the real British situation on 
the other, inferences that arise through the creation of new meaning in the blend 
can project back to the two real situations, yielding the all-important conclusion 
that the speaker is asking us to build a disanalogy between the United States and 
Britain. The import of this disanalogy might be that although the United States 
may need a certain kind ofleader, the intricacies of U.S. electoral politics make it 
impossible for that kind of leader to be elected. Or the import might be that the 
United States is lucky to have labor unions sufficiently vigilant to ensure that what 
happened to the British unions will never happen to them. 
To set up and use this blend, we need to do much more than match two ana-
logues, which is already an awesome task. Somehow we have to invent a scenario 
that draws from the two analogues but ends up containing more. We have to be 
able to run that scenario as an integrated unit, even though it corresponds to no 
prior reality or experience. Somehow, the dynamics of this imaginary scenario are 
automatic, even though it has never been run before. The blend ends up making 
possible a set of "matches" that seem obvious to us, even though we might never 
previously have matched "retired British Prime Minister" with "American presi-
dential hopeful." You can't fully match the analogues without constructing that 
imaginative blended scenario, because what counts as a good match depends on 
whether the match gives you what you need for the blend. A little matching 
helps the blend run, and running the blend helps us find matches. 
Finding the matches, however staggeringly impressive, is relatively minor 
when compared with the creation of new meaning in the blend. We cannot run 
the blend in just any way, but must somehow run it in the way that is relevant 
to the purpose at hand. For example, once Margaret Thatcher's bid is stopped 
by the labor unions, she does not then endorse another candidate, although this 
would be expected of an actual presidential hopeful. Somehow, by working in-
side the blend, we must be able to locate inferences that apply outside the blend. 
The fantastic notion of Thatcher's defeat in a U.S. election translates into a 
quite practical comment on real U.S. politics. 
The Tip of the lcebn-g 
21 
Yet the fantastic aspects of the blend do not seem to stop anyone from using 
it for everyday reasoning. It does not matter that this blend is remote from any 
possible scenario. Its very impossibility, in fact, seems to make the reasoning I 
more vivid and compelling. We will see that blends mayor may not have fea-
tures of impossibility or fantasy. Many blends are not only possible but also so 
compelling that they come to represent, mentally, a new reality, in culture, ac-
tion, and science. 
THE SKIING WAITER 
Conceptual integration is indispensable not only for intellectual work, as in 
"The Iron Lady and the Rust Belt," but also for learning everyday patterns of 
bodily action. When the ski instructor helps us learn how to propel ourselves on 
skis by inviting us to pretend that we are "pushing off" while roller skating, it 
may look as if we are simply to incorporate a known action pattern-pushing 
off-into skiing, but not so: Performing the exact action involved in roller skat-
ing would make us fall over. Rather, we must selectively combine the action of 
pushing off with the action of skiing and develop in the blend a new emergent 
pattern, known (not coincidentally) as "skating.',l.ISimiiarly, one of us had a ski 
instructor who prompted him to stand properly and face in the right direction 
as he raced downhill by inviting him to imagine that he was a waiter in a 
Parisian cafe carrying a tray with champagne and croissants on it and taking 
care not to spill them. This might seem like. a simple execution of a known pat-
tern of bodily action--carrying a tray-in the context of skiing, but again not 
so: When we carry a tray, we create equilibrium by exerting force against the 
weight of the tray, but in skiing, there is no tray, no glassware, no weight. What 
counts are direction of gaze, position of the body, and overall motion. The re-
sulting integrated action in skiing is not the simple sum of carrying a tray while 
moving downhill on skis. 
The creation of blends is guided by cognitive pressures and principles, but in 
the case of skiing it is also guided by real-world affordances, including bio-
physics and physics. Most motions that the skier can imagine are impossible or 
undesirable to execute. But within the conceptual blend prompted by the in-
structor, and under the conditions afforded by the environment, the desired 
motion will be emergent. 
The instructor is astutely using a hidden analogy between a small aspect of 
the waiter's motion and the desired skiing position. Independent of the blend, 
however, this analogy would make little sense. The instructor is not suggesting 
that a good skier moves "just like" a competent waiter. It's only within the 
blend-when the novice tries to carry the tray mentally while skiing physi-
cally-that the intended structure (the improved body position) emerges. In 
this case, as in all others, we still have the cO,9struction of "matches" between 

• 
'-
22 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
"waiter" and "skier," but the function of these matches is not analogical reason-
ing: We are not drawing inferences from the domain of waiting on tables and 
projecting them to the domain of skiing. Rather, the point is the integration of 
motion. Once the right motion has emerged through integration and the novice 
has mastered it, the links to croissants and champagne can be abandoned. The 
skier need not forever think about carrying trays in order to perform adequately. 
Both the Skiing Waiter and Iron Lady blends depend upon a widely recog-
nized psychological and neurobiological property that we have not mentioned 
yet: The brain is a highly connected and interconnected organ, but the activa-
tions of those connections are constantly shifting. The great neurobiologist Sir 
Charles Sherrington, in his Gifford Lectures titled Man on His Nature, described 
the brain as "an enchanted loom where millions of flashing shuttles weave a dis-
solving pattern, always a meaningful pattern though never an abiding one; a 
shifting harmony of subpatterns." Activation makes certain patterns available for 
use at certain times, but it does not come for free. The fact that two neurons are 
connected in the brain does not necessarily mean they will be coactivated. The 
matching that we have talked about in the Iron Lady and Skiing Waiter exam-
ples is actually a powerful way to bind elements to each other and activate them. 
What counts as a "natural" match will depend absolutely on what is currently 
activated in the brain. Some of these activations come from real-world forces 
that impinge upon us, others from what people say to us, others from our pur-
poses, others from bodily states like weariness or arousal, and many others from 
internal configurati~ns of our brains acquired through personal biography, cul-
ture, and, ultimately, from biological evolution. But much of the shifting activa-
tion is the work of the imagination striving to find appropriate integrations. In 
the Iron Lady case, the activation of a political frame made various matches 
more available: prime minister to president, British voters to U.S. voters, and so 
on. Words themselves are part of activation patterns, so when the same word is 
appropriate for two elements, we can prompt someone to match them by using 
the same word for both. The language makes matching the British "labor 
unions" and the U.S. "labor unions" look trivial: The same expression picks 
them both out, despite their radical differences. But there is no single expression 
for both "ski poles" and "waiter's tray," so the ski instructor has to direct the 
novice explicitly to make the connection. Once activated, however, this binding 
is very strong and will feed the blend that becomes a new integrated motion. 
THE GENIE IN THE COMPUTER 
In the seemingly quite different realm of technological design, computer inter-
faces are prompts to activate, bind, and blend at the level ,of both conceptual 
structure and bodily action. The most successful interface is the "desktop," in 
which the computer user moves icons around on a simulated desktop, gives 
Th~ Tip of the Iceberg 
23 
alphanumeric commands, and makes selections by pointing at options on menus. 
This interface was successful because ' novices could immediately use it at a rudi-
mentary level by recruiting from their existing knowledge of office work, interper-
sonal commands, pointing, and choosing from lists. These domains of knowledge 
are "inputs" to the imaginative invention of a blended scenario that serves as the 
basis for integrated performance. Once this blend is achieved, it delivers an amaz-
ing number of multiple bindings across quite different elements-bindings that 
seem, in retrospect, entirely obvious. A configuration of continuous pixels on the 
screen is bound to the concept "folder," no matter where that configuration oc-
curs on the screen. Folders have identities, which are preserved. The label at the 
bottom of the folder in one view of the desktop corresponds to a set of words in a 
menu in another view. Pushing a button twice corresponds to opening. Pushing 
a button once when an arrow on the screen is superimposed on a folder corre-
sponds to "lifting into view." Of course, within the technological device that 
makes the blend possible-namely, the computer interface-no ordinary lifting, 
moving, or opening is happening at all, only variations in the illumination of a fi-
nite number of pixels on the screen. The conceptual blend is not the screen: The 
blend is an imaginative mental creation that lets us use the computer hardware 
and software effectively. In the conceptual blend, there is indeed lifting, moving, 
and opening, imported not from the technological device at hand, which is only a 
medium, but from our mental conception of the work we do on a real desktop. 
Of course; the generalized Eliza effect makes it seem as if the desktop interface 
carries all of this meaning. In fact, the desktop interface is like the baby photo: 
evidently an effective tool to be used by our imaginations, but very thin and 
simple relative to them. The imaginative work we do when we use the desktop 
interface is part of backstage cognition, invisible to us and taken for granted. 
Once learned, the entire activity of using the desktop interface is coherent 
and integrated. It is not hampered by its obvious literal falsities: There is no ac-
tual desk, no set of folders, no putting of objects into folders, no shuffiing of 
objects from one folder to another, no putting of objects into the trash. The 
desktop interface is an excellent example of conceptual integration because the 
activity of manipulating it can be done only in the blend, and would make no 
sense if the blend were not hooked up to the inputs. 
The user of the interface manipulates an integrated structure that derives 
some of its properties from different inputs-office work, commands, menus. 
But however much the interface takes from the inputs, it has considerable emer-
gent structure of its own: Pointing and clicking buttons is not at all part of tra-
ditional office work or choosing from lists of words on paper; having little two-
dimensional squares disappear under other little squares is not part of giving 
commands or of putting sheets of paper into folders; and dragging icons with 
the mouse is not part of moving objects on a desktop, ordering a meal, giving 
standard symbolic commands, or, a fortiori, using the machine language. 

24 
THE WAY WE THINK 
The user manipulates this computer interface not by means of an elaborate 
conscious analogy but, rather, as an integrated form with its own coherent 
structure and properties. From an "objective" point of view, this activity is to-
tally novel-it shares very few physical characteristics with moving real folders, 
and it is novel even for the traditional computer user who has issued commands 
exclusively from a keyboard rather than from a mouse. Yet the whole point of 
the desktop interface is that the integrated activiry is immediately accessible and 
congenial. The reason, of course, is that a felicitous blend has been achieved-a 
blend that naturally inherits, in partial fashion, the right conceptual structure 
from several inputs and then cultivates it into a fuller activity under pressure 
and constraints from reality and background knowledge. 
The desktop also nicely illustrates the nonarbitrary nature of blending: Not just 
any discordant combination can be projected to the blend. Some discordant 
structure is irrelevant because it has no bad consequences--for example, the trash-
can and the folders both sit on the desktop-but other discordant structure is ob-
jectionable. Dragging the icon for a Hoppy disk to the trash as a command to eject 
the disk from the drive is notoriously disturbing to users. The inference from the 
domain of working at a desk that one loses everything that is put into the trash 
and the inference from the domain of computer use that one cannot recover what 
one has deleted interfere with the intended inference that the trashcan is a one-
way chute between two worlds-the desktop interface and your actual desk. 
Another point illustrated by the example above is that inputs to blends are 
themselves often blends, often with an elaborate conceptual history. The do-
main of computer use has as inputs, among others, the domain of computer op-
eration and the domain of interpersonal command and performance. It is com-
mon to conceive of the deletion of files as an operation of complete destruction 
performed by the system at the command of the user. In actual computer oper-
ation, however, the files are not permanently erased by that command and can 
often be recovered. The user's sense of "deletion" is already a blend of computer 
operation and human activity. More generally, by means of blending, keyboard 
manipulation is already conceived of as a blend of typing and high-level action 
and interaction, thus providing appropriate partial structure to later blends like 
desktops with icons. The existence of a good blend can make possible the devel-
opment of a better blend. Conceptual structure contains many entrenched 
products of previous conceptual integration. 
CRAZY NUMBERS 
In the Iron Lady example, integration happens on-line and quickly and looks 
unremarkable. In the Computer Desktop example, there has been laborious de-
sign to develop an efficient blend involving novel computer hardware, but once 
it is developed, users can work with it quickly, automatically, and productively. 
Tht Tip of th~ Ic~b~rg 
25 
In other cases, the conceptual work of integratioA can take years or even cen-
turies. This is often the case in scientific discovery. In Chapter 13, we will ana-
lyze in some detail the invention of complex numbers. The mathematical do- , 
main of complex numbers was fully accepted only in the nineteenth century. It 
turns out to be a blend of two much more familiar inputs: two-dimensional 
space and numbers. In this blend, complex numbers have all the usual proper-
ties of numbers (they can be added, multiplied, and so on), but they also have 
properties of vectors in two-dimensional space (magnitudes, angles, coordi-
nates). This blend is a well-integrated structure, with no inconsistencies, with 
important properties, and with impressive new mathematical power. It has ele-
gant emergent structure of its own: Numbers now have angles, multiplying 
numbers is now an operation involving addition of angles, and negative num-
bers have square roots. 
All accounts of scientific discovery acknowledge the crucial importance of 
analogy, but analogy is not enough: Historically, the analogy between imaginary 
numbers and points in space was well known by the end of the seventeenth cen-
tury, and moreover the formal manipulations yielded by that analogy were fully 
recognized. But the analogy alone did not produce an integrated notion of com-
plex number, and so it was not embraced as part of number theory. fu late as 
the end of the eighteenth century, outstanding mathematicians such as Euler 
thought that such numbers were harmless but impossible. 
HOW SAFE IS SAFE? 
The Iron Lady, the Skiing Waiter, the Computer Desktop, and Complex Num-
bers are representative cases in superficially very different aspects of human en-
deavor. They all display the imaginative complexity of activation, matching, and 
the construction of meaning. Complex blending is always at work in any hu-
man thought or action but is often hard to see. The meanings that we take most 
for granted are those where the complexity is best hidden. 
Even very simple constructions in language depend upon complex blending. 
It is natural to think that adjectives assign fixed properties to nouns, such that 
"The cow is brown" assigns the fixed property brown to cow. By the same token, 
there should be a fixed property associated with the adjective "safe" that is as-
signed to any noun it modifies. Yet consider the following unremarkable uses of 
"safe" in the context of a child playing at the beach with a shovel: "The child is 
safe," "The beach is safe," "The shovel is safe." There is no fixed property that 
"safe" assigns to child, b~ach, and shov~L. The first statem:ent means that the 
child will not be harmed, but so do the second and third-
they do not mean 
that the beach or the shovel will not be harmed (although they could in some 
other context). "Safe" does not assign a properry but, rather, prompts us to 
evoke scenarios of danger appropriate for the;, noun and the context. We worry 

26 
t' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
about whether the child will be harmed by being on the beach or by using the 
shovel. Technically, the word "safe" evokes an abstract frame of danger with roles 
like victim, location, and instrument. Modifying the noun with the adjective 
prompts. us to integrate that abstract frame of danger and the specific situation 
of the child on the beach into a counterfactual event of harm to the child. We 
build a specific imaginary scenario of harm in which chi/4, beach, and shovel are · 
assigned to roles in the danger frame. Instead of assigning a simple property, the 
adjective is prompting us to blend a frame of danger with the specific situation 
of the child on the beach with a shovel. This blend is the imaginary scenario in 
which the child is harmed. The word "safe" implies a disanalogy between this 
counrerfactual blend and the real situation, with respect to the enrity designated 
by the noun. If the shovel is safe, it is because in the counterfactual blend it is 
sharp enough to cause injury but in the real situation it is too dull to cut. 
We can create many different blends out of the same inputs. The process is 
the same in all of them, but the results are different. In "The shovel is safe," the 
child is the victim in the blend if we are concerned about the shovel's injuring 
the child, but the shovel is the victim in the blend if we are concerned about the 
child's breaking the shovel. Furthermore, any number of roles can be recruited 
for the danger input. In the imaginary blend for "The jewels are safe," the jewels 
are neither victim nor instrument; they are possessions and their owner is the vic-
tim. If we ship the jewels in packaging, then in the imaginary blend for "The 
packaging is safe," the jewels are the victim, external forces are the cause o/harm, 
and the packaging i~ 'the barrier to externaL forces. Other examples showing the 
variety of possible roles would be "Drive at a safe speed," "Have a· safe trip," 
"This is a safe bet," and "He stayed a safe distance away." 
The noun-adjective combination can prompt even more elaborate blends, 
involving several roles, as in "The beach is shark-safe" versus "The beach is 
child-safe." In the context of buying fish at a supermarket, the label on a can of 
tuna can report that "This tuna is dolphin-safe," meaning that the tuna was 
caught using methods that prevent accidenrs from happening to dolphins. This 
blend looks more unusual, but it is put together according to the same dynamic 
principles as the blends we assemble for unremarkable phrases like "safe beach" 
or "safe trip." 
"The beach is safe" shows that the "matches" are not achieved independenr of 
the blend, and that there is nothing simple about "matching." The beach in the 
real situation is matched to the role "doer of harm" in the harm scenario because 
we have achieved an imaginary blend that counts as counterfactual to the real 
situation. That match, however, is a match between a role in a frame and a spe-
cific element that is in fact not an instance of the role. The real "safe beach" is 
not a "doer of harm." That's the point of the utterance. The role "doer of harm" 
in the harm input is matched to a beach in the counterfactual blend that is 
imaginatively a doer of harm. And the beach in the real situation is matched to 
The TIp of the Iceberg 
27 
the beach in the counterfactual blend because they are opposites in the way that 
matters for this situation: One is a doer of harm, and the other is not. 
"Safe" is not an exceptional adjective with special semantic properties that set 
it apart from ordinary adjectives. Rather, it turns out that the principles of inte-
gration suggested above are needed quite generally. Even color adjectives, which 
at first blush look as if they must assign fixed features, turn out to require non-
compositional conceptual integration. "Red pencil" can be taken to mean a pen-
cil whose wood has been painted red on the outside, a pencil that leaves a red 
mark (the lead is red, or the chemical in the pencil reacts with the paper to pro-
duce red, or . .. ), a pencil used to record the activities of a team dressed in red, 
a pencil smeared with lipstick, or a pencil used only for recording deficits. Theo-
ries of semantics typically prefer to work with examples like "black bird" or 
"brown cow" since these examples are supposed to be the principal examples of 
compositionality of meaning, but, as we will show later, even these examples il-
lustrate complicated processes of conceptual integration. 
THE IMAGE CLUB 
While dogs, cats, horses, and other familiar species presumably must do percep-
tual binding of the sort needed to see a single dog, cat, or horse, human beings are 
exceptionally adept at inregrating two extraordinarily different inputs to create 
new emergent structures, which result in new tools, new technologies, and new 
ways of thinking. The archeologist Stephen Mithen, who has provided indepen-
dent archeological evidence for such a capacity, argues that it is quite recent in 
human evolution and responsible for not only the sudden proliferation of novel 
tools but also the invention of art, religion, and science. It is easy to point with 
pride to the invention of complex numbers, but the strikingly human capacity for 
two-sided blending is equally powerful throughout human domains of every de-
scription. For Mithen, blending, which he calls "cognitive fluidity," is what made 
possible the invention of racism. In a section of The Prehistory 0/ the Mind tided 
"Racist Attitudes as a Product of Cognitive Fluidity," he writes: "Physical objects 
can be manipulated at will for whatever purpose one desires. Cognitive fluidity 
creates the possibility that people will be thought of in the same manner. 
... There is no compulsion to do this, simply the potential for it to happen. And 
unfortunately that potential has been repeatedly realized throughout the course of 
human history." Similarly, mass killing of certain groups of people can be blended 
with ordinary bureaucratic frames to produce a blended concept of genocide as a 
bureaucratic operation. Because the projection to the blend is only partial, people 
who could not bring themselves to operate in the frame of genocide may find 
themselves operating comfortably in the blend. Documentaries such as Claude 
Lanzmann's Shoah reveal in great detail how bureaucrats in Nazi Germany could 
talk and think about the enormous killing machine they served as an ordinary 

28 
THE WAY WE THINK 
transfer of goods and merchandise. The blend has the two inputs of genocide and 
bureaucracy, but the bureaucrat can recruit a third input, war, to supply the frame 
according to which self-imposed ignorance is a virtue for a citizen and may be 
necessary for the security of the nation . . 
Blending imaginatively transforms our most fundamental human realities, the 
parts of our lives most deeply felt and most clearly consequential. Meaning goes 
far beyond word play. Meaning matters, in ways that have relevance for the indi-
vidual, the social group, and the descent of the species. Human sexual practices 
are perhaps the epitome of meaningful behavior because they constitute a deeply 
felt intersection of mental, social, and biological life. It is remarkable how differ-
ent they are from the sexual behaviors of the most closely related species. This re-
alization has been central to theories of the unconscious such as Freudian psy-
choanalysis, but curiously, it is almost taboo inside cognitive science. Even 
though modern cognitive science emphasizes the embodiment of the mind, phi-
losophy in the flesh, it deprives itself of sexuality as a source of data and as a lab-
oratory of analysis. Yet the role of meaning construction and imagination in the 
elaboration of human sexual practices is phenomenal and has direct, real-world 
social consequences. From the Odyssey to Ulysses, with Othello in between and 
Lolita after, the world's literatures explore the febrile and exquisite sophistications 
of mental sexual fantasies and their grave consequences in reality. This funda-
mental theme in literature-the connection between the mental apprehension of 
sex and the historical patterns of war, rape, suicide, alliances-merely reflects our 
everyday reality. These practices, which intertwine psychology, biology, and so-
ciallife-through which we, as individuals and as cultures, define ourselves-are 
unique to our species. We believe this pervasive aspect of human life has the rich-
ness and complexity it does because of the imaginative processes of blending. 
The latest inventions and twists in cultural sexual practices are reported rou-
tinely in newspapers as if they were mere curiosities. Under the title "A Plain 
School Uniform as the Latest Aphrodisiac," a New York Times article described 
"several hundred" bordellos (called "image clubs") in Tokyo in which the rooms 
are made to look like schoolrooms, complete with blackboards, and the prosti-
tutes, chosen for their youthful looks, dress in high-school uniforms and try to 
act like apprehensive teenagers, while the customer takes the role of a teacher. 
Because sexual issues and sexual fantasy are very familiar, even if not talked 
about, we may find such examples mundane, but the imaginative construction 
of emergent meaning in this instance is astounding. The inputs to the blend are 
the scenario with an imaginary high-school student and the real situation in-
volving both the man in the "image club" and the prostitute (who, in the spe-
cific case reported in the Times, is actually twenty-six years old). But the blend 
has a teacher and a high-school student. 
Since neither the customer nor the prostitute is deluded, why should this 
make-believe have any power or attraction at all? The answer is that while the 
The Tip of the Iuberg 
29 
customer can of course have sex with a prostitute, he can't have sex with a high-
school student, except in the blend, which he can inhabit mentally without los-
ing his knowledge of the actual situation. These are ~ental-space phenomena, 
about which we have more to say later. Mental spaces can exist routinely along-' 
side incompatible mental spaces. When we look in the refrigerator and see that 
there is no milk to be had, we must simultaneously have the mental space with 
no milk in the refrigerator and the counterfactual mental space with the milk in 
the refrigerator. The customer in the image club similarly has at the same time 
the mental space with the experienced and trained prostitute, the mental space 
with the imaginary and unattainable high-school student, and the blended 
mental space with the woman in the club as the attainable innocent high-school 
student. The high-school student is projected to the blend from the imaginary 
input, while the actual sexual act that takes place is imported from the material 
reality linked to the mental space with the prostitute. The blend has the essen-
tial new structure: sex with the high-school student. 
Far from just mixing the features in free-for-all fashion from two situations-
the classroom and the bordello--blending demands systematic matches between 
the inputs and selective projection to the blend according to a number of con-
straints that we will discuss in depth in this book. The teacher's privileges and re-
o 
sponsibilities in the classroom do not, for the most part, project to the blend: 
The customer is not supposed to demand that the prostitute learn how to factor 
polynomials. Many other projections are equally inappropriate. Just as in the 
Iron Lady example we had to match U.S. and British political domains, here we 
must match classroom and house of ill-repute. The matching is not obvious and 
preconstructed. It is driven by the intended blend, not by any obvious analogy 
between the schoolhouse and the whorehouse. Also, as in both the Iron Lady 
and Skiing Waiter examples, there will be only partial projection from the in-
puts, but the resulting blend must have integrated action and meaning, on the 
one hand, and enough disintegration that the participants can connect it to both 
of the inputs, on the other. In the Iron Lady example, we do not want to get lost 
in an escapist fantasy about an imaginary life for Margaret Thatcher, forgetting 
that the point is to make projections back to the real u.s. political situation. In 
the Skiing Waiter example, we do not want the skier to start believing that he 
has the job of delivering food to other people on the slopes .. And in the Image 
Club case, the customer is not supposed to turn himself in to the police for hav-
ing assaulted a high-school student, but he is supposed to pay her, in keeping 
with the prostitution input. 
Identity and analogy theory typically focus on compatibilities between mental 
spaces simultaneously connected, but blending is equally driven by incompatibil-
ities. Often the point of the blend is not to obscure incompatibilities but, in a 
fashion, to have at once something and its opposite. Consider, for example, the 
sexual response of the female in each of the two input spaces and in the blend. 
" 

30 
THE WAY WE THINK 
,. 
There are many possibilities, but one standard assumption would be that in the 
prostitution input, the workaday prostitute has no real passionate response, and 
in the input with the imaginary high-school student, there is no response at all 
because the man only desires but takes no action. In the blend, however, the 
woman' will have a spectacular, never-to-be-forgotten ecstatic experience. These 
oppositions are not suppressed; on the contrary, activa~ing them all simultane-
ously is part of the purpose of the network of spaces, and the participants must 
keep t4ese spaces distinct. The human capacity to construct,and connect strik-
ingly different mental spaces is what makes such sexual fantasies and practices 
possible to begin with. Needless to say, the capacity is much more general. The 
raison detre of mental spaces is to juggle representations that, in the real world, 
are incompatible with each other. This mental juggling gives rise, among other 
things, to phenomena that logicians and philosophers of language call "opacity," 
"counterfactual reasoning," and "presupposition projection." 
In fact, there is even more complex blending going on in the Image Club 
case. What actually happens in the blend may vary considerably depending on 
the specific projections from the two inputs, fine-tuned by the participants in 
the moment. Also to be considered is the practice the prostitute goes through to 
be able to sustain the act well but not too well. 
Whether distasteful or attractive, the schoolroom blend, as an object of con-
templation, discussion, or experience, does not leave us indifferent. But concep-
tual blending of just this sort rypically operates in ways that do not make us self-
conscious. The owner of a Dodge Viper sports car told Parade magazine, "My 
Viper is my Sharon Stone. It's the sexiest vehicle on the road." Apparently he 
felt no hesitation in committing himself to this blend of sexuality and motor-
ing. In our culture, the general version of this blend is pervasive and supported 
by efforts of corporations and advertisers. Sexual blends pervade the culture, but 
this fact neither causes chronic embarrassment nor keeps the citizenry in a per-
manent sexual frenzy. 
GRADUATION 
As we shall see throughout this book, one of the central benefits of conceptual 
blending is its ability to provide compressions to human scale of diffuse arrays of 
events. Graduation is an example everyone knows. Going to college involves 
many semesters of registration, attendance at courses, listening to lectures, com-
pleting the courses, and moving on to other walks of life. A ceremony of gradua-
tion is typically a compression achieved by blending this diffuse array with the 
more general schema of a'special event with speakers in a limited time, such as a 
presidential inauguration. The graduation ceremony is a blend of "going to class" 
and attending the special event. It compresses, into two or three hours, four years 
of being a student: You hear a distinguished person who conveys wisdom and 
.... -.. 
Th~ TIp of the Iceberg 
31 
knowledge; you have your family at your side; you'see all your college friends go-
ing with you through the same process; and the process culminates in a transi-
tion. Amazingly enough, the graduation ceremony, which is already a strong 
compression, contains compressions of itself as well as compressions of those 
compressions. The thirty seconds of the actual conferral of the individual degree 
has the student rising, taking the stage, engaging in a transitional moment that 
includes a: very compressed conversation with the university official, and depart-
ing, transformed into a graduate. These thirty seconds are then compressed in 
turn into a single moment, the movement of the tassel from one side of the mor-
tarboard to the other. And the entire event is compressed into an abiding mate-
rial anchor that you take with you and hang on the wall: your diploma. 
II CHAPTER 2 
ZOOM OUT 
C au NTERF'ACTUALS 
We began this chapter with an everyday example of thinking about presidential 
politics. 
Question: 
• Is there really anything deep going on in such examples? 
Ouramwer: 
Philosophers of language would call the Iron Lady example a "counterfac-
tual," because it is contrary to fact. Counterfactuals include reductio ad absur-
dum proofs in which the mathematician sets up as true what she wants to prove 
false and manipulates it as true, in the hope of arriving at an internal contradic-
tion that is taken as proving the original assertion's falsity. Counterfactuals in-
clude statements like "If this water had been heated at one hundred degrees Cel-
sius, it would have boiled." The philosopher Nelson Goodman points out, with 
fiendish precision, the great importance of counterfactual thinking and the pit-
falls involved in their use: "The analysis of counterfactual conditionals is no 
fussy little grammatical exercise. Indeed, if we lack the means for interpreting 
counrerfactual conditionals, we can hardly claim to have any adequate philoso-
phy of science." Following Goodman, philosophers, political scientists, lin-
guists, and psychologists have devoted considerable efforts to the study of coun-
terfactual reasoning. Their approach is to think of the counterfactual as setting 
up an alternative world whose differences from the actual world consist of only 

32 
THE WAY WE THINK 
t' 
the difference specified by the linguistic expression (e.g., "If the water had been 
heated ... ") and its direct consequences. Intuitively, this sounds easy, but the 
intractable aspect of the problem is to specifY the consequences of change in one 
little part of our actual world. How do we compute the ripples of a single hypo-
thetical change throughout a vast and intricate world where everything is inter-
related? So the logic of counterfactuals as conceived by ~heorists is already a for-
midable problem. But examples like the Iron Lady actually reveal an even 
higher order of complexity. In the Iron Lady, we are not setting up a possible 
world in which Thatcher is a candidate in U.S. presidential primaries and elec-
tions, nor are we concerned with all the consequences of such an election (e.g., a 
British woman's being head of the United States). What we are doing is match-
ing the U.S. and British systems in very partial ways and producing a blend 
that, far from being a complete world, is itself very partial, dedicated only to the 
purpose at hand. We have discovered, and will document in detail in Chapter 
11, that counterfactuals are in general complex blends with emergent structure, 
and that the case on which theorists focus-minimal modification of one 
world-is only a special case. 
So the answer to our question is that counterfactuals are widely considered to 
pose an exceptionally difficult problem, logically and semantically. Moreover, 
the Iron Lady type of counterfactual is of an even higher order of complexity 
than the ones usually studied and seems to put the lie to the usual methods of 
analyzing counterfactuals. This is because the usual methods have paid scant at-
tention to the dynamic powers of the imagination. Accordingly, counterfactu-
als-however simple they may feel to us-turn out to have deep complexities 
we are only beginning to understand. 
The problems counterfactuals pose are important not only to the philoso-
pher and the linguist. As political scientists, economists, anthropologists, sociol-
ogists, and other social scientists have often noticed, frequently to their dismay, 
the most basic methods of social science seem to depend inescapably on coun-
terfactual thinking. An assertion like "The shipping industry in Greece pros-
pered after World War II because Greece had developed good infrastructure 
during the war" is unintelligible except as a claim that "If Greece had not devel-
oped such-and-such infrastructure, its shipping industry would not have pros-
pered," which is of course an explicit counterfactual. Most of the analytic claims 
in the social sciences turn out to be implicit counterfactuals, as has been explic-
itly recognized in recent books and articles. 
HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERF"ACES 
The desktop interface for the computer is very common, and nobody seems to 
have much trouble learning to use it. 
: ...... 
The TIp of th~ Ic~b"g 
33 
Questions: 
• Are computer engineers really unaware of what we have said about the 
computer desktop? 
• Doesn't the fact that anybody can learn this interface show that it can't be 
as complicated as we say? 
Our answers: 
Computer engineers and cognitive scientists are very well aware of issues of 
metaphor in the design of interfuces, and regard them as posing difficult ques-
tions for both the designer and the psychologist. But the role of unconscious 
blending in the design of interfaces, and in the construction of the metaphors 
they use and develop, has gone unnoticed. 
The question "Can this interface really be so imaginative if everybody can do 
it?" can be asked of many examples we will present in this book. Our answer by 
now is predictable: The unconscious mental processes we take for granted de-
liver products and performances to our conscious minds that seem completely 
simple but whose invention is much too complicated for feeble consciousness to 
begin to apprehend. Just as talking, walking, seeing, grasping, and so on have 
come to be recognized as involving astonishingly complicated and dynamic un-
conscious processes, so the simplest feats we learn to perform, like using the 
computer desktop, are the hardest to analyze. That every human being can do 
it, but no member of any other species can do it, should tip us off immediately 
to the ~volutionary development that was needed to make such feats possible. 
Only really big brains connected in special ways, and doing a lot of dynamic 
work as trained by their cultures, can even begin to handle these feats, and even 
those big brains cannot know consciously what it is that they are doing. 
The form approaches, interestingly, did discover and explore the erroneous 
assumption behind the "everybody can do it" question insofar as form was con-
cerned. The child's handling of syntax and phonology is universally known to 
be a marvel of the human mind. It was by studying syntax formally and me-
thodically that Noam Chomsky convinced psychologists that learning language 
went far beyond simple associations. The fuct that every child can master gram-
mar now counts as a strong reason for studying it and for expecting it to pose 
much greater difficulties for the analyst than mere exceptional performances by 
a few special individuals. From the standpoint of cognitive science, the everyday 
capacities of the well-evolved human mind are the best candidates for complex-
ity and promise the most interesting universal generalizations. 
Our major claims in this book are radical but true: Nearly all important 
thinking takes place outside of consciousness and is not available on introspec-
tion; the mental feats we think of as the most impressive are trivial compared to 
everyday capacities; the imagination is always at work in ways that consciousness 

34 
THE WAY WE THINK 
does not apprehend; consciousness can glimpse only a few vestiges of what the 
mind is doing; the scientist, the engineer, the mathematician, and the economist, 
impressive as their knowledge and techniques may be, are also unaware of how 
they are thinking and, even though they are experts, will not find out just by ask-
ing themselves. Evolution seems to have built us to be constrained from looking 
directly into the nature of our cognition, which puts cognitive science in the dif-
ficult position of trying to use mental abilities to reveal what those very abilities 
are built to hide. 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF" ERRORS 
As we saw in the example of the Skiing Waiter, people use their mental capaci-
ties in seemingly unusual ways to learn to perform physical actions and social 
routines correctly. 
Questions: 
• Is there anything to learn from these seemingly unusual events? 
• Is the skiing example far-fetched? Is it representative? 
• How does it relate to work by psychologists on human action? 
Our answers: 
The Skiing Waiter is an example where the blending yielded good results in 
human action, and so counts as a success. But blending, always at work uncon-
sciously, can also recruit patterns and operations that end up having unfortu-
nate consequences. In the psychological study of errors, one focal question is 
how agents who made mistakes could have made them, and that is usually a 
question of how they could have brought to bear meanings and operations that 
turned out to yield the wrong results. Consider a situation in which blending 
gave bad results: A driver, paying attention to the job of driving and having 
trouble hearing the people in the back seat with whom he was conversing, "ab-
sent-mindedly" reached for the volume button on the radio to turn it up. For a 
fleeting moment, the radio volume and the voice volume were blended as both 
controllable by the radio knob. Of course, this was not an absent-minded action 
at all: The driver's mind was fully at work doing quite ing~nious and oppor-
tunistic blending that solved the problem conceptually but happened not to 
play out properly in the real car. The blending itself was not a success, but it 
might inspire a device that could be used to amplify {or mute} sounds coming 
from the back seat-a very useful invention for drivers and parents. The study 
of errors is for psychologists a precious source of evidence about actual mental 
operations and the kinds of invisible connections they carry with them. 
In the case of the skier, we saw that the instructor was able to prompt the 
novice to perform the correct motion by using an inventive blend. The novice 
Thf Iip OJthf Iubfrg 
35 
was performing the incorrect motion of looking in the direction of his feet, 
which in turn is the direction of the skis. This incorrect motion is itself a blend, 
though much less noticeable, of skiing and walking. The instructor asked ~e 
novice explicitly to abandon that blend and make a new, if unusual, blend of 
skiing and carrying a tray of champagne and croissants through a cafe. In doing 
so, the instructor was using a technique of coaching that is basic to any domain 
involving human bodily action, from leaming to ride a bicycle to learning a 
martial art. In the last few decades, elaborate simulation technologies have been 
developed to train tank drivers, airplane pilots, air traffic controllers, and even 
automobile drivers to make the right blends instead of the wrong ones. People 
learning to fly a plane must learn very early that even though they are looking 
out of a windshield and holding a steering device, motor routines for driving a 
car can be lethal in this new situation. Part oflearning a motor action is displac-
ing old blends with new. 
ANALOGY 
All the examples in this chapter involve aligning elements in two or more inputs 
and forging analogies between them. 
..I 
Question: 
• Isn't blending just a kind of analogy, and don't we already know how anal-
ogyworks? 
Our answer: 
Analogy theory is about analogical projection. In standard analogical reason-
ing, a base or source domain is mapped onto a target so that inferences easily 
available in the source are exported to the target. We can thus reason about the 
target. But in the skiing example, this is not what is happening. The instructor is 
not suggesting that the skier move "just like" a waiter. A skier who did this would 
remove his skis and start walking. It is only within the blend, when the novice 
tries to mentally carry the tray while physically skiing, that the appropriate emer-
gent action pattern arises. That pattern does not inhere in either the skiing input 
or the waiting input, as it would if it were only analogically transfetred. 
The Image Club is an even more striking example. Here, it is entirely clear 
that the customer must not determine his behavior in the image club analogi-
cally through projection from a teacher's behavior in a classroom, or conversely. 
Analogy in either direction would be disastrous. In both the Skiing Waiter and 
Image Club examples, blending is not just manipulation or projection of infer-
ences. Rather, it leads to genuine novel integrated action. Integration of this 
kind is not a feature of models for analogical reasoning, which typically rely on 
structure-mapping only. Sexual fantasy, whether o"r not enacted, is a vast and 

36 
f' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
important area of systematic human cognition that is imaginative but not ex-
plained by metaphor or analogy. 
In the case of the evolution of the notion of number, there was at one point 
in history a purely formal use of "imaginary" numbers (such as the square root 
of negative one). To the surprise of mathematicians, formal manipulation of 
imaginary numbers worked in equations, even though it violated fundamental 
conceptual properties of numbers. Then a structure-mapping analogy was de-
veloped between points in the Euclidean plane and numbers, including imagi-
nary numbers. Again, the structure-mapping analogy worked, in the sense of 
yielding mathematically appropriate actions and computations. But the analogy 
was not enough: It took mathematicians another century to achieve the inte-
grated blend in which complex numbers are a coherent category subsuming 
imaginary numbers. The achievement of this blend gave integrated conceptual 
structure to a now-extended category of "number," and so the objection to 
imaginary numbers disappeared. 
THE OLD AND THE NEW 
We have discussed many fields in which blending phenomena arise and pointed 
to research in these fields that has to do with aspects of blending. 
Question: 
,_ 
• So, hasn't everybody known about blending.forever? 
Our answer: 
In one sense, we all know everything about blending and are complete mas-
ters of it, just as we all have complete unco.DsciOUS "knowledge" about vision 
but almost no conscious knowledge of our unconscious ability. The 30,000-
year-old art of the Upper Paleolithic found on the cave walls of the Grotte 
Chauvet reflects elaborate creative blending in the mind of the artist. 
Since the products of blending are ubiquitous, sometimes visibly spectacular, 
it is natural that students of rhetoric, literature, painting, and scientific inven-
tion should have noticed many specific examples of what we call blending and 
noticed, too, that something interesting was going on. The earliest such obser-
vation that we have found comes from Aristotle. It occurs in Book 3 of Aristo-
tle's Rhetoric: 
The address of Gorgias to the swallow, when she had let her droppings fallon him 
as she flew overhead, is in the best tragic manner. He said, "Nay, shame, 0 
Philomela." Considering her as a bird, you could not call her act shameful; con-
sidering her as a girl. you could; and so it was a good gibe to address her as what 
she was once and not as what she is. 
ThtTip oftht Iubtrg 
37 
The shameful act exists only in the blend: The act is impossible for the girl, and 
the shame is impossible for the swallow. It is not quite clear that Aristotle recog-
nized the existence of this blend, or recognized the emergent meaning in 
"shameful act," or recognized that the emergent meaning exists only in the 
blend. He saw the performance of Gorgias moreover as an exotic achievement, 
not as an instance of a basic mental operation. This is presumably why he did 
not look into its theoretical consequences. Evidently, insight into blending as a 
general and routine mental operation of the imagination was simply unavailable 
to classical rhetoricians. 
The traditions of art history, literary criticism, and rhetoric are replete with sim-
ilar examples. Many writers quite insightfully notice that some creativity is going 
on but present it as idiosyncratic to the example at hand. Many Freudian analyses 
of identity and dreams can be viewed retrospectively as the study of blends that 
are central to the human condition. And more recently, special cases of what we are 
calling conceptual blending have been discussed insightfully by Erving Gollman, 
Len Talmy, H. Fong, David Moser and Douglas HofStadter, and Z. Kunda, D. T. 
Miller, and T. Clare. All these authors, however, take blends to be somewhat exotic, 
marginal manifestations of meaning. They don't focus on the general blending ca-
pacity itself In fact, they do not appear to recognize it as a general capacity. Rather, 
they point out the interesting aspects of the local product of blending, be it the 
painting, the poem, or whatever. Blending is taken for granted as an available re-
source instead of being properly viewed as presenting the challenge. How can Gor-
gias do what he does? This is not a question Aristotle even recognizes. 
One writer who did succeed in going bey9nd the particular and local features 
of individual examples of striking creativity in the sciences and the arts is Arthur 
Koestler, in The Act of Creation (1964). Seeing a symptom shared by all these ex-
amples of remarkable creative invention, he gave it the name "bisociation of ma-
trices." In doing so, he showed what the scientific challenge was-namely, to ex-
plain a notion that he left vague but which includes the idea that creativity 
involves bringing together elements from different domains. But Koestler did 
not make the next leap: to discover that the general mental operation involved 
in these striking cases is also ubiquitous in everyday thought and language. Nor 
did he offer, even for the striking cases, any specific characterizations of the 
structural and dynanlic processes that produced them. 
Our own research program has come up with decisive evidence from many 
fields that conceptual blending is a general, basic mental operation with highly 
elaborate dynamic principles and governing constraints. After launching this re-
search program in 1993, we were heartened to discover that, coming from an-
other angle and with very different kinds of data, several "creativity theorists" 
were insisting on the existence of a general mental operation-which Steven 
Mithen called "cognitive fluidity"-whose result is to bring together elements of 
different domains. As Mithen wrote in 1998: 

38 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Margaret Boden has argued that creative thought can be explained "in terms of 
the mapping, exploration, and transformation of structured conceptual spaces." 
Her definition of conceptual spaces is vague; she describes them as a "style of 
thinking-in music, sculpture, choreography, chemistry, etc." In spite of this 
vagueness, the idea of transforming conceptual spaces is intuitively appealing. It 
has a close association with the earlier notions of Koestler,. who has described cre-
ative thinking as arising from the sudden interlocking of two previously unrelated 
skills or matrices of thought, and the contemporary ideas of Perkins, who uses the 
terminology of "klondike spaces" and argues that these are often systematically 
explored in the process of creative thinking. In this regard, while creative thinking 
is clearly part of ordinary thinking, and not something restricted to "geniuses," 
we can nevertheless see the potential for how particularly creative thoughtS may 
arise from quite unusual transformations of conceptual spaces undertaken by par-
ticular individuals in particular circumstances. 
What has occurred, then, is a convergence toward the essential idea that there 
is a single mental operation involved in creativity in a number of different do-
mains. Whereas Aristotle and others picked out some interesting features of a 
few strikingly creative examples, and Koestler proposed that there is a special 
operation that underlies all these striking cases, contemporary creativity theo-
rists have argued that this operation is not reserved for geniuses or for extraordi-
nary acts of creation. We will show that this operation is indeed fundamental to 
all activities of the human mind, and we will try to layout a precise and explicit 
theoretical framework in which to study its nature. 
We begin where Koestler left off, with the case of "The Buddhist Monk." 
•• 
•• Three 
THE ELEMENTS 
OF BLENDING 
A Buddhist Monk begins at dawn one day walking up a 
mountain, reaches the top at sunset, meditates at the top 
for several days until one dawn when he begins to walk 
back to the foot of the mountain, which he reaches at 
sunset. Make no assumptions about his starting or stop-
ping or about his pace during the trips. Riddle: Is there a 
place on the path that the monk occupies at the same 
hour of the day on the two separate journeys? 
~ j 
THIS IS THE AMAZING RIDDLE that Arthur Koestler presents in The Act of 
Creation. What we have to say about this Buddhist Monk will be more effective 
if you close the book for a moment and try to solve the riddle without any 
hints. 
Now that you have found your place again, try this: Rather than envisioning the 
Buddhist Monk strolling up one day and strolling down several days later, imag-
ine that he is taking both walks on the same day. There must be a place where he 
meets himself, and that place is the one we are looking for. Its existence solves the 
riddle. We don't know where this place is, but we do know that, whatever its lo-
cation, the monk must be there at the same time of day on his two separate jour-
. neys. For many people, this is a compelling solution to the riddle. 
But solving this little riddle only poses a much bigger scientific one: How are 
we able to arrive at the solution, and why should we be persuaded that it is cor-
rect? It is impossible for the monk to travel both up and down. He cannot 
"meet himself." Yet this impossible imaginative creation gives us the truth we 
are looking for. We plainly don't care whether it is impossible or not-that's ir-
relevant to our reasoning. But the scenario of two people meeting each other is 
not only possible but also commonplace. Using that scenario is crucial to seeing 
the solution, even though it is nowhere in the original riddle, which describes 
just one person doing different things on different days. 
" 
39 

40 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
The imaginative conception of the monk's meeting himself blends the jour-
ney to the summit and the journey back down, and it has the emergent struc-
ture of an "encounter," which is not an aspect of the separate journeys. This 
emergent structure makes the solution apparent. 
THE NETWORK MODEL 
The Buddhist Monk example reveals the central principles of the network 
model of conceptual integration. We will lay them out here. 
MentalSpaw 
Mental spaces are small conceptual packets constructed as we think and talk, for 
purposes of local understanding and action. In the Buddhist Monk network, we 
have a mental space for the ascent and another mental space for the descent. 
Mental spaces are connected to long-term schematic knowledge called "frames," 
such as the frame of walking along a path, and to long-term specific knowledge, 
such as a memory of the time you climbed Mount Rainier in 2001. The mental 
space that includes you, Mount Rainier, the year 2001, and your climbing the 
mountain can be activated in many different ways and for many different pur-
poses. "You climbed Mount Rainier in 2001" sets up the mental space in order 
to report a Pa!j~ event. "If you had climbed Mount Rainier in 2001" sets up the 
same mental space in order to examine a counterfactual situation and its conse-
quences. "Max believes that you climbed Mount Rainier in 2001" sets it up 
again, but now for the purpose of stating what Max believes. "Here is a picture 
of you climbing Mount Rainier in 2001" evokes the same mental space in order 
to talk about the content of the picture. "This novel has you climbing Mount 
Rainier in 2001" reports the author's inclusion of a possibly fictional scene in a 
novel. Mental spaces are very partial. They contain elements and are typically 
structured by frames. They are interconnected, and can be modified as thought 
and discourse unfold. Mental spaces can be used generally to model dynamic 
mappings in thought and language. 
At various times along the way, we will use diagrams to talk about mental 
spaces and blends. In these diagrams, mental spaces are represented by circles; 
elements, by points (or icons) in the circles; and connections between elements 
in different spaces, by lines. In the neural interpretation of these cognitive 
processes, mental spaces are sets of activated neuronal assemblies, and the lines 
between elements correspond to coaccivation-bindings of a certain kind. In ad-
dition, the frame structure recruited to the mental space is represented as either 
outside in a rectangle or iconically inside the circle. 
Input Spaces. 
In the Buddhist Monk network, there are two input mental 
spaces. As shown in Figure 3.1, each is a partial structure corresponding to one 
The Ekments of Blending 
41 
/' 
y 
Input Space 1 
Input Space 2 
FIGURE 3 . 1 
INPUT MENTAL SPACES 
/ 
------'\-----------------""/ -----¥ 
~---~------------ - -[.----------~ 
L ______ --_-_-; _____ -_-_-_________ -_-_-:\-_-_-:7 
Input Space 1 
Input Space 2 
FIGURE 3.2 
CROSS-SPACE MAPPING 
of the two journeys. The day of the upward journey is d l , the day of the down-
ward journey is d2, the monk going up is ai' and the monk going down is a2. 
Cross-Space Mapping. 
A partial cross-space mapping connects counterparts 
in the input mental spaces (see Figure 3.2). It connects mountain, moving indi-
vidual, day of travel, and motion in one mental space to mountain, moving in-
dividual, day, and motion in the other mental space. 
Generic Space. 
A generic mental space maps onto each of the inputs and 
contains what the inputs have in common: a moving individual and his posi-
tion, a path linking foot and summit of the mountain, a day of travel, and mo-
tion in an unspecified direction (represented in Figure 3.3 by a double-headed 
arrow). 
Blend. 
There is a fourth mental space, the blended space, that we will often 
call "the blend" (see Figure 3.4). Each of the mountain slopes in the two input 
mental spaces is projected to the same single mountain slope in the blended 

42 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, , 
I 
/ ' 
I~! 
, 
I 
, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/o
Il, 
I 
, 
I 
, 
I 
I 
'
~ 
" , 
d l 
Input Space I 
, 
I 
, 
I 
, 
I 
I 
I 
, 
, 
I , , 
I 
I 
, 
I 
FIGURE 3.3 
GENERIC MENTAL SPACE 
. 
\ 
. . . 
, . 
, 
THE WAY WE THINK 
. 
, 
Generic Space 
. . 
, , 
\ 
Input Space 2 
space. The two days of travel, d l and d2, are mapped onto a single day d' and are 
thus fused. But the moving individuals and their positions are mapped accord-
ing to the time of day, with direction of motion preserved, and therefore cannot 
be fused. Input Space 1 represents dynamically the entire upward journey, while 
Input Space 2 represents the entire downward journey. The projection into the 
blended space preserves times and positions. The blended space, which has time 
t and day d', contains a counterpart of al at the position occupied by al at time 
t of day dl as well as a counterpart of ~ at the position occupied by ~ at time t 
of day d2. 
' 
Emergent Structure 
The blend develops emergent structure that is not in the inputs. First, composition 
of elements from the inputs makes relations available in the blend that do not ex-
ist in the separate inputs. In the blend but in neither of the inputs, there are two 
moving individuals instead of one. They are moving in op~osite directions, 
The Ekments a/Blending 
" 
, , 
, , 
~
"
'" 
, 
", 
, 
, 
" 
I 
' 
" 
, 
// 
a 
d;' 
I, 
• 
Input Space I 
, , , , , , 
I 
I 
FIGURE 3.4 
BLENDED SPACE 
I 
I 
I , 
I 
I 
I 
I , 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, , 
. 
I , , , , 
I 
\ , , 
\ 
\ 
, , , 
I 
, , 
Blended Space 
43 
Generic Space 
Input Space 2 
starting from opposite ends of the path, and their positions can be compared at 
any time of the trip, since they are traveling on the same day, d'. Second, comple-
tion brings additional structure to the blend. This structure of two people moving 
on the path can itself be viewed as a salient part of a familiar background frame: 
two people starting a journey at the same time from opposite ends of a path. 
Third, by means of completion, this familiar structure is recruited into the 
blended space. At this point, the blend is integrated: It is an instance of a particu-
lar familiar frame, the frame of two people walking on a path in opposite 
., 

.:;: 
44 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK ' 
directions. By virtue of that frame, we can now run the scenario dynamically: In 
the blend, the two people move along the path. This "running of the blend" is 
called elaboration. Running of the blend modifies it imaginatively, delivering the 
actual encounter of the two people. This is new structure: There is no encounter 
in either of the input mental spaces, even if we run them dynamically. But those 
two people in the blend are projected back to the "same" monk in the two input 
fD:ental spaces. The meeting place projects back to the "same" location on the 
path in each of the inputs, and, of course, the time of day when they meet in the 
blend is the same as the time of day in the input spaces when the monk is at that 
location. The mapping back to the input spaces yields the configuration sug-
gested by Figure 3.5. 
As we run the blend, the links to the inputs are constantly maintained, so 
that all these "sameness" connections across spaces seem to pop out automati-
cally, yielding a flash of comprehension, Koestler's magical "act of creation." But 
for this flash to occur, counterpart links must be unconsciously maintained even 
as they change dynamically across four mental spaces. In particular, there are 
geometrical regularities across these spaces. Given the way we have built the 
blend, we know that any point on the path in the blend projects to counterparts 
in the input spaces. More generally, anything fused in the blend projects back to 
counterparts in the input spaces. But this "geometric" knowledge of correlations 
among time, position of the monk, and location on the path in the different 
spaces is completely unconscious. What comes into consciousness is the flash of 
comprehension. And it seems magical precisely because the elaborate imagina-
tive work is all unconscious. 
WHAT HAVE WE SEEN? 
Blending in the riddle of the Buddhist Monk has features that turn out to be 
universal for conceptual integration. 
Building an integration network involves setting up mental spaces, matching 
across spaces, projecting selectively to a blend, locating shared· structures, project-
ing backward to inputs, recruiting new strUcture to the inputs or the blend, and 
running various operations in the blend itself We will talk about these opera-
tions in sequence, but it is crucial to keep in mind that any of them can run at 
any time and that they can run simultaneously. The integration network is trying 
to achieve equilibrium . .In a manner of speaking, there is a place where the net-
work is "happy." Context will typically specifY some conditions of the equilib-
rium, as when we are instructed to find a solution to the riddle of the Buddhist 
Monk. The network will achieve equilibrium if structure comes up in the blend 
that projects back automatically to the inputs to yield the existence of the special 
point on the path. More generally, what counts as an equilibrium for the 
..... 
~ .. 
The' Elemmts of Blending 
. 
, 
, 
.
" 
I 
" 
11,1 
, , 
: ,' \ :' 
.. 
" 
, 
;:!Y(;
': : 
.~:" 
:' 
~ ' ''~ 
:' 
. a: .. -.. -;,i. - -·-------- .. ----
\ 
d 
Input Space 1 
time t' (day d1 ) 
, 
1 
, 
' 
, , , 
: 
Blended Space 
time t' (day d') 
FIGURE 3.5 
MAPPING BACK TO INPUT SPACES 
Generic Space 
Input Space 2 
time t' (day d2 ) 
45 
network will depend on its purpose, but also on various internal constraints on 
its dynamics. 
The Basic Diagram in Figure 3.6 illustrates the central features of conceptual 
integration: The circles represent mental spaces, the solid lines indicate the 
matching and cross-space mapping between the inputs, the dotted lines indicate 
connections between inputs and either generic or blended spaces, and the solid 
square in the blended space represents emergent structure. 

46 
Input I I 
, 
, 
FIGURE 3.6 
THE BASIC DIAGRAM 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Generic Space 
, , , 
" . .... -~ 
, 
, 
, 
Blend 
, 
, 
Input 12 
While this static way of illustrating aspects of conceptual integration is con-
venient for us, such a diagram is really just a snapshot of an imaginative and 
complicated process that can involve deactivating previous connections, ref ram-
ing previous spaces, and other actions. We think of the lines in this diagram 
(lines that represent conceptual projections and mappings) as corresponding to 
neural coactivations and bindings. Here, then, are the essential aspects of blend-
ing, presented in a sequence not meant to reflect actual stages of the process: 
Th( Ekmmts of Bknding , 
47 
• Conceptual integration network. Blends arise in networks of mental spaces. 
In the network illustrated in the Basic Diagram, there are four mental 
sp'aces: the two inputs, the generic space, and the blend. This is a minimal 
network. Conceptual integration networks can have several input spaces 
and even multiple blended spaces. 
• Matching and counterpart connections. In conceptual integration, there is 
partial matching between input spaces. The solid lines in the Basic Dia-
gram represent counterpart connections produced by matching. Such 
counterpart connections are of many kinds: connections between frames 
an,d roles in frames, connections of identity or transformation or represen-
tation, analogical connections, metaphoric connections, and, more gener-
ally, "vital relations" mappings (as explained in Chapter 6). In the Skiing 
Waiter case, for example, ski poles are counterparts of a tray. When 
matches are created between two spaces, we say that there is a cross-space 
mapping between them. 
• Generic space. At any moment in the construction of the network, the 
structure that inputs seem to share is captured in a generic space, which, 
in turn, maps onto each of the inputs. A given element in the generic 
space maps onto paired counterparts in the two jpput spaces. In the Iron 
Lady case, the generic space is something like "Western democracy with 
labor unions and voters." Labor unions in the generic space maps onto 
American labor unions in one input and British labor unions in the other, 
which are accordingly counterpartS. In the Skiing Waiter case, the generic 
has a moving individual carrying something in his hands. The carried ob-
ject in the generic space maps onto the ski poles in one input and onto the 
tray in the other. They, too, are accordingly counterparts. 
• Bunding. In blending, structure from two input mental spaces is projected 
to a new space, the blend. Generic spaces and blended spaces are related: 
Blends contain generic structure captured in the generic space but also 
contain more specific structure, and they can contain structure that is im-
possible for the inputs, such as two monks who are the same monk. 
• S(uctive projection. Not all elements and relations from the inputs are pro-
jected to the blend. The calendrical time of the journey in the Buddhist 
Monk case is not projected to the blend. In the Skiing Waiter 'case, neither 
walking nor the customer nor the price of the champagne is projected from 
the waiter input. Sometimes two counterparts are both projected (both 
paths, both monks), sometimes only one (in the Iron Lady example, only 
American voters are projected, not British voters), sometimes none (in the 
Buddhist Monk example, calendrical dates). Sometimes counterparts in 
the input spaces are fused in the blend (the two paths), but often not (the 
two monks). And, finally, sometimes an element in one input without a 
.I 

48 
THE WAY WE THINK 
t" 
counterpart in the other gets projected to the blend (skis in the Skiing 
Waiter case). 
• Emergmt structure. Emergent structure arises in the blend that is not 
copied there directly from any input. It is generated in three ways: 
through composition of projections from the inputs, through completion 
based on independently recruited frames and scenarios, and through elab-
oration ("running the blend"). 
• Composition. Blending can compose elements from the input spaces to 
provide relations that do not exist in the separate inputs. In the Buddhist 
Monk example, composition yields two travelers making two journeys at 
the same time on the 'same path, even though each input has only one 
traveler making one journey. Counterpart elements can be composed by 
being included separately in the blend, as when the monks from the in-
puts are brought into the blend separately, yielding two monks; or by be-
ing projected onto the same element in the blend, as when the two days in 
the two inputs are projected onto the same day in the blend. We refer to 
this kind of projection as "fusion." 
• Completion. We rarely realize the extent of background knowledge and 
structure that we bring into a blend unconsciously. Blends recruit great 
ranges of such background meaning. Pattern completion is the most basic 
kind of recruitment: We see some parts of a familiar frame of meaning, 
and much more of the frame is recruited silently but effectively to the 
blend. Figure 3.7 demonstrates this well-known psychological phenome-
non, where we see two line segments and a rectangle and, through pattern 
completion, infer that there is a straight line running "behind" the rectan-
gle. A minimal composition in the blend is often automatically inter-
preted as being a richer pattern. In the Buddhist Monk case, the composi-
tion of two monks on the path is completed so automatically by the 
scenario of two people journeying toward each other that it takes some 
thinking to see that the "journeying toward each other" scenario is much 
richer than the "two monks" composition. 
• Elaboration. We elaborate blends by treating them as' simulations and
running them imaginatively according to the principles that have been 
established for the blend. Some of these principles for running the blend 
will have been brought to the blend by completion. We run the Buddhist 
Monk blend to get the "encounter" in the blend that provides the solu-
tion to the riddle. We are able to run the blend because we know the dy-
namics of the scenario of two people making opposite journeys along a 
path, which was brought in by pattern completion. That scenario gives us 
principles having to do with the passage of time, the possibilities of self-
locomotion, and so on. Part of the power of blending is that there are al-
ways many different possible lines of elaboration, and elaboration can go 
If::'" 
Tht Eltments of Blending 
49 
FIGURE 3.7 
PATTERN COMPLETION 
on indefinitely. We can run the blend as much and as long and in as 
many alternative directions as we choose. For example, the two monks 
might meet each other and have a philosophical discussion about the 
concept of identity. That particular elaboration would divert us from 
the purpose of solving the riddle, but it could also lead to something in-
teresting and useful. The creative possibilities of blending stem from the 
open-ended nature of completion and elaboration. They recruit and de-
velop new structure for the blend in ways that are principled but effec-
tively unlimited. Blending operates over the entire richness of our physi-
cal and mental worlds. 
Composition, completion, and elaboration lead to emergent structure in the 
blend; the blend contains structure that is not copied from the inputs. Note that 
in the Basic Diagram (Figure 3.6), the square inside the blend represents emer-
gent structure. 
• Modification. Any space can be modified at any moment in the construc-
tion of the integration network. For example, the inputs can be modified 
by reverse mapping from the blend, as in the Buddhist Monk case where 
we add to the inputs the existence of the location asked for in the riddle by 
backward projection of the spOt of "encounter" from the blend. 
• Entrmchment. Blends are often novel and generated on the fly, as in the 
Buddhist Monk case, but they recruit entrenched mappings and frames. 
Blends themselves can also become entrenched, as iIi the Complex Num-
bers blend, giving rise to conceptual and formal structures shared 
throughout the community. 
• Event integration. Blends are a basic instrument for achieving event inte-
gration. In the Skiing Waiter and Image Club examples, the event integra-
tion is the purpose of the imaginative construction. But in the Buddhist 
Monk case, it is only a means for solving the riddle about the existence of 
a location with certain properties. 
• Wide application. Though uniform in their dynamics, integration net-
works can serve many different goals. In the examples we have seen so far, 
these goals include transfer of emotions (Image Club) and inferences 

50 
THE WAY WE THINK 
(Buddhist Monk and Computer Desktop), counterfactual reasoning (Iron 
Lady), conceptual change and creativity in science (Complex Numbers), 
integrated action (Computer Desktop and Skiing Waiter), and construc-
tion of identity through compression (Graduation). 
Are there different kinds of integration networks and blended spaces? What 
is the relationship between imaginative integration networks and formal systems 
of language? Are there constraints on blending? If so, what are they? Where do 
the inputs come from, in the first place? Just how is blending related to catego-
rization, analogy, metaphor, metonymy, logic? How complicated can networks 
get? Can blends be reblended or serve as inputs to other blends? What exactly is 
a generic space? Does it participate in the dynamics of the network, and can it 
evolve? 
Blending is child's play for us human beings, but we are children whose 
games run deep. We will now try to find out more about those games. 
•• 
•• CHAPTER 3 
ZOOM OUT 
WILD COGNITION 
The Buddhist Monk blend is a fantastic and impossible scenario. 
Question: 
• So is blending a special device for producing fantastic thoughts? 
Our answer: 
The Buddhist Monk example might make you think that. And although the 
Skiing Waiter and Image Club cases have some connection to reality, they still 
look quite exotic. On the other hand, there is nothing fantastic about the result-
ing blends in the "safe beach" and "red pencil" examples, which go completely 
unnoticed. Clearly, blends can be either fantastic or not, but when they are fan-
tastic, they may stand out. As we will see repeatedly, unnoticed blends are much 
more common than noticeable or fantastic ones. In fact, it takes some work to 
find an example whose blending is immediately apparent. Why do we begin 
with so many exotic-looking examples? Because we have to make the phenome-
non of blending visible before we can begin to analyze its operation, and wild 
examples like the Buddhist Monk show us blending in a way no one can deny. 
Consider, by way of analogy, the topic of electricity. Although electricity is a 
Tht Elements of Blending 
51 
pervasive and usually completely unnoticed aspec~ of the universe, schoolbooks 
introduce the subject with exotic and memorable illustrations, such as Ben-
jamin Franklin's drawing down lightning by flying a kite in a storm. Indeed, it is 
quite reasonable that we do not become aware of a general, pervasive process 
until we see a case that looks exceptional. 
The blend in the Iron Lady counterfactual is completely fantastic but, in con-
text, is not noticed as unusual. We will see this repeatedly: Expressions that seem 
completely normal and literal to people (e.g., "This beach is safe") turn out to in-
volve intricate blending, which stands out once we have analyzed it. Here are 
some. other completely normal examples that have fantastic blends similar to the 
Buddhist Monk but go unnoticed in context: "This chapter is writing itself," 
"You're getting ahead of yourself," "Normal Mailer loves to read himself," "I can't 
keep up with the schedule," and "My heart is disagreeing with my head." 
The Buddhist Monk blend, rather amazingly, shows up in real life. Ed 
Hutchins studies the fascinating mental models set up by Micronesian naviga-
tors to sail across the Pacific. In such models, it is the islands that move, and vir-
tual islands serve as reference points. Hutchins reports a conversation between 
Micronesian and Western navigators who have trouble understanding each 
other's conceptualizations. As described by David Lewis, the Micronesian navi-
gator Beiong comes to understand a Western diagram of intersecting bearings in 
the following way: 
He eventually succeeded in achieving the mental tour de force of visualizing him-
self sailing simultaneously from Oroluk to Ponape and from Ponape to Oroluk 
and picturing the ETAK bearings to Ngatik at the start of both voyages. In this 
way he managed to comprehend the diagram and confirmed that it showed the is-
land's position correctly. [The ETAK is the virtual island, and Ngatik is the island 
to be located.) 
It is not just the blends that can be fantastic. Real life, from a certain point of 
view, can be fantastic, too. The Micronesian navigator's tour de force is espe-
cially fantastic for the anthropologist, Lewis, who knows the standard Western 
techniques of navigation, but what is fantastic for the Micronesian, and at first 
completely unintelligible to him, is the Western chart with the' intersection of 
bearings. The spectacular blend invented by the Micronesian navigator Beiong 
exists only to make sense of the bizarre Western conceptualization. Ed Hutchins 
and Geoffrey Hinton, in their article "Why the Islands Move," explain how the 
seemingly mysterious Micronesian system actually works and reveal its great so-
phistication and power. 
One might object that this case, even if real, is quite exceptional. But even so, it 
is no less representative of human cognition than more ordinary cases. Cognitive 
scientists take all such examples as revealing the hidden aspects of cognition: The 
J 

~.:, 
52 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
navigator had to have blending readily available as standard equipment in order to 
perform his tour de force. Evolution did not give us advanced powers of blending 
just so we could understand weird concepts held in other cultures or solve a riddle 
like the Buddhist Monk. Our robust powers of blending are useful throughout 
our everyday lives. Unusual examples and everyday examples are equally impor-
tant, for our purposes here. Unobjectionable idioms like "getting ahead of one-
s~lf" and "catching up with oneself" are built on the same principles of blending 
as the Buddhist Monk. Such blends are more common than one might think. 
Paul Rodriguez reports that when he was driving guests around the city, one of 
them said, "You're driving us around so much you're going to meet yourself com-
ing down the street." The blended space in this quip, he observes, is almost exactly 
the same as in the Buddhist Monk riddle. He then notes, 
It is interesting that very little discourse context w~ needed to set up the blend. 
The phrase driving around so much implies more than one trip, just as the monk 
riddle explicitly states there are two separate journeys. Realizing this was a blend, 
I asked my guest to explain and she said, "When the kids were in school I would 
drive them around so much that I used to say "One of these days I'm going to 
meet myself coming down the sneet." 
UNIF"ORMITY OF" THE OPERATION 
It 
We have seen cases that appear intuitively simple and others that appear intu-
itively complex. 
Questions: 
• is commonplace blending simple? 
• Is fantastic blending complex and therefore more interesting? 
Our answers: 
As we just saw, the very same principles and complexity apply in Koestler's 
strikingly creative Buddhist Monk riddle, Beiong's tour de force, and the pas-
senger's comment on driving around. Blending finds structure where it can. 
There is a variant of the Buddhist Monk riddle that recruits a quite different set 
of frames to create a quite different integration ·network, yet the same solution. 
It is contained in the Spanish short story "Paginas inglesas," in which a man 
must prove he was twice in the same spot at the same hour. He has just run 
down a hill in twenty minutes. The day before, he had climbed the hill in five 
hours. But the twenty minutes are contained in the period of the day spanned 
by the five hours. The solution comes in the form of imagining that yesterday a 
car had driven down the hill in the "same" twenty minutes. So first we have 
a nonfanrastic blend of today's quick journey and an automobile: In the blend, 
.. .. 
The Elnnmts of Blending 
53 
it is yesterday, and the automobile makes the journey. Then we are told that in-
evitably, yesterday, the person would have been passed by the automobile. This 
is a second blend, again nonfantastic. 
By comparing this variant solution with that given by Koestler, we can see 
three general points. 
First, impossibility need not be crucial to the blend: Koestler's blend is im-
possible, but the more complicated double blending in the Spanish story gives 
us twO nonfantastic blends. 
Second, the schemas used for pattern completion and emergent Structure in 
the blend are experiential. In Koestler's solution, the experiential frame recruited 
is two people meeting each other on a path. The Spanish version recruits a 
richer frame: an oncoming car passing a pedestrian, where the car is moving 
much faster than the pedestrian. The encounter schema looked almost trivial in 
Koestler's solution, but finding the right encounter schema looks like a ,much 
more imaginative achievement in the Spanish version. In fact, the story frames 
the person who finds this solution as exceptionally intelligent for being able to 
deliver a blend that is familiar and immediately intelligible. Because the S~anish 
version has the descent taking much less time than the ascent, finding the< auto-
mobile schema gives us a way to exploit our everyday knowledge about differen-
tial speeds. Even though the Spanish riddle is "mathematically" more complex, 
given the differences in the time it takes to ascend and descend and the corre-
sponding differences of average speed, some people find the solution easier to 
accept because the final blend is a straightforward instance of a Familiar situa-
tion: The oncoming car zooms past the pedestrian. It is worth noting that in 
both the original and Spanish solutions, if "the same place" were interpreted lit-
erally, we would have to imagine two objects inhabiting the same space. In the 
Spanish solution, the car would run over the pedestrian. But everyone is willing 
in both cases to exploit, unconsciously, the convention that if two moving bod-
ies pass each other closely, they are momentarily in "the same place." 
Third, both solutions begin from the same inputs (ascent and descent of one 
person) and deliver the same topological solution, but the imaginative networks 
they put together are different. So the inputs do not determine the integration 
network. 
THE SCIENCE OF" BLENDING 
We have seen that blending is not deterministic. 
Questions: 
• Does the fact that we can't predict the integration network from the in-
puts mean that just any projections from the inputs are OK? 

54 
THE WAY WE THINK 
• Is the process of blending fuzzy and unscientific? Is the science of blending 
fuzzy and unscientific? 
• Can we hope to have a science of something so uncontrolled and "magi-
cal" as blending? 
Our answers: 
This is a very good set of questions. It is part of our research program to 
show that not just any projections are OK. Indeed, as we will see in Chapter 16, 
there are quite strong constraints on projections. We have made some headway 
on this very hard problem and, in that later chapter, will suggest lines for further 
research. 
A view often implicit in form approaches holds that only generative algorith-
mic models, specifYing unique outputs from given inputs, are scientific, so that 
the underdetermined nature of blending, as we analyze it, brands our theory as 
unscientific. This objection is simply wrong. Theories of probability, subatomic 
particles, chaos, complex adaptive systems, evolution, immunology, and many 
others could not get off the ground as sciences if they were required to offer 
models in which the specified inputs determined unique outputs. 
Is "descent of species" a fuzzy and unscientific concept? You can never predict 
what new species will emerge or even how a given species will evolve; the out-
puts of evolution do not fall into clear-cut categories (although there are central 
examples for each category); and the outcome of natural selection cannot be 
specified algorithmically. But evolutionary biology is by now a pillar of science. 
FIRST THINGS FIRST? 
We have begun with striking examples so the blending can be easily seen. 
Question: 
• Wouldn't it be in better scientific taste to start by explaining the meaning 
of "The cat is on the mat" rather than trying to tackle the science fantasy 
of the Buddhist Monk who can be in two places at the same time? First 
things first! 
Our answer: 
The scientific study of meaning would be easier if there were simple theories 
for simple meanings, which could be supplemented by more complicated theo-
ries for the more complicated meanings. But the simple meanings, it turns out, 
are also complicated, and as we will show repeatedly, you must have all of the 
operation of blending in order to put them together. Blending is not special in 
this way. It takes all of our cognitive powers to have common sense. 
The Elmunts of Blmding 
55 
More generally, explanation does not come from taking simplified accounts 
of simplified observations and extending them by adding some bell~ and whis-
tles to give better explanations. Science moves in the other direction: A general 
scientific account explains the supposedly simple examples as special cases of the 
general account. For instance, it is an intuitive primitive for us that if we drop 
something, it falls to our feet. But that intuitive primitive is really only a very 
special case of the general theory of gravity, which also explains planetary mo-
tion and the parabolic trajectory of projectiles. We cannot explain scientifically 
how a dropped object falls to our feet without the general theory of gravity. 
There isn't a part of the theory of gravity that applies only to apples. Similarly, 
what we need for blending is a general theory that explains both the everyday 
and exotic examples. 
FALS I FlAB I LITY 
We have so far given analyses of blends, but we have not framed our analyses in 
terms of prediction and confirmation. 
Questions: 
• J 
• Doesn't science involve making falsifiable predictions? 
• What falsifiable predictions come from the theory of blending? 
Our ansWers: 
Actually, sciences like evolutionary biology are not about making falsifiable 
predictions regarding future events. Given the nature of the mental operation of 
blending, it would be nonsense to predict that from two inputs a certain blend 
must result or that a specific blend must arise at such-and-such a place and 
time. Human beings do not think that way. Nonetheless, in the strong sense, we 
hope to make many falsifiable predictions, including predictions about types of 
blending, what counts as a good or bad blend, how the formation of a blend de-
pends on the local purpose, how forms prompt for blending, what possibilities 
there are for composing mappings, what possibilities there are for creating suc-
cessive blends, how other cognitive operations (such as metonymy) are ex-
ploited during blending, and how categories are extended. 
In fact, we take it that we have already falsified existing accounts of counter-
factuals by showing the centrality of counterfactuals like the Iron Lady, which 
such theories are on principle unable to handle. We will do more of the same as 
we go along, by showing that, to the extent that they do not have a place for 
blending, existing accounts of metaphor, analogy, or grammar are in certain re-
spects "false." Sociologically and psychologically, theory tends to define data, so 
it is hard to use data to falsifY a theory while stayin~ conceptually inside that 
" 

56 
THE WAY WE THINK 
theory. A logician ~hose specialty is counterfactuals might honestly believe that 
an example like the Iron Lady falls outside the range of relevant data for logic 
and is only an anomaly of natural language, a "way of speaking,» not a real ex-
ample of counterfactual thinking. Philosophers like Donald Davidson who 
claim to study meaning have decreed in a similar vein that the study of 
metaphor is not part of the study of meaning. 
V I 5 I B I L I TY 0 F" THE B LEN 0 I N G 
We have tried to make consciously visible some of what happens during blending. 
Questions: 
• How can meaning be consciously apprehended at all if it is constructed 
unconsciously? 
• What parts of blending are visible to consciousness, and when do invisible 
aspects rise to the surface? 
• The Buddhist Monk example gives us a "Eureka" or "aha!" effect in which 
the whole solution pops out in a way that we seem to understand all the 
way through. How does that happen, and how is it different from moving 
step by step through a long argument to reach an earned conclusion? Is 
there a difference between meanings that we apprehend all at once and 
those we build up step by step? 
Our answers: 
Consciousness-like identity, sameness, and difference-appears to the con-
scious mind to be a primitive. For millennia, the fact of consciousness and un-
consciousness has been recognized and thought to be interesting, but theorists 
have only recently begun to be able to ask why people should have conscious-
ness at all. Previously, this seemed a nonsensical question. Now it is recognized 
as a central and extremely difficult question for cognitive neuroscience, and sev-
eral hypotheses have been proposed. We refer readers to the Journal of Con-
sciousness Studies and Brain and Behavioral Sciences for the rich but short history 
of this controversy. 
The question "How can meaning be consciously apprehended at all if it is 
constructed unconsciously?" makes the false assumption that what is appre-
hended consciously must be the output of a conscious process. But as we saw 
with the perception of a coffee cup, it is in the riature of consciousness that it 
gives us effects we can act on, and these effects are correlated with the uncon-
scious processes. In the case of meaning, the apprehension of these effects typi-
cally induces us to reifY meaning. Consciousness sees an effect and reifies the ef-
fect to provide a cause: I see a cup, and, in the folk theory, the reason I do is that 
there is a cup that causes me to see a cup. In the same way, I hear a sentence and 
f.,.l· 
The Ekmmts of Blmding 
57 
I "see" a meaning for it, and, in the folk theory, the reason I do is that there is an 
abstract thing, the meaning, that causes me to "see" it. We have already shown 
the falsity of this view. In the case of blending, the effects of the unconscious 
imaginative work are apprehended in consciousness, but not the operations that 
produce it. In the case of the Buddhist Monk, the ultimate meaning pops out 
when we realize that the inevitable encounter in the blend yields the solution to 
the initial problem. The dynamic web of links between blend and inputs re-
mains unconscious. What is registered consciously is the encounter in the blend 
and the "consequent" alignment between the two inputs . 
. The moment of tangible, global understanding comes when a network has 
been elaborated in such a way that it contains a solution that is delivered to con-
sciousness. That delivery in nonroutine cases can produce the "Eureka!" or 
"aha!" effect, and it is to be contrasted with the pattern in which we proceed 
step by step through a long analysis and are persuaded by each step, including 
the last, so that we accept the conclusion but do not feel that we have a global 
understanding of the whole. Instead. we know only that we did approve each 
step, whatever it was, and so the conclusion must be true even if we do not ac-
tually grasp why. This seems paradoxical: In cases of step-by-step analysis. we do 
part of each step consciously, yet are left without' a feeling that we understand 
the truth deeply, while in cases of blending, most of the analysis is done uncon-
sciously, yet we can end up with a deeper satisfaction. We suggest that in the 
case of blending, at the moment of solution, the entire integration network is 
still active in the brain. even if unconsciously, while in the case of step-by-step 
analysis. at the moment of solution we have already lost most of the structure of 
the preceding steps. 
J 

.. 
If 
•• 
•• Four 
ON THE WAY TO 
DEEPER MATTERS 
The authors of these books take part in the great con-
versation. 
,. 
'1 
. -Mortimer J Adler 
CONCEPTUAL INTEGRATION UNDERLIES · BOTH remarkably creative feats 
mat look as if they need explanation and everyday mental actions that look 
completely simple. Performances that seem roo simple to need explanation turn 
out ro be devilishly hard to explain. Cognitive scientists have shown that many 
fea~s th~t we find easy--categorization, memory, framing, recursion, analogy, 
metaphor, even vision and hearing-are exceptionally resistant to scientific 
analysis. They turn out to be the things that are hardest to explain. Syntax be-
fore Harris and Chomsky, framing before Bateson and Goffman, and analogy 
before Gentner, Hofstadter, and Holyoak were surely recognized as pervasive, 
but the need for meir systematic study was not perceived. In a sense it could not 
be perceived, because mere was no framework or set of techniques within which 
to ask questions systematically. 
Now that we have the beginnings of a framework for conceptual integration, 
we can begin to show how it works systematically in human cognition. 
THE DEBATE WITH KANT 
The Buddhist Monk example presents a very salient and intuitively apparent 
blend, precisely because it includes the strange event. of someone meeting him-
self. But blending, with all its structural and dynamic imaginative properties, is 
rarely so visible. Let us look at a case where the invisible blending becomes visi-
ble as we analyze it. Imagine mat a contemporary philosopher says, while lead-
ing a seminar, 
I claim that reason is a self-developing capacity. Kant disagrees with me on this 
point. He says it's innate, but I answer that that's begging the question, to which 
59 

; I 
60 
THE WAY WE THINK 
he counters, in Critique of Pure Reason, that only innate ideas have power. But I 
say to that, What about neuronal group selection? And he gives no answer. 
As a straightforward report, this passage describes an actual historical event in 
which Kant is tongue-tied when confronted by the modern philosopher. That 
no one interprets the passage this way presents us wi~ a bigger question: How 
can reporting an argument with a dead man count as a sane expression of one's 
philosophical position? Philosophers pride themselves on their logical thought 
and expression. The modern philosopher here is not experiencing a mental 
breakdown in which he has delusions of speaking to Kant and humiliating him 
in debate. On the contrary, this passage, or the first half of it anyway, is sup-
posed to be a good instance of logical thought and expression. How can a pas-
sage about talking to someone who has been dead for centuries be logical? How 
can Kant lose the debate by not answering the modern philosopher, since pre-
sumably long-dead people do not answer anybody? 
Our reader will not be surprised to hear that the reasoning of this passage is 
the reasoning that is available from integration networks, in which we can have 
a blended space that is useful but not about something real. The Buddhist 
Monk blend lets us see the truth of the situation in the inputs, but not by asking 
us to believe that people meet themselves on mountain paths. Just so, the De-
bate with Kant integration network tells us about the modern philosopher's re-
lationship to Kant and his ideas, but it does not require us to believe that the 
philosopher and Kant talk to each other, or even, in this case, to notice that 
there is any blending going on. 
The Debate with Kant blend has twO input spaces. In one, we have the mod-
ern philosopher, making claims. In a separate but related input space, we have 
Kant, thinking and writing. In neither input space is there a debate. The 
blended space has both people. In addition, the frame of debate has been re-
cruited to frame Kant and the modern philosopher as engaged in simultaneous 
debate, mutually aware, using a single language to treat a recognized topic. 
The debate frame comes up easily in the blend through pattern completion, 
since so much of its structure is already in place in the composition of the two in-
puts. Composition provides twO philosophers, both discussing the issue of reason 
but holding different views. This scenario gives us much of the structure of the de-
bate frame, which is recruited to give us further structure, such as Kant's awareness 
of the modern philosopher, questions and answers, and a potential victor in the 
debate. Once the blend is established, we can "run the blend"-that is, operate 
cognitively within it, developing new structure and manipulating the various 
events as an integrated unit. The debate frame brings with it conventional expres-
sions, available for our use. We use such expressions to pick out structUre in the 
blend directly, but because the connections between the blend and the inputs 
. ... . 
On 'the ~y to Duper Mattas 
61 
remain active, applying imagination to the blend has consequences for the inputs. 
For example, even though the debate is fictional, we assume that the modern 
philosopher's opinions in the blend are also his opinions in the input. In the 
blend, the modern philosopher wins the debate, and his victory establishes that he 
has the better idea, which projects back to both inputs. It projects back to the 
modern philosopher input to establish there that his idea is very good, that he ar-
gues very well, and that he is a very good philosopher. It projects back to the Kant 
input to establish there that, however good Kant's ideas are, they are not at the top. 
The Debate with Kant has all the expected properties of blending: 
. There is a cross-space mapping linking Kant and his writings to the philoso-
phy professor and his lecture. The counterparts include Kant and the professor, 
their respective languages, topics, claims, times of activity, goals (such as the 
search for truth), and modes of expression (such as writing versus speaking). 
There is selective projection to the blend: Kant, the professor, some of their 
ideas, and the search for truth are projected to the blend. Kant's time, language, 
mode of expression, the fact that he's dead, and the fact that he was never aware 
of the future existence of our professor are not projected. 
There is emergent structure through composition: We have two people talk-
ing in the same place at the same time. There is en\ergent structure through com-
pletion: Two people talking in the same place at the same time evoke the cultural 
frame of a conversation, a debate, or an argument. When they disagree, we tend 
to pick the frame of argument or debate. In this case, we pick the debate frame to 
structure the blend. It is evoked by the professor's syntax and vocabulary ("dis-
agrees," "answer," "counters," "What about . . . ?"). And there is emergent struc-
ture through elaboration: "Running the blend" in this case is a matter of running 
the debate frame by elaborating questions and answers, retorts and concessions, 
with corresponding emotions like defensiveness, aggression, and elation. Run-
ning the blend gives us a sequence of arguments by the modern philosopher, 
their superiority to Kant's arguments, and, therefore, their ultimate validity, since 
Kant is already at the top of the scale. 
We also see integration of events: Kant's ideas and the professor's claims are 
integrated into a unified event, the debate. Like the Buddhist Monk and Skiing 
Waiter, the Debate with Kant integrates into a single scenario various events of 
uncertain relation spread out over time. Blends provide a space in which ranges 
of structure can be manipulated uniformly. But the other spaces do not disap-
pear once the blended space has been formed. On the contrary, the blended 
space is valuable only because it is connected conceptually to the inputs. The 
Buddhist Monk blend and the Debate with Kant blend lead us to alter the in-
puts imaginatively. The Buddhist Monk looks exotic, but we do not even notice 
the blending in the Debate with Kant since the general blending template it de-
ploys is conventional for engaging the ideas of a previous thinker. 
" 

62 
,. 
INPUT 1 
ft 
GENERIC 
m' 
, 
claims, cOUllterclaims, 
question~:lmswers, ... / 
speaking 
" 
English (same language) 
cognition 
search for truth 
same timet 
m,kalive 
m aware ofk 
kawareofm 
BLEND 
FIGURE 4.1 
THE DEBATE WITH KANT NETWORK 
THE WAY WE THINK 
INPUT 2 
Debate FRAME 
rhetorical actions: 
agrees, retorts, challenges, 
anticipates, concurs, reinforces, 
questions and answers, ... 
argumentation connectives. 
affirmation and negation: 
bul, however, therefore, on the 
contrary, exactly, true enough. 
not so fast, ... 
yes, no, yes and no, ... 
On 'the ~y to Duper Matters 
63 
REGATTA 
The clipper ship Northn71 Light sailed in 1853 from San Francisco to Boston in 
76 days, 8 hours. That time was still the fastest on record in 1993, when a mod-
ern catam~an, Great American IL set out on the same course. A few days before 
the catamaran reached Boston, observers were able to say: 
At this point, Great American II is 4.5 days ahead of Northern Light. 
This expression frames the two boats as sailing on the same course during the 
same time period in 1993. It blends the event of 1853 and the event of 1993 
into a single event. There is a cross-space mapping that links the two trajecto-
ries, the twO boats, the two time periods, positions on the course, and so on. Se-
lective projection to the blend brings in the two boats, the course, and their ac-
tual positions and times on the course, but not the 1853 date, the 1853 weather 
conditions, or the fact that the clipper ship was engaged in transporting cargo. 
The blend has rich emergent structure: Like the traveling monks, the boats are 
now in a position to be compared, so that one can be "ahead" of the other. The 
scenario of two boats moving toward the same goal on the same course wd hav-
ing departed from San Francisco on the same day fits into an obvious and famil-
iar frame, that of a race, which is automatically added to the blend by pattern 
completion. That frame allows us to run the blend by imagining the two boats 
in competition. Just as in the Buddhist Monk case, elaboration of the blend is 
constrained by projection of locations and times from the inputs. The race 
frame in the blended space may be invoked more noticeably, as in: 
At this point, Great American II is barely maintaining a 4.5-day lead over North-
ern Light. 
"Maintaining a lead" is an intentional part of a race. Although in reality the cata-
maran is sailing alone and the clipper's run took place 140 years before, the situ-
ation is described in terms of the blended space. No one is fooled: The clipper 
has not magically reappeared. The blend remains solidly linked to the inputs, 
and inferences from the blend can be projected back to the inputs: In particular, 
if we know that Great American II is 4.5 days ahead of Northern Light in the 
blend, then we know that the corresponding location of Northern Light in its in-
put is less far along the courSe than the corresponding location of Great Ameri-
can II in its input, wd we know that it takes 4.5 days of sailing (by one of the 
boats) to get from the first location to the second. Another noteworthy property 
of the race frame is its emotional content. Sailors in a race are driven by emo-
tions linked to winning, leading, losing, gaining, wd so forth. This emotional 

64 
THE WAY WE THINK 
value can be projected to the Great American II input. The solitary run of Great 
American II, conceived as a race against the nineteenth-century dipper, can be 
experienced with corresponding emotions, which in turn can change the course 
of events. The crew of Great American II can draw courage and commitment 
from seeing themselves as engaged in a historic competition or, if daunted by 
Northern Light's performance, may be cowed into failun;. 
The exact words that prompted our interest in the "boat race," taken from a 
news report in Latitude 38, were these: 
As we went co press, Rich Wilson and Bill Biewenga were barely maintaining a 
4.5-day lead over the ghost of the clipper Northtrn Light . .. . 
The word "ghost" points explicitly to the blend. Its effect is to indicate how 
to build connections over three separate spaces: There are people in the tempo-
rally later input (in this case, the one with Great American II) who remember an 
element in the temporally earlier input (in this case, Northern Light in 1853), 
and that element is not in the temporally later input but it has a counterpart in 
the blend (here, the "ghost" ship). As we will see, this use of "ghost" to indicate 
how co build an integration network is quite conventional. It cannot be ex-
plained as just predicating a feature of a single element; it also tells us something 
important about the web of that element's connections. In Chapter 2, we saw a 
similar lexical phenomenon with the word "safe," which also could not be ex-
plained as just predicating a feature of a single element; instead, it told us some-
thing important about the web of connections across spaces in an integration 
network involving a counterfactual scenario of harm. In addition, the word 
"ghost" signals that events involving the "ghost" in the blend are constrained by 
the events involving its ancestor counterpart. In the Regatta example, then, the 
run of the ghost must be' the same as that of its ancestor. It cannot go faster than 
it went in 1853, benefit from 1993 weather, collide with GreatAmerican II, and 
so on. So, again, "ghost" is telling us not about specific features of the events in 
the two spaces but only that those events have a particular cross-space relation-
ship: This kind of ghost, at least, must copy its ancestor counterpart. 
Here, too, nobody is fooled into confusing the blend with reality. There is no 
inference that the sailors actually saw a ghost ship or i~agined one. The con-
struction and operation of the blend are creative, but also conventional in the 
sense that readers know immediately and without conscious effort how to inter-
pret the blend. 
Because blending is neither deterministic nor compositional, there is more 
than one way to construct an acceptable blend, and this is confirmed in Re-
gatta. The preferred reading seems to be that 4.5 days is the difference between 
the time N it took Great American II to reach its current position (point A), 
On th( Wly to Duper Matters 
65 
and the time N + 4.5 it took Northern Light back ,in 1853 to reach point A. 
Under that interpretation, the boats' positions in the initial spaces (J 853, 
1993), as well as in the blend, are their positions (point A for Great American 
II and point B for Northern Light) afrer N days, where N days is the elapsed 
time in the 1993 space at the time of writing. In this reading, the 4.5 days are a 
time in the 1853 space-the time it took Northern Light to get from B to A. 
Another conceivable reading has this reversed, taking the elapsed time in the 
1853 space 'and the 4.5 days in the current 1993 space. Under the latter inter-
pretation, Northern Light got co point B' after N days, Great American II got to 
point A after N days, and it took Great American 114.5 days to get from B' 
to A. In other words, Northern Light in the blend is just reaching the point that 
GreatAmerican II passed 4.5 days ago. 
' 
Still other readings are possible. Suppose Great American II is following a 
course different from its illustrious predecessor's, so that positions on the two 
journeys cannot be directly compared but experts can estimate, given current 
positions, how long it "should" take Great American II to reach Boston. Then, 
, "4.5 days ahead" could mean that, given its current position, Great American II 
should arrive in Boston with an elapsed time of76 days, 8 hours minus 4.5 days 
(i.e., in 71 days, 20 hours). This time, in the blended space of 1853 and the ex-
perts' hypothetical 1993 space, Great American II reaches Boston 4.5 days ahead 
of Northern Light. 
The three readings of "4.5 days" involve integration networks that differ 
minimally in how the "4.5 days" is computed over the inputs and the blend. 
Each network yields a precise quantified evaluation of the truth conditions it 
imposes on the actual world. The blended space is different in each case, and its 
structure accounts for the corresponding difference of truth values in the inter-
pretations. This is a nice point: Far from being fuzzy and fantastic, the blends 
allow an exact specification of truth values. 
,THE BYPASS 
The Buddhist Monk, the Iron Lady, the Debate with Kant, and Regatta all in-
vite us to blend input spaces that are separated in time. In the Buddhist Monk, 
the identical monks in each input are brought in as separate' elements to the 
blend, Now consider a case in which identical elements in the inputs are 
brought into the blend and fused there, as illustrated in Figure 4.2. The adver-
tisement in this figure is meant to persuade readers to help in the fight to raise 
standards in American schools, It shows three doctors in an operating room, 
who seem to be looking in the direction of the person reading the ad. The head-
line is a voice introducing the doctors to the reader, who is also the patient. It 
says, "Joey, Katie and Todd will be performing your bypass." The only odd 
01 

66 
I' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
thing about this scene is that Joey, Katie, and Todd are about seven years old. 
The body of the ad explains that doing anything sophisticated, like practicing 
medicine, requires sophisticated learning, but that America's kids are getting 
dumbed-down curricula. They won't understand chemistry or laser refraction or 
im~unology, so they won't be good doctors, and the public, personified by the 
reader, will be at risk. Specifically, Joey, Katie, and Todd will operate on you, 
and you will probably die. Therefore, you should help get standards raised. 
Joey, Katie, and Todd in one input space are children yet to be educated. In 
the other input space, they are doctors whose formal education lies behind 
them. The cross-space mapping connects child to adult. Both are projected to 
the blend, partially, and fused there. We also project to the blend the frame of 
surgery that comes from the space with the adults. The surgeons in the blend 
are seven-year-olds, a scenario that is naturally terrifying. We want our sur-
geons to be more competent than seven-year-olds, which leads us directly to 
the question of how to turn the children into competent adults. If we do noth-
ing, the ad tells us, these children will grow up in a system that will not teach 
them what they need to learn to be doctors. But we have a choice: We can leap 
in now and provide the education that will make this integration network no 
longer terrifying, since it is the input with the adult doctors that finally counts. 
It is a question of how much distance, measured in terms of education, there 
will be between the blend and the space with the adult doctors. In the blend, 
the appearance of the doctors matches their competence: They have young 
bodies and theY'are incompetent. In the input with the adult doctors, they 
have adult bodies, and the question is, What kind oLcompetence will 
they have? Doing nothing leaves the adult doctors with low competence. Im-
proving education in our schools will give us a situation in which the adult 
doctors have high competence. As the ad says, "If we make changes now, we 
can prevent a lot of pain later on." 
The ad is powerful because it uses blending brilliantly to bring together chil-
dren as they are now with the frames they will inhabit much later on. The reader 
is also projected into the blend, as the patient. This makes a distant situation ur-
gent by bringing it into the immediate present. In the inputs, the lethal conse-
quences of the children's poor education emerge only much later, when you are 
old and need a coronary artery bypass. In the blend, you need a bypass now and 
the operation is JUSt about to be performed. You might be apathetic about what 
will happen to you in twenty years, and you might be apathetic about the educa-
tion of children who are not yours, but it is hard to be apathetic about the in-
competence of doctors who are about to open up your chest. Interestingly, the 
emergent meaning in this blend includes fear and anxiety, which are not neces-
sarily attached to the inputs. 
-" " . 
" " ', 
On the Wly to Duper Matters 
67 
FIGURE 4.2 
THE BYPASS (SOURCE: EDUCATION EXCELLENCE PARTNER -
SHIP WEBSITE, 2001. 

68 
== CHAPTER 4 
ZOOM OUT 
THE WAY WE THINK 
IS KANT CONSCIOUS? 
The Debate with Kant is an elaborate blend that goes unnoticed until the blend-
ing is pointed out. Other blends, like the Buddhist Monk and perhaps the Image 
Club, are intuitively more obvious. Still others, such as "The beach is safe," do 
not feel inruitively like blends 3:t all. 
Questions: 
• Why is there variation in the degree to which blends are intuitively visible 
to consciousness, and does this variation matter? 
• Do blends become visible because more blending is going on? 
Our answers: 
Visibility and complexity are different issues. In the Buddhist Monk case, 
the blend is very visible because the reader is explicitly instructed not only to 
do the blending but also how to do it. In the Debate with Kant, the general de-
bate blend is ready-made and available whenever we compare a present thinker 
to a past thinker. We don't need explicit direction to do the blending, and so 
we don't ordinarily notice it. But once pointed out, the debate frame is very 
salient and makes the blend intuitively accessible. The same holds for "Great 
American II is 4.5 days ahead of Northern Light." This blend goes unnoticed 
until we use a word like "ghost" that is specialized to pick out counterparts in 
three separate spaces in a blending network. "Ghost" cues us both to do blend-
ing and to be aware of the process, whereas "safe," as in "The beach is safe," cues 
us only to do blending, not to be aware of the process. 
GRICE'S ERROR 
In the Debate with Kant, Regatta, the Buddhist Monk, and many other net-
works, the statement that prompts us to construct the blend, interpreted liter-
ally, is false, but it receives an interpretation that is considered to be true. For in-
stance, it is considered to be true that the catamaran is 4.5 days ahead of the 
clipper ship and that Kant disagrees with the modern philosopher. 
Question: 
• Won't a simple application of Grice's Maxim of Quality take us from the 
false meaning of the expression to the true interpretation we give it? 
On ·the ~y to Deeper Matters 
69 
Our answer: 
This q~estion is prompted by the well-known approach to irony, metaphor, 
and other kinds of "figurative" meaning offered by the philosopher Paul Grice. 
He proposed the "cooperative principle," according to which a speaker's behav-
ior is assumed to be helpful, accurate, and relevant. We assume, for example, 
that a speaker obeys the Maxim of Quality: "Do not say what you believe to be 
false." Accordingly, when a speaker says "You are the cream in my coffee." we 
take it that the speaker knows the statement is literally false but intends for us to 
come up with a true interpretation, such as "I love you." Recognizing that the 
speaker knows (and knows that we know) that the statement is false prompts us 
to see that the expression is ironic, or metaphoric, or somehow figurative. and to 
look for an alternative meaning. 
Yet Grice himself would have been the first to say that his proposal was not 
meant to explain how alternative meanings are actually reached. For us. on the 
contrary, this is qte central issue. As we have shown. constructing the blended 
meaning is no simple task. It depends on complex available cognitive capacities. 
But putting the blend together does not require going through an intermediate 
stage of forming and rejecting a literal meaning. In fact, it is hardly plausible 
that. for example, we would form a literal int~pretation in which a ghost of 
Northern Light appears on earth and runs a race with Great American II, judge 
that interpretation to be false, and then cast about for some other meaning. 
Grice's account intends to go only so far, but it is not right even as far as it goes. 
Moreover. what gets called literal meaning is only a plausible default in mini-
mally specified contexts. It is not clear that the notion "literal meaning" plays 
any privileged role in the on-line construction of meaning. 
PRO.JECTION TO THE 
BLEND IS NONTRIVIAL 
Projection to the blend often looks automatic and fairly trivial. A monk is a 
monk, a path is a path. an opinion is an opinion. 
Question: 
• What, if anything, is tricky about projection to the blend? 
Our answer: 
Let's first consider the Debate with Kant. Intuitively, it seems obvious that the 
ideas of the modern philosopher in the blend are the same as the ideas of 
the modern philosopher running the seminar. Inruitively, it seems equally obvi-
ous that the ideas of Kant in the blend are the same as the ideas of the historical 
Kant. But not so fast. The Kant of the blend understands the language and termi-
nology of the modern philosopher, including such notions as "self-developing 
" 

THE WAY WE THINK 
70 
t' 
capacity" and "neuronal group selection," which may not have been concepts 
Kant ever thought o£ He shares the modern philosopher's priorities and concerns 
and contexts. In consequence, the ideas of Kant in the blend cannot be indistin-
guishable from the ideas of the historical Kant, even when copied verbatim from 
one of his treatises. It is a general property of mental-space configurations that 
identity connections link elements across spaces witho.ut implying that they llfe 
identical or have the same features or properties. When someone says, "When I 
was six, I weighed fifty pounds," he prompts us to build an identity connector be-
tween him now and "him" when he was six, despite the manifest and pervasive 
differences. The Debate with Kant is an asymmetric integration network: It's the 
ideas of the modern philosopher that we care about, and they have priority for 
preservation. Since something must give if two people from different centuries 
are to debate, Kant's ideas are adjusted as we run the blend. 
In the Bypass example, there is an identity connector between the doctors in 
the medical input and the doctors in the blend, but they could hardly be more 
unlike. The doctors in the blend have none of what we associate with doctors-
adulthood, training, legal status-except for the garb and equipment and au-
thority and duty to cut you up. In the Debate with Kant, we try to preserve the 
content of philosophical ideas in the obvious way, but in the Bypass, we make a 
different choice for projection, with spectacular results: The kid-doctors are 
having ideas that neither the real kids nor the real doctors would have. They are 
looking expectantly at the reader, who is also the patient; that is, they are look-
ing at one personrwho is both their potential benefactor and their potential ben-
eficiary (or victim). 
AQUINAS, KANT, AND US 
Imagination is often thought of as an optional ability, employed more for color 
than for rigor. 
QUtstions: 
• Isn't blending always parasitic on more basic ways of thinking? 
• Isn't blending always optional? 
Our answtrs: 
The general debate blend is the basic way we have for conceiving of the rela-
tionship between two thinkers in different times. (Aquinas used it as the explicit 
rhetorical form of the Summa Thtologica.) Developmentally, in fact, there has 
been no way to conceive of this relationship except through some sort of blend 
in which the two thinkers can interact. And such blends typically go unnoticed 
precisely because they are conventional. For example, in rhe Zoom Out sections 
of our chapters, we are using a blend in which readers-some of them previous 
On the ~y to Deeper Matters 
71 
thinkers with whom we agree or disagree--can askus questions, and we can an-
swer. Yet this form often goes unnoticed as a blend until we point it out. There 
are many creative variants of the general debate blend. Newspaper editorials of-
ten present a disagreement with an elected official as an implicit debate between 
the official and the writer. The electronic summary of the French national press 
Lt Pttit Bouquet routinely presents opposed editorials as a debate between the 
different writers who wrote their pieces during the night, each totally unaware 
of the other. For example, in summarizing the French diplomatic response to 
the taking of French hostages in Cambodia, Le Petit Bouqutt said: 
Or, rapptlle Jose Fort, "on ne traite jamais avec des tueurs, on les combat, on les 
isole, on les met hors d'etat de nuire, mais c' est tout Ie contraire qui a ete fait lars 
de ces accords". "Non, la France n'a rien a se reprocher, lui r'torque Alain Danjou 
dans Ie Courrier de I'Ouesc. La France a encourage Ie retour d'un regime plus ac-
tentif aux droics de I'homme et la negociation engagee rendaic possible une issue 
heureuse." 
The words in italics refer directly to a debate frame, but Fort and Danjou, in the 
original editorials, were not addressing each other or using words like "Non." 
There are other cases where conventional expressions evoke the debate blend, 
as in "The bean burrito is California's answer to France's Croque Monsieur" and 
"Stag's Leap Chardonnay is California's answer to Corton-Charlemagne." Ex-
pressions like these bring in the idea of a competition between California and 
France, framed as a strange debate in which challenges and responses are food 
and wine. 
SELECTIVE PRO..JECTION 
We have used the phrase "selective projection" to talk about what comes into 
the blend from the inputs. 
Question: 
• "Selective" suggests that someone is carefully selecting something. Is that 
right? 
Our answer: 
When we see the final integration network with all of its connections in 
place, it may look like a tour de force showing the mastery of its creator in select-
ing just the right projections. In looking at the result, we miss much of what 
went into creating it. There is always extensive unconscious work in meaning 
construction, and blending is no different. We may make many parallel at-
tempts to find suitable projections, with only the accepted ones appearing in the 

72 
THE WAY WE THINK 
final network. As we project to a blend, we are also working on the entire net-
work, and we may, for instance, recruit new structure to the inputs precisely to 
make it available for possible projection to the blend. After the fact, it looks as if 
that structure was in the inputs to begin with, and as if building a network is a 
sequence of discrete operations; but that appearance is misleading. Input forma-
tion, projection, completion, and elaboration all go on at the same time, and a 
lot of conceptual scaffolding goes up that we never see in the final result. Brains 
always do a lot of work that gets thrown away. In Chapter 16, we will discuss 
the governing principles by which we unconsciously decide what to keep and 
what to throwaway. 
But blending does not happen on-line from scratch. Cultures work hard to 
develop integration resources that can then be handed on with relative ease. As 
we just saw, the debate blend is a general template widely applicable to specific 
cases. With such templates, the general form of the projections and the comple-
tion are specified in advance and do not have to be invented anew. The creative 
part comes in running the blend for the specific case. In cultural practices, the 
culture may already have run a blend to a great level of specificity for specific in-
puts, so that the entire integration network is available, with all of its projec-
tions and elaborations. This is what we saw with complex numbers, but in such 
cases, it takes the culture centuries to achieve the desired blend. In hindsight, it 
looks as if the right projections were there all along and merely had to be "se-
lected," but the discovery process was actually a painful, unpredictable, and 
messy series of trials and errors, with plenty of lucky and unlucky accidents 
thrown in. The optimality principles that govern individual brains operating 
on-line also apply to communities of brains working together in a distributed 
fashion to come up with suitable shared networks. 
In addition to specific blends and blend templates, cultures offer us methods 
for setting up a blend. The cognitive anthropologist Edwin Hutchins points to 
the method of loci used by many cultures as a way of creating blends. He de-
scribes the method of loci as follows: "In order to remember a long sequence of 
ideas, one associates the ideas, in order, with a'set of landmarks in the physical 
environment in which the items will have to be remembered. The method of 
loci sets up a simple trajectory of attention across a set of features . . . of the en-
vironment." The method of loci invites us to create a-blended space in which 
items to be remembered are objects along a familiar path and, as such, take on 
the inevitable sequence that would be perceived by a traveler along it. This is a 
very old method in Western culture. Cicero discusses it at length for the case 
where the path goes through the speaker's own house. 
Other blends, such as the Buddhist Monk, seem relatively unprepared for in 
the culture and thus highly imaginative, but they do not get picked up as useful 
for other important purposes and so remain curiosities rather than deep insights. 
But history is rife with curiosities that later became culturally important. 
On 'the ~y to Duper MatteI'S 
73 
Although it can be hard to come up with good, projections, once the culture 
has them they are easily learned, precisely because cultures have invented sys-
tems of form, such as language, whose purpose is to prompt for various kinds of 
imaginative work like selective projection. Finding a blend for which the culture 
has no previous recipe can involve considerable amounts of unconscious cogni-
tive exploration, but using the formal prompts provided by culture to recon-
struct such a blend once it has been found is much easier. The imaginative 
Achilles puts his formal armor to good use. 
01 
J 

:t!!-';·· · 
t' 
rf 
•• 
•• Five 
CAUSE AND EFFECT 
Any mathematical argument, however complicated, 
must appear to me as a unique thing. I do not feel that I 
have understood it as long as I do',not succeed in grasp-
ing it in one global idea. 
-Jacques Hadamard 
THERE IS NOTHING MO~E basic in human life than cause and effect. It has 
been a triumph of mathematics, science, ,and engineering to break up unified 
events into causal chains made up of much more elementary events, such that 
, each is the effect of the previous one and the cause of the next. This kind of 
analysis gives us the feeling that we understand the complex event, having con-
sciously reduced it to a set of basic events that are taken as self-evident. This 
type of.explanation lends itself especially well to expression in form approaches 
because we can code the basic events ~d the causal relations symbolically, in 
such a way that manipulation of the formal objects correlates with the changes 
in the complex system they code. 
For example, life and death are the biggest mysteries, and the moment of 
death is dramatic and punctual, but medical science breaks the event into com-
plicated causal chains involving simple c~lIular and metabolic events based on 
heart rates, blood flow, oxygen delivery, neuronal activation, and so on. Simi-
larly, a mathematical truth can seem striking and even mysterious, but the 
method of proof breaks the mystery down into a sequence of logical steps, each 
seemingly simple and obvious, and each leading to the subsequent step until the 
conclusion is reached. This was Aristotle's insight, which also drives modern 
computers. 
GLOBAL INSIGHT 
But as we saw at the end of Chapter 3, this step-by-step understanding is only 
one side of the coin. The breaking down of an event into a set of smaller events, 
75 

I" 
76 
THE WAY WE THINK 
each understood consciously and separately, can paradoxically give us a feeling 
of less understanding, because we feel we have not grasped the essential whole. 
It is a strength of human understanding to be able to do both, and our greatest 
assurance comes when we feel we understand the same event both ways. For a 
mathematician like Jacques Hadamard, understanding a complex mathematical 
result would demand both an intuitive apprehension of the whole and a de-
tailed step-by-step proof. The former is commonly viewed as the essence of all 
creativity. The latter is also valued of course, but often viewed as a way to keep 
intuition in check and publicly share the results of a discovery. 
Evolutionarily, our ancestors have typically been in situations where they 
needed to be able to recognize, in a flash, the potential integrated event: The 
falling tree has to be connected instantly to potential harm and to the right and 
wrong places to be standing when it falls; the roaring tiger needs to be con-
nected-hypothetically and, one hopes, counterfactually-to its killing us. It is 
a commonplace in psychology that higher animals are evolutionarily equipped 
to recognize various facial expressions, postures, gestures, and voice tones as in-
dicative of ensuing behavior. We even say that someone looks or sounds "violent" 
or "criminal" when what we mean is that their appearance makes us think they 
might cause violence or commit a criminal act. In short, it is evolutionarily ad-
vantageous to be able to unite cause and effect in our understanding. It's good 
to see potential effects in a cause, and it's good to see potential causes in an ef-
fect-it's probably a tiger that is behind that roar. We recoil from the scene of 
death, we like the scene of eating. When we recoil from the rattle of the rat-
tlesnake, it is because we are integrating it with its potential effect. When we are 
attracted to luscious fruit, it is because we are integrating it with its potential ef-
fect. To be sure, it is not impossible that some small fraction of this ability was 
genetically assimilated, but higher animals can do such integration very broadly, 
even in novel cultural domains. 
In fact, the canonical case of stimulus-response conditioning-Pavlov's dog, 
who, once he had been presented several times with a ringing bell followed by a 
piece of meat, salivated for the bell alone-shows how common it is to blend 
cause and effect. Evolution set up the part involving salivation for the meat, but 
not salivation for the bell, which is purely learned. The dog looks stupid but is 
in a way quite smart. It takes sophisticated cognitive operations to become con-
ditioned in this way. Compressing cause and effect is, on its own, no sign of stu-
pidity. It would be stupid only if the dog entirely lost the distinction between 
cause and effect and ate the bell. 
It is not trivial to bring cause and effect together. They have to be brought to-
gether in one mental space, in the right way, while being kept distinct in other 
spaces. Appropriate blending of cause and effect is a matter of having your cake 
and eating it too. 
UtUst and Effict 
77 
Pavlov's dog, who has learned to blend the food .with the ringing bell, and the 
fleeing antelope, who has a genetic disposition to blend death and the tiger's roar, 
have their analogues in the highest intellectual realms. Consider again the com-
ment of the great mathematician Jacques Hadamard: "Any mathematical argu-
ment, however complicated, must appear to me as a unique thing. I do not feel 
that I have understood it as long as I do not succeed in grasping it in one global 
idea." Such a global understanding is a matter of blending cause and effect. Each 
step of a proof is the effect of the previous steps. All of these causes and effects can 
be followed as a sequence, but achieving a global understanding requires blending 
them all into one space. This is easily seen in an example known since antiquity: 
the visual apprehension of the Pythagorean theorem. In Figure 5.1, we see one 
square on the left that consists of a smaller square and four identical right tri-
angles. The smaller square is obviously the square on the hypotenuse (h) of the 
triangle. The square on the right consists of the same four identical right triangles 
and now two other squares, which are obviously the squares on the legs (a and b) 
of the triangle. Obviously, the total square on the left and the total square on the 
right have the same area. When we subtract th~ four triangles from each of them, 
we are left with the square on the hypotenuse (Jil.) on the left and the squares on 
the two legs (a2 + hZ) on the right. So they must be equal; that is, Jil. = a2 + hZ. 
This could also be proved algebraically in steps, but most people, in keeping 
with Hadamard's intuition that a feeling of understanding requires a global 
grasp, find the visual representation more compelling. Cause and effect are 
brought together. The cause of this theorem, the reason why it is true, lies ulti-
mately in geometric properties, some of which are accurately conveyed by the 
visual representation. The effect of these properties-the theorem itself-is not 
directly perceptible if all one sees is the right triangle. But in the presence of the 
creative visual representation, we see the theorem as self-evident, which is to say, 
we see the effect directly in the cause. Presenting the effect directly in the cause 
is a matter of finding the right representation, which in itself is highly creative. 
Once found, it can prompt and guide us to corollary creativity and global un-
derstanding. In the Mmo, Socrates prompts a boy innocent of geometry to dis-
cover a theorem merely by asking him a few questions. The boy's discovery is 
supposed to be proof that, since Socrates did not actually assert anything to the 
boy, he could not have learned the knowledge from Socrates and so must al-
ready have known it in some way and have been merely reminded of it by 
Socrates' questioning. But this is not at all what it shows. Rather, it shows that 
someone like Socrates who already has the knowledge can use very efficient rep-
resentations and expressions to prompt and guide someone else to develop it rel-
atively quickly. In this case, the conclusion is the effect and the steps of the de-
duction are the cause. The boy sees the effect as carried in the cause and has 
global insight into their blend. 
J 

78 
THE WAY WE THINK 
t' 
FIGURE 5.1 
VISUAL ApPREHENSION OF THE PYTHAGOREAN THEOREM 
Of course, presentation of the effect in the cause is exactly what blending the 
Buddhist Monk's two journeys provides. The cause is the dynamics of the two 
input journeys; the effect is the existence of a location on the path they occupy 
at the same time of day. In the blend, the location and the encounter are pre-
sented direcriy as part of the causal dynamics of motion. 
. 
Finding proper representations is recognized in cognitive science as crucial 
for problem solving of all types. We are now beginning to see how imaginative 
blending that integrates cause and effect can provide illuminating representa-
tions. These rel?resentations typically take the form of dynamic scenarios that 
one can run. 
PERCEPTION AND SENSATION 
The integration of cause and effect is the central feature of perception. As we 
discussed in Chapter 2, rile perception of a single entity, such as a cup, is an 
imaginative feat still very poorly understood by neurobiologists. The perception 
available to consciousness is the effect of complicated interactions between the 
brain and its environment. Bur we integrate that effect with its causes to create 
emergent meaning: the existence of a cause--namely, the cup-that directly 
presents its effict-namely, its unity, color, shape, weight, and so on. As a conse-
quence, the effect is now in its cause: the color, shape, and weight are now in-
trinsically, primitively, and objectively in "the cup." 
In perception, at the level of consciousness, we usually apprehend only the 
blend of cause and effect. We cannot fail to perform this blend, and we cannot 
see beyond it. Consequently, this blend seems to us to be the most bedrock real-
ity. There are a few ways to make the distinction between cause and effect mini-
mally, and sometimes upsettingly, perceptible. Brain damage, psychoactive 
drugs, and certain neurobiological syndromes can cause breakdown of these 
" 
Ca~t and Effiet 
79 
integrations and consequent bizarre perceptions. But for the most part, when we 
are functioning normally, consciousness cannot see the rest of the blending net-
work. Accordingly, we are likely to think that the perception of a spot in the vi-
sual field is caused by the light coming to our eye from it, but that is false. The 
amount of light reflected to our eye from a black letter in a newspaper headline 
in sunlight is about twice the amount of light coming from the white paper in a 
dimly lit <?ffice, but we still see the letter as black and the paper as white. We are 
likely to think that we see the letter as black because it is invariantly "black," but 
mat perception is an integration of cause and effect. A large spot of uniform illu-
mination, such as a purple disk on a white wall, seems uniformly vivid, bur gan-
glion cells are in fact active for only its border, not its interior, making the vivid-
ness of the interior, no matter how apparently real, a downstream cerebral 
computation. We think the purpleness of the center is directly causing our per-
ception of it as purple, bur our perception of it as purple is an integration of 
cause and effect. Similarly, when two lights flash in succession, provided they are 
the right distance apart and the flashes are timed correcriy, we see, and cannot 
help seeing no matter how hard we try, a beam of light sweep from one to rile 
other. If the first is one color and the second is another, we see the beam switch 
colors at the midpoint, before the beam has reached the second point, even 
though the light from the second does not exist until the second flash. Our per-
ception of the beam, and our feeling that we are watching the beam in real time, 
are both effects; so here, too, we integrate effects and causes, creating an objec-
tive sweeping beam of light that changes color before the second Hash. The ef-
fects seem inherent in the cause. In this case, unusually, by covering up one light 
or the other, we can get evidence that our perception is an integration. 
Stmory projection, a universal feature of our perceptual life; also arises from in-
tegration. A sensation of pain in an ankle is constructed in our central nervous 
system, but we "feel" rile pain, of course, as located exclusively in the ankle. We 
have conceptually integrated part of the cause with the mental effect, to create a 
"painful ankle," so that cause and effect are now located together in our mental 
conception of the ankle. The neurobiological effects that constitute the "pain" are 
distributed throughout the central nervous system, but the integrated cause and 
effect have only the single, undistributed location of "the ankle." Obviously, we 
do cause-effect integration for the sensation of pain because it makes sense: The 
anatomical ankle really does need attention and care. Phantom-limb phenomena 
famously show the same kinds of integration, except that the ankle is actually ab-
sent in such cases. An amputee can feel not only pain in the missing ankle but 
also that he has the ankle as a result. He may reach "absent-mindedly" down to 
rub me ankle that is in fact not there. What has happened is that neurons that 
used to connect to the ankle are still firing, causing the sensation of pain and in-
ducing the usual integration of cause and effect. The pressure for the brain to 
achieve integration of cause and effect is so great that it will use conceptual 

80 
THE WAY WE THINK 
blending to give an emergent structure not only a localized pain but also a phan-
tom body part in which that pain takes place. The amputee cannot control this 
sensation even though it is outrageously opposed to everything he believes. Inte-
gration of sensory cause and effect is in this case badly misleading, but the inte-
grating brain charges ahead unimpeded. 
HUMAN RITUALS 
The integration of cause and effect is often the central motivation of ritual, and 
here we can perceive consciously the difference between cause and effect even as 
we see their integration. When the bride at a wedding reception throws the bou-
quet into a crowd of single women, whoever catches the bride's bouquet is the 
next to be married. Part of the effect--carrying the bridal bouquet-
becomes 
part of the cause-the event of catching. An effect distant in time-namely, the 
next marriage-becomes a feature of the person who has caught the bouquet: 
She is now the next in line. The ritual also creates the cause of the next marriage: 
There is now a woman who has caught the bouquet and is therefore next in line. 
A parallel ritual is the groom's throwing of the garter. And it is often stipulated as 
part of the combined ritual that the single man who caught the garter and the 
single woman who caught the bouquet might be considered, at least for symbolic 
purposes, a possible match. The ritual originally contains two spaces: The first is 
the present wedding, with roles for bride and groom filled by two specific people; 
the second is the unavoidable subsequent wedding, with unfilled roles for bride 
and groom. Catching the bouquet and the garter fills these unfilled roles. It cre-
ates a symbolic fiction representative of that inevitable future wedding. The sin-
gle man and the single woman become counterparts of the future bride and 
groom (themselves, by identity) and, therefore, counterparts of the present bride 
and groom by analogy. In the integration network: these complex mappings 
launch a rich blended space in which the single woman and man take on aspects 
of the present bride and groom. In the blend, causes and effects are brought to-
gether: The single woman and man as causes of the future wedding are the imag-
inary bride and groom as effects, at least for the symbolic purposes of the ritual. 
The bouquet and garter, which cause them to be the future bride and groom, are 
also the symbolic equipment needed for the virtual courtship and wedding. 
Eve Sweetser discusses a very rich public ritual, the Baby's Ascent, in which 
the newborn baby is carried up the stairs of the parents' house. This ritual, 
meant to promote the child's chances of rising in life, gets its meaning by virtue 
of an integration network. In one space, the baby is going to be carried up the 
stairs. In the other space, which is schematic, someone is going to live a life of 
some sort. This schematic space is already structured so that living a life is mov-
ing along a path in some manner, and good fortune is up and misfortune is 
down. The stair ritual has been chosen because it has many elements that can 
Cause and Effict 
81 
map naturally to the schematic motion in the spa<::e of life. In the cross-space 
mapping, the path up the stairs corresponds to the "course" of life, the baby is 
the person who will live the life, the manner of motion up the stairs corresponds . 
to how the person "goes. through" life, and so on. The main parts of the "life 
course" space are projected into the blend, so that an easy ascent of the stairs de-
termines the child's easy rise in life. The goal is of course to climb the stairs 
smoothly all the way to the top. Running the blend is now imbued with deep 
symbolic meaning, because in the blend whatever happens is the baby's future 
life. This has interesting effects: While it would be insignificant in actually car-
rying a baby up the stairs if one stumbled slightly on the third step, this manner 
of motion takes on enormous significance in the blend, and is quite different 
from stumbling on, say, the last step. 
The ritual of the baby and the stairs integrates in a single, very brief, concrete 
event the complicated and extended causal patterns of a human life. In the 
blend, reaching the top of the stairs is the desired effect. a s~ccessful life. But 
reaching the top of the stairs is also the ritual cause of the successful life because 
the ritual is performed to bring about success in life. The blend presents the ef-
fect directly as contained in its cause. This ritual is fairly representative of rituals 
in general, suggesting that such fundamental an,4 elaborate human activities, 
unparalleled in the animal world, make use of the operation of conceptual 
blending as their basic instrument of imaginative invention. 
PERS UAS 10 N AN 0 
REVELATION 
Like complex numbers in mathematics, the ritual of the baby's ascent is an en-
trenched integration network developed by a culture and taught to its young. 
But these cause-effect blends can also be invented and communicated on the fly. 
The state of California, for instance, recently undertook a billboard campaign to 
persuade people to stop smoking. One such display presents tlle stark, virile pro-
file of a cowboy above the words "WARNING: SMOKING CAUSES IMPO-
TENCE." It turns out that his cig;i;ette is drooping. Understanding tllis ad re-
quires an integration network with several input spaces. A Virile Cowboy space 
has the well-known smoking cowboy as presented in cigarette ads. He enjoys 
smoking, and smoking is part of his social independence and sexual authority. A 
Smoking Man space has a schematic man with a continued history of smoking. 
In both of these input spaces, smoking a cigarette symbolizes "being a smoker." 
And an Impotent Man space has a man with an incomplete erection. First, under 
instruction by the ad, we blend tlle Smoking Man space and the Impotent Man 
space to create a blend in which being a smoker causes impotence. In this Impo-
tent Smoker blend, the cigarette is the cause of the unfortunate posture of the 
bodily organ. The Impotent Smoker now becomes an input to a second blend. 
whose other input is the original Virile Cowboy space. In this second network, 
,J 

'j 
l' 
82 
THE WAY WE THINK 
t' 
the Virile Cowboy's cigarette, the Impotent Smoker's cigarette, and the posture of 
the Impotent Smoker's penis all project to the same element, yielding a cigarette 
that droops. The Virile Cowboy and the Impotent Smoker are cross-space coun-
terparts who are fused in the blend, giving an Impotent Smoking Cowboy. In the 
blend, cause and effect have been merged and present each other directly. To rec-
ognize one is to recognize the other. The blend is where the truth resides. It con-
flicts with the implications of the original Virile Cowboy input space, and that is 
the,point: We are to discount the Virile Cowboy space as false and instead see 
things as the blend presents them. 
Ads like this are not thought of as serious in the way that human rituals, 
global mathematical insights, and human perception are. Yet all these human 
activities are using the same basic mental operation, conceptual blending, to 
achieve global insight through effective integration of cause and effect in imagi-
native ways. And in any case, the ad itself is more serious than we might think. 
It is the culmination of inventive work by many people involved in a multimil-
lion-dollar campaign directed against rich and powerful industries. Its quite se-
rious purpose is (0 bring about a major shift in people's social habits and con-
ceptions and thereby eliminate a range of major health problems. The ad is a 
matter of life and death. 
These cause-effect blends are also a matter of spiritual life and death. No 
work of literature is more serious than Dante's Divine Comedy, which offers 
comprehensive instruction in the most fundamental moral issues of human ex-
istence. In the first section, the Inferno, we are given a tour of hell, its geography, 
its principles, and its characters so that we may understand the varieties and na-
ture of sin. One of the most famous of Dante's sinners is Bettran de Born, who, 
when we meet him, is carrying his own head in his hand like a lantern. Dante, 
en route through hell, has a conversation with the head. While living, Bertran 
de Born had created strife between the English king and his son, so his place in 
hell is with the "stirrers-up of strife": 
Perch'io parti' cOSI giunte persone, 
partito porto. il mea cerebro, lasso! 
dal suo principio che in questo troncone. 
Cosl s'osserva in me 10 contrapasso. 
Because I parted people so joined, 
I carry my brain, alas, separated 
from its root, which is in this trunk. 
Thus is to be seen in me the retribution. 
One input space has Bertran de Born as he was in life, the cause of the divi-
sion between the king and his son. The other input space is the schematic frame 
Cauie and Effect 
83 
of someone who divides a physical object into two parts. According (0 a stan-
dard metaphoric connection in which social "division" corresponds metaphori-
cally (0 physical "division," Bertran is the counterpart of the divider, king and 
son are as a unit the counterpart of the single unified physical object, Bertran's 
sinful separating of king and son is the counterpart of dividing the single uni-
fied physical object, and the alienated king and son are the counterparts of the 
twO halves of the divided object. In the blend, Bertran is blended with the di-
vided physical object, thus fusing the cause (Bertran) from one space with the 
counterpart effect (divided physical object) from the other. The punishment fits 
the crime. Bertran's body, a physical object, fits naturally in the blend into the 
schema of physical division as a man who gets decapitated. The imaginative 
connections achieved in the network work together (0 give us in the blend an 
image that integrates cause and effect. This is in general Dante's goal: (0 lead us 
(0 see the consequences of a sin in the sin itself On earth, we may have trouble 
seeing correctly into the nature of our soul and its relation (0 God. In the In-
ferno, the proper inferences are presented directly. 
•• 
•• CHAPTER 5 
ZOOM OUT 
LIVING IN THE BLEND 
As long as our perceptual and sensory systems are working properly, it is almost 
impossible for consciousness to see outside the blend of cause and effect. In 
other cases, such as rituals and ads, it is easier (0 separate cause and effect con-
sciously: Catching a bouquet is different from getting married, going up stairs 
is different from leading a successful life, smoking is different from impotence. 
In activities involving high-level abstract thinking, such as mathematics, we 
need both a step-by-step separation of cause and effect and a global under-
standing in which they are integrated. How thoroughly our conscious appre-
hension is limited to the blend depends on the kind of activity that blending 
serves. In the case of sensation and perception, our conscious experience comes 
entirely from the blend-we "live in the blend," so (0 speak. In other activities, 
conscious apprehension has more leeway to go back and forth, to "live in the 
full integration network." 
Q;eestion: 
• Why would it ever be a good thing to be condemned to live only in the 
blend? 

84 
THE WAY WE THINK 
t' 
OuransWf:r: 
As we discussed at the opening of this chapter, we live in the blend for activi-
ties that are crucial to survival-perception, sensation, arousal, immediate reac-
tion to basic environmental threats. In the face of such threats, global and im-
'mediate insight is the priority, and there is little survival value in checlcing step 
by step how that global insight is achieved. Thus we, evolved to be conscious of 
only the blend. For obvious reasons, we also live in the blend for basic mathe-
,matical and physical reasoning: We see globally and instantly that three apples 
are more than one and that the limb falling from the tree is going to hit us un-
less we jump out of the way. These kinds of global insights are most impressively 
displayed in sports events-for instance, when the centerfielder runs to catch a 
fly ball. In contrast, the development of sciences leads consciousness to live in 
the entire network: Global and creative insights require the blended space. 
Proofs, analysis, and verification and communication of theories require explicit 
unpaclcing of cause and effect. 
It is often desirable to decrease the extent to which consciousness lives in the 
full network. The acquisition of expertise is in many respects the achievement of 
successful integration networks in which living in the blend gives you the de-
sired effects with no conscious attention ro the other spaces. Recall that the Ski-
ing Waiter begins with two quite separate spaces and an instruction to try to 
blend them. Expert performance consists in having acquired the blended pat-
tern in such a way that it is felt consciously as primitive. The child learning let-
ters maintains a forceful distinction between seeing a shape and seeing a letter: 
The first causes the second. But very soon, the child cannot distinguish the 
cause from the effect: She can no longer see the shape without seeing the letter. 
HAVING YOUR CAKE 
AND EATING IT TOO 
We have now seen a wide range of cases in which there is a need to be able to 
maintain simultaneously what look like contradictory representations. In the 
ritual of the baby's ascent, a full life in the blend passes in the space of time 
needed to climb the stairs, even as we remain aware of the huge difference be-
tween a lifespan and an ascent of stairs, as they are represented in the input 
spaces. And in Bertran de Born's case, we grasp the full force of Dante's instruc-
tion in the blend, where Bertran is decapitated, even though in the inputs he 
never loses his head. 
QUf:stion: 
• Isn't holding contradictory representations irrational? 
CaUSf: and Effict 
85 
OuransW(:7: 
No, obviously, since we have now seen many reasons why the multiple repre-
sentations and the blends are efficient at many levels of cognition. Usually, each 
space in a network is internally consistent, even though the spaces themselves 
may contradict each other, as in counterfactuals. In some cases, blending may 
create blends that are intf:rnaLly contradictory, because that internal contradiction 
is significant for the rest of the network. In reductio ad absurdum blends, for ex-
ample, the self-contradiction of the blended space shows that the new assump-
tion, which is in one input, does not have a legitimate place in the mathemacical 
system, which is comprehensively available for activation in the other inpur. 
RITUAL PRO.JECTIONS 
Rituals are performed carefully and accurately, in an atmosphere of seriousness 
and even solemnity. It is not only the core events of a ritual that count-such as 
getting the baby up the stairs. "Minor" aspects of the performance may be crucial, 
Questions: 
• Why are people such sticklers about rituals? 
. ' Why do rituals have to be performed just so? 
. ' If rituals are complex blends, what is the role of the "minor" aspects of the 
performance in such blends? 
Our answers: 
Rituals integrate cause and effect, so that any aspect of the performance can 
be experienced as simultaneously a cause and its effect in bOtll the blend and the 
future life. Running the blend therefore assumes deep significance. Scripting it 
is one thing, running it is quite another, and the performance may contain 
events that are not in the script. This is an example of what we have called emer-
gent structure in blends. An unexpected slight stumbling on the third step, ob-
viously inconsequential in the input space of climbing the stairs, can neverthe-
less cause observers of the ritual to catch their collective breath in apprehension. 
An abnormally quick ascent might be experienced as a successful but too-brief 
life and, therefore, as a bad performance of the ritual. Since lives are rich and so 
are manners of performing ritual acts, the possibilities for projection from the 
ritual to the life are open-ended, and the conservative script of the ritual is 
meant to shut down the possibilities of unintended projections that could mean 
harm for the infant. The ritual is meant to give the best possible life, so any de-
parture from the norm can count as a detriment. Having the integration net-
work does not require belief in its efficacy, but having it is sufficient to activate 

86 
THE WAY WE THINK 
emotions in the blend. Independent of any belief, one does not want the ritual 
to go wrong, because for both believer and nonbeliever its going wrong calls up 
real emotions that are part of an important social situation. 
Although many participants may lack belief in the efficacy of a rilUal, they 
have a shared interest in achieving optimal correspondence between the per-
formance of the ritual and the reality it is meant to, capture. The performance 
can label the participants, and the labels can have social effects over time, mak-
ing the performance ultimately self-fulfilling. The blend, for social reasons, can 
create its own efficacy. For instance, someone who has undergone the ritual of 
being made a knight, including praying on his knees in full armor all night and 
then rising to leap onto his horse, might be expected to behave dutifully, pi-
ously, and courageously, and this expectation can call forth from him duty, 
piety, and courage. The members of the community will also be biased to judge 
even his ambiguous actions as dutiful, pious, and courageous. The label is a 
global insight integrating vast ranges of cause and effect. The knight's good 
qualities cause him to become a knight, but his being a knight causes him to 
have those qualities. 
An extreme case of this integration is voodoo death, where belief in the effi-
cacy of the network is basic for both the community and the victim; indeed, the 
effect of these beliefs is that the social body and the physiological body conspire 
to make the death happen. In the blend, the victim is dead, and so the body 
does what it can to match that blend. 
Some rituals are trials: Elements of the blend are left undecided in the script, 
to be determined by acting out the ritual. Trial by water is a ritual in which guilt 
or innocence is left unscripted. But the ritual of the baby and the stairs is not 
meant to be a trial. The script for the blend includes the desired outcome, and 
the only question is whether the performance will match the script. The script is 
intentionally made easy to perform, so that the performance will match the 
script closely. 
Clearly, then, a ritual blend needs additional specifications in order to count 
as a trial, a prediction of the future, a virtual enactment of what we want to hap-
pen or not happen, a glimpse of another world, or a technique of discovering 
history. Baptizing a baby by immersion is meant to make it eligible for spiritual 
salvation, not to protect it against drowning or to make it good at having deep 
thoughts. But even though rituals are constrained by social purposes, new 
meaning can arise inadvertently, as in the case of the stumbling on the stairs. 
This is a remarkable property of human cognition. An artificial intelligence pro-
gram runs strictly according to its script, but human rituals, which seem highly 
scripted, depend on blends, and emergent meaning is always part of the blend-
ing process. The ritual takes place embedded in the full richness of human life, 
and the principles of emergent meaning can always recruit from that richness. 
Ca'w~ and Effict 
87 
IMPLICIT COUNTERF'ACTUAL S -PACES 
Throughout this chapter, there have been alternative notions hanging in the 
background: The baby will have a good life or a bad life, the cowboy is virile or 
impotent, someone sins and is punished or does not sin and is rewarded. 
Question: 
• Where are these alternative notions in the theory of blending? 
Our answer: 
This is a subtle and deep question. It leads to a large theoretical principle of 
conceptualization-namely, that conceptualization always has counterfactuality 
available and typically uses it as a basic resource. As we discussed earlier, to un-
derstand even so simple a sentence as "There is no milk in the refrigerator" re-
quires constructing a network with counterfactual spaces: The desired space has 
the milk in the refrigerator, the other input space corresponds to the present sit-
uation, and the blend has a counterpart for the milk but the dis analogy between 
the inputs corresponds to the property absent in the blend. The blend is coun-
tetfactual with respect to the desired input. Language offers many expressions 
by which we prompt listeners to construct counterfactuality: 
I do have a car; otherwise, I would ride by bike. 
I ~i11 not listen. 
You'll be gone tomorrow? Too bad/You could have come to my party. 
He missed the ball. 
Far from being impeded by this pervasive feature of incompatibility in concep-
tualization, blending draws some of its power from being able to operate over 
incompatible spaces. In the Smoking Cowboy network, the Impotent Smoker 
space brings with it implicitly a contrasting mental space in which a nonsmoker 
is a stud. To the extent that the Virile Nonsmoker space is activated, it will clash 
with the space of the Virile Smoking Cowboy. And in fact it is strongly acti-
vated, as the approved and desired scenario. 
The Impotent Smoking Cowboy blend has two inputs: the Virile Smoking 
Cowboy and the Impotent Smoker. The first is something to emulate, the second 
something to avoid. Thus they clash on a central element. Blending works effec-
tively over this clash to produce the blended space with the drooping cigarette. In 
that space, tile Cowboy retains all of his superficially attractive facial and sartorial 
features, but his true essence is revealed via the drooping cigarette. This blended 
Cowboy prompts the projection of impotence back to me original Virile Cow-
boy input, thus leading to crucial revision of its original implications. 
.,J 

•• 
•• Six 
VITAL RELATIONS 
AND THEIR COMPRESSIONS 
To see a World in a Grain of Sand 
And Heaven in a Wud Flower, 
Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand 
And Eternity in an hour. 
- William Blake 
i ! 
THIS BOOK STARTED WITH the ambitious claim that we are now entering an 
e in which the key intellectual ~al is ~ t to ~e1ebrate the if!1~gination bUE to _ 
make a science of it. Imagination is at work, sometimes invisibly, in even the 
most mundane construction of meaning, and its fundamental cognitive opera-
tions are the same across radically different phenomena, from the apparently 
most creative to the most commonplace. These operations are characteristic of 
the human species. Though taken for granted by human beings, they are ex-
traordinary by any other standard. 
Conceptual integration is at the heart of imagination. It connects input 
spaces, projects selectively to a blended space, and develops emergent structure 
through composition, completion, and elaboration in the blend. This funda-
'mental cognitive operation has not previously been studied. What would it 
mean to study this operation? Is it enough to recognize the phenomenon and 
describe it broadly? Should this book end here? What is left to do? 
THE ANALOGY WITH CHEMISTRY 
That atoms combine to form molecules by sharing electrons is surely the funda-
mental principle of chemistry. But when we consider the world of molecules fa-
miliar to us- water, salt, citric acid, serotonin, glucose, granite-this world is 
not explained by that principle. Knowing the principle will not provide a cate-
gorization of molecules, or tell you which molecules are possible and which are 
not. It will not predict which forms are more likc;Jy than others, characterize the 
89 

90 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
stability of an individual molecule, or describe how to go about making new 
molecules for medical purposes. The principle is true and basic, but it does not 
solve any particular problem of chemistry. Rather, it opens a way to formulate 
certain problems and think about possible solutions. Over many years, chem-
istry and its later incarnations of organic chemistry and biochemistry developed 
a very careful and elaborate taxonomy of atoms. It studied the principles of their 
distinctions, which atoms would combine with othe·rs and in what proportions, 
and the complicated nature of the chemical bond. 
A science of blending needs to follow the same track. We turn now to the 
study of recognizable types of integration networks, principles and pressures 
that guide the formation of integration networks, constraints and biases in-
volved in making connections, and, further, subprinciples covering such topics 
as emergent meaning in the blend and emergent meaning in the network. 
The marvelous systematic products of chemistry-acids and bases, colors 
from titration, metabolism-are not foretold in the principle that atoms com-
bine to make molecules. And the marvelous systematic products of blending-
«living in the blend" during perception, reasoning through counterfactual 
spaces, the emergence of mathematical concepts like complex numbers, the de-
sign of computer interfaces, the evolution of language forms that prompt for 
specific patterns of blending-are not foretold in the principle that input spaces 
blend to make new spaces with emergent meaning. Just as explaining the mar-
velous systematic products of chemistry requires pursuing the details of what 
" 
happens when atoms combine, so explaining the marvelous systematic products 
of blending requires pursuing the details of what happens when spaces blend. 
We hope to show that the study of blending, like chemistry, has the potential to 
change our view of the world, subsuming many disparate phenomena for which 
we had partial descriptions, connecting them, and branching out to discover 
new phenomena we had not seen. Many phenomena for which we had partial 
descriptions-categorization, mathematical invention, metaphor, analogy, 
grammar, counterfactual thinking, event integration, various kinds of learning 
and artistic creation, global insight integrating vital relations like cause and ef-
fect-are products of the ~ame well-defined imaginative operation. The unity of 
chemical processes is the scientific basis for explaining the diversity of their 
products, the different chemicals, because the diversity flows from the many 
ways in which the processes play out. This diversity is not explained by listing 
surface symptoms: Water is clear, vinegar tastes "acidic," arsenic is toxic, iron 
rusts but gold does not. Although these surface symptoms are crucial to our 
lives and much of the motivation for true chemistry lies in trying to explain 
them, the science of chemistry cannot take them as explanations themselves or 
even as primitives of scientific explanation. Similarly, the products of blending 
are different in crucial ways. Just as in the case of chemistry, the unity of the 
'r 
1', 
Vital Relations and Their Compressions 
91 
operation of blending is the scientific basis for explaining the astounding diver-
sity of its products, because the diversity Rows from the many ways in which the 
basic principles of blending play out. 
THE ANALOGY WITH EVOLUTION 
The simple and general principle of biological evolution is that a system whose 
elements vary and descend with inheritance under selection pressures produces 
great biological variety. Richard Dawkins writes, "Never were so many facts ex-
plained by so few assumptions." But Dawkins is overstating the theory's sim-
plicity. The general principle by itself explains nothing. Explaining any of the 
interesting facts of biological evolution requires a large, detailed, and systematic 
theory about how that general principle plays out in different niches, along 
paths of development, u,nder different boundary conditions. The fascinating 
partS of the inquiry lie in connecting the real world around us to this mysterious 
general process of mutation, descent, and selection. We want to know where 
birds came from, how the panda got its thumb, why large fierce animals are rare, 
why the American pronghorn still runs from the ghosts of its predators. We 
want to know how the evolutionary river Rowed out of Eden. This fascinating 
pursuit of knowledge is a matter of discovering what counts as an element, a 
variance, a descent, an inheritance, or a selection pressure, and developing theo-
ries of how these parts of the evolutionary process interact. 
The theory of conceptual integration faces the same hard challenge. The 
simple and general network model of conceptual integration presented in 
Chapter 3 covers a great deal of ground and, on its face, seems to fit great ranges 
of human thought and language. It is a powerful scheme that covers many con-
ceptual facts. But by itself it explains nothing. 
Explaining the interesting facts of conceptual evolution requires a large, de-
tailed, and systematic investigation of the ways in which the network model 
plays out in different conceptual niches, along paths of conceptual develop-
ment, with different purposes, in different contexts, with different affordances, 
between different people with different hopes, beliefs, and desires. As with evo-
lutionary theory, the fascinating parts of the inquiry lie in connecting the real 
mental world around us to this mysterious general network model. We want to 
know where scientific discoveries come from, how we think about what might 
have been, how we can make sense of the American pronghorn's flight from the 
ghosts of predators past. We want to know why we, alone among all biological 
species, have rich, emotion-laden rituals. We want to know the bends and rurns 
in the conceptual rivers of our mental lives. We want to know the paths imagi-
nation took and explore the most challenging enigma in the universe: the way 
we think! 

92 
THE WAY WE THIN/( 
 
COMPRESSION OF 
VITAL RELATIO NS 
We do not establish mental spaces, connections between them, and blended 
~aces for no reason. We do this becauseTt gives us glob-;;Jinsight,hu~an-scale 
understanding, and new meaning. It makes us both efficient and creative. One 
of the most important aspects of our efficiency, insight, and creativity is the 
compression achieved through blending. In the previous chapter, we saw spectac-
~ar compressions of cause and effect in the Impotent Smoking Cowboy, the 
Baby's Ascent, and Bertran de Born. 
 
 
Certain conceptual relations, such as cause-effect, show up again and again in 
compression under blending. We call these all-important ~Ptual relations 
"vital relations. " 
Let us take another look at the Bypass. We have talked generally about cross-
space links between the inputs. The finer-grained structure of these links is ex-
tremely interesting. It includes links from cause to effect, links through time and 
through space, links through change, and links _through identi~~ 
The input with 
the children in school and the quality of their education is causal for the input 
with doctors of a certain level of competence. This is a Cause-Effect link between 
the inputs. There is an interval of at least a couple of decades between the chil-
dren and the doctors. This is a Time link between the inputs. There is a displace-
ment between the physical space of the schoolroom in one input and the physical 
space of the operating room in the other. This is a Space link, where in this in-
stance we mean physical space. There is a counterpart link between the children 
at one stage of life and the doctors later. This is an Identity link. And, finally, 
there is a transformation of the children into the doctors. This is a Change link. 
Blending plays marvelous and imaginative tricks with these l~ 
Look once 
more at the blended space in the Bypass. Every one of these "outer-space" links 
between the inputs to the conceptual integration network has a compressed 
counterpart in the blend! There is still cause-effect in the blend, but now the 
children must learn all at one shot. There is still a time interval between now and 
the surgery, but it has been compressed from over twenty years into the few min-
utes between the time on the clock and the time of the surgery. In the blend, the 
schoolroom is the operating room. This is space compression. In the blend, 
the children are the doctors. The "outer-space" link of personal Identity running 
over thirty years between people whose appearance, experien;;, and belief are 
very different is compressed into what we call "uniqueness" in the blended space. 
The "outer-space" protracted change of the youngsters into employed adults is 
also compressed in the blend into uniqueness. 
The Bypass example shows very vividly how links between the input mental 
spaces-what we call "outer-space" links-can be comp~ssed into relations 
Vital &/ations and Their Compmsions 
33 
inside the ble!!d-what V[e call "inner-space" r~@tions. ~ause-Effect and Time 
-;;e s~ed down to tighter Cause-Effect and briefer Time ifl..!hllend. Incom--
patible physical spaces _are compressed into the same physical ~pace.)denticr..' 
and Change are compressed into Uniqueness. This example gives us in minia-
ni"re a demonstration of the compression of "outer-space" links into "inner-
space" relations under blending. And it gives us the beginning of a list of "vital 
relations" that show up repeatedly in compression under blending. Cause-
Effect, Time, Space, Identity, Change, and Uniqueness are Vital Relations that 
we see in the Bypass. 
TYPES AND SUBTYPES 
OF VITAL RELATIONS 
Change 
Change is a very general Vital Relation, connecting one element to another and 
suites of elements to other suites. In the Bypass, the children change into adults. 
Conceptually, a sapling and the tree it grows into set up two mental spaces con-
nected by Change. Age changes a person, translation changes a text, "American-
izing" something foreign changes it into something suitable for Americans. Men-
tal spaces are dynamic, so change can be located within an individual mental 
space, as when we have a mental space for a Rash, or pushing an object, or be-
coming hungry or cold, or for a match's being blown out. 
An outer-space Change link is often bundled with an outer-space Identity 
link. In the Bypass, for example, the child who changes into a doctor remains 
the identical person. Change, with or without Identity, can be compressed into 
Uniqueness in the blend. If the devil "changes" Hitler into the Virgin Mary, 
there was no Identity connector between them, but in the blend they are a 
Unique being. There are less obvious but more noticeable cases where Unique-
ness arises in the blend even though there is no Identity relation between partic-
ular elements in the outer-space links. Consider, for example, the presentation 
of the evolution of dinosaurs into birds in Figure 6.2. Here, we see a dinosaur 
chasing a dragonfly, unable to catch it. We also see the dinosaur at a series of lo-
cations along a path. At each location, the dinosaur looks increasingly bird-like. 
The dragonfly is always the same. At the last step, the dinosaur is now a bird 
and the dragonfly is in its beak. 
In the outer-space relations between the stages of the dinosaur evolution, 
there are no Identity relations between particular dinosaurs. Instead, there are 
relations of Cause-Effect (genetic evolution) and Analogy (one dinosaur is anal-
ogous to another) and Disanalogy (generation-to-generation differences in the 
dinosaur phenotype). These outer-space relations are related: The Disanalogy is 
.. 

94 
r 
,; 
. . . . . 
, , , , , , 
Outer Space 
R 
Inner Space 
I 
THE WAY WE THINK 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, , , 
, , 
, , 
, , 
FIGURE 6.1 
GENERAL SCHEME FOR THE COMPRESSION OF AN OUTER -
SPACE RELATION TO AN INNER- SPACE RELATION 
accounted for by the Cause-Effect relation of biological evolution. But in the 
blend, we have a unique dinosaur that has undergone change during its lifetime. 
We are not fooled by this presentation: We know there is no unique dinosaur 
who became a bird. But the blend gives us an efficient compression of change 
into uniqueness at human scale, which allows us to manage the network of evo-
lutionary change from dinosaurs to birds. The connections between the blend 
~nd the inl'uts never disappear. We work not just with the blend but with ~ 
entire integration network. 
Everyday language includes expressions for automatically compressing Ois-
analogy into Change. "My taX bill gets bigger every year" presents a compressed 
blend at human scale in which there is a single thing whose size changes. We au-
romatically decompress Change in the blend into ourer-space Oisanalogy be-
tween quite distinct tax bills. 
FIGURE 6.2 
THE EVOLUTION OF DINOSAURS INTO BIRDS (SOURCE: WEXO, 
1992 . ) 
ldenti 
Identity may be the most basic Vital Relation. As we explained in Chapter 1, 
identity is taken for granted as primitive, but it is a feat of the imagination, 
something the imagination must build or disassemble. We connect the meneal 
spaces that have the baby, the child, the adolescent, and the adult with relations 
of personal identity, despite the manifest differences, and we relate these iden-
tity connections to other vital relations, of Change, TIme, and Cause-Effect. As 
we go along, we will see how blending is a powerful and supple instrumene for 
creating and disintegrating identity. 
In the Buddhist Monk, the monk in one input is "identical" ro the monk in 
the other. This kind of connection seems absolutely straightforward. But identity 
connectors always involve interesting differences: For example, one monk is a 
few days older than the other, just as "Mary" as a baby and "Mary" as a fifry-year-
old CEO and grandmother are linked by an identity connector across temporally 
separate spaces. That connection has nothing to do with objective resemblance, 
or shared visible features. Rather, identity across spaces is a stipulated connec-
~ 
The complexity of identity connections across spaces leads to phenomena 
like refereneial opacity, which have long vexed philosophers oflanguage. Identity 
connectors do not have to be one-to-one across inputs. "If he were twins, he 
would hate himself' prompts for a network in which one person in one input 

96 
THE WAY WE THINK 
,. 
space has two identity counterpartS in the other space. In the blend, the twins are 
counterpartS by identity of the single person in the first input space. The "Mary" 
case is typical of idenrity connection, and a proper name like "Mary" is a way of 
keeping track of corresponding elements across spaces. But identity can also link 
less specific elements-in particular, roles. In understanding "In France, the pres-
ident is elected for a term of seven years, while in the United States he is elected 
for a term of four years," we connect as idenrical the role president in the French 
~pace and the role pwident in the American space, and this is why we can use 
"he" in this way. Just as with "MarY," the identity connection is manu&ctured: 
The two presidential roles are remarkably different in the two countries. Identity 
connection can occur between highly unspecific elements, between a "leader" in 
one space and a "leader" in another, between a cause in one space and a cause 
in another, and so on. We can say, incorreccly of course, "The cause of the fall of 
the Roman Empire was the invasion of the Goths, but for the British Empire, it 
was failure to modernize." 
Time 
Time is a Vital Relation related to memory, change, continuity, simultaneity, 
and nonsimultaneity, as well as to our understanding of causation. The Bud-
dhist Monk, Regatta, and the Bypass all have inputs separated in time, but the 
blends bring those times together. In the Baby's Ascent, a lifetime is compressed 
into less than ,a minute in the blend. Conceptually, New Year's Day in 2000 and 
New Year's Day in 2001 are two mental spaces connected by Time. 
Space 
-------
Space is a Vital Relation much like Time. The Debate with Kant and many 
other blend networks, such as the Mythic Race, studied in Chapter 7, have in-
puts separated in physical space but a blend with a single physical space. Blends 
very frequently compress over Space. 
Cause-Effect 
Cause-Effect is a Vital Relation we have already discussed. A fire in a fireplace is 
connected by Cause-Effect to the cold ashes. It is not enough to see one thing as 
caused by the other; rather, we need the two proper mental spaces, the one with 
the logs burning and the one with the ashes. These are connected by Vital Rela-
tions of Time (one space is later than the other), Space (they are in' the same 
place), Change (the logs become the ashes through the transformation of burn-
ing), and Cause-Effect (the fire causes the change and the existence of the 
ashes). There are subtypes of Cause-Effect. Producer-Produced is one. 
ViIll{Julations and Their Compressions 
97 
Part-Whole 
Useful integrations of Part-Whole Vital Relations are more common than we 
might think. We point to a picture of a face and say "That's Jane Doe," not 
"That's the face ofJane Doe." We have constructed a network mapping the in-
dividual to the picture of what seems to us her most salient part, her face. In tl1e 
blend, the face is projected from one input and the whole person is projected 
from the other. In the blend, face and person are fused: The face is the personal 
identity. The part-whole connection between the face and person in the input 
spaces becomes uniqueness in the blend. The same could be done with finger-
prints, X rays, and, in specialized circumstances, other body parts, as when we 
see an advertisement for a ring and say, seeing only the hands, "That's Jane 
Doe." The Vital Relation between the input spaces is Part-Whole, and it gets 
compre;ed by blending into Uniqueness. A more unusual example, for most of 
our readers, is Voodoo Death. One input space has parts of a person (hair, fin-
gernails, photographs of the face); the other has the person. There are part-
whole connections between the spaces. In the blend, the parts and the whole are 
fused, so that causation for the parts is causation for the whole. For example, 
burning the hair is, in the blend, killing the person. Burning the hair (the cause) 
and dying (the effect) happen simultaneously in the blend. 
Representatio'!., 
One input can have a representation of the other-as in a sketch of a person or 
a picture of a baby. When we think of an input as a representation, we build a 
conceptual integration network. One input corresponds to the thing repre" 
senred; the other, to the element that represents it-as with paint of different 
colors on a canvas. In the blend, the representation link between the thing rep-
resented and the thing representing it is typically compressed into uniqueness. 
We look at the painted canvas and say "Here is Queen Elizabeth. She is dressed 
. as Empress ofIndia." We see the actor on stage and say "Richard II is in prison." 
We look at the marble statue and say "They are just about to kiss." We enter the 
"world of representations" by constructing blended spaces in integration net-
works. We do not lose sight of the inputs. We keep active the mental spaces in 
which the paint is just paint and not the Queen, in which the actor is an Amer-
ican employee in Hollywood and not Richard II, and in which the marble is 
only marble. 
When we look at a picture of the face of Jane and say "This is Jane," we are 
actually using a complicated network with multiple blending and compression, 
Here we have a very basic and automatic blending network in which a person is 
linked to her body, and they are compressed in the blend into a unique element. 
There is also a systematic one-to-one mapping between bodies and faces. The 

98 
THE WAY WE THINK 
neurobiological fact that faces are, through face recognition, the most salient 
part of the body for the purpose of maintaining identity favors another blend in 
which the Part-Whole and Identity connectors between the person and the face 
are compressed in the blend into uniqueness. If you have "seen Jane," "met 
Jane," or "caught a glimpse of Jane," the implication is that you have seen her 
face. It is this blend of person and face that underlies conceptions of "saving 
face," "faceless bureaucrats," and "defacing" something in the sense of altering 
its identity. In addition, we can have a representation link between Jane's face 
and a picture of Jane's face. But since we already have the blend in which Jane's 
face is the same as Jane, the picture of Jane's face is automatically a representa-
tion of Jane herself, and in the new blend, it is Jane. All of this is involved when 
we say, of the picture, "This is Jane." 
R Ie 
.-!!.-
Role is a ubiquitous Vital Relation. Lincoln was president, Elizabeth is queen, 
and the president is the head o/state: Roles have values. Lincoln, in 1863, is a 
value for president; Elizabeth, today, is a value for queen; and president, in the 
United States, is a value for head of state. Within mental spaces, and across 
mental spaces, an element can be linked, as a role, to another element that 
counts as its value. Elements are roles or values not in some absolute sense but 
only relative to other elements. President is a role for the value Lincoln, and a 
value for the role head of state. The canonical opportunities for compressing 
roles are fascinating. In the simplest-looking case, we have a role like Pope in one 
input and a value like Karol Wojtyfa in the other, and a unique element, Pope 
John Paul II, in the blend. Once we have a serial string of such unique elements, 
Pope John XXIII, Pope Paul VI, Pope John Paul, Pope John Paul II, and all their 
precursors, we can make another blend in which there is one unique Pope who 
goes through many cycles and we can say "He was Italian for centuries but in 
1978 he was Polish for the first time." When Pope John Paul, born Albino Lu-
ciani, died a month after Pope Paul VI, born Giovanni Montini, a newspaper 
ran the headline "Pope Dies Again!" 
Analogy 
Analogy depends upon Role-Value compression. Suppose we have one network 
with Pope in one input and Giovanni Montini in the other and Pope Paul VI in 
the blend, and we have another network with the same role, Pope, in one of its 
inputs and Albino Luciani in the other and Pope John Paul in the blend. In this 
case there is an identity connector between the Role input in one network and 
the Role input in the other. We say that Pope John Paul and Pope John VI are anal-
ogous, and what we mean, exactly, is that we have two Role-Value compression 
·ff 
Vital &lations and Thrir Compmsions 
99 
networks that have the same Role input. In other words, when, through blend-
ing, twO different blended spaces have acquired frame structure in common, they 
are linked by the Vital Relation of Analogy. 
Here's another example: §.9nfQrd is a West Coast "analogue" to Harvard. 
Both blending networks have the same American university frame with the role 
prestigious private American research university. One network has the value Stan-
ford in the other input; the other network has a different value, Harvard, in the 
other input. The blends in the two networks are linked by Analogy because of 
the identity of those input roles. 
As we saw in the case of the Pope who dies again, and as we will see again in 
detail in Chapter 7 in our discussion of the Pronghorn, Analogy is routinely and 
conventionally susceptible to compression into Uniqueness and Change. In the 
case of the dinosaur trying to become a bird so it can catch the dragonfly, the 
Analogy and Disanalogy of multiple dinosaurs through evolution is first com-
pressed into Identity and Change between a much smaller number of mental 
spaces, corresponding to the small number of dinosaurs we see on the path 
chasing the dragonfly; the compression of Analogy into Identity makes all these 
dinosaurs identical. With one more step of compression, we now "see" a unique 
dinosaur changing as it chases a unique dragonflY' leven though the cartoon 
merely shows us several animals that look quite different. 
Disanalogy 
Disanalogy is grounded on Analogy. We are not disposed to think of a brick and 
the Atlantic Ocean as disanalogous, but we are disposed to think of the Atlantic 
Ocean and the Pacific Ocean as disanalogous. Disanalogy is coupled to Analogy. 
Psychological experiments show that people are stymied when asked to say what 
is different between two things that are extremely different, but answer immedi-
ately when the two things are already tightly analogous. Disanalogy is often 
compressed into Change. So the disanalogy between the various dinosaurs at 
different stages of evolution corresponds, in the blend, to change in one unique 
dinosaur. Alternatively, if the blend has multiple slots with the same role, the 
disanalogous values can be brought in as separate values for those multiple slots, 
as in the case where the disanalogous boats are brought in as contesting boats in 
the Regatta blend, or the disanalogous Kant and the modern philosopher are 
brought in as debating philosophers in the Debate with Kant. 
Proper. 
Property is a Vital Relation in an obvious way: A blue cup has the property blue. 
A saint has the property holy. A murderer has the property guilty. The most obvi-
ous status of a property is as an inner-space vital relation: In the space of the blue 
of 

100 
THE WAY WE THINK 
cup, the cup is intrinsically blue. Blending often compresses an outer-space vital 
relation of some sort into an inner-space relation of Property in the blend. For 
example, outer-space Cause-Effect links can be compressed into Property rela-
tions in the blend. A warm coat is something that causes you to be warm; it is 
not something that is warm itself, but in the blend, it is has the Property warm. 
Similarity 
Similarity is an inner-space Vital Relation linking elements with shared proper-
ties. Human beings have perceptual mechanisms for perceiving similarity di-
rectly (extremely complex ones, from a neurobiological point of view), as when 
we place two pieces of fabric next to each other and see the similarity in their 
color. This direct perception of similarity is a human-scale scene. More diffuse 
outer-space links in mental space networks can be compressed into Similarity in 
the human-scale blend. For example, outer-space Analogy can be compressed 
into direct Similarity in the blend. 
Category 
Category is a Vital Relation like Property. The most obvious status of a category 
is as an inner-space vital relation: In the space of Northern Lights run in 1853, 
Northern Light is a clipper ship. Blending can compress outer-space Vital Rela-
tions such as Analogy into Category in the blend. For example, what starts out 
as an outer-space analogy between a biological virus and an unwanted destruc-
tive computer program that invisibly comes to reside on your computer is com-
pressed into a Category relation in the blend: In the blend, the computer pro-
gram is a virtu. 
Intentionality 
Intentionality covers a group of vital relations having to do with hope, desire, 
want, fear, belief; memory, and other mental attitudes and dispositions directed 
at content: We fear it will rain, hope we will get home, believe we are in Califor-
nia, remember that we were in France. We interpret each other on the basis of 
the view that people's actions and reactions are intentional in this technical 
. sense. Intentionality is crucial because everything we do and think and feel is 
based on the relations it covers. It makes a difference to us whether the glass 
breaks accidentally or because we meant to break it. When something happens, 
our two major choices for framing the event, as Erving Goffman points out, are 
as a natural and unintentional "happening" or as a scripted "happening" that in-
volves intentionality. We can say that "he died of cancer" or that "cancer took 
him." The second option adds some intentional framing. Religious thought, as 
Vi~/ Relations and Their Compressions 
101 
part of its systematic global insight, frequently adds intentional framing to the 
natural world: Death is not a purely natural event but now something involving 
divine or infernal intentionality. 
Intentionality is often heightened under blending. For example, in Regatta, 
the crew of Great American II is of course aware of the historical space in which 
Northern Light made its run. In the blend, the catamaran crew is competing di-
rectly against Northern Light. The race frame brings with it a tight relation of in-
tentionality, involving not only knowledge of facts but also desire, fear, compe-
tition, and effort. The case is very similar in Debate with Kant. In other cases, 
compression creates Intentionality in the blend. In the Dinosaur Takes Flight 
example, the dinosaurs in the input spaces are not trying to evolve into birds in 
order to eat a dragonfly, but in the blend, the unique dinosaur is. 
Uniqueness 
Uniquene~ obtains automaticall for elements in the blend, and we take it for 
granted.The importance of Uniqueness in a tec nic sense is that many vital 
relations compress into Uniqueness in the blend. 
,j 
The vital relations we will encounter repeatedly are these: 
Change 
Identity 
Time 
Space 
Cause-Effect 
Part-Whole 
Representation 
Role 
Analogy 
Disanalogy 
Property 
Similarity 
Category 
Intentionality 
Uniqueness 
There are canonical patterns of compression over these vital relations that we 
will encounter again and again. Compression can scale Time, Space, Cause-
Effect, and Intentionality. Analogy can be compressed into Identity or Unique-
ness. Cause-Effect can be compressed into Part-Whole. Identity itself is rou-
tinely compressed into Uniqueness. It is a1so.,a fundamental power of the way 

I 
I 
1 
I 
! 
!, 
102 
.. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
we think to compress Representation, Part-Whole, Cause-Effect, Category, and 
Role into Uniqueness. Other compressions will be studied as we progress. 
There are also canonical patterns of proliferation of Vital Relations. Cause-
Effect can be added to Analogy. Intentionality can be added to Cause-Effect. 
Representation can be added to Cause-Effect. Change usually comes with 
Uniqueness or Identity. 
Vital Relations are what we live by, but they are much less static and unitary 
than we imagine. Conceptual integration is continually compressing and de-
compressing them, developing emergent meaning as it goes. Certain basic ele-
ments of cognitive architecture make blending and compression possible; we 
consider these next. 
BASIC STRUCTURES 
AND CONNECTIONS 
We now turn to some fundamental properties of mental spaces and the connec-
tions between them. 
What Is a Space? 
As we have seen, mental spaces are small conceptual pac!lets constructed as we 
think and talk] for purposes of local understanding an~ action. They are very 
partial assemb1'i~s containing elements, structured by fraifies and cognitive mod-
-e1s. As explained in Chapter 2, our hypothesis is that, in terms of processing, el-
ements in mental spaces correspond to activated neuronal assemblies and link-
ing between elements corresponds to some kind of neurobiological binding, 
such as co-activation. 9!l ~ 
view, mental s aces operate in workin memory 
but are built u 
arcly Y
structures avai able from Ion -term mem-
ory:. Mental spaces are interconnected in working memory, can be modifie 
y-
~~ically as thought and discourse unfold, and can be used generally to model 
dynamic mappings in thought and language. 
Spaces have elements and, often, relations between them. When these ele-
ments and relations are organized as a package that we alread)'-kno~ ili~t, we 
say that the mental space is framed and we call that organization a "frame." So, 
for example, a mental space in which Julie purchases coffee at Peet's coffee shop 
has individual elements that are framed by commercial transaction, as well as by 
the subframe-highly important for Julie--=af i!.!!"Iing com;;;; Peet's. 
Spaces are built up from many sources. One of these is the set of conceptual 
domains we already know about (e.g., eating and drinking, buying and seiling, so-
cial conversation in public places). A single mental space can be built up out of 
knowledge from many separate domains. The space ofJulie at Peet's, for example, 
draws on all of the conceptual domains just mentioned. It can be structured by 
Vi~/ lUiatiom and Their Compressiom 
103 
frames other thap commercial transaction, 
c as taking a break from work, going 
to a public place for entertainment, or 
erenee to a d4ily routine. Another source 
for building mental spaces is immedia e experience: You see the person Julie pur-
chasing coffee at Peet's and So build a mental space of Julie at Peet's. Yet another 
source for building mental spaces is what people say to us. "Julie went to Peet's for 
coffee for the first time this morning" invites us to build a new mental space, no 
doubt one that will be elaborated as the conversation continues. In the unfolding 
of a full discourse, a rich array of mental spaces is typically set up with mutual 
connections and shirrs of viewpoint and focus from one space to another. 
Mental spaces are built up dynamically in working memory, but they can 
also become entrenched in long-term memory. For example, frames are 
entrenched mental s aces that we .. can activate all at once. Other kinds of en-
trenche mental spaces are Jesus on the Cross, Horatio at the bridge, and the 
rings of Saturn. An entrenched mental space typically has other mental spaces 
attached to it, in an entrenched way, and they quickly come along with the acti-
vation. Jesus on the Cross evokes the frame of Roman crucifixion, of Jesus the 
baby, of Jesus the son of God, of Mary and the Holy women at the foot of the 
Cross, of styles of painting the crucifixion, of moments of the liturgy that refer 
to it, and many more. 
We will see that entrenchment is a general possibility not just for individual 
mental spaces but for networks of spaces. In particular, integration networks 
built up dynamically can become entrenched and available to be activated all at 
once. Indeed, much of our thinking consists of activating entrenched integra-
tion networks for dealing with present subjects. 
I 
For our present purpose-namely, to characterize sources of variation in net-
works-the most pertinent features of mental spaces are the degree of specificity 
of the elements, the degree to which they are framed, our familiarity with the 
space, the. degree to which it is entrenched, and the degree to which it is tied to 
our expenences. 
Specificity and Familiarity of an Input Space 
Input spaces can be of any variety of specificity. A space that contains only an 
abstract notion of cause, an abstract notion of effect, and their abstract relation 
can be an input space in an integration network. So can a space that is extremely 
specific: the wedding of Allison and Chip in April 2000 in Annapolis. Allison is 
more specific than daughter, which is more specific than woman, which is more 
specific than human being, which is more specific than physical object, and an in-
pur space can be built around any of these levels of specificity. 
Input spaces can differ in the degree to which the space is framed. A space 
with minimal framing might have only two abstract elements and no relation-
ship between them. A space might have two unrelated but named people (Paul 

104 
THE WAY WE THINK 
,. 
and Elizabeth). It might have minimal framing and elements that lack speci-
ficity (this causes that). It might have more developed framing, with elements 
that correspond to roles but have no specific values (the frame of kinship roles 
attached to a person: father, mother, uncle, etc.). It might have rwo people 
(Paul and Elizabeth) framed by a subframe (father-daughter) to give a space 
with Paul and Elizabeth and a father-daughter kinship relationship berween 
them. A frame can itself be more or less specific. Action is a frame, but a very 
unspecific one. Buying co./fie at Peet's is also a frame, an instance of action, but a 
much more specific one. 
An organizing frame for a mental space is one that specifies the nature of the 
relevant activity, events, and participants. An abstract frame like competition is 
not an organizing frame, because it does not specifY a cognitively representable 
type of activity and event structure. Boxing is an organizing frame that specifies 
an activity, its events and sequences, and its participants. An input space does 
not need to have an organizing frame. 
An input space can be more or less familiar to us, more or less entrenched, 
more or less connected to our episodic experiences. Sometimes we can activate a 
frame we know well and use it to organize the entire space. In other cases, we 
may have to work to develop and modifY a frame. To learn a mental space is in 
some cases to learn the frame that organizes it. A mental space can be more or 
less easy to activate. It can also have an interesting conceptual descent of its 
own. Many mental spaces are the products of blending. 
These parameters of difference in the construction of a single mental space 
have consequences for the types of integration nerworks that can arise. 
Topology of a Mental Space 
A mental space consists of elements and relations activated simultaneously as a 
single integrated unit. Often, a mental space will be organized by what we have 
called a conceptual frame. Consider a particular boxing match. It is organized by 
the conceptual frame boxing match. Such a frame often includes scales-
for ex-
ample, how hard someone hits, how quickly the match en'ds, how much money 
the boxers make, how large the audience is, how corrupt the judges are. Such a 
frame often includesgrce-dynamic structure: An arm stops a jab, a fist strikes 
a jaw abruptly, a coa 
restrains a boxer in his corner, a man falls slowly to his 
knees, the floor stops him from dropping farther. Such a frame often includes 
image-schemas: The boxing "ring" is really a square and it is a container, the jab 
fits a particular dynamic image, the rwo boxers are opposed. There is massive in-
terplay among scales, force-dynamic patterns, image-schemas, and vital relations, 
all of which are ubiquitously available in human conceptual Structure and cogni-
tion. Human beings are set up to locate and attribute these structures: When we 
Vi~' &/ations and Thl!ir Compressions 
105 
see or think of a scene, we cannot do so without premium attention to vital rela-
tions, scales, force-dynamics, and image-schemas. 
To pursue our example, consider that the duration of the boxing match de-
pends on the vital relation of Time but also, of course, on a scale of duration. 
We understand the event-that is, we structure the corresponding mental 
space-in terms of Roles such as boxer and umpire, Identity such as the identi-
ties of the boxers, Cause-Effect such as the relationship berween an uppercut and 
a knockout, Change such as the deterioration of a boxer, counterfactual Disanal-
ogy such as "misses," Intentionality such as the goal of hitting, physical Space 
such as the boxing arena, Time such as the interval berween rounds marked by 
the bell, and Uniqueness. 
A mental space may be organized by a specific frame such as boxing and a 
more generic frame such as fighting and a still more generic frame such as com-
petition. Each of these may have its scales, image-schemas, force-dynamic pat-
terns, and vital relations. One can also use a finer topology in a mental space, 
below the level of the organizing frame. The organizing frame boxing match does 
not tell us the shoe sizes of the boxers or how much the boxing gloves weigh or 
whether the boxers are wearing protective head gear, but a finer topology can in-
clude such details. 
Mapping Spaces 
The mapping of spaces is a crucial component of the imaginative construction of 
a nerwork. In retrospect, the mappings often look like obvious matches, as if they 
were given immediately by the spaces themselves. This is an Eliza illusion, as 
Douglas Hofsradter noticed for the case of analogy; it is similar to thinking that 
the perception of a cup is directly caused by the objective existence of the cup, 
without any imaginative construal. The achieved full integration nerwork is the 
imaginative product, which we are disposed, through the Eliza effect, to see as di-
rectly caused by preexisting "objective givens." But constructing both the input 
spaces and the connections berween them is often a highly creative act. 
The different topological properties of individual spaces we just saw give rise 
naturally to different possibilities for matches berween them. On the one hand, 
we can look at what is inside spaces and build correspondences berween one 
space and another based on similar topologies. Thus, for instance, we might 
map a linear scale in one space onto a linear scale in another space, or a source-
path-goal image-schema in one space onto a source-path-goal image-schema in 
another space, or the force-dynamic pattern of Caused Motion in one space 
Onto a force-dynamic pattern of Caused Motion in another space. In all such 
cases, the vital relations of Identity or Analogy apply across spaces to tlle topol-
ogy of scales, image-schemas, and force-dynamic patterns inside mental spaces. 

J06 
THE WAY WE THINK 
On the other hand, we can match mental spaces at the level of their internal 
vital relations. Change of one sort may be mapped onto Change of another SOrt, 
just as Time (or Part-Whole or Cause-Effect) in oile mental space can be 
mapped onto Time (or Part-Whole or Cause-Effect) in another mental space. 
The vital relations of Identity and Analogy can also provide connections be-
tween organizing frames. Consider a situation where the organizing frame of 
one space can be connected by Identity to the organizing frame of another 
space. In that case, the two spaces have many identical roles because they have 
the identical frame containing those roles. The identity of the frames lines up all 
the roles at one shot. For example, there is an Identity mapping between the 
frame of ocean voyage in the space with Northern Light and the frame of ocean 
voyage in the space with Great American II. 
The organizing frames in two spaces are analogous when there is a more ab-
stract frame that applies to both of them. In that case, Analogy connects the or-
ganizing frames of the two spaces. For example, there is an Analogy mapping 
between the frame of a boxing match and the frame of a cockfight. 
An organizing frame in one space can be connected globally to values for its 
roles in another space through a bundle of Role vital relations, as when father 
and daughter in one space are connected to PauL and Elizabeth in the other. 
TOWARD A TYPOLOGY 
OF" NETWORKS 
In the next two chapters, we will investigate types of integration networks that 
arise repeatedly. In particular, we will begin to distinguish them in the way 
chemistry distinguishes molecules and evolutionary biology distinguishes 
species, having laid out an array of the possible topologies an individual space 
can have, along with the possible ways to connect two spaces. These possibilities 
of spaces and connections give us in principle a large number of conceivable 
ways to go about building networks that have input spaces, a generic space, and 
a blended space, and of course more complex networks that have multiple in-
puts or multiple blends. Blueprints for different, theoretically possible kinds of 
integration networks can be drawn up, and in fact we will see that many of these 
theoretical possibilities already exist in the world of human meaning and expres-
sion. The result will be a fairly detailed typology of everyday conceptual integra-
tion networks, the workhorses of the way we think. We will then see that the 
main prototypes in this typology fall along various continua, and that these con-
tinua anchor our intuitive everyday notions about meaning to a unified under-
standing of the unconscious processes at work. Varieties of meaning that on 
their faces seemed unequal-such as categorizations, analogies, counterfactuals, 
metaphors, rituals, scientific notions, mathematical proofs, and grammatical 
constructions-turn out to be avatars of the spirit of blending. 
~~':' 
Vit~/ Relations and Their Compmsions 
•• 
•• CHAPTER 6 
ZOOM OUT 
TRUTHS, ERRORS, 
AND WARNINGS 
107 
Blends systematically scale down relations, compress relations into others, and 
even· create new relations. 
Question: 
• Doesn't all this compression distort our apprehension of reality? 
Our answer: 
In its beginning stages, any science faces crucial obstacles that come from 
folk theories. Folk theories are elaborate and indispensable systems of thought 
in everyday life. They are also typically a starting point for science. Science must 
use the folk theories to get off the ground but must,a1so overcome some of their 
most fundamental principles. In th~ development of chemistry, a folk theory 
holds that earth, air, fire, and water are primitive components of the world. In 
the development of physics, another folk theory holds that, plainly, you have to 
keep p~shing something to keep it moving. But in chemistry as a science, nei-
ther earth nor air nor fire nor water is an element, and in physics as a science, 
the idea that a body in motion tends to stay in motion was a fundamental dis-
covery, one of Newton's laws. 
Compression of vital relations is often essential for a folk theory, but it needs 
to be undone by a science. The popular understanding of evolution has to sur-
mount exactly such an obstacle. The outcome to be explained-the wonderful 
variety of complex biological species-depends crucially on an interval of bil-
lions of years-that is, on a span of time long enough for the mechanisms of 
evolution to be able to bring about this panorama of effects. Human beings 
have no direct experience of any comparable interval of time. But blending al-
lows us, through compression of the vital relation of time, to think of such in-
tervals. The problem for the folk theory is that in the common blend, evolu-
tionary time is blended with "very large" human time. But very large human 
time isn't nearly long enough for variation and selection to bring about the bio-
logical world we see, and human beings know this because it is part of our expe-
rience that we do not see the birth of species. So the time compression, which is 
done in the service of global insight, produces a blend that is not compelling 
and leads many people to reject the theory of evolution. Time compression of-
ten gives us a useful global insight, but in this case it gives us an insight with the 
,/. 

cL 
J08 
THE WAY WE THINK 
,.. 
wrong inferences-namely, that the theory of evolution can't be right because 
there is not enough time for it to have worked the way it is supposed to work. 
The evolution blend compares badly with a different one in which the compli-
cated biological systems we see around us are the products of an exceptionally 
masterful designer and craftsman. Popularizers of evolution such as Richard 
Dawkins and Stephen Jay Gould, in an effort to discredit the God-as-designer 
Blend, spend much of their time trying to guide people to undo or hold in 
abeyance the time-compressed blend that makes evolution look unlikely. It is 
striking that one of the strongest tools in their arsenal of persuasion is a blend in 
which the vast, diverse, distributed events over biological time are compressed 
and unified into a single force: Evolution with a capital E. In this blend, Evolu-
tion is described implicitly as a designer, but one with many strange and alien 
techniques, which it uses repeatedly over billions of years. The differences be-
tween the God-as-designer blend and the Evolution-as-designer blend are all-
important, including differences in processes and differences in time scales, but 
the main conceptual shapes of the blends are very similar. 
THE PERNICIOUSNESS OF' ELIZA 
Compression over vital relations is one of the central engines of human insight 
and understanding. But as we just saw, compression ov~r vital relations creates 
Eliza effects. We compress cause and effect in perception and so think percep-
tion is easy: 'There is a "cup" with various features and it causes us to perceive a 
"cup" with just those features. What else could there be to explain? We saw in 
Chapter 1 that the Eliza effect leads us to compress forms with meanings, and 
the products of the imagination with the processes that produce them, leading 
us to think that meaning and imagination are just a matter of the combinatorics 
of the forms that we can apprehend in consciousness. 
QUl!stion: 
• How can we avoid Eliza's traps? 
Ouramwt:r: 
It is in the nature of the way we think that Eliza effects will recur repeatedly, no 
matter how vigilant we are. The main obstacle to the launching of the scientific 
study of blending is the stultification of the Eliza effect, which persistently hides 
from view the impottant imaginative operations to be explained. Just as we must 
see past our Time-compression blend if we are to respect the operations of evolu-
tion and understand how they could achieve our world of biological diversity, so we 
must see past all the many vital-relation compressions that produce Eliza effects. 
This is not easy, given Eliza's seductiveness. One thinker who is exceptionally 
insightful about how the Eliza effect fools us as we look at computer forms is 
Vital R(/ations and Thtir Comprmions 
109 
Richard Dawkins, who carefully leads us past the many Eliza errors we make 
when we watch computer models of evolutionary processes. Dawkins pioneered 
the approach of modeling computer biomorphs. In this approach, computers 
simulate heredity and random mutation, so we see evolution happening before 
our eyes on the computer screen. The program, called "The Blind Watch-
maker," compresses the time of a generation radically, so that many generations 
can live and die within a half an hour or so. What we see on the screen, the 
"biomorphs," are complicated shapes vaguely reminiscent of beetles, spiders, 
snow crystals, and tiny oak trees. Dawkins is careful to point out that we see 
much more in these shapes than is actually there. For instance, what we in-
escapably see as "legs" are not even remotely analogous to biological legs: They 
are not even functional. They play no unified role as "legs" in the evolution of 
the "biomorph"; that is, they do not make the biomorph more adaptive by be-
ing more stable, stronger, more agile, or any of the other things legs might do. 
As Dawkins points out, the computer model is not a model of natural selection, 
because it contains nothing like selection pressures. 
The biomorph computer program is useful as a way of getting us past the 
misleading Time-compression blend. We see the biomorphs, formed and 
evolved with extremely simple mechanisms, take on an amazing range of fasci-
nating and sophisticated shapes. But it leads us, as Dawkins shows, into another 
Eliza trap, Cause-Effect compression: We see natural variety in the output of the 
computer program, and so imagine that it comes from natural selection in the 
program rather than from our own imaginative construal of what we see. 
Dawkins wants to save us from more than this particular computer program. 
He wants to save us from the Eliza error involved in thinking that a computer 
model can capture "Evolution." Dawkins ponders what such a computer model 
might look like: 
What we ideally should do is simulate a complete physics and a complete ecology, 
with simulated predators, simulated prey, simulated plants and simulated para-
sites .. AlI these model creatures must themselves be capable of evolving. The easi-
est way to avoid having to make ~ificial decisions might be to burst out of the 
computer altogether and build our anificial creatures as three-dimensional robotS, 
chasing each other around a three-dimensional real world. But then it might end 
up cheaper to scrap the computer altogether and look at real animals in (he real 
world, thereby coming back to our staning point! 
What Dawkins is saying here is that natural selection cannot be scaled down, 
and cannot be compressed. A genuine model of evolution cannot compress the 
number of generations or the richness of the world. Evolution depends for its 
very operation on extremely large numbers of generations and all the richness 
of the world that is actually in place during every moment of its unfolding. 

!i 
'II ;i 
'! 
110 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Similarly, we think blending depends for its very operation on extremely large 
numbers of mappings and all the richness of the physical and conceptual 
worlds in place during blending. 
If evolution and blending cannot be modeled computationally, are they 
therefore not amenable to scientific study? With respect to evolution, Dawkins 
draws the opposite conclusion. The abstract idea of evolution is implemented, 
by the natural world. If that idea existed in a Platonic heaven, what better way 
to implement it than to create our universe and watch what happens? Watching 
what happens in the natural world is what Darwin did, and what evolutionary 
biologists still do to this day. It is in Nature's giant laboratory that we can accu-
rately investigate the properties, consequences, and regularities of evolution. In 
principle, a compressed model will not allow us to do this, although it might be 
useful for exploring some of the formal features of the processes involved. Evo-
lutionary biologists can now perform laboratory experiments, where the labora-
tory is a part of Nature that the biologists have colonized and pushed in one di-
rection or another. These experiments are still working directly with the stuff of 
evolutionary biology itself, so they are not like computer models, which are not 
instances of the biological world itself. 
The science of chemistry advances according to the same view and the same 
method: Nature is a giant laboratory for chemistry, and we can investigate the 
properties, consequences, and regularities of chemistry by investigating what ac-
tually happens in the world. The chemistry laboratory in an office building is a 
chosen subset of Nature, in which the chemist looks directly at what Nature 
does, contrived along this or that line. The chemistry experiments, too, belong 
to the real world of chemistry itself, and they are accordingly not like computer 
models of chemical events, which are not instances of chemistry. 
Scientific study of the imagination must follow the same lines. Nature is al-
ready a giant laboratory in which imagination is fully at work. Because blending 
depends crucially, not just incidentally, on the richness of the conceptual world, 
we can investigate its principles only by investigating the meanings that people 
actually do construct in real situations. Nature's giant laboratory of blending 
produces ads in magazines, hyperbolic geometry, grammatical constructions, 
counterfactual arguments, cause-effect compressions, literary allegories, com-
puter interface designs, and many other inventions. Just as Darwin found the 
Galapagos Archipelago a useful real-world laboratory, precisely because it was 
isolated and strange, so we often go to something that looks exotic but is no less 
fully a part of the human world, in order to investigate the principles and pa-
rameters of blending. And just as the evolutionary biologist or the chemist can 
contrive an experiment within nature, so we can do the same, by asking human 
beings to do something, understand something, solve something, and so on, 
and watching what they actually do under those circumstances. 
Vi~1 Relations and Thnr Compmsions 
MODU LARITY, 01 F'F'EREN C E, 
AND UNITY 
111 
We have seen many different kinds of blends-the cultural invention of 
mathematical theories over centuries, the instant-action blend of the skiing 
waiter, counterfactual arguments that arise in discourse, and so on. These 
blends not only look different but also are clearly not identical in the process-
ing they involve. 
QJte~tion: 
• How could anyone be foolish enough and simplistic enough to want to 
lump all of this diversity together? 
Our answer: 
Perhaps the greatest strength of chemistry and evolutionary biology is their 
discovery that behind striking diversity-water and nylon, beetles and ele-
phants-are general principles. These strikingly different products can arise 
through strikingly different processes. On the one hand, burning is a routine 
chemical phenomenon, while on the other hand the creation of nylon in the 
laboratory is a strange event requiring massive cultural effort. On the one hand, 
asexual reproduction happens all the time as a routine evolutionary process, 
while on the other hand cloning is a strange event requiring massive cultural ef-
fort. Some chemical and evolutionary processes happen relatively quickly; oth-
ers, like evolutionary convergence or the deformation of glass under gravity, 
happen relatively slowly. But chemistry and evolutionary biology have shown 
that behind the most diverse products and the most diverse processes there are 
common chemical and evolutionary principles. 
In this book, we examine strikingly different kinds of conceptual products 
that arise often through strikingly different processes. Jokes and mathematical 
inventions look quite different, and we understand one instantly while the other 
may take centuries of conscious effort to achieve, but both depend on the prin-
ciples of conceptual blending. 
This common, basic operation underlies all our examples. It is well recog-
nized in cognitive neuroscience that the human brain is not an undifferentiated 
mass: No one has ever imagined that we can hear with our retina or see with our 
cerebellum. But it is also undisputed that important physiological regularities 
occur throughout the entire central nervous system. Even the retina and the 
cerebellum share those physiological regularities. In the same way, conceptual 
integration is pervasively at work behind the many innovative and imaginative 
capacities of cognitively modern human beings. 
.I 

I 
I I" 
i' 
u 
t' 
I j 
•• 
•• Seven 
COMPRESSIONS 
AND CLASHES 
I see my life go drifting like a river 
From change to change; I have been many things-
A green drop in the surge, a gleam of light 
Upon a sword, a fir-tree on a hill, 
An old slave grinding at a heavy quem, 
A king sitting upon a chair of gold-
And all these things were wonderful and great; 
But now I have grown nothing, knowing all. 
Ah! Druid, DrUid, how great webs of sorrow 
Lay hidden in the small slate-coloured thing! 
.- William Butler Ytatr 
LIFE, VARIOUS AND DIFFUSE, courses· over large expanses of time and space . 
. The human mind constructS intdligible meanings by continually compressing 
over vital rdations . . 
When we see a Persian rug in a store and imagine how it would look in our 
house, we are compressing over two different physical spaces .. We leave out con-
ceptually all of the actual physical space that separates the real rug from our real 
house. When we imagine what answer we would give now to a criticism di-
rected at us several years ago, we are compressing over times. In some cases, a 
larger history includes the two spaces over which we are compressing. In the 
case of shopping for the rug, the history includes our desiring a rug, looking at 
the spot where it might go, making notes, going to the store, and looking at sev-
eral other rugs. We choose two mental spaces in that history for compression. 
When we imagine a present answer to an old criticis~, there is a history in 
which we have been thinking about an idea and dealing with criticisms. We 
choose two temporally separated mental spaces in that history and compress 
over them. 
113 

114 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Blending is a compression tool par excellence. Selective projection from differ-
ent related spaces and integration in the blend provides an exceptionally strong 
process of compression. We have seen blending perform temporal compression 
in the Buddhist Monk example (where two different journeys occurring at dif-
ferent times in history are brought together 'in a blend, thus in effect suppres~ 
ing the time interval that separates them in history) and in Regatta (where two 
ocean voyages distant in time are brought together and the century that sepa-
rates them is obliterated). In the Bypass, the entire span of time separating the 
schoolchildren from the surgical act of incision is scaled down to a few minutes. 
In the Baby's Ascent, the entire lifetime of the baby is scaled down into the time 
it takes to climb the stairs . . 
In Chapter 5, we saw many compressions of cause and effect through blend-
ing. !? the Impotent Smoking Cowboy, the cigarette as_~~J~ fused with tk 
drooping effect. In the Bypass, the long causal chain between the early educa-
tion of children and the competence of adult doctors is compressed down to the 
briefest span. 
We saw blending perform compression over geographical spaces in the De-
bate with Kant, which brings Kant and a modern philosopher into the same 
room. The Debate also achieves sophisticated time compressions, most obvi-
ously in putting people separated by centuries into the same conversational mo-
ment, but also in compressing disparate assertions, scattered throughout Kant's 
life, into the few minutes of the debate. 
Some vital relations bring with them an interval, expanse, or chain that we 
call a "string." Those vital relations are Time, Space, Cause-Effect, Change, 
Part-Whole, and Intentionaligr.Jn the Dinosaur Takes Flight, for example, the 
Time string running across all the dinosaurs is scaled down to a single lifetime. 
Furthermore, only certain moments in that lifetime are activated. This partial 
activation of points on a string we call "syncopation." Similarly, in the Bypass, 
the thirty years or so between elementary school and performing surgery are 
scaled down to a few minutes. The Causal string is also syncopated: Only the 
school learning and final professional competence are activated. The Spatial 
string between your living room and the rug store is obliterated when you imag-
ine what the rug would look like if it were in your living room. In Graduation, 
the long string of Change that a college student undergoes over four years is 
compressed by syncopation: Only certain college events are activated, such as 
attending class, hearing a lecture, and seeing one's fellow classmates. There is 
also a radical scaling of the change the student undergoes during four years, 
down to the simple and quick change of moving the tassel from one side of the 
mortar board to the other. A Part-Whole string can be compressed under blend-
ing: Consider the case where an international airline company represents itself 
by having several ticket agents, obviously of different nationalities, say "Wel-
come" in their different languages one after another. We know that there are 
11 
}~: . 
Compressions and Clashes 
115 
many levels of part-whole containment for the company. The international 
company has national parts; the national parts have many different regional of-
fices; each of those regional offices has many different kinds of employees en-
gaged in different activities, including ticket sales as one part of the operation; 
the group of ticket agents in a regional office has many members. In the blend, 
the entire sequence of part-whole steps that lead from the international com-
pany down to the individual ticket agent becomes one step: There is one whole, 
the international company, and it consists of these parts. A long string ofInten-
tionality can also be compressed. In Regatta, the crew of Great American II can 
know' about Northern Light only because there has been a long string of report-
ing between 1853 and 1993, but in the blend, the crew can observe the clipper 
ship directly. Diffuse transmission of knowledge has been compressed into di-
rect observation. 
I DENTITY, co M PRESS I 0 N, 
AND DECOMPRESSION 
As we said in the opening chapter, identity is one of the mind's three Is. It is not 
only a vital relation but perhaps the primary vital relation, without which the 
others are meaningless. Human mental life is unthinkable without continual 
compression and decompression involving identity. A linguistic system, to be 
useful at all, has to have a wide and powerful array of resources for prompting 
such compressions and decompressions. Identity seems to be a primitive, an un-
analyzable notion, but instead it is an achievement of the imagination. Toger a 
feel for the role of imagination and the importance of blending and compres-
sion in building up identity, consider the following story, which appeared on 
the front page of the science section of the New York Times on Tuesday, Decem-
ber 24, 1996. The 'story, titled "Ghosts of Predators Past," was illustrated by a 
large photograph of a small American pronghorn antelope chased by pen-and-
ink prehistoric cheetahs and long-legged dogs. The American pronghorn is ex-
cessively faster than any of its modern predators. Why would evolution select 
for this costly excessive speed when it brings no additional reproductive benefit? 
The scientists propose that 
the pronghorn runs as fast as it does because it is being chased by ghosts--the 
ghosts of predators past . . .. As researchers begin to look, such ghosts appear to 
be ever more in evidence, with studies of other species showing that even when 
predators have been gone for hundreds of thousands of years. their prey may not 
have forgotten them" (p. CI). 
The conceptual integration network for this passage is exceptionally complex. 
We will focus on some of the compression and dec,pmpression involving identity. 

116 
THE WAY WE THINK 
.. 
In the prehistoric story, the American pronghorn barely outruns nasty preda-
tors such as cheetahs and long-legged dogs. In the modern story, it easily out-
runs all its modern predators. In the blend, the pronghorn is being chased by 
nasty ancient predators, marked as "ghosts" to signal that they have no reference 
in the modern world. We are not confused by this felicitous blend. We do not 
expect to see ghosts chasing a real pronghorn; we do not think any living prong-
horn remembers the prehistoric pr~dators . Instead, we know how to connect 
the blend to the story of the pronghorn: Great speed was adaptive for the ani-
mal's ancestors, who faced nasty predators, and although those predators are 
now extinct, the physiological capacity for speed survives. 
In the blended space of this integration network, there is a single individual 
pronghorn and that pronghorn remembers the nasty predators that once chased 
it. It was conditioned by those chases, and so now, when any predator tries to 
chase it, it runs with its old speed. 
But wait a minute. Who is this pronghorn? Clearly not any individual ani-
mal, but also clearly not just a typical representative of the pronghorns in the 
world today. And it is not a representative of the modern American species, be-
cause no member of that species has seen any of these nasty predators, and so 
none could "remember" them. What gives us a global insight into an evolution-
ary truth is a massive compression of identity over species, individuals, and 
time. 
Clearly, to achieve this blend, we must have as inputs a space in which there 
is a modem pronghorn that runs fast, but not from fast predators, and a space 
in which there is a prehistoric pronghorn that runs fast from fast and nasty 
predators. Notice that the one pronghorn in the blend corresponds to two quite 
different pronghorns in those inputs. But where do these input spaces come 
from? Where do we get "the prehistoric pronghorn" being chased by a cheetah 
and "the modern pronghorn" with no cheetahs around? Neither "the prehistoric 
pronghorn" nor "the modern pronghorn" is an actual individual. Each one is it-
self a compression into uniqueness over an epoch in the history of the species. 
Each one is chosen from an idealized set of "prototypical pronghorns," a set that 
is itself imaginatively constructed by attributing to each "prototypical prong-
horn" the traits that are characteristic of the group of actual pronghorns during 
the relevant epoch. 
Even more compression and decompression are needed to get to the proto-
type, but let us consider only the complex of compressions we have seen so far. 
At the outer limit, we have a decompression into all the individual pronghorns 
existing during either of these two epochs. First, they are compressed into two 
separate groups, each constituting a subcategory-ancient pronghorns versus 
modern pronghorns. Each group is compressed over time and space (and evolu-
tionary cause and effect, for that matter, since each group consists of all the 
pronghorns during the epoch as either ancestors or descendants). We compress 
Compressions and Clashes 
117 
each of these groups by pretending that there is a homogeneous nature, experi-
ence, and behavior for all the members of the group. So now all the members are 
the same in each of the two groups. Then we compress each group through the 
nifty device of picking one member (anyone, since they are all the same). This 
compression turns the two groups into two unique animals-the Ancient Prong-
horn versuS the Modern Pronghorn. Now, at last, after several compressions, we 
have what we need to do the actual noticeable blend, of the procotypical ancient 
pronghorn and the prototypical modern pronghorn, co get one pronghorn in the 
blend who can have today's flight behavior (the same as the ancient flight behav-
ior) and memory of the cheetahs who used to chase it. This memory is an emer-
gent Structure in the blend, since neither the idealized Modern Pronghorn nor 
any acrualliving pronghorn can possibly have such a memory. 
The input spaces are connected by vital relations of time and causality. The 
reason the Modern Pronghorn runs so quickly is that it has inherited that capac-
ity through the generations that connect it back to the Ancient Pronghorn. This 
cross-spatial relation of evolutionary inheritance between the input spaces is 
compressed into structure inside the blended space-namely, the memory of the 
pronghorn. This is the general strategy available in building integration net-
works that we saw in Chapter 6: A vital relation between spaces is compressed 
into structure inside the blend. This very example of the pronghorn illustrates a 
second use of the general strategy. It is easy to think of the Ancient Pronghorn 
as having been conditioned by the nasty predators to run fast, as if it had 
learned that it had better run fast. But of course no learning was involved. The 
reason the Ancient Pronghorn runs so fast is that the pronghorns in the line of 
descent above it were the ones fast enough CO escape the predators. Their slow 
cousins got eaten. This is a story of adaptation that connects many different 
generations of pronghorns, and this connection is a cross-space vital relation of 
change. Change through adaptation across spaces is compressed into change 
through learning for the Ancient Pronghorn. 
When we get to the last compressions we need co do, we have one input with 
the Ancient Pronghorn and another input with the Modern Pronghorn, related 
by inheritance. First, the Category connection between the Ancient Pronghorn 
and the Modern Pronghorn is compressed into an outer-space Identity relation. 
The Ancient Pronghorn and the Modern Pronghorn become identical individu-
als, the Young Pronghorn and the Mature Pronghorn, at separate stages of one 
life. Evolutionary time between the Ancient and Modern Pronghorn has been 
compressed into the period of a lifetime. But now; Intentionality links can be 
added between the two spaces because it is the same individual in the two 
spaces. Therefore, the Modern Pronghorn can "remember" what the Ancient 
Pronghorn once "learned." 
In the final blended space, the Identity and Intentionality links between these 
two pronghorns are compressed into Uniqueness and inner-space Intentionality: 

118 
THE WAY WE THINK 
There is a unique Mindful Pronghorn who remembers what it learned. Why can 
this mature pronghorn run so fast when there is no reason for it? Because it 
learned how when it was young and lived in a bad neighborhood. In other 
words, running fast, which is a property of the Ancient Pronghorn, is projected 
to the blend as a capacity of "the pronghorn," learned when young. The persis-
tence of this capacity in the species is projected to th~ persistence through life of 
something one has learned when young. Just as we do not forget the taskmasters 
at the head of our classes or the bullies in the schoolyard who taught us to fight 
back and be self-reliant, so the mature pronghorn has not forgotten the cheetahs 
who taught it to run fast in its youth. 
The compressions that give us the Mindful Pronghorn can be teased apart 
under analysis. They seem useful and fairly natural, if also perhaps a little su-
pernatural. We have already seen compressions into uniqueness that seem even 
more natural. We compress over a person's lifetime to yield a unique person and 
a label that we call a proper name. We see the compression, but it seems some-
how true to the essence of human life. An even less noticeable compression is 
the kind that gives us the perception of a single "blue cup." In this case, we 
need a neurobiologist to explain even the fact that identity compression-bind-
ing-is going on. But in the other direction from the Mindful Pronghorn, 
there are compressions into uniqueness that seem more supernatural. 
Metempsychosis is a case in point. You might be stunned at the compression 
involved in the discovery that you, Cleopatra, Saint Barbara, Queen Elizabeth 
the First, your great grandmother (the diva), and Sarah Bernhardt are the same 
person, but this explains why you dream in Egyptian, were once hit by light-
ning without harm, like to ride horses, think you can sing the Queen of the 
Night's aria flawlessly, and have a penchant (your friends say) for being histri-
onic. Unlike others, this compression into uniqueness is not primed for by a 
culture that gives us proper names for individual people, patronymics for fam-
ily groups, and common nouns like "pronghorn" and "cup" for referring to the 
corresponding compressions, but no expression or construction for picking out 
the unique element that compresses the series of identical individuals extending 
from Cleopatra to you. Because it is not expressed conventionally within the 
language, it stands out in ways that the more conventional compressions of per-
sonal identity over time or of groups-to-single-individual do not. But that does 
not mean it is not present in our culture. We routinely ~se the conventional 
construction "You must have been So-and-So in a former life" to highlight that 
"you" are doing something that calls for some explanation, which would be sup-
plied by your having been So-and-So, just as the pronghorn's speed calls for 
some explanation, which would be supplied by the pronghorn's memory of fast, 
hostile predators. This identity compression across history is a deep principle of 
life in any culture that supports it-for example, one with a belief system that 
includes reincarnation. 
r,':: 
Cornpmsions and Clashes 
119 
Compressions into uniqueness over history are meant to give us global insight 
into diffuse and various histories-of a species in the case of the pronghorn, of 
an organism in the case of biological identity, and of a human being in the case 
of personal identity. In the epigraph to this chapter, William Butler Yeats de-
scribes the metempsychosis that Fergus the Red Branch King is able to recognize 
once he has opened the "small slate-coloured thing" that the Druid has given 
him. In this case, the compression into identity and thence into uniqueness ex-
tends over the history of a people, their environment, and their culture. 
HOW NETWORKS 00 
COMPRESSION AND 
DECOMPRESSION 
Integration and compression are one side of the coin; disintegration and decom-
pression are the other. The pronghorn blend does not provide the appropriate 
understanding on its own; it must be connected to the rest of the network, in 
which things that are compressed in the blend are decompressed and held sepa-
rate. The same is true of the Buddhist Monk: The blend does not solve the rid-
dle without its connection to the disintegrated input.spaces. By itself, discover-
ing that two monks traveling in opposite directions on the same path meet each 
other provides no insight. It is only when that encounter has projections back to 
the input spaces of the ascent held separate from the descent that we gain global 
insight into the riddle. When we are working with all the decompressions and 
compressions of the full network, the encounter in the blended space automati-
cally connects into an alignment across the input spaces, and it is specifically 
this alignment of the two journeys that is the solution to the riddle. The under-
standing, therefore, is crucially a matter of activating and connecting compres-
sions and decompressions simultaneously in the entire network. 
In principle, a conceptual integration network contains its compressions and 
~ecompressions. Typicatly, in use and processing, only parts of the network are 
available and the rest must be constructed dynamically. In some cases, decom-
pression will be the main avenue of construction, and in other cases, compres-
sion will. But in most cases, in processing or recognition or scientific discovery 
or artistic creation, there will be some of each. 
The multiple possibilities for compression and decompression, for the topol-
ogy of mental spaces, the kinds of connections among them, the kinds of pro-
jection and emergence, and the richness of the world produce a vast array of 
possible kinds of integration network. Amid this diversity, four kinds of integra-
tion network stand out: simplex, mirror, single-scope, and double-scope. The 
network model predicts their existence from theoretical principles, and, indeed, 
when we look at the laboratory of Nature, we find very strong evidence that 
they really exist. 
J 

I: 
;11 
120 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Simplex Networks 
An especially simple kind of integration network is one in which human cul-
tural and biological history has provided an effective frame that applies to cer-
tain kinds of elements as values, and that frame is in one input space and some 
of those kinds of elements are in the other input spac,e. A readily available frame 
of human kinship is the family, which includes roles for father, mother, child, 
and so on. This frame prototypically applies to human beings. Suppose an inte-
gration network has one space containing only this frame, and another space 
containing only two human beings, Paul and Sally. When we conceive of Paul as 
the father of Sally, we have created a blend in which some of the structure of the 
family frame is integrated with the elements Paul and Sally. In the blended 
space, Paul is the father of Sally. This is a simplex network. The cross-space 
mapping between the input spaces is a Frame-to-values connection-that is, an 
organized bundle of role connectors. In this case, the role father connects to the 
value Paul and the role daughter connects to the value Sally. 
In a simplex network, the relevant part of the frame in one input is projected 
with its roles, and the elements are projected from the other input as values of 
those roles within the blend. The blend integrates the frame and the values in 
the simplest way. The frame in one input is compatible with the elements in the 
other: There is no clash between the inputs, such as competing frames or in-
compatible counterpart elements. As a result, a simplex network does not look 
intuitively like a blend at all. But it is a perfectly regular integration network, 
predictable in kind from the theoretical principles of blending. A sentence in 
English that will prompt the construction of this blend is "Paul is the father of 
Sally." We will see later that this grammatical construction, "X is the Y of Z," is 
a general prompt for constructing integration networks of any type. 
But "Paul is the father of Sally" is taken to be the prototype of semantic com-
position, easily expressible in first-order Fregean logic as F(a,b), where F is fa-
ther, a is Paul, and b is Sally. And this is correct! What we have just discovered is 
that Fregean logical forms correspond to the cross-space mappings in simplex 
networks. The blended space in such a network is compositional in the sense 
that the entirety of the relevant information from both inputs is brought into 
the blend. This composition is truth-conditional in the following sense: The 
sentence counts as "true" in a world if the blend fits the current state of that 
"world" (i.e., if Paul is indeed the father of Sally). 
What a surprise to find that this type of complex integration network, the 
simplex network, is nothing but our old friend "framing" as studied in artificial 
intelligence and as captured formally in predicate calculus notation! If it is a 
compositional form, goes the thinking, then it can't be a blend. But on the con-
trary, it is wonderful to discover that first-order logic and blending are not 
i"" 
',? ",' 
Co,,;pmsions and Clashts 
, , 
121 
Generic 
Here, one input contains a frame with roles but 00 values, the other input 
contains unframed elements, and the inputs are matched by a Frame-to-values 
connection. 
FIGURE 7.1 
A SIMPLEX NETWORK 
antagonistic; one is a simple case of the other. It is similarly wonderful to dis-
cover that a point, a line, and a triangle are all special cases of conic section, as 
are a hyperbola, a parabola, a circle, and an ellipse. This brings parsimony to our 
description; but, more important, it captures a deep generalization about the 
phenomena being studied. There is a great variety of conceptual integration net-
works, and this variety accounts for the variety and creativity in the way we 
think. One such network, the simplex network, has special properties: It is for 
the most part compositional and truth-functional. We suggest that it has ideal 
properties for external computation and sequential symbolic manipulation, 
which is why it has been seized upon by form approaches as both tractable and 
basic. These properties explain the success of logic for computational purposes, 
.. 

122 
THE WAY WE THINK 
,. 
while at the same time helping us to see why, despite decades of focused effort, 
it has proven to be impossible to reduce semantics and other important forms of 
thought to symbolic logic. Because the construction of meaning requires many 
kinds of integration networks in addition to simplex networks, a great deal of 
semantics falls outside the realm of symbolic logic. 
On inspection, we find that even in simplex netwo,rks, more is going on than 
the logical approaches recognized. It turns out that one of the conceptual 
streq.gths of a simplex network is its ability to compress roles and establish the 
compression as a single new role in the blend. For example, in the inputs for con-
ceiving that Paul and Sally are related as father and daughter, we have an abstract 
role father in one input and a concrete person Sally in' the other. The simplex 
blend inherits these elements but also creates a new role: father of Sally. Once that 
new role is established, it can be referred to directly, as in "Paul is the father of 
Sally. As such, Paul is responsible for Sally's parking tickets." As we saw in Chap-
ter 6, Role-Value is an essential vital relation. In simplex networks, it connects 
the twO input spaces through Frame-to-values organization. Like other vital rela-
tions, Role-Value can be compressed through blending. This is what happens in 
simplex networks. The connection between father and Paul is an outer-space 
Role-Value connection between the inputs, as is the connection between ego and 
Sally. But under blending, the inner-space father-ego relationship inside one input 
is compressed with the outer-space Role-Value connection between ego and Sally 
to create a single compressed new inner-space role: father of Sally. In the overall 
blend, this role i~,additionally compressed with its unique value, Paul. 
Of course, any value may itself have internal complex semantic structure. 
Take the simplex blend that has, as its first input, the frame ,of sports, which has 
a role for fan and a role for sporting event, and as its other input a specific sport-
ing event, bicycle racing, and a specific person, Sally. In the blend, we can have 
Sally as a fan of bicycle racing. One role connector, from sporting event to bicy-
cle racing, and another, from fan to Sally, are compressed in the blend, along 
with the frame relation of the fan to the sporting event. In this particular case, 
the value bicycle racing itself has frame structure as well as roles such as contest-
ant, umpire, and mechanic. 
In simplex networks there are no dashes between the organizing frames of 
the inputs, because the input with the values (Paul and Sally) has no organizing 
frame that competes with the organizing frame provided by the other input lfa-
ther-ego). Accordingly, these networks perform indispensable role compressions. 
Mirror Networks 
We have seen several mirror networks already-the Buddhist Monk, the Debate 
with Kant, and Regatta. A mirror network is an integration network in which 
all spaces-inputs, generic, and blend-share an organizing frame. As we saw in 
Compressions and Clashes 
123 
Chapter 6, an organizing frame for a mental space is a frame that specifies the 
nature of the relevant activity, events, and participants. An abstract frame like 
competition is not an organizing frame, because it does not specifY a cognitively 
representable type of activity and event structure. 
The input spaces mirror each other in the sense that they have the same or-
ganizing frame. So does the generic space. The blended space also has that 
frame, but o~en, in the blend, the common organizing frame of the network in-
heres in a yet richer frame that only the blend has. For example, in Regatta, the 
shared organizing frame boat sailing along an ocean course inheres in the more 
elaborate frame in the blend of sailboats raCing along an ocean course. In the De-
bate with Kant, the ~hared organizing frame philosopher musing on a problem in-
heres in the more elaborate frame in the blend of philosophers debating about a 
problem. And in the Buddhist Monk, the shared organizing frame man walking 
along a mountain path inheres in the more elaborate frame in the blend of two 
men meeting on a mountain path. 
An organizing frame provides a topology for the space it organizes; that is, it 
provides a set of organizing relations among the elements in the space. When 
twO spaces share the same organizing frame, they share the corresponding topol-
ogy and so can easily be put into correspondence. Establishing a cross-space 
mapping between inputs becomes straightforward. 
While spaces in a mirror network share topology at the level of an organizing 
frame, they may differ at a more specific level. For example, in the boat race net-
work, there are two elements that fit the role boat in the organizing frame and so 
have identical topology at the level of the frame. More specific relations, how-
ever, define finer topologies that ofren differ. For example, in Regatta, one of the 
elements fits the more specific frame nineteenth-century clipper on a fteight run 
and the other fits the more specific frame late-twentieth-century exotic catamaran 
on a speed run. The two specific frames are different, so the topologies at that 
specific level are differen t. 
A mirror network can integrate many different spaces, provided they share 
the same organizing frame. On July 8, 1999, the New York Times reported that 
Hicham el-Guerrouj had broken the world record for the mile, with a time of 
3:43.13. An illustration accompanying the article shows a quarter-mile race-
track with six figures running on it, representing el-Guerrouj in a race against 
the fastest milers from each decade since Roger Bannister broke the 4-minute 
barrier in 1954. EI-Guerrouj is crossing the finish line as Bannister, trailing 
everyone, is still 120 yards back. This illustration prompts us to construct a con-
ceptual packet that blends structure from six separate input mental spaces, each 
with a I-mile race in which the world record is broken by a runner. The blend 
places all six runners on a single racetrack, with a single starting time. 
This blend has all the familiar features of conceptual integration networks. 
There is a cross-space mapping connecting counterparts in each of the six 

124 
THE WAY WE THINK 
spaces: winners, racetrac,ks, finish lines, the I-mile distance, and so on. There is 
a generic space containing the structure and elements taken to apply to all these 
spaces, which constitute the fairly rich organizing frame of running the mile and 
breaking the record. There is selective projection to the blend: From each of the 
six input spaces, we project to the blend the entire frame of running the mile, 
but not, for example, a specific location for the race, or any of the runners ex-
cept the winner. Some counterparts projected to th~ blend are fused, such as the 
racetracks; others, such as the record breakers, are not. And, finally, there is 
emergent dynamic structure in the blend-namely, structure that cannot be 
found in any of the inputs: The blend is a simulation of a mythic race between 
giants of the sport, most of whom never in fact raced against each other. In this 
mythic race, el-Guerrouj "defeats" Bannister by 120 yards. 
This blend is immediately intelligible and persuasive, but its construction is 
remarkably complicated. Projecting to the blend e1-Guerrouj, his location at the 
finish line, and his winning time as he crosses the finish line does not tell us how 
to locate the other runners behind him. The historical records do not indicate 
where they were at time 3:43.13. Their location on the track at that time must be 
calculated separately. In this case, the calculation is made by assuming that each 
runner ran his race at a uniform speed even though this never happens. We 
therefore see that the input mental spaces to the blend, however useful, are fic-
tions that do not quite correspond to the real situations that inspired them. With 
these fictions in place, it is easy to compute the distance each runner has traveled 
at time 3:43.13 as the product of 1 mile and the ratio of el-Guerrouj's winning 
time to the runner's winning time. Subtracting the distance traveled from 1 mile 
yields the distance by which the runner trails el-Guerrouj. Specifically, Bannister, 
whose historic time was 3:59:4, trails el-Guerrouj by [1,760 yards] -
[(3:43.13/3:59.4)(1 ,760 yards)] '" 120 yards, rounding to the nearest yard. 
To see further that there is nothing automatic or inevitable about this mirror 
network, we can compare it to the blend for the history of breaking the distance 
record for a fixed time in bicycling. In the standard one-hour competition in bi-
cycling, the time of the performance is invariant but the distance varies. One 
breaks the record by going farther in one hour than anyone else has ever gone in 
one hour. For this blend, we can project both the time and the distance for each 
previous record-holder without having to perform any calculation. We simply 
place all the record-holders on the same track, each at the distance he achieved 
after one hour. The blend for the bicyclists looks just like the blend for the run-
ners, but in the latter case some aggressive manipulations were required to 
achieve it. In the bicycle competition, the contestants in the inputs and in the 
blend do in fact stop after an identical time has elapsed-namely, one hour. In 
the runners' race, the contestants in the blend effectively stop competing to win 
the moment the winner crosses the finish line, even though their counterparts 
,., 
'r, 
Compmsions and Clashes 
125 
in the input spaces continue to compete, finish the mile, and break the world 
record that holds in each input space. 
C!I1shes. 
In a mirror network, there are no clashes between the inputs at the 
level of organizing frame, because the frames are the same. But there will be 
clashes at more specific levels below the frame level. In Regatta, the centuries and 
the kinds of boats in the two spaces clash. In the Buddhist Monk, the directions 
and times of travel in the two spaces clash. In the Debate with Kant, the input 
spaces clash with respect to the languages used by the philosophers, the centuries 
in which they live, the mode of expression, and so on. These specific-level 
clashes can be resolved in two ways. In the first way, only one of the clashing ele-
ments is projected to the blend. For example, in the Debate with Kant, the 
frame-element language is the same in both spaces, and is projected from both 
spaces to be fused in the blend, but at the more specific level, there is a clash be-
tween its values in the two inputs-German and English, respectively-and 
only English is projected to the blend. In the second way of resolving specific-
level clashes, the clashing elements are brought into the blend as separate enti-
ties. For example, in Regatta, the frame-element boat is the same in both spaces, 
and is projected from both spaces, but they are not fused in the blend. The more 
specific clashing elements clipper ship and catamaran are both brought into the 
blend, to yield two boats of different types. At the frame level in the blend, this 
projection of two boats satisfies the frame ocean race emergent in the blended 
space. But at the specific level in the blend, the result is an odd kind of race, be-
cause clippers don't usually race catamarans. The oddity has no effect on the 
purpose of constructing the mirror network-namely, to determine the relative 
speeds and positions of the boats-but it makes plain that this race is a concep-
tual blend with two input spaces. 
Compressions. 
Mirror networks perform compressions over the vital rela-
tions of Time, Space, Identity, Role, Cause-Effect, Change, Intentionality, and 
Representation. Indeed, they make it exceptionally easy and straightforward to 
find the right candidates for compression and to perform acceptable compres-
sions, because there are no clashes between the frames in the various spaces. Any 
footrace occurs on a single track located in a single location, so making a blend 
of footraces that has only a single track is easy. 
The Buddhist Monk, Regatta, the Mythic Race, the Pronghorn, and the De-
bate with Kant all employ time compressions in which two spaces separated by 
the vital relation Time are made simultaneous in the blend. This simultaneity fits 
the frame used for the blend: Encounters require two people approaching each 
other at the same time, boat and foot races require competitors to perform simul-
taneously, predation requires the predators to be chasing as the prey is fleeing, 
and debating requires interaction. However, simultaneity is not the only possibil-
ity. Other patterns of selective projection of times to the blend can produce other 
J 

126 
THE WAY WE THINK 
,. 
results, such as time overlap, immediate succession, or separation by a short in-
terval. As we have already seen, chunks of time can be syncopated: In the Bud-
dhist Monk, fusing the times of his ascent and descent results in syncopation of 
the time between his arriving at the summit and descending from it. 
The Buddhist Monk, Regatta, and the Mythic Race do not involve time scal-
ing, since they preserve time magnitudes. Yet mi~ror networks can use time 
scaling, which preserves the topology of a temporal interval but changes its 
length. In the Pronghorn, which is a mirror network since all spaces have the 
frame in which a pronghorn is running from prey, the very long outer-space tem-
poral expanse of evolutionary time is scaled down in the blend to the lifetime of 
the pronghorn. 
Compression of Space is also easy in mirror networks. For example, spatial 
distances between the various inputs to the Mythic Race are compressed to zero 
in the blend, where all the runners are on a single track in a single location. 
All the other vital relations-Identity, Change, Cause-Effect, and so on- are 
equally compressible into mirror networks. The Pronghorn is a marvel of vital-
relation compressions. The most obvious is compression into Identity and 
Uniqueness, which turns, by stages, every pronghorn that ever existed into a 
single pronghorn in the blend, bent on survival and sprinting for its life. The 
long outer-space chain of many small evolutionary Changes of adaptation and 
inheritance is compressed into the blend as Intentional Change in the mind of a 
lone pronghorn, whose life has been a struggle to avoid death through feats of 
learning and memory. And the long outer-space chain of causes and effects 
across the entire phylogenetic descent of the pronghorns is compressed in the 
blend into being chased and learning very quickly to run fast and escape. 
Conceptual integration in mirror networks routinely performs compressions 
of vital relations, both inner-space and outer-space, keyed by the shared frame 
of the network. The shared frame automatically provides linked roles. 
Single-Scope Networks 
A single-scope network has two input spaces with different cirganizing frames, 
one of which is projected to organize the blend. Its defining property is that the 
organizing frame of the blend is an extension of the organizing frame of one of 
the inputs but not the other. 
The scenario of two men boxing gives us a vibrant, compact frame to use in 
compressing our understanding of two CEOs in business competition. We say 
that one CEO landed a blow but the other one recovered, one of them tripped 
and the other took advantage, one of them knocked the other out cold. This 
construal of the situation builds up a conceptual integration network. There is a 
cross-space mapping between the boxing input and the business input that maps, 
?~ ' 
Compressions and Clashes 
127 
. for example, each boxer to a CEO, a punch to an effort by one of the CEOs, a 
blow to an effective action, and staying in the fight to continuing the business 
competition (see Figure 7.2). In shon, the projection to the blend in a simple 
single-scope network is highly asymmetric: One of the inputs but not the other 
supplies the organizing frame (boxing) and, therefore, frame-topology. (For ex-
ample, there are just two agents, in close spatial and temporal proximity, engaged 
in physical adversarial action.) 
Single-scope networks are the prototype of highly conventional source-target 
metaphors. The input that provides the organizing frame to the blend, the 
framing input, is often called the "source." The input that is the focus of under-
standing, the focus input, is often called the "target." 
In one type of single-scope network, the inputs are not contained within a 
larger history. For example, in the Boxing CEOs example, we do not think that 
the boxers and the CEOs belong to one unified narrative. There are no histori-
cal connections between the input of boxing and the input of business. The 
CEOs are not former sparring panners, their businesses are not subsidiaries of 
the boxing business, and what they sell is not some transformation of boxing 
gloves. More generally, there are no vital relations of Time, Space, Change, 
Cause-Effect, and Intentionality that connect the input spaces directly, and no 
outer-space Identity connections between organizing frame roles or elements 
below that level of topology in the two different inputs. So, the individual boxer 
of the framing space is nor directly identical to the individual CEO of the focus 
input space, and the role boxer in the framing space is not directly identical to 
the role CEO in the focus input space. 
In a second type of single-scope network, however, the inputs are contained 
within a larger history. Outer-space vital relations can connect their organizing 
frames and elements below that level. The relevance of one input space to the 
other cannot be denied. Suppose a man tells his older sister about his present 
troubles, and she responds, 
"Do you remember how when you were little you were so intent upon hiding 
your treasures that you hid them so well even you could not find them again? Do 
you remember that you hid your new penny when you were four and we never 
found it? That's just what you have done with Angela. You've been talking for two 
hours about all your troubles, but what they boil down to is that you have hidden 
away your love for her so deeply that you can't see it. Once again, you've hidden 
your penny, even from yoursdf." 
This is an example of a single-scope network. The frame that is exploited in the 
blend for purpo~es of understanding is the frame of one input (hiding the cher-
ished penny too well), and the point of the blend is to cast light on the other 

128 
Competition 
between 
competitors 
Boxing CEOs 
FIGURE 7 . 2 
SINGLE-SPACE MAPPING 
THE WAY WE THINK 
input (the adult brother's troubled life). Hiding the Penny is the framing input 
and the Troubled Life is the focus input. When there is such a vital relation be-
tween the two inputs, the effect of the network goes far beyond analogy. It adds 
to the temporal connection in the overall history a comprehensive pattern of 
causality. What has happened once will happen again in another guise. "Hiding 
the Penny" reveals a deeper principle of psychological character and action that is 
responsible for the later input as well. This single-scope network reveals some-
Compressions and Clashes 
129 
thing of the brother's deeper psychological essence. -Indeed, such Vital-Relation 
single-scopes have many purposes. Suppose the sister says, "Watch out! Do you 
remember when you hid your penny .. . ? Well, you are on the verge of doing 
just that with Angela. Don't do it to yourself again! This time it's more than a 
penny you are going to lose!" In this case, she would be alerting her brother to 
the network and its potential, in the hope that he will take action now to stop 
that network from "coming true." Alternatively, it might happen that the brother 
himself, coming home to find Angela gone, has a sudden revelation, a sense of 
deja vu, in which the image of himself as a four-year-old tearfully tearing up the 
house looking for the penny comes suddenly to his mind. The folk psychology 
behind this kind of network is either It Is Written ("A leopard can't change its 
spots") or Early Habits Persist ("As the twig is bent, so grows the tree"). In the It 
Is Written version, the person possesses an essence or abiding character that 
causes "the same thing" to happen repeatedly, so that the first such event be-
comes a warning signal for the later cases; in the Early Habits Persist version, the 
person early in life establishes a pattern that persists. Accordingly, in the It Is 
Written version, the causality in the network is flowing from the abiding per-
sonal character in the generic space to the two infuts; in the Early Habits ver-
sion, the causality is flowing from the earlier framIng input. 
Single-scope networks offer a highly visible type of conceptual clash, since the 
inputs have different frames. They are cases where the clash is dealt with by giv-
ing the overall organizational power of the network ro only one of the input 
spaces, the framing input. In the typical case, the framing space has a prebuilt su-
perb compression that is exploited to induce a compression for the focus input. 
Naturally, then, single-scope networks give us the feeling that "one thing" is giv-
ing us insight into "another thing," with a strong asymmetry between them. This 
feeling of insight has three causes: The blend brings to bear inferences that are 
available from the framing input; it brings to bear useful compressions that al-
ready exist in the framing input; and it evokes emotions, seemingly anchored in 
the trustworthy framing input, that feel to us as if they are all-clarifying. As we 
have seen for blends in general, strong emotions emergent in the blend can in-
duce the feeling of global insight, because the highly compressed blend remains 
actively connected to the entire network. 
. 
In prototypical single-scope networks, the blend does not disrupt the frame 
of the framing input. One feels that what is experienced in the blend was there 
all along and, therefore, that the insight captured is indeed some reliable discov-
ery about the focus input. 
The most obvious kind of compression in single-scope networks is the use 
of preexisting compressions from the framing input. A principal job of such 
networks is to project diffuse structure from the focus input into the already-
compressed inner-space relations that have been projected to the blend from 
the framing input (see Figure 7.3). 
J 

130 
Inner-Space 
Relation 
(Ii 
FIGURE 7.3 
t' 
.. 
.. 
'. 
, , , , , , , , , , 
" 
, , , , , , , , , 
Inner-Space 
Relation 
~ 
.. -.:.. 
.:~ .;;
, 
THE WAY WE THINK 
• 
• • 
• 
• • 
• • . 
• • • 
• • 
• • 
• • 
• 
• 
PROJECTION OF" INNER-SPACE RELATION 
In the boxing input, the identities, events, time, space, role-value relations, 
and causality individually have a tight compression, and the package of relations 
that frames them is also compresse~. Two individual people who are boxers 
throw punches in a boxing ring for a half-hour or so, and the ~Iows cause one of 
them to fall down. In the focus input, the identities, events, time, space, role-
value relations, and causality are diffuse. The CEOs are part of a large organiza-
tion of agents, and the businesses they head have complicated relations to other 
institutions and to external financial events. The relevant actions may occur 
over long periods of time, involve many agents, and take place in many physical 
locations. Despite these manifest clashes between the framing input and the fo-
cus input, the topologies of the two spaces are preserved in the cross-space map-
ping: Cause-effect relations, agent-action relations, and temporal ordering are 
aligned in the two spaces. For this crucial reason, projecting the business struc-
ture as values into the boxing frame (e.g., each CEO is a boxer) leaves that 
;i.-' 
Compressions and Clashes 
131. 
frame undamaged. This kind of projection is an imaginative achievement. Fre-
quently, considerable work is required to find a way to project the focus input 
that leaves the frame undistorted in the blend. 
"He digested the book" elicits a single-scope network that achieves a superb 
integration of events. On the one hand, the network blends conceptual counter-
parts in the two spaces--eating and reading. On the other, it helps us to inte-
grate some distinct event sequences from the space of reading. In the framing 
inpl.\t, digesting already constitutes an integration of several different events. 
But its counterpart in the focus input, if considered independent of the net-
work, is a series of discrete events-taking up the book, reading it, parsing its 
individual sentences, finishing it, thinking about it, and understanding it as a 
whole. The integrity in the framing input is projected to the blend so that this 
array of events in the focus input acquires, in the blend, a conceptual integra-
tion of its events into a unit . 
Double-Scope Networks 
A double-scope network has inputs with different (and often clashing) organiz-
ing frames as well as an organizing frame for the blend that includes parts of 
each of those frames and has emergent structure of its own. In such networks, 
both organizing frames make central contributions to the blend, and their sharp 
differences offer the possibility of rich clashes. Far from blocking the construc-
tion of the network, such clashes offer challenges to the imagination; indeed, 
the re~ulting blends can be highly creative. 
The Computer Desktop interface is a double-scope Jletwork. The two princi-
pal inputs have different organizing frames: the frame of office work with fold-
ers, files, and trashcans, on the one hand, and the frame of traditional computer 
commands, on the other. The frame in the blend draws from the frame of office 
work-throwing trash away, opening files-as well as from the frame of tradi-
tional computer commands-"find," "replace," "save," "print." Part of the 
imaginative achievement here is finding frames that, however different, can 
both contribute to the blended activity in ways that are compatible. "Throwing 
things in the trash" and "printing" do not clash, although they do nor belong to 
the same frame. 
Double-scope networks can also operate on strong clashes between the in-
puts. Consider the familiar idiomatic metaphor "You are digging your own 
grave." It typically serves as a warning that (1) you are doing bad things that will 
cause you to have a very bad experience, and (2) you are unaware of this causal 
relation. A conservative parent who keeps his money in his mattress may express 
disapproval of an adult child's investing in the stock market by saying "You are 
digging your own grave." 

132 
THE WAY WE THINK 
At first glance, this conventional expression looks like a straightforward single-
scope network, where the organizing frame of graves, corpses, and burial is pro-
jected to organize the blend-a blend in which someone unwittingly does the 
wrong things, and ultimately fails. Failing is being dead and buried; bad moves 
that precede and cause failure are digging one's own grave. It is foolish to bring 
about one's own burial or one's own Failure. And itis foolish not to be aware of 
one's own actions, especially those that may lead to one's very extinction. 
A closer look, however, reveals that this cannot be a single-scope network, be-
cause in a single-scope network the cross-input mapping aligns the topologies of 
the inputs and that topology appears in the blend. But in Digging Your Own 
Grave, the topologies of the inputs clash on causality, intentionality, participant 
roles, temporal sequence, identity, and internal event structure. In all these 
cases, the blend takes its topology from the "unwitting failure" input, not from 
the "digging the grave" input! The causal structure in the blend comes from the 
"unwitting failure" input, not the "digging the grave" input. Foolish actions 
cause failure, but grave digging does not cause death. It is typically someone's 
dying that prompts others to dig a grave. And if the grave is atypically prepared 
in advance, to secure a plot, to keep workers busy, or because the person is ex-
pected to die, there is still not the slightest causal conneclion between the dig-
ging and the dying. Even in the exceptional scenario where a prisoner is coerced 
into digging his own grave, it is not the digging that causes the death. The pris-
oner will be killed anyway. 
The intentional structure comes from the "unwitting failure" input, not the 
"digging the grave" input. Sextons do not dig graves in their sleep, unaware of 
what they are doing. In contrast, figurative digging of one's own grave is con-
ceived as unintentional misconstrual of action. 
The frame structure of agents, patients, and sequence of events likewise 
comes from the "unwitting failure" input. Our background knowledge is that a 
"patient" dies, and then the "agent" digs the grave and buries the "patient." But 
in the blend, those actors are fused and the ordering of events is reversed. The 
"patient" does the digging and, if the grave is deep enough, has no other option 
than to die and occupy it. Even in the unusual real-life case where one might dig 
one's own grave in advance, there would be no necessary temporal connection 
between finishing the digging and perishing. 
, 
The internal event structure comes from the "unwitting failure" input. In 
that input, it is certainly true that the more trouble you are in, the more you risk 
failure. Amount of trouble is mapped onto depth of grave. But again, in the 
"digging the grave" input, there is no correlation between the depth of some-
one's grave and that person's chances of dying. 
The blend in digging one's own grave inherits the concrete structure of graves, 
digging, and burial, from the "digging the grave" input. But it inherits causal, 
Compmsions and Clashes 
133 
intentional, and internal event structure from the "unwitting failure" input. 
The twO inputs are not simply juxtaposed. Rather, emergent structure specific 
to the blend is created, with all the curious properties noted above. The exis-
tence of a satisfactory grave causes death and is a necessary precondition for it. 
It follows straightforwardly that the deeper the grave, the closer it is to comple-
tion, and the greater the chance for the grave's intended occupant to die. In the 
blend (as opposed to the "digging the grave" input), digging one's grave is a se-
rious mistake that makes dying more likely. In the blend, it becomes possible 
to be unaware of one's concrete actions-a situation that is projected from the 
"unwitting failure" input, where it is indeed fully possible, and common, to be 
unaware of the nature or the significance of one's actions. But in the blend, it 
remains highly foolish to be unaware of such concrete actions-a judgment 
that is projected from the "digging the grave" input and will project back to the 
"unwitting failure" input to produce suitable inferences (i.e., to highlight fool-
ishness and misperception of individual's behavior). 
We wish to emphasize that in the construction of the blend, a single shift in 
causal structure-The existence of a grave causes death, instead of Death causes the 
existence of a gravt'--is enough to produce emergent structure, specific to the 
blend: undesirability of digging one's grave, exceptional foolishness in being un-
aware of such undesirability, correlation of depth of grave with probability of 
death. The causal inversion is guided by the "unwitting failure" input, but the 
emergent structure is deducible within the blend from the new causal structure 
and familiar common-sense background knowledge. This point is essential, be-
cause the emergent structure, though fantastic from a literal point of view, is 
supremely efficient for transferring the intended inferences back to the "unwitting 
failure" input and, thereby, for making real-world inferences. This emergent struc-
ture is :lot in the inputs-it is part of the cognitive construction in the blend. But, 
also, it is not stated explicitly as part of the blend. It just follows, Fairly automati-
cally, from the unstated understanding that the causal structure has been projected 
from the "unwitting failure" input, not the "digging the grave" input. 
The integration of events in the blend remains linked to events in both input 
spaces. We know how to translate structure in the blend back to structure in the 
inputs. The blend is an integrated platform for organizing and developing those 
other spaces. Consider a slightly fuller expression: "With each investment you 
make, you are digging your grave a little deeper." In the "financial Failure" input, 
there are no graves, but there are investments; in the "digging the grave" input, the 
graves are not financial, but one digs; in the blend, foolish investments are shovels, 
and what one digs is one's financial grave. A single action is simultaneously invest-
ing and digging; a single condition is simultaneously having finished the digging 
and having lost one's money. Digging your own grave does not kill you, but dig-
ging your own financial grave causes your death/bankruptcy. 
" 

134 
THE WAY WE THINK 
,. 
Digging Your Own Grave is a double-scope network. Death and graves come 
from the "dying" input, but crucial framing is projected from the "unwitting 
failure" input of discretionary action and mistakes that lead to failure. 
Complex numbers are also a double-scope network. The inputs are, respectively, 
two-dimensional space and real/imaginary numbers. Frame structure is projected 
from each of the inputs: angles, rotations, and coordinates from two-dimensional 
space; multiplication, addition, and square roots from the space of numbers. In the 
blend~ there is an emergent structure of numbers with angles and of multiplication 
as involving rotation. We will return to this blend in Chapter 13. 
We also see a double-scope network in same-sex marriage: The inputs are the 
traditional scenario of marriage, on the one hand, and an alternative domestic 
scenario involving two people of the same sex, on the other. The cross-space 
mapping may link prototypical elements such as partners, common dwellings, 
commitment, and love. Selective projection takes frame structure from each in-
put. It takes social recognition, wedding ceremonies, and mode of taxation from 
the first input of "traditional marriage," and same sex, absence of biologically 
common children, and the culturally defined roles of the partners from the sec-
ond input. Emergent properties will characterize this new social structure re-
flected by the blend. 
Double-Scope Networks with High Asymmetry. 
In some double-scope net-
works, although the blend receives projections of organizing frame topology 
from both inputs, the organizing frame of the blend is nonetheless an extension 
of the organizing &arne of only one input. 
Suppose a person, observing that the Vatican seems to be flat-footed in the 
metaphorical boxing match over abortion, says, "I suppose it's hard to bob and 
weave when you have a mitre on your head." The Pope's competition with an 
adversary is portrayed as a boxing match where the Pope is impeded as a boxer 
by the mitre he is obliged as Pope to wear on ritual occasions. We interpret this 
as meaning (with respect to the input space with the Pope) that his obligation as 
Pope to remain dignified impedes him in his competition. In the input space 
with the Pope, there is a relationship at the level of the organizing frame be-
tween the Pope and dignified behavior and also between the Pope and his mitre. 
The cross-space mapping between inputs does not give counterparts in input 1 
for the required dignity or required headgear elements in input 2. The Pope's ob-
ligation and his headgear in input 2 both project to the headgear of the boxing 
Pope in the blend. 
In the organizing frame of the input of boxing, the boxers are not impeded 
by headgear that is an impediment. In the blend, the organizing frame is slightly 
different: It contains the role heavy headgear that makes fighting difficult. This or-
ganizing frame is an extension of the frame of boxing, not of the frame of Pope 
and Roman Catholicism. Specifically, the frame of the blend has all the roles of 
boxing. But, the headgear-the mitre--is projected from input 2. In that input 
~~ '.'r" 
Compmsions and Clarhes 
135 
2 frame, there is a crucial relation R· The dignity of the Pope makes it harder for 
him to compete because he must always be honest and decorous. In input 2, the 
role mitre is directly linked (as a symbol) to the role dignity and obligation of 
pope. The crucial relation R in input 2 is projected to R' in the blend: The 
mitre/dignity makes it harder for the Pope to box. Mitre and dignity in input 2 
are both projected to the same element in the blend, and, crucially, they have no 
counterpart in input 1. The blend gets an organizing frame from input 1 but 
also the frame-level relation R from input 2. This is what makes it double-scope. 
In the blend, we find all the elements of the frame of boxing plus the heavy 
and unwieldy mitre on one boxer's head. It turns out that having a heavy object 
on the head is an impediment to fighting, and so we have a very natural and au-
tomatic pattern completion of the blend, leading to the new frame of boxing as 
impeded by heavy headgear. This frame is an extension of the organizing frame of 
input 1, not of input 2. This is what makes it asymmetric. 
Recall that, in Digging Your Own Grave, the cross-space mapping connected 
incompatible counterpart relations, such as direction of causality, and that to 
project causal direction to the blend, it was therefore necessary to choose one 
rather than the other of these counterpart relations. In the Pope example, be-
cause relation R in input 2 has no counterpart relation in input 1 (and, a for-
tiori, no incompatible counterpart relation), it can be projected to the blend 
(appropriately extended by completion) and we need not choose between in-
compatible counterpart relations. 
Nonclashing Double-Scope Networks. 
Of course, the two organizing frames 
of a double-scope network are not required to clash. On occasion, they can both 
contribute to a blend that incorporates both of them. For example, if in a par-
ticular corporate community traveling business partners are typically lovers, we 
can develop the traveling business partners/lovers frame, with emergent struc-
ture, which can become familiar and used routinely in the culture. Similarly, if 
during a Cold War all symphony orchestras that one superpower sends to tour 
the other contain spies, we can develop the second violinist spy frame, a double-
scope whose input organizing frames have no frame-level clash. 
•• 
•• CHAPTER 7 
ZOOM OUT 
TOBLERONE 
Some networks have what appear at first sight to be extremely tenuous cross-
space mappings between the two frames organizing the inputs, but they lead 

136 
THE WAY WE THINK 
ultimately to extraordinarily rich emergent meaning and global insight. The 
construction of the network produces strong and essential vital-relation connec-
tions between inputs that at first seemed only tangentially related, if at all. 
As an example, consider the following ad for Toblerone, a pyramid-shaped 
chocolate candy that comes in three sizes-small, medium, and large. This ad 
shows the famous Egyptian pyramids of Giza, two of them small, one medium, 
and one quite large. Much smaller, the ad shows a group of four Toblerone 
chocolates in the identical configuration. The caption reads "Ancient Toblero-
nism?" The ad also includes the motto "Toblerone: Inspires the World." With a 
wink, it suggests that such a match of shape and proportion between the Giza 
pyramids andToblerone chocolates can hardly be an accident. Surely some pro-
found causality connects them! In the blend, Toblerone inspired the world in 
antiquity to construct these monuments. In the monuments frame, monuments 
are built in honor of, and often in the likeness of, great things. Just so, in the 
blend, the pyramids have been built to honor and resemble Toblerone. 
The emergent structure here is that Toblerone has been around throughout his-
tory and is the great wonder of the world that inspired all the others. 
This integration network approximates a single-scope network: The frame 
of great things and monuments organizes the blend, in which Toblerone now 
fills the role for "great thing." Little if any of the chocolate-eating and chocolate-
making frame needs to be brought in. But the network establishes deep vital re-
lations of causality, intentionality, and time between the inputs: Toblerone now 
causes the pyramids; it inspires the pyramid-builders, who intend to honor To-
blerone. Crucial outer-space vital relations are the main emergent structure of 
the (ironic) network. The two main elements, the pyramids and the chocolate, 
though linked by resemblance, are not counterparts in the frames of the in-
puts: Toblerone is the counterpart not of the monument but, rather, of the 
great thing that inspired the monument. The emergent vital relations of 
Causality, Intentionality, and Time are intuitively in the wrong direction, since 
we must now have Toblerone preceding and being more important than the 
pyramids. This example, which arises entirely by means of the general struc-
tural and dynamic principles of integration networks, shows how far one can 
go from the prototypes with these principles. 
The Toblerone network looks frivolous, but building a rich emergent struc-
ture out of a tenuous connection between inputs is a deep principle of science. 
The connection between an apple and the moon seems at first blush to be only 
the most tenuous analogy of shape and some motion, but in the blend of New-
tonian physics, the apple and the moon are the same and exemplifY the laws of 
the universe. Similarly, the psychoanalyst searches for seemingly "accidental" 
identities and analogies running across childhood experience, dreams, and adult 
behavior ("You say you always wear red shoes to the circus. What was the color 
of your hat, did you say, when you visited your grandmother on her deathbed? 
"IF' 
Compressions and Clashes 
137 
You said the circus was a 'celebration of life.' Of course, you mean 'of death. '''). 
The psychoanalytic case of building global insights out of weak connections be-
tween spaces depends upon building vital relations of Identity, Cause-Effect, 
Time, and Intentionality between the earlier and the later spaces, on the basis of 
the emergent structure in the blend. As in the Toblerone network, the outer-
space vital relations are emergent. Both Toblerone and the psychoanalytic blend 
develop theories in order to create the missing vital relations between inputs. In 
the Toblerone network, the theory is ironic, since it runs entirely contrary to our 
knowledge. In the psychoanalytic network, the theory is meant to convey the 
deepest principles of reality, and the specifics of the network explain inexplica-
ble or poorly understood behavior. 
o I V E R S I TY 0 F' PROD U C T S 
F'R 0 M 
U N I TY 0 F' PRO C E S S 
Now consider a straightforward example from geometry. A hyperbola, an ellipse, a 
parabola, and a circle-all are clearly different shapes. Intuitively, they fall into 
different categories. Mathematically, they can be given different precise geometric 
characterizations, specific to each kind of curve. And again, intuitively, a straight 
line or even a single point seems to be maximally different from conic curves. Yet 
all these geometric shapes can be viewed as variations on a single theme: the two-
dimensional planar section of a three-dimensional (quadric) cone. Keep the plane 
perpendicular to the axis of the cone, and you get all circles; tilt the plane to ob-
tain ellipses, tilt a little more for parabolas, and tilt again for hyperbolas. Move the 
plane parallel to one of the sides of the cone until the parabola condenses into a 
straight line. Move the plane toward the vertex of the cone until the ellipses or cir-
cles shrink into a single point. All of these different shapes are conic sections and 
fit on the same conceptual continuum. On this continuum, we find prototypes: 
the oval of an ellipse, the parabola of the cannonbaU .,hooting through the air, the 
circle of a beer coaster, the asymptotic hyperbola. AnJ we find limiting cases: the 
straight line, the point, the circle itself relative to ellipses, or the parabola as a lim-
iting case of ellipses stretched out to infinity. 
A theory of conic sections offers a way to see a useful mathematical unity be-
hind the diversity .of shapes and figures, without reducing this diversity to a sin-
gle prototype: We do not say that these shapes are all more or less circles simply 
because, when viewed from this perspective, they belong to the same contin-
uum on which the circle is a prototype. Similarly, conceptual integration net-
works offer a way to see unity behind the diversity of particular manifestations 
of meaning constructions. We start, as in the conic-section case, by formulating 
the general characterization evoked above (cross-space mapping, projection into 
a blend, emergent structure by completion and elaboration, etc.). Then we look 
at specific variants of this general structured dVlamic process. 

,. 
.' 
l' 
~ ' ~ 
· .. ·f':; 
.~ . 
.:,.: 
II Eight 
CON TIN U I TY BE H I N D 
DIVERSITY 
Every minute now should be the Father of some 
Stratagem, 
. 
- William Shakespeare 
SIMPLEX, MIRROR, SINGLE-SCOPE, and double-scope networks turn out to 
be powerful, widely deployed tools of the imagination. They look and feel dif-
ferent for all the reasons we have shown, but there is a deep continuity across 
them. They are not four separate and unrelated species that exhaust the world of 
blends but, instead, are prominent points that stand out on a continuous land-
scape, Here, we will take a walk along that landscape to show, step by step, how 
we get from one to another, encountering intermediate cases as we go. 
What could be the consequences of this inquiry? More specifically, what 
could be the importance of an underlying continuity? For theorists of concep-
tual integration, the regularities of the operation and the corresponding regular-
ities that operation creates in its products are at the heart of the scientific enter-
prise. For linguists and cognitive scientists who are already directly interested in 
how meaning is constructed and how language prompts for meaning, we offer 
explanations of these constructions and prompts. For those interested in creativ-
ity and the construction of meaning in other areas-such as reasoning, inven-
tion, or the cultural development of new frames ofknowledge--it will be useful 
and, we hope, illuminating to see how the continuities manifest themselves in 
those areas and how they extend across language phenomena as well. 
But even more is at stake. The findings of this chapter lay the ground for a 
fundamental hypothesis about the origins oflanguage, which we begin to present 
in the next section of the book. The origin of language is an enthralling series of 
multidisciplinary puzzles. For the evolution of species, we find intermediate fos-
sils that have rudimentary structures, and we find species living now that have 
similar organs but with varying degrees of complexiry-different levels of 
"wing," for example. But for languages, there are no intermediate fossils, and 
133 

140 
THE WAY WE TlilNI( 
every human language we know of, living or dead, is highly complex. Among the 
world's full adult languages, there are no simple languages, or languages simpler 
than others. Even rudimentary pidgin codes that serve as linguae ftancae turn al-
most immediately into creole languages of great complexity if there are any chil_ 
dren around learning those codes as native languages. We also see that many 
species have vocal skills but no language, and we s~e that human language can 
come in different modalities-spoken or signed-with equal levels of grammati_ 
cal complexity. Moreover, there are very many separate human languages, nOt 
just one, and they accomplish their tasks in ways that often seem surprisingly dif-
ferent. Human languages change over cultural time but do not as a result acquire 
increased complexity. Indeed, it seems that, at any given time, languages present 
the same kind of diversity and have the same degree of complexity. We will con-
sider these puzzles in the next chapter on the basis of what we find in this one. 
Let's begin with an example from the last chapter: the simplex network in 
which Paul is the father of Sally. The generic space has two people and no rela-
tions. The framing input is the father-child sub frame of our more general kin-
ship frame. The values input consists only of two people with no relation be-
tween them, Paul and Sally. Such a network creates a compression of roles and 
values in the blended space. This simple network is only the beginning of a long 
gradient of increasing complexity. Let us look at a gradient of networks all using 
the father-child input and, crucially, the word "father." One result will be that 
,~ 
word "father" will seem to have many different meanings. But in fact the 
word is always playing the same role, inviting us to use our potential to con-
struct networks that have father-child as one input. Consider: 
Zeus is the father of Athena. She was born OUt of his head, fully clad in armor. 
Now, from the kinship space, we bring in general schemas of human progenera-
tion, such as the offspring's coming out of the body of a parent, but we bring in 
from our knowledge of divinity the possibility of unusual birth. We explicitly 
build in the blend, on the warrant of the second sentence, an unusual kind of 
progeneration that involves neither a mother nor an infant. 
The divinity in the Zeus-Athena input allows for many wonderful blends, each 
of which contains a father and a creative method of pc<~generation. For instance, 
Zeus is also the father of Aphrodite-this time, by virtue of having castrated 
Chronos and cast his genitalia into the ocean foam, whence Aphrodite was born. 
The Zeus cases do not entail figurative speech or analogy. Zeus is still felt to 
be quite clearly the father of Athena, and of Aphrodite. Family structure is in-
ferred, as are the sentiments and emotions that come with it. 
Now consider: 
Joseph was the father of Jesus. 
Continuity &hind Divmity 
141 
I this blend, we do not project the usual structure of the father's role in procre-
:Cion or the nonvirginity of the mother. But we can project family structure and 
emotions. We also know that the communities of people in which they lived 
largely took Joseph to be Jesus' father in every way. Again, this use of "father" is 
not felt to be metaphoric or analogical. 
Now consider a neighbor who takes care of Sally for the day while Paul is 
away, carrying out fatherly duties such as making her lunch, accompanying her 
to school, and reading bedtime stories. That neighbor can say to Sally: ''I'm 
your father for today." As in the Zeus and Joseph blends, some family structure 
and genealogy is projected. As in the Joseph blend (but not the Zeus blends), 
progeneration is not projected. Many of the typical aspects of the father-off-
spring relationship are projected (routines, care giving, responsibility, affection, 
protection, guidance, authority, and so forth). Meaning compositionality is no 
longer an option to account for this case. Too many properties felt as central are 
missing. We have moved along the continuum from the pole of simplex net-
works. But clearly, we have not reached a point on the continuum that would be 
felt intuitively to be metaphorical. Fatherhood is not a metaphor for what 
the neighbor is doing. In fact, although some analogy has now contributed to 
the mapping, the function of this blend is stronger than mere analogy. The 
neighbor really is filling the role of the father in relevant respects, not just doing 
something "similar" to what the father does. The flexibility of blending with se-
lective projection and contextual elaboration allows for this intermediate kind 
of situation, which doesn't fit a usual characterization. 
These "father" networks reveal some fascinating principles of how words work. 
When a word is attached to one of the inputs, it too can be projected to the blend, 
to pick out meaning there. We will call this principle "word projection." For ex-
ample, in the Zeus and Joseph cases, "father" is projected to the blend from the 
father-ego input but now picks out new meaning in the blend. Because the blend 
and the framing input remain connected, we can refer to birth as "leaving Zeus's 
head" in much the same way that we refer to birth as "leaving the womb." Many 
similar expressions, each using words that already apply to the inputs, can be fash-
ioned that pick out meaning only in the blend. We can also refer to Joseph as "Je-
sus' mortal father," giving "mortal father" a contrastive rather than redundant 
meaning, which is likewise inappropriate for the father-ego input. 
Consider these additional examples linked to "father": 
The Pope is the father of all Catholics. 
The Pope is the father of the Catholic Church. 
George Washington is the father of our country. 
The first example still has people in both inputs. From the "kinship" input that 
provides the word "father," we project not progeneration at all but, instead, 
. 
~ 

-:' 
142 
TH E W AY W E THIN 
- - ·~1 
authority, size otilie family, responsibility, leadership, social role. From the Se . 
c-
ond input, we project specific properties of Catholicism. 
. 
"The Pope is the father of the Catholic Church" arguably projects the role ofi 
a child to a single social entity (the Church). The blend reflects a type of Socio_ 
cultural model-specifically, one in which a social entity (church, nation, cOIll_ 
munity) is the "child" of its leader. The word "father" is now felt to have a dif_ 
ferent meaning, but not a particularly metaphoric one. The same sentence can .. 
also be understood to blend the role of the Pope in the institution with the role 
of (ather in a family. 
With t~e ~e~rge Washingron sentence,. we go a bit further by highlighting 
the causality In tIme between parent and child and between founder and nation. 
This abstraction increases the perceived difference between the two inputs and 
their domains. The impression of metaphor is undoubtedly stronger. That sub-
jective impression reaches a higher point when the two domains are even more 
explicitly distinguished, as in "Newton is the father of physics." Physics, unlike 
church and country, does not even stand in metonymic relation to people and 
groups of people. Yet Newton and Washington as adult men have all the biolog-
ical features of possible fathers plus some of the stereotypical social ones (au-
thority, responsibility, and so on). The conceptual integration networks directly 
bring in frame structure from both inputs. 
Even more subjectively metaphorical is an expression like Ezra Pound's "Fear, 
father of cruelty," in which the two domains (emotions/qualities and 
people/kinship) have no literal overlap at all, and the projected shared schema, 
causality, is correspondingly abstract. Finally, Wordsworth's acrobatic metaphor 
"The Child is father of the Man" comes around almost full circle by using back-
ground knowledge (children grow into men) to create emergent structure in the 
blend that maps kinship to the human condition in an unorthodox way. The 
oddness of its counterpart connections and the extensive drawing on the frames 
of both inputs to create a new organizing frame for the blend help make 
Wordsworth's line feel figurative. But the syntax and mapping scheme of "The 
Child is father of the Man" are the same as the syntax and the mapping scheme 
of "Paul is the father of Sally." 
The blends we have been talking about are often constructed using language. 
The reason language can prompt for blends that result in the same word's being 
used t? pick out different meanings is that language does not represent meaning 
directly; instead, it systematically prompts the construction of meaning. All of 
the "father" examples are examples of the familiar XYZ construction ("X is the 
Y of Z") whose purpose is to systematically prompt for blends. 
We feel that the word "father" has different meanings because "father" is in 
each case attached to one of the inputs, blending as a conceptual operation ap-
plies to those inputs, and "father" comes to pick out elements in the blend and 
LieiPa" in ph=" ,ha< pick ou, muc<u« in ,h, bl,nd bu< no, in ,h' 
143 
rhe meanings of "father" are not pr~perdes ~f the wor~ "father" but 
of the operation of conceptual mtegratIon and of the fact that 
like anything else attached to inputs, can be projected to blends. The 
operation of conc.eptual ble~ding, w~th i~s ~echanisms of s elec~ive 
and elaboration, IS not restncted to lingUIstic examples. But a mInd 
do blending and that also knows language will inevitably develop 
can for words through blending. If words show up in inputs, they can be 
like any other element of an input. This outcome will change their 
of application, un noticeably in most cases, but noticeably when the 
meaning to which they apply in the blend seems remarkably distant 
the domain of the input from which they came. When we notice this dis-
we call it by one of many names: extension, bleaching, analogy, meta-
displacement. "Polysemy"-the fact that a single word seems to have 
meanings"-is a very common phenomenon, a standard by-product of 
;"'nceptual blending, but noticed in only a fraction of c~es. 
. 
. 
We may think of language as a system of prompts for integratIon. Smce there 
many conceptual structures to be integrated, each with ranges of words at-
to them, an expression that prompts for their appropriate integration has 
combine words, and language has to have forms to make such combinations 
,,:possible. Obvious examples are predication ("This beach is safe") and com-
;pounding ("likely sto~: " "~ossible ,soluti~.n'" :'e1igible . bachelo:,~" "fake gun"). 
€onsider, for example, ThiS beach IS safe, which we discussed Ih Chapter 2. A 
;~mmon but misguided way of describing the me-aning of this sentence is to say 
a particular property, safe, is predicated of an object, beach, by means of the 
"safe" and "beach." On this view, "This house is safe" asks us to apply the 
particular property, safe, to a different object, house. So, "safe" has just one 
ing. It would be straightfotward to say "The beach is safe" when we want 
let a child play there. And in that situation, it would be equally true that 
child is safe." But now we see that the purported property safe attributed 
the beach in "The beach is safe" and to the child in "The child is safe" would 
to be twO different properties: something like not potentially harmfitl in the 
sentence and not likely to be harmed in the second. By the same token, 
word "safe" in the sentence "The beach is safe" would have to apply many 
different properties depending on whether the beach is legally protected from 
development, has a statistically low number of drownings, is a low-crime area, is 
awned in such a way that its ownership cannot be taken away from the owner, 
'or is a vacation spot that can be proposed without problem to someone (as in a 
.:, Ksafe bet"). On inspection, then, "safe" can seem to mean many different things, 
: but users of the word feel that it is the same word and the same concept. 
.' In order to do justice to the meaning of "safe," we must regard it not as apply-
Ing a particular property but, instead, as prompting for a particular kind of 
blend. The blend takes into account the frame of harm and the specifics of the 

-
144 
THE WAY WE THIN\< 
situation referred to in the rest of the expression. It requires us to blend them to 
create a counterfactual scenario in which there is specific harm and to understand 
how the present situation is disanalogous to that scenario. In fact, the linguistic 
expression singles Out the disanalogous counterparts. For example, "The beach is 
safe," meaning that the child won't drown, singles out a counterfactual COUnter-
part beach with riptides and deadly waves, and asks us to understand that the 
beach in the present situation lacks these dangers. The meaning of "safe" is not 
an invariant set of properties but, rather, a set of instructions for building a suit-
able conceptual integration network on the basis of the harm scenario. 
In the network, the complex vital relations of Dis analogy, Cause-Effect, and 
Identity involved in making the counterfactual space in which harm happens 
are compressed in the blended space into the inner-space vital relation of Prop-
erty, applied to one of the roles in the harm scenario. 
Can we find other kinds of linguistic evidence for the claim that a unified op-
eration-conceptual integration-is being used to construct meaning across all 
these continua? One kind of linguistic evidence would be very strong: If a range 
of meanings that we view as different-simple framing, analogical, metaphori-
cal-are indeed all instances of conceptual integration, then there might be a 
single syntactic form that prompts for the construction of all these different 
meanings. In fact, English, almost too good to be true in this regard, has a con-
struction that is specialized in exactly this way. The construction is the apparently 
pedestrian but immensely powerful )0fZ construction, such as "Necessity is the 
mother of invention" or "He was the Einstein of the fifth century B.C." In this 
construction-"X be Y of Z"-X, Y, and Z are nouns or noun-phrases. X and Z 
identify elements x and z in one input space, and Y identifies element y in a sec-
ond input space. The copula be indicates that x and y are counterparts. And the 
understander must identify the two relevant domains and set up an implicit ele-
ment w to be the counterpart ofy. In "Vanity is the quicksand of reason," one in-
put space is concerned with human traits such as reason and vanity while the 
other has to do with traveling and falling into quicksand. The missing element w 
is the traveler. The structure in the input of travel has a traveler falling into 
quicksand and therefore failing in his enterprise (perhaps to the point of dying). 
In the input with reason, we understand that reason is similarly imperiled by 
vanity. The blend corresponding to the grammatical XYZ construction thus has 
one element that is reason/traveler and another that is vanity/quicksand. 
Yet, quite interestingly, we have seen how that same construction also prompts 
for simplex networks. "Paul is the father of Sally" has the very same syntactic 
form as "Vanity is the quicksand of reason." It maps the kinship subframe father-
ego onto the two people Paul and Sally and integrates the two inputs into a more 
richly structured blend. The mapping scheme is exactly the same as in the 
metaphorical case: In one space, x and z are Paul and Sally; in the other space, y is 
\1-'-
1 
.~ 
I. 
Continuity &hind Divmity 
145 
the role father and the counterpart of x (Paul). The missing element w is the ego 
of the kinship frame. 
The )0fZ construction in English is a general prompt to construct an )0fZ 
integration network. This construction covers not only simplex, single-scope, 
and double-scope networks but also all the intermediate integration networks 
("Zeus is the futher of Athena," ''I'm your father for today," The Pope is the fa-
ther of the Catholic Church," and so on). 
But what about the frequent cases in which the word "of" seems to mean "a 
part 0[," as in "the door of the car" or "the top of the building"? Indeed, these 
cases. are also straightforward instances of the general mapping scheme. The word 
"top" does not in itself denote a part of a building. Rather, it is part of a more 
general frame-roughly referring to things that have vertical orientations and are 
bound in space. So when we point to a location in the building and say "This is 
the top of the building," we are constructing a simplex XYZ blend, just as in the 
other cases. As depicted in Figure 8.1, "This" identifies location x in the focus in-
put with the building, "the top" identifies a vertical extremity y in the whole with 
parts framing input, and "the building" identifies element z in the building in-
put. The missing element w is the general notion of a whole vertically oriented 
thing in the whole with parts frame. The whole w is mapped onto z, the building. 
Are there )0fZ phrases that prompt for mirror networks? Yes, of course! Sup-
pose Paul had a daughter Elizabeth who died at age ten, and then, two years later, 
another daughter, Sally. The loss of Elizabeth, with whom he had a warm, spon-
taneous relationship, was traumatic for him and made him stiff and withdrawn 
with Sally as she grew up. Finally, when Sally is sixteen, and Paul has seen her 
grow up during a stage that Elizabeth never knew, Paul comes to his senses and 
suddenly begins to behave with full warmth and spontaneity with Sally. Sally, 
confused, finally asks him why he is treating her in this new way. He responds, 
after a long pause, "Because you are my long-lost daughter." This expression is 
the idiomatic equivalent of "you are the long-lost daughter of me." In one space. 
organized by the father-d4ughter frame, we have Paul as the value of father and 
Elizabeth as the value of d4ughter. In the other space, organized by the same 
frame, we have Paul as the value of father and Sally as the value of d4ughter. The 
generic space and blended space are also organized by the father-d4ughttr frame, 
making this a straightforward mirror network. In the blend, father is blended 
with father, daughter with daughter, Paul with himself, and Elizabeth with Sally. 
In the blend, Elizabeth is Sally. By making this blend. Paul recovers his long-lost 
daughter Elizabeth, who died, and also recovers his daughter Sally, who had been 
lost to him in a different way. There are many crucial vital relations between the 
inputs, so this is a vital-relation mirror)0fZ network. The blend has spectacular 
emergent emotions and dramatic psychological changes for two people and for 
the memory of a third. 
J 

146 
t" 
top 
Vf 
THE WAY WE THINK 
DOD 
DOD 
w I 
I ~OD 
z building 
o 
0 
FIGURE 8.1 
A SIMPLEX XYZ BLEND 
C 0 Nt PO SIT ION A L I TY 
When we see words on a page, do those words stand directly for external reali-
ties? No. As we have seen, words and the patterns into which words fit are trig-
gers to the imagination. They are prompts we use to try to get one another to 
call up some of1what we know and to work on it creatively to arrive at a mean-
ing. Blending is a crucial part of this imaginative work, and, as we have seen; 
blending is not the mere addition of one existing meaning to another to get 
their sum. Words by themselves give very little information about the meaning 
they prompt us to construct. 
Any integration network we build will end up having a mapping scheme. A 
simplex network, for example, maps roles in one input onto their values in an-
other, fusing them in the blend. Precisely because it is not merely additive, 
blending is highly creative. But the capacity to combine and recombine is also a 
hallmark of hUman thought. Can blending gain strength by drawing on this ca-
pacity for recombination? Yes. Using recombination in conjunction with blend-
ing is an exceptionally powerful trick of the imagination. 
We have seen various mapping schemes so far-schemes that operate over two 
inputs, a generic space, and a blend. And we have seen forms oflanguage-"safe," 
"if," "of," and so on-that prompt us to use some of those mapping schemes. 
What these examples show us is that blending is a constant mental activity: We 
blend again and again, building blends out of earlier blends, blends all the way 
down. Now we ask a crucial question: Is there any regulariry to the way that 
blends compose, or do we have to invent new, idiosyncratic mapping schemes for 
every compound network? Rather amazingly, no matter how unpredictable 
, ~ 
Continuity &hind Diversity 
147 
creative blending is at every stage, and no matter how various its products seem-
simple predication, jokes, metaphors, counterfactuals, mathematical discoveries, 
analogies, category extensions, event integrations, action blends, and so on and 
on-it can use the same skeletal mapping schemes again and again and combine 
them in the same simple ways. And we will see that we combine in simple ways 
the linguistic expressions that prompt for those skeletal mapping schemes. This is 
remarkably efficient and elegant: The combination of expressions prompts for a 
parallel combination of the skeletal mapping schemes they evoke. Composing 
language forms into more complex language forms thus tells us what kinds of 
mapping schemes to build, although those language forms say nearly nothing 
about the kinds of meaning we will construct under their guidance. Meanings 
~ themselves are the imaginative products of blending, whether simple or complex, 
and are not predictable from the forms used to evoke them. The mapping 
schemes, by contrast, are predictable from the language forms used to evoke them. 
The meaning of the whole is not predictable from the meaning of the parts, but 
the mapping scheme of the whole is predictable from the mapping schemes of the 
parts. This compositional aspect of forms has . been interpreted in the form ap-
proaches as telling us the nature of thought itself. But on the contrary, it is only an 
exceptionally ingenious, useful, and efficient feature of the forms that guide 
thought. 
An "XYZ expression like "The adjective is the banana peel of the parts of 
speech" can mean that unwary writers ofren slip up on adjectives, that the adjec-
tive is a very useful element that helps us get a grip on the noun to which it is at-
tached, that the adjective attracts us but the noun is the real substance, that the 
adjective is a deceptive surface that hides the essential meaning, and so on. All 
these different meanings arise from the identical "XYZ mapping scheme: X (ad-
jective) in the first input is the counterpart ofY (banana peel) in the second, Z 
(parts of speech) in the first input is the counterpart of some unmentioned Win 
the second input. A suitable but unspecified Y - W relationship (banana peeL- W) 
is to be projected to the blend and integrated there with the X and Z projec-
tions. The language form "X is the Y of Z" directs us to this mapping scheme 
but does not indicate what we are to do with it. Constructing the meaning in-
volves much more: frames, topologies, general knowledge, context, connections 
of identiry and role and vital relation, and, above all, blending. 
For example, we construct meaning for "Sally is the daughter of Paul" on the 
basis of our full knowledge of human beings, progeneration, family structure, 
and so on. Using the same language form and the same mapping scheme, we 
construct quite a different meaning for "Athena is the daughter of Zeus." In the 
Zeus-Athena blend, daughter is now compatible with the structure having no 
mother, born out of the father's head, born as an aduLt fuLly clothed in armor, and so 
on, so that what look like necessary properties of daughter have not been pro-
jected to the blend. "France is the eldest daughter of the Church" has the same 

148 
THE WAY WE THINK 
.. 
language form and the same mapping scheme but even more inventive_ projec-
tions to the blend with emergent meaning. 
Language forms combine to evoke orderly combinations of mapping schemes. 
This handy ability can be nicely illustrated by looking at compound Y:YZ expres-
sions of any length, such as "Elizabeth is the boss of the daughter of Paul" or 
"Jim is the secretary of the wife of the president of Disney" or "Elizabeth is the 
boss of the daughter of the secretary of the wife of the president of Disney." To 
conduct this illustration, we need to back up and look at the backbone of an 
Y:YZ expression-namely, Noun-Phrase of We will call this backbone a "Y 
expression." 
Consider, for example, the phrase "The boss of," which is diagrammed in Fig-
ure 8.2. It prompts us to call up an input space structured by the boss-worker 
frame, to construct a blended space, to project boss from the input to create boss' in 
the blended space, to provide for a w (almost certainly worker) in the input space, 
to project worker to create worker' in the blend, to project the boss-worker relation-
ship in the input to boss-worker' in the blend, to construct open-ended connectors 
from boss' and worker' in the blend, and to expect the open-ended connector from 
worker' to connect to some element that can be picked out by the noun-phrase 
that will follow "of." 
In general, a Y expression has this very simple form: 
Noun-Phrase of 
rl 
Expressions like "the boss of," "the secretary of," and "a beginning student of" 
are Y expressions. The Noun-Phrase in a Y expression is typically a role in a 
common frame, often a relational frame like father-daughter, husband-wife, mas-
ter-apprentice, president-company, and so on. A Y expression prompts for blend-
ing. Specifically, it prompts uS to perform the following operations: 
• Call up an input space for the relational frame containing y (the element 
named byY). 
• Construct a blended space. 
• Project the element y to create an element y' in the blend. 
• Provide for a w in the input space that will bear an appropriate relation-
ship to y. 
• Project that w to create an element w' in the blend. 
• Project the y-w relationship onto y'-w' in the blended space. 
• Provide open-ended connectors from y' and w' in the blend, as shown in 
Figure 8.3. These connectors are expected to make connections at some 
point. 
• Expect the open-ended connector from w' in the blend to connect to 
something picked out by the noun-phrase that will follow "of." 
. ....... 
Continuity Behind Diversity 
149 
~ ~ (open-ended connector) 
~~ 
Input space 
- - - - - - - -(open-ended connector) 
Blended space 
FIGURE B . 2 
"THE B055 OF''' 
What are these open-ended connectors? For w', what follows "or' will tell us 
how to attach that open-ended connector. For example, "The boss of Hierony-
mous Bosch" prompts us to build a space containing the painter Hieronymous 
Bosch and to connect w' to him. "The boss of the company" prompts us to 
build a space structured by the company frame and to connect w' to the role 
company in that space. For y', the open-ended connector can be directed by ex-
plicit linking, as in the simple XYZ"expressions we discussed above-for 
example, "Elizabeth is the boss ofHieronymous Bosch" or "Elizabeth "is the boss 
of the orchestra." Alternatively, it can be explicitly directed by a gesture, as when 
you point at someone and say "The boss of the orchestra." If there is no explicit 
linking, the y' element stands on its own as a role. 
In the default case, open-ended connectors will attach to elements in the 
same space. This is exactly what we saw in ,.the original simple Y:YZ construc-
tion, exemplified by "Paul is the father of Sally." "The father of" is a Y expres-
sion that sets up the V-of network diagrammed in Figure 8.4. 
In the full XYZ expression "Paul is the father of Sally," Paul is explicitly 
linked to the role father. Because "Sally" follows "ot:" Sally is necessarily linked 
to w' (child) in the blend. In this case, our V-of network is completed as shown 
in Figure 8.5. 
Most important, we can compose Y expressions by letting the open-ended 
connectors attach to other roles. That is, what follows the "of" in the first Y ex-
pression can be another Y expression, for as long as we like: "The doctor of the 
sister of the boss of Hieronymous Bosch ... " (or, more generally, "The yl of 
the y2 of the y3 of the y4 of ... "). Earlier, we saw the mapping operations 
called for by a Y expression. Because these operations have open-ended connec-
tors, they can be repeated, so that an open-ended connector of one V-of network 

150 
THE WAY WE THINK 
~. (open-ended connector) 
~ ~ 
, 
Input space 
~~ 
Blended space 
FIGURE 8.3 
THE V-OF NETWORK 
~ _ ~ (open-ended connector) 
Input space 
-- - - - - (open-ended connector) 
Blended space 
FIGURE 8.4 
"THE FATHER OF" 
attaches to another Y-of network. Repeating the expression just asks us to repeat 
the mapping operations. So if we have "The Yl of the Y2 of," which contains 
two Y expressions, we are instructed to go through the mapping operations 
twice. We begin with Yl to construct the Yl-of network. That gives us an ele-
ment in the blend wI' with an open connector. Then we' connect that network 
to y2 by attaching that open connector to y2. This is just what the mapping in-
structions tell us to do: Whatever follows "of' tells us where to connect the w in 
the blend. In this case, what follows "of" is Y2, so we attach the wI' open con-
nector to y2. Then we proceed to construct the Y2-of network. The composed 
mapping scheme is shown in Figure 8.6. 
"The secretary of the wife of the president of" has three Y expressions, which, 
as shown in Figure 8.7, prompt us to repeat the mapping operations three times. 
Contin'uity Behind Diversity 
Input space 
Blended space 
FIGURE 8.5 
THE XYZ NETWORK 
, 
, 
I 
I 
I 
Input space 
(Base space) 
151 
A general network of this kind is what we call a yo network, where n is the 
number of repetitions. In principle, there is no limit to~fhe number ofY expres-
sions or to the number of mapping schemes. But in practice, we find few exam-
ples that are higher than Y-of cubed. One important reason for this is that there 
is more going on in these networks than simply stringing along the spaces and 
doing the s'uccessive blends. Compression for global insight is a general value 
for cognition, as we have discussed. In Y networks, new meaning is being con-
structed in the blends. Therefore, as blends arise, the pressure will be to inte-
grate them if they are compatible. As we build Blend 2, we are trying to blend it 
with Blend 1, and each time a new blend arises, we try to blend it with the most 
recent megablend of all the previous blends. At any moment, the megablend of 
blends is giving the best global insight into the entire network. For example, 
"the valet of the secretary of the president" prompts for a compressed 
megablend, as depicted in Figure 8.8. In the successive blends given by the 
mapping schemes, we get new roles valet of the secretary in Blend 1 and secretary 
of the president in Blend 2. In the megablend, compression gives us yet another 
role, valet of the secretary of the president, which can become conventional and 
have its own emergent structure that is not a composition of the features of the 
individual roles. We might say, for example, "The valet of the secretary of 
the president is a hereditary title" or, in another domain, "The wife of the secre-
tary of the president is the most important position in the government." That 
role is not in any of the intermediate blends or in any of the input spaces to 
those blends. It provides evidence for the building of the megablend. 
Figure 8.8 depicts only the mappings to the megablend, not the richness of 
its emergent meaning. For example, a in the megablend is now a compressed 
,J 
I
, I
1
!, 

152 
THE WAY WE THINK 
•••• (open-ended connector) 
Blend 1 
FIGURE 8.6 
THE V-OF" SQUARED NETWORK 
.......... 
___ (open-ended connector) 
Blend I 
Blend 2 
FIGURE 8.7 
THE V-OF" CUBED NETWORK 
Blend 2 
.• ' (open-ended 
connector) 
_______ (open-ended 
connector) 
___ . (open-ended connector) 
Blend 3 
Continuity Bthind Divmity 
153 
(open-ended' connector) 
.-
_. (open-ended connector) 
Megablend 
FIGURE 8.8 
MEGABLEND #1 
~ ~ 
role in a world where the president has a secretary and the secretary has a valet, 
and a is that valet. In general, as we move from blend to megablend and from 
earlier megablends to later ones, the frames become more complex and perform 
greater compressions_ Unconnected roles like president, valet, and secrttary end 
up integrated into a single emergent frame. 
There is a true elegance and simplicity to the composition of the mapping 
schemes and the emergent global blends. The yn expressions are not at all unusual 
in being guided by these principles of linking, compression, and blending. In 
Chapter 17 we will tell a more general story, in which grammatical constructions 
in general are pre-compressed integration networks with open-ended connectors 
available to be attached. Grammatical form may provide multiple ways to set up 
the same complex blend. For example, "the valet of the secretary of the president" 
and "the president's secretary's valet" result in the same ultimate compound inte-
gration network, and the mapping operations of both the "of" and the possessive 
form ("'s") proceed from the general principles of linking, compression, and 
blending; yet the dynamics of building' that network differ in systematic ways_ 
The two expressions prompt us to begin building the same netWork, but &om dif-
ferent starting points and in different directions. "The valet of the president's sec-
retary" gives us another, closely related way to build the network. We emphasize 
that forms as simple and basic as "the valet of" and "the president's" are funda-
mentally prompts for intricate blending. Each of these phrases, for example, asks 
J 

~ 
.'t' 
154 
THE WAY WE THINK 
,. 
us to build an input, a blend. elements in each. projections from the input to the 
blend. and two open-ended connectors from the two elements in the blend! 
At this point. let us return to the XYZ expressions with which we began and 
diagram a compound form like "Ann is the boss of the daughter of Max." This 
expression contains the y2 expression "the boss of the daughter of." which 
builds up the integration network already discussed. including the megablend. 
In addition. it links the three open connectors to elements in a specific mental 
space: Ann and Max and an element that is the counterpan of the worker! 
daughter in the megablend. The resulting diagram. shown in Figure 8.9. looks 
identical to the previous one. except for the labels and the grounding of the 
open connectors in a specific space. 
This example clearly shows the standard features of conceptual integration 
as they operate in composed integration networks prompted by composed 
syntactic cues. The construction of links and spaces systematically follows the 
syntactic order. 
COMPOSITION OF" 
METAPHORIC INTEGRATIONS 
The language forms and the corresponding mapping schemes we have seen work 
identically in metaphoric cases. Metaphoric integrarions are typically single-scope 
or double-scope. and they feel quire different from simplex integrarions like "Paul 
is the farher of Sally." They involve quite different projections and consrructions 
" 
of meaning. Bur the differences in the imaginative construction of meaning are 
one thing; the language forms and the mapping schemes are.another. 
We now come to an exciting insight into how form and meaning are driven. 
The language forms that lead to intuitively literal meanings can also give us in-
tuitively metaphorical meanings thar seem to belong to radically different kinds 
of thinking. Yet those identical forms are prompting for identical mapping 
schemes to guide rhose radically different constructions of meaning. And those 
mapping schemes compose in identical ways. regardless of whether the ultimate 
meanings are flatly literal. oetically meta horical. scientificall analo ical, sur-
real~ 
y_~estive. or opaque. Once again. an this time arrestingly. we see 
that grammar is a set of prompts for guiding us quite precisely in our use of 
imaginative mental operations. The grammar indicates a kind of path. But what 
ultimately happens on thar path depends on what specifically is encountered 
and on the imaginative operations conducted along the way. The results may 
subjectively seem to occupy different realms of thought. even though we are un-
consciously carrying out the same mapping schemes. 
What have we developed so far? We have shown that rhe same XYZ language 
form prompts for the same integration mapping scheme, regardless of the con-
ceptual content. It works across simplex. mirror. single-scope. and double-scope 
Continuity &hind Divn-sity 
155 
Megablend 
FIGURE 8 . 9 
MEGABLEND #2 
arrays as well as every intermediare kind of array: "Paul is the farher of Eliza-
beth." "You are my long-lost daughter." "Zeus is the farher of Arhena." "Fear is 
the father of violence." "Vanity is the quicksand of reason." "Causation is the 
cement of the universe." We have also shown in detail how Y expressions 
prompt for integration mapping schemes and how those expressions compose 
syntactically and call for precise compositions of the corresponding mapping 
schemes. 
If what we have developed is correct. then any compound XYZ expression 
thar contains a yn expression should prompt for the same composed mapping 
scheme. regardless of the nouns in rhe expression. This is an unavoidable predic-
tion of the theory we have proposed. but it is not a feature of any other theory of 
language. metaphor, logic, rhetoric. or cognition that we know of Mosr of the 
major theories of meaning have assumed thar these various kinds of expressions 

156 
THE WAY WE THINK 
are incommensurable and that notions like compositionality are meaningless for 
figurative phenomena like metaphor .. 
This is a major prediction. Is it true? Well, pick any nouns that are acceptable 
for the xynZ construction and splice them in. The resulting sentence may be 
unintelligible, but our prediction says that you will know the mapping scheme 
you are supposed to carry out across all those spac~. Some expressions, like "Jean 
is the sister of the mother of the son of Joseph," will seem conventional. Others, 
like "My office is the secretary of the understudy of despair," will seem bizarre. 
But they will all have the same mapping scheme, as we can see by taking one that 
is doubly metaphoric and going through it. Consider the doubly metaphoric ex-
pression "Prayer is the echo of the darkness of the soul." Its grammatical form 
and its mapping schemes are identical to those in "Ann is the boss of the daugh-
ter of Max." And both are X'f2Z expressions. In fact, we have already seen, in 
Figure 8.9, a diagram of the mapping scheme for "Ann is the boss of the daugh-
ter of Max." If we are right, that diagram, with appropriate labels, should directly 
reflect the complex compound mapping scheme prompted by "Prayer is the echo 
of the darkness of the soul," which is diagrammed in Figure 8.10. 
For this latter example, we have a starting point-a religious space contain-
ing things like prayer. The first Y expression, "the echo of," prompts a blend 
where the space with echo is one input. One obvious provisional choice for that 
input is a space where there is an echo in response to a sound. Echo in that space 
is linked by "is" to prayer in the religious space, which thereby becomes the sec-
ond input space to the blend. At this point, the part of the language form that 
has been provisionally processed is "Prayer is the echo of," and Blend 1 has been 
set up, complete with its open-ended connector from sound. The mapping 
scheme of the Y expression now instructs us to attach that open-ended connec-
tor from sound to something picked out by what follows "of"-in this case, 
"darkness." Again it is up to the imagination to construct an appropriate space 
containing darkness, and again the imagination may make many different 
choices, any of which could later be revised; but one obvious choice is a space in 
which there is a locus and a gradient of light in that locus. The Y expression "the 
darkness of" prompts for another blend network, so we set up Blend 2 accord-
ingly, complete with open-ended connectors from both darkness and locus. We 
also blend Blend 1 and Blend 2, giving us, in the megablend, prayer/echo, 
soundld4rkness, and, so far, locus, whose corresponding open connector has yet 
to be completed. Now the word "soul" completes the second Y expression (and 
the sentence), telling us to attach the open connector from locus to soul, which is 
in the same religious space as prayer. The remaining open connector from d4rk-
ness attaches to a new and unnamed element in that religious space. 
As a consequence of this complex mapping scheme, we ultimately have one 
specific space with elements corresponding to X, Z, and all the elements in the 
blends that have open-ended connectors hanging off them. It may be that this 
Continuity Behind Divmity 
157 
Megablend 
FIGURE 8.10 
MEGABLEND #3 
specific space is already available in the context (e.g., religion), or that it is 
mostly available and we need only build some new elements and relations in it, 
or that we have to create it from scratch by means of this very,compound inte-
gration network, as in "Ann is the boss of descendants of dinosaurs," which 
leads us to group Ann, her workers, and the ancestor dinosaurs in one space. 
The mapping scheme just outlined faithfully reflects all of the metaphorical 
blends and mappings prompted by "Prayer is the echo of the darkness of the 
soul." Moreover, that mapping scheme is exactly the same as the one for "Ann is 
the boss of the daughter of Max" and, therefore, exactly the same as the one for 
any X'f2Z expression. 
So the prediction is true! 
J. 

158 
THE WAY WE THINK 
,. 
But there is more to say. Blending is the tool of compression par excellence, 
and in this case it delivers rich and indispensable new compressions. The new 
compressed frame of the megablend gives us a new conception of the causality of 
the soul and religious expression. In this frame, there is a new role for something 
that is unnamed but sharply conceived: something that is simultaneously sound 
and darkness. This new role is darkness within a scale oflight; it is sound that has 
something against which to reverberate. It is part of your soul and part~f your 
sp~ritual experience. Given this experience and the nature of the soul, it results in 
prayer. The imagination is free within this emergent frame to develop richer 
meaning, further associations. In fact, the imagination is free to develop as many 
differently nuanced and potentially conflicting interpretations of this suggestive 
phrase as it likes, provided they are all guided by this one mapping scheme. We 
can use "echo," "darkness," and "soul" to call up any space these words suggest 
from publicly shared mental spaces or deeply personal experiences. We may pre-
fer some of these interpretations over others; some may be memorable and others 
nonsense. But they all have the same mapping scheme, and in all of them the 
megablend is the site for possible global insight. 
Does this variety of possible meanings for the doubly metaphoric example im-
ply that the metaphoric mapping schemes are radically unlike those in doubly 
simplex cases such as ''Ann is the boss of the daughter of Paul"? On the one hand, 
the answer is no: The mapping schemes are not different, and in principle we are 
free to call up any spaces we like for "boss," "daughter," and "PauL" People's ideas 
of "boss" or "daughter" might be very different by virtue of personal experience 
and memories. For some, the sentence might evoke Paul's willingness to accom-
modate Ann. For others, it might evoke Paul's animosity against someone who 
gives orders to his daughter or presents a challenge to his authority over her. Such 
larger frames emerge in the megablend and can vary from context to context. We 
get one reading if this sentence is said in explanation to someone who has just 
observed Paul doing something for Ann that he would never do for anyone else; 
we get another if he is being exceptionally contrary with Ann. But none of this 
variation changes the mapping scheme. In the same way, "Prayer is the echo of 
the darkness of the soul" could be said to indicate that prayer is a symptom 
of psychosis or the most visible and reliable proof of spiritual conversion. But, 
again, either interpretation has the same mapping scheme. 
On the other hand, even as the mapping schemes remain the same, the partic-
ular kinds of integration networks within those schemes are different. ''Ann is the 
boss of the daughter of Paul" is a compound of two simplex nerworks, while 
"Prayer is the echo of the darkness of the soul" is a compound of two double-
scope networks. Those two kinds of networks are profoundly different in all the 
ways we explained in Chapter 6. For example, in the boss-daughter case the inter-
mediate blends have organizing frames that come from only one input, while in 
the echo-darkness case the intermediate blends have organizing frames that draw 
,)':" 
Continuity Behind Diversity 
159 
on the organizing frames of both inputs. The Compound Double-Scope )(Y2Z of-
fers exceptionally rich possibilities for creative clashes. Prayer is voluntary, vocal, 
meaningful, human, and deep, while echo is non intentional, automatic, not neces-
sarily vocal, meaningless, physical, and merely a thin, distorted copy of something 
dse. Similar clashes between sound and darkness, and between locus and sou!, C0me 
immediately to mind. Then there are the clashes berween the two intermediate 
blends as inpurs to the megablend. Across all this mismatch we are to find a 
deeply meaningful compressed role connecting prayer to soul. We might well have 
had connections between prayer and soul already: Prayer "comes from" the soul, 
prayer is the soul "talking to God," prayer is "evidence of' having a soul, and so 
on. The clashes in this case lead not to failure but to effective ·new meaning. 
For both "Ann is the boss of the daughter of Max" and "Prayer is the echo of 
the darkness of the soul," the integration network builds an element in the spe-
cific space (the one with Ann and Max or the one with prayer and soul). In the 
first case this element is someone who is both a worker and a daughter but who 
is unnamed and whose existence we need not have recognized at the ourset. In 
the second it is an element related to prayer and soul for which we have no com-
mon name and whose existence we likewise need not have recognized at the 
outset. The religious element in this specific space may be profound and distinct 
but ineffable, and the compound expression allows us to prompt for it as such. 
Had we set up the XY2Z diagram in Figure 8.10 solely to depict the mapping 
scheme of the doubly metaphoric definition of prayer, it would have seemed 
plausible, because everyone recognizes that the interpretation of the mysterious 
and suggestive metaphor involves elaborate and creative mappings. The same di-
agram might have seemed implausible as a representation of what is going on 
when we make sense of ''Ann is the boss of the daughter of Max," because that is 
not how logic approaches usually analyze such a case. But the blending explana-
tion, which applies to both, is more accurate, more parsimonious, and more gen-
eral than the traditional logic explanations. It is more accurate because the logic 
explanations miss the many compressions of the mega blend, including the emer-
gent frame with its compressed role. In fact, logic notations are just labels for the 
input frames. They presuppose psychological access to those frames and say 
nothing about emergent new frames. The blend explanation is more parsimo-
nious because the same blending and mapping schemes account for many super-
ficially different meaning phenomena, generally described as literal, metaphoric, 
analogical, categorical, and so on. The general explanation does away with a jum-
ble of highly specialized operations, each tailored to deceptive surface features of 
a phenomenon. Finally, the blending explanation is more general because it ac-
counts in a deep way for the harmony of form and meaning over a vast and 
open-ended array of data. That harmony consists in the pairing of the form and 
the mapping scheme, and in the way the composition of the forms is paralleled 
by the composition of the mapping schemes. 

160 
== CHAPTER B 
ZOOM OUT 
SUPERNATURAL F"ATHERS 
THE WAY WE THINK
!; 
We have discussed XYZ blends that have father in one of the inputs. 
Question: 
• How far out can a father be pushed and still be a father? 
Our answer: 
Literary works frequently prompt for highly intricate blending. Milton's por-
trayal of Satan as father in the second book of Paradise Lost is an extended dis-
play of double-scope blending. 
The commonplace notion of Satan is already a blend for which a conceptual 
domain has been elaborated. Satan is a blend of individual human being-
thinking, talking, desiring, intending-and theological ontology. In the theo-
logical space, he has eternal features such as evil as well as nonhuman powers 
and limitations. He is anthropomorphic but has theological features and non-
human conditions. The blended domain for Satan is quite elaborated: He has 
like-minded colleagues in the form of a cohort of devils, together they form an 
intricate hierarchical organization of social groups, and so' on. This blended do-
main is entrenched both conceptually and linguistically. Consequently, al-
though the blend is in some ways double-scope, expressions like "The devil 
made me do it" or "Get thee behind me, Satan" --or even expressions based on 
further blending, such as the reference to a child as a "little devil"-do not feel 
especially figurative. 
Milton extends this blend in ways that seem strikingly figurative and allegor-
ical. His theological space includes evil, disobedience, sin, death, and their rela-
tions, as well as the psychology of the sinner confronted with spiritual death, 
His kinship space includes progeneration and kinship relations, especially the 
role father, and he adds a preexisting blend of the birth of Athena from the brow 
of Zeus. In short, he gives us two double-scope theological blends: Satan as the 
father of Sin and Satan as the father of Death. 
In Milton's blend, Satan conceives of the concept of sin; a fully grown 
woman, Sin, leaps from his brow. Satan is attracted to sin/Sin: he has sex with 
her. Although he does not know it at the time, his involvement has a conse-
quence-namely, death; in the blend, Death is the male offspring of Satan's in-
cestuous involvement with Sin. Death rapes his mother, causing her to give 
birth to a small litter of allegorical monsters. 
' " 
Continuity &hind Divn-sity 
161 
After Satan has been sent to Hell and has decided to try to escape, he meets 
two characters at the gates of Hell who have been stationed there to keep him 
in. They are Sin and Death. He does not recognize them. 
The mental spaces that contribute to this blended story-the kinship space 
and the theological space-correspond in some ways but not others. Milton 
draws from both of them, selectively, to create a double-scope blend. For ex-' 
ample, he takes exclusively from the kinship space Sin's intercession between 
Death and Satan-father and son-when they are on the brink of terrible 
combat. 
He also takes many central features exclusively from the theological space. In 
the theological space, there is a sinful cast of mind that does not recognize physical 
and spiritual death as the result of sin and that is at last appalled when it must ac-
knowledge these consequences. Hence, in the blend, Sin is surprised to have con-
ceived Death, and she finds her son odious. Next, in the theological space, mortal-
ity and spiritual death overshadow the appeal of sin and are stronger than sin; 
acknowledging death devalues sin; willful, sinful desires are powerless to stop this 
devaluation. Hence, in the blend, Sin is powerless to stop her horrible rape by 
Death. In the theological space, the fact of spiritual death brings ceaseless remorse 
and anguish to the sinful mind, and the torments, ,of Hell bring eternal punish-
ment. Hence, in the blend, the rape of Sin by Death produces monstrous off-
spring whose birth, life, actions, and relationship to their mother are impossible 
for the domain of human kinship: 
These yelling Monsters that with ceaseless cry 
Surround me, as thou saw'st, hourly conceiv'd 
And hourly born, with sorrow infinite 
To me, for when they list, into the womb 
That bred them they return, and howl and gnaw 
My Bowels, their repast,. then bursting forth 
Afresh with conscious terrors vex me round, 
That rest or intermission none I find. 
Milton creates subtle correspondences between the kinship space and the 
theological space. For example, he blends the unusual scenario of disliking a 
child with feeling horror at the fact of death. He blends the unusual scenario of 
a son raping a mother with the effect of death on sin. And perhaps most ingen-
iously, he blends the unusual medical frame of traumatic vaginal birth that 
physically deforms the mother and so makes her less attractive with the way sin 
becomes less attractive once death is acknowledged as its outcome: 
At last this odious o./fipring whom thou seest 
Thine own begotten, breaking violent way 
J 

162 
THE WAY WE THINK 
t' 
Tore through my entrails, that with fear and pain 
Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew 
Transform'd. 
Although Milton's pomayal of Satan as a father is double-scope, it preserves 
considerable structure associated with father and birth. Consider first the paternity 
of Death. The "father" has human form and speaks human language, is excited by 
feminine beauty, and has anthropomorphic sex with an anthropomorphic female 
in a typically human scene. There is a birth through a vaginal canal; the son inher-
its attributes of both father and mother; father and adolescent son have a conflict 
over authority. Now consider the paternity, of Sin. Here, too, the father has hu-
man form and speaks human language. There is an offspring in human form, who 
emerges from a container-like body part and develops into a sexual being. 
Readers of Milton never stop to ask themselves whether or in what sense Sa-
tan is the father of Sin and Death. Milton gives them the answers before they 
can ask those questions. Although many of what might have been considered 
criterial features or truth-conditional features of father are abandoned in these 
two double-scope blends, which are themselves connected by vital relations and 
compressed into one huge megablend, Milton's imaginative work has provided a 
coherent global insight in which the ascription of fatherhood to Satan is 
straightforward and true. This is particularly amazing if we recall that turning 
Satan into a father was originally the great challenge that motivated the creation 
of this network. 'God the Father has a son, Christ. The other member of the 
,Holy Trinity is Spiritus Sanctus, the Holy Ghost, the breath of eternal life. Mil-
ton intends to give us a picture of the infernal as the opposite of the divine. He 
needs to create an Infernal Trinity, in which Satan is the counterpart of God. 
How to make Satan a father is a conundrum, which Milton solves so well that it 
seems never to have been a question at all. 
WAYS OF THINKING 
ABOUT COM P~S ITI ONALITY 
A lot has been said about compositionality in logic, semantics, artificial intelli-
gence, and philosophy of language. 
Question: 
• What is different about the compositionality story here? 
Our answer: 
First, we must distinguish compositionality in our general sense from narrow, 
truth-conditional compositionality. In a logical system, there must be a composi-
tional syntax and a compositional semantics such that any syntactic combination 
' " 
"
'
·";· ~ ·"
tl 
, , 
Continuity Behind Diversity 
163 
of propositions that is itself a proposition encodes a,computation of the truth 
value of the whole from the truth values of the parts. For example, the connective 
"v" (inclusive or) in propositional logic is compositional because there is a truth 
function that yields the truth value of p v q given the truth value of p and the 
truth value of q. 
Some form of compositionality is always assumed in semantic theories be-
cause it appears that people can construct meanings in consistent ways on the 
basis of syntactic combinations-in particular, they understand one another. 
Compositionality accounts naturally for the generative nature of meaning: An 
unlimited number of meanings can be constructed from combinations of a fi-
nite number of forms. 
The most basic view of compositionality for semantics is the one that holds 
for logical systems: Linguistic expressions in isolation have truth conditions that 
are computable from the truth-conditional properties of their parts. For ex-
ample, the conditions under which an expression like "brown cow" will be true 
of something can be computed from the conditions under which "brown" is 
true of something and "cow" is true of something. Many versions of formal se-
mantics--for instance, Montague grammar-have attempted to maintain this 
basic view of compositionality. But there is a general consensus that this rudi-
mentary view is refuted by empirical evidence. The examples discussed through-
out this book are part of that empirical evidence. 
A looser view of compositionality permits elements from context to come into 
the computation of truth conditions, in addition to what is given by the truth 
conditions of the parts of the expression. An obvious case is an expression like "I 
am here," where the deictics I and here have to be given reference in context. A 
less obvious case is an expression like "The newspaper is on Main Street," where 
we need to know from context what newspaper is referred to, but also whether 
the understood reference is to the editorial offices, a copy of the paper, or the 
momentary location of the action reporters covering the current scene. 
In this looser view of compositionality, the purpose of specifying the context 
is to add needed referential assignments to the computation of truth conditions, 
not to remanufacture the truth conditions of stable parts. But in the blend for 
"Athena is the daughter of Zeus," daughter is now compatible with the structure 
having no mother, born out of the father's head, born as an adult folly clothed in ar-
mor, immortal and so on, so that what look like truth conditions of daughter 
have not been projected to the blend. Specifying the context to the degree that 
it would specify all the appropriate truth conditions in this case would require 
specifying the framing of the inputs, the counterparts in the cross-space map-
ping, the details of the selective projection, the degree of matching topology, 
and all the other parts of the network model of conceptual integration. 
Views of truth-conditional compositionality-whether of the narrow or looser 
species-are inadequate to account for the variety of meaning constructions 

164 
THE WAY WE THINK 
people actually achieve. But this is not to say that meaning construction is not 
compositional in other fundamental ways: People do construct meanings in con-
sistent ways on the basis of syntactic combinations. As we have seen in this chap-
ter, the consistency is accounted for by the fact that there is compositionality at 
the level of the general mapping schemes themselves and at the level of the syntac-
tic forms that prompt for those schemes. 
The general pattern of this two-level composition'ruity is this: A given syntac-
tic form- such as an "of" construction-prompts for the creation of structure 
in a blend and also provides a way of referring to that structure. That blend then 
becomes available for further mapping under prompting from additional syn-
tactic constructions. The mapping schemes themselves compose, as do the 
grammatical constructions. 
Although Fregean compositionality has an intuitive appeal as a model of how 
we construct complex meanings in response to complex syntactic prompts, it 
cannot account for actual construction of meaning. The network model applies 
uniformly over the cases of supposed Fregean compositionality and the cases 
that are clearly beyond the Fregean model. In a simplex network in which, addi-
tionally, the values in one input are prototypical for a rigidly categorical frame 
in the other ("Paul is the father of Sally"), the blending mapping scheme is 
truth-conditionally equivalent to Fregean compositionality. In all the other 
cases- involving looser frames, mirror, single-scope, or double-scope net-
works-the network model continues to apply, but Fregean compositionality 
fails on principle since it presupposes the very features of rigid categorization 
that these examples do not have. Even if a mirror network happens to have a 
rigiqly categorical shared frame and absolutely prototypical values for its roles 
(e.g., "You are my long-lost daughter"), that integration network is not captured 
by Fregean compositionality. 
Rather surprisingly, the network model is less dependent on reference to con-
text than the "looser" version of Fregean compositionality we discussed above, 
which attempts to preserve Fregean truth-conditional compositionality by 
adding discourse information to the computation of truth conditions. The net-
work model shows a relationship between syntactic composition and composi-
tion of mappings that holds independent of reference to domains, situations, 
and contexts. The compositional mapping schemes we discovered in the case of 
"Ann is the boss of the daughter of Max" and "Prayer is the echo of the darkness 
of the soul" were essentially identical, and identically based on syntactic compo-
sition of "of" constructions, even though their conceptual domains and con-
texts were radically different. Of course, context is all-important-but for the 
imaginative elaboration of the blends, not for the mapping scheme. 
It is also worth reemphasizing that the general construction of the mapping 
scheme follows the order of the syntactic construction quite closely, thus sug-
gesting a plausible model of the way in which such meanings are actually 
Continuity &hind Diversity 
165 
processed. We saw that the same ultimate blend' could be constructed from 
many different starting points so that different languages can use different syn-
tactic constructions, and in fact the same language can have more than one way 
to prompt for the same mapping scheme. "The valet of the secretary of the pres-
ident" and "The president's secretary's valet" prompt for the same ultimate map-
ping scheme but start at different points. 
In this chapter we have also studied the way in which a composition of syn-
tactic cues prompts for a composition of mapping schemes, and we have used as 
our showcase illustration the syntactic composition "Noun-Phrase 1 is the 
Noun-Phrase 2 of Noun-Phrase 3," where Noun-Phrase 3 has the form Noun-
Phrase 4 of Noun-Phrase 5. That is, we have used the syntactic part of the XY2Z 
construction. The points we have made apply across all syntactic compositions. 
Indeed, syntactic compositions as different as "Language is the fossil poetry of 
the soul," "Las Vegas is the American Monte Carlo," "Paul's daughter is the 
president of Disney," "Social movements are at once the symptoms and the in-
struments of progress," and "As poetry is the harmony of words, so conversation 
is the harmony of minds" all compose syntactic cues to prompt for composition 
of mapping schemes. 
" 
GREAT-GRANDFATHER OF 
We have seen actual yn expressions for n as large as 3. 
Question: 
• If the mapping scheme can in principle be compounded indefinitely, why 
don't we routinely see yn expressions for n greater than 3 or 4? 
Our answer: 
The "y of" language form provides the ability to compound indefinitely or, 
more important here, to compound five or six times and still give a perfectly 
memorable and pronounceable sentence. But as a matter of on-line processing, 
the megablend must maintain active connections across the whole network to 
give us a sense of overall global insight. Our hypothesis is that the megablend 
and its connections run into limits on working memory. The 'most obvious way 
around these limits is to build and make conventional a subscheme of a com-
pound network. Consider a y3 network in which the compressed role in the 
megablend is Father of Parent of Parent of The English language has a name for 
this compressed role: "great-grandfather." That megablend and the word for its 
compressed role are available to us as a chunk from long-term memory and so 
they place less demand on working memory than would a fresh y3 network such 
as "The father of the mother of the mother of." By providing a compression 
that is available as a unit from long-term memo .. ry, with an attached word for the 

166 
.. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
compressed role, great-grandfather makes it relatively easy to construct on-line a 
megablend for "The mother of your father's great-grandfather." 
FREEDOM AND LIMITS 
ON INTERPRETATION 
We have pointed out that different interpretations are possible for the same 
x.yz expression. 
Questiom: 
• What are the sources of these differences, if the mapping schemes are the 
same? 
• Are there any limits? 
Ouramwers: 
First, we should be careful to note that grammar pairs forms with mapping 
schemes, and that the same grammatical form can be paired with more than one 
mapping scheme. For example, "Y of" is a form that is paired with the Y-of net-
work mapping scheme we have discussed. But that same form is paired with a 
different mapping scheme, in which y is the counterpart of what is picked out 
by the noun following "0[," as in "the state of Alabama." Charles Fillmore gives 
this example: "ene needn't throw out the baby of personal morality with the 
bathwater of traditional religion." These counterparts need not be metaphoric, as 
we see from examples like "the nation of England," "the island of Kopipi," "the 
stigma of cowardice," "the feature of decompositionality," "the condition of de-
spair." In this chapter, we have not talked at all about the "of" expressions that 
prompt us to use this different mapping scheme. But of course it is possible to 
find expressions that are ambiguous. "The fire of love" could be read either way: 
Love is metaphorically fire, or fire is the metaphoric counterpart of something 
related to love, such as sexual passion or anguish. One source of difference in 
readings, then, comes from the different mapping schemes associated with the 
same language form. But chis is not our focus here. 
Suppose we are concerned with just one mapping scheme. We already saw 
that the imagination has wide latitude in recruiting, projecting, and blending 
additional background knowledge, context, and memories in order to develop a 
full meaning on the basis of a particular mapping scheme and a choice of partic-
ular domains and counterpart elements. But the mapping scheme itself leaves 
latitude in the selection of domains and counterpart elements. Consider "Vanity 
is the quicksand of reason." The mapping scheme prompts us to find an un-
named w in the space with quicksand and an unnamed relationship between 
quicksand and that element w .. It seems straightforward to select traveler as w, 
r~: 
{' 
Continuity Behind Divn-sity 
167 
since quicksand is a potential trap for the traveler JUSt as vanity is a potential 
crap for reason. And given that choice of elements for the mapping scheme, it 
seems automatic to conclude that vanity is something reason would want to 
steer clear of. But Oscar Wilde might have offered the reading that only the 
virtue of vanity can keep reason from wandering aimlessly in a barren, un-
charted desert; that vanity provides clarity of vision, excitement, purpose. Cru-
cially, the mapping scheme itself does not even guide us to choose traveler as w. 
Instead, the imagination has full latitude to choose, for example, desert as w, 
since quicksand is part of the desert, and part of is a very common and basic re-
lationship. Under that choice, we can form a blend in which vanity is part of 
reason. For example, we might conceive that there can be no reason without 
vanity, even though vanity is the weakest and least reliable part of reason. 
Does this freedom of the imagination mean that anything goes? On the con-
trary, finding one or two such integrations out of the potential infinity of 
connections afforded by the world is extremely difficult and anything but ran-
dom. There are several different influences on what connections will be made 
and what resulting networks will be satisfactory; In order to use a connection, 
such as the connection between quicksand and traveler, it has to be made active, 
and it cannot be made active unless it first exists or is constructed. Different con-
nections that might be made active vary on their degree of entrenchment and on 
how easy it is to activate them in any given moment. Suppose that you hear 
"Vanity is the quicksand of reason." It launches the XYZ mapping scheme, and 
your brain is now looking for a w. Suppose also that your brain has complete lat-
itude and tries bacteria. What happens at that point in pursuing the elaboration 
of the integration network? We need a frame in the quicksand-bacteria input 
space that will project to the blend and contribute to its emergent meaning. A 
minimal requirement on that frame is that it must contain the elements quick-
sand and bacteria and a relationship between them. But for most people, such a 
frame is not available because they have no conventional public knowledge or 
personal memories of such a frame. So even if the brain does try out bacteria, 
nothing comes of it, no blend is formed, and there is no conscious memory of 
the attempt. Alternatively, suppose we bring into existence the appropriate frame 
just before "Vanity is the quicksand of reason" comes along. Then this frame will 
be activated and probably tried out. In that case, bacteria might prove a superbly 
successful candidate for the missing w. This prediction is easily confirmed by in-
terpreting "Vanity is the quicksand of reason" within the following context: 
Did you know chat some bacteria can live only in quicksand and depend on it for 
everything? For them, quicksand is not a trap, it is what chey need to live at all. 
Well, for some people, vanity is the quicksand of reason. Their vanity gives them 
the self-confidence to chink well. 

168 
t' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
In any theory of meaning, activation does not come for free. The existence of 
frames, knowledge, experience, scenarios, and memories does not come for free. 
Ease of activation and degree of entrenchment by themselves impose very strong 
. constraints on the imagination and the use of language. Linguists, logicians, 
and, for the most part, even psychologists tend to focus on the entrenched cases, 
which are already built and usually easy to activate. When only the rigid and en-
trenched patterns are used, meaning becomes predictable based on the mapping 
schemes and those patterns. This is probably why linguists, logicians, and ana-
lytic philosophers of language have often incorrectly excluded inventive, figura-
tive, creative, and literary examples from their domain of inquiry. The mistaken 
view was that only predictable composition of meaning can be scientifically 
tractable and important, and that only predictable composition of meaning can 
support genuine rational thought as opposed to the glinting ephemera of 
whimsy. As we discover repeatedly, the power of thought-whether rational or 
whimsical, emotional or practical-lies in the same basic mental operations. To 
focus exclusively on the entrenched cases is co be blind to the way we think. It 
obscures not only our general operations of thought but nearly all of what is 
happening in the entrenched cases themselves. The action on stage in the en-
trenched cases is possible only because of much greater activity in the wings of 
the imagination. 
The latitude of the imagination can be pointed out for even the most en-
trenched tases. Take, for example, "Mary is Paul's mom." The strong default 
mapping is that PauL is the counterpart of son in the input with the kinship 
frame. That default is a choice the imagination makes, even though it is the easi-
est choice because of activation and entrenchment. But it is defeasible, and other 
choices, requiring different activations, can be made using the same principles of 
thought. Suppose in a nuclear family with children, Paul is the male parent and 
there is some scheme of divided labor or psychological roles with respect to the 
children. In this scenario, Paul's nuclear family has a role mom, and Mary fills 
that role for Paul; she is, as it were, mom of the household that has PauL as maLe 
parent, and we might say "Mary is Paul's mom" to mean this. Whether we choose 
as a counterpart of Paul son or male parent in a household, we have the identical 
general XYZ mapping scheme. But the two readings have different actual map-
pings, because different counterparts have been selected for the cross-space map-
ping, and of course different integrations have been performed in the blend. 
'.~ 
:: Part Two 
HOW CONCEPTUAL 
BLENDING MAKES 
HUMAN BEINGS WHAT 
THEY ARE, FOR 
BETTER AND FOR WORSE 

•• 
•• Nine 
THE ORIGIN 
OF LANGUAGE 
Every child is born a genius. 
-Buckminster Fuller 
LANGUAGE IS A MYSTERY because it is a singularity: Only human beings have 
grammar of the sort we find in natural languages. But language is not the only 
singularity: The considerable efforts of animal psychologists have uncovered no 
evidence that other species can reach very far in conceiving of counterfactual 
scenarios (such as those underlying pretense), metaphors, analogies, or category 
extensions. Even the most impressive nonhuman species have very limited abili-
ties to use tools, let alone design and make them. Human beings have elaborate 
rituals that constitute cultural meaning without being tied to immediate cir-
cumstances of feeding, fighting, or mating, but the nearest that other species 
can come to "rituals" are instinctive displays directly tied to such immediate cir-
cumstances. As Merlin Donald puts it, "Our genes may be largely identical to 
those of a chimp or gorilla, but our cognitive architecture is not. And having 
reached a critical point in our cognitive evolution, we are symbol-using, net-
worked creatures, unlike any that went before us." 
As we discussed at the beginning of Chapter 8, it is hard to get a reasonable 
explanation oflanguage that sees it as the product of gradual steps, each produc-
ing a grammar by making the previous grammar a little more complicated. Such 
an explanation would have to propose that a group of human beings began with 
a very simple grammar that gradually, generation after generation, grew ever 
more complex, until it reached the level we see in the languages in the world to-
day. However, such an explanation runs up against the fact that we can point to 
no simple languages, or even ones that are simpler than others. There are many 
evolutionary developments for which it is relatively easy to see a gradual path: 
We can see gradual steps by which early mammals plausibly evolved into pri-
mates or cetaceans. But we do not see any gradual path in mammalian history 
for the development over many generations of ever lJlore complex grammars. 
171 

·~ . 
172 
f' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
EXISTING THEORIES 
The hunt is on for the origin of language. What could have caused this singular-
. ity to corne into existence? One line of thinking looks at language as a very spe-
cific human production and asks how it could have arisen. The language faculty 
is viewed as distinct from other human capacities, .and so the correlation with 
the other human singularities has no theoretical place: Those other abilities are 
, distinct from language and call for other explanations. This line of exploration 
has room for many differe~t kinds of theories. 
Nativist theories-Chomksy is the preeminent name here-place the dis-
tinctiveness of language in specific genetic endowment for a specifically geneti-
cally instructed language module. Under that view, there is minimal learning in-
volved in acquiring a language. Most of the language module is already in place. 
Which language actually gets spoken-Chinese, Bantu, English-is relatively 
superficial: Very thin exposure to a given language sets parameters that control 
the output of the language module-that is, gives us one language instead of an 
alternative language. Bur it is not clear what, in the evolution of the human 
brain, could have been the precursor of the language module. Nor is it clear 
what pressures from natural selection would have produced such a module, 
given that we find no intermediate stages. This is why many nativists have em-
braced the view that a sudden, dramatic, perhaps unique event in human evolu-
tionary hi~fory produced in one leap a language module resembling nothing 
like the brain's previous resources. 
Other nativist views of language see it as having arisen by gradual natural se-
lection. For example, Stephen Pinker and Paul Bloom argue that "there must 
have been a series of steps leading from no language at all to language as we now 
find it, each step small enough to have been produced by a random mutation or 
recombination. " 
Although viewing language as a specific production distinct from other hu-
man capacities is associated with nativist theories of language as modular, nei-
ther nativism nor modularity is crucial for the view of language as a distinct ca-
pacity. A radical associative theorist who sees cognition as developing during 
childhood through the forming, strengthening, and weakening of connections 
between neurons might easily view language as a very special set of operations 
that arise in a network. On this view, language would be essentially distinct 
from other capacities of the network, even though all of them would share a 
common denominator in the basic associative operations. While the language 
faculty would not be localized in any area of the network, it would still be dis-
tinct operationally. 
Some associative theories emphasize the role of evolution in developing pow-
erfullearning mechanisms that perform statistical inferences on experiences. In 
~ .~~ 
y 
.-;.1,' 
......... 
The Origin of Language 
173 
these views, the brain has evolved rich, specific architectures for statistical ex-
traction, and language is one of the things that can be learned through those do-
main-general processes of statistical inferencing. Language is intricate and de-
pends upon the evolution of those learning abilities, but the way we learn it is 
not specific to language. The language the child hears-far from impover-
ished-is adequate for the purpose of converging on grammatical patterns by 
doing statistical inferencing. The evolutionary story here is that the brain 
evolved learning abilities with some bias for learning things like language, but 
did not evolve "language" or a neural "language module." As Terrence Deacon 
writes, "The relevant biases must be unlike those of any other species, and exag-
gerated in peculiar ways, given the unusual nature of symbolic learning." It re-
mains a challenge, of course, to explain how those particular learning abilities 
and biases for language could have evolved, and it is still not clear under this ex-
planation why we have no evidence of intermediate, simpler forms of language. 
One line of thinking, associated with theorists like William Calvin and 
Derek Bickerton and Frank R. Wilson, tries to find preadaptations for lan-
guage-such as the development of the hand or of reciprocal altruism-that 
could have put in place some of the computational ability that language needs. 
In this way of thinking, there were gradual steps toward language, but the early 
steps did not look like language because they weren't. They simply had some 
powers that made sophisticated language possible later on. 
There are also co-evolutionary proposals, including an influential recent pro-
posal by Terrence Deacon. Language, he argues, is not an instinct and there is no 
genetically installed linguistic black box in our brains; language arose slowly 
through cognitive and cultural inventiveness. Two million years ago, australo-
pithecines, equipped with non linguistic ape-like mental abilities, struggled to as-
semble, by fits and starts, an extremely crude symbolic sYstem-fragile, difficult to 
learn, inefficient, slow, inflexible, and tied to ritual representation of social con-
tracts like marriage. We would not have recognized it as language. But language 
then improved by two means. First, invented linguistic forms were subjected to a 
long process of selection. Generation after generation, the newborn brain de-
flected linguistic inventions it found uncongenial. The guessing abilities and intri-
cate non linguistic biases of the newborn brain acted as filters on the products of 
linguistic invention. Today's languages are systems of linguistic forms that have 
survived. The child's mind does not embody innate language structures. Rather, 
language has corne to embody the predispositions of the child's mind. 
The second, subordinate means by which language improved, in Deacon's 
view, had to do with changes in the brain. Crude and difficult language imposed 
the persistent cognitive burden of erecting and maintaining a relational network 
of symbols. This demanding environment favored genetic variations that ren-
dered brains more adept at language. Language began as a cognitive adaptation, 

174 
THE WAY WE THINK 
and genetic assimilation then eased some of the burden. Cognitive effort and ge-
netic assimilation interacted as language and brain co-evolved. In Deacon's view, 
language was "acquired with the aid of flexible ape-learning abilities." It was 
grafted onto an ape-like brain. Language, then, is not walled off from other cog-
nitive functions such as interpreting and reasoning. Grammatical form is not in-
dependent of conceptual meaning. There is no lingl,listic black box and there was 
no genetic installation of language. 
A RANGE OF" ARRESTING 
HU MAN SI N GU LARITI ES 
Three of the biggest singularities that seem to have entered explosively on the 
human stage around the same time in human prehistory are art, religion, and 
science. As Stephen Mithen writes in "A Creative Explosion?": 
An makes a dramatic appearance in the archaeological record. For over 2.5 mil-
lion years after the first stone tools appear, the closest we get to art are a few 
scratches on unshaped pieces of bone and stone. It is possible that these 
scratches have symbolic significance-but this is highly unlikely. They may not 
even be intentionally made. And then, a mere 30,000 years ago, at least 70,000 
years after the appearance of anatomically modern humans, we find cave paint-
ings in southwest France-paintings that are technically masterful and full of 
emotive power. 
Mithen makes the same claim for religion and science, and naturally asks what 
could have led to these singularities. His answer is that human beings suddenly 
developed a totally new capacity for "cognitive fluidity"-that is, a capacity for 
the "flow of knowledge and ideas between behavioral domains," such as "social 
intelligence" and "natural history intelligence." Although he has no theory 
about the principles of "cognitive fluidity" and views it as a higher-order opera-
tion used for the special purpose of putting different domains together, Mithen's 
general notion bears some resemblance to our idea of conceptual integration, 
and even his diagrams look strikingly like Figure 3.1, which we used to illustrate 
the Buddhist Monk riddle. What caused cognitive fluidity? In Mithen's view, 
there must have been some singular, explosive evolutionary event that produced 
a quite different sort of brain. 
Mithen observes that time and again, theorists have confidently if vaguely lo-
cated the exceptional cognitive abilities of human beings in their capacity to put 
two things together. Aristotle wrote that metaphor is the hallmark of genius. 
And as we saw in Chapter 2, Koestler proposed that the act of creation is the re-
sult of "bisociating" different matrices. 
Tht Origin of lAnguagt 
175 
The prehistoric picture we are left with is one of mysterious singularities: ex-
plosions, some perhaps simultaneous, in new human performances. We also 
have, for all these singularities, the problem that there is essentially no record of 
intermediate stages between the absence of the ability and its full flowering. 
And this prehistoric story has, at least for language, its contemporary parallel: 
We find no human groups, however isolated, that have only rudimentary lan-
guage. We find no primates with rudimentary language. At first glance, this 
seems a completely abnormal situation. We find no parallels in evolution of 
species, for example--no complex organisms that leap without precursors out 
of the .slime. What kind of theory do we need, then, in order to account for 
such a strange and unprecedented picture? 
WHAT SHOULD A PROPER 
THEORY OF" THE ORIGIN OF" 
LANGUAGE LOOK LIKE? 
As Darwin noted, evolution's main trick seems to be gradual change, so an 
adaptationist account is obliged to show that each step would have been adap-
tive. Evolution is never allowed to think "Well, if I'could get to stage ten, it 
would be good, so give me a break while I go through the first nine." Other 
things being equal, we prefer an evolutionary account that shows continuity of 
change rather than a spectacular singularity. Even "punctuated equilibrium" 
theories propose only relatively minor jumps-not jumps that produce an eye 
or language out of nothing. 
But we face a problem: How do we explain the emergence of arresting hu-
man singularities out of relatively continuous changes in brain and cognition? 
To think about this question, we must put aside twO major fallacies. The first 
is the fallacy of Cause-Effect Isomorphism. Compressing cause and effect is in-
dispensable to cognition, but it often has the bad consequence for scientific 
thinking that, recognizing an effect, we conceive of the cause as having much 
the same status as the effect. If the effect is dramatic, we expect a dramatic 
causal event. If the effect is unusual, we expect an unusual causal event. This 
way of thinking is so common that popular science accounts routinely offer en-
tertaining demonstrations of the way in which unusual cases come from boring, 
routine causes. This is always the story for popular accounts of evolution or 
chaos theory: The beetle whose abdomen has grown into a covering costume 
that makes it look like a termite so it can live in termite nests aros.e through the 
most routine operations of gradual natural selection. 
The Cause-Effect Isomorphism Fallacy leads us to think that a discontinuity 
in effects must come from a discontinuity in causes, and therefore that the sud-
den appearance of language must be linked to a catasuophic neural event. The 
01 

,\. 
176 
t' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
only evidence we need against this fallacy is the straw that broke the camel's 
back, but in fact we see such evidence everywhere in science. Under heat, there 
is a smooth continuity of causation as ice goes abruptly from solid to liquid. 
, The change from solid to liquid is a singularity, bue there is no underlying sin-
gularity in the causes or in the causal process. One more drop of wat~r in a full 
cup causes a lot of water to flow suddenly out onto, the table, not just the one 
drop that was added. One more gram of body fat can make it possible for you to 
, float on your back without effort in the middle of the South Pacific; a gram 
fewer and you sink down. In this last case, a life-and-death singularity arises 
from smooth continuity in causes and causal operations. Nothing has changed 
about the principles of hydrodynamics or buoyancy when you drown. 
So, in principle, the sudden appearance of language is not evidence against 
evolutionary continuity. Singularity from continuity is a normal occurrence. 
The only remaining question is, Can biological evolution also work this way? 
Are there specific evolutionary processes that give us remarkable singularities 
out of causal continuities? Here, we encounter a second major fallacy, the Func-
tion-Organ Isomorphism Fallacy. This is the well-known idea that the onset of a 
new organismic function requires the evolution of a new organ. Under this fal-
lacy, because opossums hang from trees by their tails, tails are organs for per-
forming the function of hanging from trees; because people speak with their 
tongues, tongues are organs for talking. But biologists routinely point out that 
as an orgal}, evolves it may acquire new functions or lose old functions or both. 
There were intricate mammalian tongues before there was language; the tongue 
did not need to be invented afresh. And the ancestors of opossums had tails be-
fore opossums hung from trees. The continuous evolution of an organ does not 
necessarily correlate with a c,9ntinuous evolution of a function. Functions can 
be singularities while the evolution of an organ is continuous. Like the body in 
the water,an,organ may need only the tiniest increment of change to subserve a 
striking new function, such as floating. 
We see this in the case of the proposed theories of how dinosaurs evolved 
into birds. Nobody proposes a theory of discontinuity for the organ (wings) but 
nobody proposes a theory of continuity for the function (flight). Rather, ac-
cording to such theories, wings came gradually: Scales seem to have developed 
slowly into feathers, feathers provided warmth, the existence of longer arms and 
feathers made it possible to flap for a little extra ground speed and so the arms 
got longer and more feathery. Flight in all these theories came at one fell swoop: 
At a critical point, the organism could become truly airborne, and so could now 
fly after the dragonfly and gobble it up. It occurs to no one to propose that 
flight-a spectacular singularity of function-came about because an organ for 
flight suddenly evolved from scratch. It also occurs to no one to propose that 
since modern birds fly higher than one hundred feet, there must have been 
' .. : 
The Origin of Language 
177 
intermediate stages in which birds could attain heights of first one foot, then 
many generations later two feet, and so on up to one hundred feet. Being truly 
airborne is all-or-nothing, and so the behavior of flying is also basically a11-or-
nothing. An organism either flies or does not. 
In thinking about the origin of language, we must put aside the fallacies of 
Cause-Effect Isomorphism and Function-Organ Isomorphism. Language is not 
an organ. The brain is the organ, and language is a function subserved by it, 
with the help of various other organs. Language is the surface manifestation of a 
capacity. It is a singularity of function, and so nothing prevents it from having 
arisen from a basically continuous and adaptive process of evolution. The func-
tion can have arisen recently in human evolution even though the continuous 
changes that brought it about can have been working for many millions of 
years. The causes are very old bue one particular effect showed up just yesterday. 
This is what we propose. 
The best theory of the origin of language would have the following features: 
• A recognition of the singularity of language. There is no phylogenetic evi-
dence of susta.ined intermediate stages, and no evidence of present human 
languages that are rudimentary. 
• Rejection of an extraordinary event as responsible for the extraordinary ca-
pacity. In other words, no Cause-Effect Isomorphism. 
• A continuous path of evolutionary change over a very long period as the 
cause of language, since that is how evolution almost always works. 
• A path that is a plausible adaptive story: Each change along the path 
must have been adaptive in itself, regardless of where the path ulrimately 
led. 
• Hence a continuous evolutionary path that produces singularities. 
• A model of what mental operations developed along that path, and in 
what order. 
• An explicit account of what continuous changes produced what singulari-
ties, and how they did so. 
• Robust evidence from many quarters that human beings actually perform 
the mental operations on that hypothetical path. 
• Intermediate steps not for the function of language itself but for the cog-
nitive abilities that finally led to the precipitation oflanguage as a product. 
• Evidence in the anatomy or behavior of today's human beings pointing to 
the history of these steps, just as anatomical evidence in today's human be-
ings points to our once having had tails. 
• Other things being equal, a parsimonious way of explaining the emer-
gence of many related human singularities as products that arise along the 
same continuous evolutionary path. 

178 
THE CENTRAL PROBLEM 
OF" LANGUAGE 
THE WAY WE THINK 
The world of human meaning is incomparably richer than language forms. Al-
though language has been said to make an infinite number of forms available, it 
is a lesser infinity than the infinity of situations offered by the very rich physical 
mental world that we live in. To see that, take any form, such as "My cow is 
brown," and try to imagine all the possible people, cows, and shades of brown 
to which it might apply, as well as all the different uses of the phrase as ironic or 
categorical or metaphoric, including its use as an example in this paragraph. 
A word like "food" or "there" must apply very widely if it is to do its job. The 
same is true of grammatical patterns independent of the words we put in them. 
Take the resultative construction in English, which has the form A-Verb-B-
Adjective, where the Adjective denotes a property C. It means A do something to 
B with the result that B have property C, as in "Kathy painted the wall white." We 
want this construction to ptompt for conceptions of actions and results over 
vast ranges of human life: "She kissed him unconscious," "Last night's meal 
made me sick," "He hammered it flat," "I boiled the pan dry," "The earthquake 
shook the building apart," "Roman imperialism made Latin universal." We find 
it obvious that the meaning of the resultative construction could apply to all 
these different domains, but applying it thus requires complex cognitive opera-
tions. The events described here are in completely different domains (Roman 
imperialism versus blacksmithing) and have strikingly different time spans (the 
era in which a language rises versus a few seconds of earthquake), different spa-
tial environments (most of Europe versus the stovetop), different degrees of in-
tentionality (Roman imperialism versus a forgetful cook versus an earthquake), 
and ~ery different kinds of connection between cause and effect (the hammer 
blow causes the immediate flatness of the object, but eating the meal at one 
time causes sickness at a later time through a long chain of biological events). 
This very simple grammatical construction allows us to perform a complex 
conceptual integration that, in effect, compresses over Identity (e.g., Roman im-
perialism), Time, Space, Change, Cause-Effect, and Intentionality. The gram-
matical construction provides a compressed input space with a corresponding 
language form. It is then blended in a network with another input that typically 
contains an unintegrated and relatively diffuse chain of events. So, if it is our 
job to turn off the burner under the pan containing zucchini in boiling water, 
and we forget about it and all the water evaporates, we can say, confessionally, 
"No zucchini tonight. I boiled the pan dry. Sorry." In the diffuse input, the 
causal chain runs from forgetting to the invariant position of the burner knob, 
to the flow of gas, to the flame, to the temperature of the pan, to the tempera-
ture of the water, to the level of the water, to the dryness of the pan. The agent 
'\:, 
The Origin of Language 
179 
performs no direct or indirect action on the pan at all. But in the blend, the 
compressed structure associated with the grammatical construction is projected 
together with some selected participants from the diffuse chain of events in the 
diffuse input. In the blend, the agent acts directly on the pan. Moreover, al-
though the boiling of the water is an event and its cause was something the 
agent did or did not do, there is cause-effect compression in the blend such that 
in the blend, although not in the input spaces, boiling is an action the agent per-
formed on the pan. 
As this example shows, the simplest grammatical constructions require not 
only high abstraction over domains but also complex double-scope integration. 
This is a very general feature of grammatical constructions, as we will demon-
strate with considerable additional evidence in Chapter 17. 
Paradoxically, language is possible only if it allows a limited number of com-
binable language forms to cover a very large number of meaningful situations. 
The previous chapter described an example of how that happens. We saw how a 
simple form, "y of," prompts for an integration mapping scheme that efficiently 
covers vast ranges of meaning. We also saw in some detail how that form com-
bines to prompt for ever-larger mapping schemes. 
There is every reason to think that some species ·are able to operate effi-
ciently in separate domains of, say, tool use, mating, and eating without being 
able to perform these abstractions and integrations. If that is so, then grammar 
would be.of no use to them, because they cannot perform the conceptual inte-
grations that grammar serves to prompt. But couldn't they just have a simpler 
grammar? The only way they could have a simpler grammar and yet have de-
scriptions in language for what happens would be by having separate forms 
and words for everything that happens in all the different domains. But the 
world is infinitely too rich for that to be of any use. Trying to carry around 
"language" of that size would be crippling. The evidence does not suggest that 
primates have compensated for lack of language by developing, for example, 
one million special-purpose words, each conveying a special scenario. On the 
contrary, although primate species are capable of specific "vocalizations" (e.g., 
in response to a potential predator), the best efforts to teach words to chim-
panzees cannot get them past a vocabulary of about two hundred items. Hav-
ing a handful of vocalizations is clearly a help, but evolution has found no use 
in trying to extend that strategy very far. The extraordinary evolutionary ad-
vantage of language lies in its amazing ability to be put to use in any situation. 
We will call this crucial property of language "equipotentiality." For any situa-
tion, real or imaginary, there is always a way to use language to express 
thoughts about that situation. The key to the amazing power of the equipoten-
tiality of language, which we take for granted and use effortlessly in all circum-
stances, is double-scope conceptual integration. 
oJ 

180 
G RADI ENTS 0 F" CO N CEPTUAL 
INTEGRATION AND THE 
EMERGENCE OF" LANGUAGE 
THE WAY WE THINK 
On independent grounds, we must grant that human beings today have power-
ful and general abilities of conceptual integration. In particular, double-scope 
networks are the kind of mental feat that human beings perform with the great-
est of ease but that other species are unable to achieve. Thus far we have seen the 
crucial role of double-scope networks in grammatical constructions, the inven-
tion of scientific and mathematical concepts, religious rituals, counterfactual 
scenarios, persuasive representations, and vital-relation compressions. 
We have also seen that networks of conceptual integration fall along gradi-
ents of complexity. At the top end are networks whose inputs have clashing or-
ganizing frames and blends that draw on both of those frames, the double-
scopes. At the bottom end are simplex networks with conventional frames and 
ordinary values for their roles. In Chapter 8 we surveyed a continuum of com-
plexity from the most rigid and basic simplex networks to topology-clashing 
double-scopes. Along the way, we discovered other prototypes: mirror and sin- . 
'gle-scope networks, and saw that these types of network are not separate cate-
gories but products of the. basic mental operation of conceptual integration. 
They stand out from the great range of blending networks. 
Our hypothesis for the origin of language is as follows: 
• Double-scope conceptual integration is characteristic of human beings 
but not other species and is indispensable across art, religion, reasoning, 
science, and other singular mental feats that are characteristic of human 
beings. 
• The hallmark virtue of advanced blending capacity is its provision of effi-
cient, intelligible, strong compressions across ranges of meaning that 
would otherwise be diffuse and unmanageable. There are many scenes 
that are immediately apprehensible to human beings: throwing a stone in 
a particular direction, breaking open a nut to get the meat, grabbing an 
object, walking to a visible location, killing an animal, recognizing a mate, 
distinguishing friend from foe. Double-scope blending gives us the 
supremely valuable, perhaps species-defining cognitive instrument of an-
choring other meanings in a highly compressed blend that is like these im-
mediately apprehensible basic human scenes, often because such scenes 
are used to help frame the blend. 
• The development of blending capacity was gradual and required a long 
expanse of evolutionary time: Basic blending is evident as far back as the 
evolution of mammals. 
.;:j 
" 
.~ 
Tht Origin of Languagt 
181 
• Each step in the development of blending capacity was adaptive. From 
very simple simplex blends to very creative double-scopes, each step of the 
capacity would have been adaptive because each step gives increasing cog-
nitive ability to compress, remember, reason, categorize, and analogize. 
• There is ample evidence of intermediate stages in the development of 
blending capacity. Some species, for example, seem able to do only simple 
simplex networks, while others seem able tq do slightly more unusual sim-
plex networks. 
• There is also ample evidence of intermediate stages in human beings, in 
the sense that although we can do double-scope blending, we can of 
course still do simplex blending. 
• A special level of capacity for conceptual integration must be achieved be-
fore a system of expression with a limited number of combinable forms 
can cover an open-ended number of situations and framings. 
• The indispensable capacity needed for language is the capacity to do dou-
ble-scope blending. 
• The development of double-scope blending is not a cataclysmic event but, 
rather, an achievement along a continuous sc~e of blending capacity, and 
so there is no Cause-Effect Isomorphism in the origin of language: The 
cause was continuous but the effect was a singularity. 
• Language arose as a singularity. It was a new behavior that emerged natu-
rally once the capacity of blending had developed to the critical level of 
double-scope blending. 
• Language is like flight: an all-or-nothing behavior. If a species has not 
reached the stage of double-scope blending, it will not develop language at 
all, since the least aspects of grammar require it. But if it has reached the 
stage of double-scope blending, it can very rapidly develop a full language 
in cultural time because it has all the necessary prerequisites for a full set 
of grammatical integrations. The culture cannot stop at a "simpler" lan-
guage-for example, one that has only the Subject-Verb clausal construc-
tion. A grammatical system, to meet the crucial condition of equipoten-
tiality, must possess a full set of possible integrations and corresponding 
forms that can combine to give expressions suitable for any situation. 
Therefore, language will automatically be multiply double-scope and 
complex. And there will be no stopping the development of language 
from achieving that level, since the engine of double-scope blending that 
produces equipotentiality will be fully in place. 
• The story of the origin of language does have room for intermediate 
stages, in the capacity: Human beings still have the capacity to do simple 
forms of blending. But no intermediate stages will be found in languages 
themselves because full grammar precipitates quickly as a singular product 
J 

182 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
of the blending capacity once it reaches the critical stage. By "quickly" 
here we do not mean instantaneously but within cultural rather than evo-
lutionary time. 
• The hallmark virtue of language is its ability to use grammatical patterns, 
suirable for basic human scenes, to capture and convey much less tidy mean-
ings. This is done through the massive compression offered by double-scope 
blending, which can achieve blends that fit the grammatical patterns associ-
ated with those basic human scenes. (In Chapter 17 we will survey the ways 
in which the basic constructions of a grammar rely on double-scope blend-
ing.) Language, in the strong sense, must be equipotential. It must be ser-
viceable for the innumerable new situations we encounter. But the only way 
it can be equipotential is for the human mind to be able to blend those new 
situations with what we already know to give us intelligible blends with at-
tached grammatical patterns so those existing grammatical patterns can ex-
press the new situations. To say something new, we do not need to invent 
new grammar-and a good thing, too! Rather, we need to conceive of a 
blend that lets existing grammar come into play. Only in this way can an in-
dividual with a small, relatively fixed vocabulary of words and basic gram-
matical patterns cope with an extremely rich and open-ended world. 
If we follow the view of Stephen Mithen-according to which other sin-
gular explosions in human capacity and society, such as tool design, art, 
religi?'>:I,and s~ientific knowledge, were the result of "cognitive fluidity"-
then It IS plaUSIble to conclude that all these specracular changes in human 
performance came about once the continuous improvement of blending 
capacity reached the critical level of double-scope blending. Mithen ex-
plicitly places the origin of language far before the development of "cogni-
tive fluidity." For him, language is an input to "cognitive fluidity." For us, 
by contrast, it is the most impressive behavioral product of double-scope 
blending. 
In summary, continuous improvement of blending capacity reached the crit-
ical level of double-scope blending, and language precipirated as a singularity. 
But why should double-scope blending have been the critical level of blending 
that made language possible? The central problem of expression is that we and 
perhaps other mammals have a vast, open-ended number of frames and provi-
sional conceptual assemblies that we manipulate. Even if we had only one word 
per frame, the result would be too many words to manage. Double-scope inte-
gration, however, permits us to use vocabulary and grammar for one frame or 
domain or conceptual assembly to say things about others. It brings a level of ef-
ficiency and generality that suddenly makes the challenging mental logistics of 
expression tractable. The forms of language work not because we have managed 
The Origin of Language 
183 
to encode in them these vast and open-ended ranges of meaning, but because 
they make it possible to prompt for high-level integrations over conceptual ar-
rays we already command. Neither the conceptual operations nor the concep-
tual arrays are encoded, carried, contained, or otherwise captured by the forms 
of language. The forms need not and indeed cannot carry the full construal of 
the specific situation but, instead, consist of prompts for thinking about situa-
tions in the appropriate way to arrive at a construal. 
Our proposal would explain the apparent discontinuity of the appearance of 
language: No "fossils" of early simple language have been found because there 
were none. The appearance of language is a singularity much like the rapid crys-
tallization that occurs when a dust speck is dropped into a supersaturated solu-
tion. When a community graduates to double-scope integration at the conceptual 
level, any local problem of expression that is solved by a specific double-scope in-
tegration gives the pattern for solving the general problem of expression, making 
that general problem tractable, and resulting in the complex singularity of the ap-
pearance of a system that uses a limited number of combinable forms to cover an 
open-ended number of situations. It "covers" these situations not by encoding 
construals of them (e.g., through truth-conditional compositionality) but, rather, 
by using a limited number of forms to prompt for on-line inventive integrations 
that are full construals. 
THE ORIGIN OF 
COGN/T/VELY MODERN HUMANS 
Here are some fascinating individual truths about evolution and the origin of 
modern human beings that have been widely, if disparately, recognized but 
never before combined into a single coherent story: 
• Biological evolution happens gradually. 
• Human language appears, in evolutionary terms, very suddenly in recent 
prehistory. 
• Art, science, religion, and tool use also appear very suddenly in recent pre-
history. 
• Human beings differ from all other species in having these behavioral sin-
gularities, and their performances in these areas are extraordinarily ad-
vanced. 
• Anatomically modern human beings arose 150,000 years ago. 
But behaviorally modern human beings date &om around 50,000 years ago. 
That is, evidence of advanced modern behavior in tool use, art, and religious 
practices appears in the archeological record around 50,000 years ago. 
• There is no evidence of "simple" languages in other species. 
./ 
) 
{

184 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
• There is no evidence of "simpler" languages in other human groups. 
• Children learn co~plex languages remarkably easily. But they go through 
what look like intermediate stages. 
None of the previous theories puts all these truths together, and the theories 
that do exist conflict with one another, sometimes in extreme ways. 
Some theorists propose that a dramatic biologic~ event produced dramati-
, cally different human beings who had language. Chomsky proposes such a dra-
matic biological event for language. Mithen, by contrast, proposes a neurological 
"big bang" for cognitive fluidity but not for language. For Mithen, the earliest 
anatomically modern human beings already have language, but it takes them an-
other hundred thousand years to get art, religion, science, and elaborate tool use, 
and when they do get those performances, it happens overnight. That change in 
behavior is triggered by an exceptional, singular change in the human brain that 
is highly adaptive. For Mithen, that dramatic biological change is unrelated to 
the origin of language but instead produces remarkable human creative abilities. 
Language, already available, latches on to these new abilities. It is a beneficiary of 
cognitive fluidity but is not in itself creative under this account. For Chomsky, 
the dramatic biological event has only syntax as its direct product; he is also skep-
tical of accounts that adaptation played any role in the appearance of language. 
Both Chomsky and Mithen look at a singular result or results and explain them 
by postulating a singular biological cause. In this way, they deal efficiently with 
the absenc~ ' of intermediate stages: The full results followed quickly from the 
causes. For Chomsky, the singular result of the dramatic biological change is lan-
guage, which appears explosively on the human stage. For Mithen, art, science, 
and religion appear explosively on the human stage, but not language. These the-
ories do not come without cost, however. They go against the principle of gradu-
alism in evolution. Chomsky even seems to go against natural selection. Both he 
and Mithen pull a speculative, catastrophic, indeterminate, but all-powerful bio-
logical event out of a hat. Their explanations have built-in limits beyond which 
they cannot be pushed. Chomsky would need an extra theory to account for all 
the other human singularities, and Mithen would need an extra theory to ac-
count for language. Their theories are driven by Cause-Effect Isomorphism. 
Chomsky adds Function-Organ Isomorphism of the strongest possible sort. 
Since these isomorphisms give us compressions and hence global insights, they 
are seductive. 
Other theories, such as those of Terrence Deacon on the one hand and 
Steven Pinker and Paul Bloom on the other, propose gradual evolutionary or 
co-evolutionary development of language ability. Both of these theories avoid 
the trap of proposing dramatic biological causes, but they face the problem of 
explaining why there are no surviving intermediate stages: Both propose that 
there were intermediate stages, but that the people who had them are gone and 
,'lI," 
The Origin of Language 
185 
left no trace of those stages. Pinker and Bloom additionally face the difficulty of 
explaining the other human singularities; their theory, like Chomsky's, is di-
rected exclusively at the origin of language and not at the development of cer-
tain forms of conceptual thought. Deacon is the one theorist on our list who 
leaves ample room for relating the origin of,language to the origin of other cul-
tural behaviors. He proposes the gradual. adaptive evolution of a relational abil-
ity that underlies a range of human performances, Those performances then co-
evolved with that mental and biological capacity. From our point of view, 
Deacon has the right overall frame for the origin of language, but his theory is 
missing an explanation of the mental operations underlying this relational abil-
ity. The findings we present in this book were not available when Deacon was 
developing his views. More generally, the notion that human mental feats as dis-
parate as simple framing, counterfactual thinking, and event integration could 
proceed from the same cognitive ability and lie on a common continuum was 
unavailable in the cognitive neuroscience community. We have seen that con-
ceptual blending is a good candidate for a continually evolving mental ability 
that could produce the singularity of language. This opens up possibilities that 
Deacon could not have considered. Another consequence of our findings is that 
language would have precipitated much more quickly than Deacon proposes, 
over a span of thousands of years rather than millions. But on the other hand, 
the evolution of the cognitive capacity that yields language as a singularity could 
have begun long before there were human beings. hominids, or even primates. 
Still other theories, such as the Lingua ex Machina proposal of William 
Calvin and Derek Bickerton, offer a preadaptation story. According to these 
theories, evolution labored long to produce abilities that ended up subserving 
syntax. These theories thereby avoid postulating a singular cataclysmic cause. 
On the contrary, they are gradualist stories. Calvin and Bickerton also go into 
the details of what those evolved capacities were (e.g., the ability to throw a pro-
jectile, the ability for reciprocal altruism) and what computational abilities they 
could provide to syntax. There is certainly nothing wrong with thinking that 
preadaptations played an important role in making the origin oflanguage possi-
ble. Indeed, the capacity we invoke, conceptual blending. far from being limited 
to language. extends to action, reasoning, social interaction, and so on. The 
emergence of conceptual blending would have been favored by preadaptations. 
Where we differ with Calvin and Bickerton is that they propose that evolution 
delivered an ability for grammar while we propose that evolution delivered an 
ability for conceptual blending which, once it reached the stage of double-scope 
integration, had grammar as a product. 
None of the proposals we have seen explicitly links all the singularities-lan-
guage, science, religion, the arts-as deriving from a common cause. But there 
are other accounts that do see that linking as a priority. For example, Richard 
Klein, in The Human Career, offers the hypothesis that a dramatic mutation 

186 
THE WAY WE THINK 
produced neurological change about 50,000 years ago, and that this neurologi-
cal change gave human beings some signal capacity such as language. Once that 
particular capacity was in place, it led to the development of advanced tool use 
and the invention of art and perhaps other abilities, and these neurologically ad-
vanced human beings spread throughout the world. 
Our proposal for the origin of language has ample room for full linkage 
across the singularities in human performance that aro'se around 50,000 years 
ago, but it does not require anyone of them to have been the cause of the oth-
ers. On the contrary, there is a deeper, underlying cause-namely, the continu-
ous development of blending capacity until it arrived at the critical point of 
double-scope blending, and all these staggering new performances of human 
beings proceed from that capacity as products developed in parallel. On our 
view, these new performances reinforced each other in cultural time. The evolu-
tionary achievement of double-scope blending still needs cultural time in which 
to bear all its fruit. The visible products of the new cognitive capacity are all so-
cial and external-art, religion, language, tool use. There is every reason to 
think that once the capacity was achieved and the cultural products started 
to emerge, they reinforced each other. Language assisted social interaction, so-
cial interaction assisted the cultural development of language, and language as-
sisted the elaboration of tool use, as the tree of culture put forward these excep-
tional new products. Language and art became part of religion, religion part of 
art, language part of the technology of tools, all intertwined. Certainly this is 
the picture we see when we look at human beings today. We will consider more 
evidence for this intertwining in the next chapter, when we look at blending 
and material culture. 
We agree with Klein that the singularities are linked, but this does not imply 
that one of them caused the others. They are all products of the underlying 
evolution of the capacity for double-scope blending. There is another aspect of 
Klein's work, however, that is crucial to our account. He places the origin of 
language near in date to the origin of the other singularities. Why would a the-
orist like Mithen, who saw cognitive fluidity as the "big bang" of human evolu-
tion, not have considered language as part of the constellation of singularities 
like art, science, and religion that resulted from that big bang? The answer is 
simple: He assumes that language falls out of a combination of big brains and 
modern vocal apparatus. Mithen writes: "During the last few years the argu-
ment that both archaic H. sapiens and Neanderthals had the brain capacity, 
neural structure and vocal apparatus for an advanced form of vocalization, that 
should be called language, is compelling." This account would place the origin 
of language in the range ·of 100,000 to 400,000 years ago, and perhaps as 
much as 780,000 years ago. Therefore, language must have arisen, on Mithen's 
view, at least 50,000 years before the explosion of art, science, and religion in 
the human record. 
'-
The Origin of lAnguage 
187 
Yet Mithen himself takes the view that human beings about 50,000 years ago 
developed striking new mental abilities that did not require a change in brain 
size or in anatomy. We think that is exactly right, but that language was part of 
the suite of products that flowed from that evolution. This unifying hypothesis 
receives strong suppOrt from recent archeological and genetic studies that were 
not available to Mithen. 
Klein provides archeological evidence that there are two distinct types of mod-
ern human beings--anatomically modern and behaviorally modern. The anatom-
ically modern humans have our anatomy, but not our characteristic behaviors. 
The behaviorally modern humans have both. The anatomically modern human 
beings, dating from about 200,000 years ago, at some point cohabited with more 
archaic human beings, such as Neanderthals. The behaviorally modern human 
beings originated much more recently-about 50,000 years ago-and dispersed 
eastward from Africa, ultimately supplanting all other human beings. 
Klein's view receives even stronger support from two genetics studies, one by 
Silvana Santachiara-Benerecetti, the other by Russell Thomson, Jonathan 
Pritchard, Peidong Shen, Peter Oefner, and Marcus Feldman. Santachiara-
Benerecetti's work on mitochondrial DNA led her to the conclusion that behav-
iorally modern human beings arose about 60,000 years ~o out of Mrica and 
migrated eastward into Asia rather than northward into' Europe, as was previ-
ously found for the more ancient anatomically modern human beings. In turn, 
Russell Thomson and his colleagues looked at Y chromosomes in people around 
the world today and computed an expected time on the order of 50,000 years to 
our most recent common ancestor. That dating falls within a large range of un-
certainty but, in any event, moves the origin of behaviorally modern human be-
ings closer to us by many tens of thousands of years. 
Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza takes the final step, locating language as an in-
vention of behaviorally modern human beings. He places it alongside the in-
vention of boats and rafts and Aurignacian technology, which is to say, beads 
and pendants and other items of personal decoration used for social and ritual 
purposes. While Cavalli-Sforza brings the origin of language forward to about 
50,000 years ago, other researchers would push the date of the invention of 
craft technologies such as cord-making and weaving back by several tens of 
thousand years. James M. Adavaso, an anthropologist specializing i'.l textiles, 
estimates that weaving and cord-making probably date from 40,000 B.C., "at a 
minimum," and possibly much earlier. 
These new findings converge to suggest the rapid cultural invention of a co-
ordinated suite of modern human performances, dating from the same epoch, . 
perhaps about 50,000 years ago. We have argued that all of these modern hu-
man performances, which appear as singularities in human evolution, are the 
common consequence of the human mind's having reached a critical level of 
blending capacity-namely, double-scope conceptual integration. 
" 

188 
,. 
== CHAPTER 9 
ZOOM OUT 
BLENDING LEADS TO 
SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERIES BUT 
ALSO TO SCIENTIFIC FALLACIES 
THE WAY WE THINK 
We have seen in earlier chapters that compression through integration can yield 
global insight, as in the case of complex numbers. But in this chapter we have 
seen that a compressed global insight can also be a fallacy. Cause-Effect Isomor-
phism and Function-Organ Isomorphism are cases where compression can de-
liver misleading global insights. 
Question: 
• What is the merit of compression through blending if it leads to error? 
Our answer: 
Compression through blending often leads to deep insight into useful truth. 
When an earthquake causes a building to fall down, we see' a tight cause-effect 
isomorphi~,m between the trembling of the ground and the trembling of the 
building. the trembling building becomes part of the earthquake: This impulse 
to find similarities in cause and effect has been examined at length in anthropo-
logical studies of culture, myth, and magic-for example, by Sir James George 
Frazier in The Golden Bough. 
But while compressing cause and effect so they are similar or isomorphic can 
be good, assuming as given that they must be similar or isomorphic is a fallacy. 
After all, long wear over centuries can cause a wall to collapse in seconds. We 
have seen this fallacy at work in theories of cataclysmic genetic mutation that 
immediately produced language capacity from scratch. In those theories, the 
isomorphism blends the singular nature of the effect with the cause, to give sin-
gularity to the cause. Conversely, if we assume that the cause is gradual, as in 
gradual natural selection, it is a fallacy to assume that the effect should also have 
appeared gradually. We see the fallacy at work in the theory that gradual natural 
selection must have produced a gradually developing protolanguage, even 
though there is no evidence for protolanguage. Theorists as different as Deacon, 
Pinker, and Calvin and Bickerton all proposed the existence of such proto-
languages as stages on the evolutionary path to full language. On our view, lan-
guage is a singulariry and an external social manifestation of having reached the 
critical level of double-scope blending. There need not have been any external 
language-like manifestations of the earlier levels of the capacity for conceptual 
The Origin of Language 
189 
integration or, for that matter, any additional biological evolution after humans 
reached the level of double-scope blending: Cultural evolution in cultural time 
would have sufficed. The Cause-Effect Isomorphism Fallacy consists of taking a 
Cause-Effect Vital Relation and assuming that it is equally a Similarity relation: 
The cause and effect are identical at some level. 
Another fallacy of compression appears in Klein's proposal that language was 
the large neural event that caused the other singularities in human evolution. In 
this case, because performances like language, decoration, and technology have 
relations of similarity at some level, we assume that they must also have cause-
effect connections: One becomes not merely like the others in some ways but 
therefore the cause of the others. This is the flip side of Cause-Effect Isomor-
phism. We call it the Toblerone Fallacy, after the Toblerone ad that turns the 
similarity between the chocolate candy and the pyramids into the candy's being 
the cause of the pyramids. 
All of these are fallacies of assuming certain kinds of compression. Yet the 
compressions often turn out to be right. We ourselves are proposing a compres-
sion over many singularities of human performance, seeing all of them as effects 
of a single cause, double-scope blending. We do not, however, use Cause-Effect 
Isomorphism compression: According to our proposal, the cause was gradual, 
continuous, and cognitive, while the effects were singular, quick, and social. 
MENTAL BLENDING 
AND SOCIAL LANGUAGE 
Capacities for conceptual integration are internal processes. Language, like art, sci-
ence, and religion, is an external social process that depends on communication. 
Question: 
• In the blending account, it seems as if language itself plays no role in the 
origin of language. Can language be just a by-product? 
Our answer: 
Our analysis of the origin of language differs from others in proposing that 
an internal cognitive operation evolved over a long evolutionary period for 
functions independent of language, but that a certain stage of this operation-
double-scope blending-was a sine qua non condition for the external commu-
nicative capacity oflanguage. To have the capacity oflanguage means to have an 
inventory of grammatical constructions that, although small relative to the rich-
ness of the world, are equipotential. For a relatively small inventory of gram-
matical constructions to be equipotential-that is, to apply generally rather 
than to only a small number of restricted scenes-they must be double-scope 
conceptual integrations. Therefore, there will be no language in the proper sense 

190 
THE WAY WE THINK 
until the stage of double-scope blending is reached. But from that point, there is 
in principle no limit to the invention of complex constructions. In Chapter 17, 
we will see in detail that this double-scope capacity is indispensable for the 
everyday use of basic grammatical constructions and even of rudimentary 
words. To have any degree of command of an apparently simple word like "fa-
ther" requires sophisticated double-scope blending. The same is true of all open-
class words-"house," "red," "fly." Closed-class items-"of," "that," "here," 
"-ed" as a suffix, and so on-are themselves, as we saw, prompts for mapping 
schemes, typically involving integration. 
To miss this point is to commit the Kanzi Fallacy, an instance of the Eliza 
Fallacy. Kanzi, a bonobo or pygmy chimpanzee, is to date the most adept in a 
tradition of ape users of signs that includes Nim Chimsky and Sarah. At the age 
of six, Kanzi seemed to have a command of about 150 words and could make 
two-word sequences. The furious debates over Kanzi and his colleagues have 
had to do with the question of whether Kanzi has syntax. But there is agreement 
that Kanzi has vocabulary, because he can manipulate some symbols that, for us, 
correspond to words we know. It is a fallacy, however, to assume, when Kanzi 
manipulates symbols that we see as words, that he is necessarily engaged in the 
same equipotential double-scope conceptual integration that human children 
use when they deploy vocabulary. 
We want to make it clear that we do not dispute that Kanzi must be using 
powerful conceptual integration to do what he is doing in manipulating sym-
bols and even combinations of symbols. Kanzi and human beings do indeed fall 
on a continuum of mental ability. But we note that none of Kanzi's attested be-
haviors displays the capacity for equipotentiality or reaches the level of double-
scope conceptual integration. 
The human child's use of words looks entirely different from Kanzi's be-
cause it is equipotential. There is apparently no limit to the child's rapid acqui-
sition of new words and to their very wide application, and the child is con-
stantly using words of everything and everybody she encounters. Kanzi, 
however, is stuck with few words and with limited application, and apparently 
has no impulse to develop them on his own or to use them except for limited 
purposes like making a request. We suggest that Kanzi's "vocabulary" relates to 
a finite number of frames of limited application and that because there is no 
higher-level blending capacity, those frames cannot be integrated fluidly, which 
is the power of blending and the sine qua non of language. The Eliza Fallacy 
here consists in taking word combinations by Kanzi and assuming that Kanzi is 
doing mentally what the child would be doing with those same word combina-
tions. We have no dispute in principle with the proposal that Kanzi or Sarah 
might know meanings, might associate symbols with those meanings, and 
might put some of those symbols together in ways connected with the juxtapo-
sition of corresponding meanings. We are making a different observation: This 
!i; 
'" 
~ : 
'The Origin of Language 
191 
kind of symbol-meaning correlation need not be equipotential. For the limited 
frames Kanzi is using, his behavior and the child's might be quite similar, even 
though the underlying mental processes are different. It is a fallacy to assume 
that Kanzi is doing essentially the same mental work as the child. This is like 
assuming that because a chess-playing machine can play chess, it is doing all 
the fabulous double-scope blending that a human being does while playing 
chess. We suggest that our account is corroborated by the fact that Kanzi's vo-
cabulary tops out at fewer than 200 words oflimited application, while the six-
year-old child uses 13,000 words with very wide application. The actual wide-
ranging human use of even a rudimentary word turns out to be a major 
imaginative achievement. 
THE LANGUAGE OF' CHILDREN 
An eighteen-month-old does not speak like an adult. 
Questions: 
• Is child language simple language? 
• And if so, isn't that a counterexample to the theo,l;;}' that language flows out 
immediately from double-scope blending, since of course the child has 
that capacity? 
• Isn't that also a counterexample to the claim that there can be no lan-
guages simpler than ours? 
Our answers: 
If we take a snapshot of a two-year-old's language, is it equipotential? Is it 
based on grammatical constructions that are equipotential? Absolutely yes. Is its 
system of grammatical constructions simpler than ours, in the sense of being 
smaller? Again, absolutely yes. So why would we say there are no simpler lan-
guages, properly speaking? The answer is that the child must have the capacity 
to do double-scope blending even at the very beginning of his us~ of language, 
and that this capacity will in the normal course of development carry him to 
fully complex language very quickly. From the moment the child begins to de-
velop language, there is no way, short of death, brain damage, or nearly un-
thinkable absence of social support, to stop him from developing full grammar. 
We think the story is analogous for the origin of language: Once human beings 
had the capacity for double-scope blending and began to use it to develop lan-
guage, they would have spooled up to a fully sophisticated system'of granlmati-
cal constructions within a span of cultural time. But from the beginning, both 
child language, developing over a few years, and prehistoric human language, 
having developed over a "short" span of cultural time, depend on double-scope 
blending and are strongly inclined toward achieving equipotentiality . 
.I 

192 
I' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
On our explanation, it is possible for a species to use symbols-Kanzi uses 
symbols-before having the capacity for language. Language originated in a so-
cial community of human beings that already had symbols, elaborate social 
. practices, and communication. It was the evolution to cognitive modernity that 
gave this community the ability to do double-scope blending. That change was 
dramatically adaptive because it brought powers for succeeding in natural and 
social situations. Cognitively modern human beings flourished. They then used 
, their common ability for double-scope blending to express and evoke double-
scope integration networks, not merely to represent individual frames in re-
stricted ways. This was the birth of language. 
THE BICYCLE 
The bicycle was a great and singular event in recent human cultural history. Its 
invention had a long evolution-wheels, gears, seats, handlebars for gripping, 
and, earlier, mining of metal and production of steel. And let's not forget the 
brakes, and the air pump, and extraction of rubber from trees. None of this 
early evolution achieved a lower level of bicycle: The achievement of the bicycle 
came at one fell swoop, with little refinements thereafter. Interestingly, learning 
to ride a bicycle is similar to inventing the bicycle itsel£ It seems counterintu-
itive that one could move on two wheels, since with all the previous modes of 
transportation using wheels, it was easier to be at rest than to ride-easier to sit 
on the stati6nary horse, buggy, or chariot than to move with it. But with the bi-
cycle, the faster you go, the easier it is to stay up, and this is counterintuitive un-
til you've got the hang of it. One learns how to ride progressively, but success is 
a singularity. All at once, you can move on the two-wheeled contraption, after 
many fruitless and perhaps painful attempts. 
No one would argue that first we must have learned to ride a one-wheeled 
contraption without handlebars or pedals, and, by steps, moved up to riding 
more and more complex machines until we finally achieved the level of the 
modern bicycle. No historian is looking into garages to find the intermediate 
steps of the bicycle, as opposed to finding earlier forms of what counts as a 
proper bicycle. No one proposes that children must first learn to ride a unicycle 
and then the more complicated bicycle. On the contrary, they start with the tri-
cycle and then drop the third wheel. Anyone who has crashed a bicycle without 
being harmed knows that we can look at the damaged bicycle to see whether it 
can still get us home--with its handlebars twisted, or its brakes missing a pad, 
or its frame crumpled. Very often it can, but no one would therefore argue that 
the bicycle must have had as one of the intermediate stages of its invention this 
crumpled machine that still functions. 
The Origin of Language 
193 
Riding a bicycle is a phylogenetic, ontogenetic, and technogenetic singularity 
that can arise only because we reach a crucial stage on very smooth, intersecting 
continua. We need wheels, tubes, and so on, and we also need legs (snakes and 
fish do not ride bicycles), eyes that look forward, refined balance, thumbs, and 
bipedal~sm. Just as bipedalism is essential for riding a bicycle although no one 
would suggest that bipedalism evolved to support our efforts to bicycle, so dou-
ble-scope blending is essential for language although double-scope blending did 
not evolve to support our efforts at language. Language needs the cognitive ca-
pacity for double-scope blending and a social community that can support an 
effort to develop and disseminate grammatical constructions. Once these pre-
requisites were fulfilled, which is to say, once cognitively and socially modern 
human beings had evolved, we could learn language as easily as we can learn to 
ride a bicycle. 

•• 
•• Ten 
THINGS 
Give us this day our daily bread. 
-
Th~ Lord's Pray" 
ONE OF THE MOST arresting singularities of human beings is our continual 
invention and deployment of, and attachment to, things. We make things, carry 
and consult them, teach each other how to use them, adorn ourselves with 
them, make gifts of them. Why? 
~ ~ 
Consider a wristwatch. A watch is a few ounces of metal and glass, with com-
plicated interior parts one usually cannot see, strapped around an appendage. It 
has two or three thin rods radiating from a center that go round and round at 
unequal rates. As a thing in itself it is bizarre and pointless, an extra weight for 
the wrist, a fragile object in a position where it can easily be broken. We cannot 
eat it; it does not keep us warm or cool; it does not hold a soothing drink. Why 
make, buy, carry, and consult it? 
The cognitive anthropologist Ed Hutchins has studied with great insight the 
way in which material culture is suffused with coriceptual blending of a type 
that typically employs everyday objects as material anchors. Hutchins's examples 
include things like watches, sundials, gauges, compasses, and sliderules. The 
wristwatch is a material anchor for a fascinating conceptual blend. 
The first step.in analyzing the watch is to consider the powerful integration 
network in our cultural model of time for a single day. This is a mirror network, 
with as many inputs as there are distinct days. It is a significant achievement to 
be able to conceive of time as periodic. Days follow days, seasons follow seasons. 
The sun rises and will rise again tomorrow. We have analogy connectors run-
ning across all these days, connecting noon to noon, for example. In the generic 
space, there is a single abstract day. The corresponding times in distinct days are 
compressed in the blend into uniqueness, so that noon yesterday, noon today, 
and noon tomorrow in the different input spaces are felt to be the same noon in 
the blend. In each input space, a single day runs its course just once. In the 
generic space, an abstract day runs its course just once. But in the blend, tht day 
J 
195 

196 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
perpetuaHy runs its course and then stans again, going through the same pro-
gression of times: dawn, morning, noon, afternoon, evening, night. We will call 
this the Cyclic Day network. In its blended space, we "reach noon again." 
. Phrases like "your morning coffee," "swallows disappear and bats appear in the 
early evening," and "this park closes at dusk" pick out structure in the blended 
space of the Cyclic Day network. This compression. of outer-space analogy rela-
, tions between the inputs into uniqueness in this blend uses the compression 
principle of fusing. Of course, there are many similar integration networks for 
different units of time, giving us blended notions of a week ("your weekly work-
out"), a month ("your monthly visit to your mother"), and a year ("your annual 
checkup"). In each of these networks, the inputs all have a similar unit of time, 
each of which runs its course just once. There are analogy connectors between 
times in the inputs, and fusing to create in the blend a natural unit of time that 
repeats, so that the same unit of time happens again and again. Each of these net-
works has linear time divided into equal segments in the input spaces but cycli-
cal time in the blend. The outer-space linear ordering of the inputs-successive 
days that can go on to infinity-is compressed within the blend into an inner-
space cyclical ordering of repeated motion through the same unique day. The 
Cyclic Day is a remarkable compression that conforms admirably to the govern-
ing principles and overarching goals that we discu'ss in Chapter 16. It com-
presses an infinity of time into the human scale of a single day; it compresses 
Many (aJI t ~he mornings, all the evenings, all the "noons" , .. ) into One (the 
morning, the evening, noon, . . . ). 
In this network, quite interestingly, we see inner-space time relations-the 
period from dawn to dusk-and outer-space time relations-the "nighttime" 
that bridges day to day-compressed into a single inner-space temporal cycle. 
The open-ended sequence of outer-space nighttimes has become a single arc in 
the cycle. 
The watch depends on the existence of the Cyclic Day integration network. 
One input to the integration network for the watch is the blended space in the 
Cyclic Day network (and that space stays connected to the rest of its network). 
The other input is the rotating rods-that is, the physical appearance of the 
watch itself, with the thin rods in a specific position and each of them moving. 
That input is also inherently cyclical. 
The cross-space mapping is obvious, if a little bizarre: One cycle of the Cyclic 
Day maps onto two cycles of the small rotating rod and 24 cycles of the larger 
one. When the Cyclic Day reaches noon, the positions of the Rotating Rods 
point at 12. After two cycles of the small rod and 24 cycles of the larger one, it is 
noon again in the Cyclic Day. 
Our modern understanding of time as consisting of a repetition of a periodic 
day is emergent in the blend for the Cyclic Day network. Our more specific un-
derstanding of time as consisting of a repeating clay divided into hours, minutes, 
, < 
Thingr 
197 
~-~-~ 
•• Q5 
CD 
Q5 
CD 
Q5 
CD ••• 
~mmel m~/ 
(( 
nighttime 
FIGURE 10 . 1 
THE CYCLIC DAY 
d 
u 
s 
k 
and seconds of equal duration is emergent in the Timepiece blend. In the cross-
space mapping for the TImepiece network, each moment of the Cyclic Day is 
mapped onto a position of the rotating rods. In this cross-space mapping, the du-
ration of an interval of time in the Cyclic Day corresponds to the length of an arc 
swept by a rod. In the blended space of the TImepiece network, the arc swept by 
a rod is an interval of time. A crucial emergent property is that equal arcs are 
equal intervals of time. This blended emergent notion of time is consistent be-
cause of human invention of a thing, a machine, that uses a periodic event like 
the rotation of the rods or the swinging of a pendulum. It is further important to 
be able to calibrate the machine so that it is always in the same position every 
noon. Once you have done that, you have automaticaHy "divided" the Cyclic 
Blended Day into as many equal segments as the machine goes through from 
noon to noon. If we divide the watch face into k equal arcs, and there are n revo-
lutions from noon to noon, we thereby divide the Cyclic Day into "n rimes k" 
equal intervals. If n is 2 and k is 12, we have the conventional division of rhe day 
into 24 hours. If n is 2 and k is 1, we have the conventional division of the 
clay into A.M. and P.M. Cultural evolution since Babylonian times has arrived at 
the universal convention of making k equal to either 12 or 60. The same watch 
can have markings for both 12 and 60 by dividing each of the 12 arcs into 5 
equal smaller arcs. The little hand of the typical watch corresponds to n = 2 and 

198 
THE WAY W E THINK 
k = 12. In the Timepiece blend for this hand, the motion of the little hand twice 
around the face of the watch, with identifiable positions at 1, 2, ... 12, divides 
the Cyclic Blended Day into the 24 equal time periods we call "hours." In the 
different Timepiece blend for the longer hand on the watch, n = 24 and k = 60. 
This divides the Cyclic Day into 1,440 minutes. In the yet different Timepiece 
blend for the third, thin hand on the watch, n = 1440 and k = 60, which divides 
the Cyclic Day into 86,440 seconds. It is an extr~mely impressive cultural 
achievement with incalculable consequences for human life and knowledge to 
have developed these successive compressions of the Cyclic Day and the Periodic 
Physical Event. The deep conception of time that emerges is so compelling that 
we take it to be part of the fabric of time itselE We find it intuitively obvious that 
time is divided into equal intervals that repeat day after day, year after year. 
The watch is additionally ingenious in exploiting the fortunate facts that 
there are the same number of seconds in a minute as there are minutes in an 
hour, 60, and that 12 is a factor of 60, so that the second hand ends up exactly 
at twelve after one minute, the minute hand ends up exactly at twelve after one 
hour, and the hour hand ends up exactly at twelve after one day. The watch it-
self is a material anchor for all three Timepiece blends-the one with n = 2 and 
k = 12, the one with n = 24 and k = 60, and the one with n = 1440 and k = 60. 
Ed Hutchins points out that the watches we have today are historically the 
product of many successive blends, beginning with sundials. He notes that there 
is an obvious link between compasses, clocks, and dials in general. All of these 
blends integrate frames of time with frames of direction. 
GAUGES 
The pattern of blending linear scales of any magnitude with markings on a 
compressed circular object was extended throughout the history of gauges. We 
have circular dials with pointers for a host of technical measuring and naviga-
tion instruments: the radio tuner, the speedometer, the tachometer, the altime-
ter, the barometer, the oven temperature knob, the oven thermometer, and the 
thermostat. All of these gauges seem simple and transparent, but they are quite 
complex. Consider the oven temperature knob, for example. It indicates not 
the temperature of the oven but the temperature we would like the oven to be. 
But we also sometimes want to know when the oven has reached that tempera-
ture, as when we want to bake the salmon for a few minutes at 550 degrees but 
not at any lesser temperature. So ovens often have an "idiot light" that comes 
on when the oven is actually at the set temperature. Before the light comes on, 
the arrow points to a temperature in a desired mental space. Then, as soon as 
the light comes on, it points to a number on the knob that corresponds to the 
temperature. 
Thini,J 
199 
In the case of the thermostat, the two gauges for the desired space and the re-
ality space are superposed in the instrument, one hand for each space, and they 
share the same dial and its calibration. 
Finally, Hutchins points to the superb selective projection involved in reading 
aviation dials. The dial illustrated in Figure 10.2 is giving the pilot information 
on when to reconfigure the wings for lift by positioning the slats and flaps on the 
wings. The appropriate configuration of slats and flaps depends on the speed of 
the plane and on its gross weight, which varies with the weight of the cargo on a 
particular flight and the present weight of the remaining fuel during a particular 
flight. After initiation of the descent from cruise altitude and before reaching a 
certain 'altitude, the pilot prepares the landing data. This involves determining 
the gross weight of the airplane and locating in some reference work the appro-
priate speeds at which the wings should be reconfigured for that weight. The pi-
lot then moves the four clips, called "speed bugs," that are mounted on the rim 
of the speed gauge to mark off the speeds at which the wings are to be reconfig-
ured. In that way, during descent, the pilot need no longer worry about the spe-
cific speed of the plane or the gross weight of the plane. 
In the blend anchored by the instrument, the emergent structure is that if the 
hand is pointing between two particular clips, we wan,~ the slats and flaps to be 
in the corresponding configuration. Crucially, this structure is invariant from 
flight to flight and gross weight to gross weight, so that cognitively, once the 
clips are set, the pilot need only live in the blend. Here we see an example of 
modifying the real world by setting the clips in order to keep a conceptual struc-
ture constant in the blend. This blend has complicated connections to other 
spaces, but once he has set the clips appropriately, the pilot need not activate 
those connections while flying in order to succeed. In flight, all he needs to do is 
reset the slat-and-flap configuration when the dial is pointing at the clip. 
Modern planes have linear digital displays, such as the one depicted in Figure 
10.3. Ironically, as Hutchins shows, they do not reflect perceptually at human 
scale the differences in speed and positioning of slats and flaps, even though for-
mally they contain all the necessary information. ' In the old gauge, the gross 
physical configuration of the display was different for different speeds, and dif-
ferent regions of the display corresponded to different positioning ranges; but in 
the new display, the gross physical configuration of the display does not change. 
We take the dials for granted as simple, obvious objects, but replacing the~ 
with sophisticated and in some cases more accurate digital displays can reveal 
that they were supremely efficient compressions. 
Modern displays also show remarkable emergent structures and compressions 
to human scale, most of them intended by the designers, but some discovered 
by users. Barbara Holder discusses the case of the "blue hockey stick" in the Air-
bus 320 flight control display. The blue hockey stick is a small, crooked blue 
J 

~" 
200 
f' 
FIGURE 10.2 
AN AVIATION DIAL 
FIGURE 10.3 
LINEAR DIGITAL DISPLAY IN A MODERN PLANE 
Things 
201 
FIGURE 10.4 
"BLUE HOCKEY STICK" 
arrow on the screen that displays the course of the plane (see Figure 10.4). It 
shows the point on the future precomputed path of the plane at which the de-
sired altitude will be reached under the current settings. During descent. the pi-
lot will be cleared for a certain altitude at a certain geographical location. He 
wants to achieve that altitude by the time he reaches that location. In vertical 
speed mode of descent. the pilot can alter the altitude of the plane by manipu-
lating the vertical speed knob. whose setting indicates the desired vertical speed. 
Manipulating the vertical speed knob has the effect. through (he computation 
done by (he plane's instruments. of changing the point on the Right path where 
the desired altitude will be reached. Since that point is indicated on (he display 
by the blue hockey stick. (he blue hockey stick will move when the knob is 
turned. This is a fabulous compression that allows the pilot to work directly in 
(he blend; the pilot simply turns the vertical speed knob to move the hlue 
hockey stick to the desired location on the Right path display. This compression 
is not taught to pilots. but some pilots discover it. Holder quotes one who did: 
''And what I do in a case where they [Air Traffic Control] give you a crossing re-
striction. I use that blue hockey stick. and just roll the vertical speed to wherever 
you think it should be and see where the blue hockey stick ends UPi if that looks 
right on the map display on the nav display. away you go." 
MONEY 
A watch is useful because of its mechanical functioning. The conceptual net-
work required to understand it is one we can carry in our heads. Alone on a 
desert island. we might be very thankful for a watch. 

202 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Money is a material anchor with different features. It, too, depends upon an 
elaborate conceptual network, but one that can only be supported socially. The me-
chanics that make money useful are in the society rather than in the money itselE 
Alone on a desert island, we would find a dollar bill to be practically worthless. 
The history of money, like that of watches, is complex and involves many 
successive blends, now long forgorten. But we can look at the concept of money 
synchronically, just as we looked at the concept of time materially, anchored by 
timepieces. To get a taste of how this analysis would go, we will outline a much 
simplified integration network for money. Take one input, the Goods, to be the 
set of things that can be needed, traded, desired, inherited, given, stolen, or in 
some way transferred from me possession of one agency to that of anomer. Now 
take a second input, the Values, to be a metric scale using an arbitrary unit of 
measurement. Value scales are widely available: We can speak of something be-
ing three times as beautiful as something else or of someone being ten times as 
smart as someone else. 
The Goods input typically has a local value structure of its own: A cow may 
be worth 20 chickens, and three chickens may be worth so many yards of cloth. 
Most goods, however, cannot be directly compared: A fisherman has no reason 
to exchange his net for a farmer's plough. 
Goods are mapped onto the Value scale in such a way that topology of values is 
preserved across the inputs. So if the plough is worth 2 cows to the farmer, and the 
fisherman is willing to give 30 salmon to a weaver in exchange for a net or for a 
piece of cloth that is worth 10 chickens to the weaver, and one salmon is mapped 
onto position 2 on me value scale, then for consistency and preservation of local 
topology we must map a net onto position 60, a cow onto 120, !l plow onto 240, 
a chicken onto 6, and the piece of cloth onto 60. The obvious consequence of 
projecting a full Value structure onto the Goods input is to define exchange stan-
dards implicitly for the entire domain of Goods. Clearly it would take 3 salmon to 
get a chicken, -4 nets to get a plough, and 2 pieces of cloth to get a cow. The map-
ping generalizes exchange but does not simplifY it: One would have to always 
travel with salmon and hope that the farmer or the weaver likes fish. 
The amazing step in the invention of a true Money network is to bring in a 
third input with objects that have no place in the original system of exchanging 
goods, such as identical pieces of colored paper. In the simplest case, the new 
objects are identical tokens. We map each token onto the same position on the 
scale in the Value input-say, position 1. 
Next, we project all the objects from the Goods input and the tokens from 
the new third input to the blended space. We also project all the values from the 
Values input, so that every element in the blended space now has a value, 
including the new objects; the new objects are now collectively called money 
and individually given a name (e.g., dollar). The exchange system is projected 
from the Goods input and in the blend applies to all objects that have value. 
Things 
203 
Therefore, money can participate in the exchange system, In the input spaces, 
the relation of goods to values is a complex derived computation, as we saw for 
the chicken and salmon. The outer-space connections between the three in-
puts--of goods, values, and arbitrary objects-provide a complicated way to 
compute connections between the exchange relations of goods. But this compu-
tation requires not only doing arithmetic but also polling the entire community 
to discover what exchanges are acceptable. In the blended space, these outer-
space connections are compressed into simple properties of the objects. Each 
now has an intrinsic value. In the blended space, knowing the simple value re-
places doing the arithmetic and conducting the poll. In the standard buying-
and-selling scenario, there is the further constraint in the emergent structure of 
the blend that one of the exchanged objects must be money. 
The elementary social structure of buying and selling as we know it emerges 
in this blended space. The objects that count as money have many special prop-
erties: For example, there has to be a legally enforced public consensus on the 
value and nature (minting, etc.) of these special objects, and the culture must 
ensure that the objects are easy to carry, easy to recognize, and resistant to de-
composition (see Figure 10.5). Complex financial and economic structures ap-
pear in the social practices that are part of the blended spacc;) 
Historically, the leap to the money network has always required elaborate cul-
tural steps, especially the intermediate step of selecting as the object that will count 
as money something that is easily measured and transported and also easily incor-
porated into the exchange system of goods, such as a weight of precious metal or a 
quantity of spice. In retrospect, when we start to think about the culturally mature 
network for money, we may be amazed that anybody ever swallowed it: 
But what do we mean by worth? When we use the word, we are talking about a 
system of equivalencies-a transaction between the symbolic and the actual that 
many people believe is the most real thing there is, but which is, in fact, a sheer 
act of the imagination. Whose idea was it that a hard, inedible, and unprotective 
substance (stones, shells, metal) could be traded for food, clothing, shelter? The 
use of money is the purest act of faith; no anchorite who has followed a vision 
into the desert has acted on an idea as fiu-fetched as our belief that if we put a 
dollar in a machine we will be drinking a Diet Coke in a minute. 
Although our account of the development of the money network is outra-
geously simplified, it illustrates our main point: Money, in the form of bills 
and coins, provides a key material anchor for a tight compression of the no-
tion of goods and how to exchange them. It is amazing that the socially sanc-
tioned production of a simple material object can result in a material anchor 
that radically reorganizes social practice, with dramatic consequences for hu-
man culture generally. 
.. 
r 
i 
I 
i 
I I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, 
,I 
I 
I 

204 
THE WAY WE THINK 
FIGURE 10.S 
MONEY 
TOMBS, GRAVES, AND ASHES 
In the Homeric epics, the martial elite cremates its honored dead, while the 
common folk bury their dead and tend the graves. We still maintain these tradi-
tions, both of which can leave us with a material anchor for the departed per-
son. In one case it is ashes in a mausoleum or in an urn on a shelf at home; in 
the other case it is a "plot" of land with a tombstone. 
In the previous chapter, we presented the hypothesis that striking singulari-
ties of cognitively modern human beings arose from "double-scope" blending. 
That hypothesis applies equally to the invention. of burial rituals and, more gen-
erally, to the invention of the concept of living with the qead. The archeological 
record suggests that such treatment of "the dead" also arose roughly 50,000 
. years ago. In the network for "the dead," one input space has the person when 
alive, and the other input mental space has the remains, typically looking as 
much as possible like the living person just before death. Some burial practices 
are meant to ensure that the remains have this appearance; these include em-
balming, death masks, sarcophagi, and cosmetic techniques used by morticians, 
who dress the body in its best clothes and surround it in the casket with its char-
acteristic accessories. Many vital relations connect the input space with the per-
son and the input space with the remains: The person and the remains are 
causally related; they are also related by physical change; and they can be related 
by disanalogy-for example, the person moves but the corpse does not. The 
body is a part of the person in the input with the living person, so there is a 
physical relation of change between the body-as-part in one input and the 
corpse in the other. There is also a strong literal similarity between the body-
as-part and the corpse. In the input with the living person, the body and the 
soul--Qr, if you prefer, the intentional aspect of the person-
are inseparable. In 
the blend, we have a being who has some intentionality projected from the 
space of the living person, and so might, for example, have some of the living 
Things 
205 
person's memories, interests, and psychological characteristics. The blend has, 
typically, the temporal moment taken from the present mental space with the 
remains. The outer-space disanalogy connector between the inputs-the person 
was vital but the remains are not-is compressed into an absence inside the 
blend. The dead person in the blend is an absence, felt as such, but with projec-
tions from the space of the living person. 
In the blended space, person has been projected from the input space with the 
living person, and the complex structure of input spaces and outer-space con-
nections has been compressed into the inner-space property dead. Dead is like 
saft: It prompts for a complex network. And once the blend for dead person has 
become entrenched, it can serve as an input to a standard extension of the cate-
gory person, so that now the category includes dead people, whose help we im-
plore, whose wrath we avoid, and whose advice we seek. 
Personal identity itself involves a diffuse network of mental spaces whose com-
pression in the blend creates the unique person. Conceptually, a person is in-
volved in mental spaces over many times and places, through many changes. All 
those spaces contribute to a blend that has the single unique person. There is a 
physical material anchor for this conceptual blend-the active living biological 
body that we can see and with which we can interact. We can hear its voice, and 
it can hear ours. When the person dies, the concepni:U network with the unique 
person persists for us, if not for the person. But the material anchor is gone. 
The complexity of the conceptual blends involved with dying and the dead, 
and of the material anchors for these blends, is immense. We point here only to a 
very few striking ways in which material anchors are used to develop such blends 
to make the dead, though absent, accessible. Cemeteries and tombs are part of 
the real world and have their own physical organization. But their importance 
lies in the role they playas material anchors for the blend of "living with the 
dead." The projections are relatively straightforward. Since the living person's 
body is mapped onto the corpse, a place where you might encounter the living 
person (i.e., a place where her or his body might be) is mapped onto the place 
where the corpse "is" -the grave. We project from the space of the living person 
the notion of establishing contact with the person, and from the other input the 
place where that contact is best established-the grave marked by the tombstone. 
This simple material anchoring of the blend provides the necessary implements 
for such widespread cultural practices as paying honors to the dead by putting 
flowers on graves, visiting graves at regular intervals or on publicly chosen days 
like All Saints Day, and, above all, communing with the dead and even talking to 
them on the site where "they" were buried. In the double-scope blend, the dead 
exist as a category, whose elements are both present and absent. 
The transition of death progresses from living person near death, to the per-
son who has just died, to the mortuary preparation, to the visitation of the body, 
" 

THE WAY WE THINK 
206 
,. 
to the funeral. to the burial. to communing with the "departed" at the grave. 
Right after death. the corpse itself is a very powerful material anchor for the 
complex integration network of the person's personal identity. and. as such. it is 
treated in elaborate ritual ways so as. on the one hand. to deal with the fact that it 
is dead organic matter and. on the other hand. not to dishonor the person for 
whom it is serving as temporary material anchor. During that period. the corpse 
is the material anchor for "making contact" or "communing" with the person. 
Wakes and veilUes and other rituals designed to prevent the corpse from being 
left alone before burial are themselves blends of care for the living and dealing 
with the corpse. Once the corpse is buried. it does not serve as a material anchor. 
That role shifts to the tombstone and the grave plot and the cemetery. with its 
other graves and. possibly. a chapel or church. In establishing contact with the 
dead years later and communing with them over their grave. we typically call up 
memories of the body just before burial. and we typically think of that body-
not of the actual contents of the coffin-as inhabiting the grave. 
In Carullus's farewell elegy to his brother. the material anchor is the ashes in 
the vicinity of the death: 
" 
Multas per gentes et multa per aequora vectus 
advenio has miseras, frater, ad inftrias, 
ut te postremo donarem munere mortis 
et mutam nequiquam a//oquerer cinerem. 
Across many lands and seas 
I have come, brother, to your sad funeral rites 
to offer the final gift to the dead. 
and speak in vain to your mute ashes. 
In the blend, there is a unique element that corresponds to the brother in one 
input and to the ashes in the other. By the first projection. Catullus can call it 
"brother" and "you" ("frater" and "te" in Latin). By projection from the ashes, 
it cannot respond to Catullus. In the blend. the brother does not respond, 
therefore he is mute. and therefore the ashes are mute. even though in the input. 
absent the blending. ashes cannot be mute. The ashes in a fireplace do not speak 
to us. but nobody would call them "mute." 
CATHEDRALS AND 
THE METHOD OF" LOCI 
Graves are not an isolated case. Enormous amounts of human time. energy, and 
talent go into building material anchors for spiritual and personal integration 
networks. Robert Scott has written a book-length study of "the idea of the 
Things 
207 
Gothic cathedral" and its anchoring in actual Gothic cathedrals. with their fur-
nishings and rituals, in actual physical sites. Just as the grave is a material anchor 
for communing with the relatively inaccessible dead. so the cathedral is a mate-
rial anchor for communing with the relatively inaccessible world of the divine 
and the departed. 
In the case of a grave. the place where the corpse is buried has a natural and 
inevitable link to the dead person. In the blend of living with the dead. the dead 
person is naturally available at the grave. In the more general case of the sacred. 
according to Scott. the goal is "to draw sacrality to the community." There is no 
a priori reason why the sacred should be drawn to any particular place. In Scott's 
words. the sacred is conceived of as a "diffuse. ubiquitous, pervasive but unfo-
cused force" that is "so to speak. hovering about in the atmosphere." One of the 
purposes of the cathedral is to attract the sacred and focus it in a particular loca-
tion. This requires the "creation of a habitat for the sacred. a special place and 
an environment to which sacrality would be drawn and kept in place in such a 
manner that its potential to evanesce or migrate would not be realized." 
The cultural and perceptual experience of the cathedral and its site must con-
duce the community to activate a blend that gives them a sense of the sacred. 
Somewhat obviously, the cathedral has .features of grandeur, size, degree and 
quality of light. difficulty of construction and maintenance, patterns of music 
and prayer, and other elaborately scheduled rituals that distinguish it from any 
human-scale practical building and associate it with the cultural conception of 
the sacred~ Less obviously. there are mental and cultural integrations that go far 
beyond the visible aspects of the cathedral. The concept of the cathedral is 
linked to aspects of imagination and memory that increase its effectiveness 
many times over as a material anchor for sacrality. Scott's hypothesis for how 
this happens depends upon a mental instrument that has long been recognized 
within Western rhetoric. This instrument is the "method of loci." 
In the method of loci. someone needs to remember a complex organization 
of ideas, perhaps to deliver later in the form of a speech. She does this by associ-
ating the ideas with locations on some familiar path and then remembering and 
expressing the ideas by imagining that she is going through the locations on the 
path. One input space has the ideas. the other has the familiar path, and there is 
an Analogy mapping between two well-ordered sequences in the two input 
spaces. 
For example, if you need to memorize an after-dinner speech, you might 
think of the path from the front gate of your house through the porch. the front 
door. the rooms. the back door. and into the yard. Then. attach each of the 
ideas or actions in order to the places along the path. So the thanks you give to 
those who have invited you is the gate to your front yard. the "opening" joke 
you tell is the opening of that gate, and so on through the entire dinner speech. 
Then. nervous at the podium. all you need to do is take a mental stroll through 

208 
t' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
your house to remember what you need to say when. Hutchins provides an in-
sightful analysis of this method as involving a layered blending template: 
The method of loci provides a well-known example of the cognitive use of material 
structure. In order to remember a long sequence of ideas, one associates the ideas, 
in order, with a set of landmarks in the physical environ~ent in which the items 
will have to be remembered. The method of loci sets up a simple trajectory of at-
tention across a set of features, let us call them landmarks, of the environment. 
One may establish a Bow through the environment that brings attention to the 
landmarks in a particular order. This is a layered blend. The initial input spaces are 
the shape of the motion of a t~ajector and the set oflandmarks in the environment. 
Together these produce a blend that is the sequential Bow through the landmarks 
in the environment. The sequential relations of the landmarks are an emergent 
property of the blend. This space then becomes an input space for a more complex 
blend. The items to be remembered are associated with the landmarks, producing 
a space in which the items to be remembered are imagined to be co-located with 
their corresponding landmarks. In this blended space, the items to be remembered 
acquire the sequential relations that were created among the landmarks. These se-
quential relations among the items to be remembered are an emergent property of 
this compound blended space. 
This method was part of the art of memory, developed by Cicero and others 
and practiced ;ince classical antiquity. Hutchins finds examples of the method 
of loci in many cultures; for instance, "in the Trobriand Islands of Papua New 
Guinea, long narratives are structured around local geography." Since the adult 
islanders know the geography, the progression of a story's protagonist along a fa-
miliar path associates the order of the locations along that path with the order of 
the parts of the story, making the long narrative much easier to remember. 
In Hutchins's examples, the material anchors used in the method ofloci already · 
exist. The Gothic cathedral, Scott argues, is a different case. The idea of the cathe-
dral begins from an input space with theological content and an i.nput space with a 
building. The method of loci is used to create a blend in which the theological or-
ganization is fused with the order of locations as one moves through the building. 
But then, strong emergent structure arises in this blend: The building becomes 
modified in imagination so as to accept topological projections from the theologi-
cal space. Over generations and generations, theologians elaborate this blend, and 
those who present the theology use it. The result is a fabulous emergent concept-
namely, the Gothic cathedral, a structure that in many complex interacting ways is 
fused in the blend with Christian theology. The cathedral, Scott argues, although 
based of course on knowledge of antecedent places of worship, exists first as a men-
tal construct, which is only secondarily given a full material anchor by actually 
building one. Scott explains how extensive knowledge of sacred texts guided monks 
Things 
209 
"toward an immanent experience of the Divine": "Imaginary monastic schemes" 
were devised for remembering those sacred texts that 
had a locational quality in the sense that they provided a place for everything and 
assigned everything to its place, and that the metaphors employed for doing this 
were architectural. Since the materials chat were meant to be accessed (i.e., the sa-
cred texts) were used for purposes of mediation, this meant that in using them, 
the practice of the art of memory required the practitioner to engage in imaginary 
movements through imaginary spaces. 
Scott reports the examples given by Mary Carruthers in The Book of Memory 
of how the art of memory worked. He writes, 
One involved a monk, Peter of Cellar, who imagined an entire monastery in this 
way and invited his audience to enter and use it together with him. Another ex-
ample she gives is that of Hugh of St. Victor whom she described as being 
" . . . careful to show exactly how each piece (of his imaginary building) is articu-
lated in the scheme of the entire structure, and how the story and rooms are di-
vided in them to 'place' information in the form of images within these divisions, 
used as mnemonic loci .... Hugh saw this building in his mind as he composed: 
he 'walked' through it and ... he used it himself as he advised others to, as a uni-
versal cognitive machine.".A third example is Augustine of Hippo, who, in his 
sermons, painted a literary picture of a tabernacle and then invited his fellow 
monks to look around and walk about it with him. 
Perhaps the most fiunous example, famous in part because it survives, is the 
Plan of St. Gall, an actual drawing of a plan for a wholly functional monastic 
community that provided the ideal space for engaging in liturgical processions 
and meditation in pursuit of the path to enlightenment. Significantly, though it 
was never actually built, it was in fact used in imagination by the monks of St. 
Gall as a space in which to meditate individually and as a community. 
In short, the cathedral is developed as a conceptual structure in the blend be-
fore it has an accurate material anchor to support that blend. The material anchor, 
once constructed, supports the mental activities of monks but also enables them 
to communicate that conceptual structure to the lay community, and to organize 
their activities-much as watches and money now organize the actions and inter-
actions of people in a society. Over centuries, the conception of the cathedral, the 
building of the cathedral, and the acrual use and existence of the cathedral culmi-
nate in an optimal compression. 
The cathedral, like places of worship in general, contains many varieties of ma-
terial anchors, all coordinated: vestments, candies, special chairs and benches for 
special activities, confessionals, stations of the cross with their own use of the 

210 
THE WAY WE THINK 
method of loci, altars, sacristies, visual images, graves, and books. To the uniniti-
ated, this collection of material anchors can look like a bizarre and unaccountable 
assembly, but those raised in the tradition will have the means and competence to 
unpack and decompress what is actually a very powerful blend, culturally evolved 
through centuries of worship. 
We grow so used to interacting with material al.lchors like money and 
watches that the compressions they provide seem almost as complete and obvi-
ous as the compressions provided by biology, like the perception of the blue 
cup. When we see banknotes exchanged for bread, the fact that one is money is 
as obvious as the fact that one is bread. But to the cultural outsider, such things 
can look entirely mysterious. The outsider who enters the cathedral lacks the 
elaborate conceptual integration networks that make it possible to see the mate-
rial anchors for what, in the compression, they are. But to the faithful, the 
cathedral-with its altar, its vestments, its candles before statues-is as immedi-
ately understandable as buying bread with money or seeing a blue cup. 
We began this book by discussing networks that do not seem to require ma-
terial anchors: counterfactuals, metaphors, the riddle of the Buddhist Monk, 
the Debate with Kant. Following Hutchins's lead, we have now turned to con-
ceptual integration networks that seem to require material anchors in order to 
be manipulated mentally: Indeed, it is hard to imagine a society using "concep-
tual money" as an effective medium of exchange without any material anchors 
in the form of bills, coins, numbers in account books, or electronic banking de-
vices. Barbara Holder discusses successive blends in the development of the Au-
tomated Teller Machine. 
But is there a clear difference between conceptual integration networks that 
require material anchors and those that ostensibly do not? Let us turn to cases 
where the material anchors are less obvious than money or watches. We begin 
with writing. 
WRITING 
Writing hardly seems the same kind of thing as a watch, a coin, or a cathedral. 
Yet when we look at it, we see physical marks on stone or paper or a computer 
screen, and these marks are circulated through the community. By themselves, 
these marks are meaningless: If we could send a sheet of writing back 10,000 
years to a tribe of cognitively modern human beings, they would not have the 
slightest idea what to do with it, although the sheet would be a marvel. But we 
have elaborate conceptual and linguistic mental systems that can use these 
marks in culturally supported ways. Just as we look at the watch to see what 
time it is, we look at a sentence in a letter to see what someone is saying to us. 
The blend seems natural to us even if it is immensely rich in its projections 
and elaborations. Suppose a woman is reading a letter from her fiance, a soldier 
I 
.'f. 
\~ , 
f. 
Things 
211 
at the front. What is she doing? From one perspective, she is looking at and dis-
tinguishing marks on a sheet of paper. But a lab rat or a pigeon can probably 
distinguish marks on a sheet of paper, too-and the woman is clearly doing 
something the lab rat or the pigeon cannot. There is one input in which the 
woman is alone, looking at a material object. There is another with the fiance 
and his general capacity to speak to her. In the blend, her fiance is speaking to 
her. The projections are selective and imaginative. There is emergent structure 
in the blend: They cannot answer each other in all the usual conversational 
ways, and there is no audible sound from the fiance. The fact that the writing 
consists of words comes from the space of speaking. And the specificity of those 
words/marks comes from the space with the specific marks on the paper, com-
bined with a general mapping, evolved by the culture, for connecting equiva-
lence classes of sounds to equivalence classes of marks-that is, connecting the 
mark "boy" to the sound "boy~' (or, more precisely, a category of marks like boy, 
boy, boy, boy, Boy, BOY, 6og . .. to a category of sounds that consists of all the 
ways of pronouncing the word "boy" -with high or low pitch, with a British or 
Australian accent, in a whisper, ... ). 
A proficient reader ends up with a general competence for constructing inte-
gration networks for writing and reading. One input has someone talking, the 
other has some medium with marks, and in the blend, th~ !marks and the speech 
are fused in impressive ways. The emergent integrated activities of "expressing 
oneself through writing" and "understanding others through reading" are strik-
ingly different from speech in nearly all aspects. 
The writing and reading blend is of immense cultural importance to us. It 
cannot exist without the material anchors of distinctive marks on material sub-
stances. But the use of these material anchors depends on a very powerful prior 
conceptual blend that compresses a certain infinity of marks (boy, boy, boy, boy, 
Boy, BOY, 60g, ... ) into a single entity, the written word "boy," and that entity 
itself is construed as identical to another compressed infinity, the spoken word 
"boy." 
Once we have learned it, the writing and reading blending network seems 
simple and inevitable. But it includes complex projections and social conven-
tions that we take for granted. For example, to read a book in English, we must 
map speech in time onto linearly ordered locations from left to right; horizon-
tally on the page, and understand that at the end of the line, the speech jumps 
back to the beginning of the next line, and that turning the page (the common-
est action we take with a book) has no counterpart in the speech space. 
SPEECH 
Speech may seem immaterial, hardly like a watch or a cathedral or even an in-
scription on a tombstone. But in fact it is a material anchor. Consider the scene 
" 

212 
THE WAY WE THINK 
in which the woman is actually listening to the speech of her fiance. He has re-
turned unscathed, and they are having coffee in the kitchen. From one perspec-
tive, what is happening is that longitudinal waves in the air are striking her 
eardrums, and she is aware of this. But from that same perspective, a lab rat or a 
pigeon would be doing the same thing, and again, she is clearly doing something 
they are not. For her, the longitudinal waves give ri~e to "sounds" that are like 
physical objects. Our ability to categorize sounds in such a way that two sounds 
count as the same for the purpose of communication accounts for the perma-
nence that gives sounds the status of material anchors. She knows a complex 
mapping that connects particular equivalence classes of sounds to particular lin-
guistic structures like words and clauses that are publicly shared and mentally 
represented. 
The complexities of these conceptual integration networks are much greater 
than we have portrayed. One would need to bring in phonetics, phonology, and 
morphology to describe aspects of them. Our superficial description neverthe-
less hints at the type of blending that is going on in writing and speech and at 
the ways in which material anchors of various kinds are indispensable to the 
mental and social activity. 
SIGN LANGUAGES 
it is now universally recognized that language can have modalities other than 
voice. Spoken languages use oral-auditory modality; but sign languages use vi-
sual-gestural modality. The structural and conceptual complexity of sign lan-
guages is of the same magnitude as that of spoken languages. Voice is the indis-
pensable material anchor for the public sharing and learning of integration 
networks in spoken languages; gesture is the equivalent material anchor for sign 
languages. But because the modalities are different, their material anchors show 
some interesting differences as well. 
A number of distinguished scholars-such as Scott Liddell, Karen Van Hoek, 
and Christine Poulin-have studied the ways in which connections between 
mental spaces are reflected and prompted for in the modality of sign. Liddell, 
who has explicitly studied blended spaces in American Sign Language (ASL), 
shows that mental representations of one's immediate surroundings constitute a 
special type of mental space, which he calls a "grounded mental space." The im-
mediate physical surroundings are the material anchor for that mental space. El-
ements in this grounded mental space have corresponding physical locations in 
the immediate surroundings that can be pointed to as part of communication. 
Sign languages use blending and pointing in interesting ways to allow speakers 
to refer again and again in complex ways to the same referent. When the things 
being talked about are not physically present, signers can make them conceptu-
ally present by creating grounded blends. 
rr;' 
Things 
213 
Liddell presents the following analysis of a revealing case: 
[A] native speaker of American Sign Language is narrating, describing an interac-
tion between the cartoon character Garfield and his owner in which Garfield is 
looking up at his owner. This immediately follows a section of the narrative in 
which the owner has just told Garfield that he has removed the batteries from the 
remote control for the television. The signer produces the two-sign clause CAT 
LOOK-AT to describe Garfield's initial response to the owner. The subject of the 
clause is the sign CAT. The predicate LOOK-AT is illustrated in Figure [10.6], 
Space B. 
The meaning being expressed is that the cat is looking up and to the right (to-
ward its owner). During the narration the real cartoon characters are not present. 
In order to explain both the direction of the sign LOOK-AT, the turning of the 
head, and the direction of the eye gaze in Figure [10.6], I propose that the signer's 
head position and eye gaze are no longer his own. Instead, they are demonstra-
tions of Garfield's turning his head to the right and looking up at his owner. The 
signer has also conceptualized Garfield's owner as standing to his right. This con-
ceptualization involves blending elements from spaces A and B to produce the 
grounded conceptual blend shown as Space C. 
f ' 
Within the blend Garfield's owner is now standing to the right of the signer-
as-Garfield and the signer looks up to the right in order to show that the blended 
. character is making eye contact with the owner. This is no longer Real Space, be-
cause Real Space is a mental representation of only one's immediate physical envi-
ronment. Here the signer's head position and eye gaze are to be interpreted as 
Garfield's head position and eye gaze in the blend. That is, the signer's head and 
eye gaze provide a demonstration of what Garfield did. So the signer has become 
Garfield, at least partially, since his head and eye gaze are conceived of as 
Garfield's. In Figure [10.6] lines connect Garfield in A and the signer in B to the 
blended Garfield in C. 
In other words, the living body of the signer has become the material anchor for 
an absent character, and a location where another character is absent is brought 
into playas a material anchor by pointing to that location. This is a blend of a 
present scene and an absent but reported scene. We take what we 'see as prompt-
ing for a blended space that we are to unpack so as to construct the input spaces, 
the connections between them, and the selective projections to the blend. A 
given element in the blend, such as the direction of gaze, is in one input the di-
rection in which the signer is looking and in the other input the direction in 
which Garfield is looking. 
Liddell points out that similar blends are also found in systems of gesture 
that accompany spoken languages, and indeed we find such blends involving 
gestural material anchors so natural that we might have to think twice to see 

214 
t' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
FIGURE 10.6 
A BL.END WITH SIGNER AS GARFIEL.D. IN C (THE BL.END), THE 
CDNCEPTUAL. SETTING IS THE CARTDON AND THE PHYSICAL. SETTING IS THE 
HERE AND (~OW. (SOURCE: ADAPTED FROM LIDDEL.L., 199B, FIGURE 4.) 
how complex these performances really are. They bring in the power of double-
scope blending, which is an astonishing capaciry that human beings take for 
granted because every one of us can use it easily, beginning from early child-
hood. We just can't help thinking that way. 
•• 
•• CHAPTER 10 
ZOOM OUT 
Over time, cultures have developed a range of objects that pr~mpt for elabo-
rate conceptual integration networks. 
Questiom: 
• How does the young child learn to use. these .objects? 
Things 
215 
• What capacities does the child have, and what line of development does 
the child go through in becoming able to manipulate all these integration 
networks? 
\ 
Ouramwers: 
In Chapter 9, we discussed the evolution of the capaciry for double-scope in-
tegration around the time of the Upper Paleolithic. But having a capacity is not 
the same as having its products. Human beings, equipped with the capacity for 
double-scope integration, had to go through the arduous cultural work of pro-
ducing integration networks, using those networks as inputs to further net-
works. In retrospect, looking back at the cultural invention of a repertoire of 
blends, we may be able to pick out the developmental sequence, as in the devel-
opment of speaking tens of thousands of years before the invention of writing, 
with speaking as an input to writing. We also saw in the case of the develop-
ment of numbers a long sequence in which each newly achieved number blend 
became an input to a later number blend. In this history, we need always to 
keep in mind the distinction between the operation of conceptual blending and 
the cultural products of conceptual blending. 
Clearly, the child learns very quickly what often took the culture centuries or 
thousands of years to develop-how to write or use money or use clocks. Ie 
might seem strange that what cultures struggled so hard with is so straightfor-
ward to most of the children who must learn it. It might seem as if it should 
take longer for the child, or as if the culture should have moved much faster. 
But, in fact, recent work in psychology-in particular, Jean Mandler's "How 
to Build a Baby"-has shown that infants have developed complex conceptual 
systems long b~fore they starr talking. We know that the child comes into the 
world with double-scope capacity. We see from work like Mandler's that the in-
fant, as early as seven months old and perhaps earlier, is already deploying pow-
erful integration networks. At least as early as the stage of pretend play using 
props, and certainly no later than eighteen months, the child has clearly con-
structed robust double-scope networks. 
With these capacities, the child comes into a world already populated with 
material anchors for the culture's conceptual blends. What for the adult is a 
blended space in an elaborate integration network comes to the child at first as 
a single integrated space. The child plays with money, toy watches, and books 
long before having the concepts of buying, telling time, and reading. Through 
imitation, the child can develop some of the routines for manipulating those 
material anchors before developing the integration networks they are meant to 
evoke. What for the culture is the blended space of an elaborate integration net-
work can be for the child a starring point for acquiring that network. That 
space, by virrue of the constraints on integration, is at human scale, involving 
direct perception and action. This makes it a good place for the baby to begin. 

216 
t' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
The child is on the path of both acquiring networks that lie behind what its cul-
ture offers and developing new ones through blending of inputs. 
The case is no different for language. In our view, the culture is using mate-
rial anchors at human scale as well as all the directly perceptible features of the 
environment-from mother's voice to the baby blanket to the trees to the baby's 
own body and actions-to entrain the child toward the development of its 
repertoire of integration networks. There will be external evidence for the acqui-
, sition of these networks-in particular, the culturally appropriate manipulation 
of material anchors such as intonation patterns, words, and phrases, simultane-
ously with and inseparably from gestures, facial expressions, eye movements, 
dress, handy physical objects, social interactions, and anything else at human 
scale that can be manipulated as a prompt for constructing meaning. 
This view sets up a vast research program of investigating these particular 
networks and anchors and the development of the mastery of such networks 
and anchors that counts as cultural competence. 
ti 
•• 
•• Eleven 
THE CONSTRUCTION 
OF THE UNREAL 
"I see nobody on the road," said Alice. 
"! only wish I had such eyes," the King remarked, in a 
fretful cone. "To be able co see Nobody! And at that dis-
tance, too!" 
-Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking Glass 
PEOPLE PRETEND, IMITATE, LIE, fantasize, deceive, deyude, consider alter-
natives, simulate, make models, and propose hypotheses. Our species has an ex-
traordinary ability to operate mentally on the unreal, and this ability depends 
on our capacity for advanced conceptual integration. 
Evolution has a way to consider alternatives and make choices: Organisms 
that differ from each other are already, from a God's-eye view, alternative exper-
iments that evolution runs in the natural world. Which alternatives are fitter is 
gradually made clear, over generations, by the calculus of differential reproduc-
tion. The great evolutionary change that produced cognitively modern human 
beings was a matter of evolving an organism that could run off-line cognitive 
simulations so that evolution did not have to undertake the tedious process of 
natural selection every time a choice was to be made. Human beings can run 
several scenarios, mentally check the outcomes, and make choices, all in min-
utes rather than generations. Conceiving complicated new scenarios in nearly 
any domain while making complicated new inferences and choices is now 
something that can be run as part of mental and cultural life. The cognitive ca-
pacities of modern human beings not only allow individuals a far greater power 
of conception and choice, they also allow cultures to transmit choices that have 
been made and tested by entire communities. 
VARIETIES OF' THE UNREAL 
In Chapter 2, we quoted Nelson Goodman's classic observation: "The analysis 
of counterfactual conditionals is no fussy little grammatical exercise. Indeed, if 
217 

218 
THE WAY WE THINK 
we lack the means for interpreting counterfactual conditionals, we can hardly 
claim to have any adequate philosophy of science." By now, this observation is 
not in dispute in any of the branches of learning that discuss counterfactuals. 
Goodman's point-that science depends in essential ways on counterfactual rea-
soning and, therefore, on the availability of counterfactual constructions in lan-
guage-is equally valid in the social sciences, where in f;tct the importance and 
the problems of counterfactual reasoning are explicitly recognized. Gary King, 
Robert O. Keohane, and Sidney Verba, in Designing Social Inquiry: Scientific In-
ference in Qualitative Research, argue that there is no form of causal inference in 
the social sciences that does not depend upon counterfactual reasoning. Analyz-
ing causality for social events is a matter of contrasting what in fact happened 
with counter factual scenarios of what might have happened under different 
conditions. 
[The] counurfoctual condition is the essence behind this definition of causality. 
. .. Thus, this simple definition ~f causality demonstrates that we can never hope 
to know a causal effect for certain. Holland (1986) refers to this as th~ fondamen-
taJ problem of causal inference, and it is indeed a fondamental problem since no 
matter how perfect the research design, no matter how much data we collect, 
no matter how perceptive the observers, no matter how diligent the research assis-
tants, and no matter how much experimental control we have, we will never 
know a causal inference for cettain. 
'·- i 
l~] 
\~ 
Although the key/role of counterfactuals is widely recognized, it is often 
thought that concei' ing of a counterfactual scenario is a simple matter of mak-
in a chan e in the actual world and observing the conse uences of that chan e. 
King, Keohane, and Verba, for example, espite their experience with the com-
plexities of local politics, ask us to consider the real situation of an election in a 
specific congressional district in which the Democratic incumbent runs against 
one Republican (nonincumbent) challenger and receives fraction x of the vote. 
To do the counterfactual reasoning, we are to "imagine that we go back in time 
to the start of the election campaign and everything remains the same, except that 
the Democratic incumbent decides not to run for reelection and the Demo-
cratic Party nominates another candidate," who receives fraction y of the vote. 
King, Keohane, and Verba define the causal effect (in this case, of the incum-
bency of the Democratic nominee) as the quantity x-yo 
But as Goodman first recognized, changing anyone element opens up com-
plicated questions of what else would need to be changed in order for that one 
element to differ. Counterfactual scenarios are assembled mentally not by tak-
ing full representations of the world and making discrete, finite, known changes 
~ deliver J ull possible worlds but, instead, by conceptual integration, which can 
compose schematic blends that suit the conceptual purposes at,hand. 
Th~ Construction of the Unreal 
219 
It is also commonly argued that counterfactual thought is always directed at 
causal analysis. Neal Roese and James Olson, in introducing The Social Psychol-
ogy 0/ Counterfoctual Thinking, state as an established discovery of social psy-
chology that "all counterfactual conditionals are causal assertions." But on the 
contrary, as we will see, great ranges of counterfactual thought are directed at 
important aspects of understanding, reason, judgment, and decision that are 
not concerned principally with causality. 
Let us now turn to some striking examples of this process of assembling 
counterfactual blends. 
Our first example is a counterfactual but not a causal assertion. A woman 
who had already been in a coma for ten years was raped by a hospital employee 
and gave birth to a child. A debate ensued concerning whether the pregnancy 
should have been terminated. Counterfact~al scenarios arose such as "It is right 
to figu're out what she would want [emphasis added]. It is wrong to try to figure 
out what we want." The Los Angeles Times article reporting the case ended with 
a comment by a law professor, who said, "Even if everyone agrees she [the com-
atose woman] was pro-life at 19, she is now 29 and has lived in PVS [persistent 
vegetative state] for 10 years. Do we ask: 'Was she pro-life?' Or do we ask more 
appropriately: 'Would she be pro-life as a rape victim in a' persistent vegetative 
state at 29 years of life?'" 
In the blend, the woman is in a persistent vegetative state, but has the rea-
soning capacities and general information that she would have had at age 29 
under ordinary circumstances. The purpose of this blend is not to construct a 
plausible situation in which a woman is reasoning about her inability to rea-
son. Nor, obviously, is the purpose to establish the causes of the woman's coma, 
her pregnancy, or anything else about the situation. The counterfactual blend 
is instead offered with the purpose of casting light on the element of "choice" 
in the input space in which the woman is indeed in a coma, so that we can 
come to a considered judgment about what action is legitimate. The issue is 
not causality but propriety. The law professor is committed to framing this 
woman as having the right ro choose, but what does it mean for a woman in a 
coma to choose? Her abstract opinion, voiced ten years before her specific 
dilemma, does not meet our frame for "choice," so the professor is offering an 
alternative: In the blend, the pregnant woman can make an informe'd choice 
about the specific dilemma, and this choice should be projected back to the in-
put to guide our actions. 
This example makes it crystal clear that counterfactual reasoning is not a mat-
ter of imagining what we would have to change in the real world for the counter-
f.'lctual scenario to be possible. We cannot fabricate a possible scenario in which 
someone who has been in a coma for ten years has also been fully aware during 
that time and can now reason about her inability to reason. The blend is as im-
possible as the Buddhist Monk's meeting himself or G~at American Irs racing 
, 
J 

220 
t' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
against Northern Light, but possibility or impossibility is entirely beside the point 
in such cases. 
Although they may attract the attention of the philosoph~r who is discon-
certed that truth can be sought by imagining impossible situations, such cases 
go mostly without notice in everyday discourse. This counterfactual, for ex-
ample, was offered in legal discussion and was meant to guide our actual reason-
ing and judgment. It was reported by the newspaper as a perfectly rational com-
ment needing no explication or apology. The question for the judge, the 
lawyers, and the readers of the newspaper was only whether the law professor 
was right or wrong. Nobody thought she had said anything bizarre. In fact, her 
comment could have been followed quite naturally with remarks like "That's 
absolutely true" by people who supported her position or "That's false" by 
people who did not. Both sets of respondents could continue without hesitation 
to reason in the blend. The supporters could say "She was so young at 19 that 
her opinions were not yet her own." The detractors could say "She was steadfast 
and decent and would not have been swayed by mere fashionable amorality." 
It is worth noting that there is no levity involved here. The law professor's 
counterfactual is at the center of one of the most crucial and prickly social nego-
tiations in current American society, and her blend is a genuine cognitive effort 
to offer a real solution to a deep and troubling question. There is no reason to 
expect blends to be pleasant, as we can see in this countervailing blend offered 
by the pro-life side: "Every Third Baby Dies by Choice." The billboard carrying 
this slogan depicts nine cute babies, sitting in a line, but the' third, sixth, and 
ninth babies are shaded grey. The ninth looks to the side, its mouth open in a 
cry that, while not particularly dramatic, is nonetheless unmistakably a cry of 
unhappiness or distress. In a standard counterfactual blend ("if it had lived 
... "), the specific baby would be alive, doing what babies do. The grey baby in 
the blend is simultaneously an embryo or fetus that has been aborted and a baby 
some months old. The Change relation of development from embryo to baby 
has been compressed in the blend. The Cause-Effect relation between embryo 
and child has been compressed. The Time span has been compressed. This is the 
packet of vital relations that we compress in our usual template of personal 
identity, so the ad gets them for free. Consequently, there is in the blend a coun-
terpart for what happens to the embryo in one of the inputs. In the blend, what 
happens to the embryo and the baby is the same since the embryo and the baby 
are the same. And we are told that the baby is dead. The ninth baby's distress 
can be projected back to the reality space of the fetus. It is only in the blend that 
the cry can be interpreted as a normal baby's reaction to a distressing situation 
that happens to be the impending death of a fetus. 
Like any important subject of political or social debate, abortion elicits nu-
merous powerful and competing blends that become part of the conventional 
cultural discourse, available for journalists, interviewers, political candidates, or 
The Construction of the Unreal 
221 
anyone else to use directly. The two examples we have given are very strongly 
double-scope: The woman in a coma has a frame incorporating absolutely con-
tradictory elements from the frames of the two inputs (e.g., coma versus con-
sciousness), and the billboard about every third baby takes the termination of 
the organism from one space but, from the other, features of the organism that 
arise only later. Seana Coulson provides a detailed and insightful analysis of sev-
eral arrested abortion debates and interviews. Her cognitive rhetorical analyses 
show the intricate mapping schemes, cultural models, and conceptual blends 
deployed in these discussions. 
While these examples are acrobatic, counterfactual reasoning is an everyday 
event that usually goes unremarked: "If! had milk, I would make muffins," "If! 
were you, I would quit." Grammar uses the same conventional forms to prompt 
for both everyday and acrobatic blends. Just as we can use the same form in 
"Ann is the boss of the daughter of Max" and "Prayer is the echo of the darkness 
of the soul," so we c;m say both "IfI had the money, I would buy a house" and 
"If she could think about herself being pregnant in a coma, she would not 
choose to give birth." Even though the blends feel very different, the same map-
ping schemes are at work, prompted by the same language forms. In English, a 
typical form for explicitly setting up counterfactual blends uses two clauses, an 
antecedent clause with "if" and a consequent clause; these may appear in either 
order ("I would buy a house if I had the money"). A combination of tenses, 
moods, and time reference in the two clauses either suggests or forces Counter-
factuality. "If! had measles, I would have spots" only suggests counterfactuality; 
it could be followed by 'i\nd I have spots, so I'm going to the doctor to check." 
But "If you had come to my party today, you would have had a lot of fun" forces 
counterfactuality. 
, 
"If Clinton were the Titanir;, the iceberg would sink" is a striking counterfac-
.tual that circulated inside Washington, D.C., during February 1998, when the 
movie Titanic was popular and President Clinton, already famous for sexual 
scandals, had just been accused of another escapade, this time with a young in-
tern in the Oval Office. Yet he seemed to be surviving the rumor without dam-
age. This counterfactual turned out to be prophetic: Because of the scandal that 
ensued, Clinton would become only the second president in history to be im-
peached. He would survive impeachment, and six months later almost everyone 
would have essentially forgotten the entire incident. But at the time the coun-
terfactual was coined, the history had only gorren started. 
The counterfactual blend has two input mental spaces-one with the Titanic 
and the other with President Clinton. There is a partial cross-space mapping be-
tween these inputs: Clinton is the counterpart of the Titanic and the scandal is 
the Counterpart of the iceberg. There is a blended space in which Clinton is the 
Titanic and the scandal is the iceberg. This blend is double-scope. It takes much 
of irs organizing frame structure from the Titanic input space--it has a voyage 

222 
THE WAY WE THINK 
by a ship toward a destination and it has the ship's running into something 
enormous in the water-but it takes crucial causal structure and event shape 
structure from the Clinton scenario: Clinton is not ruined but instead survives. 
In the Clinton input, the events were largely speculative. It was not clear how 
many people were involved in arranging these events or what their motivations 
were. But the Titanic space supplies to the blend a tight compression at human 
scale: A ship runs into an iceberg, and the clear and dramatic consequence of 
that single cause follows quickly. The blend is counterfactual to the space of the 
historical Titanic, which sank. The historical Titanic is ranked as the supreme 
vessel on a scale of unsinkability, and therefore the iceberg as the supreme obsta-
cle on a scale of immovability. The blend uses the compression from that space 
and retains the scales. But it reverses the causality of the sinking so that the 
Clinton-Titanic is now even more unsinkable than the real one. The blend is 
deliberately hyperbolic: Icebergs can be submerged but cannot sink. In the 
blend, Clinton is stronger than even the laws of physics. 
There is a generic space whose structure is taken as applying to both inputs: 
One entity involved in an activity motivated by some purpose encounters an-
other entity that poses a threat to that activity. In the generic space, the outcome 
of that encounter is not specified. 
As we discussed in Chapter 8, the products of conceptual integration fall 
along a number of gradients and, at first blush, do not look like the same kind 
of thing. Superficially, metaphors, counterfactuals, literal framing, analogy, and 
hyperbole feel like different species, and it is easy to fall into the Cause-Effect 
Isomorphism Fallacy by assuming that the differences in the products must be 
caused by differences in the basic mental operations that produce them. That 
fallacy has conditioned most of the study of these products in philosophy, lin-
guistics, psychology, and the humanities, which have sharply separated the phe-
nomena on the basis of surface differences and so assumed an equally sharp par-
titioning of the underlying mental operations. The Unsinkable Titanic is 
interesting because it provides us with a blend that exhibits many of these sup-
posedly quite different phenomena all at once. It has an explicitly counterfac-
tual grammatical form and an explicit counterfactual blend-Clinton is not a 
ship and the Titanic did sink-so the blend is counterfactual with respect to 
both its inputs. Its cross-space mapping is metaphoric and recruits basic 
metaphors like PURPOSIVE BEHAVIOR IS JOURNEYING, FAILING [S BEING 
STOPPED, FAILURE IS DOWN, and ADVERSARIAL OPPOSITION IS PHYSICAL COLLI-
SION. In this cross-space mapping, the ship on' the journey is metaphorically 
mapped onto Clinton, the person with the purpose. Metaphors typically have 
source domains that provide tight compressions at human scale. That is exactly 
the case here. The compression is projected into the blend from the Titanic in-
put. The conceptual integration network develops a disanalogy between the two 
input spaces, and, as we saw, the final rhetorical effect is hyperbole. In this 
!:j' 
',' 
Tht Construction of tht Un~al 
223 
single conceptual integration network we see many features traditionally 
thought to be distinct and even incompatible. 
Most of the counterfactual blends we have considered thus far, such as the 
Buddhist Monk blend we analyzed in Chapter 3, are noticeably counterfactual. 
But counterfactual blends are more often unremarkable, their intricacy hidden 
from conscious sight. "Kant disagrees with me on this point," the unremark-
able but intricate statement we analyzed in Chapter 4, depends upon a coun-
terfactual blend, as do all of our "safe" examples ("This beach is safe," "The 
child is safe"). 
To see, how easy it is to construct intricate counterfactual blends, let us con-
sider an unremarkable blend used in the middle of a serious argument. Roger 
Penrose, in a book about consciousness titled Shadows of the Mind, presents a 
diagram summarizing his view of the connections between mental, physical, 
and platonic worlds. He writes: "[S]ome might argue for a reversal of the direc-
tions of some of my arrows. Perhaps Bishop Berkeley would have preferred my 
second arrow to point from the mental world to the physical one .... I am 
somewhat uncomfortable about directing the third arrow in the seemingly 
'Kantian' orientation that is depicted [in the diagram]." Here, the past counter-
factual ("would have preferred") prompts for a councerfactual blend in which 
Berkeley can see the diagram and express opinions about where the arrows 
should point. "Would prefer" would also work, prompting us to construct the 
sort of timeless space we noticed in the Debate with Kant. In the blend, we find 
Bishop Berkeley, Penrose, ourselves, and other thinkers evoked by the phrase 
"some might argue. " 
It is very easy to construct and work from a blended space in which we, 
Berkeley, Kant, Penrose, and innumerable others are all together, able to con-
verse. The conceptual frame for this conversation is based on the debate frame, 
but it has special intricacies because of selective projection, topology, and other 
principles of blending. In the blend, for example, Berkeley can disagree with 
Penrose without being his contemporary-which is to say, without knowing 
who Penrose is or knowing any modern neuroscience. The reader works with an 
intricate and surprising conceptual integration network and its counterfactual 
blend without being aware of the network, its intricacy, the blend, or its coun-
terfactuality. 
The Berkeley counterfactual is actually a multiple blend, of the sort discussed 
in Chapter 14. Many things are going on in such a blend, motivated by many 
inputs. The arrows printed in Penrose's book can now move; Bishop Berkeley 
can see them and object to their orientation. The verb "prefer" sets up mental 
spaces for Berkeley's conceptions. Compression over these many inputs is mani-
fest. There is compression of Space and TIme in placing Berkeley, Penrose, and 
the moving arrows together. There is compression of cause and effect: In the 
blend, preference alone moves the arrows. There is also the compression of a 
wi 

224 
t' 
THE WAY WE THINI( 
difficult philosophical discussion, carried on over centuries, into the simple ac-
tion of pointing an arrow in one of two possible directions. 
THE CeUNTERFACTUAL zee 
Explicit counterfactuals, with their surprising vari~ty of forms, provide one of 
, the most recognizable laboratories for the investigation of blending. To give a 
flavor of this variety, we list here a few counterfactuals with pointers toward the 
problems they raise. 
"If all circles were large, and this small triangle '0' were a circle, would it be 
large?" This wonderful and absurd counterfactual, invented by David Moser, 
has the surprising property that people very consistently and unhesitatingly an-
swer "yes." The reasoning seems unproblematic: Now that D is a circle, it must 
obey the laws applying to members of that category, one of which is, by stipula-
tion, that circles are large. How can people be willing to build this absurd "pos-
sible world," in which all circles are large, despite the law of plane figures that 
they can be of any size, and in which a triangle of our world shows up as a cir-
cle? The answer is that people are not considering the causal connection be-
tween our world and this counterfactual. They are instead setting up a straight-
forward integration network in which identiry and projection have been 
stipulated. One way to construe this counterfactual statement is to make succes-
sive blend~:; The first has one inpur in which there are plane figures of any size, 
including small triangles and small circles, and another input in which it is a cri-
terial property of circles that they are large. This blend is a world that can have 
small triangles but only large circles. Next, · we blend the output of the first 
blend, containing D, with a mental space containing a counterpart circle of un-
specified size for D. In this new blend, it is still the case that circles must be 
large, but now 0 is also a circle, and hence large. Notice that the same 
schematic counterfactual form elicits quite a different answer in "If all the coins 
in your pocket were quarters, and this dime were placed in your pocket, would 
it be a quarter?" Here, the response is "no," because the projection principles are 
construed differently. We apparently find it harder to view as criterial "is a quar-
ter" for the set of coins in our pocket than to view as criterial "large" for the set 
of circles. We surmise that logical and mathematical systems are relatively poor 
laboratories for thinking about everyday counterfactual reasoning because the 
everyday world is very rich in possibilities for selective projection, adjustment, 
and transformation. "Being a circle" is a stark and rigid category, but "being in 
your pocket" has available to it all the possibilities of human life. 
"If you'd only put yourself in my shoes, you'd have some sympathy, and if I 
could put myself in your shoes, I'd walk right back to me." This simple line from 
a country-western song points to a very complex, but common, use of counter-
factual blending to manipulate identity, dispositions, and situations. We will 
The Construction of the Unreal 
225 
return to this topic in the next chapter. For X to be in Y's shoes usually means 
that X keeps X's identity and dispositions but imagines being in Y's situation. 
The first counterfactual in this song lyric uses that conventional meaning, but 
the second does not. In the first counterfactual, the jilted lover asks the departing 
lover to imagine herself in his situation. In the second counterfactual, the depart-
ing lover does not change situations but inherits new dispositions from the jilted 
man. In the first case, a change of situation for the woman generates in the blend 
a change of disposition toward the man. In the second case, a change of disposi-
tions for the woman generates a change of action toward the man. 
"In France, Watergate would not have hurt Nixon." This counterfactual can 
have many readings, but a typical one contrasts the American and French cul-
tural and political systems (see Figure 11.1). It brings in aspects of the French 
system from one input and the Watergate scandal and President Nixon from the 
other. In the blend, we have a Watergate-like situation in France, but running 
the blend delivers attitudes quite differen~ from those in the American input, 
and so the president is not harmed. Again, the speaker is not making a causal as-
. sertion. The point is not to imagine what changes would need to be made in 
our world to have Watergate take place in France or to have Nixon be president 
of the Republic. 
"If the Earth were as close to the sun as Venus, life as we know it would never 
have evolved on our planet." The point of this counterfactual is to emphasize 
the special conditions on Earth that made the origin of life possible. The point 
is not at all to imagine the nearly unthinkable changes that would have to be 
made in physical laws to allow the Earth to evolve in the orbit of Venus or to 
evolve in its own orbit and somehow be magically moved to the orbit of Venus. 
"If cars were men, you'd want your daughter to marry this one" (said of a 
Volvo in an advertisement). This counterfactual underscores the arbitrariness of 
some of the cross-space mappings at work in integration networks. The world in 
which cars are men does not strike us as at all possible; and, even if conceivable, 
its "distance" from us on a scale of possibility or similarity is in no way measura-
ble. Nor is the counterfactual causal in the sense of the social psychologists: The 
ad is not inviting us to make a causal assertion about the world in which cars are 
men so that we can deduce a causal assertion about our world, in which men 
are men. Rather, what the blend is exploiting is an analogical mapping that links 
wanting to buy and wanting to marry. This analogy is built on the assumption that 
you want to buy and marry what is best and most reliable. When buying and 
marrying are blended, so are optimal cars and optimal sons-in-law. Notice once 
again that no preexisting objective similarity between cars and men, buying and 
marrying has to exist for this blend to be intelligible. 
"Coming home, I drove into the wrong house and collided with a tree I don't 
have." This statement is counrerfactual because it depends upon the evoked but 
counterfactual scenario of driving into the right house and therefore not colliding 

226 
world knowledge about 
Water~ate. Nixon: 
break-m, tapes, lies, 
impeachment looms, 
resignation, ... 
THE WAY WE THINK 
("Western Democracy frame"): 
country bas a presldentlleader elected by citizens 
president is bead of political party competing with 
others for leadership of country 
president's actions are constrained by laws, public 
reaction ... 
action brings harm to president if 
- it triggers negative public reaction 
- it is unlawful and president is punished 
etc. 
runningJlJe blend: 
. 
French Watergate scandal doesn't harm French president Nixon 
(~ inferences about France, disanalogy with US, etc.) 
FIGURE 1 1.1 
NIXON-IN-FRANCE NETWORK 
with a tree. The grammatical trigger here is not "if .. . then". but rather the adjec-
tive "wrong." In one input, the driver drives into the parking place at his home. In 
the other, he drives onto the property of some different house and collides with a 
tree. These inputs share the frame of parking a car at a house, and there are iden-
tity connectors between the cars and the drivers, but there are disanalogies be-
tween the two inputs, having to do with the value of the role house and the 
',:r" 
The Construction of the Unreal 
227 
existence of a tree at a particular location. In the blend, we have, from the space of 
what actually happened, the house where the driver did drive, and the tree, and 
the collision. The disanalogy between the houses is compressed in the blend into a 
property of the house: It is now the "wrong" house. And the disanalogy having to 
do with the tree is compressed into a property of the tree: "a tree I don't have." It is 
tempting to think that this is a property of the tree independent of the blend, but 
note what happens if our companion on a walk through some public woods says, 
pointing to a tree, "That is a tree I don't have." We are likely to interpret the 
speaker as meaning that he does not own a tree of that type. It would be quite 
strange if he actually meant to point out that he did not own that particular tree. 
In the statement we are looking at, "a tree I don't have" is not interpreted to mean 
that the driver does not own that particular tree but, rather, that there is a coun-
terfactual relation between the blend and the input with the driver parking his car 
at his home: There is no tree in the corresponding spot at his home, and no colli-
sion when he drives through that spot, either. Very generally, when disanalogy op-
erates on the existence of a value for a role, that disanalogy is a good candidate for 
compression into nonpossession, as in "That car does not have air conditioning," 
"Arkansas has no coastline," "Africa does not have bears," and "My house doesn't 
have that porch." 
,j 
"Caffeine headache," "money problem," "nicotine fit": These straightforward 
phrases-referring to a headache that comes from lack of coffee, a problem that 
involves a lack of money, a fit brought on by lack of nicotine (presumably from 
not smoldng enough)-all set up an integration involving a counterfactuallink 
between spaces. "Caffeine headache" brings up two situations, one in which you 
have your coffee and one in which you have a headache. There is evident iden-
tity, analogy, and disanalogy between these two situations: In both, it's late 
morning, and you are at work. But there is the coffee only in the first and the 
headache only in the second. A blended network is constructed in the following 
way: There are input spaces corresponding to the two contrasting situations, 
links of analogy, disanalogy, and identity between them, and projection of the 
frame of morning aci:ivities from both inputs to the blend. From the input with 
the headache, we project the headache. And from the desired input, we project 
the causal relation and the causal element. In the blend, the headache is now the 
effect of something (see Figure 11.2). 
Th~ blend is the new construal of the situation (see Figure 11.3). The input 
with coffee is counterfactual with respect to the blend. In the blend, there is a 
counterpart for coffee that causes the headache. It is what we refer to by means 
of the expression "absence of coffee. " The expression "caffeine headache" brings 
in the label "caffeine" from the coffee element in the counterfactual input and 
applies it to its counterpart in the blended space. 
In the linguistic construction shared by "caffeine headache," "money prob-
lem," and "nicotine fit," the first noun picks out the element in the desired 
J; 

228 
.. 
, 
\ 
if 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
·. ;~. 
Analogy 
Disanalogy 
Identity 
. ~ M "~. 
. THE WAY WE THINK 
your morning 
activity 
FIGURE 11.2 
THE CAUSED HEADACHE NETWORK 
" , ' 
input whose absence in the blend is causal for the unwanted state, and the sec-
ond noun picks out the bad state that obtains in one of the inputs and in the 
blend. Thus we also have "security problem," "arousal problem," "insulin coma" 
and "insulin death" (in the case of hyperglycemia, which results from absence of 
adequate insulin), "food emergency," "honesty crisis," and "rice famine." 
These examples demonstrate the way in which blending has multiple possi-
bilities. For example, we could read "caffeine headache" as referring to a 
headache caused by the caffeine. For both networks, there is a cause-effect rela-
tionship in the blend-in the first case, between absenu of caffeine and 
headache, and in the second case, between presence of caffeine and headache. In 
both, the Cause-Effect vital relation is further compressed into Property. There 
can now be "caffeine headaches," "whisky headaches," and "sex headaches." 
The notion of absence is not explicitly indicated by any part of the expression 
"caffeine headache." It emerges from the entire network, as prompted by this 
grammatical construction. But there are linguistic expressions for indicating this 
compression explicitly: "absence of," "lack of," "want of," even "no," as in "I 
have a no-caffeine headache." 
The Construction of the Unreal 
your morning 
activity 
coffee 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
Analogy 
Disanalogy 
Identity 
FIGURE 1 1.3 
THE CAFFEINE HEADACHE NETWORK 
229 
These counterfactual networks are frequently very hard to notice, since we 
construct them so effortlessly as part of backstage cognition. Consider, for ex-
ample, the January 31, 2000, edition of USA Today on that year's Super Bowl. 
In the last play of the game, the ball carrier for the Titans was tackled one yard 
from the goal line. We unavoidably construct the contrasting space in which the 
runner advances one more yard and scores. Blending these two spaces gives us a 
blended space in which there is now an element that is absence of one more yard 
of progress. We might express this blend by making the negative element explicit: 
"The Rams won by stopping the Titans from advancing one more yard." But 
the front-page headline actually read "Rams win by a yard." It then becomes 
possible to refer to the Rams' "one-yard win"-a phrase that, in its integration 
patterns, is identical to "caffeine headache." This example reveals something else 
as well. The more conventional pattern for expressions like "winning by a yard" 
and "winning by a nose" is, of course, that of a race where the winner crosses the 
finish line a yard ahead of the runner-up. This doesn't feel intuitively like a 
counterfactual expression; it seems as if we can "see" that fateful yard right there 
on the photograph of the finish. But when you think about it, you realize that 

230 
THE WAY WE THINK 
this more standard notion of a "one-yard win" is indeed counterfactual. The 
crucial yard is the one that the loser failed to cover, just as the crucial yard in the 
Super Bowl win was the yard that separated the ball carrier from the goal line. 
BLENDS, INPUTS, AND 
IMPLICIT COUNTERFACTUAL SPACES 
h is common to imagine that reality is simply opposed to unreality, and that 
counterfactual spaces are those that do not refer to reality. Thus it is an easy but 
false step to imagine that when we are thinking about reality, about events such 
as what we did this morning or what we might do this afternoon, we are not do-
ing counterfactual thinking. We are doing counterfactual thinking, the logic 
goes, only when we imagine what we might have done this morning if we had 
won the lottery, or what we would do this afternoon if we were a millionaire. 
On this view, studying the history of World War II does not involve counterfac-
tual thinking, but wondering what would have happened if Churchill had be-
come prime minister in 1938 does. 
There is every kind of evidence against this logic. Thinking of a caffeine 
headache that we in fact have is certainly thinking about reality in the most 
practical terms, but it involves fundamentally a space in which we had the cof-
fee, and that space is counterfactual with respect to the blend in which we have 
a special kind of headache, a caffeine headache. Counterfactuality is forced in-
compatibility between spaces, and when one is thinking about reality, counter-
factuality is often a vital relation between spaces that involve some of the same 
people and the same events. 
Counterfactuality is not an absolute property. A space will be counterfactual 
depending on the point of view one takes-that is, on the space that serves as 
the viewpoint. Consider, for example, "The suitors don't know that the beggar 
is really Odysseus in disguise, so they abuse Penelope's hospitality. They are 
thinking that if Odysseus were here, they would all be in great danger." The 
grammatical cues present as counterfactual the space in which Odysseus is 
watching and they are in danger, even though readers know it is real. 
In this book, we use "counterfactual" to mean that one space has forced in-
compatibility with respect to another. But there is a narrower and more com-
mon use of the term to mean that one space has forced incompatibility with re-
spect to a space we take to be "actual." This narrower meaning is also useful. But 
the important point is that there is no difference in the cognitive operations of 
mapping and blending between the two cases. "Counterfactual thought," with 
all of its mechanisms, is happening in any case; it just happens that we some-
times mark one of the spaces as "actual." As we saw in Chapter 5, typically any 
integration network has implicit counterfactual spaces attached to various of the 
"actual" spaces we are focusing on. Expressions like "safe beach," "fake gun," 
Th( Construction of th( Unr(al 
231 
and "If Clinton were the Titanic," pointedly require us to build counterfactual 
spaces and to deploy a precise mapping scheme. But these spaces are also often 
involved in networks without such expressions. In the Impotent Smoking Cow-
boy integration network, the spaces with virility and potency are crucial but are 
not prompted for grammatically. 
TRUE SCIENCE AND EMOTIONS 
FROM COMPLEX FALSEHOOD 
We began this chapter by saying that the capacity to juggle counterfactual 
spaces is a consequence of the evolution of cognitively modern human beings 
and their remarkable capacity for double-scope blending. Counterfactuals are a 
good exemplar of double-scope blending because the oppositions between the 
spaces are so manifest. One cannot overstate the importance of counterfactuals 
in human life. Many thinkers, from many different fields, have realized that 
counterfactuals have an enormous and basic indispensability in human life. We 
will look at two striking cases that illustrate this indispensability in very differ-
ent ways. One has dramatic consequences that stem from invisible and unstated 
counterfactual blending. The other has dramatic con,~equences, too--but they 
stem from profiled and explicit counterfacrual blending. In both cases, reality is 
profoundly affected by cognitive work in the unreal. 
An especially strong form of depression was studied in Britain in the 1980s. 
Sufferers had purchased a lottery ticket a few weeks before the drawing, know-
ing full well that the odds against winning were enormous. They expressed no 
hope of winning and rationally declared that they were buying the ticket for 
fun. Yet once the drawing was held and they had lost, they slumped into debili-
tating depression. The symptoms were significantly different from "gambling 
depression," which is an effect of addiction to gambling. The victims of "lottery 
depression" had symptoms like those of people who have suffered severe losses, 
such as destruction of a house or loss of a parent. The interpretation given by 
therapists was that in the two weeks or so between the purchase of the ticket 
and the drawing for the winner, these victims had fantasized, consciously or un-
consciously, wittingly or not, about what they would do upon winning the lot-
tery. The actual drawing made them lose everything they had acquired in the 
fantasy world. In that world, they did indeed suffer a severe loss. The amazing 
thing is that the fantasy world seems to have had profound effects on the psy-
chological reality of the real world, given that the patients had no delusions 
about the odds of winning, and said so clearly. 
The lottery players constructed a hypothetical blend that became counterfac-
tual upon the drawing. We have talked earlier about living in the blend and about 
the all-powerful role of the unconscious in building up the most mundane every-
day meanings. Here, in lottery depression, the unconscious has the same great 
" 

232 
t' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
power and the players have lived in the blend for several weeks. This is considered 
a psychiatric condition, but the effects of "living in the blend" also show up in 
neurobiological syndromes. V. S. Ramachandran reports on patients who have a 
. paralyzed arm as the result of cerebral hemispheric damage and who also have 
a syndrome known as anosognosia. Such patients are obviously sane, . but the 
anosognosia causes them to be convinced they can .move their paralyzed limbs. 
When Ramachandran asked such a patient whose left arm was paralyzed whether 
she could use her left hand, she said that of course she could and that her two 
hands were equally strong. When Ramachandran asked her to touch his nose, her 
hand lay motionless in front of her, but she "confabulated" the belief and the per-
ception that she was following his instruction. When asked "Are you touching my 
nose?" she replied "Yes, of course." Other patients with the same syndrome com-
monly concoct rationalizations such as "I'm sick of it; I don't want to move my 
arm," or "I have severe arthritis." 
The victims of lottery depression are running multiple conceptions simultane-
ously, some of them conflicting with each other, and it seems that the brain is 
very well designed to run such multiple and potentially conflicting conceptions. 
Consider another of Ramachandran's patients with anosognosia, Mrs. Macken. 
Using a technique devised by Eduardo Bisiach, an Italian 'neurologist, Ra-
machandran squirted ice-cold water into her ear. This sets up a convection in the 
ear canal that fools the brain into thinking the head is moving. Amazingly, the 
cold-waterjirrigation of the left ear brought about a complete, though temporary, 
remission of the anosognosia. Mrs. Macken was suddenly fully able to acknowl-
edge and admit her paralysis. Moreover, she correctly stated that she had been 
paralyzed for three weeks. "This was an extraordinary remark," Ramachandran 
reports, 
for it implies that even though she had been denying her paralysis each time I had 
seen her over these last few weeks, the memories of her failed attempts had been 
registering somewhere in her brain, yet access to them had been blocked. The 
cold water acted as a "truth serum" that brought her repressed memories about 
her paralysis to the surface. 
Once the truth serum wore off, Mrs. Macken not only returned to her denial 
but insisted that under the cold-water treatment she had answered that her arm 
was fine. Another patient with anosognosia overcame her denial of her paralysis' 
permanently. When Ramachandran asked this patient what she had told him 
about her arm each time he had visited her, she answered that she had always re-
ported that her left arm was paralyzed, even though on every previous visit she 
had told him her arm was fine. Both of these patients were running conflicting 
conceptions and continually revising their memories according to whichever 
conception was in control. 
The Construction of the Unreal 
233 
There are many spectacular scenarios-from hypnotism to delusion-where 
. we can see clearly that human beings are living in a blend, and sometimes in 
more than one blend at once. In cases of lottery depression, the lottery player, 
before the drawing, is living in parallel blends-one in which he has won and 
one in which the ticket is incidental, for fun only-but it is only when depres-
sion sets in and has to be explained that it becomes clear that the player had 
been living in the blend in which he won. Lottery depression is just one of 
many ways of "living in the blend" that have been studied by Daniel Kahne-
man, Paul Siovic, and Amos Tversky. One of their fundamental results is that 
the same objective facts are much more painful for subjects when framed as a 
loss than when framed as a gain. In lottery depression, the player has a long time 
between the buying and the drawing in which to accumulate fantasies of impor-
tant gains. Those "gains" are lost in one fell swoop when the winning number is 
announced. The patient had only a dim consciousness, if any, of how solid 
those fantasy gains had become for him. The real event of drawing the winning 
ticket is part of both blends-the one in which the player wins, and the one in 
which the ticket is only incidental. This is a devastating event in the winning 
space, since it throws out the fundamental presupposition of that space; it 
changes a settled fact in a way that is completely unjust and outrageous. 
A contrasting case, in which the counterfactuality is not only explicit but the 
driving goal, is the fundamental deduction technique of reductio ad absurdum in 
mathematics (and, for that matter, logic and natural sciences). In reductio ad ab-
surdum. we seek to prove the falsity of a proposition P within the system. The 
network is explicitly constructed by blending two inputs. The first is built up 
from our settled knowledge of a consistent mathematical system. In that input 
we activate some facts and deduction procedures from the mathematical system 
and the certainty that it is noncontradictory. In the other input, we have the 
same facts, but also the proposition P, considered as true. In the blend, we have 
P from one space, the currently activated facts from both spaces, and the deduc-
tion procedures from the input built up from the settled mathematical system. 
We can now run the blend with its facts, deduction procedures, and P, and re-
cruit as we go along any potentially helpful new facts that we choose to activate 
from the settled system of mathematics linked to the first input. We seek to de-
velop in the blend a contradiction as emergent structure. If a contradiction 
emerges, we know that the blend is counterfactual with respect to the settled in-
put, which is independently known not to be self-contradictory. Since the only 
difference between the blend and the settled input is the truth-status of P, we 
conclude that P is not true in the settled input. 
For example, suppose a mathematician is working with number theory and 
wants to prove that there is no highest prime number. She assumes that there is 
such a highest prime number, h, and then operates on it with some of what is 
already known about arithmetic. She constructs the number hI + 1, where hI 

234 
THE WAY WE THINK 
(pronounced "h factorial") is the product of all the integers from 1 to h. Now, h! 
+ 1 is much bigger than h. Therefore, by assumption, it cannot be prime, and 
so, by definition, must have a prime factor other than 1 and itselE But if that 
factor is any integer between 1 and h, then it also must be a factor of 1, and so 
can only be 1. So h! + 1 must have a prime factor bigger than h. But this implies 
that there is a prime number bigger than h, so in, the blend, h is the largest 
prime and there is also a prime larger than h. This is a contradiction, so the as-
sumption that there is a highest prime must be false. 
The method of reductio ad absurdum is not a special procedure in mathemat-
ics. It is among the bedrock procedures of mathematics and has been used fre-
quently from Euclid to Bourbaki, often in the development of the most impor-
tant theorems. The canonical view of falsifiability in science, such as Popper's, 
incorporates the notion of reductio in all experimental procedures. Given a hy-
pothesis A, the way to falsifY A is to construct a blended space that includes A, 
some of what we take to be unquestionable, and some experiments and their re-
sults. We then run the blend to show that A has consequences that conBict with 
the experimental results. Therefore, the blend is self-contradictory, and this is 
taken as evidence that A must be false. In everyday life, we do much the same 
thing. Hypothesis: Billy does not love Jane. Combine this with what we think 
we know of human nature: Therefore, he will not sacrifice himself for her and, 
in particular, will not type her doctoral dissertation for her. But he did. The 
blend is contradictory; therefore, he must love her. QED. Without reductio, 
there would be no detective novels, and fewer love stories. 
Some of the blends we have seen in previous chapters are everyday reductio ar-
guments. In the Bypass, you die from being operated upon.by well-meaning but 
incompetent children-surgeons. This is what comes of neglecting education, and 
so is a reductio of present policies. You must therefore "act now" to improve edu-
cation. In the Impotent Smoking Cowboy, the impotence in the blend is a conse-
quence of continued smoking, and so is a reductio of continuing to smoke. The 
general goal of reductio is to show a catastrophe in the blend, which is therefore 
to be avoided. In the special case of mathematics, the catastrophe is mathemati-
cal self-contradiction, which we avoid by rejecting the assumption. In other 
'realms the catastrophe can simply be an undesirable consequence. 
It may seem as if reductio is principally a negative technique for keeping fool-
ishness out of our systems of truth, but it is often a technique of great mathe-
matical discovery. 
Consider hyperbolic geometry. As both Morris Kline and Roberto Bonola 
describe it, the laborious birth of non-Euclidean geometry took fifteen hun-
dred years. Euclid had defined parallel lines as straight lines in a plane that, 
when extended indefinitely in both directions, never meet. He had presented a 
sequence of proofs independent of the parallel axiom showing that two straight 
lines are parallel when they form with one of their transversals equal interior 
The Construction of the Unreal 
235 
alternate angles, or equal corresponding angles, or·interior angles on the same 
side that are supplementary. But proving the converses of these propositions 
appeared to require what is known as the parallel axiom: "If a straight line 
falling on two straight lines makes the interior angles on the same side less than 
twO right angles, the two straight lines, if produced indefinitely, meet on that 
side on which the angles are less than two right angles." This axiom seemed to 
many geometers, probably including Euclid, to lack the desirable feature of 
self-evident truth. Rather than assume it as an axiom, they sought to derive it 
from the other axioms and from Euclid's first twenty-eight theorems, none of 
which uses the parallel axiom. 
It was Gerolamo Saccheri (1667-1733) who made the crucial attempt, fo-
cusing on a quadrilateral ABCD where angles DAB and ABC are right angles, 
and where line segments AD and BC are equal (see Figure 11.4). Without using 
the parallel axiom, it is easy to prove that angles BCD and CDA must be equal. 
Saccheri did this. If we assume the parallel axiom, BCD and CDA must be right 
angles. Therefore, if we deny that BCD and CDA are right angles, we thereby 
deny the parallel axiom. Saccheri did just this, in the hope of deriving a contra-
diction from the denial, which would prove the parallel axiom by reductio ad 
absurdum. 
I! 
But if BCD and CDA are not right angles, they are still equal, and so must 
be either obtuse or acute. Saccheri sought to show that, in either case, a contra-
diction follows. He assumed that they are acute, with the result that in the 
,bl(!nd, DAB and ABC are right while BCD and CDA are acute and equal (see 
Figure 11.5). The blend is impossible in Euclidean geometry, but Saccheri never 
found a clear-cut contradiction. He carefully drew many conclusions about this 
blend that he regarded as repugnant elaborations of the blend's inherent falsity 
but that today count as foundational theorems of hyperbolic geometry. 
Saccheri's reasoning, far from being exotic, employs the uniform strategy of 
all reductio arguments in logic and mathematics: A system of inferential princi-
ples that is taken to be consistent is applied to a structure that may not be con-
sistent. Saccheri imagined that he was conducting what could only be a reductio 
ad absurdum argument, and he hoped that the expected contradiction would in-
evitably emerge. Those who came after him reinterpreted the same proofs not as 
reductio arguments but as steps in the development of a new and consistent 
branch of geometry. 
It happens that there are many equivalent ways to produce a blend that deliv-
ers hyperbolic geometry. All that is needed is a blend that requires the interior 
angles of a triangle to sum to fewer than 180 degrees. 
Saccheri is not credited with the invention of non-Euclidean geometry. Kline 
summarizes and simplifies the history as follows: "If non-Euclidean geometry 
means the technical development of the consequences of a system of axioms 
containing an alternative to Euclid's parallel axiom, then most credit must be 
" 
. 
J

236 
f' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
B 
c 
A 
D 
FIGURE 1 1 . 4 
QUADRIL.ATERAL ABeD WHERE ANGLEB DAB AND ABC ARE 
RIGHT ANGLES AND LINE SEGMENTS AD AND BC ARE E~UAL 
accorded to Saccheri, and even he benefited by the work of many men who 
tried to find a more acceptable substitute axiom for Euclid's." Credit is given in-
stead to .Cari Friedrich Gauss, Janos Bolyai, and Nikolas Lobatchevsky for rec- . 
ognizing (but not proving) that hyperbolic non-Euclidean geometry is mathe-
matically consistent, and to Gauss for recognizing that physical space might be 
non-Euclidean. 
The essence of the rtductio strategy is to blend two spaces, one of them con-
taining already accepted truths in the mathematical system, the other contain-
ing the assumption to be proved false. We then run the blend to develop inner-
space compressed structure: The blend contradicts itself. It is therefore 
counterfactual with respect to the settled mathematical input. Since the only 
thing that differed in the blend before we began running it was the assumption, 
that assumption cannot be in the mathematical system. 
REPRISE 
Many of the integration networks we considered in earlier chapters include ex-
plicit or implicit spaces that are counterfactual with respect to our "actual" 
world-in other words, that are "false." The "false" blends are used in powerful 
ways to operate on the rest of the network, ultimately yielding inferences that are 
relevant for reality. They can yield both new structure or inferences for a particu-
lar space and new outer-space connections between the inputs. The "literal fal-
sity" of these spaces is irrelevant to reason. The Iron Lady example has a "false" 
space in which Margaret Thatcher runs for U.S. president but is opposed by the 
labor unions. Inferences developed inside that "false" space are meant to cast 
light on aspects in the input space with the United States. The Buddhist Monk 
has an even more exotic "false" blend in which someone exists in two locations 
and ultimately meets himself, and this inner-space structure of multiple location 
and self-meeting is decompressed to give us the "true" answer to a question about 
rh( Construction of th( Unr(ai 
237 
B 
c 
AI 
I D 
FIGURE 1 1 . 5 
QUADRILATERAL ABCD WHERE ANGLES BCD AND CDA ARE 
ACUTE, ANGLES DAB AND ABC ARE RIGHT, AND LINE SEGMENTS AD AND 
BC ARE E~UAL 
real-world events. The Pronghorn has a "false" blended space in which the 
pronghorn is being chased by nasry predators and has memories of having 
learned to run fast because of them. This "false" inner-space structure is again de-
compressed into the fac~ual outer-space connections of adaptation and inheri-
tance. By now we see a general pattern for many of these "false" blended spaces: 
When we want to establish, understand, or manipulate actual outer-space con-
nections over various spaces, it is good to compress them into a blend, which of-
ten means compressing them into powerful inner-space relations in the blend. 
The "literal falsity" of those relations is irrelevant to the reasoning process. We see 
exactly this pattern in Regatta: The blend has the "literally false" inner-space 
structure of two boats from different centuries racing from San Francisco to 
Boston. This compressed "literally false" inner-space structure corresponds to the 
actual outer-space connections between the two input spaces, each with one boat 
in its own time. This way of constructing integration networks is particularly 
useful for casting light on the input spaces by finding a counterfactual compres-
sion that, through proper alignments between the blend and inputs, preserves 
the structure we need in the inputs but operates over that structure efficiently 
and memorably, giving a global insight at human scale. The Bypass, the Impo-
tent Smoking Cowboy, the Mythic Race, and the Debate with Kant all have the 
same pattern of "literally false" inner-space structure in the blend that decom-
presses into outer-space "true" relations between the inputs. 
There are also integration networks in which the blended space contains in-
ner-space structure that is "false" but the point of the network is not to empha-
size the relationship between that structure in the blended space and the outer-
space relation between the inputs. For example, in the blended space of the 
Image Club, there is a man having sex with a high school student, and in the Mi-
cronesian navigation blends, there is an island, the ETAK, that serves the pur-
poses of the navigator; but from a perspective outside the blend there is no real 

238 
THE WAY WE THINK 
high school student involved and no real island at that location. In these net-
works, the principal purpose of the blended space is to provide integrated guid-
ance to satisfactory action, and, while for various purposes it might be necessary 
to have access to the inputs, decompression might interfere with action. Some-
times, it is preferable to stay in the blended space. 
II C HAP T E R 
1 1 
ZOOM OUT 
C OU NTERF"ACTUALS 
ARE EVERYWHERE 
It is common to think that counterfactual thought is rare and marked in lan-
guage by a handful of very specific grammatical constructions, such as "if, then" 
or "What if?" with verbs of the right form. 
Question: 
• Is counterfactuality a restricted grammatical phenomenon? 
Our answer: 
Far from it. Language is rife with forms that prompt for the construction of a 
counterfactual relation between one space and another. "Paul believes he'll get his 
daughter admitted to Berkeley because he thinks Mary is the dean of admissions" 
invites us, in compliCated ways, to imagine that although there is a Paul, his 
daughter, Berkeley, Mary, and a dean of admissions, nonetheless Mary is not 
dean of admissions, and therefore that Paul's belief space is "false." If Bill is call-
ing Paul and is annoyed that he can't fax something to Paul, he might ask, "Why 
don't you have a fax machine? You could be reading my proposal right now!" We 
must construct a "false" but preferred blend in which Paul has a fax machine and 
is reading the proposal. In fact, "in fact" automatically asks us to build a counter-
factual relation, and in fact the only sense in which the space in which Paul has a 
fax machine is "false" is that we have already set up an imaginary base space in 
which there is an imaginary Paul, an imaginary Bill, an imaginary phone call and 
proposal, but no fax machine in Paul's imaginary house! Relative to that space, 
the blend with Paul's fax machine is "false." But from a "real" point of view, they 
are both "false." "Pont-Ivy was meant by Napoleon to have become the capital of 
France" requires a "false" space in which Pont-Ivy is the capital of France. "I 
didn't buy a car. It would take too much room in the garage" illustrates the fact 
Th( Construction of th( Unl'(al 
239 
that negation routinely sets up counterfactual blended spaces, which can be elab-
orated. The pronoun "it" picks out the car in the "false" space in which "I" did 
buy a car and it does not fit in the garage. There is no limit to how much we 
might elaborate this "false" blend: We could go on with "it would have cost me a 
fortune in gas, I couldn't have gotten insurance for it," and so on. As we noted in 
Chapter 5, expressions like "too bad," "missed," and "otherwise" also routinely 
prompt countemctual spaces. Some verbs, like "prevent," and nouns like "dent," 
also prompt for countemctual spaces. 
COUNTERF"ACTUAL NETWORKS 
We have defined counterfactuality as a forced incompatibility between spaces in 
a network. 
Question: 
• Is this the only place in thought that counterfactuality can be found? 
Our answer: . 
Interestingly, an entire integration network can be counterfactual with respect 
to some other meaning. In Chapter 7, we presented the Toblerone network, in 
which Toblerone chocolate is frarried as the motivation for monuments, and 
in the blend, the pyramids of Giza have the shape they do in imitation of the 
shape ofToblerone chocolate. This entire network is counterfactual: We think it 
is false to bring the "monument" frame and Toblerone chocolate together in the 
first place, much less to construct ancient Toblerone worship in the blend as 
the context for the building of the pyramids. 
MODUS TOLLENS 
We have given a straightforward explanation of reductio ad absurdum as blend-
ing and have pointed out that it is pervasive in everyday reason. 
Question: . 
• Isn't all this just the simple logical operation of modus tol/ens, in which, 
given that p implies q and given that not-q, then it follows that not-p? 
Our answer: 
It is true that if an assumption p implies a contradiction q, as in our ex-
ample with prime numbers, it follows that not-q is true tautologically and 
therefore not-p is true, by modus tol/ens. Clearly, in that sense, the logical law of 
modus tol/ens captures something true and important. But modus tol/ens has 
J 

240 
THE WAY WE THINK 
nothing to say about how q could possibly be found. This is where the con-
struction of the counterfactual blend is crucial, and it takes considerable run-
ning of the blend before q pops out. In the case of hyperbolic geometry, for ex-
ample, q never popped out even after ce·nturies of effort, and yet the blend was 
not run in vain, since what did emerge was the much greater discovery of mul-
tiple geometries. The long work of the mathematician or logician who finally 
finds the contradiction q can, in retrospect, be compressed into a modus tol/ens 
statement, but the logical law of modus tol/ens is not in itself a way to discover 
contradictions. In fact, even more simply, inference, as in "p implies q," is af-
ter-the-fact shorthand for what may be a long, difficult, imaginative cognitive 
process. Constructing the contradiction is a cognitive achievement. We often 
construe truths of mathematics or logic Platonically, as having eternal, inde-
pendent existence, and so we naturally distinguish the cognitive accomplish-
ment from the eternal truth. This creates the illusion after the fact that "p im-
plies q" was always there. What is true of mathematics is true a fortiori of 
everyday life: Proving absence of love by inference from an untyped thesis re-
cruits considerable cultural and cognitive resources, and the conclusion is a 
product of all that imaginative work in a counterfactual blend. The modus tol-
lens formula is only a superficial report that such a process has taken place 
(somehow) and delivered a certain result. 
TRUTH FROM FALSEHOOD 
We have seen many counterfactual blends that persuade us. 
Questions: 
• How could falsehood ever persuade us of anything? 
• How can truth come from falsehood? 
Ouramwers: 
We saw that blends can, on the one hand, compress long causal chains into 
inner-space structures that give us global insight or, on the other hand, set up 
inner-space structures to do cognitive work that can then be decompressed 
into outer-space relations between the inputs. That inner-space blended struc-
ture bears precise relations to the structures in and between the inputs. What is 
important in such blends is the compression and the decompression. Whether 
the inner-space structure in the blend is true or actual is not the point. For ex-
ample, the coherent (but "false") world of the pronghorn antelope remember-
ing fleet predators is systematically decompressed into the "true" outer-space 
relations of Change and Identity specifically involving adaptation and inheri-
tance. The false mathematical blended space in which there is a largest prime 
~1 
'til 
The Construction of the Un"ai 
241 
number finds its inner-space contradiction nicely correlated with a "true" 
outer-space counterfactuality: A mathematical space with a largest prime is 
counterfactual with respect to our existing system of mathematics. 
NONTHINGS 
Here are some things that we say: "Put the vegetables on the plate in front of the 
missing chair," "I have a tooth missing," "The absence of fog made landing 
easy," "Nobody offered a proposal; it would have been shot down," "I had no 
luck, ~' "Do you take your coffee with milk or with no milk?" 
Question: 
• Expressions like "the missing chair," "a tooth," "a proposal," and so on, 
seem to be pointing to something, but what they point to looks like a gap 
in the real world. Is this phenomenon just a convenience of language, or 
does it say something about the way we think? 
Our answer: 
The compressions we saw in examples like "caffeil\e headache" routinely cre-
ate elements that are· actual in the blend but are nonetheless non things. In the 
blend, absence of caffiine is a thing that is real and causal. It is constructed by 
projection from the thing in one space (caffeine) and the fact that the caffeine in 
one input has ho counterpart in the other input. In the blend, we have by com-
pression a thing that, from the outside, we view as a non thing: absence of caf-
feine. Inside the blend, this new element can be manipulated as an ordinary 
thing, and the usual routines of language for referring to things can be de-
ployed. In the case of "the missing chair," the missing chair is a thing in the 
blend that, viewed from ·the outside, is a non thing. It can be pointed to and 
takes up physical space. It inherits thing-hood from the counterfactual space in 
which there is a chair. It inherits its physical characteristics of being a gap from 
the "actual" input, in which there is not a chair in the corresponding position. 
We suggest that it is no accident that expressions like "nobody," "nothing," and 
"no luck" are ordinary noun phrases for picking out things in a space. That is 
why it is easy to get them in all the normal places in grammatical constructions: 
"He was seen by no one," "I had no money," "No brains is your problem," "I 
expect no one to understand me," "He has a no-nonsense attitude." 
NONTHINGS WE 
CAN'T DO WITHOUT 
We've just seen that non things do indeed playa large role in everyday thinking. 
J 

242 
,. 
THE WAY WE THIN\( 
~estion: 
• Do they have any role in serious thought, such as science and mathematics? 
Our answer: 
Nonthings have been a great engine of mathematical and scientific discovery. 
The invention of zero is a signal case. In general, the history of the development 
of numbers is a history of reconstruing the number system so that we see "gaps'" 
in it ~hat are themselves reconstrued as numbers on their own. The numbers 0, 
1, 2, 3, ... were reconstrued as having "gaps" between them, and these gaps 
were reconstrued as fractions like one-half. The fractions were in turn recon-
strued as having gaps between them, and these gaps were reconstrued as irra-
tional and transcendental numbers. The same pattern holds for the invention of 
negative and complex numbers. 
The history of mathematics shows that the concept of number has been re-
peatedly revised by creating blends in which we have two (or more) inputs-
one with numbers of some kind, the other with elements of some kind. There is 
a partial counterpart mapping between them in which every number has a 
counterpart in the other input space but not conversely. All the numbers and 
the category number are projected to the blend. From the other input, all the el-
ements and much of their organization is projected in the blend. Everything in 
the blend comes to be viewed as belonging to the category number, 'and as a re-
sult of this recon~trual, some elements in the blend are now viewed as filling in 
gaps in the ante~edent number system, the one in the inpiit ·space. 
In such a network, those elements that have a number counterpart in the 
cross-space mapping are fused with that number in the blend. The rest of the el-
ements in the blend are new numbers. Topology of mathematical orderings and 
operations is preserved. 
For example, if in one space we have whole numbers and in the other space 
we have proportions of objects, then in the blend we have all the proportions, 
all categorized as numbers. Those proportions that had whole-number counter-
parts are fused with those counterparts, so that, for example" 6:3, 12:6, and 
500:250 are fused in the blend with 2. But now 3:4, 256:711, and 5:9, which 
had no whole-number counterparts, are now also numbers in the blend. They 
now count as filling in gaps between whole numbers. 
Some topology from both inputs is preserved. The number input, of course, 
has ordering, addition, and multiplication. The proportion input also has topol-
ogy. In that input, every proportion a:b has two parts, a and b. Given any two 
proportions that have the same second term, the one with the larger first term is 
larger. And, taking one more step, given any two proportions a:b and c:d, a:b 
is equal to ad:bd and c:d is equal to cb:db, so we can compare a:b and c:d by the 
previous principle: If ad is larger than cb, the proportion a:b is larger than 
Th( Construction of rh( Unreal 
243 
the proportion c:d. These topologies and operations ate preserved under projec-
cion to the blend. Equivalence of proportions like 3:9 and 1:3 in the proportion 
space is compressed into identiry of number in the blend: 1/3 = 3/9 = 5/15 .... 
In this way infinities of elements in the proportion input are compressed into 
single numbers in the blend. 
The blend has considerable emergent structure. It turns out that there is an 
"addition" operation in the blend that will correctly preserve addition from the 
number input and ordering from the proportion input. It can be defined as alb + 
dd = {ad + cb}/bd. Similarly, topology preserving multiplication in the blend can 
be defined as alb X dd = adbd. Quite interestingly, some topology that is useful 
in the proportion space is not projected to the blend. We can compose two pro-
portions a:b and c:d into a+c:b+d, and this is a useful operation (distinct of course 
from addition of rational numbers): If2 warriors oppose 3, and another 3 oppose 
2, and they compose, suddenly the battle is equal, because 2+3:3+2 is balanced. 
But the topology of this kind of composition is not preserved under projection to 
the blend, because in the blend 3/2 is identical to 6/4, but 2+6/3+4 does not equal 
1. In the blend, adding 6/4 to 2/3 is the same as adding 312 to 2/3, but in the 
space of proportions, composing 6 warriors against 4 with 2 warriors against 3 is 
not the same as composing 3 warriors against 2 with 2 warriors against 3. 
The blend of numbers and proportions is elaborate and highly imaginative, 
with selective projections and striking emergent structure. This blend is of 
course none other than the domain of "positive rational numbers including 
zero," or what children in second grade learn as whole numbers and fractions. 
For a child to learn how to add fractions, she must give up the very useful op-
eration of composing proportions (a:b and c:d = a+c:b+d), and also give the sta-
tus of number to many proportions that previously had no such status. She 
must additionally see as identical proportions that, in the number of elements 
they involve, are quite different: In the blend, the proportions 2:4 and 53: 1 06 
become identical even though the first looks as if it involves six things and the 
other looks as if it involves 159. 
Going from the input of whole numbers to the blend of rational numbers 
has a dramatic consequence: Previously, 2 was the next number after 1, and 3 
the next number after 2. There was no other number between 1 and 2. In fact, 
there could not be any other number between 1 and 2. Whether another num-
ber might exist between 1 and 2 was an issue that could not even arise. But in 
the blend of rational n'umbers, we have the staggering emergent property that 
there is now an infinity of numbers between 1 and 2. Once we have the blend of 
rational numbers it becomes intelligible to ask whether, given two consecutive 
whole numbers, there is another number between them, and we can now figure 
out, as a theorem, that the answer is yes. We can then ask whether, given any 
two rational numbers, there is another number between them, and again prove, 

244 
t" 
THE WAY WE THINK 
a little surprisingly to the second-graders, that the answer is yes. Still more sur-
prisingly, between any two numbers, no matter how close, there is always an in-
finity of others! 
. Once we have the blend and reify it, we can adopt the view that the previous 
conception of number was "missing" several numbers that were "there" but not 
yet "discovered." 
. Another spectacular blend arises when rational numbers are mapped onto seg-
ments of different lengths on the same line. As before, the geometric topology of 
the line and its segments is mapped exactly to the blend. Segments that have ra-
tional-number counterparts are fused with those counterparts. If one segment of 
the line is given the rational number 1 as its counterpart, then it becomes the 
unit segment and all the other counterparts are determined by the proportion of 
the segment to the unit segment. A segment half the length of the unit segment 
is, in the blend, 112. Are there any segments without number counterparts? As 
the Pythagorean geometers discovered to their horror, the answer is yes. It is well 
known the hypotenuse of an isosceles right triangle whose legs are unit segments 
has no rational-number counterpart. 
. 
Yet another blending network in response to this "gap" produces another dra-
matie emergent .structure, the irrational numbers. In hindsight, we can now 
"see" that another infinity of numbers was "missing" from the rationals. Again, 
things that could not exist have become elements in the blend, and we see 
"gaps" in the .original input. Another round of extremely·imagin:nive blending 
will "reveal" further gaps: the transcendental numbers. Still other blends create 
zero, negative numbers, imaginary numbers, .... In all cases, the blend has 
many elements with no counterpart in the preceding number input, and in 
hindsight, those numbers are regarded as "missing" from the previous concept 
of number. The symbol 0 was used by the Alexandrian Greeks to denote the ab-
sence of a number, but "the absence of a number" became a full number, able to 
participate in addition, subtraction, and multiplication, in the blends developed 
by Hindu mathematicians in the seventh century A.D. The history of the con-
cept of number is one "caffeine headache" after another. The recent work of 
George Lakoff and Rafael Nun.ez on the embodied nature of mathematics pro-
vides considerable additional evidence for the crucial role of blending in the de-
velopment of mathematics and mathematical thought. 
Not only number theory but the entire set-theoretic foundation of mathemat-
ics proceeds by making blends that have dements where before there was nothing. 
A standard set-theoretic way of deriving numbers is to begin with nothing and call 
it the "null set." This null set is now something-it is a set, commonly denoted <II. 
Now consider the set that has as its only element <II. It is commonly denoted {<II}. 
There is now also automatically a set of two elements {<II, {<II}}. And therefore a set 
of three elements {<II,{<II},{<II,{<IIj}. And so on: In the set-theoretic foundations, 
these sets are the whole numbers (through an implicit blend with the everyday 
The Construction of the Unreal 
245 
notion of number). The blend of positive or negative rationals can be "defined" 
using equivalence classes of pairs of such sets, and additional frills such as "cuts" 
will provide a set-theoretical foundation for the real numbers. 
King Lear's great mistake is embodied in the line "Nothing will come of 
nothing." Not only Cordelia's love but also the history of mathematics proves 
him wrong. 
NONEVENTS 
We have seen nothing become a thing. Our mental universe is populated by a 
dark matter of nonthings. 
Questions: 
• Can nothing become an event? 
• Can nothing become an action? 
Our answers: 
Nonevents and nonactions are nearly everywhere in our cognition. Physical 
reality is a material anchor for conceptual blends that typically carry many pro-
jections from counterfactual spaces. "The jar-lid won't come off," "The stack of 
books has not fallen," "The stack of books will fall," "The jar-lid refuses to come 
off," and "The stack of books wants to fall over" all present networks in which 
one input has nothing happening and the other input has something happening. 
In the blend, the nothing happening becomes an event that is contrasted with 
the other event: The stack of books stays upright versus the stack of books falls. 
"Missing a shot" evokes a blend that contains a nonevent: Both inputs have the 
shot, one input has the ball going somewhere other than into the goal, the coun-
terfactual input has the ball going into the goal. In the blend, the ball's not going 
into the goal becomes a "missed shot," a nonevent. 
Missed shots can even be blended with nonshots, as in the wisdom printed 
on a sports T-shirt: "You miss 100 percent of the shots you don't take." This ob-
servation prompts for an elaborate integration network with many kinds of 
nonevents. Two of them are already conventional. First, any "missed shot" is al-
ready a blend; both inputs have a ball thrown and going somewhere, but only 
one of the inputs has the ball going into the basket. Both of these spaces are fuJI 
and complete events. The contrast between them is compressed in the blend: 
The blend now has a new category of event-namely, missed shots, which are 
not in either of the inputs. Second, any "shot not taken" is already a blend: In 
this case, both inputs have a player doing something with the ball, but only one 
of those spaces has her throwing the ball toward the basket. Both of these spaces 
are full and complete events. The contrast between them is compressed in the 
blend: The blend now has a new category of event, shots not taken, which is not 

246 
THE WAY WE THINK 
in either of the inputs. Each of these conventional blends creates a new category 
of shots-missed shots and shots not taken. They playa crucial role in the game 
of basketball. Statistical measures are routinely applied to shots in basketball_ 
successful three-pointers, unsuccessful two-pointers, and so on. Those measures 
can now be applied to nonshots. Interestingly, for all other categories of shot, we 
have to play the game to get the statistical measur~s, bur the shots-not-taken 
blend guarantees in advance that no nonshot goes into the basket, and the 
missed-shot blend guarantees that all of these are "missed shots." Therefore, 100 
percent of shots not taken are missed shots. 
This blending extravaganza takes all the statistical machinery from the 
missed-shots blend. Since one wants to avoid missing shots, the implication is 
that one should avoid shots not taken; that is, one should shoot more. But there 
is topology in the shots-not-taken blend: If you don't take the shot, you retain 
control of the ball, which is useful. That topology is different from the topology 
in the missed-shots network, where you take a shot and so give up control of the 
ball. In the shots-nat-taken = missed-shots blend, the topology of shots-not-taken 
is lost at the expense of the topology of taking a shot. 
CONVENTIONAL CU LTU RAL 
C 0 U NT E R F' ACT U.A L COM PRE S S ION S 
We have seen that language provides counterfactual compressions, as in "caf-
feine headache," "missing chair," and "gap." 
Question: 
• Is this a purely linguistic artifice? 
Our answer: 
It seems that cultures find it efficient to evolve compressions that can be eas-
ily transmitted. On the one hand, cultures want to channel thought soas to 
block off large ranges of possible double-scope integrations. There are, for in-
stance, many ways to deal with the possibility of collision at an intersection, but 
culture does not want you to try them all out, so it delivers one governing solu-
tion: the traffic light. The traffic light is a material anchor for a complex com-
pression. The decompressed form has a different mental space for each of the 
possibilities of cars going through intersections: no cars, one in this direction, 
one in that, one in each direction, one that has just gone through as another ar-
rives, and so on, including values for different speeds, different kinds of drivers, 
and so on. All of these spaces have the same frame, but there are very many ways 
to specifY that frame. In some of these spaces, there would be a collision. Those 
are the ones we want to be counterfactual with respect to the actual world. One 
way to arrange for that is to disallow all possibility of movement along crossing 
:. 
Thl! Construction of thl! Un1'(al 
247 
paths simultaneously through the intersection, and one way to do that is to 
make certain that when it is possible to move along one path through the inter-
section, it is impossible to move along the crossing path. This solution is ab-
solute but overpowerful, since it means that often a driver will sit at an intersec-
tion watching no cars go through the intersection. Still, the overpowerful 
solution avoids the catastrophe, so it is adopted. 
The driver with the green light has confidence that the social system has 
arranged for one particular blended space to be actual. In that blended space, we 
have projected from the no-collision space the fact that no cars on the cross 
street are entering the intersection, and we have projected from the collision 
space that there may be many cars on the cross-street, including some that are, 
at present, obviously on course to collide with the driver. The emergent struc-
ture of the blend guarantees that there will be no collision in the blend, but not 
for the same reason that there is no collision in the no-collision space. 
A RIDDLE 
What is greater than God? 
More evil than the devil? 
The poor have it. 
The rich need it. 
And if you eat it, you die. 
' I 
Hint: It is what you should stop at if you are looking for the answer. 
.I 

·~:~. 
~.J' 
•• 
•• Twelve 
IDENTITY AND CHARACTER 
These names recur incessantly; within the great uncer-
tainty of the race, they are anchors that link the episodic 
and tumultuous passage of time to the stable essences of 
great characters, as if man were above all a name that be-
comes the master of events. 
-Roland Barth~s, on th~ Tour de FranC( 
~} 
IN THE ODYSSEY, ODYSSEUS works through nearly every situation conceiv-
able-fighting, sailing, disputing, womanizing, hiding, pleading, persuading-
and remains Odysseus throughout. It is a central aspect of human understand-
ing to think that people have characters that manifest themselves as 
circumstances change. When someone acts in a certain way in a novel situation, 
we might say "That's just like him. I would never have done that." Character 
transports over frames and remains recognizable in all of them, to the extent 
that we can ask "What would Odysseus do in these circumstances?" despite the 
fact that those circumstances are unknown in Odysseus's world. Children's liter-
ature gives us contrasting characters in the same situations-Toad, Ratty, Mole, 
and Badger in Tht Wind in tht Wi/lows. But adult literature does the same-
Achilles, Diomedes, Hector, Ajax, Menelaus, Odysseus. Roland Barthes, in 
Mythologits, analyzes the Tour de France as an epic in which the characters man-
ifest their essences through their performances in the Tour: 
II y a une onomastique du Tour de France qui nous dit It elle seule que Ie Tour est 
une grande epopee. Les noms des coureurs semblent pour la plupart venir d'un 
age ethnique tees ancien, d'un temps OU la race sonnait It travers un petit nombre 
de phonemes exemplaires (Brankaer Ie Franc, Bobet Ie Francien, Robie Ie Celte, 
Ruiz I'Ibere, Darrigade Ie Gascon). Et puis, ces noms reviennent sans cesse; ils for-
. ment dans Ie grand hasard de I'epreuve des points fixes, dont la tache est de rac-
crocher une duree episodique, tumultueuse, aux essences stables des grands carac-
teres, comme si I'homme etait avant tout un ,Porn qui se rend maitre des 
249 

t ~ 
250 
t' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
evenements: Brankart, Geminiani, Lauredi, Antonin Rolland, ces patronymes se 
Iisent comme les signes algebriques de la valeur, de la loyaute, de la tra1trise ou du 
stolcisme .... Gaul incarne l'Arbitraire, Ie Divin, Ie Merveilleux, l'Election, la 
complicite avec les dieux; Bober incarne Ie Juste, l'Humain, Bobet nie les dieux, 
Bobet illustre une morale de l'homme seu!. Gaul est un archange, Bobet est 
prometheen, c'est un Sisyphe qui reussirait it faire basc~ler la pierre sur ces memes 
dieux qui l'ont condamne it n'etre magnifiquement qu'un homme. 
There is an onomastics to the Tour de France that tells us all by itself that the 
Tour is a great epic. The cyclists' names seem to come from an ethnic age long ago 
when a few superb phonemes trumpeted the valor of one's blood {Brankart the 
Frank, Bobet the Francian, Robic the Celt, Ruiz the Iberian, Darrigade the Gas-
con}. These names recur incessantly; within the great uncertainty of the race, they 
are anchors that link the episodic and tumultuous passage of time to the stable 
essences of great characters, as if man were above all a name that becomes the 
master of events: Brankart, Geminiani, Lauredi, Antonin, Rolland-these 
patronymics read like algebraic signs of valor, loyalty, treachery, or stoicism. 
... Gaul incarnates the Arbitrary, the Divine, the Marvelous, the Chosen, com-
plicity with the gods; Bobet stands for the Just, the Human, Bobet denies the 
gods, Bobet symbolizes man on his own; Gaul is an archangel, Bobet is 
promethean, a Sisyphus who succeeds in toppling the rock onto the very gods 
who condemned him to be, magnificently, only a man. 
o 
Family lore paints a similar picture-Uncle Joseph had this character, Aunt 
Emily that, and we can tell what they would have done in ,any given situation. 
In the way we think, a character can stay essentially the same over widely differ-
ent frames, and a frame can stay essentially the same when populated by widely 
different characters. 
In some of the blends we have analyzed, it is crucial that specific characters 
from one input get projected with their essences intact into the blend. In the 
Debate with Kant, for instance, Kant must come in with 4is characteristic 
philosophical and logical dispositions. We do not just import to the blend what 
he actually wrote; rather, we construct what he might have said given his charac-
ter. A counterfactual blend like "If Churchill had been prime minister in 1956, 
there would have been no Suez disaster" implicitly assumes an essential charac-
ter for Churchill that can be projected co a time and circumstance when he was 
no longer active. For people-whether bartenders or political scientists-co use 
such expressions persuasively, there must be an uncanny consensus regarding 
the existence of such an essential character. Characters, like frames, are basic 
cognitive cultural instruments. We may dispute every aspect of their accuracy or 
legitimacy or invariance, or even their very existence, but cognitively we cannot 
do without them. 
Identity and Character 
251 
IDENTITIES AND F'RAMES 
To this point, our taxonomies of integration networks have emphasized the role 
of frames. Simplex, mirror, single-scope, a,nd double-scope networks were all 
defined, as main types, by the relations of the organizing frames of the inputs 
and their relation co the frames in the generic space and the blended space. Sur 
identity and character are an equally important aspect of the way we think. We 
can think of frames as transporting across different characters (the buy-sell frame 
stays the same regardless of who is buying and selling), or we can think of char-
acter as transporting across different frames: Odysseus remains who he is regard-
less of his situation. 
Consider, for example, a corporate employee who describes his situation co his 
wife, who has no role in that profession. She says, "If I were you, I would quit." 
Here, we must construct a blend with the organizing frame from the company 
but a blended person in the role of employee. That person has the identity of the 
husband in the general public sense, as well as his experience and many of his 
characteristics, but now has the disposition, judgment, and will of the wife. Im-
portantly, in this case we are not blending frames. 
Recall also our example from the previous chapter, "In France, Watergate 
would not have hurt Nixon." Our analysis there focused on the blended U.S.-
France frame and took it for granted that a president "like Nixon" was available 
for that blended frame. But a more perspicuous treatment would say that Nixon 
is like Odysseus, a character who can make a place for himself in any frame. In 
the blend, we have not only a U.S.-France blended political frame but also the 
appearance of a character. 
This transportability of character is manifest from a campaign slogan used 
against Nixon: "Would you buy a used car from this man?" To clarify Nixon's 
character, we insert him into a frame where it is cast into high profile. It makes 
no difference that selling used cars has no place in Richard Nixon's actual life. 
What matters is that the new frame gives a great compression and a global in-
, sight into the character. This campaign slogan is just one instance of a very gen-
eral cognitive strategy for prompting people to understand character. If we want 
co describe a co-worker, we might say "He's the kind of guy who, if he bought a 
lottery ticket, would immediately dine out on his winnings." In the used-car 
and lottery-ticket examples, the focus is on discovering the essential character 
that transports across frames. 
This subject-the stability of character across different activities-is im-
mensely complicated and infinitely explored in the world's literatures. And as 
we have just pointed out, conceptual blending plays a central role in this con-
ception of character. We are not in a position here to go into further detailed 
analysis on this point, but some general patterns are clear. First, we are able to 
extract regularities over different behaviors by the same person to build up a 

252 
THE WAY WE THINK 
generic space for that person-a personal character. Second, we are able to ex-
tract regularities over different behaviors by many people to build up a generic 
space for a kind of behavior. They interact. The phrase "He's the kind of guy 
who does X" asks us to do both: to establish a generic for him and a generic for 
the kind of behavior exemplified by X. There is a further kind of extraction, the 
kind Theophrastus and his successor La Bruyere do in ,their works on character, 
where we create a generic space for a "kind of person"-the Vain Man, the Liar, 
the Social Climber-who is a blend of several of these kinds of generic behavior. 
A great deal of popular psychology-finding out "who you are," discovering 
your real self-consists in finding and constructing these kinds of generic spaces 
for character. The same is true of the science of personality. The works of Sig-
mund Freud, Abraham Maslow, and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi are directed at lo-
cating generics for character and how it got that way. This achievement of 
blending is a mainstay of humor: A recent humorous blend reports that God's 
mysterious and otherwise inscrutable acts can be accounted for once we realize 
that he has bipolar disorder-a condition whose cyclic nature results, for ex-
ample, in seasons on Earth. 
In these cases, character is clarified by transporting it across frames to locate 
the shared generic. But in other cases, the frames are clarified by transporting 
across them the same essential character. So, in "In France, Watergate would not 
have hurt Nixon," the focus is on the political frame as instantiated in the 
United States and France, respectively. The purpose is to draw a disanalogy be-
tween those two instantiations of "Western democracy," and this is helped by 
putting Nixon into both of them. 
What we see are general principles: To clarify a single frame, fill it with differ-
ent essential characters; to clarify the relationship between frames, fill thein with 
the same essential character; and to clarify essential character, transport it across 
different frames. 
Naturally, frames and characters are not always distinct, since some charac-
ters seem to be attached to their frames. Odysseus builds a place for himself in-
side many different kinds of frames, but Sherlock Holmes brings his detective 
frame with him and causes a frame-blend just by appearing: If Sherlock Holmes 
comes to your dinner party, someone is going to get killed. 
Again, we are not debating the merit of assessing character by shifting frames 
or assessing frames by shifting character. Rather, our point is that making such 
assessments involves general imaginative routines. What is remarkable, given an 
identity like Odysseus or Churchill, is that we would feel confident in running a 
blend of that identity and some frame, regardless of whether the person ever oc-
cupied such a frame. If anything, we seem to have especially great global insight 
if the frame is alien to the individual: "He'd give you the shirt off his back." 
The overall folk theory that we see here is that we use character to converge on 
an understanding of frames and we use frames to converge on an understanding 
Identity and Character 
253 
of character. In the folk theory, frames and characters are interlocking aspects of 
human reality. You can't have one without the other, although in some cases the 
emphasis falls more on character and in other cases it falls more on the frame. 
What makes all this slippery is that character is in principle all the behaviors in 
all possible frames, but frames themselves may be just as substantially linked to 
characters. Saint, diplomat, hookt:r, mt:diator, and conqut:ror, for instance, can 
work in both ways. Consider prostitutt:. It can be construed as a frame that any-
body can fall into, or as a frame with character implications: Someone who can 
fit into it aptly must have a certain character. Construing prostitute as just a gen-
eral frame, we can investigate character by asking how such a character would 
perform in that frame: How would someone with the character of Mother 
Teresa, Margaret Thatcher, Cleopatra, or Bill Clinton operate within the prosti-
tute frame? Construing the frame as having implications for character, we can in-
vestigate whether someone has the character befitting a prostitute by imagining 
whether that person could operate within that frame. Under the first construal, 
Mother Teresa reveals her sainthood by accepting the sacrifice with fortitude, by 
never complaining, by trusting God. The frame cannot impinge upon her char-
acter, for "To the pure, all things are pure." Under the second construal, Mother 
Teresa's character prevents her from ever becoming a p,rostitute. One might take 
the view that to convert from prostitute to saint, as i; said to have happened in 
the caSe of Mary Magdalene, requires a change of character. 
CONCEPTUAL INTEGRATION, 
MENTAL SPACES, F"RAMES, 
AND CHARACTER 
Just as conceptual integration networks arise that emphasize frames-simplex, 
mirror, single-scope, double-scope-so integration networks arise that empha-
size either the blending of a character and a frame or the blending of a character 
and a character. Here we will consider some examples of these kinds of integra-
tion network. 
. 
Recall the Debate with Kant, a mirror network with a blended space in 
which Kant and a modern philosopher were brought in as distinct elements. 
Using character blending, we could readily create a different kind of integration 
ne~ork in which Kant and the modern philosopher are fused in the blend in-
stead of projected to distinct elements. Perhaps the modern philosopher has 
taken up a classic philosophical problem of the sort Kant might have consid-
ered, or that he pursued only briefly. The philosopher, stymied, asks herself, "If 
I were Kant, how would I attack this problem?" This scenario launches a 
blend--one that can then be run creatively and indefinitely-in which there is a 
single philosopher. The modern philosopher uses her knowledge of Kant's char-
acter and identity, and her own intellectual character, tastes, and interests, in 
.. 

254 
,. 
THE WAY WE THIN\( 
order to run the blend-that is, to "become" Kant in some respects as she ap-
proaches the problem. Whether her imitation of Kant is objectively accurate is 
beside the point; what matters is whether the blended character she imagines 
and "becomes" is intellectually productive. Remarkably, she can get new insight, 
have a different cast of mind, acquire new capacities to an extent as she inhabits 
this blend, and thus make discoveries that were otherwise unavailable to her. 
But wait a minute. Who is this "Kant" anyway? when we were focusing on 
frameS, we could see structure coming in from them. In the case of character, 
identity, or ego, what is projected into th~ blend? The philosopher has a rich ac-
quaintance with the life and works of Kant in the way others might have a rich 
acquaintance with Freud, Odysseus, Jesus, or Socrates. Far from being just a set 
of features, "Kant" for her is a rich knowledge of his behavior over many differ-
ent scenarios, including his personal styles and manner of action and the feel-
ings he had in situations that he later reported in letters. Cognitively, this 
amounts to a very rich set of neural patterns that may be activated in the run-
ning of the blend. From a frame perspective, this is still a mirror network. But 
from an identity perspective, it is double-scope, since it brings in sharply differ-
ent aspects of the identity of Kant and the modern philosopher. 
Now imagine that the modern philosopher is a computer scientist and neu-
roscientist-Patricia Churchland, perhaps-and is tackling a problem involving 
connectionist computation and neuronal group selection. Her activity still fits 
the schematic frame of a musing philosopher, but the frames in the inputs are 
nevertheless significantly different. Connectionist theories and neural darwin-
ism did not exist in Kant's day; he could not have tackled them. Yet this fact is 
in no wayan obstacle to constructing and running the blend. It may turn out to 
be efficient for Patricia Churchland to blend herself with Kant in order to ap-
proach the relevant issues in the deepest and most insightful way. 
Not only the identities but also the frames themselves may be strikingly dif-
ferent and yet lead to a creative blend. So Dawn Riley, a sailor lost at sea with a 
failed electronic guidance system but with charts and instruments and a sextant 
she never learned how to use, might draw upon her lifelong interest in Kant 
when asking herself: "If I were Immanuel, what would I do now?" Like the pre-
vious ones, this blend is double-scope for Identity: Kant never left his house, let 
alone sailed the Pacific, and Dawn has previously always kept her philosophy 
and her sailing distinct. But the blend is now also double-scope for framing 
since a new blended frame of sailor/philosopher emerges from it. The person in 
the blend now has the public identity of Dawn Riley but a new character that 
delivers, she hopes, some way of proceeding that is not available from the char-
acter of Dawn Riley alone. She does not know when she asks this question how 
the blend will be put together or what structure will emerge. Blending is neither 
deterministic nor compositional, which is gOQd in this situation: If it were, it 
would be far less likely to deliver new insight. 
Itkntity and Characur 
255 
Conceptual integration is a basic mental operation over mental spaces, and it 
satisfies the same structural and dynamic principles in all cases. Frames give one 
basic way to organize a mental space. Character, Identity, and Ego give another. 
Inevitably, conceptual integration works over both frames and character when it 
operates over mental spaces. 
IF I WERE YOU 
Once we see this system of canonical integration networks and the principles 
that underlie them, it becomes clear how to approach a great range of data that 
logic and semantics previously found puzzling. One kind of data consists of 
statements like "If I were you, I would be with Ursula today," said by Marianne 
to Roben on a Saturday when both are in the office. One input has Robert, who 
has chosen to go to the office; the other has Marianne. In the blend, Marianne 
and Robert are fused to give a new character influenced by both Robert's rela-
tionship with Ursula and Marianne's judgment. The blended character has cho-
sen to be with Ursula, so in the blend we have a different frame: companion-
ship. Conventionally and pragmatically, bringing up an alternative can be 
evaluative. Marianne's comment can thus be construed as critical of Robert (he 
should be with his wife) or as laudatory (he is truly dedicated to his work). 
"If! were you, I would hire me," said by the prospective employee to the boss, 
asks for a similar blend of identities. In one input we have "you" considering 
whether to hire "me," and in the other input we have "me" with an essential char-
acter, judgment, and disposition. The expression makes "you" and "me" counter-
parts by means of a Disanalogy connector, and makes "me" and "me" counterparts 
by means of an Identity connector. 
The "you"-to-"me" outer-space Disanalogy connector is compressed in the 
blend into a unique person, with the public identity and powers and interests of 
the employer, but Ehe speaker's good judgment and the speaker's familiarity with 
himself. But the blend also has the "me" who is the prospective employee as 
viewed by the employer. This is a straightforward projection from the interview 
input to the blend. That the two "me"s are projected from different inputs corre-
lates with the grammatical preference for not marking the pronoun as a reflexive: 
"If! were you, I would hire me" is preferred to "If! were you, I would hire my-
self" (which is likely to be understood as saying that the boss should hire himself 
for the job). 
But if the job applicant is grammatically in the third person, we do not say 
"If he were you, he would hire him" but rather "If he were you, he would hire 
himself" (with the intended interpretation that if "he" is the applicant Bill and 
"you" the employer Mary, then the employer in Mary's position and with Bill's 
knowledge and judgment would hire Bill). There is a stronger constraint on the 
third-person pronouns in "he would hire him" that prevents them from pointing 

256 
THE WAY WE THINK 
to connected elements when there is no reflexive marking. In our example, the 
elements are connected and therefore only the reflexive option is available (he 
would hire himself). 
Using an expression like "I would hire me" to pick out structure in a blend 
may look exotic, but such examples are quite common and usually go unno-
ticed, as in the following comment by right-handed pitcher Bret Saberhagen: "If 
I was a writer [who votes for the Cy Young Award] and looking at the numbers 
and how the pitchers have performed throughout the year, I would say I would 
be the leader." Similarly, Michel Charolles points out the following line from 
Samuel Beckett: "S'il avait ete sa mere, il se serait deteste" ("If he had been his 
mother, he would have hated himself," with the reading that in the counterfac-
tual blend, the mother hates the son); and Eve Sweetser reports the following at-
tested example: "Quand j'etais etudiante, j'aurais voulu me rencontrer" ("When 
I was a student, I would have liked to have met me"), meaning that the speaker 
wishes her own professors had given her the personal attention and concern that 
she tries to give to her students. 
Jeff Pelletier reports that he was once invited to interview for a job in Ancient 
Philosophy, in which he had some training but no real specialization. His An-
cient Philosophy professor advised him, "If! were you, I would go; but if! were 
in your position, I probably wouldn't go." She meant that Pelletier, given his 
confidence and facility, could succeed in the interview despite his lack of expert-
ise but that she herself was too timid to try such a thing. Yet, unlike Pelletier, she 
actually was an expert in Ancient Philosophy. Such examples show the power 
but also the great flexibility of counterfactual blending of identities. "If I were 
you, I would go" prompts for a blended job applicant who inherits from his 
professor her wisdom about obtaining appointments in the academic world and 
about the student Pelletier; so the blended applicant, who has the public iden-
tity of Pelletier, now possesses more knowledge about Pelletier than the real Pel-
letier does about himself. But this blended applicant has Pelletier's confidence 
and courage, at least as perceived by the professor. Contrastingly, "If I were in 
your position, I probably wouldn't go" prompts for a counterfactual blend in 
which the professor, perhaps at a younger stage of life, is in the frame of being 
interviewed for this particular job in Ancient Philosophy. The blend of identi-
ties here is much less double-scope: The professor has all of her character, but 
Pelletier's relative ignorance about Ancient Philosophy. In the complete advice 
given by the Ancient Philosophy professor, the first part is advice to her student, 
but the second part is only a comment on herself, perhaps meant to clarifY her 
reasoning in suggesting that he, with his different character, could succeed. 
In addition to permitting the blending of two different identities, counterfac-
tual blends evoked by similar grammar may emphasize the blending of a character 
with a frame. "If I had been his wife, I would have been his widow long ago," an 
example reported by Nili Mandelblit, emphasizes the persistence of character: 
Identity and Character 
257 
The speaker dislikes the man so much that marriage would· not have altered her 
feelings; the frame is overcome by the character and must be deformed in the 
blend, where the wife quickly kills the husband. It should be noted that a reading 
that blends identities is also available: If the man already has a wife, and it is the 
wife's experiences that prompt the outrage, then that outrage, blended with the 
steely determination of the speaker, gives a character and a murder that are not 
available from either input. 
These points are also apparent in the following example, spoken by President 
Bill Clinton at a fund-raising event for his wife Hillary's campaign for senator: "I 
would be here for my wife if she were not my wife, because we have got to have 
people with a lifetime commitment to the future, to the children." There is lee-
way in constructing the counterfactual blend: By stipulation it has Bill Clinton 
and Hillary Rodham, but not married, and she has her lifetime commitment to 
the future. Beyond that, it is a matter of pragmatics whether, in the blend, she 
and Bill have been lifelong friends, went to Yale Law School together, and so on, 
or she is simply anybody with such a commitment running for office. Techni-
cally, the frame-role my wife in one input is used to access its value, Hillary, and 
what we find in the blend is a counterpart of that value, not a counterpart of the 
role my wife. The counterfactual expression would be app.ropriate with a differ-
ent interpretation if Bill Clinton had refused to participate in the fund-raiser on 
the grounds that it was bad form for him to support his wife so publicly. 
The fact that Hillary Rodham is Bill Clinton's wife is clearly not a side issue. 
Frame structure Can play an essential role in behavior apparently linked to iden-
tity. Consider a dialogue from the movie The Naked Lie, in which a prostitute 
has been found murdered. Webster, an unpleasant, self-centered character, 
shows no sympathy. Victoria challenges him: 
Victoria: What if it were your sister? 
Webster: I don't have a sister, but if I did, she wouldn't be a hooker. 
Later in the movie, Victoria, talking to someone else, says "You know that sister 
Webster doesn't have? Well, she doesn't know how lucky she is." 
At first, Webster rejects the counterfactual blend on the logic that there is no 
value of the role websters sister to be projected into the blend. But . then he is 
forced to accept a blend in which only the role sister is projected from a schematic 
kinship &arne, and the value of that role is emergent in the blend. So in the blend, 
we have a specific websters sister, with an identity, but we know nothing about her 
except that she is Webster's sister, and therefore her "character" is entirely defined 
by this property. According to Webster, the property of being his sister confers 
upon her character an essence that prevents her from being a prostitute. He is 
viewing his own kinship frame as having implications for character, so that a sister 
of his could no more be a prostitute than could Mother Teresa. Victoria's later 
.I 

258 
THE WAY WE THINK 
t' 
comment about "that sister Webster doesn't have" takes the previous counterfac-
tual blend in which Webster does have a specific sister, call her Ann, as an input 
for a further blend with reality. It projects Ann from the counterfactual input to 
this new blend and projects from reality the fact that Webster has no sister. So in 
the new blend, Ann exists but is not Webster's sister, which makes her very fortu-
nate. She cannot know of the fate she was spared, since she is not aware of her 
counterpart in the counterfactual input. As we have seen ~arlier, many words call 
for alte{native counterfactual spaces: "dent," "drop," "miss," and so on. "Lucky" is 
another one: We can understand it only by constructing another space, if only a 
very schematic one, in which the person in question has less success. In the dia-
logue in The Naked Lie, the needed counterfactual space has already been built up 
during the discourse: It is the previous counterfactual blend in which Ann is Web-
ster's sister. Indeed, that is the only space that contains any information about 
Ann, so it must be activated to understand anything about her. 
REDEMPTION, VEN GEANCE, 
AND HONOR 
Let's revisit this bit of dialogue from Chapter 7: 
"Do you remember how when you were little you were so intent upon hiding your 
treasures that you hid them so well even you could not find them again? Do you 
remember that you· hid your new penny when you were four and we never found 
it? That's just what you have done with Angela. You've been talking for two hours 
about all your troubles, but what they boil down to is that you have hidden away 
your love for her so deeply that you can't see it. Once again, you've hidden your 
penny, even from yourself." 
Earlier, we pointed out that in this blend, hiding treasures is projected to the 
blend from the input about childhood and provides the blend's organizing 
frame. The frame of hiding treasures provides a way of construing the love sit-
uation with Angela. But there is more going on. First, constructing the inte-
gration network develops a generic space in which there is a deep charactero-
logical psychology, an essence, that is shared by all the spaces in the network 
and is the speaker's rhetorical point. Second, this remark is addressed as a rev-
elation to the man in love, and to understand it he must perform double-
scope blending on his own identities: The adult man in love must be blended 
with the child hoarding objects. This blending is a way to bring out this 
essence, which is itself abstract and invisible except in its concrete manifesta-
tions. Hiding love and hiding a penny are both behaviors. In the blend, they 
are the same and so take on the double concretj:ness that comes from the two 
vivid input spaces. 
Idmtity and Charact" 
259 
In Chapter 8, we discussed identity blending in XYZ mirror networks, as when 
Paul, who had been traumatized by the loss of his daughter Elizabeth, and so be-
haved coldly to his much younger daughter Sally, finally comes to his senses, and, 
when asked by Sally why he is treating her in this new way, replies, "Because you 
are my long-lost daughter." If we emphasize frames, this is a mirror network: Each 
space has the roles fath" and daught" and Paul as the value of the role fath". But 
if we emphasize character, this is a double-scope network. Although Paul is blend-
ing himself with Paul, he is psychologically a much different man than he once 
was. He recovers some of his former self by blending his present and former selves. 
The emergent strucrure here is evident: He undergoes a considerable psychologi-
cal transformation. Sally is also blended with Elizabeth, and it is this radical dou-
ble-scope identity blend that makes Paul's realization psychologically possible. 
These examples point to a general dynamic principle of human psychological 
and emotional life: Outer-space vital relations, ofren connecting a person in one 
space to himself in another, can be compressed into inner-space character traits 
understood to be part of the essence of the person. The "hiding your penny" ex-
ample gives an idiosyncratic blend and an idiosyncratic personal essence. But 
culture sets up general models of just this type and makes them into cultural 
categories like redemption, restoring honor, vengeance, vendetta, curse. 
Redemption is a matter of entering or in fact creating a later situation that 
counts as equivalent to a prior situation in which 'one failed. From a frame point 
of view, these are mirror networks. One succeeds in the later situation. In literary, 
dramatic, and cinematic representations of redemption, the protagonist fre-
quently hesitates at just the instant when he failed before, but this time does the 
right thing. We do not take such a plot as the story of a person who failed once 
and succeeded once, with equal weight given to the two events. Instead, we take 
'the second event as the one that reveals the essence of the protagonist and proves 
that the first was a fluke. The success does not simply neutralize the failure, setting 
the scale back to zero. It restores the protagonist's identity, making him "whole" 
"once again." Objectively, it is odd that any later performance should have an ef-
fect on the evaluation of an earlier performance: The failure cannot be changed, 
and none of the terrible consequences that provide the guilt or shame and so fuel 
the need for redemption can be changed in the slightest detail. In the input 
spaces, no redemption is possible. But in the blend, the two situations become 
one, and the character (if not the behavior) of the protagonist comes from the 
later input, thus providing in the blend and in the generic space a stable and good 
character from which the earlier input space is merely an unfortunate deviation. 
Art and conversation ofren point very explicitly to these blend structures. In 
the movie The Sixth Sense, a child psychologist who catastrophically failed one of 
his patients many years before goes to supernarurallengths to locate a boy with 
the same symptoms, and to treat him. Why? He says, "I thought that helping 
this new one would be like helping the old one." There is no way, objectively, 

260 
THE WAY WE THINK 
that the former patient can be helped, because he is dead, arguably as a result of 
the psychologist's failure. An elaborate folk notion of character is at work here. 
One failure can suggest a generic space in which the protagonist has essential bad 
character. Does he? The later success in the same kind of situation denies that es-
sential bad character in the generic space, and so denies that it could have been 
the cause of the earlier failure. The blend goes even further: In the blend, times 
are fused and the situations are blended, so success in the new situation counts as 
retrospective success in the old. No one is deluded: The old failure stands as un-
changeable history. But in the integration network, the psychological context 
and weight of that failure are completely changed. In The Sixth Sense, the child 
psychologist feels that he is "making it up to" the first boy. 
There are also genres of redemption story in which the failed protagonist does 
not seek redemption, perhaps thinking it is not to be attained, and goes on with 
life, only to be informed by a human sage or divine messenger that he has in fact 
redeemed himself Alternatively, after the fact, it dawns on him and on those 
around him that an act of redemption has just taken place. The original failure and 
the later success happen independently but then get blended psychologically, pro-
ducing a global insight about character running over time. The cultural category of 
redemption thus depends on blending, but its reality for the culture can be so strong 
as to seem a fundamental defining property. Vice-President AI Gore, when asked 
during his 2000 presidential campaign what should be done to a baseball pitcher 
who had made racist comments, proposed that, instead of punishment, he should 
be given a chance to redeem himsel£ He added, as indisputable warrant for his 
view: "America is all about redemption." With this comment he transfers redemp-
tion from the character of the individual to the character of the nation. 
Redemption's absolute opposite is curse. In that case, the later event also has a 
failure, and in both the blend and the generic space, and in fact in the two in-
puts, there is an essential property that is the cause of these failures. In one ver-
sion of curse, this essential property attaches to the character of the actor and it 
is not caused by any outside agent. In other versions, the essential property is at-
tached to the actor by some outside agent, such as a god or even a human being 
with spiritual connections. There are intermediate cases, too, as in a curse on a 
family, imposed by an outside agent but then carried by the descendants as an 
inherited property of character. In social life, anybody's curse counts, but has 
greater weight the closer the person cursing is to the person cursed. 
Revenge is a similar cultural category. A later situation has meaning only with 
respect to an earlier one, and again the result is not one loss versus one win but 
instead a true integration in which the elements of the revenge situation are ele-
ments of the original situation. Enacting the integration network does not 
change the facts of the original situation as an input, but it does change the 
overall defining context in which it sits, and it also eliminates the possibility 
that losing is a permanent or fundamental feature of the avenger .. 
Identity and Characur 
261 
In rtdemption, curse, and rtVenge, we see cross-space vital relations compressed 
into inner-space cultural dements in the blend. All these cases do essential com-
pressions on Identity and Time. Curse also does compression on Identity of the 
outcomes (loss - loss), while rttlemption and revenge do compression on Disanal-
ogy on the outcomes (loss - win). Further, overarching compressions create cul-
tural elements like honor. Like absence or gap, honor is a word that caI1s up an im-
plicit counterfactual. specifical1y a mental space in which something dishonorable 
has happened. such as cowardice, an unanswered insult, or an attack on friends or 
family. But once honor has been "lost" in such a mental space, it can be "regained" 
or "restored" by later action. Once again, we do not view this simply as a dishon-
orable event followed by an honorable event, a mere sequence of one loss versus 
one win. Rather, the later scenario has meaning by relation to the earlier one. and 
although the integration does not eliminate the input space in which honor was 
lost, it does eliminate the condition of being in a state of dishonor. 
There are many similar notions, all depending on the general availability of 
blending for the creation of cultural meaning: vendetta, punishment, restitu-
tion, lex talionis. and many others. Crucially, they interact, so that, for example, 
an action may be simultaneously a redemption. a revenge, and a punishment. 
The coherence of the system shows up especially vividly in overarching concepts 
like honor: Under the general warrant of honor, one can put together an espe-
cially rich integration network that all at one swoop provides meanings of re-
demption.vengeance, and punishment, as when the hunter. who must leave his 
family to provide for them. returns to the evidence of a dishonoring criminal act 
committed in his absence, tracks down the criminals, and. in punishing them. 
redeems himself and regains honor. 
1= C H A PT E R 
1 2 
ZOOM OUT 
SCENARIOS 
In discussing the blending of frames, blending of characters. and blending of 
frames and characters. we have noticed that notions like double-scope and mir-
ror apply to both frames and characters. 
Question: 
• Do we have a neat picture then in which we have frames on one hand and 
characters on the other. so that all we have to do is bring them together by 
composition? 
" 

262 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Our answer: 
Alas, or perhaps thank God, no. In our exposition, we have often spoken as if 
frame and character are separable. In a sense, they are, and the linguistic system 
presents them as such: We can think of the frame of air travel without any essen-
tial attachment to the character of the traveler, and the language gives us words 
like "passenger" to pick out the frame with no reference to ~he character. In the 
other direction, we can think of a character like Bob Hope (who traveled a great 
deal) without any essential attachment to the frame air travel, and of course the 
language gives us the name "Bob Hope" to pick out that identity with no refer-
ence to any frames at all. If we refer to Bob Hope as "passenger," we are abstract-
ing away in the direction of the frame; if we call him "Bob Hope," we are ab-
stracting away in the direction of the identity. But in fact, one can never abstract 
all the way in one direction or the other. Any identity comes with considerable 
attachment to frames, and any frame comes with considerable attachment to 
identities: Father is a very abstract frame, but fully attached to our own and our 
friends' fathers. By the same token, if your father is "John Smith," you will have a 
difficult time trying to think of John Smith without activating the frame of fa-
ther. It is accurate to say that the blend evoked by "Paul is the father of Sally" uses 
as one input a schematic frame of father and as the other input the identities Paul 
and Sally, but the frame is embedded in a myriad of potentially active connec-. 
dons to characters, and the identities Paul and Sally are embedded in a myriad of 
potentially active connections to frames. All of this feltwork of knowledge is 
available for recruitme'rlt to the inputs and projection thence to the blend. 
Knowing someone means knowing what that person will do in the most diverse 
situations, including novel or impossible ones, and knowing that depends on 
knowing what the person has done in the past, and being able to apply frames to 
the old and new situations. Similarly, knowing a frame is knowing specific in-
stances and how various characters operate inside it. There is no limit to the 
amount of detail in frames or identities, and at the neurocognitive level of activa-
tions, frames and characters are always intertwined. Naive metaphysics and folk 
theories supported by language and conscious apprehension keep frames and 
identities neatly apart, masking their more intricate backstage involvem~nts. 
THE EFFLORESCENCE OF THE BLEND 
In many of our examples of blends, and in particular the identity and counter-
factual blends, a clear meaning emerges, and there is substantial agreement as to 
what that meaning is. 
Qumion: 
• Doesn't this show that blends are, after all, in some sens·e compositional, 
algorithmic, and deterministic? 
'I 
·~i.· 
, \ 
; 
-','./. 
Identity and Character 
263 
Our answer: 
Again: Alas, or perhaps thank God, no! For each of the language forms asso-
ciated with a particular blend, there were a large number of different blends that 
would have been equally possible in a different context. The meaning that is 
prompted by a language form in particular circumstances seems subjectively like 
[he only meaning associated with that form. This is natural, since the backstage 
cognition that leads to the emergence of that meaning is largely unconscious, 
and once a meaning has emerged, we usually have no reason to explore an alter-
native construction. The Eliza effect comforts us in the belief that the meaning 
we got was entirely contained in the language form and did not require any spe-
cial cognitive choices. Special circumstances-the punchline of a joke, for in-
stance-may bring some of the choices to conscious awareness. By contrast, "If 
I were you, I would quit" might seem to express a unique blend, but in fact it 
can prompt for many blends, as shown by the following continuations: 
· .. but I am independently wealthy; you shouldn't quit by any means. 
· .. but I am a hothead and would regret it later and would have to go on my 
knees begging for my job back. 
· .. and so should you. 
· .. but you shouldn't. 
· .. but that's only because the boss needs me so much he would offer me a raise 
to get me back. 
: .. since I couldn't live with myself knowing how badly I had treated me. 
· .. because being you would make me so utterly miserable I couldn't possibly 
get any work done. 
· .. since I would have a wealthy father. 
· .. since you have another job offer. 
· .. since I have another job offer. 
· .. since your beloved boss has another job offer and will be leaving soon. 
THE IDENTITY OF 
THE MISSING 
In Chapter 11, we saw nonthings, nonevents, and nonactions. In Chapter 10, 
we saw blends that permit us to make contact with the dead at tombs. 
Question: 
• Can nothing be a person, too? 
Our answer: 
Our worlds are full of nonpeople. We discussed how tombs and ashes serve as 
material anchors for making contact with the departed. Using the same kinds of 

264 
THE WAY WE THINK 
networks with material anchors, we can address a photograph of someone dead 
or alive, a wedding ring of a dead spouse, even a letter from someone not here. 
A song, a place, a memory of someone is enough to induce us to create, in the 
blend, a person who is absent but who nonetheless has intentional features: We 
ask our former mentor for advice, one of our grandparents pops up to scold us, 
or we have a conversation with a departed spouse. These are not merely static 
memories: We can hear our dead grandmother talking about our daughter even 
though the living grandmother died before the daughter was born. Psychologi-
cally, there is nothing mysterious about this once we recognize how blending 
works. Selective projection from long-term memory on the one hand and from 
present circumstances on the other is available for constructing such blends, 
which like all blends can have their own elaborate emergent structure and mate-
rial anchors. 
Using the identical patterns of blending, teachers coming into a classroom 
notice the "absent" students. Those students exist; they are not dead; they are 
present somewhere in the ·world. But they are also "absent" in the classroom by 
virtue ofa blend that brings in the counterfactual space in which they are in 
class as expected. These blends, which compress the counterfactual outer-space 
vital relation into a property· (absence) in the blend, have the same general struc-
ture as blending networks that let us contact the dead or that let us conceive of 
caffeine headaches that could have been avoided by having a cup of coffee. In 
other words, just as we have the nonthings, nonevents, and nonactions de-
scribed in Chapter 11, we have nonpeople. 
The pointing techniques of gesture and signed languages that we mentioned in 
Chapter 10 are equally available for these networks of nonpeople. We can desig-
nate the nonperson by pointing to where the actual person ·sat last time we met. 
Empty chairs and phones that keep ringing, like graves, photos, and locks of hair, 
provide material anchors for missing people. We can feel anger at the absent stu-
dent in the empty chair: or curse the nonperson on the other end of the phone. In 
signed languages, through referential shift (see Chapter 10), the speaker can be-
come a material anchor for an absent person being talked about. 
The example, earlier in this chapter, of Webster and his sister is a more no-
ticeable case of nonpeople playing some important role in assessing reality: The 
sister doesn't exist, she was never Webster's sister, and she is extremely lucky. 
And she is important to our understanding of Webster and Victoria. Similarly, 
in the Debate with Kant, the modern philosopher implicitly invites us to assess 
his intellect according to his performance in debating the missing Kant. 
The Debate with Kant is an integration network in which Kant, who is not 
in the space with the modern philosopher, is present in the blend where the de-
bate takes place. But the language for evoking this blend is so conventional that 
it does not point explicitly to the construction of the blend. By contrast, there 
are linguistic instruments whose purpose is to draw attention to the blend. We 
Idmtity and Character 
265 
have seen one such instrument, the word "ghost," which is used in saying that 
Great American II is "barely maintaining its lead over the ghost of Northern 
Light," and in saying that the American Pronghorn runs as fast as it does be-
cause it is being chased by the "ghosts of predators past." Todd Oakley discusses 
an elaborate example of this usage of "ghost" to point to the blend, taken from 
Maw II, a Survivor's Tak, by Art Spiegelman. 
[Art is talking to his wife Fran<;:oise about his brother Richieu, whom he 
never met.] 
Art: I wonder if Richieu and I would get along if he was still alive. 
Franc;:oise: Your brother? 
Art: My Ghost-Brother, since he got killed before I was born. He was only 
five or six. I didn't think much of him when I was growing up. He was 
mainly a large, blurry photograph hanging in my parents' bedroom. 
The photo never threw tantrums or got in any kind of trouble. It was 
an ideal kid, and I was a pain in the ass. I couldn't compete. They 
didn't talk about Richieu, but that photo was a kind of reproach. He'd 
have become a doctor and married a wealthy Jewish girl ... the creep. 
But at least we could've made him go deal wi~N1adek . It's spooky 
having sibling rivalry with a snapshot. 
The missing brother is the most important person in Art's life, and perhaps in 
his parents' li~es: The present reality and the people who inhabit it are assessed 
in relation to that missing person. 
Missing persons come in all types. Most of our examples stress the sorrow 
caused by the absence, but these people can bring honor, will, and satisfaction as 
well. Consider just one case, in which a skipper is trying to win the America's 
Cup for his nation. America's Cup racing now has an officially designated spot 
for "the seventeenth sailor," a passenger who rides in the boat but is forbidden 
to help sail it. Suppose the competing nation has a legendary skipper, Horatio, 
now deceased, who several times came very close to winning the America's Cup. 
This time, the skipper wins, and when he is asked at the press conference how 
he did it, he says, "My seventeenth man today was Horatio." In this case, there 
is a mirror network, where in each input there is a skipper from the same nation 
trying to win the America's Cup. In the blend, these skippers are not competi-
tors but allies. The modern skipper becomes the successor and redeemer of his 
mentor. The TIme and Space outer-space vital relations are compressed by su-
perposition, and the ourer-space vital relation of analogy is strengthe·ned by the 
successor relation, and that successor relation between the input spaces is com-
pressed in the blend into the inner-space role collaborator. The blend has im-
pressive emergent structure of many sorts, not the least in now having a seven-
teenth sailor who, instead of being a mere passenger, is the most effective 
'" 

266 
l' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
member of the crew. The diffuse chain of events over many years in which the 
country attempted repeatedly to win with different boats and different crews 
and different skippers, racing in different places, and finally did win, is now 
compressed into a single human-scale race and a glorious victory brought about 
by the collaboration between a living skipper and a Ghost Skipper. 
DRAMA CONNECTORS 
Dramatic performances are deliberate blends of a living person with an identity. 
They give us a living person in one input and a different living person, an actor, 
in another. The person on stage is a blend of these two. The character portrayed 
may of course be entirely fictional, but there is still a space, a fictional one, in 
which that person is alive. In the blend, the person sounds and moves like the 
actor and is where the actor is, but the actor in her performance tries to accept 
projections from the character portrayed, and so modifies her language, appear-
ance, dress, attitudes, and gestures. For the spectator, the perceived living, mov-
ing, and speaking body is a supreme material anchor. The outer-space relation is 
one of Representation. Typically, Representation is supported by outer-space 
Analogy, so that, for example, a middle-aged female character will be played by 
a middle-aged female actress. In the blend, these outer-space relations'are com-
pressed into uniqueness. 
In principle, actors ar~ linked to characters by virtue of performing in the real 
world actions that share physical properties with actions performed by the char-
acters in a represented world. This allows us, as Erving Goffman observes, to be 
aware, when we see a play, of more than one framing. While we perceive a single 
scene, we are simultaneously aware of the actor moving and talking on a stage in 
front of an audience, and of the corresponding character moving and talking 
within the represented story world. Common to the two frames are some lan-
guage and action patterns. Movies are technologically more complex, but again 
we can be aware simultaneously of the character and the actor. In Gone with the 
Wind, we see Rhett Butler and also know that we are seeing Clark Gable. We in-
terpret Rhett's actions as part of the story, and the very same actions, attributed 
to Clark Gable, as part of movie making. In this sense, in each particular the-
atrical representation, there will be rich shared generic structure between "real-
ity" and "fiction." 
The spectator can decompress the blend to recognize outer-space relations 
between these input spaces, as when we notice that the actor has not quite got 
the accent right or Hamlet trips over the stage lights. But the power of drama 
does not come from these outer-space connections: We do not go to a perform-
ance of Hamlet in order to measure the similarity between the actor and a his-
torical prince of Denmark. The power comes from the integration in the blend. 
The spectator is able to live in the blend, looking directly on its reality. Goffman 
Identity and Character 
267 
points out that in extreme cases, spectators have been known to lose the framing 
of themselves as spectators and of the actors as actors, and have rushed onstage 
to stop the murder or had a heart attack when the heroine is hacked to bits. 
Dramatic performances can proliferate spaces and connections in the net-
work. For example, there may be an additional space of historical reality that has 
relations to the story of the drama, as when the eponymous character in Shake-
speare's ](jng Henry Vis connected to a historical King Henry V, and is also con-
nected to the actor Laurence Olivier. A man can play his great-grandfather in a 
reenactment of a Civil War battle. In a cameo appearance, someone can play 
himself. The possibilities are many. 
Experiencing a dramatic performance requires further complex blends. We 
will not look at these in detail, but they have remarkable properties. Perhaps 
most notably, the spectator will live in the blend only by selective projection: 
Many aspects of her existence (such as sitting in a seat, next to other people, in 
the dark), although independently available to her, are not to be projected to the 
blend. Her normal animacy and agency, her motor powers and her power of 
speech, her responsibility to act in response to what she sees, must all be inhib-
ited. The actor, meanwhile, is engaged in a different kind of blend, one in which 
his motor patterns and power of speech come directly into play, but not his free 
will or his foreknowledge of the outcome. In the blend, he says just what the 
character says and is surprised night after night by the same events. The toddler 
engaged in pretend play and the parent watching have yet different projections 
and experiences. 
The' importance and power of living in the blend would be hard to overesti-
mate. In some cases, biology has arranged for us to live in the blend, as when we 
perceive a blue cup as obviously blue, and its blueness as the cause of our seeing 
it as blue. We also live in the blend when we use watches and gauges and com-
plex numbers, but in these cases the blend is a product of cultural evolution, 
and the inputs and their outer-space relations are much more accessible. In 
drama, the ability to live in the blend provides the motive for the entire activity. 
These are advanced double-scope blends, perfectly natural for human beings 
but apparently unavailable to other species. In principle, there is no reason that 
bonobos and even jackals could not put on plays in their groups. They can per-
form actions, they have memories, they have organized goal-driven behaviors, 
and they have elaborate social structures and social needs that could be served 
by dramatic performances. But they do not have double-scope blending, so the 
possibility never arises. 

IU' 
~ ' 
•• 
•• Thirteen 
CATEGORY 
M ETAM 0 RPH 0 SIS 
The imaginary number is a fine and wonderful recourse 
of the divine spirit, almost an amphibian between being 
and not being. 
-Gottfritd Ldbniz 
WE FREQUENTLY ORGANIZE NEW material by eitending a conventional cat-
egory. Usually, these category extensions are provisional. A handout for an aca-
demic talk had one column with elements listed 1 through 7, and another col-
umn with elements listed A through F. During the question period, people 
began referring unselfconsciously to "Number E." The inputs to this blend are 
the counting numbers and the alphabet, each ordered in its customary fashion. 
The generic space has only a well-ordered ordinal sequence. It defines the 
counterparts in the two inputs. The blend has the well-ordered ordinal se-
quence, but also has, linked to it and thus to each other, two paired sets of 
counting numbers, one of which is the "real" counting numbers and the other 
of which is the letters of the alphabet. But the blend does not have, for ex-
ample, arithmetic properties from the input space with counting numbers, or 
spelling from the alphabet. 
SAME-SEX MARRIAGE 
In other cases, blending may lead to a permanent category change. Consider the 
phrase "same-sex marriage," which we discussed in Chapter 7. Expressions with 
this syntactic form-a noun from one conceptual space and a modifier from a 
different conceptual space-can be systematically used to trigger blends. For 
"same-sex marriage," the inputs are the traditional scenario of marriage, on the 
one hand, and an alternative domestic scenario involving two people of the same 
sex, on the other. The cross-space mapping may link typical elements such as 
partners, common dwellings, commitment, 10vOf sex. Selective projection then 
269 

270 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
recruits additional structure from each input. For example, social recognition, 
wedding ceremonies, and mode of taxation are projected from the input of "tra-
ditional marriage," while same sex, absence of biologically common children, 
and culturally defined roles of the parmers are projected from the other input. As 
illustrated in Figure 13.1, properties of this new social structure emerge in the 
blend. 
Such a category metamorphosis can change fUnd~entally the structure of 
the category. Traditional marriage may, for many or most, have had criterial at-
tributes such as heterosexual union for the sake of progeneration. That structure 
would be lacking in a new category of marriage that includes same-sex union. 
Other criterial attributes would structure that new category. 
COMPLEX NUMBERS 
The history of science, and of mathematics and physics in particular, is rich in 
conceptual shifts. It is customary to speak of models either replacing or extend-
ing previous models, but the pervasiveness and importance of blending has been 
underestimated. 
We have already seen in Chapter 11 how the category number changed to in-
clude zero and fractions, and, in the case of fractions, how complicated was the 
blending that produced the new version of that category. After the fact, it looks 
as if new elements have simply been added to the old ones, because we still use 
the same words for them. But in fact, in the metamorphosis of the category, the 
entire structure and organizing principles have been dramatically altered. It is an 
illusion that the old input is simply transferred wholesale as a subset of the new 
category. As we saw for same-sex marriage, the metamorphosis of the category 
can change it fUndamentally. 
Consider again the development of complex numbers. Historically, the 
mathematical conceptual development in which complex numbers became en-
dowed with angles and magnitudes was slow and fraught with difficulty. Square 
roots of negative numbers had shown up in the formulas of sixteenth-century 
mathematicians who correctly formulated operations on these numbers. But the 
very mathematicians who did this, Cardan and especially Bombelli, also felt 
that such numbers were "useless," "sophistic," "impossible," and "imaginary." 
Descartes held the same opinion a century later. Leibniz said no harm came of 
using them, and Euler thought them impossible but nevertheless useful. The 
square roots of negative numbers had the strange property of lending them-
selves to formal manipulations without fitting into a mathematical conceptual 
system. A genuine concept of complex numbers took time to develop. 
This development began from a preexisting blend of numbers and one-
dimensional geometry: The points on a line had been blended with whole num-
bers and fractions so that each number was a point and each point was a number. 
·r;;; .. 
~, 
Category Metamorphosis 
TRADITIONAL 
MARRIAGE 
SAME-SEX 
PARTNERSHIP 
man and woman 
religious sacrament 
legal status 
procreation 
children 
family 
kinship 
socially positive status 
publicly displayed 
love 
------r-------- stigmatized 
-- --- ---- . often concealed 
love 
sex 
seI 
live together 
financial advantages . 
live together 
same-sex couple 
religious sacrament 
legal status 
socially positive status 
publicly displayed 
love 
sex 
live together 
financial advantages 
SAME·SEX 
MARRIAGE 
FIGURE 13 . 1 
SAME-SEX MARR'IAGE 
271 
Today, this blend is so entrenched in our culture as to seem a brute fact of physi-
cal reality, but the intellectual struggle to achieve it shows how imaginative it 
was. 
The blend of numbers and one-dimensional space was extended by Descartes 
to create the coordinate plane, in which each point was defined by a pair of 
numbers, including negative numbers. The next step was taken by the seven-
teenth-century mathematician John Wallis, who observed in his 1685 book Al-
gebra that if negative numbers could be mapped onto a directed line, complex 
numbers could be mapped onto points in a two-dimensional plane. Wallis pro-
vided geometric constructions for the counterparts of the real or complex roots 

272 
THE WAY WE THINK 
ofax2 + bx + c = O. In effect, he provided a consistent model for the mysterious 
numbers, giving some substance to their formal manipulation. Although Wal-
lis's mapping showed the formal consistency of a system including complex 
numbers, this was not enough to extend the concept of number. As Morris 
Kline reports, Wallis's work was ignored: It did not make mathematicians recep-
tive to the use of such numbers. This is an interesting p.oint in itself. Mapping a 
coherent space onto a conceptually incoherent one is not enough to give the in-
coherent space new conceptual structure. It also follows that coherent abstract 
structure is not enough, even in mathematics, to produce satisfactory concep-
tual structure: In Wallis's representation, the metric geometry provided abstract 
schemas for a unified interpretation of real and imaginary numbers, but this 
failed to persuade mathematicians to revise their domain of numbers accord-
ingly. Only after the new conceptual structure of complex numbtr develops in 
the blended space is the domain of numbers actually extended. 
In this blend, but not in the original inputs, it is possible for an element to be 
simultaneously a number and a geometric point, with Cartesian coordinates (a, 
b) and polar coordinates (p, e). In the blend, numbers have interesting general 
formal properties, such as 
(a, b) + (a', b') = (au', b+b') 
(p, e) x,(p', e') = (pp', e + e') 
Every number in this extended sense has a real part, an imaginary part, an 
angle, and a magnitude. By virtue of the link of the blend to the geometric in-
put space, the numbers can be manipulated geometrically; by virtue of the link 
of the blend to the input space of real numbers, the new numbers in the blend 
are immediately conceptualized as an extension of the old numbers. 
The entire conceptual integration network has two inputs: two-dimensional 
geometric space and real numbers. Complex numbers and their properties 
emerge in the blended space. As in Wallis's scheme, the mapping from points on 
a line to numbers has been extended to a mapping from points in a plane to 
numbers. This mapping is partial from one input to the other--only one line of 
the plane is mapped onto the real numbers in the other input-but it is total 
from the geometric input to blend: All the points of the plane have counterpart 
complex numbers. And this in turn allows the blend to incorporate the full 
structure of the geometric input space (see Figure 13.2). 
When a rich blended space of this sort is built. an abstract generic space 
comes along with it. Having the three spaces respectively containing points (in-
put 1), numbers (input 2), and complex points/numbers (blend) entails a 
fourth space with abstract elements having the properties "common" to points 
and numbers. The abstract notions in this case are "operations" on elements. 
For numbers. the operations are addition and multiplication. For points in the 
_oi, 
Category Mttamorphosis 
273 
Generic Space 
[Commutative ring operations on pairs of elements] 
Input I, 
Input 12 
[points in oriented plane; 
vector transformations] 
, 
[positive and negative numbers, 
, , 
' ,addition, multiplication] 
, . 
, ' 
, ' 
Blend 
" \ 
,. " ------..... 
, 
~ I 
[complex numbers; real and imaginary 
parts, argument, magnitude, addition 
and multiplication of complex numbers] 
FIGURE 13.2 
COMPLEX NUMBERB 
plane. the operations can be viewed as geometric transformations'such as rota-
tion and stretching. In the blended space of complex numbers. numbers and 
vectors are the same thing; so addition of numbers is just vector addition. and 
multiplication of numbers is just rotation and stretching of vectors. 
In the generic space of the fully completed integration network, specific geo-
metric or number properties are absent. All that is left is the more abstract no-
tion of two operations on pairs of elements. such that each operation is associa-
tive and commutative and has an identity element; each element has under each 
operation an inverse element; and one of the two operations is distributive with 

'/1' 
, , 
274 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
respect to the other. Something with this structure is called by mathematicians a 
"commutative ring." It is typically manipulated unconsciously by mathemati-
cians who study geometry, arithmetic, or trigonometry until it becomes itself an 
object of conscious study in mathematics. In the development of complex num-
bers, it took roughly three centuries for mathematicians to reach that point. 
The emergence of the concept of complex numbers with arguments and 
magnitudes displays all the properties of blending. There is an initial cross-space 
mapping of numbers to points in planar geometric space; a generic space; a pro-
jection of both inputs to the blend, with numbers fused with geometric points; 
and emergent structure by completion (arguments and magnitudes) and by 
elaboration (multiplication and addition reconstrued as operations on vectors). 
The blend takes on a realist interpretation within mathematics. It constitutes 
a new and richer way to understand numbers and space. Yet it also retains its 
connections to the earlier conceptions provided by the input spaces. Conceptual 
change of this sort is not just replacement. It is the creation of more elaborate 
and richly connected networks of spaces. 
The evolution of the concept of complex numbers highlights the deep differ-
ence between naming and conceptualizing; adding expressions like "';-1 to the 
domain of numbers, and calling them numbers, is not enough to make them 
numbers conceptually, even when they fit a consistent model. This is true of cat-
egory extension in general. 
" 
COMPUTER VIRUS 
We can see an effort in the direction of permanent category extension in the 
current study of "artificial life." Consider the following remark: "Several scien-
tists insisted that the term virus is more than a nice metaphor .... Although 
computer viruses are not fully alive, they embody many of the characteristics of 
life, and it is not hard to imagine computer viruses of the future that will be just 
as alive as biological viruses." This is a dramatic double-scope blend, with one 
input organized by the frame for a manufactured product, compuur. and the 
other organized by the frame biological virus. 
Over the last fifteen years of the twentieth century, this invention of a new 
category arose from two unconnected situations. In the first, hackers caused 
mischief by writing software code that interfered with the operation of comput-
ers. In the second, as we discussed in Chapter 6, biologists and complexity theo-
rists wrote programs like "The Blind Watchmaker" to simulate the evolution of 
organisms on computers. The hacker scenario led to the initial, relatively thin 
blended concept of "computer virus." The cross-space mapping for this original 
blend was based at first on some vague shared properties of viruses and the 
hackers' nefarious programs: 
Category Metamorphosis 
275 
• The element is present, but unwanted; it comes in, or is put in, from the 
outside; it does not naturally belong. 
• The element is able to replicate; new copies of it appear that have the same 
undesirable properties as the original. 
• The. element disrupts the intended functioning of the system. 
• The element is harmful to the system and, hence, to its users. 
That integration network was rapidly developed to create a much richer cate-
gory of computer virus, with associated categories like disinfectant, vaccine, safe 
interface, and computer health maintenance providers. 
In the meantime, the modeling of biological evolution on computers was it-
self evolving: It went from modeling life to the more general study of th.e algo-
rithms and processes that allow this modeling, collectively called "artificial life." 
Artificial life was a new computational concept, built upon the analogy with bi-
ological processes. Artificial life and biological life were still viewed as sharply 
distinct, but also as sharing some interesting and fundamental dynamics. Just as 
in the evolution of complex numbers the intriguing but noncategorial blend of 
geometric space and numbers advanced to the stage in which a richer and more 
integrated blend counted at last as an extension of the concept number itself, so 
in the development of the notion of artificial life the noncategorial blend of 
computational processes and biological life advanced to the stage in which the 
richer and more integrated blend was dramatically nominated as an insight into 
the nature of the category lift. The blend was now offered as a discovery that lift 
was other than ~hat we had thought. 
Computer virus and artificial lift both evolved into legitimate categories of 
their own. The final step, envisioned by the scientists quoted above, would con-
sist of establishing a conventional cultural and scientific megablend of biological 
lift, computer virus, and artificial lifo. The generic space would characterize this 
blend as constituting a crucial scientific category, and the blend would give us 
details unimagined by Darwin or Lucretius. 
WORDS AND THEIR EXTENSIONS 
As the neuroscientist Antonio Damasio has pointed out, words are not different 
from other neurobiological elements: They are attached to networks, become 
activated, are connected to other networks, and so on. This means that in 
blending (which of course must be fully instantiated in the brain), words, like 
other elements, will attach to activation patterns for mental spaces and will be 
selectively projected to blends. We explicitly analyzed this kind of projection for 
"caffeine headache," "money problem," and "nicotine fit" in Chapter 11. The 
word "caffeine" is projected from the counterfacrual input in which there was 

276 
THE WAY WE THINK 
caffeine and no headache, and so it ends up being part of the linguistic label for 
a kind of headache that occurs in situations where there is no caffeine at all. 
We can see this projection easily in "caffeine headache" because the contrast be-
tween caffeine and no caffeine jumps out at us. But in fact it is the normal course of 
events for the use of any word. This is why words end up "having" multiple "mean-
ings," and why we can usually use existing words to talk about new categories. The 
operation of selective projection in blending, when applied to words as elements at-
tached to input spaces, yields four principles for extending the uses of words: 
1. Through selective projection, expressions applied to an input can be pro-
jected to apply to counterparts in the blend. In this way, blends harness 
existing words in order to express the new meanings that arise in the 
blend. For example, "virus" refers to something in the original input space 
of health, and it can be projected to refer to the relevant counterpart in the 
blend of computers; but crucially, what "virus" picks out in the blend is 
not at all what it picks out in the input from which it was projected. We 
can now say "I got a virus from your floppy" to pick out the structure in 
the blend. 
2. Combinations ot expressions from the inputs may be appropriate for pick-
ing out structure in the blend even if those combinations are inappropri-
ate for the inputs. Grammatical but meaningless phrases can thus become 
grammatical and meaningful for the blend. For example, once we have the 
complex-number blend, we can say meaningfully, using preexisting words 
and grammatical patterns, "the square root of negative one." And once we 
have the same-sex marriage blend, we can say meaningfully "The brides 
married each other at noon." We can do this even though neither of these 
expressions is meaningful for the preexisting inputs. 
3. We often have terms for emergent structure in the blend and can use them 
even if those terms cannot be applied to the inputs themselves. For ex-
ample, in the Debate with Kant, we can say that "Kant has no answer," 
and this does indeed tell us something about the input space with Kant, 
even though "answer" has no application in that space. 
4. Blending routinely and inevitably extends the uses of words, but we rarely 
notice these extensions. "Safe," for example, as we discussed in Chapters 2 
and 11, has many more "surface" "meanings" than we realize. 
It is important to realize that these principles, far from being sloppy, often' make 
precise and consistent reference possible. Mathematics loses none of its rigor by 
using words like "number" in various ways. In some contexts, "number" picks 
out elements that do not have angles; in others, "number" picks out elements 
that do have angles. "Number" retains all of its old meanings but acquires a new 
one to pick out elements in the complex-number blend. 
Category Metamorphosis 
277 
We have often seen these principles at work. For 'example, the discussion of 
"father" x.yz blends in Chapter 8 provided many extensions of the use of "fa-
ther." Some of these uses pick out meanings that we see as metaphoric, or cre-
ative, or provisional, or permanent. This gradient for the word "father" falls out 
naturally because "father" is in each case attached to one of the inputs; blending 
as a conceptual operation applies to those inputs; and by principles 1 and 2, "fa-
ther" comes to participate in phrases that pick out structure in the blend but 
not the inputs. Extending or modifYing the use of a word is not a property of 
words per se but a by-product of the operation of conceptual integration and the 
fact that words are projected from inputs to the blend. The cognitive operation 
of conceptual blending is not restricted to language. But a mind that can blend 
and that also knows language will inevitably develop multiple meanings for 
words through blending. If words show up in inputs, they can be projected like 
any other elements of that input. This will change their domain of application, 
un noticeably in most cases, but noticeably when the emergent meaning in the 
blend seems remarkably distant from the domain of the input from which they 
came. When we notice this distance, we call it by one of many names: exten-
sion, bleaching, analogy, metaphor, displacement. On our view, polysemy-
that is, multiple meanings for a single word-is v~ common, a standard by-
product of conceptual blending, but noticed only rarely. 
Human beings face a fundamental problem: Conceptual systems are vast and 
rich and open-ended, but linguistic systems, however impressive, are relatively 
quite thin. How can a linguistic system be used to convey the products of con-
ceptual systems, and how can these products find expression in language, given 
the stark mismatch in their respective infinities? If forms of language had to rep-
resent complete and invariant meanings, language could communicate very 
little. The evolutionary solution to this problem is to have systems of forms 
prompt for the construction of meanings that go far beyond anything like the 
form itsel£ The "of" found in a range of examples like "Paul is the father of 
Sally," "father of cruelty," "father of the Catholic church," "Vanity is the quick-
sand of reason," and "Wit is the salt of conversation" does not single out any 
particular blend or even any particular projection; it only prompts for finding a 
way to construct a conceptual network that will have a relevant meaning. What 
we have to do to construct that network is nowhere represented. in the linguistic 
structure. The single word "of" is thus associated with an open infinity of map-
pings. Yet this infinity of mappings is anything but arbitrary. It is constrained by 
the requirements on conceptual integration networks. Different grammatical 
forms prompt different infinities of conceptual mappings. 
Because linguistic expressions prompt for meanings rather than represent 
meanings, linguistic systems do not have to be, and in fact cannot be, analogues 
of conceptual systems. Prompting for meaning construction is a job they can 
do; representing meanings is not. 
J 

t' 
/i 
II Fourteen 
MULTIPLE BLENDS 
Thou antic death, which laugh'st us here to scorn, 
. .!\non, from thy insulting tyranny, 
Coupled in bonds of perpetuiry, 
Two Talbots, winged through the lither sky, 
In thy despite shall 'scap!= mortaliry. 
0, tjlo!J, whose wOl,lnds become hard-favour'd death, 
Speak tq thy facher ere tho~ yield thy breath! 
,Brave.deatq by speaking, whether he will or no; 
Imagine him a Frenchman and thy foe. 
Poor boy! he smiles, methinks, as who should say, 
Had death been. French, then death had died today. 
-William Shakespeare 
. . , 
CONCEPTUAL INTEGRATION ALWAYS INVOLVES at least four spaces: two in-
put spaces, a generic space, and a blended space. Until now, we have mainly 
used this minimal template. Now, however, we turn to a more general account 
of conceptual integration as a dynamic operation over any number of mental 
spaces that moreover can apply repeatedly, its outputs becoming inputs for fur-
ther blending, 
In this more general scheme, ·we still finq the defining features of conceptual 
integration: cross-space mappings between inputs, selective projection, generic 
spaces. But there need not be a single generic space for a multiple blend net-
work. As we will see, there are two main ways in which networks can be multi-
ple blends: Either several inputs are projected in parallel, or they are projected 
successively into intermediate blends, which themselves serve as inputs to fur-
ther blends. 
DRACULA AND HIS PATIENTS 
Here is an excerpt from a newspaper editorial about former U.S. President Clin-
ton's health care reform. 
279 

280 
THE WAY WE THINK 
What President Clinton did, bravely and brilliantly, I think, was to gamble that 
the repertory actors of the health care industry have frightened Americans so 
badly that we are willing to accept anything, including higher taxes, rather than 
to continue being extras in a medical melodrama that tesembles nothing so much 
as an endless "Dracula" movie where the count always wins, right up to the last 
drop . . .. The Dracula crowd will scream "socialized medicine" and moan that 
you won't be able to pick your own doctor. 
In this passage we find two blending networks, each of whose input spaces is 
connected by a metaphoric mapping. In the first network, one input space is the 
health care industry. It has professionals (doctors, hospital administration, 
health insurance agents) and the public (who are patients, pay for services, and 
pay for insurance). The other input space gets its structure from movie making 
and contrasts privileged repertory actors (who have stable employment, good 
pay, and arrogance perhaps) with "extras" (who are at the mercy of producers' 
whims, have no protection, and are exploited). The repertory actors (movie pro-
fessionals) are the counterparts in this cross-space mapping of the health care 
professionals, and the lowly extras are the counterparts of the weary public. 
The second blending network also has the input space of the health care in-
dustry. Its other input space has a conventional horror story, that of Count 
Dracula the Vampire, who sucks the blood of his victims. In the blended space, 
the health professionals are vampires and the patients are their victims. These 
health care vampires extract money/blood from their victims/patients. 
Both of these blending networks feel metaphoric and have metaphoric cross-
space mappings, and clearly the two metaphors are different and could be used 
independently: In one the doctors and HMO's are vampires, and in the other 
they are repertory actors. 
But now we see the way that conceptual integration can operate over any 
conceptual array. These two metaphoric integration networks shart an input 
space: the health care industry. Additionally, the other two input spaces (reper-
tory acting and Dracula the Vampire, one of them in each of the networks) have 
a natural and conventional cross-space mapping: The story of Count Dracula is 
often told in movies, where there are actors and extras who play the parts of 
Dracula and his victims. This natural mapping links actors to characters, ac-
cording to the Drama connectors discussed in Chapier 12. This Drama cross-
space mapping is not metaphoric. 
The phrase "the repertory actors of the health care industry" is a "Y of" 
prompt to begin to build an integration network whose inputs are the spaces of 
movie making and of health care. When we learn almost instantly that these ac-
tors have "frightened Americans," we include that act in the blend, but its rela-
tion to the other elements is in many ways indeterminate until we are offered 
.'~~, 
'~i 
.I ! 
~ 
,~ 
Multiple Blends 
281 
"Dracula." Then one way of accounting for the fright is clear: There is another 
space, with the horror story of Dracula that has a metaphoric cross-space map-
ping to the health care industry and a natural Drama mapping to the movie-
making input. A multiple blend is now off and running. The Dracula space is 
now also an input to the blend, in which we have doctors/actors/vampires ex-
tracting money/privileges/blood from the patients/extras/victims. 
With three mutually connected spaces for movie making, movie content, and 
health care, the counterpart structure is as follows: 
MOVIE MAKING 
repertory actors 
extras 
MOVIE CONTENT 
vampires/Dracula 
victims 
HEALTH CARE 
health care professionals 
public 
Notice that this structure maps extras onto victims even though in real movies, 
victims may well be played by leading actors. 
All three spaces are selectively projected to a blended space in which event-
participants inherit features of all three inputs. One group gets frightened, they 
are extras, they are the public (patients), and they get their blood sucked in 
more ways than one. The other group (the "Drac!-Jla" crowd) consists of reper-
tory actors/vampires/exploiters. 
. 
How do we know this is a multiple blend rather than two intertwined 
metaphors? First, the mapping of actors/extras to exploiters/victims would be a 
very poor metaphor. Repertory actors are hardly the stereotype of bloodthirsty 
exploiters. But in the blend, where the force of the victimization relation is 
projected from the vampire space, the compatible actors/extras structure serves 
to add useful features and subtract others. For instance, the repertory actors are 
the ones you see all the time, who come back in different guises, the only ones 
who matter as actors. In the blend, there is a movie "establishment" just as 
there is a health care establishment, and the "extras" are not part of it or part of 
,its preoccupations. In the vampire-movie space, on the other hand, victims are 
at the forefront of the action and of the spectator's attention, and they are im-
portant. But those features are not projected into the blend, where they would 
clash with the more relevant "extras" properry of being unimportant, which 
corresponds with the intended message for the health care input that the pub-
lic is being ignored. 
The linguistic form employed in the passage is also characteristic of blending: 
"The repertory actors of the health care industry have frightened Americans so 
badly." Here we find vocabulary from the three inputs in a: single sentence. 
Repertory actors, whatever their faults, do not typically frighten extras or Amer-
icans. "Frightened" is projected from the vampire space in accordance with the 
principles for projecting words that we presented at the end of the previous 
.. 

.. 
THE WAY WE THINIC 
282 
,. 
chapter. And we find in the blend the kind of opportunistic recruitment often 
noted for other examples: 
"The count always wins, right up to the last drop." 
This formulation, in terms of the vampire input, tak~s advantage of the role of 
blood in the medical/health care input. The link, however, is not part of the rel-
evant cross-space mapping between the vampire input and the health care space: 
The editorialist is not accusing the hospitals of trying to take human blood 
away from the patients. Rather, bloodsucking from the vampire space is conven-
tionally mapped to deprivation of resources, money, and energy. In the blend, of 
course, money and blood are the same, doctors and vampires are the same, and 
the opportunistic recruitment works splendidly. This is not to say that distinc-
tions between money and blood or vampires and doctors get blurred: All the 
links to the separate inputs remain dynamically activated. Although bloodlet-
ting is incidental topology in the health care input, it ends up being merged 
with central frame topology (bloodsucking) in the blend. 
Call the blend B and the three input spaces M, V, and H (movie making, 
vampires, and health care, respectively). In the ultimate network configuration, 
shown in Figure 14.1, the dashed lines stand for cross-space mappings between 
spaces and the solid lines indicate selective projection to the blend. 
This configuration has three cross-space mappings, but we have said nothing 
yet about generic spaces. Because there are three cross-space mappings, we can 
have up to three distinct generic spaces. Informally, the schematic structure GVH 
common to V and H is the oppressor/victim schema. GMH" common to M and 
H, is a social-status schema: "prominent, important, essential versus low status, 
unimportant, dispensable." The generic space GMV links real actors to the char-
acters they portray. We discussed this type of generic in Chapter 12 in the sec-
tion on Drama connectors. 
The outer-space vital relations of analogy and drama that link M, V, and H 
are compressed into uniqueness following the usual principles. The two generic 
spaces GVH and GMH, which drive the metaphors, are congruent. Though dis-
tinct, they can be seen as subcases of an even more schematic generic G of the 
form "more power/little or no power." Because it fits V qnd H on the one hand 
and M and H on the other, G automatically fits V and M, but this is an 
achieved product of the complex integration network. The Drama Mapping by 
itself can connect extras to millionaires at a banquet. But the elaborate Dracula 
multiple blend brings the Drama Mapping and therefore GMV into congruence 
with all the other generic spaces: GVH, GMH, and G. Now, victims, extras, and 
patients must be aligned, and vampires, repertory actors, and health care profes-
sionals must be aligned. 
Multiple B/mds 
283 
-- ----
--
--
--
FIGURE 14.1 
DRACULA NETWORK 
There are additional vital relations between the inputs M, V, and H. Cause-
effect links M to V because the film industry has vampire films as one of its 
products; intentionality links M to V because the filmmakers intend to make 
these films. The overall structure of the integration network is thus configured 
as shown in Figure 14.2. 
The function of this particular network, rhetorically and conceptually, is to 
structure H. The writer is saying something about the health care system, not 
commenting on vampire movies or the movie industry. The notion of a double-
scope network, introduced in Chapter 7, is naturally extended here to the no-
tion of a multiple-scope network. 
Dracula and His Patients highlights features of generic spaces not previously 
encountered. Although the network does include a single highly schematic 
generic space G, which fits all the other spaces, we need to take into account the 
more specific generic spaces GMH and GVH, which specify the relevant cross-
space mappings, and the generic space GMY, which specifies the independent 
Drama Mapping between M and V. As the network develops, pressure is put on 
the various generic spaces to align. For example, pressure is put on GMV to make 
extras the counterpart of victims. More generally, there is strong pressure to 
achieve an overall generic space having to do with cruel exploitation of lower 
agents by higher ones. But that generic space takes some adjustments to achieve 
because cruelty is not a standard part of GMH: Repertory actors may be indiffer-
ent to extras but are not typically viewed as cruel to them. GMH is dynamically 

281 
THE WAY- WE THINK 
FIGURE 14.2 
DRACULA NETwoRK WITH GENERIC SPACES 
reconstructed in the interest of achieving G. Multiple blends, then, reveal the 
possibility of elaborate generiC space organization, and of pressures between 
generic spaces, within a single complex conceptual integration network. 
PRESIDENT BUSH ON THIRD BASE
, 
Consider the following four-space blend, intended as a joke made by candidate 
Tom Harkin during the 1992 U.S. presidential campaign: 
George Bush was born on third base and thinks he hit a triple. 
One input is baseball and the other is society and one's image of one's relation to 
society. The generic space contains agents in competition and goals to be 
'~j l 
Multiple Blmds 
285 
reached. The network is double-scope, getting frame structure from both in-
puts. The baseball situations come from baseball, but the possibility of not 
knowing how you got where you are is a projection from not understanding 
why you have your social station. These projections lead to emergent structure 
in the blend: the possibility of being deluded about how you got on base. This 
impossible level of stupidity in the baseball input is actually possible in the 
blend, but still astonishingly stupid. 
Now consider this contrived development of the blend: 
The stork dropped George Bush on third base with a silver spoon in his mouth, 
and he' thinks he hit a triple. 
Several blends are linked together here to produce a megablend. The conventional 
multiple blend that delivers the Birth Stork is based on a conventional metaphoric 
blend of being born as arriving at a location, where the location is typically the 
world: "He came into the world fifteen years ago." Mark Twain said that he "came 
in with Halley's comet and would go out with it" (and he did). To get the Birth 
Stork multiple blend, the conventional blend of Birth as Arrival is itself used as an 
input, together with other inputs. One is the flight of a ~fork; another is the vety 
old frame of air travel, which covers everything from wi~g-footed Hermes sent as 
messenger of Zeus to Aladdin's flight by magic carpet. Yet another is everyday life 
with a baby. The baby in the blend is on the one hand about to be born, but on 
, the other has features of an older baby: We can see it, it can see the Stork, it smiles, 
it is already wearing diapers, and it can hold its head up. The inputs, most of them 
objectively unrelated, are smoothly integrated in the blend into a single scene: The 
Stork Carrying the Baby (see Figure 14.3). Though impossible in the world as we 
know it, the scene is easy to understand because it is at human scale and borrows 
structure from many very familiar scenes. 
There is another blend, of life and baseball, which can be manipulated inde-
pendently, as in "I never got to first base." This is used in "George Bush was 
born on third base." 
Yet another subnetwork blends the hierarchy of stations in life with the hier-
archy of dining scenarios. Having a silver spoon in one's mouth belongs to the 
blended space of this projection. 
All three of these blended spaces (Stork Brings the Baby, Life Is Baseball, and 
Silverware Is Status) are then blended into a hyperblended space, in which be-
ing born, the stork, third base, and the silver spoon all reside. Inferences, moti-
vations, and emotions constructed in this hyperblended space can then all be 
applied to our understanding and feelings about George Bush, his social status, 
and his candidacy. 
This multiple blend expresses something similar to the original joke-being 
born in a privileged position, having lime merit for being in that position, and 
J 

286 
Coming into 
existence 
special I 
case 
.. 
,. 
Stork flying 
(. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Person p with 
object 0 in 
container c at 
Location 2 
a v 
Air 
travel 
Carrying + 
container 
! /' 
Flying 
Stork/person with 
baby/object in 
diaper/sling/carrier 
at location 1 
+ 
carries 
Stork/person with 
baby/object in 
sling/carrier 
arrives at location 
ofpart:nts 
I special 
t case 
FIGURE 14. 3 
THE BIRTH STORK NETWORK 
being deluded about one's achievements. But it achieves a form of integration 
that the original formulation lacked. This is because the scene of a stork drop-
ping something on a base is well integrated. as opposed to the scene of someone 
being born on a base. The blend is more integrated (and not as funny) because 
the overall scene (however unlikely) is independently conceivable. The blend 
has a better match both with being born and with being on base because "being 
born on third base." which was left indeterminate and unexplained in the origi-
nal blend. has now been framed explicitly so as to accord with both the conven-
tional Stork Brings the Baby blend and the scene of a baseball game: The Stork 
now flies into the concrete spatial situation of a baseball game, and drops an ob-
ject on third base. and this counts as birth, even though dropping the baby is 
not part of any of the three inputs. 
Of course, scene integration is not the same as frame integration. The stork sce-
nario disrupts the baseball frame in outlandish ways. Players are not carried 
Multiple Blends 
287 
around the bases by storks. and they do not have spoons in their mouths. We need 
to construct a strange and noticeable new possibility for baseball: Nearly everyone 
has to run the bases. but this person. quite unfairly. began from third base. 
Two kinds of cross-space mappings contribute to this complex integration 
network. The first kind consists of metaphoric mappings-Birth as Arrival. Sta-
(US as Silverware, Life as Baseball. The second kind consists of partial vital-rela-
tion connections between the target spaces of these metaphors-namely, Birth. 
Life, and Social Status. A Part-Whole connector links Birth to Life; a Cause-
Effect connector links social status to social life; a Cause-Effect connector links 
birth to social status by virtue of the cultural model that assigns a newborn the 
social status of its parents. Identity connectors connect the person born, the per-
son leading the life, and the person with the social status. 
Independent of this multiple blend, Life. Binh, and Status are already inte-
grated for us in a complex cultural "Story of Life. " The existence of this integrated 
Story of Life and the consequent vital-relation connections across Life. Birth. and 
Status in the multiple integration network give the network a character that was 
missing from the multiple blend of Dracula and His Patients. There is no conven-
tional integrated .story of actors. health care professionals, and vampires that we 
are expected to know as part of our culture. but there is a conventional story of a 
person being born with a particular social status and leading a life. 
How is this Story of Life handled in the multiple blend? Let us step back and 
observe that there is a standard rhetorical procedure for telling any complex 
story that is organized by such a large schematic story. For example, suppose a 
politician is giving us his· autobiography. the story of his ascent from humble be-
ginnings. That story has snapshot moments such as childhood industry. first 
taste of politics. early work in a worthy cause, and first election. For each of 
those static snapshots, the story commonly gives us an individual. often 
metaphoric integration network. So the politician might present the snapshot of 
childhood industry as "taking the first steps toward responsibility," early politi-
cal involvement as "developing a taste" for politics. winning the first election as 
"gaining a seat at the table." and so on. In this rhetorical design, the overall pres-
entation is strewn with individual stand-alone integration networks. There is no 
further attempt to integrate first steps, tasting, and having a seat at the table. 
The Bush-Stork-Baseball-Spoon integration network. by contrast, does a 
further integration of the apparently disparate inputs to create the coherent 
scene in which the stork drops the baby onto third base with the spoon in his 
mouth. To put together that integrated scene, blending takes opportunistic ad-
vantage of their all being structured by locations: Third base is a location. ar-
rival is always at a location, and the silver spoon represents a scale of "higher" 
and "lower" "locations" on the dining register. The integrated scene of "Arriv-
ing on Third Base by Stork with a Silver Spoon in the Mouth" is coherent with 
the Story of Life because its spatial relations match the vital relations between 

2BB 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Birth, Status, and Life in ways that are licensed by conventional metaphor: 
States are metaphorically locations, so being in a location in life-as-baseball 
matches being in a state of life and matches having a certain social status; 
changes of states are metaphorically changes of locations, so changing from 
one state of life to another matches moving from one base to another in life-as-
baseball; being born matches being dropped on the .base (the new location); 
being born matches being sent into the game. 
Crucially, some of the essential organizing structure of the conceptual 
megablend for "Arriving on Third Base by Stork with a Silver Spoon in the 
Mouth" comes from the vital relations in the Story of Life that connect Birth, 
Dining, and Life, rather than separately from structure internal to any of those 
spaces. In the normal unfolding of events in the blend, the stork will drop you 
at bat, and then, if you have merit, you will run the bases and possibly go all the 
way to home plate. Therefore, there is crucial temporal structure in the blend-
being dropped by the stork must precede being on base, just as birth precedes 
achievement-that comes from the Story of Life rather than from the inputs: In 
baseball, there is no stork preceding anything, and in the stork input there is no 
baseball game. There is crucial inttntional structure in the blend: If the stork 
drops you directly on a base, this is an intentional act by the stork to insert you 
into play in the game that is also social life. This intention on the part of the stork 
cannot come from baseball and dining, where there is no stork, or from the in-
put with the stork, where his only intention is to deliver the baby to the mother. 
Not surprisingly, an integration network that contains within it several smaller 
integration networks presents opportunities for conceptual integration of a sort 
we have not previously emphasized. We have now seen in this integration net-
work compression involving vital relations between inputs in the different inte-
gration networks, blending of separate blends (life as baseball, birth as arrival by 
stork, status as dining) into a megablend, and the use of preexisting overarching 
integrations (the Story of Life) to guide some of these compressions. 
What about generic spaces in multiple integration networks? The many 
spaces involved (baseball, life, birth, air travel, storks, arrival, status, dining) 
seem to share no overall generic structure but only local ones. The generic space 
for life and baseball has an agent trying to succeed in· time over various states; 
the generic space for birth and arrival has an agent who is in one state and then 
another; the generic space for status and dining has a privilege scale and some-
one at a spot on that scale. 
This massive integration network does, however, offer the chance to recast the 
Story of Life itself as progress along a path of locations. Each of the individual 
blends in the network happens to have a structure-sometimes rich, sometimes 
thin--of moving from one location to another. In life-as-baseball, that structure 
is obvious and complex, and getting to home plate is good. In birth as arrival by 
stork, there is the contrast between the arrival location and the locations along 
;: ~ 
, ~. 
,I 
Multiple Blmds 
2B9 
the way, and arriving is good. In the scale of dining pr.ivilege, moving up from 
plastic spoons to silver spoons is social success. 
Arriving at this overall generic structure for the network is an imaginative 
achievement that requires work on various parts of the network. All of the indi-
vidual blended spaces share some structure: In each of them, states are locations, 
and there is a change from one ranked statellocation to another. This structure 
is therefore a generic space, call it G, for all the blended spaces and for the 
megablend; but, interestingly, G does not apply to the generic spaces of each of 
the individual integration networks. For example, this generic space G running 
over the blends and the megablend has actual locations, not JUSt abstract states. 
But the generic spaces for life-as-baseball, birth-as-arrival, and status-as-dining 
do not have locations; they have only abstract states. So G does not apply to 
them. But we can make a more abstract version of G, call it G', that has only 
change of ranked states. Then G' applies effortlessly to the generic for life-as-
baseball and the generic for status-as-dining. Does G', the space with change of 
ranked states, apply to the generic for birth-as-arrival? It can, but only if we de-
velop for the birth-as-arrival generic space an emphasis on change from a worse 
state to a better one. This emphasis, though not part of the original birth-as-
arrival integration network, can easily be fitted in: Th~ ) prior state (not yet born, 
earlier on the path) can be worse than the final state (newborn, at the destina-
tion). By this additional work, G' can apply to all the generic spaces in the indi-
vidual integration networks, and so be an overall generic for the entire multiple 
integration network. It then applies to all the generics, all the inputs, all the 
blends, and the megablend. As a corollary, it provides additional structure to the 
cultural Story of Life that provides vital-relation connections over the input 
spaces of Birth, Status, and Life. 
To recapitulate, in Dracula and His Patients and the Baseball Stork we have 
seen for the first time how an important generic space can be built up that is not 
just a local generic space applying to two inputs. We will return to these generic 
spaces in the Zoom Out section of this chapter. 
AS AN UNWANTED CHILD MYSELF .•. 
A multiple blend like Dracula with His Patients can look like a three-ring cir-
cus, entertaining and impressive, but somehow marginal to real life and reason-
ing. Yet multiple blends are every bit as crucial in the most serious contexts. 
Seana Coulson reports the following excerpt from a letter, written by Lee Ezell 
to the editor of the Los Angeles Times in 1992: 
I say thanks that no Planned Parenthood Clinic was available to me in 1963, 
when, as a virgin teenager, I was raped and became pregnant. The state of Califor-
nia would have been taking advantage of me in my crisis state by offering me this 
J 

290 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
seemingly easy out. As an unwanted child myself. I decided abortion was too per-
manent a solution to my temporary problem. 
A staggering number of spaces. many of them counterfactual blends. must be 
constructed if we are to make sense of this seemingly easy argument: 
o The counterfactual blend in which Lee's mother did not have the child 
Lee (because she didn't get pregnant. or didn't have intercourse. or had an 
abortion ... ). 
o The counterfactual blend in which Lee in 1963 was not raped and there-
fore did not have Julie (the child whom she had as a consequence of being 
raped. named elsewhere in the letter). 
o The space in which it is 1992 and there are Planned Parenthood Clinics 
providing abortions to teenage rape victims. 
o The space in which it is 1963 and Lee is pregnant and there are no 
Planned Parenthood Clinics and Lee considers having an abortion by 
some available means but decides against it. 
o The counterfactual blend in which it is 1963 and there are Planned Par-
enthood Clinics and Lee has an abortion at one of them (the "easy out"). 
o The counterfactual blend in which it is 1963 and no Planned Parenthood 
is available but Lee still has an abortion. 
o The counterfactual blend in which it is 1992 and Lee did have the abor-
11 
tion in 1963 and so Julie does not exist. 
There are many vital relation and frame connections across these spaces that 
will prompt for central blends: Frame-to-Frame. Identity, Counterfactual. 
Change. Time. Role. and Analogy. Lee's situation in 1963 is clearly analogous to 
that of her mother when pregnant and to that of teenage rape victims in 1992. 
Lee identifies deeply with her mother. with teenage rape victims and teenage 
mothers, and with children in all the spaces. real or counterfactual. She takes 
into account the unfolding of events over time: the pre-I963 space with her 
pregnant mother and the 1963 space with the pregnant Lee and the 1992 space 
where she is a mother with Julie. It is by reasoning over these Time connections 
that she is able to say that abortion would have been "too permanent a solution" 
(one whose consequences stretch over many spaces) to "my temporary problem" 
(a problem that exists only in the 1963 space). 
This finely interconnected array of spaces sets the stage for any number of 
blends that could drive decision and judgment. One such blend has as one in-
put Lee's mother giving birth to Lee. and as the other input. Lee's giving birth to 
Julie. In this blend. for Lee. who is also Lee's mother. to spare Julie is to spare 
herself-namely, Lee. The motivations for focusing on that blend. which does 
drive her reasoning, are obvious. 
Multiple Blends 
291 
A maximally contrasting spectacular blend. pointed out by Coulson. has the 
following spaces: (1) The pre-1963 space in which Lee's mother is pregnant 
with Lee and has Lee. (2) The counterfactual pre-I963 space Lee's mother 
would have preferred. in which she is not pregnant with Lee. (3) The counter-
factual blend in which Lee in 1963 has an abortion. 
Like the expressions "absence ... · "gap," "missing," and "no milk" discussed in 
Chapter 11. "unwanted" represents a compression of mutually counterfactual 
inputs (1) and (2). We blend these to create a new space. (4). in which Lee is an 
"unwanted" child. Blending (4) and (3) gives yet another blend. the crucial one, 
in which, as Coulson points out, Lee as mother aborts Lee as unwanted child. 
On the principle that self-elimination is dispreferred, this blend delivers th~ in-
ference that the abortion ofJulie w<?uld have been a bad idea. 
Yet further blends are available. If we blend the 1992 space with Planned Par-
enthood Clinics and the pre-1963 space with Lee's mother and her "unwanted" 
pregnancy, we can create a counterfactual blend in which Lee's mother aborted 
Lee. and we can blend that blend with the counterfactual blend in which Lee 
aborts Julie, to create a final bleak blend in which there is only Lee's mother, a 
missing Lee, and a missing Julie. 
THE GRIM REAPER 
The representation of "death" as "the Grim Reaper," a sinister, skeleton-like 
character holding a scythe and wearing a cowl, is an integration involving com-
plex interactions of metaphor and metonymy. The Grim Reaper arises from 
many spaces: (1) a space with an individual human being dying; (2) a space 
with an abstract pattern of causal tautology in which an event of a certain kind 
is caused by an abstract causal element (e.g., Death causes dying, Sleep causes 
sleeping. Smell causes smell, Sloth causes laziness); (3) a space containing a 
stereotypical human killer; and (4) a space with reapers in the scenario of har-
vest (see Figure 14.4). The Grim Reaper resides conceptually in none of the 
other input spaces. It resides instead in a blend to which we project structure 
from all these spaces. 
At once the least surprising and most surprising space in this array is that of 
Causal Tautology-least surprising because it is entirely conventional to talk 
about "death" or "illness" or "love" as general causes that operate across human 
life. and hardly big news to hear that death causes you to be dead; most surpris-
ing because it is shocking to propose that wildly different ways of being dead 
(through lethal knifing; terminal cancer, extreme old age, automobile accident, 
starvation) all have a single overarching cause, Death, for which there is no ref-
erent in the world and no evidence other than the effects themselves. From the 
Event, we read off a Cause that is tautologically and exclusively defined in terms 
of the event category and is referred to by the very terms for that category. These 

292 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Human Death 
Causal Tautology 
Reaper 
,,+ 
Death the Grim Reaper 
Blend: Death The Grim Reaper 
FIGURE 14. 4 
DEATH , THE GRIM REAPER NETWORK 
causes beg the question: If we ask "What caused this death?" and receive the an-
swer "Death," we do not think our question has been answered. We will call 
such begging-the-question causes "Empty Causes." The constru~tion of empty 
causes is itself a blending process, in which we blend a space with an event with 
a space that has a cause and a caused event; in the blend, the original event now 
has a cause. Interestingly, the features of the cause are projected from the event: 
Dying is caused by Death, just as the "blueness" of the blue cup is supposedly 
caused by the "blue" that we create as a feature of the cup. 
Not surprisingly, Empty Causes are not like other causes in our world. We 
think we can see most causes or hunt them down. We can locate the microbes that 
cause a disease or discover the biological changes that result in old age. But Death, 
the Empty General Cause, is not available to our perception in the usual ways. 
Multiple Blmth . 
293 
Blending the Causal Tautology with the space for an individual dying gives 
us a space in which the individual event of human dying is caused by Death the 
Empty Cause. This is extremely conventional. If we blend again, using this con-
ventional blend as one input and a space with a killer as the other, the result is a 
new blend that contains an element that is simultaneously Death the Empty 
Cause and a killer. This is personification. The actor and nonactor (killer and 
Dtath) are fused in the blend, as are the two events. There is moreover an action 
(killing) projected from the input space with the killer. Additionally, the person 
who dies is fused with the victim of the killing. In the blend, Death is a killer 
who performs an action of killing with the causal result that the victim dies. 
We can' also activate as an input space the scenario in which a reaper har-
vests grain. It is easy to connect this scenario to human life because there is al-
ready a conventional mapping between stages of plant growth and stages ofhu-
man life ("He's a young sprout," "He's withering into old age"). The reaper 
space maps naturally onto the Death-killer blend: The grain maps to the per-
son who dies and the reaper maps to the killer. Now, in the blend, Death-the-
killer-reaper causes the death of the person-victim-plant. We could have ar-
rived at the same blend through a different sequence, blending first the reaper 
scenario with the scene of death to create a blend in whic;:p Death is not a killer 
but instead a good farmer, and then blending that blend with a space that has a 
killer and a victim. 
The Grim Reaper resides in the blend but cannot reside in any of the input 
spaces. Neither the individual event of human dying nor the input space with 
the killer contains any plants or reapers. And he is too specific to reside in the 
Causal Tautology space. But he is not in the input with harvests and reapers, ei-
ther: The stereotype of reapers in that space is incompatible with features of The 
Grim Reaper. 
It is easy to think that the metaphor of death as a reaper is simple and in-
volves little more than a straightforward projection of ~ source-domain frame of 
reaping onto a target domain of dying. To see how inadequate this view would 
be, it is worth going over all the ways in which the emergent structure of reap-
ing in the blend differs from the input of reaping (and a fortiori from all the 
other input spaces). 
Human reapers are subject to persuasion and argument, but Death the Empty 
Cause is beyond persuasion. In the blend, we do not project-from the space of 
reapers--persuasion, argument, or any other component of human negotiation. 
Instead, we project the intransigence of Death. 
The individual authority of any reaper is unknown: Perhaps he takes his or-
ders from others; perhaps he is a slave. But Death the Empty Cause has author-
ity that, when projected to the blend, yields a reaper who is his own authority. 
Mortal authorities can command a reaper to stop, but no mortal authority exists 
who can command The Grim Reaper to stop. 
.. 

294 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Actual reapers are numerous and essentially interchangeable. But Death the 
Empty Cause is conceived of as a single cause, which, when projected to 
the blend, yields a single and definite Death-the-reaper. This explains the defi-
nite article: The Grim Reaper. 
Actual reapers are mortal and are replaced by others. But Death the Empty 
Cause is neither, and projecting this structure to the blend creates a Death-the-
reaper that is eternal: We will be cut down by the same Grim Reaper who cut 
down our ancestors. 
Human reapers are strong, productive, often healthy, and sometimes attrac-
tive. But the killer is destructive and unhealthy, and kills us, so The Grim 
Reaper must be unattractive, or "grim." Human reapers work in daylight, har-
vesting entire fields indiscriminately, indifferent to the identities of individual 
stalks of grain. But The Grim Reaper comes by dark, he comes for a specific per-
son at a specific time, and he kills. He can stalk you like a killer. 
In personification, the appearance and behavior of the person are chosen to 
express our feelings about the event being personified. If death is' grim, 'then the 
personification of Death looks grim and behaves grimly. 
If we look at the linguistic elements of "Death, The Grim Reaper," we see 
that they reflect the conceptual blending. The definite article "The" come~from 
the causal tautology, since it picks out a single general cause. The name "Death" 
comes from the blending of the causal tautology with the individual event of 
dying. The adjective "Grim" comes from both the space with the prototypical 
killer and the spacei '~ith the individual event of human dying. The noun 
"Reaper" comes from the space of harvest. 
We have described multiple blends ranging from jokes to serious argument, in 
such genres as newspaper columns, letters of opinion, and personifications. Some 
are novel, like Dracula and His Patients, while some are entrenched, like the 
Birth Stork. But all of them use the same operations of conceptual integration, 
and, perhaps surprisingly, no matter how elaborate the multiple blend, people 
have no difficulty constructing it. The speed and power of complex conceptual 
integration shown in "As an Unwanted Child Myself" looks mir;J.culous on 
analysis. But this is what cognitively modern human beings do all the time. It 
would be wrong to think that cases of the sort anal~ed in detail in this chapter 
are exotic or arise from exotic mental artifice. One example is the kind of news-
paper editorial that we read effortlessly: It is harder to pour our morning coffee 
than to understand the column. Another is a heartfelt letter to a newspaper that 
anyone would judge to be clear, simple, and to the point. The Baseball Stork is 
the kind of joke that political campaigners and late-night comedians can say to a 
vast audience. And The Grim Reaper is a cultural commonplace for children and 
adults alike. Although it has taken us fourteen chapters to get to this point, the 
reality is that most of everyday communication involves multiple blends. Al-
though some multiple blends draw more attention than others, that is not 
Multiplt Blends 
295 
because they are more complex or use more exotic mental instruments. The 
Baseball Stork is highly noticeable, even ludicrous, but the Unwanted Child, 
whose multiple blending goes completely unnoticed, is arguably more complex, 
involving many hidden counterfactuals, acrobatic hyperblends, and cause-effect 
compression across mutually counterfactual spaces to produce negative elements 
inside blends. The most striking multiple blends of entertainers and advertisers 
arise from basic operations of conceptual integration that we use every day. 
II C HAP T E R 
1 4 
ZOOM OUT 
REPRISE 
This chapter has focused on multiple blends. 
Question: 
• Haven't we seen multiple blends, at least implicitly, earlier in the book? 
Our answer: 
Certainly. The Computer Desktop has multiple inputs: working at a desk, 
choosing from lists, giving alphanumeric computer commands at a prompt, 
looking through windows, changing the size of a window, pointing. The basic 
integrated manipulation of mouse, arrow, and objects on the screen of the com-
puter desktop is itself a spectacular multiple blend. The desktop interface activ-
ity builds on prior successive blends such as that of two very basic inputs-typ-
ing a string of symbols and giving someone a command-to create the blended 
concept of "giving" a computer "commands" by typing. 
In fact, just about every blend we have discussed has multiple inputs. Scien-
tific and cultural concepts are the products of successive blending over genera-
tions: Our complex numbers example has inputs of number and space which 
themselves result from elaborate successive blending. A striking case of multiple 
inputs is the Mythic Race, discussed in Chapter 7, where partial aspects of many 
previous races were all projected and blended into a single event. In simple mir-
ror networks, like Regatta or the Debate with Kant, the recruitment of an exist-
ing frame (racing or debating) to organize and run the blend is tt:chnically a 
projection from a third input space. Blending of multiple identities into one 
metempsychosis-Cleopatra, Saint Barbara, Queen Elizabeth the First, your 
great-great-great grandmother (the diva), and Sarah Bernhardt-is of course 
also multiple blending. The Impotent Smoking Cowboy of Chapter 5 was the 

296 
THE WAY WE THINK 
product of successive blending, and also involved the multiple blending of im-
plicit counterfactual spaces. Other striking multiple blends we have encoun-
tered include Satan Father of Sin (Chapter 8) and the Mindful Pronghorn 
(Chapter 7). 
MOREOVER 
The analyses we have seen in this chapter look complicated. 
Question: 
• But, in fact, aren't these blends even more complicated than the analysis 
suggests? 
Our answer: 
Yes. There is even more going on than we have said. Dracula and His Patients 
has yet another important blend of politicians and gamblers ("What President 
Clinton did, bravely and brilliantly, I think, was to gamble"), and the excerpt we 
cited was taken from a newspaper column titled "Best Performance by a Politi-
cian" in which the entire political situation was blended with the nominations 
for the Academy Awards. The newspaper's artist moreover took advantage of the 
fact that the U.S. Post Office was issuing "celebrity" stamps, each with the face 
of a great entertainer: The illustration shows two such stamps, one for Elvis 
Presley, the other for "Bill," in which President Clinton is depicted as an enter-
tainer singing into a microphone. 
The Birth Stork blend additionally performs compressions on outer-space vi-
tal relations: Features of the later infant are given to the unborn fetus. When the 
Birth Stork is in flight, the baby has not yet been born, but in the blend the not-
yet-born baby looks like an everyday infant. 
In general, blends in real life are extremely rich because they are connected to 
many collective and individual aspects of the situation. Our purpose is not to give 
an exhaustive presentation of any particular integration1network but, rather, to ex-
plain the cognitive operations by which they all work. 
GLOBAL GENERICS 
In this chapter, we have seen for the first time new kinds of generic spaces 
built within multiple integration networks by abstraction; modification, and 
elaboration. 
Questions: 
• Didn't we see megablends in Chapter 8? Why didn't we see this type of 
generic space in that chapter? 
Multiple B/mds 
297 
• Can these kinds of generics arise only for multiple integration networks? 
Can they arise in simplex, mirror, and other kinds of networks? 
Our answer: 
In Chapter 8, where we discussed yn megablends, we skipped these new 
kinds of generic spaces because we did not yet have the theoretical machinery to 
analyze them. In a yn network, there are of course the usual local generic spaces, 
built in the usual way, so that each element or relation in the generic space has a 
counterpart element or relation in each of the two inputs. But the interesting 
new issue for us here is the possibility of a global generic space for the entire 
network. W~ have now seen generic spaces like "The Story of Life" that operate 
over inputs and outer-space vital relations between them and have a new and 
very useful property: The structure of the generic space need not apply fully to 
each individual input. We will call such a space a "Global Generic." Each ele-
ment or relation in a Global Generic will have a counterpart somewhere in the 
inputs or outer-space vital relations over which it operates, but not necessarily 
inside each of the inputs. All of the generic spaces we discussed before this chap-
ter applied fully to each of the two inputs over which they operated. For ex-
ample, the generic space for Regatta had a boat making <i1llocean voyage from 
San Francisco to Boston, and this applied to the space with Great American II as 
well as the space with Northern Light. 
A Global Generic is an abstract integration over the important elements in 
the inputs and the important outer-space vital relations between those inputs. It 
gives an integrated global insight at a schematic level. 
A yn network has n + 1 inputs, n blended spaces. and n local generic spaces 
of the usual sort. But we can now point out that it also has a Global Generic 
that extends over all n + 1 inputs and the outer-space vital relations between 
them. This Global Generic has (at least) n + 1 elements linearly ordered with a 
pairwise relation between any two adjacent elements. The Global Generic for 
"Ann is the boss of the daughter of Max" has a very abstract structure fitting any 
situation in which there are two simple roles, a compression of those two roles 
into a complex role, and three elements related to one another by those three 
roles. That Global Generic fits the situation in which there is the role boss, the 
role daughter. the complex role boss of the daughter of and the three elements 
Ann, Max, and some unnamed but specific daughter/employee. It also fits many 
other situations. 
There is another general method of deriving potentially useful generics from 
integration networks. A blended space is a mental space, and we can always 
make a more abstract version of a mental space. Consider the blend for "This 
surgeon is a butcher." The blend has emergent structure, incompetence. which is 
in neither of the inputs. One very abstract generic space fitting this blend has 
only a person who acts. A less abstract one has an actor and something acted 
J 

298 
l' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
upon. A still less abstract space has an actor and the physical object (living or 
not) acted upon. A generic space derived in this manner might coincide with 
the local generic space over the inputs, or be more abstract, or be more specific. 
Or it might contain abstract structure corresponding to emergent structure in 
the blend, in which case it will not fit the inputs. For example, a generic for the 
surgeon-butcher can have a person who acts on a physical object while using 
methods that are appropriate for a different physical object in a different situa-
tion. That generic space does not fit the surgeon input, the butcher input, or the 
local generic space for the network, but it is highly compatible with the notion 
of an incompetent person, which is the point of the blend, and we might want 
to have that generic available for use in other networks. Some of the generic 
spaces taken from the blend but incompatible with the inputs might be inde-
pendently available or even conventional. The race frame is obviously a generic 
for the blended space in Regatta even though it is incompatible with the 1853 
space, the 1993 space, and their local generic space. The same is true for gener-
ics like debate or dialogue in the Debate with Kant. 
i· 
•• D;I+ 
•• rt.J~een 
MULTIPLE-SCOPE 
CREATIVITY 
We are double-edged blades, and every time we whet 
our virtue the return stroke straps our vice. 
-Henry David Thoreau 
IN SIMPLEX, MIRROR, AND single-scope J1etworks, the organizing frame of the 
blend is borrowed from an input or from a pre-existing pattern. But in double-
scope networks we see the new and faScinating phenomenon of innovation, which 
is unique to cognitively modern human beings. In this chapter, we will investigate 
the development of new frames in double-scope networks. In the next chapter, we 
will describe the principles that guide the development of blends, including the 
development of innovative frames. 
ANGER 
In 1987, George Lakoff and Zolcan K6vecses did an impressive analysis of 
metaphoric understandings of anger, in which they revealed the mapping be-
tween folk models of heat and folk models of anger: In this mapping, a heated 
container maps to an angry individual, heat maps to anger, smoke and steam 
(signs of heat) map to signs of anger, explosion maps to uncontrolled rage. This 
mapping is reflected in conventional expressions: He was steaming. She was 
filled with anger. I had reached the boiling point. I was fuming. He exploded. I 
blew my top. 
Lakoff and K6vecses also note that this metaphor is based in the folk theory 
of physiological effects of anger: increased body heat, blood pressure, agitation, 
redness of face. The Cause-Effect vital relation linking emotions to their physio-
logical effects allows expressions like the following to refer to anger: He gets hot 
under the collar. She was red with anger. I almost burst a blood vessel. 
The metaphoric mapping and the vital relation define the following kinds of 
correspondences: 
299 

300 
THE WAY WE THINK 
THE STORY OF" EMOTION AND BODY 
HEAT INPUT 
"physical events" 
container 
heat 
steam 
boiling point 
explode 
EMOTION INPUT 
"emotions" 
person 
anger 
sign of anger 
highest degree of emotion 
show extreme anger 
BODY INPUT 
"physiology" 
person 
body heat 
perspiration. redness 
acute shaking. loss 
of physiological 
control, violent actions 
Here we have independently manipulable spaces for the emotion of anger and 
bodily states. We also have a conventional cultural notion of their relationship, 
based on correlation: People often do get flushed and shake when they are an-
gry. We will call this notion "The Story of Emotion and Body." 
In addition to the metaphoric mapping between Heat and Emotions and the 
vital-relation connection between Emotions and Body, there is a third partial 
mapping between Heat and Body. In this mapping, steam as vapor that comes 
from a container connects to perspiration as liquid that comes from a container, 
the heat of a physical object connects to body heat, and the shaking of the con-
tainer connects to the body's trembling. 
The three partial mappings set the stage for a conventional multiple blend in 
which the counterparts in the inputs are fused. yielding, for example, a single el-
ement that is heat, anger. and body heat and a different single element that is 
exploding, reaching extreme anger, and beginning to shake. Once we have this 
blend, we can run it to develop further emergent structure, and we can recruit 
other information to the inputs to facilitate its development. 
For example, we might say, 
He was so mad I could see smoke coming out of his ears. 
This scenario derives from recruiting ears to the Body input and an orifice to 
the Heat input, and projecting them to the same element in the blend. We now 
have a new physiological reaction-smoke coming out of the ears-that is in-
conceivable in the original Body input. In the blend, this reaction is fused with 
anger. Conventional expressions like "He exploded" can also prompt for new 
physiological reactions in the blend that are impossible for the Body input itself. 
In these cases, the notion of physiological correlates of emotion is coming from 
"The Story of Emotion and Body" inputs. but the specific content of the physi-
ological reaction (smoke, explosion) is coming frolll the Heat input. This is a 
multiple-sc?pe network, with a. conventional global generic space (The Story of 
.;~ 
Multiple-ScOpt Creativity 
301 
Emotions and Body) over two of the inputs and their vital relations, and with a 
systematic compression of those outer-space vital relations to uniqueness in the 
blend. 
The blend remains linked to the inputs. A sentence like "He was so mad I 
could see smoke coming out of his ears" directly identifies structure in the 
blend, but inferences-smoke is a sign of great anger-are projected back to 
corresponding inferences in the Emotion input and the Body input: He was ex-
tremely angry and was showing physiological signs of it. (What these signs actu-
ally were in the actual human situation is irrelevant.) 
ExpressioJ:ls can refer directly to the blend, as in "He exploded. I could se!! the 
smoke coming out of his ears." This description, which would be inappropriate 
for any of the input spaces by itself, coherently picks out the integrated scene of 
the blend. Additionally, even when the vocabulary is appropriate for one of the 
input spaces, the blend can often use it in ways that would be ungrammatical for 
that input: For example, suppose the chef is angry and acts it out by boiling a 
pressure cooker until it explodes; although "anger" and "explode" apply to this 
scene, and although we could say the cooker "exploded with force," we cannot 
say it "exploded with anger." But in the blend. where the anger is pressure and 
heat and force. we can indeed say "He exploded with anger. il 
Vocabulary from all three inputs can be combined when referring to the 
blend, as in "She became red with anger and finally exploded." Again, however, 
we could not say of a pan heated red by the angry chef that it was "red with 
anger." 
Running the blend can produce elaborate emergent structure, as in "God, 
was he ever mad. I could see the smoke coming out of his ears-I thought his 
hat would catch fire!" 
There are no burning hats in the heat input or in the anger input. Burning 
hats are emergent in the blend, which has the frame of somebody on fire. They 
imply greater heat/anger. greater loss of control, and greater danger. 
In multiple-scope networks, we can often pick out patterns beyond the main 
types. The Anger network has the same pattern as Dracula and His Patients. 
This might seem surprising, since they treat entirely different conceptual do-
mains, and one is an entrenched cultural model while the other is a novel and 
highly noticeable blend. But both have three input spaces and a set of vital rela-
tions between two of those input spaces. Those vital relations and the two 
spaces they connect are instances of a Global Generic ("Horror Movie" for 
Dracula, "The Story of Emotion and Body" for Anger). The vital relations in 
both cases include Identity connectors. In addition, Dracula has Drama con-
nectors and Anger has Cause-Effect connectors. A superficial difference between 
the two networks, however, is that in Dracula the topic of the network is the 
space that is not under the Global Generic ("Health Care" is not under "Horror 
Movie"), while in Anger the topic of the network is one of the spaces under the 

/ 
302 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Global Generic ("Emotion" is under "The Story of Emotion and Body"). These 
parallel networks are illustrated in Figure 15.1. 
In some cases-such as a canoon in which Elmer Fudd turns red, beginning 
at his feet and climbing thermometer-like to his head, at which point smoke 
blows out his ears-we consciously set up a world to instantiate the blend, a 
world in which angry people really do have smoke coming out of their ears. . 
This is like the Regatta network in which a "ghost ship" could (but did not have 
to) be explicitly brought in. In most cases, however, no such world is set up. The 
Anger multiple blend is used routinely without any construction of a fantastic 
world. The cartoons that set up such worlds are merely exploiting the already 
existing blend. In the same way for the Regatta example, we can say" Great-
American II is now 4.5 days ahead of Northern Light," which prompts for con-
struction of the blend but does not set up a world with ghost ships. The opera-
tion of the mappings is the same, but creating a world to go with it makes the 
blend much more salient to us. 
Building a world forces us to make distinctions between structure in the blend 
that is inferential for the inputs and structure that is not. If Bugs Bunny blows 
away the smoke in the Elmer Fudd cartoon because he does not like smoke, there 
may be no inference for the anger input. But one might perhaps say: "I was able to 
blow the smoke away," with the implication that "I" was able to calm down the 
angry person. Under that interpretation, if there is no longer any smoke. then 
there is no fire either, hence no anger. But this is wrong in the heat input and in 
the everyday world: Siowing away smoke coming out of the heated pot does 
nothing to the level of heat. In the emotion input, on the contrary, it is assumed 
that if the signs of anger have disappeared, then the anger has too. and this is the 
rule that is projected to the blend. The blend violates laws of physics valid in 
the heat input by taking some of its structure from inputs of emotion and body. 
This inversion of causal structure is like the one observed in the grave-digging ex-
ample in Chapter 7, where, in the blend, digging the grave causes death. 
THE RETURN OF" THE GRIM REAPER 
As in the Anger blend, there are compressions in The Grim Reaper network of 
Cause-Effect vital relations: Death the Empty Cause has many effects far down-
stream, such as existence of the skeleton and the ~eremonies surrounding burial. 
In the blend. some of these Cause-Effect relations?ue compressed, but not all the 
way to uniqueness. For example. the many-step Cause-Effect chain from Death 
the Empty Cause to the specific death of the specific human being to the corpse 
to the burial to the decay of the flesh underground to the exhumation to the vis-
ible skeleton is compressed to the tightest of vital relations next to Uniqueness-
namely. Part-Whole: In the blend. the skeleton is the body of the Grim Reaper. 
Multiple-Scope Creativity 
303 
8
ealth ...... 80'~8r 
Movies 8
H'U ... :.~E:O~ 
\.7/-;= \····yV 
8 
8 
FIGURE 15.1 
DRACULA NETWORK VERSUS ANGER NETWORK 
Similarly, the many-step chain from Death the Empty Cause to the cowls and 
robes worn by spiritual attendants at the moment of dying or burial is· com-
pressed into another tight vital relation: The cowl and robe are now also an in-
separable part of the Grim Reaper. 
Vital-relation compression is one of the most powerful governing principles 
of conceptual integration. The multiple-scope blends of Anger and The Grim 
Reaper confirm the centrality of vital-relation compression, which we will ex-
amine from a general theoretical perspective in the next chapter. 
THE GRIM PRINTING PRESS 
Elements in inputs are related to each other and, of course. have relations to 
other knowledge in long-term memory. For example, a newspaper company is 
related to the published newspaper (its product), the building (its location), and 
its publicly traded shares. These connections motivate expressions like "The 
newspaper is on Main Street," "The newspaper was sold for fifry million dol-
lars," and "The newspaper decided to hound the mayor." where the same word, 
"newspaper.". can be used for buildings. companies, and people. 
Blends use these connections in creative ways. Consider a cartoon representing 
a powerful newspaper company about to complete a hostile takeover of a weaker 
automobile company that it will then eliminate by selling off its assets. The car-
toon shows a giant printing press smashing a car. This blend involves metaphor: 
Input 1 has the stronger and weaker objects. input 2 has the contest between com-
panies, and the cross-space mapping is the basic metaphor that connects stronger 

304 
THE WAY WE THINK 
objects destroying weaker objects to winning and losing. The strong heavy object 
is mapped onto the powerful newspaper company; the weaker object is mapped 
onto the weaker automobile company. In the blend, we find the printing press as 
the strong heavy object and the car as the weak object. 
This is an efficient exploitation of relations: The printing press is a salient in-
strument of producing newspapers, and cars are the salient products of automo-
bile companies. In the input, the printing press is not an instrument of destruc-
tion, but its force dynamics can be associated with a car-smashing machine of 
the sort used in recycling automobiles. In the blend, the printing press is fused 
with both the company and the car-smashing machine. The result is a new 
frame for the blend, in which the stronger object intentionally defeats the 
weaker object. This frame does not fit the input with stronger and weaker ob-
ject, where there is no intentionality; nor does it fit the input with the busi-
nesses, where the competition is not between objects. 
What is going on here? The blend must achieve three goals. First, given that 
the cartoon is a visual medium, the blend must contain some concrete elements 
that can be represented visually. Second, it must fit the frame of stronger and 
weaker object. Third, these stronger and weaker objects in the blend must be 
properly connected to the companies in input 2. These companies, being ab-
stract, cannot in themselves provide the concrete elements needed for the blend. 
The weaker and stronger objects in input 1 are concrete but not specific and vi-
sually representable. But we can exploit relations in the inputs to make the ele-
ments in the blend adequate. The printing press and the car are concrete, spe-
cific things, associated with the companies, that can be fit into the frame of the 
stronger object destroying the weaker one. They fit this frame in part because 
the printing press intrinsically has force-dynamic structure capable of destruc-
tion and in part because we are familiar with car-smashing machines. In the 
blend, two elements are simultaneously (a) two concrete, specific objects; (b) a 
stronger object destroying a weaker object; and (c) two companies. 
Such a blend is clearly creative. The printing press and car have relations in 
the blend (the press crushes and the car is crushed) that their counterparts in the 
business input do not have (the press is an instrument of making newspapers 
and the car is a salient product of the automobile company). The printing press 
and car in the business input have no counterparts in the input with the 
stronger and weaker object. Interestingly, the elements that did not project their 
input-relations (printing press and newspaper) end up being the only objects in 
the blend. 
In the cartoon, the integration of the blend and the match between the rela-
tions in the blend and the relations in the inputs are maximized by recruiting spe-
cial internal connections from the business input. Because the topologies of strong 
and weak object on the one hand and competing companies on the other will 
match only at a very abstract level, we find that in addition to the companies, 
Multipk-Scope Crtativity . 
305 
objects closely connected to them are projected to the blend in a way that elabo-
rates the relations in the input with the stronger and weaker objects. 
This blend structure is double-scope. The relation of stronger and weaker ob-
ject comes from the first input, but the intentionality (the printing press intends 
to crush the car and the car hates it) comes from the business input, where it is 
attached not to the printing press and the automobile but rather to the respec-
tive companies. 
What we see in the blend is a tight compression of the inner-space vital rela-
tions in the business input. In the business input, the printing press is con-
nected to the newspaper company by part-whole and means and intentionality, 
and the car is similarly connected to the automobile company by cause-effect 
(producer-product) and intentionality. In the blend, these inner-space vital rela-
tions are compressed all the way into uniqueness: The printing press is the 
newspaper company and it intends to smash the car, which is the automobile 
company and which does not want to be smashed. 
This analysis shows that conceptual projection is a dynamic process that can-
not be adequately represented by a static drawing. Once the conceptual projec-
tion is achieved, it may look as if the printing press has always corresponded to 
the stronger object and the car to the weaker. But,in the cross-space mapping, 
the printing press and the car play no role; they have no counterparts in the in-
put with stronger and weaker object. Rather, the cross-space counterparts are 
stronger object and newspaper company, weaker object and automobile com-
pany. Vital relations in the business input are compressed into uniqueness in the 
blend: The newspaper company as agent and the printing press as the causal in-
strument used by the company to create the salient effect are compressed into 
one element, and the automobile company as agent and the automobile as the 
salient effect it produces are compressed into one element. The first is also the 
stronger object and the second the weaker object. 
Suppose the cartoon is more elaborate and shows the newspaper magnate op-
erating the printing press to smash the car, which is being driven by the car 
magnate. The blend structure now .contains an adversaries-with-instruments 
frame in which adversaries fight with opposing instruments, and in which the 
winner has the superior instrument. Now the printing press and car in the busi-
ness input have counterparts in the adversaries-with-instrumenrs frame: In the 
business input, the printing press is a symbol of a capacity for productivity that 
is an instrument of corporate competition, and the car is a product that is an in-
strument of corporate competition. The relation between the opposing instru-
ments in the blend now matches the relation between the opposing instruments 
in the adversaries-with-instruments frame. This frame has the useful property of 
aligning superiority of instrument with superiority of adversary. Exploiting rela-
tions in the business input makes it possible to recruit a frame that increases 
matches between the relations in the inputs and relations in the blend. 
~ 

306 
t' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
TWO-EDG ED SWORD 
The phrase "two-edged sword" denotes an argument or strategy that is risky be-
cause it may simultaneously help and hurt the user. In the domain of literal 
swords, two-edged swords are superb weapons, better for stabbing since both 
edges cut and better for slashing since both edges slash. Their superior perform-
ance explains their development and deployment despite the relative difficulty 
of manufacturing and maintaining them. But a two-edged sword in the blend is 
quite different: One edge of the sword/argument exclusively helps the user and 
the other edge exclusively hurts the user. It is not impossible for a literal warrior 
to be hurt by his own blade, but it is rare, and even then, it doesn't happen that 
one of the edges always hurts the user while the other always helps. If it did, the 
two-edged sword would be discarded for the one-edged model. 
In this blend, the sword input has two elements that are distinguishable and 
spatially symmetric, the argument input has two elements that are distinguish-
able and opposed on intentionality, the generic has two distinguishable sym-
metric elements, and the blend has two symmetric elements opposed on inten-
tionality. This pattern runs across several similar examples: "The other side of 
the coin is . . . ," "The flip side is ... ," "This is a two-way street .. . . "This pat-
tern is so common we hardly notice it. We use it to call opposed political parties 
"right" and "left." The blends in all these cases have a useful generic space that is 
incompatible with the local generic space connecting the two inputs,. That use-
ful generic space has bilaterally symmetric elements, completely matched spa-
tially but bearing a relationship of intentional opposition. 
TRASHCAN BASKETBALL 
Seana Coulson asks us to imagine a college dormitory with a wastebasket into 
which students place or throw their failed efforts-an activity that could easily 
develop into a game of trashcan basketball, in which the player gets points for 
throwing the "ball" to land in the "basket." This invention is a conceptual blend 
that projects selectively from basketball on the one hand and disposing of paper 
into a wastebasket on the other. Figure 15.2 presents the conceptual integration 
network for trashcan basketball. The generic space has only agents who throw 
vaguely spherical objects into a receptacle. 
Trashcan basketball does not result from an isolated mapping between a wad 
of paper and a basketball. Rather, it arises from a whole system of correspon-
dences that speakers can establish between the various domains. Once initial 
mappings are set up between the basketball and the trash domains, any number 
of frames from the basketball input (such as dunks, lay-ups, hook shots, one-
on-one, and team play) become available for projection into the blend. More-
over, because the physics of interacting with a piece of paper is different from 
Mu/tip/~-Scop~ Cr~ativity 
Generic 
Leather-
'0. 
Sphere(b) 
Bball(b) 
Elements 
Person 
Bball 
Basket 
Relations 
Shoot 
(Person, 
Bball, 
Basket) 
Blend 
Trashcan-
Bball(b') 
Crumpled-
Paper(b") 
Trash(b") 
Elements 
Person 
Paper 
Basket 
Relations 
Throw-out 
(person, 
Paper, 
Trashcan) 
FIGURE 15.2 
CONCEPTUAL INTEGRATION NETWORK F'OR TRASHCAN 
BASKETBALL 
307 
the physics of interacting with a leather ball, participants in the game will natu-
rally discover differences in shooting or dribbling. These differences lead to 
emergent structure in the blend under pressure from physical affordances-the 
walls, the placement of the furniture, the weight of the paper-and social forces 
of interaction. As the game develops, the players discover this emergent struc-
ture. They could not have predicted it in advance, much less have stipulated it 
in the "rules." The development of the trashcan basketball blend is like the de-
velopment by mathematicians of the blend for complex numbers. Structures 
emergent in the blend, such as "multiplication involves addition of angles," for 
example, are not predictable from the inputs. More generally, crucial scientific 
leaps involve the discovery of powerful blends that can be run ever more to de-
velop ever more useful emergent structures. 
Trashcan basketball does not derive from finding possible local counterpart 
alignments in the two inputs and then selecting the strongest "match." For ex-
ample, placing a piece of paper manually in the wastebasket is fine in the input 
with the wastebasket, and placing a basketball manually in the basketball hoop is 
a good action in basketball, but placing the wad of paper manually in the waste-
basket is too easy to be worth much in trashcan basketball. Despite the extremely 
strong match between the inputs, that match is not projected to the blend. 

308 
THE WAY WE THINK 
DEATH THE MAGICIAN 
George Lakoff and Mark Turner originally considered two contrasting personifi-
cations of Death, as an evil magician and as a benevolent one. The evil magician 
makes things disappear forever; in the blend, he is Death the evil magician, who 
causes people to go out of existence forever. The benevolent magician makes ob-
jects disappear and reappear as something else; in the blend, he is Death the 
benevolent magician, who reincarnates people. 
These blends are double-scope, with structure not provided by the inputs. 
This is obviously so for some elements: In neither input is there a magician who 
is Death. But there is a subtler point: Evil and benevolent are themselves emer-
gent structure! Death the Empty Cause is not intentional, and so not evil or 
benevolent. In the domain of magicians, magicians of any character can per-
form both kinds of magic tricks, and it might be desirable for some things, such 
as warts and stains, to disappear. But in the blend, the object that the magician 
works on is "us." Our permanent disappearance is undesirable, and the return of 
a person who disappears or dies is desirable. Consequently, the magician who 
performs the undesirable act counts as evil, and the magician in the other blend, 
who performs the desirable act, counts as benevolent. In the case of death as 
eternal, we are left ultimately with an input space that has an evil magician who 
specializes in one kind of trick; in the case of death as reincarnation, we are left 
ultimately with a different input space that has a benevolent magician who spe-
cializes in a different kind of trick. The construal of the magician in these inputs 
as evil or benevolent is a backward projection of inferences developed in the 
blend. In the blend, we compress the desirability or undesirability of the Effect 
with the character of the Cause. 
'~~~I1 .. ., 
·1 
II Sixteen 
CON STITUTIVE AN 0 
GOVERNING PRINCIPLES 
THROUGHOUT THIS BOOK, WE have explored the ways in which human be-
ings use conceptual integration to create rich and diverse conceptual worlds 
with such features as sexual fantasies, grammar, complex numbers, personal 
identity, redemption, and lottery depression. Such a panorama of wildly differ-
ent human ideas and behaviors raises a question: Does anything go? And if any-
thing goes, is a theory of conceptual integration anything more than a theoreti-
cal statement that anything goes? 
We point again to the analogy with evolutionary biQlogy. The world of or-
ganisms is so rich and diverse that it repeatedly surprises the most sophisticated 
scientists. Every year, evolutionary phenomena are discovered that escaped even 
advanced prediction. Now, with genetic engineering, we have, in full conform-
ity with the laws of evolutionary biology, human ears growing from the back of 
mice, eyes on the legs of grasshoppers . . . . Does anything go? 
You might think so. A few decades ago, if we had speculated about funda-
mental constraints on phenotypes, we might have come up with hypotheses 
based on overwhelming statistical evidence that, for example, eyes must go on 
the head. But now we see that eyes can go on legs quite easily. Does this mean 
that evolutionary biologists have thrown out the constraints of natural and sex-
ual selection? 
On the contrary, these monstrous or spectacular deviations show the great 
power of the theory, and were in fact manufactured by following its guidance. 
Evolutionary biologists still know that for advanced organisms almost every 
mutation is lethal. Nonetheless, out of many, many, many new combinations, 
almost all failures, come enough successes to give us a world of beetles and roses, 
glowworms and titmice, viruses and naked mole rats. 
In crucial respects, the construction of meaning is like the evolution of 
species. It has coherent principles that operate all the time in an extremely rich 
mental and cultural world. Many, many, many new integrations are attempted 
and explored in an individual's backstage cognition, and in interchange by 
members of a culture, and most of them never go anywhere. But enough survive 
,t 
309 
I
, 

" 
310 
THE WAY WE THINK 
t' 
to provide all the languages, rituals, and innovations we see around us. We need 
to explore what makes for success versus failure in conceptual integration. 
A theory of human cognitive powers must not only account for the richness 
and variety of human innovation but also show how that innovation is guided. 
We now turn to these guiding constraints, the constitutive and governing prin-
ciples of conceptual integration. 
In this book we have repeatedly come across the structural and dynamic prin-
ciples of conceptual integration-partial cross-space mappings, selective projec-
tion to the blend, development of emergent structure in the blend. These prin-
ciples already give a rich and intricate order to the operation. We will call these 
the constitutive principles of.conceptual integration. Constitutive principles, in 
themselves, place extremely strong constraints on any social, cognitive, or phys-
ical activity. 
. 
For example, in the spirit ofJohn Searle in Speech Acts, consider football and 
language. What counts as football, as opposed to shopping or driving a car, is 
what conforms to its constitutive rules. In order to be playing football, one 
must be on the right kind of field, with the right number of players on each 
side, none of them in forbidden positions, using a certain kind of ball and not 
using it in any number of ways (such as putting it up your shirt). You must go 
through a sequence of downs, each with stipulated beginnings and endings. You 
must turn over the ball in one of the stipulated ways at the end of your four 
downs, but of course your opponents have a very limited number of ways in 
which they caq take the ball from you before that. You cannot remove your op-
ponent with ~ spin-kick, as you could in karate. These are extremely forceful 
guiding constraints. Compared to all the things a human being might be doing 
at a given moment, the set of things that count as part of playing football is very 
small. Martian anthropologists trying to investigate the mysterious human ac-
tiviry of football would count it as astounding progress to have discovered the 
rules of the game. 
But knowing the constitutive rules of football will not tell you what you will 
see when you go to look at any football game, and indeed the~~ are countless 
events that conform to the rules of football that you will never see in any foot-
ball game. The cultural development of the game concerns finding the best ways 
to achieve certain goals within the rules. Falling on the ball every time it is 
handed to you is perfectly legal, but doing so will not win football games. Sit-
ting down to admire the performances of your opponents is legal, but in general 
it is a bad strategy. The emergent structure that actually develops for the game 
of football is far richer than the rules, and further constrains the game. The 
Martian anthropologist must also try to discover these structures, but unless he 
has found the constitutive rules and the goals that they define, his hopes are 
slim indeed. Nonetheless, these two levels of constraint-the constitutive princi-
ples and the emergent governing principles-still do not determine the product. 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
311 
When we go to see two football teams play, we do not know what will happen, 
but we know a lot that won't happen and we would be horrified to find that the 
game was an exact replica of their previous encounter. 
Such a twofold pattern of constraint is common in human behavior. Tonal 
. music is no different from football in this respect. The jazz improvisationist, 
working with several other musicians, is engaged in a behavior that conforms to 
both principles of tonal harmony and emergent principles that govern the im-
provisation·. Someone who can playa tune may know the principles of tonal 
harmony but be completely inept at improvisation, because she has not ac-
quired the additional principles that govern that performance. 
The same is true oflanguage. The grammatical patterns and vocabulary of a lan-
guage are constitutive, and those principles limit quite powerfully what can happen 
in the language, but speakers of the language have also developed a vast additional 
set of principles governing what to say when and to whom and under what circum-
stances. Moreover, even a complete knowledge of constitutive and governing prin-
ciples does not predict what you will hear at your next lunch conversation. 
In short, constitutive principles-in the case of conceptual integration, those 
underlying the network model-already place strong constraints on the relevant 
processes, but additional governing principles limit their scope much further. 
We now turn to a closer examination of these governing principles. They are 
not all-or-nothing constraints on networks. Rather, they characterize strategies 
for optimizing emergent structure. Such "other things being equal" principles 
are called "optimality" principles. Often, satisfYing one goes part way toward 
satisfYing another, but governing principles also frequently compete with each 
other. This relationship is very familiar: In tennis, other things being equal, it is 
good to hit the ball hard, into the corners, away from the opponent, near the 
net, and with maximum chance of its landing in the court. Often, a very suc-
cessful strategy is to follow two principles and hit the ball both into the corner 
and hard. But hitting the ball hard toward the corner reduces the chance that 
the ball will land in the court. And if the opponent is in the corner, then follow-
ing the strategy of hitting the ball into the corner runs afoul of the strategy of 
hitting it away from the opponent. None of these strategies is constitutive for 
tennis: You are still playing tennis if you hit the ball softly right to your oppo-
nent. In the same way, the governing principles for conceptual integration may 
lead in different directions and may have lesser or greater force depending on 
the specific network and the overall goals. 
First, we will take up the governing principles for compressing relations. One 
relation may be compressed into a tighter version of itself One or more rela-
tions may be compressed into another relation. And new compressed relations 
may be created from scratch in the blend. We will also discuss highlights com-
pressions and provide some overall comments on the governing principles for 
compression. 

312 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Second, we will turn to other governing principles, having to do with topol-
ogy, pattern completion, integration, heightening of relations, maintenance of 
connections in networks, perspicuity of the blend, and relevance of structure in 
the blend for the entire network. 
There is one overarching goal driving all of the principles: 
• Achieve Human Scale. 
The constitutive and governing principles have the effect of creating blended 
spaces at human scale. The most obvious human-scale situations have direct 
perception and action in familiar frames that are easily apprehended by human 
beings: An object falls, someone lifts an object, two people converse, one person 
goes somewhere. They typically have very few participants, direct intentionality, 
and immediate bodily effect and are immediately apprehended as coherent. 
Once blending achieves a human-scale blend, the blend also counts as hu-
man scale, and so can participate in producing other human-scale blends, in a 
bootstrapping pattern that characterizes much of cultural evolution. 
Achievement of a human-scale blend often requires imaginative transforma-
tions of elements and structure in an integration network as they are projected 
to the blend. There are several subgoals worth noting, as follows: 
• Compress what is diffuse. 
• Obtain global insight. 
• Strengthen vital relations. 
• Come up with a story. 
• Go from Many to One. 
COMPRESSION 
We have seen time and time again that conceptual integration is a compression 
tool par excellence. It operates on networks of all types to create compressed 
blends. These blends have compressed versions of both outer-space relations 
that connect spaces in the network and inner-space relations that lie within the 
inputs. Below we review the main kinds of compression. We will look first at 
compressing a single vital relation. 
: 
Compression of a Single Relation 
Scaling of a Single Vital Relation. 
Many vital relations come with a scale. An 
interval of time, for example, can be long or short. One of the most obvious 
kinds of compression is simply scaling down. In the ritual of the Baby's Ascent, 
one input encompasses an entire human life. That temporal interval is shortened, 
'. ~., 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
313 
as it is projected to the blend, to equal the amount of time it takes to carry a baby 
up the stairs. An inner-space vital relation within one of the inputs is thus com-
pressed to a tighter inner-space vital relation in the blend by using the temporal 
compression already provided by the other input. We see a compression of outer-
space vital relations between inputs into tighter inner-space vital relations in the 
blend in the case of the Bypass, where an interval of decades between the inputs 
becomes, in the blend, the few minutes before surgery. 
In the case of cause and effect, scaling can consist in shortening the causal 
chain from many steps to few or only one (or in the case of perception, zero, 
since in the blend the effect is the cause). Scaling of cause and effect can also 
consist in reducing the number of different types of causal event, as in "digging 
your own financial grave," where many different financial and social causal ac-
tions are compressed in the blend into a single repeated action. The range of ef-
fects, of kinds of effects, of causal agents, and of kinds of causal agents may be 
similarly compressed. Another scaling of cause and effect is to compress a dif-
fuse or fuzzy causation into a sharp one. For Role vital relations, we saw in 
Chapter 8 how multiple roles (boss and daughter, or secretary and valet) get 
compressed in the blend into a single composite role. 
For Intentionality, complex patterns with either no !ptentionality, little or dif-
fuse intentionality, or many different intention ali ties can be scaled along many 
scales to give a single, sharp, recognized intentionality (e.g., deceive, attack, ques-
tion, doubt, believe). Intentionality has a scale. In the Debate with Kant, Re-
gatta, and the Mythic Race, someone (the modern philosopher, the skipper of 
Great American II, e1-Guerrouj) is aware in one input space of the participants in 
the other and has an intentional seance toward them. In the blended space', this 
intentional stance is tightened into a mutually conscious intentional interaction. 
El-Guerrouj in the input is merely aware of Roger Bannister in another input. 
But within the blended space, e1-Guerrouj knows he is competing directly with 
Bannister and intends to make him lose. Consider a politician who blocks a for-
eign aid bill that would have authorized the expenditure of funds for famine re-
lie£ His detractors can say that he is "taking the food out of the mouths of starv-
ing children," or just "starving the children," or "depriving the children offood." 
In the input with the long political process, there is intentionality, but of a dif-
fuse sort. The strength of the intentionality is sharply increased in the blend: The 
politician is now seen to be directing his action exclusively at the children with 
the specific purpose in mind of starving them. This is also an example of scaling 
causality. In the input with the politician, signing the bill is only one of many 
causes required for feeding the children-the food must also be bought, pack-
aged, shipped successfully, distributed to the right people, and so on. But in the 
blend, there is only one cause-passing or blocking the bill-for feeding or 
starving the children. That cause also operates directly, in an immediate human 
scene with time and space intervals that are at human scale. 
.. 

314 
THE WAY WE THINK 
t' 
The vital relation of change scales very easily, permitting long, complex 
changes to become quick visible changes of a single object. In the Bypass, the 
long and complicated process of change through education is compressed into 
one act of instruction. In the example of the politician blocking the foreign aid 
bill, the long processes of political change and change in the foreign country be-
come a single act of direct change in taking the food from the child. 
Syncopation of a Single Vital Relation. 
As we noted in Chapter 7, another 
w~y to compress a relation into a tighter version of the same relation is through 
syncopation. We can compress a lifetime not only by scaling it to run very fast 
but also by dropping out all but a few key moments (being born, meeting 
Christ, being shot through with arrows, going to heaven). Scaling and syncopa-
tion often work together. In the case of the dinosaur evolving into the bird, we 
have scaling of change and time and number of agents and number oflocations, 
but we also have syncopation: Only a few key moments in that continuous evo-
lution are picked out and conjoined in the blend. 
Compression of One or More 
Vital Relations into Another 
A striking general property of blending is that it can compress one vital relation 
into another. Indeed" there are canonical compressions relating different vital re-
lations. Consider the vital relations Analogy, Oisanalogy, Uniqueness, and 
Change. AnalQgy is commonly compressed into Uniqueness without Change. 
and Oisanalogy into Uniqueness with Change. We will now explore such hier-
archies of compression and the work of blending to replace a vital relation with 
another, more compressed one. 
Analogy. Disanalogy. Change, Identity, Uniqueness. 
The Pronghorn, for ex-
ample, compresses analogical relations at various levels into Uniqueness in the 
blend. The various individual pronghorns over evolutionary time are analogues. 
The pronghorns of two supposedly distinct periods (ancient and modern) are 
compressed into a unique ancient pronghorn and a unique modern pronghorn. 
The two are analogous in many respects and disanalogous in 'others. The Ois-
analogy is compressed into a relationship of Identity + Change: We say that the 
ancient pronghorn "changed" into the modern pronghorn. Finally, the vital rela-
tion ofIdentity is compressed into Uniqueness: In the final blended space, there 
is only a single pronghorn. We can view Analogy, Oisanalogy, Change. Identity, 
and Uniqueness as relations organized into a hierarchy. Identity and Change are 
more compressed than Analogy and Oisanalogy, and Uniqueness is more com-
pressed than Identity. Quite usefully, when conceptual blending produces a 
compression of a vital relation, it does not discard the uncompressed vital rela-
tion. In the complex network for the Pronghorn, the vital relations of Analogy 
and Oisanalogy still do useful conceptual work, but the blended space gives us a 
C(lnstitutiV( and G(lverning Principles 
315 
very tight global insight, a platform from which to understand and manipulate 
the entire complex integration network. All of these vital relations are complex in 
themselves: The one unique pronghorn in the blend has a complex life, involving 
change, learning, memory, and experience, with analogies between different mo-
ments in that life. The compression yields a conception at human scale: a single 
animal, changing (or not changing) over the course of a single lifetime. Paradox-
ically, although this vignette is far more schematic than the complex story of the 
evolution of pronghorns over millions of years, it is also far richer in humanly 
meaningful vital relations: Uniqueness. Change of an individual, and Intention-
ality (learning, memory, intentional action). 
Cause-Effict and Uniqueness. 
We have seen many examples where Cause-
Effect is compressed into Uniqueness. The automobile company produces the 
automobile. but in the blend the company and the automobile are the same 
thing. In the Impotent Smoking Cowboy network, the cigarette is in the causal 
chain that leads to the shape of the organ, and in the blend there is a unique 
shape for the cigarette and the organ. The fundamental Cause-Effect compres-
sion in daily life is the compression of the p~rception and the cause of the per-
ception. We can think about distinguishing the perception and what causes it, 
but in action, we fuse them in the blend. 
Representation, Part-Whole, Uniqueness. 
The outer-space relation of Repre-
sentation, connecting a representation to what it represents, can be compressed 
into Uniqueness in the blend. In a painting of the crucifix, Spots of red paint 
, represent the stigmata of Christ, but in the blend, the paint is the blood. A more 
quotidian example is the use of a photograph of a face to represent a person. Be-
tween the photo and the person there are relations of both Representation and 
Part-Whole. but these are compressed in the blend into Uniqueness. The police 
officer points at an 1.0. photo and says, "00 you know this man?" 
Time. Space, Identity, Memory. 
Our most basic understanding of time is 
achieved through cultural blends like the sundial, the watch, the calendar. It 
is customary now to represent time and notions of time by means of static dia-
grams in space. The Oow Jones Industrial Average, for example, is commonly 
presented as a graph with value as one axis and time as the other. In general, 
change over time-reading level achieved, amount of oil spilled from a founder-
ing oil tanker, national debt, popularity in polls-is given graphically. Watches, 
sundials, and graphs are all material anchors for blends in which Time is com-
pressed into Space. 
Another way of using Space to compress Time is to exploit the fact that some 
locations-the Bastille, Valley Forge, Troy, Bethlehem-are associated with his-
torical events and therefore with times or eras-1789, the American Revolu-
tionary War, the Fall of Hector, the Birth of Christ. Consider the following pas-
sage from Norman Mailer's Armies of the Night, in which the author is crossing 
Memorial Bridge to march on the Pentagon: 

316 
THE WAY WE THINK ' 
He [Mailer] was not used much more than any other American politician. littera-
teur. or racketeer to the sentiment that his soul was not unclean, but here, walk-
ing with Lowell and MacDonald, he felt as if he stepped through some crossing in 
the reaches of space between this moment, the French Revolution, and the Civil 
War, as if the ghosts of the Union Dead accompanied them now to the BastiIIe. 
In this passage, Mailer constructs an elaborate blend of "revolutionary" events. 
The physical place he inhabits, the Memorial Bridge, which connects the Lin-
coln Memorial to the east with Arlington National Cemetery, once the home of 
Robert E. Lee, the leader of the Confederate Army, to the west, is an anchor for 
both his present activities and those of the Union soldiers. The fact that he is 
part of a mob crossing a bridge in the service of a "great cause" is an analogical 
anchor to the storming of the Bastille and the crossing of its drawbridge. Com-
pressing these spaces and events entails compressing the times into one mo-
ment. In one input, the bridge, the cemetery, and Lee's' home are already spa. 
tially very close to each other and close to the speaker; this makes it easier to 
bring the relevant times t~gether as well. That Mailer is walking with Robert 
Lowell, author of "For the Union Dead," makes it easier to bring the relevant 
events and times together. 
. 
. 
This use of space as a prompt to blend events, intentionality, and times is a 
basic cultural instrument: We visit the graves of dead relatives, heroes, and mar-
tyrs; we visit the towns where Vermeer and Shakespeare were born; we return to 
our alma mater; we go to chapels or churches to pray even when there is no 
service, and of course the graves are either in the floor of the church or in the 
graveyard next to the church. Part of the motivation for these visits is the sense 
that, if we actually inhabit them, we can more easily integrate our thinking and 
emotions with the people, cultures, and events associated with them, no matter 
how ancient. Cultures organize these compressions by designating certain places 
(the cemetery, the churchyard, the Vietnam Memorial) and certain dates 
(Memorial Day, All Saints' Day, Easter) as calling for special attention to associ-
ated compressions across times and events for the purposes of remembrance. 
Physical spaces are already attached by memory to sensations and events in our 
past. A culture does enormous additional work to load these physical spaces 
with material anchors for memorial purposes (gravestones, relics, plaques). 
Many other material anchors incidentally become prompts for memory and 
time compression (such as our personal effects, rooms in a house we once in-
habited or inhabit now, cars we have owned). 
We have a conception of time as simply a long ordered succession of events 
separated by "time distances," such that what happened long ago is less and less 
accessible. That conception of time, which is not unlike the scientific concep-
tion of time, has no obvious place for compressions. Yet we have seen again and 
I 
.
~~ 
:~- . 
COnStitutjv~ and Governing Principl~s 
317 
again that compression of time is conceptually valuable and one of the human 
imagination's favorite tools. We suggest that there is a fundamental neural basis 
for these time compressions: The human brain does not for the most part or-
ganize events according to the sequence in which they happened or were 
recorded. Human memory is nor a tape that we must rewind to get back to the 
desired spot. When we go to a place and remember the last time we were in that 
place, we do not do so by rewinding our memory through the sequence of 
events between now and then. Simple introspection shows that people cannot 
predict what thought will come to them a minute from now: Pick up a pen, 
stub your toe, have a drink. eat a cookie, and "out of the blue" may come a 
memory from any time in your past, even early childhood. Just as physical space 
is suffused by culture and memory with blend-prompting powers, our brains, in 
a very different sense but with equal powers, give us imaginative compressions 
of things that we know are far apart in time or space. 
From an objective viewpoint of time and space, the activities of human 
memory are bizarre. Why do our memories work in these strange ways? One 
possible answer to this puzzling question is that memory and conceptual inte-
gration evolved to support each other. To do advanced conceptual integration. 
we need the ability to integrate and compress over inputslthat are often very dif-
ferent and highly separated in time and space. We cannot predict which inputs 
will turn out to be useful, but we do know that useful inputs from many sources 
. need to be activated simultaneously and linked by vital relations. Human mem-
ory appears to be superb both at providing simultaneous activation of quite dif-
ferent inputs and at offering good provisional connections between them. Ap-
parently running on autopilot, it often delivers up inputs and connections that 
have no apparent reason for being activated simultaneously or being connected 
at all, except that they lead us to quite useful blends. 
Oth~r R~lations. 
We have also seen cases where Cause-Effect relations in 
the inputs are transformed into tighter Part-Whole relations in the blend. In 
Death the Grim Reaper, the many-step Cause-Effect chain between Death the 
Empty Cause and the cowl or the skeleton is compressed into a Part-Whole re-
lation. And various outer-space configurations compress into Category in the 
blend. So, an action can bring a pleasure, and this involves a Cause-Effect con-
nection, but in the blend the action is a pleasure: It is an instance of a category. 
Similarly, something that brings pain becomes a pain itself Something that 
brings benefit is a benefit. An action that results in a deception is a deception. 
And the product of an effort becomes an effort, as in "Here is my effort" said of 
a charcoal drawing. All of these and indefinitely many more are compressions 
of Cause-Effect into Category. 
Outer-space Intentionality can compress into Category in the blend. If we 
remember an event, there is a mental space with the person remembering and a 
" 

318 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
-":0 
, 
t,. 
mental space wit~ the event remembered. There is an Identity link between the 
rememberer in one space and the participant in the other. There is an Intention-
ality link of remembering between them. There is also a Cause-Effect link be-
cause the event is causal for the remembering. These Intentionality and Cause-
Effect links are compressed in the blend into the cat~gory memory. We say, "I 
have a memory of that moment." One can show that hope, desire, and belief also 
involve compression of Intentionality. 
As'discussed in Chapter 11, the category gap is a compression of Disanalogy 
and Counterfactuality. 
Complex arrays of vital relations can end up being compressed in the blend 
into the single vital rehition of Property. The property safe in the blend com-
presses a complex counterfactual network, yielding expressions like "safe child," 
"safe jewels," and "safe distance." And the property likely, as Eve Sweetser 
shows, compresses a network of actual and hypothetical spaces, yielding eXples-
sions such as "likely candidate," as used to mean a candidate who is likely to 
give an interview. 
Category and Property compression can combine. Consider "guilty pleasure," 
a phrase used to describe an action (such as eating fatty foods) that brings both 
pleasure and guilt and that typically brings guilt partly because it brings pleasure. 
The action is causally related to its results, pleasure and guilt, and the pleasure is 
causally related to guilt. The action is intentionally related to the pleasure but 
also to the guilt, since the actor expects the guilt and wittingly indulges nonethe-
less, perhaps even' partly because the action will bring guilt. These outer-space vi-
tal relations of Cause-Effect and Intentionality are compressed in the blend: 
Guilt and pleasure, which were Effects in the inputs, are now in the blend respec-
tivelya Property and a Category. Everyday examples of Property compression are 
ubiquitous but so conventional that they go unnoticed. A "loud man," for ex-
ample, is one whose actions sometimes result in our experiencing loud noises. 
That Cause-Effect relationship is compressed in the blend so that the man ac-
quires an essential Property: loud. "Violent look" and "breakneck speed" are sim-
ilar examples of compression into a Property. 
We saw earlier that "a memory" is already a compression of Intentionality to 
Category. The phrase "with grateful memories" is on a plaque accompanying a 
gift to the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences from its class 
of 1996 Fellows. In one mental space, the person who remembers is grateful. In 
another is the remembered event that prompts the gratitude. There are Inten-
tionality and Cause-Effect links between these spaces, having to do with re-
membering. In the blend, the Intentionality and Cause-Effect are compressed 
into the category memory, and the further Cause-Effect link having to do with 
being grateful is compressed into Property, so the memory itself has the Prop-
erty of being grateful. This blend has the additional remarkable feature of turn-
ing the memory into an intentional gift on the part of the person being 
" 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
319 
thanked. We can thus express our gratitude to someone for memories even if 
that person did not know us and did' not notice us at the time. 
Achieving Inner-Space Scalability. 
Individual mental spaces have inner-
space vital relations that scale easily: Time, Space, Change, Similarity, Property, 
and Part-Whole. But in full integration networks, there are vital relations that 
are only outer-space and nonscalable: Representation, Analogy, Disanalogy, 
Identity. To achieve a human-friendly integrated blend, we often compress such 
outer-space relations into inner-space relations in the blend that are scalable. 
Thi§ is a very general principle of compression in integration networks. To 
achieve human-scale blends, we need to achieve scalable vital rela;ions. Con-
verting nonscalable outer-spac;;e relations to scalable vital relations is a general 
mechanism for achieving human-scale blends. Some of this compression is so 
conventional and entrenched that it is hard to notice. For example, we have an 
outer-space vital relation of Representation between a person and the label for 
the person, suc:h as a name. In the blend, the name becomes a: part and a prop-
erty of the person. So we see that our everyday frame for thinking of a person is 
already a remarkable compression of outer-space relations to inner-space rela-
tions. The outer-space role-value connections between colonel and Oliver North 
or between father and Paul become, in the blend, property relations. We can 
even compress a role-value connection to a part-whole relation in the blend, as 
when we put on a nametag or wear a military uniform with stripes, bars, 
epaulets, or medals that signal our rank. Cognition is embodied, and the spec-
tacular intellectual feats that human beings perform depend upon being able to 
anchor the illtegration networks in blends at human scale, using the vital rela-
tions that are employed in perception and action. 
Creating a New Relation Through Compression 
As we discussed briefly above in the passage on scaling, conceptual integration 
often creates a relation in the blend where there was none in either the inputs or 
the connections between them. Roger Bannister, for example, in the Mythic 
Race, although he is aware of competitors in his own input space, has no outer-
space relation ofIntentionality to the input with e1-Guerrouj: He is not in com-
petition with el-Guerrouj or trying to defeat him. But in the blend, Bannister is 
aware that he is in a competition with el-Guerrouj and aware that he loses to 
e1-Guerrouj. There is no intentional connection in the inputs from Bannister to 
el-Guerrouj, but there is a tight and poignant one in the blend. In the Mindful 
Pronghorn, the Cause-Effect connection of adaptation is compressed into a re-
lation of change for the individual pronghorn in the blend, who goes from be-
ing young and slow to being older and faster; and that relation of change is in-
corporated into a richer human scenario of learning, an intentional scenario. 
In the scientific account of evolution, there is a stage of adaptation where the 

320 
THE WAY WE THINK 
pronghorns change over time so that later pronghorns are on average faster, and 
then there is a stage of inheritance where that speed is transmitted genetically 
down through generations. Both stages have Cause-Effect relations, the first 
through adaptation and the second through continued genetic transmission. In 
the blend, those two kinds of outer-space cause-effect vital relation are com-
pressed into two kinds of intentionality: learning and memory. It is quite an 
imaginative feat that the two-stage scenario of evolution has been fit nicely into 
a two-stage model of life for an individual: First you learn something and can 
do it, and after that you can still do it because you remember how. Similarly, in 
the drawing of the dinosaur evolving into a bird, the dinosaur is driven to evolve 
by his desire to catch the dragonfly. When an effect of compression is created 
for the blend by constructing a new vital relation for it, we will call this "Com-
pression by Creation." 
The Highlights Compression 
We have seen global generic spaces that present a "Story of Life," a "Story of 
Birth," or other "stories" that consist of a number of key events and participants 
connected by strong vital relations extending over mental spaces. Blends, as we 
mentioned, can provide integrated versions of these stories. Death The Grim 
Reaper compresses into a single scenario the various stages of the "Story of 
Death." That generic story contains such stages as being about to die, expiring, 
burial, decay of the corpse, and, much later, the visible abiding result-the 
skeleton. The highlights in the overarching story are compressed into simult4Ile-
ous highlights in the blend. The Grim Reaper blend has the arrival of the Grim 
Reaper for being about to die, the scythe for the expiring, the cowl for the bur-
ial, and the skeletbn for the final result. 
What we see here is a general pressure for blended spaces and global generics 
to reflect the structure and highlights of the overarching stories. This is possible 
only because vital relations of one type can be compressed into vital relations of 
another-for example, Cause-Effect to Part-Whole in the Grim Reaper. We are 
now in a position to see some remarkable aspects of Time compression in a 
blend like the Grim Reaper. What seems like an essential structure of the overar-
ching Story, the order of events through time, is absent from the blended space. 
The highlights compression transforms the temporal and causal chain into a 
part-whole structure where everything is simultaneous. 
Borrowed Compression 
Cross-cutting all these kinds of compression is. the distinction between borrow-
ing a compression that already exists in one input and compressing outer-space 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
321 
relations between inputs. Sometimes one of the inputs already has a tightly inte-
grated scenario that is projected to give a tight compression in the blend. For ex-
ample, in "digging your own financial grave," the digging input already has a 
compression of agent, action, time, space, and cause-effect, which is projected 
to the blend. Much of the frame structure of the blend comes ftom the financial 
input, but that structure is placed inside the compressed scenario provided by 
the digging input. The ritual of the Baby's Ascent also uses the tight integration 
provided by one of the inputs-carrying the baby up the stairs-to give com-
pression to the blend. 
Optimality and the Bubble Chamber of the Brain 
Like other principles that we will see, those for compression are optimality prin-
ciples. Because they compete among themselves and with other principles and 
goals, they are only partly satisfied in any network. 
As we have noted, there is a useful analogy between biological evolution and 
the construction of new blends. Every organism faces competing values and con-
straints: It may be good to be powerful but also good to be fast, and good to have 
low nutritional requirements. But these values pull in opposing directions. Evo-
lution does not work by somehow conceiving the optimal design of an organism 
for a niche and then constructing that organism. Rather, interactions happen and 
products result, and those products are selected for or against. A particularly fit 
organism for a niche might not come up simply because the mutations needed 
for it did not happen. Similarly, the brain can be thought of as a bubble chamber 
of mental spaces: New mental spaces are formed all the time out of old ones. We 
surmise that the brain is constantly constructing very many blends, and that only 
some of them are selected out for further development and application. Even 
fewer become available to consciousness. A "culture," which includes a large col-
lection of brains, is an even larger bubble chamber for evolving candidate blends, 
testing them, discarding or cultivating them, and promoting and disseminating 
some of them. Yet despite the teeming activity of the brain's bubble chamber and 
the vastly larger bubble chamber of a culture, only some blends will come up, 
only some inputs will be activated, only some conceptual mutations will happen. 
Many could have happened in principle, but did not. We see in the history of 
mathematics and science, for example, that absolutely useful blends can take cen-
turies to bubble up, even though, once available, they are easily inteliigible and 
memorable. Moreover, in such a system, optimization is not absolute: When an 
organism or blend is ~ntirely good enough for the purposes at hand, relative to 
other organisms or blends, it is not additionally required to be the best one possi-
ble. Evolution does not look through all possible worlds; it selects only from what 
has come up. In the same way, conceptual integration employs whatever happens 
.. 

322 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
to have been activated in individual brains and collections of brains, rather than 
reviewing everything that could have been activated. In blending, as in evolution, 
good enough is good enough: The system does not have infinite time or infinite 
facts or activations, and it is strongly biased by its present state. Once evolution 
has a pronghorn that outruns its predators, it doesn't have any motivation to 
evolve even greater speed for the pronghorn. Evolution does not come up simul-
taneously with the fastest possible lion and the fastest possible gazelle, but it does 
optimize lions and gazelles, not in any absolute sense, but relative to the available 
ecology and the random mutations that occur. In the same way, success in blend-
ing does not consist in meeting every possible governing principle in the 
strongest possible way-a logical impossibility given that the principles often 
conflict. In a system of many optimality principles, success is a matter not of sat-
isfying each of them but of satisfYing all of them enough. 
Converting to Human Scale 
At the beginning of this chapter, we said that the governing principles 
are driven by one overarching goal: Achieve Human Scale. Human beings are 
evolved and culturally supported to deal with reality at human scale-that is, 
through direct action and perception inside familiar frames, 
icall involving_ 
few participants and irect intentionality. The familiar falls into natural and 
comfortable ra-ngeS:-Certain ranges of temporal distance, spatial proximity, in-
tentional relation: and direct cause-effect relation are human-friendly. Other 
things being equal, it is good for a blend to belong to these ranges. Transform-
ing vital relations by compression or creating new ones, properly done accord-
ing to the governing principles, will make the blend more human-friendly. For 
example, we can deal easily with strong and simple intentionality in interaction, 
so adding intentional relations to a scene of interaction can help make the blend 
more intelligible, vivid, memorable, and useful to us as human beings. We have 
seen many cases of converting to human scale. The complex evolutionary story 
of pronghorns is converted to the human-scale story of a single animal who 
learns and remembers. The diffuse and intricate notion of a pers~n's life is con-
verted to the human-scale event of going up the stairs in the ritual of the Baby's 
Ascent. And the far-off and abstract connections between educating children 
you don't know and technical competence on which your life depends is con-
verted to the human-scale event of children getting ready to do your bypass. 
The principles of conceptual integration----constitutive and governing-have 
been discovered through analysis of empirical data in many domains. These 
principles, with all their intricacies and technical mechanisms, conspire to 
achieve the goal 
• Achieve Human Scale 
Constitutiv~ and Gov"",ing Principles 
323 
with its noteworthy subgoals: 
• Compress what is diffuse; 
• Obtain global insight. 
• Strengthen vital relations. 
• Come up with a story. 
• Go from Many to One. 
The fact that blends achieve impressive compressions is one we have amply 
discussed. We have also seen how the blended space of a complex and diffuse 
network could be structured by a human-scale scenario. For example, the Mind-
ful Pronghorn achieves a blended scene at human scale in which a single prong-
horn runs from predators. This scene compresses complex and diffuse structures 
that operate in evolutionary time. The ritual of the Baby's Ascent gives a very 
simple scene with very few agents and events-an adult carries a baby up the 
stairs-that compresses over very many events and agents involved in at least 
twO human lives. The Impotent Smoking Cowboy presents a highly compressed 
blend at human ~cale with a single agent, event, and time-a man smoking a 
bent cigarette. Such blends produce impressions of global insight. It seems that 
th~ construction of the network with a blend at human scale and the appropri-
ate connections to a complex array of mental spaces is what generates the im-
pression of global insight. Another consequence of the principles of conceptual 
integration is the strengthening of vital relations, either by making new ones, or 
by intensifYing existing ones, or by converting vital relations of one type into vi-
tal relations of another. We have also seen many cases in which the blend itself 
provides a simple story for the entire network-as when, in Regatta, there is a 
simple story of a race in me blend. Stories can also be provided by global gener-
ics of the sort we saw in discussions of the "Story of Life" and the "Story of 
Death." Finally, nearly every network we have seen goes from many elements in 
the inputs to one or few in the blend. For example, the very many agents and 
events involved in going bankrupt through investing become one agent per-
forming a single action of digging repeatedly in digging one's own grave. And 
the millions of pronghorns involved in the evolutionary history of the American 
pronghorn become in the blend a single pronghorn with learning and memory. 
These goals are not independent. Compression is a way to achieve human scale, 
and by the same token achieving human scale will produce compression. Strength-
ening vital relations is also part of achieving human scale, and a scenario at that 
scale typically involves a simple story. The human scale is the level at which it is 
natural for us to have the impression that we have direct, reliable, and comprehen-
sive understanding. This is why achieving a blend at human scale will induce the 
feeling of global insight. The compression and scale of the blend make it cogni-
tively more tractable to deal with, more manipulable, and since it is tied to the 

324 
THE WAY WE THINK 
complex network, its manipulation gives mastery of a diffuse network, which cre-
ates a feeling of global conceptual mastery and insight. Going from many elements 
and relations in the network to few in the blend also helps achieve human scale, 
compression, and stories, because a simple human-scale scenario, with a minimal 
number of agents in a local spatial region and a small temporal interval, is what we 
are set up to engage with perceptually and behaviorally. ' 
Governing Principles for Compression 
We can now state several governing principles for compression. They all maxi-
mize compression in the network; that is, they lead to compression of vital rela-
tions as they are projected to the blend. 
• Borrowingfor compression. When one input has an existing tight coherence 
at human scale but the other one does not, the tight human-scale coher-
ence can be projected to the blend with the effect that the other input is 
compressed as it is projected to the blend. Examples: "digging your own 
financial grave," "He digested the book,» the ritual of the Baby's Ascent. 
• Single-relation compression by scaling. Some inner-space or outer-space vital 
relations can be scaled to a more compressed version of the same vital rela-
tion in the blend. Time, Space, Change, Part-Whole, Intentionality, and 
Cause-Effect can all be scaled, whether from outer-space to inner-space or 
within a single space. Also, within a single space, Property and Similarity 
can be scaled. The scale of Similarity is correlated with the number of 
shared properties and the property scales themselves. Something can be 
more or less blue, and two things can be similar if both are blue, dissimilar 
if one is blue and the other red, and if both blue, more or less similar ac-
cording to their blueness. 
• Single-relation compression by syncopation. Diffuse structure in an input or 
across inputs can be compressed as it is projected to the blend by dropping 
out all but a few key elements. 
• Compression of one vital relation into another. A relation of one type can be 
compressed into a relation of a different type. 
• Scalability. The overarching goal of compression is to achieve human scale 
in a single mental space. In a single space, elements satisfy Uniqueness by 
definition, and other vital relations--Time, Space, Change, Cause-Effect, 
Part-Whole, Property, Similarity, and Intentionality-are scalable. Non-
scalable relations--Analogy, Disanalo , Identi , Re resentation=;;n 
accordin I be com resse to scalable ones. 
• Creation by compression. 
ng new Vlt 
relations to a space can help it 
achieve human scale. Compression can' create a vital relation for the blend 
that is not in the inputs. 
' Of 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
325 
• Highlights compmsion. Distributed elements in an overarching Story can 
be compressed into a simultaneous arrangement in the blend by such in-
struments as compression to Category, compression to Property, and syn-
copation over detail. 
Figures 16.1 and 16.2 illustrate two of the compression hierarchies for which 
we currently have evidence. 
TO ,POLOGY 
In Chapter 6, we discussed organizing relations within and between input 
spaces. We called the first "inner-space topology" and the second "outer-space 
topology," and saw that an essential part of the topology of a mental space is de-
fined by its vital relations. In a network with input spaces and outer-space con-
nections, various possibilities exist for projecting inner-space and outer-space 
topologies to the blend. The default possibility is that a relation is projected 
without change. For example, the distance traveled by Great American II from 
San Francisco is not changed as it is projected to the blend. 
All other possibilities involve some difference between the blend and the in-
ner-space or outer-space relations for the inputs. 
The first such possibility is that a relation has no counterpart in the blend. It 
might seem intuitively as if nonprojection of some topology to the blend is nec-
essarily detrimental, since it is a loss of information. On the contrary, the pres-
ence of only some topology in the blend emphasizes that particular topology 
and so can provide a better understanding of its importance. A good example of 
this, discussed in Chapter 10, is provided by the two alternative displays for the 
airplane cockpit. 
A second possibility is that the relation is projected to the same relation in 
the blend but is scaled. In the ritual of the Baby's Ascent, time in the input with 
the entire life is scaled as it is projected to time in the blend. 
Third, there may be syncopation in projecting the relation to the blend. Syn-
copation preserves ordering but leaves out all but certain highlights. 
Fourth, a relation may be compressed into another relation (as in Analogy to 
Uniqueness). Although there are manifest differences between the relations along 
a cline of this type, such clines are basic in human conceptual systems. For ex-
ample, if we see a person once and then again a year later, we can effortlessly draw 
analogy and disanalogy between what we see on the two occas,ions. We automati-
cally and effortleSSly invoke a process of change, even though we did not see it. We 
think the change left some features invariant (the analogical parts) but changed 
others (the disanalogous parts). That relationship of change is unconsciously com-
pressed into a personal identity: We think we are perceiving the "identical" per-
son, even if in the last year all his hair has gQlle grey. The cause-effect relation 

326 
r 
THE WAY WE THINK 
AnaIogylDisanalogy 
Representation 
/ 
Part-Whole 
Similarity 
C~tegory 
Uniqueness 
Property 
, :. . 
~ 
, 
FIGURE 16.1 
COMPRESSION HIERARCHY FOR ANALOGY/DISANALOGY 
between Death and the skeleton is changed into a part-whole relation in The 
Grim Reaper. This is a standard strategy for iconographic representations of 
Empty Cause£--Famine and War, for example. 
Though 'it may seem obvious, this mental process should not be taken for 
granted; it can be distorted in neurological pathologies. In Capgras' delusion, a 
rare neuropsychological pathology, a patient views people who are in fact his 
close relatives and friends to be perfect impostors, exactly analogous to his real 
relatives and friends in every detail, but not identical to them. Additionally, as 
we have discussed before, compressing cause-effect into uniqueness (in the per-
ception of the blue cup, in hearing the roar of the tiger, in perceiving someone's 
expression as "violent") is a very natural and useful compression for human be-
ings to make. In most cases it goes without notice, but it can be exploited in cre-
ative blends, as we saw in Chapter 15 in the example where the corporation that 
produces a certain kind of automobile becomes that automobile in the blend. 
Fifth, a relation in one input can be the inverse of that relation in the other. 
The blend takes the relation from one space but its compression from the 
:' .. 
Constitutive and Governing Principks 
327 
Cause-Effect 
Similarity 
Category 
Uniqueness 
Property 
FIGURE 16.2 
COMPRESSION HIERARCHy ' FOR CAUSE/EFFECT 
other. For example, in "digging your own financial grave," the direction of 
causality in the investment input is the inverse of the direction of causality in 
the grave input. The investment input has the preferred topology, but the grave 
input has the preferred compression. We take for the blend the tight integra-
tion of the grave input but the causal direction of the investment input. 
The five ways we have seen of aligning the topologies of the blend and of the 
Lnputs represent strategies for preserving organizing topology while optimizing 
co~ 
all based on the guiding principle of Topology. 
- -
Topology Principle: Other things being equal, set up the blend and the inputs so 
that useful topology in the inputs and their outer-space relations is reflected by 
inner-space relations in the blend. 
The guiding principles of To polo 
constitutive princip es of conceptual integration do not by themse ves orbid 
compressing everything that is in the inputs and in their outer-space relations 

I I 
328 
. THE WAY WE THINK 
into a single undifferentiated element in the blend. Compression pulls in that di-
rection, but such a severe compression produces a blend with virtually no COun-
terparts for the topology of the inputs and their outer-space relations. The Topol-
ogy Principle resists Compression that eliminates important topology. Similarly, 
the constitutive principles of conceptual integration do not by themselves forbid 
projecting every bit of the topology of the input spaces and their outer-space re-
lations to the blend with no change and no fusion. But such a blend will typically 
not be at human scale. The Compression principles therefore resist the Topology 
Principle's preference for the preservation of topology. An appropriate balance 
must be struck between them for any integration network. The widely exploited 
patterns of compression are a way of accommodating these competing demands. 
The less compressed topology in the inputs can be inferred from the more com-
pressed topology in the blend if you know the patterns. 
PATTERN COMPLETIO N 
In many cases of blending-such as the Debate with Kant and Regatta-an ex-
isting tightly integrated frame is recruited to the blend to give it tight integra-
tion. In the version of the Grim Printing Press where the newspaper CEO is 
turning the press and the automobile CEO is in the driver's seat, we recruit to 
the blend a frame in which opponents use instruments against each other and 
win or lose by virtue of having the better or worse instrument. These recruit-
ments structure the elements in a blend into an integrated pattern. The Mindful 
Pronghorn, for example, has a frame for the blend with learning and memory, 
and these relations serve in the network as the compressed versions of the im-
portant outer-space vital relations of Cause-Effect, Time, and Change (adapta-
tion and inheritance) between the inputs with the various pronghorns. There is 
a general guiding principle for Pattern Completion. 
Pattern Completion Principl~: Other things being equal, complete elements in the 
blend by using existing integrated patterns as additional inputs. Other things be-
ing equal, use a completing frame that has relations that can be the compressed 
versions of the important outer-space vital relations betw~en the inputs. 
INTEG RATION 
Integration-one of the mind's three Is-is the main subject of this book. 
The impulse to achieve integrated blends is an overarching principle of hu-
man cognition. 
Inkgration Principle: Achieve an integrated blend. 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
329 
Since the essence of a conceptual integration network is to project from 
many different and sometimes dashing inputs into a single blended space, inte-
gration in that space is a considerable achievement, not something implicit in 
the inputs. Integration in the blended space allows its manipulation as a unit, 
makes it more memorable, and enables the thinker to run the blend without 
constant reference to the other spaces in the network. Integration helps bring 
the blend to human scale, and thereby also increase the possibility for further 
useful recruitments to the blend from the range of our knowledge that is already 
at that human scale. 
As' we just saw, the inputs often have opposed topology. Projecting these 
topologies to the blend could create a disintegrated space. It is a corollary of the 
Integration Principle that in such cases, selections and adjustments must be 
made to avoid a disintegrated blend. For example, in the Debate with Kant, the 
language, German, from the first input, is not projected because integration in 
the debate frame requires a single language. 
PROMOTING VITAL RELATIONS 
We saw in the Mindful Pronghorn that new vital relations of intentionality 
(learning, memory) come up in the blend. It is a common occurrence for 
blends to develop internal vital relations. Naturally, this maximization of vital 
relations cooperates with the recruitment of new frames to the blend and with 
the conversion of blends to human scale. There is also a general principle of 
maximizing reflection between the outer-space vital relations and the vital rela-
tions in the blend, which can lead to building new outer-space vital relations. 
The Toblerone ad we discussed in Chapter 7 does both. The viewer of the ad 
sees chocolate, the pyramids, and the expression "Ancient Tobleronism?" This 
is the basis for building a much richer blended space by analogy with conven-
tional cases of monuments built in honor of somebody or something. That 
blended space is accordingly unpacked to a familiar mapping scheme in which 
a person who does great deeds comes to be admired by followers and later, per-
haps after his death, is given a statue in his likeness. To complete the concep-
tual integration network for Toblerone, the outer-space vital relations need to 
be considerably proliferated: The chocolate was available in antiquity and was 
so good that a cult of admirers erected monumental likenesses in its honor. 
The end result of this remarkable cognitive work is an integration network 
with many supplementary vital relations in the blend and in the outer-space 
connections. A similar example is Hiding the Penny, discussed in Chapter 7, in 
which someone's psychology during a romantic relationship later in life is ex-
plained by reference to his childhood habit of hiding things so well he could 
not find them. The analogical connection between "hiding the penny" and 
.. 

:~ . 
~ ~.
-.j 
330 
THE WAY WE THINK 
,. 
"hiding your love" becomes a causal relationship of either the "It Is Written" or 
the "Early Habits Persist" variety. 
Maximization olVital Relations Principle: Other things being equal, maximize vi-
tal relations in the network. In particular, maximize the vital rel;ltions in the 
blended space and reflect them in outer-space vital relations. 
~ we will see, the relative weight of a guiding principle can depend on pur-
pose. Where the purpose of the blend is to reveal something about the relation 
between the inputs, maximizing vital relations takes on special importance since 
that revelation can depend on new outer-space vital relations, such as the ex-
alted status of Toblerone in antiquity. Where the purpose of the blend is, by 
contrast, to develop a hypothetical space markedly different from the inputs, 
the principle has less weight. For example, someone who is wondering whether 
to become a stockbroker might form a blend of herself and a friend who is a 
stockbroker, so that, in the blend, she is a stockbroker and has emergent feelings 
and judgments about her new occupation. The purpose of that blend is not to 
explore the comparison between herself and her friend as they are now, and 
therefore it does not prompt for novel outer-:space vital relations. Under such a 
purpose, the guiding principle of maximizing outer-space vital relations has less 
weight. Still, it exerts a latent pressure on the network and can lead to concep-
tual consequences. Although exploration of comparison was not its purpose, the 
blend may still lead, by virtue of the principle, to comparison with her friend 
and new feelings toward her friend, such as admiration,' envy, jealousy, or con-
tempt. We often reject invitations to fuse two elements, even when the purpose 
is clearly not comparison, because there is always latent possibility for tighter 
connection between the inputs. For example, blending an oppressed minority 
with an endangered species may have good intentions but it will be rejected as 
insulting. 
The process of maximizing vital relations in the blend and reflecting them in 
outer-space vital relations between the spaces is a way of intensifying the struc-
ture in the blend and of intensifying the overall connection 'between input 
spaces. Another way of doing this is to intensify vital relations already available. 
We commonly find nerworks involving human action where the form of causa-
tion and intentionality in the blend is sharper, simpler, and stronger in the 
blend than it is in the inputs. An example is the politician who blocks the for-
eign aid bill and is accused of "taking the food out of the mouths of starving 
children." This nerwork also compresses the many agents involved in the politi-
cal process into one. 
lnunsification olVital Relations Principle: Other things being equal, intensify vital 
relations. 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
331 
WEB 
web Principle: Other things being equal, manipulating the blend as a unit musr 
maintain the web of appropriate connections to the input spaces easily and with-
out additional surveillance or computation. 
This principle reflects the fact that even when we are focusing on only one 
space in the network, the entire network is implicated. It is because good con-
nections in the web are maintained unconsciously that some work in the blend 
can have automatic effects in the inputs or across the inputs. For example, the 
Buddhist Monk's meeting himself in the blend has immediate consequences for 
the inputs, because the time of day is always identical in the blend and the rwo 
inputs, and a monk's location at a time of day is identical to the location of his 
counterpart at that time of day in the respective input. This strict identity be-
rween blend and inputs of the progress of clock time and of the monk's location 
at a particular clock time gives very good satisfaction of the Web Principle. 
When Topology is satisfied, it helps satisfy Web, because users typically as-
sume that the web connections are those provided by projections of topology. 
But these two principles are distinct and need not be aligned; they can compete. 
Topology pushes in the direction of maximizing topology between an input and 
the blend. But Web is about maintaining the appropriate connections berween 
spaces, so it can push in the direction oflimiting the topological connections. In 
using a blend as the basis for thought and action, we must remain clear about 
how inputs and blend do not match topologically. For example, the Computer 
Desktop circa 1995 had no use for pointing with the finger at a screen, giving 
voice commands, or scribbling information on the outside of a folder (like "Dis-
card after April 15"). These topologies are important in the input spaces of giv-
ing interpersonal commands, working in actual offices, and indicating a selec-
tion from a list (as when we indicate to the waiter which wine we want from a 
list of names we cannot pronounce). But they are not available in the blend. 
Speaking into the mouse as if it were a microphone (as a human visitor from the 
future does in one of the Star Trek films) is funny to someone who knows that 
the topology of vocal communication is not projected to the Computer Desk-
top blend. Such a "natural mistake" comes from using topology in the blend 
that is available only in the inputs. Interestingly, the desktop interface is cur-
rently evolving to include more of these topologies. 
The visitor from the future projected too much topology from an input to 
the blend. In the other direction, from blend to input, we must not project back 
from the blend emergent topology that is inappropriate for the inputs. This is 
what happens when obsessive viewers of soap operas attack actors in the street 
who play evil villains in the soap operas. There is emergent topology in the 

332 
THE WAY WE THINK 
blend: The evil person has the actor's appearance. That unification of character 
and person is not to be projected back to the real-life input with the actor. 
In both directions, the mistakes come from maximizing topology in violation 
of the Web Principle. 
A corollary of the Web Principle is that we should not disconnect valuable 
web connections to the inputs. The Computer Desktop has web connections to 
the space of computer operations, in which all shifts of focus require only a 
simple click. For example, if a user is running five different applications on the 
desktop and wants to see only one of them, he can click "Hide others" (con-
versely, "Show others"); to see a given document partially occluded by another, 
he need only click anywhere on the desired document. But in the space of 
offices, to hide everything on his desk except the one thing he wishes to focus 
on would require complex physical operations. Projecting all these operations to 
the blend would sever its useful web connections to the input of computer oper-
ation. Function guides competition here. The web connection to "change of fo-
cus" in the computer operations input is important b~cause the desktop inter-
face is designed to run a computer. If its function were to simulate an office 
working environment, then th~ complexity of the physical operations would be 
maintained at the expense of co'mputing efficiency. 
' 
Web combines with Integration to force novel integrations in the blend. For 
instance, in the metaphor "digging one's own grave," the blend's causal, tempo-
ral, and intentional structures (actor is unaware of his actions, sufficient repetitions 
of that action bring about the failure) come to the blend from the input space of 
mistakes and failure. This web connection is crucial to the reasoning, but it 
would be destroyed if we instead projected the ~ommonplace structure of the 
grave input (death followed by conscious grave-digging by somebody else). In 
the Nixon-in-France example, we project to the blend Nixon, but not his U.S. 
citizenship, which would prevent him from being president of France, thus cut-
ting off a crucial web link from the blend to the second input. 
UNPACKING 
The Unpacking Principle: Other things being equal, the blend all by itself should 
prompt for the reconstruction of the entire network. 
One of the powers of the blend is that it carries in itself the germ of the entire 
network. If one already has the entire network active, then running the blend 
gives inferences and consequences for the rest of the network. But if the entire 
network has not yet been built or has been forgotten, or if relevant portions of it 
are not active in the moment of thinking, then the blend does good work in 
prompting for those activations. Part of the blend's power to provide global 
insight lies in its utility as a mnemonic device-in cases where we have knowledge 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
333 
of the network and merely need to retrieve and activate it--or as a triggering de-
vice, carrying small compressions that guide us to unpack them into full-blown 
parts of the network. While the discourse environment will sometimes set up the 
inputs and connections before the blend, in other cases-as when we see a bill-
board-we may be presented only with a material anchor for the blended space. 
Unpacking is often facilitated by disintegrations and incongruities in the blended 
space. The Impotent Smoking Cowboy billboard, for example, gives us just the 
cowboy with the drooping cigarette, and the phrase "Warning: Smoking Causes 
Impotence." The incongruity of the drooping cigarette itself prompts us to con-
strue this representation as something more than a simple picture of a cowboy 
smoking a cigarette. The cigarette "unpacks" to both the normal cigarette in the 
space with the virile cowboy and the drooping organ in the space with sexual per-
formance. In fact, it might be better to say that at first we recognize a space with 
incongruities and that those incongruities prompt us to take the space as a blend 
and look for its inputs. In the same way, the Debate with Kant blend satisfies Un-
packing because it has someone from the eighteenth century and someone from 
the twenty-first in the same space. In these cases, the scene presented to us has dis-
integrations that prompt us to take it as having disparate inputs. Similarly, "He 
was so mad I could see smoke coming out of his ears:' presents a scene that is inte-
grated at the highest level but has explicit prompts (or ang"' heat, and bodily phys-
iology. Prompts for making the right connections often take the form of tight 
compressions, as in The Grim Reaper, whose body, clothing, and tools prompt for 
skeletons, funerals, reaping, and killing. 
As Douglas Hofstadter points out, the Unpacking Principle is not purely one 
of structure within the network but, more broadly, one of communication, 
since the unpacking possibilities offered by the blended space will depend on 
what is already active in the context of communication. 
RELEVANCE 
The Rekvance Principk: Other things being equal, an element in the blend should 
have relevance, including relevance for establishing links to other spaces and for 
running the blend. Conversely, an outer-space relation between the inputs that is 
important for the purpose of the network should have a corresponding compres-
sion in the blend. 
Participants in communication are under general pressures to make their 
communications relevant. When a blend is used in communication, it is sub-
ject to these general pressures, but part of its relevance derives from its location 
and function in the network. An element in the blend can fulfill the general ex-
pectation of relevance by indicating its connections to other spaces or indicat-
ing the lines along which the blend is to develop. Speaker and listener are both 
J 

334 
THE WAY WE THINK 
t' 
aware of this fact, and it guides their construction and interpretation of the net-
work. The expectation of relevance encourages the listener to seek connections 
that maximize the relevance of the element for the network, and it encourages 
the speaker to include in the blend elements that prompt for the right network 
connections, but also to exclude elements that might prompt for unwanted con-
nections. We will call this principle "Network Relevance." ,Network Relevance 
can be satisfied for an element in the blend if it can be successfully taken as a 
prompt for Unpacking. Consider The Grim Reaper. Once Death the Empty 
Cause is personified, it must have a shape, body, and manner, and may easily 
have clothes. But these aspects are not enforced by the frames of either the event 
of death or the killer. As we saw in the discussion of highlights compression, 
these elements are well-chosen Part-Whole compressions that guide unpacking 
and prompt for vital relations in the network such as Cause-Effect. Interpreting 
them as prompts for unpacking gives them Network Relevance. 
It is a general feature of the presentation of self in everyday life that one's 
clothes, accessories, manner, expression, gesture, and,appearance have relevance. 
They can thus prompt for blends in which they have Network Relevance. The 
sullen high-school student dressed in a dog collar and fatigues is implying not 
that he is a soldier (or a dog) but, rather, that parts of his character are received 
by projection from trained acts of aggression and violence. 
The Relevance Principle pressures networks to have relationships in the 
blend that are compressions of important outer-space relations between the in-
puts. We have seen this at work in many networks. For example, in Regatta, the 
space with Northern Light is the reference space: The sailors of Great American 
II know about it and have ambitions with respect to it, and that knowledge is 
causal for their activities. These outer-space relations of Intentionality and 
Cause-Effect need, by the Relevance Principle, to have compressions in the 
blend, which they do because of the intentional and causal structure of 
the frame of race. 
RECURSION 
One crucial corollary of the overarching goal of blending to Achieve Human 
Scale is that a blended space from one network can often be used as an input to 
another blending network. Once blending delivers a new blend at human scale, 
that new blend is a potential instrument for achieving yet more compression to 
human scale. We saw that the complex multiple blend of The Grim Reaper pro-
duces a human-scale situation with a person, The Grim Reaper. There is no rea-
son in principle why The Grim Reaper would have to fit an existing category 
like person. It could be the case that double-scope networks typically produce 
elements belonging to entirely novel categories. A complex network with many 
.,', .... 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
335 
compressions delivers The Grim Reaper blend. The' Grim Reaper, as a person, 
can be part of any input that includes persons. In particular, personification 
blends can now have The Grim Reaper as the input with the person. We can 
personify a hawk as The Grim Hawk, complete with skeleton, scythe, and cowl 
but also with wings and beak, who is a divine force in the world of mice. This 
kind of recursion happens routinely in the development of science and mathe-
matics. If we start with a wave such as we see at the seashore, and then consider 
sound, and recognize that sound, though a different phenomenon, still has lon-
gitudinal motion in a medium, we can make a new blended category wave that 
now includes various kinds of "longitudinal" waves. That new category wave 
can be an input to a further blending network, whose other input has electro-
magnetic phenomena. The blended space in the new network now has a cate-
gory wave that includes "electromagnetic" waves. 
The history of the concept of number has seen many successive blends, 
where at each stage a blended concept of number serves as the input to a new 
integration 'network, whose blended space has yet a newer concept of number. 
If we already have counting numbers 1, 2, 3, ... , they can serve as an input to 
a network whose other input has proportions of these numbers. The cross-
space mapping will be a one-to-many partial correspondence, where each 
counting number n maps onto any ratio of counting numbers r and s where r 
has n parts; each of magnitude s. By selective projection, all proportions are 
projected into the blend from the space of proportions, and all counting num-
bers from the space of counting numbers. Equivalent proportions are projected 
onto the same element in the blend. Operations like multiplication are emer-
gent in the blend. The blend has a new category whose elements are projec-
tions of widely disparate elements in the inputs, and yet, in the blend, the cate-
gory for all these elements is number again. They are all just numbers. For 
example, there is an element in the blend that is the projection of the ratio of 9 
to 3, and the projection of the ratio 12 to 4, and the ratio of the projection 333 
to 111, which is also the projection of the counting number 3. In other words, 
that element in the blend is the projection of an infinity of input elements that 
are in quite different categories. Another element is the projection of the ratio 
of 9 to 5 and 18 to 10 and 27 to 15 and so on, but is the projection of no 
counting number at all. Although the proportions themselves are not linearly 
ordered, the number created in the blend by projections such as the projection 
from the proportion of 550 to 900 turns out to be smaller than the number 
created by projection from the proportion of 2 to 3, even though the numbers 
of the first proportion are very large and the numbers of the second are very 
small. On the one hand, the blend, which creates the new concept number in-
cluding rational numbers, is a great mathematical achievement. On the other 
hand, the blend delivers numbers, an old category. The category that is the out-

336 
THE WAY WE THINK 
put of the blend has the same name as the category that was the input to the 
blend, and is felt to be the same, even though the inner structure of that cate-
gory has been dramatically altered. Again, because numbtr is a human-scale 
notion, the blend has human scale. But when we look inside that notion of 
number, we see that it is now more complicated, and attached to various dif-
fuse input spaces. The fact that the same category, number, organizes both the 
input and the output is what introduces recursion in the successive blending 
process, just as recursion is introduced in the Grim Reaper network by the fact 
that person organizes both an input and the output. What is particularly dra-
matic about the history of the concept of number is that through many succes-
sive blends, the category numbtr is always an input and an output. Number, 
meaning rational numbers, comes to be an input to an integration network 
whose output is numbtr, meaning real numbers. And as we saw in Chapter 13, 
member meaning rtai numbers blends with two-dimensional space to produce 
number, meaning complex numbers. At each stage the organizing category is 
felt to be the same in both the input and the output; yet at each stage the inter-
nal structure of the category is different in the blend than it was in the input. 
Can such recursion go on indefinitely? On the one hand, the category of the 
output is the same as the category of the input and is at human scale in that 
sense, so the blended space at any step is a candidate for yet further blending. 
But on the other hand, the internal structure of the category at each step is as-
sociated with more and more decompressions in the rest of the network, and 
that makes the network less tractable. 
HOW THEY COOPERATE 
AND COMPETE 
We have seen throughout this chapter how constitutive and governing princi-
ples cooperate: Compression helps human scale, human scale helps getting a 
story, getting a story helps global insight, going from Many to One helps the 
blend achieve human scale. We have also seen how the governing principles may 
compete. Compression competes with topology, since topology is a pressure to 
preserve various distinctions and elements while compression works in the 
countervailing direction. Similarly, integration competes with unpacking since 
absolute integration leaves a blend that carries no sign of its distinctive inputs. 
For example, a picture of the Annunciation, in which the Angel of the Annunci-
ation tells the Virgin Mary that she is to be the Mother of God, might look like 
two young women having a conversation in a bedroom, in which case we would 
not be prompted to unpack it to two quite different inputs-one of which has a 
girl in her bedroom, and the other the eternal divine relationship of God, 
Christ, the Holy Spirit, and the Mother of God. 
Constitutivt and Govtrning Principks 
HOW GOVERNING PRINCIPLES 
WORK IN TYPES OF" NETWORK 
337 
With any conceptual integration network, we must resolve the lines of coopera-
tion and competition presented by the various principles. This is a difficult matter, 
but one that human beings are uniquely evolved to handle. The various canonical 
types of network negotiate among the governing principles in different ways. 
Mirror Networks 
Mirror networks have special characteristics that suit some governing principles 
well and preclude others. 
We saw in some detail in Chapter 7 how mirror networks provide compressions. 
Like any network, a mirror network can use Scaling Compression, Syncopation 
Compression, Compression from one type of vital relation to another, and Creation 
of vital relations. On the other hand, mirror networks have no role for Borrowing 
Compression ·since both inputs and the blend share the same compressed frame. 
It is a special virtue of mirror networks that they easily satisfY Topology, Inte-
gration, and Web simultaneously. The sharing of ..the organizing frame automat-
ically transfers a rich topology from space to space. Integration is provided in 
the blend by the shared frame and its elaboration. This elaborated frame is often 
already a common, rich, and integrated frame, like rae( or debate or encounUr. 
The sharing of the frame throughout the network automatically preserves the 
Web connections between spaces. 
. 
When the counterpart elements in the inputs to a mirror network are fused 
in the blend, the organizing frame of the inputs will exhaust the elements of 
the blend and there will be no Pattern Completion: Blend and inputs will have 
the same organizing frame. We saw such a case in Chapter 8: You Are My 
Long-Lost Daughter. There are also cases where some counterpart elements 
from the inputs are not fused but the organizing frame for the inputs can 
nonetheless accommodate their composition in the blend, as in the Successor 
Skipper. Often, however, the multiplicity of non fused elements in a blend in a 
mirror network creates relationships that can be recognized as partial patterns 
to be completed by bringing in a fuller frame, as when the nonfusing of the 
two philosophers in the Debate with Kant produces a blend of two philoso-
phers musing on the same problem, which can be completed with the frame 
for debatt. 
The integration provided by the shared frame and its elaboration would seem 
to work against Unpacking, by providing a blend that is a straightforward in-
stance of the shared frame. But a space can be well integrated at one level of de-
tail and poorly integrated at a finer level. For instance, a race between two boats 
J 

.' 
-. 
~ 
338 
THE WAY WE THINK 
,. 
is a fine integration, but at the more detailed level, the race between an 1853 
clipper and a 1993 catamaran is a poor integration. 
Thus it is possible for a blend to satisfy Integration by being well integrated 
at one level and yet to have a weaker integration at a more detailed level. As we 
saw in Chapter 7, the spaces in a mirror network share an organizing frame but 
not necessarily structure at lower levels. In a mirror network, Unpacking is often 
provided by just such poor integration at lower levels, which provides a signal to 
connect elements in the blend to counterparts in different input spaces in which 
their counterparts are well integrated. The blend in Regatta, for instance, is in-
tegrated at the level of the organizing frame, but the contrast of clipper ship and 
small catamaran produces poor integration at a lower level, and this serves as an 
aid to Unpacking. When we encounter the blend, the poor integration prompts 
us to project the clipper ship and the catamaran back to different inputs. In fact, 
the phrase "ghost of Northnn Light' simultaneously evokes backward projection 
to an input and emergent structure in the blend. The word "ghost" signals vital 
relations between the input spaces, and in the blend it is a compression of those 
vital relations. The sailors in the 1993 space know about the history of Northern 
Light. That is a link ofIntentionality through memory. "Ghost" prompts for the 
construction of these outer-space vital relations and also for the creation of an 
element in the blend. This of course satisfies Unpacking. 
The category Ghost is a powerful compression of Intentionality (in the form 
of memory), Time, Representation, Identity, Counterfactuality, and Cause-
Effect. It compress~s Cause-Effect because the historical event is causal for the 
memory. It compresses Identity between the content of the memory and 
the historical space. It compresses the Counterfactual links ·between the blend 
and each of the inputs. The ghost in the blend is naturally decompressed into a 
Time link between the two inputs. The Intentionality link of remembering that 
connects the inputs is often supplemented with a Representation link, making 
the memory a representation of the past event. The particular ghost in the blend 
compresses that representation link into a directly perceived instance of the cat-
egory ghost, and that instance is identical t9 the remembered thing in the histor-
ical input. The features of ghost that we have noted for Regatta ·are general and 
by no means restricted to mirror networks. This remarkable category is found in 
cultures allover the world, and perhaps in all cultures. 
A mirror network provides a straightforward satisfaction of Relevance to the 
extent that an element in the blend is, by virtue of the shared frame, automati-
cally connected to its counterparts in the inputs. But crucially, an extended 
frame recruited or constructed for the blend is also subject to Relevance. The re-
lations in that frame that are not in the shared frame are assumed to be com-
pressions of outer-space connections between the inputs, as when memory in 
the Mindful Pronghorn compresses unchanged inheritance between the ancient 
and modern pronghorn inputs . . 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
339 
Single-Scope Networks 
In a single-scope network, such as the portrayal of business competitors metaphor-
ically as boxers, Integration in the blend is automatically satisfied because the 
blend inherits a compressed organizing frame ftom one of the inputs-in this case, 
boxing. For the same reason, Topology is satisfied between the blend and the input 
that provides the organizing frame. But Topology is also satisfied between the 
blend and the other input because the conventional metaphor of competition as 
physical combat has aligned the. relevant topologies of the two inputs. Thus, when 
an element in the blend inherits topology from an element in either input that is 
involved in the cross-space metaphoric mapping, the topology it inherits is auto-
matically compatible, by virtue of the existing conventional metaphor, with the 
topology of that input element's counterpart in the other input. 
Single-scope networks also give us straightforward Borrowing for Compres-
sion and Scaling Compression. The input that provides the frame is typically in-
tegrated at "human scale" (e.g., two men fighting). When projected into the 
blended space, that frame becomes a massive compression of the focus input-
in this case, the business rivalry. We find scaling of time down to the duration of 
a fight, the number of agents compressed to two, the types of actions reduced to 
blows and dodges, and the causal chain scaled down to hitting or missing. 
Web is similarly satisfied by this shared topology provided by the borrowed 
frame and the metaphoric mapping. Unpacking is provided just as it was for a 
mirror network: Although the blend is integrated at the frame level, it is disinte-
grated at the more specific level. Suppose, for example, that the competitors are 
represented in a cartoon as boxing in business suits. The lack of integration be-
tween business suits and boxing prompts us to unpack the blend to two differ-
ent spaces. In the same way, if we know that "Murdoch" and "Iacocca" refer to 
businessmen and not boxers, then their use in the sentence "Murdoch knocked 
out Iacocca" directs us to the lower levels of the input of businessmen, and this 
helps satisfy Unpacking. 
In the case of single-scope or mirror networks with a custom-built source do-
main, as in Hiding the Penny, or You Are My Long-Lost Daughter, or the vari-
ous Redemption examples, there are many natural opportunities to strengthen 
the outer-space vital relations. For example, in Hiding the Penny the analogy 
between the inputs becomes a Cause-Effect relationship, under the Early Habits 
Persist reading. These single-scope networks also offer natural opportunities for 
syncopation, so that the distinctions between the input spaces drop out of con-
sideration in the -blend, where the fusion can produce an intensified personal 
identity that overshadows any of the other events in life. In You Are My Long-
Lost Daughter, daughters in the inputs related by outer-space analogy are com-
pressed into identity. In Hiding the Penny, events in the inputs related by ourer-
space analogy are compressed into essential identity . 

340 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Double-Scope Networks 
In a double-scope network, Compression, Topology, Integration, and Web are 
not automatically satisfied: It is necessary to use a frame that has been developed 
specifically for the blend and that has central emergent structure. (This may be 
why double-scope networks-such as the Computer Desktop, Complex Num-
bers, and Digging Your Own Grave-are typically thought of as more creative, 
at least until they become entrenched.) In these networks, then, we expect to see 
increasing competition between governing principles and increasingly many op-
portunities for failure to satisfy them. 
The Computer Desktop illustrates many of these competitions and opportu-
nities. We stress that failing to satisfy a governing principle does not necessarily 
mean that the resulting blend fails; on the contrary, constructing a useful dou-
ble-scope blend often depends upon finding a suitable way to relax governing 
principles. First lei: us consider' an aspect of the Computer Desktop blend in 
which Topology clashes with Integration, and Integration of the blend wins. 
The purpose of this blend is to provide an integrated conceptual space that can 
serve as the basis for integrated action. The basic integrative principle of the 
Computer Desktop is that everything is on the two-dimensional computer 
screen. But in the input space of real office work, the trashcan is not on one's 
desk. Topology would place the trash can off the desktop in the computer inter-
face blend; but because this would destroy the internal integration of the blend, 
the computer screen has the trashcan on the desktop. Integration of the blend in 
this case can be achieved only by relaxing the Topology Principle. Also, as Ri-
cardo Maldonado has pointed out, the computer trashcan essentially never fills 
up. This is another case where Integration wins out over Topology. 
There are at least two reasons why we are content to relax Topology in this way. 
First, the topology being dropped is incidental to the cross-space mapping: The 
three-dimensionality of the office and the position of trashcans under desks has no 
counterpart in the cross-space mapping to the input of computer operation; nei-
ther does the capacity of the trashcan, since any folder (of which the trashcan is 
one) has as its capacity the entire unused capacity of the system. Second, as we 
have mentioned, the purpose of this blend is to develop a conceptual basis for ex-
tended action, not to draw conclusions about the input space of offices. In a case 
like the Buddhist Monk, where the purpose is to draw conclusions about topology 
of input spaces-specifically, coincidence oflocations and times-relaxing Topol-
ogy is likely to allow inferences in the blend that would project wrongly or not at 
all back to the input, and so defeat the purpose of the blend. 
A satisfactory. blend is achieved by finding an effective relative weighting of 
the governing principles for the purpose at hand. A good relative weighting for 
the Buddhist Monk would not be good for the Computer Desktop, and vice 
versa. Real failure occurs when the weighting is not achieved and the massive 
'l ~ " 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
341 
violation in the blend defeats its purposes. The most' noticeable such failure for 
the Computer Desktop is the use of the trash can both as the container of what is 
to be deleted and as the instrument of ejecting floppy disks. This failure involves 
failures ofIntegration, Topology, and Web. It provides good compression, but in 
this case the compression blends two operations that should have been kept sep-
arate so as to preserve essential topology, and to preserve integration in the blend. 
There are violations of the Integration Principle. Using the trash can for both 
deletion and ejection violates Integration in three ways. First, in the frame elab-
orated for the blend, the dual roles of the trashcan are contradictory; since one 
ejectS the floppy disk to keep it rather than discard it. Second, in the frame elab-
orated for the blend, all other operations of dragging one icon to another have 
the result that the first is contained in the second with the unique exception of 
dragging the Boppy to the trashcan. Third, for all other manipulations of icons 
on the desktop, the'result is a computation, but in this case it is a physical inter-
action at the level of hardware. 
This dual use of the trashcan also violates Topology. In the input of office 
spaces, putting an object in a folder or in the trashcan results in containment, 
and this topology is projected to the blend. The trashcan on the desktop is like 
any icon that represents a metaphoric container: If ~e drag a file to a folder icon 
or to the trashcan icon, the file is deposited there, and this is the topology of the 
input of office spaces. But putting the floppy disk icon into the trashcan icon so 
as to eject.it violates the projection of topology from the input of offices. It also 
violates topology by not preserving the relation in input 2 (the space of real of-
fices) that items transferred to the trashcan are unwanted and destined to be-
come nonretrievable. 
The operation also violates Web. The very process of ejecting floppy disks 
from the computer desktop creates nonoptimal web connections, since the 
floppy is sometimes "inside" the world of computer operations and sometimes 
"inside" the world of the real office. 
The design of word-processing programs for the desktop interface demon-
strates other forms of competition among governing principles. The command 
sequence Select-Copy-Paste on word-processing applications violates both 
Topology and Web. It violates Topology because in the input where text is actu-
ally copied by scribes or xerox machines, copying (after selection) is a one-step 
operation. There is no pasting and no clipboard. Properties specific to the Inte-
gration in the blend make it convenient to decompose this operation into two 
steps, but they do not map topologically onto corresponding operations in the 
input of "real copying." 
The labels "Copy" and "Paste" chosen for these two operations also violate 
Web: The Copy operation in the blend (which actually produces no visible 
change in the text) does not correspond to the Copy operation in the input 
(which does produce visible change); the Paste..operation, which does produce 

! ~ 
342 
THE WAY WE THINK 
t" 
change, is closer to "copying" in the input, but the label "Paste" suggests a coun-
terpart (pasting) that is not even part of the copying process. 
Not surprisingly, these flaws in the blend lead to mistakes by novice users. 
They click Copy instead of Paste, or try sequences like Select-Select Insertion 
Point-Copy. This fails miserably because the first selection (not marked for copy-
ing) is lost when they click the second selection, and, anyway, Copy at that point 
is the wrong command. Mistakes like this are interesting because they are an ef-
fort by the user to maintain optimal Topology and Web connections. If double 
selection were possible on the blended interface (as it is, in terms of attention, in 
the Input), Copy and Paste could easily be reintegrated into a single process op-
erating on both selections, and the attempted sequence would be viable. In fact, 
the application being used to type the present text has a keyboard command 
(with no counterpart in the menus) that comes closer to this conception. 
The "Cut and Paste" method of moving text is a less severe violation, because 
the projected operations from the "office" input are plausible and properly web-
connected. But it does add conceptual complexity to what is more easily con-
ceived of as simple unitary "moving." Recent versions of the application we are 
using to type this manuscript have added the possibility of selecting and drag-
ging text directly to the appropriate location. The portion of text does not actu-
ally "move" (only the arrow does) until the mouse is unclicked. 
Despite these failures, the Computer Desktop blend draws rich and effective 
structure from familiar frames, and users are able to use it in a rudimentary 
fashion very quickly and to learn the elaborated frame, warts and all. The 
nonoptimality creates difficulty for novices, who are reluctant to put the floppy 
disk in the trash can since by topology it should then be lost, but advanced users 
forget this difficulty and learn a less optimal but more elaborate blend. 
The fact that in double-scope networks the organizing frame of the blend is 
not available by extension from the organizing frame of either input increases 
chances of nonoptimality and of competition between the governing principles, 
but it also offers opportunity for creativity. Pressure to satisfy governing princi-
ples in highly complex double-scope networks has historically given rise to some 
of the most fundamental and ingenious scientific discoveries. 
' 
The development of complex numbers is a case in point. The complex-num-
ber blend turns out to be a double-scope network. Some key elements in each in-
put have no counterparts in the basic cross-space mapping: The operation of 
multiplication for numbers has no counterpart in the geometry input, and 
the angles in the geometry input have no counterparts in the number input. The 
blend, however, inherits both the multiplication operation from the frame of the 
"number" input and the angle from the frame of the "geometric" input. This is 
already enough to make it a double-scope network, since multiplication in the 
blend has topology from the second input while angle in the blend has topology 
from the first input. But beyond this, multiplication includes addition of angles 
as one of its constitutive components. This fact was discovered only by running 
i.~~ 
Constitutiv~ and Governing Principles 
343 
the blend; it turned out to be a highly unexpected essential property of the new 
concept of number. Indeed, the pressures to satisfy the governing principles in 
this double-scope network led to an important mathematical discovery. 
Let us consider some of these competitions in the construction of complex 
numbers. As we mentioned in Chapter 13, there are actually three inputs to the 
complex-number blend. Two of them are already superbly rich and well inte-
grated: The two-dimensional geometric plane and the real numbers. The third 
input is a badly unintegrated space: the real numbers and, in addition, some 
strange, "impossible" elements that are useful in doing numerical calculations 
but do not seem to qualify as actual numbers. Consider a typical mental chal-
lenge faced by a mathematician as great as Euler and as late as 1768, in what 
Morris Kline calls "the best algebra text of the eighteenth century": 
Because all conceivable numbers are either greater than zero or less than zero or 
equal to zero, then it is clear that the square roots of negative numbers cannot be 
included among the possible numbers [real numbers]. Consequently we must say 
that these are impossible numbers. And this circumstance leads us to the concept 
of such numbers, which by their nature are impossible, and ordinarily are called 
imaginary or fancied numbers, because they exist only in the imagination. 
Euler is driven to this reasoning because he requires well-ordering to be pro-
jected from the input of real numbers into any concept of "possible" number. 
The impossibility of well-ordering these elements automatically makes them 
something less than full numbers. But in the modern blend of complex num-
bers, well-ordering is indeed not projected to the blend. 1 and the square root of 
negative 1 are not equal, yet it is not the case that one of them is "less than" the 
other. Euler is insisting on too thorough a satisfaction of Topology with respect 
to real numbers. It turns out that the successful blend finally achieved had to re-
lax that particular governing principle. 
It is tempting to think that only wildly acrobatic mathematical constructs 
like imaginary numbers could require such a profound relaxation of Topology, 
committing criterial properties of number to the flames. On the contrary, the 
same sorts of struggles and the same kinds of relaxation were necessary to grant 
the status of "number" to irrational numbers, zero, and negative numbers. 
Blaise Pascal himself judged that irrational numbers had no existence independ-
ent of continuous geometrical magnitude. Consider the illuminating reasoning 
of the great theologian and mathematician Antoine Arnauld, a close friend of 
Pascal's in the mid-seventeenth century, about the turmoil involved in thinking 
of negative "numbers" as actual numbers: 
Arnauld questioned that -1:1 = 1:-1 because, he said, -1 is less than +1; hence, 
How could a smaller,be to a greater as a greater is to a smaller? The problem was 
discussed by many men. In 1712 Leibniz agreed that there was a valid objection 

344 
THE WAY WE THINK 
but argued that one can calculate with such proportions because their form is cor-
rect, just as one calculates with imaginary quantities. 
Arnauld, Leibniz, and others were struggling to find an integrated notion of 
number that would include "negative numbers" and yet retain all the properties 
deemed crucial for what everyone already accepted as numbers. For those tradi-
tional numbers, it was certainly true that if a <b, alb could not be equal to b/a. 
In fact, alb had to be smaller than b/a. Well, -1 is less than + 1 in anybody's con-
ception, but -Ill = II-I. To accept "negative numbers" as full numbers that 
could be involved in divisio~ required relaxing what looked like crucial topol-
ogy from the input space of numbers. In the blend, this relaxation yields a fan-
tastic emergent structure, a new concept of division. Dividing two numbers is 
now a matter of determining the ratio of their magnitudes and assigning a sign to 
that ratio based on other operations not previously invented. 
The struggle to achieve the conceptual blend was not eliminated by achiev-
ing perfect formal toutines. As early as the sixteenth century, Raphael Bombelli 
had perfected formal routines for both negative and imaginary numbers. In fact, 
it was the success of these formal routines that created the mathematicians' 
dilemma. John Wallis in the seventeenth century had developed formal routines 
for placing imaginary numbers into correspondence with the two-dimensional 
plane, and associated operations on such numbers with geometric construc-
tions. Amazingly, mathematicians used the formal routines even while refusing 
conceptual status to the nontraditional numbers. 
Given the blends that we have been taught in our sch~ols and universities, 
and that we take for granted, it is easy to be blind to the great creativity involved 
in the invention of the concept of number and the centuries-long struggle to in-
corporate the notion of negative and imaginary numbers into the category 
number. That struggle was a titanic competition between governing principles. 
These advances in number theory were not a mere matter of extending what 
one already knew about number by adding a few new numbers. On the con-
trary, basic notions like division, greater than, and multiplication had to be thor-
oughly reconceived for all numbers in order to create a successful new blend. 
Many potential blends come up in the struggle to achieve an effective one. To 
give just one example, Wallis, by carefUl projection from the input space of real 
numbers, achieved a blend in which negative numbers are both less than zero 
and greater than infinity. Like Arnauld's reasoning, his logic is quite crisp and 
admirable: 
In his Arithmetica Infinitorum (Arithmetic ofInfinitesimals, 1655), he argued that 
since the ratio a/D, when a is positive, is infinite, then, when the denominator is 
changed to a negative number, as in alb with b negative, the ratio should be 
greater than alO because the denominator is smaller. Thus the ratio must be 
greater than infinity. 
" \~~ 
, <"", 
\.~ ; 
' ,' 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
345 
Wallis's reasoning is simple. For usual numbers (i.e., what we call positive num-
bers), as b moves toward zero, alb gets larger and larger, so that aA> is infinite. 
Continuing this procedure, when b is even smaller than zero (i.e., negative), 
shouldn't alb continue to become larger (i.e., larger than infinity)? This is a fine 
blend, but not the mathematically most successful one. In the modern blend we 
use now, we give up the criterial properties of division that Arnauld and Wallis 
wanted to maintain. 
We take the modern blend as almost self-evident, with the negatives nicely 
trailing the positives on an infinite line, but this apparent simplicity is deceptive 
from a cognitive, cultural, and historical point of view. 
Jeff Lansing has pointed OUt other marvelous examples of important scien-
tific blends leading to discovery (by Fourier, Maxwell, and Faraday), which sug-
gests that this is a general process. We emphasize that this type of creativity is 
possible by virtue of the competition of governing principles and the power of 
blending to accommodate them. Douglas Hofstadter has also analyzed the re-
markable analogies in a number of scientific discoveries in physics in the twenti-
eth century; we would add to his analysis that the analogies in question are 
themselves components of creative conceptual blending networks. 
Finally, Unpacking is relatively easy to satisfy in tHe double-scope networks 
since key elements in the blend cannot all be projected back to the same organ-
izing frame of one of the inputs. For example, in Digging Your Own Grave, the 
grave digger is responsible for the death, and this structure cannot be provided 
by the single organizing frame of digging graves. Thus the blend must be un-
packed to the organizing frames of different inputs. 
SUMMARY 
One of our major tasks for the fUture is to investigate and clarify the constitu-
tive and governing principles of conceptual integration. The principles we have 
already discovered turn out to be simple to state, but they interact to produce a 
rich world of products. We recapitulate these principles below, both as a sum-
mary of the progress made so far and as a prompt for further research. This is a 
rich area for further exploration. 
CONSTITUTIVE PRINCIPLES 
Matching and counterpart connections 
Generic space 
Blending 
Selective prOjection 
Emergent meaning 
Composition 
Completion 
Elaboration 
J 

THE WAY WE THINK 
346 
.. 
GOVERNING PRINCIPLES FOR COMPRESSION 
Borrowing for compression 
Single-relation compression by scaling 
Single-relation compression by syncopation 
Compression of one vital relation into another 
Scalability 
, Creation by compression 
Highlights compression 
OTHER GOVERNING PRINCIPLES 
The Topology Principle 
The Pattern Completion Principle 
The Integration Principle . 
The Maximization of Vital Relations Principle 
The Intensification of Vital Relations Principle 
The Web Principle 
The Unpacking Principle 
The Relevance Principle 
OVERARCHING GOALS 
. Achieve Human Scale, 
" 
Noteworthy subgoa/s: 
Compress what is diffuse. 
Obtain global insight. 
Strengthen vital relations. 
Come up with a story. 
Go from Many to One. 
II C HAP T E R 
1 6 
ZOOM OUT 
HUMAN SCALE 
We have seen governing principles for maximizing compression. 
Question: 
• But don't we think of tiny or very brief things by "exploding" them? 
~ .. 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
347 
Our answer: 
Yes. For example, we can understand atoms better by thinking of pinheads 
revolving around an orange. In that sense, we are scaling up rather than scaling 
down. But the net effect is still to bring us to human scale, and also to compress 
very many different events into an intelligible scenario. Similarly, we can under-
stand events in high-energy physics that happen in a few nanoseconds better if 
we use a blend where they happen in a few seconds. Again, the effect is to com-
press many different events into a scenario at human scale. Compression is not a 
matter of absolute size, and is not uniformly achieved by scaling down. In some 
cases it requires scaling up. 
TIME WARPS THROUGH COMPRESSION 
SO time can be shortened or lengthened to make a human scale blend. 
Question: 
• What else can happen to time in the blend? 
Our answer: 
A highlights compression gives at a shot the elements of a story that unfolds 
in time. The painting of the Annunciation in the Merode Altarpiece shows the 
breath of God blowing toward the Virgin Mary's abdomen, and traveling on 
that breath is a homunculus already carrying his own miniarure cross. In Rogier 
van der Weyden's Louvre Annunciation, a medallion hanging from Mary's bed 
depicts the Resurrection. These two paintings prompt for conceptual blends 
that include the story of Christ from the moment when His birth is announced 
to Mary to the time of His Crucifixion and Resurrection. In these scenes, the 
carrying of the cross and the resurrection from the tomb are presented as facts 
before the birth of Christ. The blend in these cases is a human-scale scene, All at 
once, the blend is a single momentary highlight in a larger global story, but it 
includes the other highlights of the larger global story in a single compression. A 
crucial highlight such as the Resurrection, which in the larger story happens 
much later than the Annunciation, is now in the blend a cause of the medallion 
present at the Annunciation. 
The medallion looks so natural in the painting that it is easy to overlook the re-
markable system of compressions to human scale that it is carrying. There is a 
causal link between the space of the annunciation and the space of the resurrection. 
There is an identity link between Christ in the womb of Mary in the Annunciation 
and Christ at the Resurrection. There is a representation link between the Resurrec-
tion and the medallion. And of course there are time and space links between these 
spaces. All of these imperceptible outer-space links are compressed into a visible 
object in the blend. The medallion in the blend is like the blue hockey stick we 
.. -'-

348 
THE WAY WE THINK 
discussed in Chapter 10. It, too, is a visible object in the display that compresses 
outer-space relations of time, space, cause-effect, identity, and representation. 
It might seem as if such a time warp is possible only in blends that represent 
stories that transcend human time, stories of eternal truths or divinity. But in fact 
it is a standard operation of symbolic highlights compressions. In Vermeer's 
Arnolfini Wtdding, the couple, holding hands, is presented in a bedroom, in front 
of the bed, with many extra elements, such as a small dog at their feet. The image 
of the bride is sometimes construed as indicating pregnancy. If we interpret this 
painting as a snapshot in time, the pregnancy can pose a problem. But in a differ-
ent interpretation, it is a highlights compression. The story of marriage includes 
the house, the bedroom, the holding of hands, the wedding clothes, the fidelity 
(represented by the loyal dog), and, of course, the pregnancy and the children. 
The highlights compression giving pregnancy at the moment of the wedding is 
another temporal inversion through compression of cause and effect. Again, the 
wedding is a momentary highlight in a larger story and includes other highlights 
in a single compression. 
The Grim Reaper gives a similar time warp through highlights compression. 
It is one moment-the moment of impending death-in a larger story of dy-
ing, and it includes other highlights in a single compression. Inevitably, there is 
a time warp in the blend. For example, the costume for the religious attendants 
at the funeral is already on the Grim Reaper before he appears to announce the 
impending death. 
SCALING AND 
C REATI NG I NTENTI aNALITY 
We have seen that achieving human scale can involve constructing or intensify-
ing Intentionality in the blend. 
Questiom: 
• Is there a system to constructing Intentionality in the blend? 
• Are there limits to this magic? 
Ouramwers: 
There is a system and an order to constructing Intentionality in the blend, 
but that system is more powerful than we have so far discussed. Consider first 
the case where intentional actions are already in the input spaces. Earlier, we 
discussed the political cartoon in which the politician who vetoes the foreign aid 
is represented as taking food out of the mouths of starving children. In the in-
put with the veto, the politician is already entirely intentional. In the input with 
the frame for taking something away from someone, the agents are already 
';:;, 
Constitutive and Governing Principles 
349 
entirely intentional. Borrowing the frame for taking something away from 
someone provides compression in the blend and has the effect of heightening 
the intentionality of the politician. 
Now consider the case where the topic input has only an event without in-
tentionality. The biological event of death does not involve intentionality. But 
"Death took him" prompts for a blend in which the events are now actions of 
an intentional agent. This is a very general pattern of meaning construction, 
discussed in More Than Cooi Reason and elsewhere as EVENTS ARE ACTIONS. Po-
tentially, it allows any event to be construed in the blend as intentional. Intensi-
fying existing intentionality and attributing intentionality to nonintentional 
events' are not two different kinds of operation. They are both cases where a 
blend integrates the intentionality from one input with events projected from 
the topic input. The distinction is only that in one case the event in the topic 
input has relatively weak intentional structure of its own, and in the other it has 
no intentional structure. EVENTS ARE ACTIONS, then, is a systematic way of con-
structing blends in accordance with the governing principles that intensify and 
create vital relations. 
What if something is not even an event? Can blending give it intentionality? 
The answer is yes, through a precise conceptual procedure called "fictive mo-
tion." We will return to this topic in detail in Chapte~ 17. Fictive motion blends 
a dynamic scenario of motion with a static situation so that the static situation 
can be conceived and described as having motion. Some well-known examples 
are "The ferice runs all the way down to the river," "The mountain range goes 
all the way to Canada," and "The road traces a winding path through the 
mountains." The dynamic input contributes a moving trajector on a path, 
which is mapped onto a relevant dimension of the static object in the other in-
put. Thus, in the blend we have a trajector moving along the relevant dimension 
of the static object. 
Such a blend, in which the static scene now has motion, can be an input to a 
new blend constructed according to EVENTS ARE ACTIONS, in which the static 
scene now has not only motion but intentional structure for that motion. Con-
sider the attested sentence "Trees climb the hills toward the Golan and descend 
to test their resolve near the desert." The line of trees up the hill is a static scene 
that acquires motion by a fictive-motion blend. Blending that ponintentional 
fictive motion blend with an input that has an intentional agent gives a new 
blend in which the trees "climb." Fictive motion on the one hand and EVENTS 
ARE ACTIONS on the other are systems of blending that can be combined into a 
complex system in which nonevents can be given intentional structure. This sys-
tem is an exceptionally good way of satisfying the Intensification of Vital Rela-
tions Principle and the Maximization of Vital Relations Principle, as well as the 
goals of achieving human scale and getting a story. 
" 

~" 
~':~:~; -. \' . 
. .... 
350 
r 
CONSTRAINTS ASSOCIATED 
WITH THE CONSTITUTIVE AND 
GOVERNING PRINCIPLES 
THE WAY WE THINK 
We have seen that the constitutive and governing principles can be satisfied in 
very many ways. Indeed, everywhere we have looked, we have found impressive 
blends that provide superb satisfactions of these principles. 
Questions: 
• You seem to be finding blends everywhere. Does this mean everything is a 
blend? 
• If so, isn't your theory vacuous because it applies to everything? If blend-
ing is everywhere and in everything, how could one say anything focused 
about it? 
Our answers: 
Brains can put together elements in very many ways other than blending. 
When we see a table next to a chair, we are organizing them as spatially adjacent, 
but we are not blending the table and the chair. We may assume that the chair is 
for sitting at the table; we may think they were manufactured to go together and 
were sold together. In this case, we are putting them together in a number of dif-
ferent frames, but we are not matching the inputs, doing selective projection, 
and blending the chair and the table. When we remember that weleft our house, 
went to the furniture store, and bought the chair and table, we are organizing 
events as temporally adjacent, but we are not blending our leaving the house 
with our entering the store, or our entering the store with our buying the furni-
ture. We may further organize the events into a coherent single scenario (leaving 
the house to go to a furniture store in order to buy the chair and table), but again 
this brings mental spaces together without blending the sequential events. We 
may categorize table and chair together as things that are sold in furniture stores 
or as kitchen furniture, but again we are not blending chair and table. We may 
look at a restaurant and see first a chair and then a table, so that they· are linked in 
a perceptual sequence, but again without blending. And so on. We have no rea-
son to think that other species cannot perform these organizing operations in-
volving categorization, spatial and temporal sequencing, and episodic memory. 
All of these organizational operations are available to put together a skier ski-
ing and a waiter waiting on tables. For example, the airborne skier out of con-
trol might land on the waiter at the lodge. Someone might work as a waiter at a 
lodge and ski during her days off. We might see first a skier skiing down the hill 
and then the waiter bringing us our martini. We might do the accounting for a 
lodge that has to take out insurance on both the ski instructor skiing and the 
waiter ~aiting on tables. None of these conceptual organizations establishes a 
Comtitutiv~ and Governing Principles 
351 
cross-space counterpart mapping between the skier skiing and the waiter wait-
ing for the purposes of projecting them to a blend. 
Yet as we have seen, there is another way to put them together-into the 
novice who improves his skiing by making a provisional blend of his skiing and 
the waiter's carrying a tray. 
Of all the ways in which the brain can put two things together, conceptual 
blending is a relatively small subset. The constitutive principles of conceptual 
blending already place a very strong set of limiting constraints on mental 
organizations. 
But as small as it is compared to the brain's full range of possibilities, the set 
of mental organizations that fits the constitutive principles is huge compared to 
the subset that also meets the governing principles. It is easy to come up with . 
any number of blends fitting the constitutive principles that no one would ever 
construct because they run counter to tPe governing principles. For example, it 
is easy to construct a blend that satisfies the constitutive principles but not the 
governing principles for compression. Recall the case where we said of some 
polidcian's vetoing a foreign aid bill that "he's taking the food out of the mouths 
of starving children." Here we see a cross-space mapping between two inputs 
and a compressed blend. B~t suppose we want to talk about someone's actually 
snatching food from a child. Why not use the same inputs and the same cross-
space mapping to say that the snatcher is "vetoing a bill that would provide for-
eign aid to a number of countries"? This blend fits the constitutive principles 
perfectly, but it is entirely alien to us. It takes something that is already com-
pressed and at human scale with a clear story and recasts it as something diffuse 
with many agents and many patients and no single clear goal. It violates Bor-
rowing for Compression, Scaling of Time and Space for Compression, Synco-
pating Compression, the Integration Principle, the Maximization of Vital Rela-
tions Principle, and the Intensification of Vital Relations Principle. It also 
violates overarching goals: Achieve Human Scale, Compress What Is Diffuse, 
Strengthen Vital Relations, and Go from Many to One. 
Consider the mirror network You Are My Long-Lost Daughter. Nothing in 
the constitutive principles prevents us from keeping the cross-space mapping 
between frame counterparts but projecting those frame elements in the inputs 
onto different frame elements in the blend. So the father could say to the 
daughter, "I am your long-lost daughter." This is nearly unintelligible, but not 
because it violates constitutive principles. It completely violates Topology in a 
case where the topology does most of the good work. As a result, it ends up vio-
latingWeb. 
The Buddhist Monk is a mirror network in which the shared frames makes it 
very easy to keep the essential topology of space-time collocation. We have seen 
a blend that gives an easy global insight into the solution. But now suppose we 
chose different projections of the moments in the inputs onto the moments in 

352 
THE WAY WE THINK 
the blend. Suppose that there is a one-to-one mapping between moments in the 
inputs and moments in the blend, but that there is no additional order to the 
mapping. So. for example. dawn in the inputs might be mapped to 11 A.M. in 
the blend. and 11 A.M. in the inputs might be mapped to 9:30 A.M. in the 
blend. Then it is still true that in the blend. the monk meets himself as the two 
monks hop back and forth along the path. and this does indeed. mathemati-
cally. prove that there is a spot on the path that the monk inhabits at the same 
time of day in the two different inputs. but no one can get that inference easily 
out of a blend with a hopping monk. The hopping monk blend fits the consti-
tutive principles just as well as the original Buddhist Monk blend. but it violates 
Topology (in a particularly perverse manner) and as a result destroys Web al-
most completely and gives no global insight. It also precludes the pattern com-
pletion that comes in the original blend from recruiting the common frame of 
two people approaching each other along a path and meeting each other. 
We leave it as an exercise for the reader to recall a good integration network 
but then. keeping the same inputs. to violate the governing principles to pro-
duce horrid expressions like "If the Titanic had been President Clinton. it 
would have been unanimously vilified in the press. instantly impeached by a 
unanimous Congress. tried summarily in the Senate. and promptly kicked out 
of office." This is a blend. It fits the constitutive principles. Yet it violates the 
governing principles so badly that it is hard to believe that it could ~e the struc-
tural analogue to the good Clinton-Titanic blend. although it is. We have only 
switched the topic spaces. but that is enough to force massive decompression. 
II Seventeen 
FORM AND MEANING 
Linguistics is arguably the most hotly contested property 
in the academic realm. It is soaked with the blood of po-
ets. theologians. philosophers. philologists, psycholo-
gists. biologists. and neurologists. along with whatever 
blood can be got out of grammarians. 
-RwsRymfr 
THROUGHOUT THIS BOOK. WE have emphasized 'the importance of com-
pression and of maximizing and intensifying vital relations. Double-scope ca-
pacity provides human beings with the ability to do remarkable compressions. 
and every language provides a systematic array for types of compression. Various 
highly useful compression patterns become conventional and are associated 
with specific grammatical forms. Having studied one example of this in Chapter 
8. we will now consider the general cognitive phen"omenon of associating a 
compression pattern with a linguistic form. 
DOUBLE-SCOPE COMPRESSION 
IN A TWO-WORD NUTSHELL 
We can bring two things together mentally in various ways. Blending them is 
one subset of those ways. and the blends that satisfy the governing principles are 
a much smaller subset. An even smaller subset consists of those core compres-
sion patterns that are entrenched in a culture. The next subset down consists of 
those entrenched compression patterns that have associated grammatical forms. 
It is easy to think that a simple form corresponds to a simple meaning. But 
as we saw. blending can perform massive compressions and express them in 
simple forms. So. by virtue of the power of compression and decompression. a 
simple form can prompt for the construction of an extremely complicated 
meaning. 
Some of the apparently simplest forms in the language consist of putting two 
words together: Noun-Noun compounds like "boat house." Adjective-Noun 
353 

,l ;, 
.;r' , 
<--
354 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
combinations like "angry man," Noun-Adjective combinations like "child-safe 
or "sugar-free." 
Through decompression, we can construct a variety of complicated integra-
tion networks for any given phrase using "safe," such as "dolphin-safe," "shark-
safe, I' or "child-safe." In all such cases, there is successive blending. We first 
blend the mental space for the current situation-involving dolphins, sharks, or 
children-with an abstract frame of danger. This yields a specific cOunterfactual ' 
mental space in which dolphin, shark, o~ child is assigned to a role in the danger 
fram'e. This mental space of specific harm is disanalogous to the mental space 
for the current situation. These two disanalogous spaces are inputs to a new 
blend, in which the disanalogy is compressed into the property safe. 
"Dolphin-safe," as it currently appears on cans of tuna, means that measures 
were taken to avoid harming dolphins during the harvesting of the tuna. "Shark-
safe," as applied to, say, swimming, refers to conditions under which swimmers 
are not vulnerable to attack by sharks. "Child-safe," as applied to rooms, means 
the rooms are free of typical dangers for children. In every case, from simple 
forms the understander must construct elaborate integration networks. 
How one does this mental work may differ from case to case. In "dolphin-
safe tuna," the dolphins are in the role of potential victims. But in "dolphin-safe 
diving," when said of mine-seeking human divers who are protected by dol-
phins who are not themselves at risk, the dolphins are in the role of agents of the 
safety. Contrastingly, "dolphin-safe diving," when said of diving that imitates 
the way dolphins swim and is therefore safe, uses the manner of swimming asso-
ciated with dolphins. If we assume that dolphins eat goldfish, then "dolphin-
safe goldfish" would cast dolphins in the role of predators. Genetic engineers 
who are concerned not to produce anything resembling a dolphin might refer to 
a technique that is known never to lead to a dolphin embryo as "dolphin-safe." 
The dolphin here does not fill the role of victim, victimizer, causal agent, or role 
model. In a world in which the most humiliating thing for a shark is to resem-
ble a dolphin, behaviors that are unquestionably sharkly might be 'called "dol-
phin-safe." And of course, a compositional theory of meaning immune to our 
dolphin examples would be hailed as "dolphin-safe." 
" 
If the adjective "safe" comes before instead of after the noun "dolphin," as we 
saw in Chapter 1, then we find another multiplicity of potential meanings. 
"Safe dolphin" can mean a dolphin who is protected, a dolphin who will not in-
flict the kind of harm other dolphins might cause, the role of swimmer-at-the_ 
front-of-the-school whose responsibility it is to keep the rest of the school safe 
from running into obstructions, or the decoy dolphin robot that behaves in 
such a way as to communicate to other dolphins a situation of complete safety 
and so lulls them into being caught. 
A more specific blending pattern for the compounding of a noun with "safe" 
arises when the noun refers to an endangered species. Now, we can talk about 
<-1:. 
I-,;:r~ 
Form and Meaning 
355 
"turtle-safe nets" or "salamander-safe landscaping" or "hawk-safe agriculture." In 
order to make appropriate sense of these phrases, one must know the compression 
pattern chosen by the culture for thinking about endangered species, and also 
know that it is associated with the Noun-safe form where the Noun picks out an 
endangered species. Without this knowledge, the meaning cannot be predicted 
compositionally ttom the noun 'and the adjective. What the culture ends up with 
in this case is'a very powerful compression-a maximally simple two-word form 
that points to an integrated blend and that satisfies Unpacking by evoking map-
ping schemes and counterfacrual spaces that go with "safe." The particular culture 
that has entrenched this compression has double-scope creativity, a language (En-
glish), ecological concerns, food-packing corporations, and grocery stores. Dou-
ble-scope creativity is universal for our species. The English language offers a syn-
tactic Noun-Adjective form and entrenches certain blend types that go with it, 
like those prompted for by Noun-safe. The ecological concerns are relatively re-
,cent, certainly as applied to dolphins. They make salient and important the sce-
nario of dolphins bei~g harmed by fishing methods, and make it desirable that the 
scenario be counterfactual. Consequently, the scenario is a good candidate for 
Noun-safe expression, arid a good candidate for marketing departments seeking to 
induce shoppers 'to buy their products. This convergence of syntaX and commerce 
creates the compression that appears on cans of tuna fish: "dolphin-safe." 
Examples like "dolphin-safe" are useful because they highlight, in a transpar-
ent and uncontroversial way, the nature of the blending process. Furthermore, 
they abound. Think of "cruelty-free" on bottles of shampoo, or the variety of 
noncom positional integrations running across "waterproof," "tamper-proof," 
"foolproof," and "child-proof," or "talent pool," "gene pool," "swimming pool," 
"football pool," and "betting pool." 
Familiar compositions like "dirt-brown," "pencil-thin," "red pencil," and 
"green house" work in the identical fashion, but because they are very deeply 
entrenched, it is possible to misinterpret them as somehow different in their op-
erations from the examples above. Following Charles Travis, we observe that 
noncom positional conceptual integration is JUSt as necessary in these "core" 
cases. As we have said, "red pencil" can mean a pencil whose wood has been 
painted red on the outside, a pencil that leaves a red mark (the lead is red, or the 
chemical in the pencil reacts with the paper to produce red, or ... ), a pencil 
used to record the activities of the team dressed in red, and a pencil smeared 
with lipstick-not to mention pencils used only for recording deficits. For a set 
of houses that differ only in location and in the color of the kitchen linoleum, 
"green house" can mean the house with green linoleum, where "green linoleum" 
means the one with spots that are green, where "green spots" means spots cre-
ated with a green pencil, where "green pencil" means. , .. 
The scenarios needed for these integrated meanings are no simpler than 
those needed for "dolphin-safe" and "fool-proof." The cognitive capacities 

356 
THE WAY WE THINK 
needed to construct these integrated meanings are the same as those needed to 
interpret the supposedly exotic examples, and these cognitive capacities apply as 
well to the supposedly central examples like "green house," used to mean a 
house whose exterior walls, exclusive of windows, shutters, trim, porches, flash-
ing, foundations, and fascia boards, are mostly green on the weather surface. 
That some interpretations stand out more than others.........:especially when the 
phrases are taken in isolation-stems from the existence of strong defaults. This 
difference has to do with the conceptual and linguistic defaults most likely to be 
activated in any given situation, not with the mechanisms of integration. 
If we look across the central cases like "red pencil" and "government bond," 
we find that some of the relevant defaults are provided by cultural frames with 
rich structure, others by generic roles that run across many frames, others by the 
local situation at the moment of utterance. This last case includes elicitation by 
linguists and philosophers: The subject is asked to judge an expression in a sup-
posedly context-free way, but in fact must construct a minimal context in which 
to interpret it. Such minimal contexts typically use the strongest defaults. 
How do we go from the linguistic units to the conceptual elements or from 
the conceptual elements to the linguistic units? In the case of nominal com-
pounds, the formal unit names two elements in two different spaces, and directs 
the understander to find the rest. We will call these conceptual elements the 
named elements. Consider "land yacht" as a reference to a large, luxurious auto-
mobile. Clearly, "land" and "yacht" come from different domains: Yachts are as-
sociated with water as opposed to land. "Land yacht" gives us land from one 
space and yacht from another, and asks us to perform a mapping between these 
spaces. In this mapping, yacht corresponds to luxury car, land corresponds to 
water, driver corresponds to skipper, and the road for the car corresponds to the 
course for the boat. 
Figure 17.1 shows how the conceptual blend depends on building an analog-
ical mapping, and how, in the corresponding integrated syntactic form "land 
yacht," "land" and "yacht" name elements that are not counterparts in the map-
ping. "Land yacht" now names the new element in the blend, even though it 
names nothing in either of the inputs, and even though land is not a counter-
part of yacht. Formal expression, in this case a two-word combination, prompts 
for the construction of the blend and provides a way of naming part of the 
emergent structure. The general conceptual and linguistic patterns are the same 
in the earlier "prairie schooner." 
Consider "Language is fossil poetry." "Fossil poetry" works just like "land 
yacht": Fossil comes from the domain of paleontology and poetry from the do-
main of expression. In the mapping, poetry corresponds to the living organism, 
while language corresponds to the fossil of that organism. The conceptual ele-
ments named in the integrated syntactic form "fossil poetri,' are not counter-
parts in the conceptual mapping. 
. 
Form and Mt!aning 
357 
FIGURE 17 . . 1 
·LANO YACHT 
Now let us look at the kinds of compressions that can be provided by such 
two-word Noun-Noun nutshells. Consider "jail bait," a phrase used to refer to 
an underage girl whom an adult man finds sexually attractive. "Jail" comes from 
the domain of human criminality, while "bait" comes from the domain of fish-
ing or trapping. In the mapping between them, attraction to the girl corre-
sponds to attra~tion to the bait, initiating sex corresponds to swallowing the 
bait, and ending up in jail (for sex with a minor) corresponds to being caught. 
The conceptual elements named in the integrated syntactic form "jail bait" are 
not counterparts in· the conceptual mapping. Here, obviously, we are prompted 
to borrow the compressions and intensities of the fishing frame for the purpose 
of compressing the sex with a minor frame and intensifying many of its vital re-
lations. For example, the causal chain in the sex with a minor frame, which runs 
from perception to incarceration, can be long and diffuse, whereas the fishing 
frame has direct human-scale causation: A single bodily action results in imme-
diately being caught. There is extraordinary emergent structure. In the blend, 
the man is not to blame. In the space of fishing, the fish does not know that the 
bait is bait. In the space with the man and the mjnor, the man certainly does 

;~~:! 
, -' 
THE WAY WE THINK 
358 
,. 
know about laws and jail and he recognizes that sex with the girl is legally for-
bidden. But in the blend, he is blameless for the action, indeed even the prime 
victim, even though he understands the law, the prohibition, the possible pun-
ishment, and the reasons for it. The "jail-bait" blend may acquire further emer-
gent structure through the Intensification of Vital Relations Principle. In the 
fishing space,' the intentionality is in the fisherman's attempt to trick the fish and 
catch it. In the other input (st'x with a minor) the intentionality is in the man's 
attraction. There is no counterpart for the fisherman in the space with the mi-
nor, but it is nevertheless possible to project something like the fisherman's in-
tentionality into the blend. One corresponding interpretation holds the girl her. 
self responsible for what befalls the man. Another might bring in the Devil. Yet 
another might bring in the injustice of society and its laws. 
"Jail bait" is an example of a two-word nutshell that prompts for compression 
through borrowing of the inner-space relationships in the fishing frame. In that 
compression, Time is scaled down and a diffuse interpersonal interaction with 
many actions is compressed into a single action-swallowing the bait. This com-
pression can create relations in the blend, such as the attribution of intentionality 
to the young woman. There is also highlights compression: The sequence in the 
human story of perception, greeting, seduction, doing the deed, having it be-
come known, being arrested and tried and sentenced and jailed is all compressed 
in the blend into seeing and doing, where, because taking the bait is automati-
cally taking the hook, there is no separation between committing the act and be-
ing punished. This is ;u{'·intense Cause-Effect compression. In the blend, the Ef-
fect is literally in the Cause because the hook is literally inside the bait. "Jail bait" 
is said as advic~: The compression is meant to focus the man on the Effect by 
making it part of the Cause, thus giving him powerful global insight. 
By contrast, we have seen many cases where it i~ out~r-spaa vital relations be-
tween the inputs that are compressed in the blend, as in "caffeine headache," 
"money problem," and "nicotine fit," analyzed in Chapter 11, in which the Dis-
analogy between the inputs is compressed into a, Property in the, blend. For ex-
ample, money problems are a certain kind of problem, the ones caused by ab-
sence of money. Again, we see the simplest possible linguistic form prompting 
for remarkably complicated integration networks. Communicating through 
simple grammatical forms is possible because cognitively modern human beings 
can bring to bear on those forms all of double-scope integration and its govern-
ing principles and overarching goals. The language itself does not have to carry 
such operations as compression or pattern completion because human brains 
supply those operations at no linguistic cost. 
One common aspect of these compounds is that someone attempting to "un-
pack" the linguistic form does not begin from the assumption that the named 
elements are necessarily conceptual counterparts. When presented with such a 
linguistic form, we cannot predict, a priori, the relationship between the named 
• "i " 
Form and Meaning 
359 
elements. Notice that the generic roles of these elements are different in "land 
yacht," "fossil poetry," and "jail bait." "Land" is a locative, "fossil" is a product 
of a process, and "jail" is a result. "Yacht" is a means, "poetry" an activity and its 
product, and "bait" an instrument. 
Now consider "boat house." The same operations are involved. As in "land 
yacht," we have a connection between the two different spaces of land and wa-
ter: Houses are as'sociated with land, boats with water. In the mapping between 
them, the residents of the house correspond to the boats, the house itself corre-
sponds to a protective shelter for storing the boats, and leaving the house corre-
sponds to being launched. "Boat" and "house" name elements that are not 
counterparts in this mapping. 
Of course, there is no restriction that prevents the named elements from be-
ing counterparts. Consider "house boat," which again evokes two different 
spaces of land and water. In the space of land, the resident lives in the house; in 
the space of water, the sailor is aboard the boat. In the formal integration "boat 
house," "boat" and "house" are not conceptual counterparts; but in "house 
boat," the boat and the house are conceptual counterparts, and they map onto a 
single element in the blend. Similarly, "jail house" evokes a domain of domestic 
residence and a domain of criminal punishment. In the mapping between them, 
the jail a~d the house are conceptual counterparts, and they map onto a single 
element in the blend. This corresponds to the possibility we saw in Chapter 8 
for "Y-of" expressions like "city of London" and "burden of guilt" where Y and 
Z are counterparts. As Christine Brooke-Rose'shows in great detail, Noun-
Phrase-of-Noun-Phrase can name metaphoric counterparts, such as "fire of 
love." Charles Fillmore gives the example "One needn't throw out the baby of 
personal morality with the bath water of traditional religion." These counterparts 
need not be metaphoric: "the nation of England," "the island of Kopipi," "the 
feature of decompositionality," "the condition of despair." 
In all of these cases, including those in which the syntactic form names ele-
ments that are blended conceptually-:-"house boat" and "jail house" -the 
blend is both less and more than the composition of the input spaces. In "land 
yacht," we ignore that yachts have cooking and sleeping facilities and require no 
manufactured course. Yet the blend contains more than the inputs: For ex-
ample, the inputs may supply the knowledge that we are dealing with a vehicle, 
but not that it is a car as opposed to something else, or that many specific fea-
tures that we link with luxury cars belong to the land yacht: electric windows, 
leather upholstery, opera windows, and suspension built for comfort rather than 
handling. 
In "fossil poetry," on the one hand, we ignore that fossils are typically associ-
ated with extinct species, and generally that poetry is not physical or biological. 
On the other hand, the conception of language as a derivative of poetry, which 
is the central inference of the blend, is absent from the input space. In "jail 

360 
THE WAY WE THINK 
bait," we ignore that someone intends to lure the fish while perhaps no one in-
tends to lure the man. We ignore that the man is neither a fish nor (in the case 
where he merely admires) a criminal. In the blend, we make use of the particu-
lar social frame according to which the world is full of pitfalls and traps for the 
man, teasing him with what it forbids. In the space with the fish, fish are not ca-
pable of such a perspective, while in the space of criminal action, the world does 
not necessarily tempt people to commit crimes. 
The situation is no different when the named elements happen to be concep-
tual counterparts. In "house boat," we ignore that houses have yards and are sta-
tionary or that boats are designed principally for travel. We also know many 
things from background knowledge about house boats that are not derivable 
from the inputs. We know that a house boat cannot be simply a regular boat put 
on land that happens to have people living in it, or a regular boat at mooring 
that someone has been living in; but there is nothing in blending or the use of 
language to prompt for integration networks that would forbid these meanings. 
We see in these examples the falsity of the general view that conceptual struc-
ture is "encoded" by the speaker into a linguistic structure, and that the linguis-
tic structure is "decoded" by the hearer back into a conceptual structure. An ex-
pression provides only sparse and efficient prompts for constructing a 
conceptual structure. 
The problem, then, is to find the relations between formally integrated lin-
guistic structure on the one hand and conceptually integrated structures built 
by the speaker or retrieved by the hearer on the other. In general, we will find 
that the conceptual integration is detailed and intricate, while the formal inte-
gration gives only the briefest indication of a point from which the hearer must 
begin constructing this conceptual integration. 
BLACK KETTLES 
AND BROWN COWS 
Another deceptively simple construction is Adjective-Noun, again a two-word 
nutshell. We have already seen with "safe" that the adjective prompts for a spe-
cific complex mapping scheme and conceptual blend. While nominal com-
pounds give named elements, one from each input, and leave, the blending to 
us, the adjective in an Adjective-Noun compound brings its own mapping 
scheme for the resulting integration network. The mapping schemes are espe-
cially distinctive for adjectives such as "safe," "likely," "possible," "eligible," and 
"fake." As we discussed, the mapping scheme for "safe" includes a general sce-
nario in which something is harmed, a specific real scenario, the application of 
the harm scenario to the real situation to produce a counterfactual scenario in 
which some particular thing in the real situation is · harmed, and creation of a 
blend in which there is now "absence of harm." 
Form and M~aning 
361 
Eve Sweetser considers the case in which "likely candidate" means not some-
one likely to become a political candidate or succeed as a political candidate 
but, for example, a political candidate likely to grant an interview. As she 
writes, "So long as we can think up a scenario relative to the candidate in ques-
tion, and evaluate that scenario for likelihood, likely candidate can mean the 
candidate who figures in the scenario we have labeled as likely." On her analysis, 
conceiving of such a scenario and evaluating it consists of finding a blend of the 
frame for likelihood, conceived of as probability of occurrence in a sequence, 
and the frame for candidate. Like "safe," "likely" prompts for a blend. "That is a 
likely event" decompresses into two contrasting outcome spaces, one expected 
and with the event, the other not expected and where the event has no counter-
part. In the blend, the event has the property likely. "Likely person" this time 
decompresses into a series of events that share the same frame and are disanalo-
gous only with respect to the value of some role, and marks one of those events 
as likely in the sense we just discussed. For example, if the frame is giving an in-
terview, "likely person" can be interpreted as indicating that the contrasting 
event space that has that person in the role of interviewee is an expected one. 
The property likely in this case is a double compression of contrasting expecta-
tions and disanalogy on the value of a role. If the noun modified by "likely" 
evokes a particular frame, that frame may be selected as the frame that organizes 
all the contrasting events. "Likely candidate" can therefore mean "someone 
likely to become a candidate" or "a candidate likely to be chosen or elected." 
But, as Sweetser shows, other frames can be used. "Likely candidate" can be 
used to mean a candidate likely to give an interview; "likely suspect" is similar, 
meaning alternatively "a person likely to be deemed a suspect" or "a suspect 
likely to be guilty" or "a suspect likely to be convicted." But the scenario of like-
lihood in the blend need not be the one evoked by the noun. Sweetser's reading, 
"a candidate likely to grant an interview," does not use the likelihood of either 
becoming a candidate or being chosen. If every year the governor pardons 
someone in the jail house, we might bet on who is the "likely suspect." Simi-
larly, "possible textbook" may refer to a textbook that might possibly be chosen 
as required reading in a college course. 
Just as the different meanings of "safe" may go unnoticed, so may the differ-
ent meanings of "possible" and "likely." But from a logical standpoint, a "possi-
ble textbook" in the sense of an existing textbook that might be adopted is not 
the same as a "possible textbook" in the sense of a textbook that might be writ-
ten or of an existing popular book that could serve as a textbook. 
Seana Coulson has shown that the adjective "fake" carries an especially elabo-
rate blending and mapping scheme. It calls for two input spaces with a Dis-
analogy connector, such that an element in one space is "real" but in the other 
space its counterpart is not. For example, the "fake" of "fake gun" prompts a 
mapping between an actual scenario with an agent 3j1d an instrument, and a 

f~;t(~ 
362 
THE WAY WE THINK 
,;' 
.. 
counterfactual scenario in which the counterpart of that instrument is a real gun 
and some other participants react accordingly. In the blend, the reactions and 
beliefs of other participants are projected from the counterfactual scenario, 
while the nature of the object and the beliefs of the gunman are projected from 
the actual scenario. The entire situation is now construed through the blend, 
and the language for picking out the element in the blend can be used to pick 
OUt its counterpart in the actual input space. In the blend, the counterfactual vi-
tal relation of this interplay between the two perspectives is compressed into a 
Property of the element identified by "gun" (through projection from the "real" 
input). In the case of fake flowers meant to decorate a dining table, there is an 
input space in which the objects are flowers and a space in which they are not, 
because they are silk or rubber or for some other reason. There is a Disanalogy 
connector between the flowers in one space and the silk or rubber object in the 
other space. This relation is compressed into a property of the object in the 
blend. It is now a "fake flower." Note there need be no indication that any of 
the participants believes the object is a flower. It can be treated as a flower, per-
haps for aesthetic purposes, by projection from one space, and as not a flower by 
projection from the other space. One might enjoy it but not have to water it. 
"Fake money'" requires two spaces, one in which the object is money and the 
other in which it is just paper, for example. There are many possible projections 
to the blend. For example, the fake money might not be legal currency but still 
have monetary value because it is issued by a casino for in-house use. Alterna-
tively, it could be used t6 fool someone by making him a worthless payment. In 
that case, the space where it is money is also the belief space of the person 
fooled, and the space where it is paper is the belief space of the crook. 
Adjectives like "safe," "likely," "possible," and "fake" compress complex 
outer-space vital relations between inputs into properties of elements in the 
blend. But so do less remarkable adjectives like "little" and "big." First, it is well 
known that such adjectives are "relative." Something is little or big only relative 
to a standard. Furthermore, the notion of little or big relative to a standard pre-
supposes comparison with the standard and, in general, comparison of two ob-
jects. Following Euclid, it is natural to think of this comparison as consisting of 
bringing the two objects into an encounter with each other-superimposing 
them, in Euclid's case, or putting them next to each other and looking at the re-
sult. Whether executed mentally or physically, this encounter is a blend, with 
composition and emergent structure. In the blend, one is part of the other in 
the case of superposition, or the top of one is lower than the top of the other in 
the case of placing them next to each other, or some similar relationship 
emerges from the encounter. In the case of superposition, for example, the 
outer-space disanalogy berween the rwo objects corresponds to the inner-space 
relationship of part-whole. In the same way, we can compare three objects of 
different sizes, 1, 2, and 3, so that in the blend, 1 is part of 2 and 2 is part of 3. 
Form and Meaning 
363 
These part-whole relationships in the blend correspond to the outer-space rela-
tions in which 1 is smaller than 2 and 2 is smaller than 3. With this blend in 
hand as one input, and the general schema of a category and its central example 
as the other input, we make a new blend in which we have three members of the 
category and the central example is 2. This blend is a general schema of compar-
ison of three elements of some category, and in this blend, 1 is little, 2 is stan-
dard, and 3 is big. The outer-space disanalogy relations in the nerwork have as 
their counterpart the inner-space properties of little, standard, and big. 
For these properties to actually apply to anything, rwo further blends are re-
quired. In the first, the general schema of little, standard, and big is one input 
and the other input is a specific category (e.g., elephants, butterflies, planets) 
and its central example. In this blend, there is a standard prototypical elephant, 
for example, and also a metric for eiephants on which this one is the standard 
size. To judge the size of a particular elephant, we need one more blend, which 
has as one input the standard elephant and its spot on the elephant metric, and, 
as the other input, the particular elephant. In the blend, the particular elephant 
will be little, standard, or big. 
This imaginative compression of relations into properties follows lines we have 
seen many times. The first integration nerwork, which gives us 1 as part of2 and 2 
as part of 3 in the blend, is a mirror network: The input spaces have the same 
frame, in which there is a particular type of object with a specific size. The next in-
tegration nerwork, which blends the 1-2-3 blend with the general frame for a cat-
egory and its central example, is a double-scope network: In the blend, for ex-
ample, 2 is both the central example and the container for 1 and part of 3. The 
third integration nerwork is a double-scope nerwork where the rwo organizing 
frames are completely compatible: The general little-standard-big frame, which al-
ready includes the structure of category and prototype, is blended with a particu-
lar category and its prototype. The last integration network is a simplex nerwork, 
in which the particular category, its prototype, and the little-standard-big metric 
for that category are blended with a particular element of that category. 
Because little and big strike us as simple properties, it is natural to think that 
the conceptual work underlying their meaning must be simple. But just as the 
simple perception of a color is caused by extremely complex perceptual work, so 
is the simple recognition of something as little or big. 
And brown cows? It's the same story, a story partly told already by Charles 
Travis for black kettles and green apples. Suppose we are looking at a kettle and 
Charles Travis says "This kettle is black" and we all agree that it is indeed black. 
But then Charles wipes the soot off the kettle and we see that it is green, so it 
isn't black. But is it really green? Charles scrapes off the green paint, and we see 
that the underlying metal is black, so maybe the kettle is black after all. But now 
as the sunlight hits it, we see that it is actually dark brown. Charles gives us pur-
ple glasses, and now we see that the kettle is black. The moral of this first part of 

364 
THE WAY WE THINK 
Travis's story is that there is no absolute sense in which the property black ap-
plies to the kettle or not. Particular circumstances and contextual presupposi-
tions make it appropriate or inappropriate to call the kettle black. 
The second part of the story is that we can call the kettle black if it has a 
black decorative design; if it has a black spot while all the other kettles have 
green spots; if it is one of two identical kettles with no black color on their sur-
faces and it is on the black oven instead of the white one; if it is the one that 
came in the black box; if it was manufactured by a company owned entirely by 
blacks; and so on. Each time "black" is used in these cases, we feel that it is indi-
cating a Property of a kettle. And at the same time, we see from the examples 
above that there is no such stable property in any absolute sense that could be 
defined for the kettle once and for all independently of anything else. How can 
this be? The answer is that "black" is like the other adjectives we saw. It prompts 
for an integration network and compresses some outer-space relations into the 
inner-space Property black in the blend. 
Note that we focus exclusively on cases where it seems that the color black 
has been assigned literally to an element, and not on metaphoric or metonymic 
uses such as "black magic" or "black arts." In what looks like strict color assign-
ment, "black" followed by a noun prompts for a mapping scheme in which one 
space has colors (in particular, the color black) and the other space has the ele-
ment picked out by the noun. We are to find a cross-space mapping between the 
color black and something salient in the other space. Typically, the nou~ might 
pick out an object one of whose visible parts has a color that is close to black. In 
the integration network, that color is mapped onto the color black in the space 
of basic colors. By selective projection, only the color black from the color input 
is projected to the blend, while the object and its environment are projected 
from the other input. Thus, in the blend, the object itself has the Property black 
to the exclusion of any other colors. And as the black spot example shows, this is 
possible regardless of the actual objective amount of other colors on the object. 
But parts of an object are only one kind of salient aspect of an element in a 
space. As the oven example shows, what the object is sitting on can be salient. 
Similarly, what it contains can be salient (a red cup containing black paint can 
be a "black cup" next to a red cup containing white paint). Also, the producer of 
the object can be salient, so the kettle produced by blacks can be the "black ket-
tie." Bur the element in the space evoked by the noun does not have to be a pro-
totypical object. We can refer to a "black sky" where "black sky" can mean that a. 
few ominous clouds are dark enough to be mapped onto black in the basic color 
space. 
Evidently, color adjecti~es prompt for specific complex integration networks 
in which outer-space connections correspond to color Properties in the blend. 
This blending scheme explains why the red of "red bal!," "red lipstick," "red 
hair," and "red fox" can be very different shades. The color of the fox, for 
Form and Meaning 
365 
instance, is mapped onto red because the mammalian fur colors are mapped 
onto the basic colors black, red, white, brown, yellow, and grey, and the fact that 
these fur colors are basic for mammalian fur is mapped onto the fact that black, 
red, white, brown, yellow, and grey are basic for color in general. This outer-
space mapping between the inputs is compressed -in the blend so that the fox 
does indeed have the Property red. In the blend, the color of the fox is now a 
central instance of the color category red. A fox spray-painted candy-apple red 
could still be called a "red fox," and in the blend would have the Property red, 
but now this red would count as a nonstandard instance of the category red. In 
the blend, the color of the everyday red fox comes from the input of furry ani-
mals, but its status as basic and red comes from the input of basic color terms. 
So, the interpretation of "brown cow" turns out to involve an integration 
network, and "little brown cow" turns out to involve all the major types along 
the continuum of integration networks, from simplex to mirror to double-
scope. This is not as remarkable as it might seem. Semanticists who have looked 
closely at size and color terms have produced ever more complicated analyses of 
how they work. The most sophisticated analysis of size terms is perhaps Ronald 
Langacker's, which recognizes the same degrees of complexities that we do. The 
folk notion that simplicitY of form, conventionality or'vocabulary, and fre-
quency of use indicate simplicity of underlying conceptual organization has 
been thoroughly recognized as a fallacy. 
That blending is a component of many diverse constructions should be no 
more surprising than that chemical bonds are ubiquitous in chemicals. In point-
ing out the role of bler'tding, we are not claiming that the phenomena in ques-
tion reduce to just blending. 
F"DRMAL BLENDING 
Novel conceptual blends do not generally need novel forms of expression. A lan-
guage already has all of the grammatical forms it needs to express almost any 
conceptual blend. For example, all the two-word expressions we have consid-
ered in this chapter use existing syntax: compound forms like Noun-Noun, Ad-
jective-Noun, and Noun-Adjective, as well as particular existing nouns or adjec-
tives filling those forms. The concept land yacht may be a new blend, but the 
phrase uses existing grammar and vocabulary to prompt for the land yacht inte-
gration network. 
Forms are mental elements, and they can be blended just like any mental ele-
ments. Sometimes, this blending will align with the blending of conceptual 
structure to which the forms attach. We can see this pressure to achieve formal 
organization to express conceptual blending across a range of constructions, 
from morphemes to sentences. Consider single-word integrations like "Chun-
nel," referring to the tunnel that runs under the Englis~ Channel. Clearly, there 

,. 
366 
T 
W 
W T 
,.,
~, 
HE 
AY 
E 
HIN!} ~>. 
fS.~· :t ~~-
is a conceptual construction that integrates structure from both the abstract 
frame of a tunnel and the specific frame of the body of wat~r between England 
and France. This integrated unit can serve as the site for integrating a great 
range of knowledge, from the relevant geology to problems of engineering, from 
the history of relations between England and France to issues of quarantine, dis-
ease, and ecology. Its corresponding grammatical form, "the tunnel under the 
English Channel," is already tightly integrated. English makes available an even 
more compact compound-noun construction, "the Channel tunnel." By fortu-
itous accident, a further integration of form is possible, given the phonemes in 
"Channel" and "tunnel." This integration is a formal blend, triggered by a par-
tial phonological and orthographic mapping between the two words. Pressure to 
integrate produces (in the case of English) "Chunnel"j the corresponding acci-
dents are lacking in French, leaving as the most integrated form "tunnel sous La 
Manche." This shows another important aspect of integration: Ie is opportunis-
tic. The fact that this opportunism depends in any specific case upon apparently 
peripheral accidents can lead to the mistaken view that the operation itself is pe-
ripheral. But in actuality, it is precisely through opportunistic exploitation of ac-
cidents that the most central events and structures can arise. Evolution teaches 
us that this is nO[ paradoxical. 
Suzanne Kemmer reports the following example of integration: 
"The Whiners' most '~ommon complaint is that they've been relegated to what 
Mr. Coupland calls 'McJobs.''' 
"Mc" evokes a space of fast food and employment in that industry. "Jobs" 
evokes the more general frame of seeking employment. They have roles in com-
mon (workers, employers, wages, benefits, possibilities for advancement, etc.), 
providing a generic foundation for the blend. Two input spaces are set up, one 
for aspects of McWorld and another for seeking employment. A straightforward 
mapping links common roles. But that mapping does not in itself provide the 
central inference of "McJobs." Specific aspects of jobs at McDonalds-no pres-
tige, no chance of advancement, no challenge, no future, boredom, a certain 
kind of social stigma-are blended with the more general notion of low-level 
service jobs. Absent this blend, we would be free to associate low-level service 
jobs with other stereotypes-altruistic and even saintly devotion to others, 
climbing of the social ladder, small-town serenity and rourine, freedom from 
avarice and grueling ambition. So this simple blend brings in analogical map-
ping, the construction of a generic space, and, in the blend, such new categories 
as the McJob, the type of person who has the McJob, and the pay scale for a 
McJob. One purpose is to bring inferences from th.e blend to the conception of 
crucial realities-such as the plight of young people in the modern economy-
and to influence legislation and government policy. The blend's power and 
Fonn and Meaning 
367 
efficiency seem to derive from its homogeneous internal structure and its corre-
sponding formal compression into a single word. The striking thing about this 
unit is that it creates new conceptual structure while all the conceptual engi-
neering that went into building it can be retrieved by a member of the relevant 
linguistic and cultural community from the single word "McJobs." We see that 
the blend satisfies governing principles at the conceptual and formal levels: It of-
fers maximal formal and conceptual Compression and Integration and satisfies 
both Web and Unpacking. 
Formal blending can occur independent of whether there is any background 
conceptual blending. An ad on the back of a bus for the Del Mar racetrack, 
whose post time is 2:00 P.M., reads: "Hunch hour. 2 P.M." To get the pun, we 
must access both "hunch" and "lunch hour" simultaneously. This means doing 
pattern completion from "hunch hour" to "lunch hour." It means doing a par-
tial mapping of "hunch" to "lunch hour": "Hunch" and "lunch" are noun 
phrases that differ only in their initial phoneme. It means projecting both the 
"unch" of "hunch" and the "unch" of "lunch" onto the "unch" of "hunch hour," 
and projecting the nominal compound structure (N 1 N2) of "lunch hour" onto 
the corresponding nominal compound structure of "hunch hour." And it means 
projecting the common noun status of the counterparts ("hunch" and "lunch") 
onto the noun status of "hunch" in the blend. 
Suppose one speaker in a group wonders aloud whether the new mall down 
. the road is still open at 9 P.M., and another speaker responds, "Well, they should 
be, since everyone knows about Amahl and the Night Visitors." Here, "Amahl" in 
the title of the ·opera is blended with the noun-phrase "a mall," bur there is no 
conceptual blend. Or consider the caption in Latitude 38 accompanying pic-
tures of the 1994 Vallejo boat race, which had two legs, with the upwind leg 
particularly sunny: "Vallejo 94-Two legs, sunny side up." This caption re-
quires formal blending, partial projection, mapping between forms, pattern 
completion, and so on, but no conceptual blending: The race is not blended 
with a particular breakfast dish. 
Sometimes, the formal blend parallels the conceptual blend very closely. The 
Atlanta Constitution of February 17, 1994, carried a front-page caption reading 
"Out On a Limbaugh," followed by a summary of the story to be found inside: 
"Critics put the squeeze on Florida's citrus industry for its $1 million deal with 
broadcaster Rush Limbaugh." To get the punning effect of "Out On a Lim-
baugh," we mUst access "out on a limb" and "Limbaugh" simultaneously. Be-
hind this formal blend is a conceptual blend with two input spaces: one with an 
agent who climbs out on a tree limb, another with the deal between the Florida 
citrus industry and Rush Limbaugh. Just as limb and Limbaugh are blended 
conceptually, so "limb" and "Limbaugh" are blended formally. In this particular 
unusual case, conceptual counterparts that are conceptually blended have for-
mal expressions that are formally blended. In fact, the fonnally blended element 

368 
TH E WAY W E THINK 
refers to the conceptually blended element. The formal blend, as is standard for 
a blend, comains formal StrUcture: that is not calculable from the formal inputs. 
Let us look at thesc formal inputs. ~Out On a limb~ has an indefinite article 
with a COmmOn nOun. "Lirnbaugh~ is a prop<"r Surname. Although a proper sur-
name in English can become a conltnOIl 110un indicaling one of a group of 
JX'<'plc with that surname ("She", a Kennedy," "She', the poo,,,,' Kennedy") or 
one of a group of people analogically equivaJem !O a panicular person ("He's an 
Einsrein"), rhis is nOl what is going on here. Nor is "J Limbaugh" a case of 
an indefinite article med with a proper noun referring to an unknown person 
who happens !O have that label. as in 'There is a Fidelia Cumqual on dIe tele-
phone for YOll." In «0 111 On a Limbaugh,H «Umbaugh" has nOI become a com-
mon noun, rererring to namesakes or analogues of Limbaugh; nor is il picking 
OUI an unknown person. On Ihe conuary, il is picking Olll all eXlT<:mdy well· 
known particular person. Nonetheless ~Limballgh" (ollom an indefinite artide; 
this is a property of its counterpart "limb" in the otha input to the blend. A!; a 
resnll, the formal blend has new syntactico-semantic srructurc--namely, indefi· 
uite article + proper name associated wi:h a known person. 
In the Limbaugh example, We see formal blending and conceptual bknding in 
clme parallel, bill Ihis mirroring is very rare. We ha'·e already seen cases of formal 
blending that have no corresponding blend at the conceptual level. Conversely. 
mOst conceplllal blending happens with no corresponding formal blend. For ex-
ample. "Look betoTl! you leap~ is a standard prompt for metaphorical blends that 
has no formal blending. There are even cases where conceplUal blending and (or-
mal blending aTl! both at work but the formal blend rlllts conTrary to the concep-
tual blend. For example, contestants on the BBe game show "My \Vord» were 
challenged to come up with an intelligible expression identical to the tide of any 
popular show song except for a single lener in the last word-
for example, 
"When yon wore a pink carnation/and [ wore a big red nose.» One contestant's 
response was "Why can't a woman/be mOre like a mat?» (The original. from M] 
Fair Lad], is «Why can·t a woman/be more like a man'") At the formal level, 
"man" and "mat·· are blended. but at the conceplllalle""l. ma" is to be blended 
not will, mal bill with its opposing d ement: prrw" wlJO walla 0" t/" mal. 
The impulse [0 do formal blending for ilS own sake, and the corollary dispo-
sition to find conceptual blends behind the formal blends. is evident in many 
jokes, slIch as the following anonymous obituary. posted widely on the lntanet: 
Vc[cron Pillsbury sj><,k""p"r,<on. ,hc Pill<bury Dou);hboy, diM yes[crday of" ,;e. 
ve", yeast infc"Ction and complications from rql<.·:ued pokes to [he belly. He wa, 
71. Doughboy wa, buric-d in 0. ' liW"ly gr:o.t.>cd coffin. Du",n, uf celchriti"" tUfnM 
Out. including Mrs. Bm'''rwonh. the C.liforni. Rai, in<, Hungry Jack. S"ny 
Crocker, the Hostess T winkies, C'p,a;n Crunch. and many others. The graveside 
was piled hi);h with Auurs as lon);[ime fr.cnd. Aunt Jcmima. delivered thc cul"!;Y. 

I 
370 
THE WAY WE THINK 
! 
not simultaneously study the blending schemes for which these language forms 
prompt. Even when the language forms are simple--as in "jail bait"-the corre-
sponding integration networks can be very complicated. 
We will now analyze the central role of blending in some more elaborate con-
structions. This will give an idea of the general inseparability of language, 
blending, and compression. Language has elaborate formal patterns because it 
prompts for powerful blending schemes. But the formal patterns and blending 
schemes are so deeply entrenched as to be almost invisible to consciousness. 
CAUSED MOTION 
One of the most common and familiar human scenes involves moving an ob-
ject: We throw it, kick it, hurl it, or nudge it, and it moves in a direction and 
lands somewhere. This is the "caused-motion" scene. It contains an 'agent who 
does something, and that act causes an object to move. There are verbs whose 
entire job is to indicate some specific version of the °caused-motion scene, like 
"throw," "hurl," and "toss." Many, perhaps' all, languages have such verbs and a 
pattern into which they fit. In English, that pattern is Subject-Verb-Object-
Place, as in "Jack threw the ball over the fence." But in English, unlike most lan-
guages, this pattern can also be used with verbs that in themselves do not ex-
press caused motion, verbs like "walk," "sneeze," and "point." So we get "I 
walked him into the room," "He sneezed the napkin off the table," and 
"I pointed him toward the door." This patteni can even accommodate verbs 
that involve no physical motion at all-verbs like "tease," "talk," and "read." So 
we get "They teased him out of his senses," "I will talk you through the proce-
dure," and "I read him to sleep." In these examples, the subject performs some 
action and this causes the object to "move" either literally or metaphorically, in a 
"direction" either literal or metaphoric.' The caused-motion construction has 
been studied in great detail by Adele Goldberg. 
In all of these cases, the form is prompting for an integration network that 
has the caused-motion scene as one input and some other diffuse scene (involv-
ing walking, or throwing, or sneezing, or talking, or reading, etc.) as the other 
input. In the case of "He sneezed the napkin off the table," the diffuse input 
consists of a sequence of events in which there is a person, a napkin, and a 
table; the person sneezes; the sneeze moves the ambient air; the air stream im-
pacts the napkin; and the napkin, because it is light, moves under pressure 
from the air stream, typically reaching the edge of the table where gravity 
causes it to move in a quasi-parabolic path (except for air resistance) to land on 
the floor, which it cannot penetrate, because, after all, it is only a napkin. In 
rl,p cliffuse input, we have an action (sneezing), an agent, and a motion by an 
• • 
.. 
• 
t 
II
Form and Mtaning 
371 
an object, and a direction. Conceptually, there is a natural mapping from the 
caused-motion scene to the diffuse input:' The agent maps onto the agent, 
the object onto the object, the direction onto the direction, and the action-mo-
tion onto any of a number of distributed candidates-the action, the causal re-
lation, or the motion. 
In the compressed input, there is a syntactic form associated with the concep-
tual compression. In the diffuse input, particular words like "sneeze" and "nap-
kin" and "off" and "table" are associated with individual events and elements. In 
the full integration network, the conceptual compression and the syntactic form 
come from the compressed input, while some individual words come from the 
diffuse input through selective projection. In the case of "He sneezed the napkin 
off the table," we integrate the conceptual structure of the caused-motion scene 
with many elements and events from the diffuse input: the agent, the action, 
the causation, the object, the motion, and the direction. The single action-
motion in the caused-motion input maps to at least three different e1ements-
the action, the causal link, and the motion in the diffuse input. We also inte-
grate the caused-motion syntax (Subject-Verb-Object-Place) with a few of the 
words available for the diffuse input-in this case, a word for the agent ("he"), a 
word for the action ("sneeze"), and some words for the object and the direction. 
But notice that we do not bring in a word for the causal link from the diffuse 
input, or a word for the motion of the object. Because the mapping from the ac-
tion-motion to the diffuse input is not one-to-one, we have many possibilities 
for projecting words from the diffuse input. We might project a word for the 
causal link rather than the action or the motion, as in "Sarge let the tanks into 
the compound." This example typically evokes a military situation in which 
Sarge's permission is needed for the tanks to enter the compound. The sentence 
does not specify the particular causal action performed by Sarge (waving his 
hand, signing a paper, giving a verbal OK by telephone) or the motion of the 
tanks (being carried in on trucks, airlifted by helicopters, moving on their own 
power). We might project a word for the motion of the object, as in "He rolled 
the barrels into the warehouse," where it is the barrel that rolls, not the agent. 
The sentence does not specify the particular causal action (pushing the barrels, 
kicking them down a ramp, pressing a button to release the queue of barrels, 
. . . ), nor does it specify a causal link. In fact, the single integrated action-mo-
tion in the caused-motion input includes manner of both action and motion, as 
we see in specifically caused-motion verbs like "throw," "push," and "hurl," 
which indicate something about both the manner of the action and the manner 
of the motion of the obj~ct. So the single action-motion co~nects to the manner 
of the action and the manner of the motion in the diffuse input as well, and we 
can project words for those manners into the blend, as in "He floated the boat 
.~ ~p" " " 1 "Hf" w;l'P"l E'd the nail out of the ho lr " The scenes evoked by these

:)/ L 
... u 
.... 
nu.. 
. }~~!"i~:,:? 
"floating" and "wiggling," do not themselves require motion along a path'or ex-
ternal action. They focus on th'e manner of being. 
. .,-:; 
Such constructionstOffer ready-made and powerful blen'ding schemes. A tightly 
compressed frame and a corresponding syntactic form from one input can be re-
cruited into a blended space linked to a diffuse input. Constructing a network 
based on that scheme for a particular case depends crucially on being able to con-
struct a generic space that applies to the two inputs. In the case of the caused-mo-
tion examples we have seen, this generic space has agent-action, object-motion, 
and direction. This description also fits the very striking example "They prayed 
the two boys home." Here the blend is performing an extreme compression: The 
scene with the prayer and the boys contains many causal steps over an expanse of 
time, and intermediate agents, with relatively weak or vague causality, but in the 
blend there is a single action that is directly causal for the boys' coming home. 
As we have seen many times in this book, metaphoric mappings provide one of 
the standard ways of locating a cross-space mapping between inputs and con-
structing an integration network. If the diffuse input has causation of change of 
states, then there is already an existing template for blending states and locations 
and changes of states with changes oflocations, and that template can be recruited 
wholesale to provide much of the cross-space mapping and much of the projec-
tion to the blend. For example, "I pulled him out of his depression" prompts for a 
network where one input is the caused-motion scene with its syntax and the other 
input has a complicated interpersonal causation involving a change of psyChologi-
cal state. We automatically construct much of this particular caused-motion inte-
gration network by recruiting the states-locations blending network. "Pull" is a 
prototypical caused-motion verb, but the analysis works identically for "I talked 
him out of his depression" or "He drank himself into oblivion." 
We have seen ~es where the cross-space mapping is a bundle of Role-Value 
mappings in a simplex network (as in "He threw the ball over the fence," where 
throw is a value for the role causal action-motion), and cases where the cross-
space mapping is analogical or metaphorical ("He drank himself into oblivion"). 
The caused-motion network also operates in interesting ways when there are 
counterfactual connections. Adele Goldberg offers the example "Pat blocked 
Chris out of the room"; others include "We barred him from the building," 
"John forbade him from participating," and, with the metaphorical connection, 
"We kept him out of trouble." Such examples show that the compressed input is 
more general than just caused motion. The more general frame is that of an 
agent exerting a force and of an object undergoing a force in the direction of a 
goal. In the simple case, the agent exerts force on the object in the direction of 
the goal, as in "We moved the wolf to the door." In this case, "move" indicates 
the application of a force by the agent, "to" indicates that the force is in the di-
rection of the goal, and "door" indicates the goal. But alternatively, the force 
exerted by the agent can oppose the movement of the object, as in "We kept the 
~ .! .1 
wolf from the door." Here, the verb "keep" indicates that a certain force is ap-
plied in opposition to an existing force, "from" indicates that this applied force 
is in the direction away from the goal, and "door" indicates the goal. 
We see, then, that the general compressed input in a "caused-motion" net-
work is force-dynamic and applies equally well to the caused-motion and 
blocked-motion examples. The blocked-motion examples have an implicit 
counterfactual space: The verb "keep" implies that the agent's force opposes the 
object's force, so if the agent's force disappears, the object moves to the goal. 
EMERGENT SYNTAX 
In the caused-motion construction, the syntactic component comes entirely 
from the compressed input space of integrated caused motion, while words 
come from the space of the events associated with the causal sequence. But there 
are other coristructions in which the syntactic form used for the blend does not 
come entirely from one space. Part of it comes from one space, part of it from 
the other, and part of it develops specifically for the blend. In this case, the 
blend has emergent syntax relative to the inputs. Consider causatives in French, 
which are formed using the verb foir~ ("do"): 
NP 
Pierre 
[Pierre 
V 
fait 
makes 
meaning "Pierre feeds Paul." 
["Paul" is the agent of "manger] 
Pierre 
NP 
fait 
V 
V 
manger 
eat 
envoyer . 
V 
[Pierre 
makes 
send 
meaning "Pierre has the package sent." 
["Ie paquet" is the object of "envoyer"] 
Pierre 
NP 
fait 
V 
manger 
V 
la soupe 
NP 
NP 
Paul. 
Paul] 
Ie paquet. 
NP 
the package] 
a Paul. 
aNP 
[Pierre 
makes 
eat 
the soup 
to Paul] 
meaning "Pierre feeds Paul the soup." 
[Paul is the agent of "manger" and "Ia soupe" is the object] 
Through these double-verb forms, French provides its speakers a way to evoke 
an integration network that delivers a compressed, human-scale scene in which 
at least two agents (Pierre and Paul), a causal action, a causal link, and a caused 
action (eat) are integrated into one event. Now, the French language already has 

31< 
TIH; WAY WE THINK 
s;ngle-verb forms fh ill a~ good for p.am of Ihis imcgr:uion. For example. "Jean 
nil Ie pain~ ;, fine: for C'\'Oking a sct'ne in which J",:m pt'rforms a cmgj :Klion in. 
volving anolher dc:mc:m (Ie pain). And "Paul man~ IJ. 50111""''' is fine: for ~ok· 
ing a sa'nc in which P:!.ul pt'rforms >on:e :IClion on ,onOli.er ckmenl (Ia IiOUpc). 
Fll'lIch al$(! Ius ~cr.tl b;uic singk.verb cbuw consuuclions ;1110 which 0111' 
can pLlI ,hC.K ,;ngk-...:rb fnrm~ 8". how shall w..- express ,he xcnc in which 
I';nll' doet something Ihal awes Paul ro cal Ill .. 5OU p~ None of the buic single. 
vcrb cbug] coO!lruClions 'Iuile ,s.ervl'$. French offers Ihrtt complex blends for 
doing Ihe job. E:&ch h:u:u onc inPIII onc of Ihl'« oompn=co:l b.uic ,ingle-vcrb 
cbu$OIl conSltuClions, and as 11M: olher inpIII Ihe difrust chain of c:lus:1I n'cnu 
wilh imcrmetliau: agenu; Ihal Wt "':UI( If) oompr<:ss. T he blend 13k~ much ofilS 
clauAI synl:lX from tile' cornl'rt'~ fiut input, but, ~nd this is cn,cial, it h;lS ad· 
dillonal, C'lIIergC'm sYIll:lX. [n Ihal ~ynt:l~ t hc~ arc IlOW two vC'rbs, MorcovC'r, 
thC'rC' a ~ IlOl'e! positions forditic pronouns (such;lS 1~.llIi, and".;IS in Kralll It 
f;ail luer pat Jea n , ~ meaning " I'~ul has hinudfkilled by JC'an," v('rSII$ Kr aul bil " 
tn(,r J('an,K nleaning "Paul makes Jean kill himself H) and vario ll,complemerm 
(;IS in " I'~u l fai t C'nvoycr Ie paquet ). Marie ~ Jeall, K me~ n ing Kl'aul has the r~",ckct 
K ill by JC'an 10 Mari .. 
K
) . I II Ihese douhle-l'<'rb u uutivC'S we KC' double-scop(, in-
lq;raliOIlS at dl(' concq)luallevd; The conceplual frame for the basic COU5lruC-
lioll d OC's nOI nlatch in a one-lo-onC' fashion dlt· com l~lex and diffuse c;llIlal 
chain in Ihe olher inpul. W(' also ~ 
douhll."-S<:0pc: inlcgratiolls :11 thl." formal 
II."''I.''J. ddil'C'ring n('w, ('1II('rgcllt liymacti: forms for cxpl'C'SSing thC' bknd. III the 
cau5('(!-motion construction. the syntactic form came emirely from the com-
p~~ input. Here, in lhe double-... erb ClIus:ui ..... s, Ihl." syntKtlc form coma 
only panly from the COlllprnJCd input. Some words and thcir gr.lmmatical cat-
T
ries COIll(, from Ih(' oth('r. diffuse input. And tht" full SYllt:I.Ctlc form is (,IIlC'r-
gC'IlI in the bl .. nd. 
Th(' doubie-l'C'm Clusati,-.: constructions may bC" a response 10 an imcgT:Ilion 
problem fXC"d by humans C"l'C''Y''''ht're: Onto pc:rson doc$ $OI11<'thillg th,:1! is Clw:;Il 
for someone dse's action. A blC'nding templ~,(' :M,:h;.,...'\'$ appropriate compl'C'SSiom 
in 1hcsC" instanC('S, and bngWG<' forms eM1 promp' for Ihese comprasions. Many 
bnguagCll hal'<' arrived independently :;;t the $Olulion of doubl('-vt'lb ausati ... (' 
constrUCtions. using blends like Ihe ones in Fn::nch bUI having diffcn::1II ('nJ.C'Tl;t'nt 
JynlU. T he developu1<'111 of th('$e bngllage forms is an (')CalliI'll." of Ihe way in 
which human cultum. using lhe cognilivdy modem capacity fOI doubk-scOJ1<' 
iUIq;r:uion. r,'OI.'I." blrnding lemplalo, including langu:tge form" Iha, are IrJIIS-
mil(('(llo SUb5C'<\IICIlt geller-uions, Our princip<ll 3rgUn1<'1lI in Chajll('r 9 wu Ihal 
language could nOI bC" d("l'l."Iopc:d as an efficient set of forms without lhe capacity 
ror dOllb le.~]X" imegrJlion. H ere we Iluke thaI point more ('xplicit by highliglll-
ing Ihr crucial ml(' of blending in a kw particular oon~tnlct ions. I..3nguages, wilh 
Ihcir gr:ulllllars, are greal cuhur.tl K hil'\ellll."nus produced and pc:rpclllally trans-
formed through Ihe exploit3tlon of till." a~ity for {loubJ('-scopC' imcgr.llion. 
315 
A differen t response, onC' Ihal UK'S Ihl' same collcrptual b le nd~ bUI Ihal Cl\. 
ploits morphology to C1I."3t(' col~$l'ondillg formal blends, an bC" seell in 51."-
millc bnguag(,$. Nili Mandelblil hal given Ihe most IhoTOugh and dC'gant 
analysis of ,].., role of blending in a particular gr:umnatical S)"IC'm in ].." study 
of the ~rbal JySlem ofHroll."w. 
I kb,ew Yerl» .011 consi .. of (~ I • ~kdclo" of co''>o''.''" (the Kr(lO(~) , .Ioned 
imo (b) $OmC' ... owel pauC'rll. or rrefix • vo .... eI p<lllern, Such a vowel or prefix. 
vowel pallern is oiled a bi"J"'" Tile plural is bit'l'lIIim, The oon501131115 arty 
the "con:: rneming~ of the Yerb, There Ul' K~n major bi"l'mim in Hehn::w (the 
apital C's nand for thr TOO[ con 5On~ ntJ to bC" inSCrled); QlQIc. CIIUc' Ci-
Ctc' lIiCenc. l!iCCiC. huCCaC. and hi/C"Ct<:. Consider, for eumplC'. [he 
rool r.!.!]. ( .... here ? st31lds for a glollal oon5On3nl), with Ih(' muning "sec." Here 
an:: five forms of Ihis verb wilh diff~rcnt billl'lIIim; 
CaCaC , r.U] 
niCDC. d,h 
hiCCiC + ,'!.b 
huCCaC. r. J.h 
hi tCaCcC + r.?h 
["'?tI) 
KIO sec" 
[uir:',,) 
~IO be seen," or "to .secm" 
[llt'r?,,) ~IO show" 
[/mr:',,) KtO be shown" 
[hit"'?,,) ~IO see uch other" 
Mallddblil shows I h~t each vil/J"I/prompts for J Ilmicuiar blendillg schema. 
u)I]sider, for eXaml)le, I].., bil/J"~ hiCCiC ([('rmed /,if';I), .... hich suggem C:Uls:t-
[ion. and th~ TOOt ~rb r-u-c, meaning ' rUII," Thc:y arc blellded all follows: 
hiruic 
[ ... rineR "h('lic") 
This formally blended l'<'rb ottn", in till." following KI1[C'II«: 
hametaked 
Ihe-commander 
heric 
run.h~'i lllfl. 
., 
direct-obfect-marker 
"The commander made Ihc scldiers run: 
haxayaJim, 
Ihe-soldiers. 
This Kruence ilHegr.l[cs a whok c~ us;tl SC'<tuellce Qf eveuu; There is lhe ausing 
event of the cornmalldcr acting on tk soldiers and th~ resulting (or effuted) 
evcnl or the SQ ldi~rs running, W( sec frum [his SC'n l~'n,(' th;H Hebrcw has a way 
of prompting for a comprC'uion ofhoth a causing event 311d a caused event in a 

.• 
376 
. .:. , 
'., 
THE WAY WE THtNK 
,. 
single-verb clausal construction. The verb is "herie;" and ~e single-verb clausal 
construction is the Hebrew Transitive, whose language form is 
NounPhrase-Verb-et-NounPhrase. 
Figure 17.2 depicts the integration network evoked by this se~tence. 
This is a hif'if sentence in which Hebrew is employing exactly the same strat-
egy for conceptual and grammatical compression that we saw in French: Use the 
compression of a basic single-verb construction in order to compress an elabo- . 
rate, more diffuse causal sequence of events. But while the strategy expressed it-
self superficially in French through new emergent syntax, it is expressed in He-
brew through novel morphology. Using the formal blending of morphological 
patterns, Hebrew is able to produce a single verb that fits perfectly into the rran-
sitive construction, so that the grammatical compression of the compressed in-
put is borrowed without modification for the blend. 
HUMAN-SCALE CONSTRUCTI.ONS 
FOR SPACE, FORCE, AND MOTION 
We have seen many examples in which diffuse and complex ranges of conceptual 
structure give rise to the construction of human scale blends: "digging your own 
grave," "boiling the ,Pan dry," "snatching food from a child's 'mouth," "guilty 
pleasures," "grateful1memories," "driving someone out of his mind," and so on. 
This achievement of human scale is ·not simplification pn' S~, because in every 
case we have the full network attached to the blend. The blend provides global 
insight into a human-scale pattern, but it remains connected to all the inputs. 
Ostensibly simple conceptual structures also give rise to human-scale blends. 
In these cases, the blended space looks at first blush to be more complex than 
the inputs. But the overarching goal, as we saw in Chapter 16, is not to aug-
ment or reduce complexity for its own sake but, rather, to converge on human-
scale patterns. For example, it might seem that there is nothing simpler at the 
conceptual level than recognizing that an object has a shape and location and is 
contiguous to other objects. Using mathematical or computational representa-
tions, we could express that knowledge with diagrams or with Cartesian coordi-
nates and functions or with indicators of relative position. 
Certainly, human beings use indicators of relative position and diagrams, and 
we can develop a sophisticated ability to use coordinates and functions; but we 
also have a standard way of using conceptual blends to give insight into loca-
tion, shape, and contiguity. In this case, the blended spaces seem to increase the 
complexity of the description gratuitously by involving superfluous dimensions 
and structures. Len Talmy's example, "The mountain range goes all the way 
from Mexico to Canada," has as its purpose to give us global insight into the 
., 
; 
Form and Mtaning 
Transitive Construction 
NPVetNP 
New Ev.ent 
-x hamefaked 
Causing 
Event 
...... f ... acts I::] 
• •••.••.••••••••••••••••. CAUSE 
hi..i. 
'.\ 
..-----
.: •... J.y haxaya/im I 
.... \ -.. J 
• peed r.u.c. 
BLEND 
FIGURE 17 . 2 
NETWORK F'OR A HEBREW CAUSATIVE CONSTRUCTION 
377 
location of the mountain range and its spatial relationship to Mexico, Canada, 
and the United States. Ie presents a static scene using motion: goes all the way 
ftom . . . to . .. . Far from being unusual, this is a standard strategy in many and 
perhaps all languages. As Talmy writes, "Most observers can agree that languages 
systematically and extensively refer to stationary circumstances with forms and 
constructions whose basic reference is to motion." "The mountain range goes 
all the way from Mexico to Canada" is a basic idiomatic expression that does 
not feel either figurative or complex. Yet the addition of a dimension of motion 
to a static scene confronts us with a paradox: We now have something that is 
more complex and also patently false, since the mountain range is not really 
moving along a path from Mexico to Canada. 
Why would human cognition and language work in this bizarre way? The 
answer is that we have the overarching goal of achieving human scale, and the 

378 
THE WAY WE THINK 
operation of conceptual integration accomplishes that by projecting motion to 
the blended space. We also have grammatical constructions that prompt for 
just such integration networks, and we can use those constructions to describe 
the static scene, provided that we use the motion input. The integration net-
work has, in one input, the static situation of the mountain range. In the other, 
we have the more general frame of a trajector moving along a path from a be-
ginning point to an end point. The cross-space mapping connects the trajec-
tory to a relevant dimension of the static object. In the case of the mountain 
range, this dimension is the horizontal. In the mountain range blend, the hori-
zontal dimension of the static mountain range is now a trajectory, and there is 
additionally a trajector, projected from the motion input, that moves in time 
along the trajectory, from Mexico to Canada. The grammatical construction 
that sets up this blend normally assigns the trajector to the subject position and 
the movement to the verb ("Marie goes to the store"). But in the blend the 
construction uses the label for the trajectory in the subject position: "The 
mountain range goes from Mexico to Canada." Of course, the mountain range 
moves in neither the inputs nor the blend. But because the trajector in the mo-
tion input has no counterpart in the static input, there is no label available for 
it in the static scene. Using the label of the trajectory (mountain range) in sub-
ject position with a movement verb has the virtue of presenting as topic what 
we are actually talking about (the mountain range) and evoking the moving 
trajector metonymically. 
The blended space now has a human-scale scene of a trajector moving in hu-
man-scale time along a human-scale path. Space and time have been scaled 
down, and a simple, ideal path has been created along which there is motion. 
Understanding the dynamic scene in the blend allows one to do the correct pro-
jection back to the static input with the mountain range, and to construct the 
appropriate relevant configurations of the range and the countries. In most re-
spects, the blended space is more complicated than the static scene. It has all the 
aspects of dynamic motion, including time-space coordinates and contiguous 
positions in time. It can include the global form of the trajectory and the man-
ner of motion, as in "The mountain range goes straight/curves/meanders/ 
winds/skips from Mexico to Canada." In spite of or, rather, because of this 
added complexity, the blended space gives global insight at human scale into the 
static configurations. 
Human action, with motion and intentionality in physical space and time, is 
a basic human-scale structure. The fictive-motion blends take states as inputs 
and add motion and possibly intentionality to produce the blended space. 
Adding motion transforms a state into an event. Adding intentionality trans-
forms an event into an action. The blended space, with action, event, and state, 
is more complex from a formal point of view than the input with just a state, 
but the added complexity crucially enhances the human-scale quality of the 
:1 
Form and Meaning 
379 
scene. It is more congenial for human beings to process a full, dynamic, inten-
tional human-scale action than it is to process one apparently simple compo-
nent of it. 
There are many ways to project motion to the blend in order to enhance its 
human-scale quality. Talmy provides an insightful taxonomy of sources of mo-
tion for fictive-motion blends. In our terms, this taxonomy presents a range of 
different motion inputs and a range of different projections to the blend. The 
mountain range blend has an input with a trajector moving along a linear path, 
but another of Tal my's examples-"The field spreads out in all directions from 
the granary"--;-has a motion input in which a material substance (such as oil or 
wine) distends or diffuses from an initial spot. 
The formal blending in fictive-motion expressions is particularly noticeable 
in what Talmy calls "Access Path" expressions, such as 'The bakery is across the 
street from the bank." The static input could be expressed by "The bakery is on 
the street." The motion input has something departing from one point, travers-
ing some surface, and arriving at another point. The words "across" and "from" 
come from the motion input. The expression for the blended space combines 
grammatical elements from the two inputs, so we can say, "The bakery is across 
the street ftom the bank." The mountain range example and the bakery example 
have the same motion input. In the bakery example, the motion input has a sur-
face that is traversed. Its counterpart in the static input is the street. In the blend, 
the surface traversed is fused with the street; we can use the label "the street" to 
pick out that fused element in the blend and we can put "the street" in the gram-
matical position for the surface traversed ("across the street"). Similarly, the end-
points of the trajectory in the motion input have counterparts in the static in-
put: the bank and the bakery. In the blend, we fuse the endpoints of the 
trajectory with their counterparts in the static input, and we can use the labels 
from the static input ("the bank" and "the bakery") to pick out the fused ele-
ments in the blend and then place those labels in the grammatical positions for 
the endpoints. In the mountain range example, the surface traversed is lefr im-
plicit: Although the United States will typically.show up in the conceptual blend 
as the surface traversed, it is assigned no expression. But one could say "The 
mountain range goes across the United States from Mexico to Canada." The 
kinds of fictive-motion blends that can be achieved are driven by the governing 
principles of conceptual integration and the availability of motion inputs. Prin-
ciples that play an essential role include Topology, Integration, Unpacking, Max-
imization of Vital Relations, and Intensification of Vital Relations. They con-
tribute to satisfying the overarching goals of achieving human scale and 
strengthening vital relations. 
Under "Advent Paths," Talmy gives the example "The palm trees clustered 
together around the oasis." Here, the motion input has multiple trajectors and 
trajectories converging on a location. This time, the trajc;Ftors in the motion 

JF 
380 
THE WAY WE THINK 
,. 
input have counterparts in the static scene-namely, the fixed palm treci. The 
trajectories, on the other hand, have no counterpart in the mental space of 
the static scene. Blends of this type incorporate the static scene as the end state 
of elaborate motion in the blended space. 
In the palm tree example, there is no motion and no change in the static in-
put. The motion is projected from a different input. Similarly, in another of 
Talmy's examples, "As I painted the ceiling, paint spots sl~wly progressed across 
the floor," the motion that is relevant in the fictive-motion blend is not available 
from the input with the paint spots. The motion of the paint drops falling from 
ceiling to floor has nothing to do with the progress of the paint spots across the 
floor in the blended space. In this case, too, the trajectors have counterparts-
namely, the paint spots-but the mapping is one-to-many, because each trajector 
in the motion space with multiple positions is mapped onto each of many dis-
tinct paint spots, each with a single position. The positions of the trajector are 
mapped one-to-one onto the positions of the distinct but analogical paint spots, 
but the single trajector is mapped one-to-many onto the distinct paint spots. In 
the blend, many paint spots become one paint spot that has achieved many posi-
tions. Analogy between the paint spots has been compressed into Identity of sin-
gle paint spots that ptogress across the floor. This example illustrates the nonde-
terministic nature of blending; one can evoke different input spaces to achieve 
the blend. For example, we might see the paint spots in the blend as caravans 
moving across the floor, where the "lead" paint spot always has the same identity 
and subsequent p~int spots have the identity given by their order. In that case, 
the "new" paint spot on the floor is analogous in the input space of painting to 
the immediately previous spot and, thus, in the blended space C;ln take over its 
identity, as it takes over the identity of the one behind it, all the way back to the 
wall, where a new paint spot has just emerged onto the scene. 
Under "Shadow Paths," Talmy gives the example "The tree threw its shadow 
down into the valley." In this case, the end state of the motion (in the motion 
input) has as its counterpart the perceptible shadow in the static scene. Here, 
fictive motion creates motion by exploiting the already available blend in which 
a shadow is a changing and moveable object and not just an area of diminished 
lighting. That blend is already lexicalized in English by the word "shadow." 
It turns out, then, that fictive-motion blends are strongly double-scope. They 
blend an essentially static scene with an essentially dynamic one to create a blend 
with emergent properties that draws on the organizing frames of both inputs. 
Often, the path of the motion in the blend is not available to real trajectors in the 
real world, but part of the emergent meaning in the blend is the possibility of 
this motion. Fictive-motion blends are double-scope at the conceptual level, and 
also at the formal level. They draw grammatical elements from both inputs to 
create double-scope syntactic blends to express the conceptual structure in the 
blended space. 
Form and M~aning ... 
C U LTU RAL EVO'LUTI 0 N 
OF LANGUAGE 
381 
Language changes over centuries. Latin gave rise to French. It is in fact a re-
markable universal feature of all languages that they change over cultural time. 
For the most part, deep changes in the structure of a language take so long that 
we do not see them happening in a single lifespan, although we sometimes see 
lesser changes taking place in the space of a few years, as when new words come 
into the language, slang and idioms are created, or existing words acquire new 
extensions, such as "virus" for the nefarious program that ruins your computer. 
Linguists agree that this change is not a matter of either improvement or deteri-
oration of a language. Languages do not change because they are deficient or 
unstable. Perfectly fine systems in a language routinely evolve into different per-
fectly fine systems. Why should this be? 
We suggest that the central role of conceptual blending, compression, and 
double-scope creativity in grammar and grammatical constructions induces lan-
guage change very naturally and, in fact, unavoidably. One reason for this is the 
natural emergence of new syntax under pressure from borrowed compressions, 
as we saw in the case of the French double-verb causatives. Another reason for 
progressive change in languages is that conceptual blending networks are under-
specified. Because such networks prompt for mapping schemes without specifY-
ing the mappings and projections exhaustively, grammatical constructions leave 
users, singly arid collectively, some leeway in the actual implementation of the 
mapping schemes. This kind oflanguage change stems from variation of the un-
derspecified aspects of the selective projections and mappings within the net-
work. Suzanne Kemmer and Michael Israel have shown conclusively, in their ex-
tensive studies of the "way" construction, that within a relatively stable blending 
scheme over several centuries, usage during a certain period will emphasize cer-
tain projection patterns and not others, and, moreover, that this usage will 
change over time. 
Modern examples of the "way" construction are "He found his way to the 
market," "He made his way home," "He elbowed his way through the crowd," 
"He jogged his way along the road," "He talked his way into the job," and "He 
whistled his way through the graveyard." This usage developed from a Middle 
English go-your-path construction, which accepted almost any noun that 
meant something like "way," as in "He lape one horse and passit his way" 
(1375) and "Tho wente he his strete, tho flewe I doun" (1481). Later, a new 
syntax developed that allowed for a complement indicating direction, as in 
"He went his way home." The construction developed by allowing ever more 
kinds of verbs indicating something about the manner of the movement. Israel 
remarks that these verbs tend to cluster around certain well-defined semantic 
prototypes. Between 1826 and 1875, a large number of verbs coding difficult 

382 
THE WAY WE THINK 
motion or tortuous paths became acceptable. They include plod. totter. sham-
ble. grope. flounder, fUmble. wend, wind. thread. corkscrew. and serpentine. Dick-
ens writes in 1837: "Mr. Bantam corkscrewed his way through the crowd." It is 
not until the end of the nineteenth century that we begin to find verbs like 
crunch. crush, sing, toot, and pipe in the construction. Israel explains that they 
encode "not motion per se, but rather the noise that in~vitably accompanies 
certain forms of motion." A different development of the construction, the 
means thread, comes up fairly late at the end of the sixteenth century. In this 
thread. verbs for creating a path become acceptable, as in "Arminius paved his 
way" (1647). A familiar example would be "Every step that he takes he must 
battle his way" (1794). Israel writes: "By 1875, examples include uses with 
push, struggle. jostle. elbow. shoulder, knee, beat and shoot. In the nineteenth cen-
tury, as the manner thread experiences a rapid expansion, the means thread be-
gins to allow verbs encoding' increasingly indirect ways of reaching a goal." as 
in "Not one man in five hundred could have spelled his way through a psalm" 
or "He smirked his way to a pedagogal desk." The role of blending is crucial: 
It is useful, in this light, to consider the ["way") construction .. . as an example of 
a syntactic blend-that is, as a specialized grammatical pattern serving to com-
bine disparate conceptual contents in a single. compact linguistic form. Essen-
tially. the modern construction provides a way to blend the conceptual content of 
an activity verb with the basic idea of motion al,ong a path. The trend toward 
verbs coding activities which are increasingly marginal to the achievement of mo-
tion thus reflects the construction's gradually increasing power to blend different 
types of events into a single conceptual package. 
Israel has succeeded in showing that some underspecified projection patterns for 
the integration network associated with the "way" construction were extended 
over time. He also shows that another underspecified projection pattern for the 
construction diminished over time: "The third thread .. . involved usages with 
verbs like keep, hold. take, snatch. and find for coding the acquisition or mainte-
nance of possession of a path. These usages were very common in early stages of 
the construction. But unlike the other two threads, this usage shrank rather 
than expanded over time, so that now only find . . . and a few, other verbs re-
main to represent it." 
CONCLUSION 
All along. we have stressed creativiry and novelry as consequences of conceptual 
integration. But creativity and novelty depend on a background of firmly an-
chored and mastered mental structures. Human culture and human thought are 
/ 
~ 
FQrm and Meaning 
383 
fundamentally conservative. They work from the mental constructs and mate-
rial objects that are already available. Conceptual integration. too, has strong 
conservative aspects: It often uses input spaces, blending templates, and generic 
spaces that are anchored in existing conceptual structure; it has governing prin-
ciples that drive blends in the direction of familiar, human-scale structures; and 
it readily anchors itself on existing material objects. Emergent structure-both 
conceptual and formal-can arise through conceptual integration within basi-
cally conservative integration networks. 
This general pattern of development in culture and thought has the evolu-
tion of grammar as a special case. We have seen sample evidence of the central 
role of blending and compression both in superficially simple constructions 
such as Noun-Noun and in constructions that are acknowledged as highly com-
plex such as French double-verb causatives. Advanced conceptual integration 
operates simultaneously for both conceptual and formal structure. It requires 
double-scope capacity and, by its very nature, promotes both continuiry and 
change at the conceptual and formal levels. Indeed. for conceptual blending to 
happen at all, continuity is essential. We have shown how-thanks to ctmcep-
tual integration-novel constructions or variants of G9nstructions draw on 
deeply entrenched constructions, conceptualizations, and blending templates. 
But because blending involves selective projection, composition. completion. 
and elaboration under a set of governing principles, it can produce new, well-
anchored conceptual and formal structures. In his article on "way" construc-
tions, Israel points to just these features of simultaneous conservatism and nov-
elty. He writes$ "Utterances should sound like things the speaker has heard 
before." There are also, he notes, forces for innovation. The world is rich, both 
physically and culturally, and it evolves, and this places pressures on us to create 
new conceptions and expressions. We do so through double-scope integration, 
but the products are not wholly novel. Constitutive and governing principles 
ensure that the network is in many ways deeply familiar, not least ill using fa-
miliar frames, a canonical set of vital relations, an easily accessible initial cross-
space mapping, and human-scale organization and compression in the blended 
space. For grammar, all this delivers slightly new expressions that, however 
novel. are intelligible precisely because they are for the most part strongly an-
chored to existing constructions. When we hear an expression, we try to con-
struct an integration network; but to do so we have to do some selective projec-
tion, composition. completion, and elaboration that is not specified by what we 
hear, so there is yet more room for creativiry and novelty. We do as much blend-
ing as we need to do'co make sense of the utterance, and this work is simultane-
ously conservative and innovative. 
As we have argued in some detail in this chapter, blending turns out to be a 
central feature of grammar. Far from being an independently specified set of 
.I 

0. . 
; . 
t" 
THE WAY WE THINK 
384 
forms, grammar is an aspect of conceptual structure and its evolution. Grammar 
has something in common with metaphor ("You are digging your own grave"), 
counterfactuals ("If I were you, I would quit my job, ... "), category extensions 
("same-sex marriage," "computer virus"), and material culture (watches as descen-
dants of sundials). All are products of integration and compression. And so, not 
surprisingly, all show degrees of entrenchment, novelty, and change over time. 
They depend on simultaneous continuity and creativity. "If I were you, I would 
do X ... " is a very conventional counterfactual construction, and the implication 
"you should do X" is typical. But as we discussed in Chapter 12, "If! were you, I 
would quit my job," however anchored in familiar patterns, has ample room for 
variable selective projection and emergent meaning. Counterfactuals like the 
Woman in a Coma, in Chapter 11, require blending that is unconventional but 
nevertheless routinely available to newspaper readers. Just so, a noun compound 
like "divorce fixer" (meaning a fixer-upper house you could buy cheap because it 
was being sold as part of a divorce settlement) may look bizarre, but it is still a 
noun and still has inside it two very conventional nouns, and in fact the entire 
blending template that subtends it is the extremely conventional patrern we saw 
for "land yacht" and "boat house." The general point here is that speakers and 
hearers are continually called upon to construct blends. There is no reason to 
think that "novel" blends are inherently more costly or less desirable than totally 
conventional ones. In fact, presumably because people are highly competent dou-
ble-scopers, finding the network that best fits a particular conceived situation is 
something that people enjoy and are proud of Finding optimal networks has al-
ways been a highly valued skill, for which writers, poets, statesmen, teachers, sci-
entists, and lawyers are highly regarded. The central blending at play in grammat-
ical constructions, metaphor, and counterfacruals means that language users are 
perpetually constructing blends with varying degrees of novelty of which they are 
seldom aware. In this way, we suggest, diachrony is built into synchrony: The very 
way in which language is used synchronously (at a given time by a given commu-
nity) is ~so the way language will change. 
. 
II C HAP T E R 
1 7 
ZOOM OUT 
RECURSION IN GRAMMAR 
When we do the 19.nds of blends where nouns are put together, the grammatical 
category in the blend is Noun. That is, putting the noun "jail" and the noun 
"bait" together gives us the noun "jail bait." 
i 
Form and M~aning 
385 
Qu~stion: ' 
• Since the output grammatical forms are different from the input forms, 
why aren't special grammatical categories created for them? 
Ouransw~r: 
As we saw in Chapter 16, the overarching goal of blending is to Achieve Hu-
man Scale. A corollary of this overarching goal is that human-scale blends serve 
as inputs to further blending. And as we saw in the case of personification, the 
category p~rson organizes both one of the inputs and the output, so the output 
becomes a candidate for any blending template that takes pmon as an input, in-
cluding the personification template itself We called this process "recursion" 
and showed how it created the possibility for multiple successive blends, as in 
the elaboration of the concept of numb" in mathematics, which changed dra-
matically over time while always preserving the same human-scale category 
numb". 
Grammatical categories are also human-scale elements, grounded in human-
scale conceptual structures such as Objects, Events, Processes, Force Dynamics, 
and Visual Focus and Perspective. Noun is an especially basic grammatical cate-
gory, with a prototypical meaning of Thing. The disposition to achieve human 
scale constrains blending networks in the direction of having grammatical forms 
that fit existing grammatical categories. This achievement is not required by any 
logical or computational or linguistic consideration. It would be acceptable on 
all these grounds, perhaps even preferable, for the new structure in the blend to 
be a new grammatical category. But that would violate the overarching goal that 
the blend be at human scale. It is remarkable, in fact, from a merely formal 
point of view, that in the many thousands of languages studied by linguists we 
find a very small number of basic grammatical categories occurring over and 
over again. This formally surprising observation is explained by the principles, 
power, and goals of blending. In particular, it is explained by these three things: 
(1) Grammatical categories are human-scale elements. (2) Novel grammatical 
constructions are created through blending from existing grammatical construc-
tions. (3) The Human Scale/Recursion Principle places value on having human-
scale blended spaces. 
In grammatical constructions, the blended space achieves human scale by 
borrowing its compression from an input with existing grammatical categories, 
which are already at human scale. So the compound of Noun and Noun in the 
blend takes Noun as its grammatical category from the inputs. The grammatical 
form for the blended' space is now able to fit into other patrerns in the language 
that employ that existing grammatical form. This central feature of preserving 
category from input to blend favors recursion at the formal level, just as it favors 
recursion at the conceptual level, because the two forms of recursion are the 

386 
THE WAY WE THINK 
same thing. So "ballet school" achieves the human scale of being a Noun by 
borrowing that category from the inputs. So does "girl scout." Since they are 
both Nouns, they are suitable inputs for the Nominal Compounding template, 
so we can form "girl scout ballet school," which is perfectly grammatical, and 
also "ballet school girl scout." They, too, are Nouns, so we can form "lace stock-
ing girl scout ballet schoo!." 
And yet, just as The Grim Reaper fits the category person but, when looked at 
on the inside, is a strange sort of person who remains connected up to the input 
spaces out of which he was formed, so "lace stocking girl scout ballet school" fits 
the grammatical category noun but has unusual internal structure. Preserving an 
organizing category like number, person, or noun favors recursion through the 
steps of successive blending networks, but the internal organization of the cate-
gory changes. The Grim Reaper is not a standard person: It would be odd to 
think of him undergoing bypass surgery, for example. Complex numbers are 
certainly challenging sorts of numbers, palpably different from 1,2, and 3. And 
a noun that consists of six nouns is indeed a noun, but it looks odd on the in-
side and prompts for exceptionally heavy amounts of decompression. Although 
recursion in theory allows unlimited iterations, it is widely known that human 
beings typically top out after a handful of repetitions. We say "The scarf my 
aunt bought" and "The scarf my aunt my uncle married bought," but it gets 
hard at "The scarf my aunt my uncle my father disliked married bought." This 
difficulty is commonly attributed to "performance"-perhaps involving limita-
tions of working memory, cognitive load, or conceptual complexity. We now see 
that the ability for recursion and the limitations on that ability do not come 
from different considerations: The preservation of the category under projec-
tion from input to blend and the changing of the internal structure of that cate-
gory as it is built in the blend are parts of the same process of conceptual inte-
gration. The preservation part preserves human scale while the alteration part 
moves away from human scale. The preservation part favors recursion while the 
alteration part impedes recursion. A sequence of too many iterations of the re-
cursive blending gives us something that, while still fitting the human-scale cat-
egory, now has content too far removed from human scale to be suitable for yet 
further recursive blending. That content, through successive blending, comes to 
involve more and more levels of decompression involving levels of "upstairs" in-
put spaces. "Lace stocking girl scout ballet school," like "the scarf my aunt my 
uncle my father dislikes married bought," forces decompression. By contrast, 
there is the capacity of language to come up with a single word for the same 
content. This is called chunking, and it removes the forced decompression. So if 
"lipple" comes to mean "lace stocking girl scout ballet school," or, in a family, 
"scad" comes to mean "the scarf my aunt my uncle my father dislikes married 
bought," then it becomes easy to put them through further recursions, because 
Form and Meaning 
387 
the internal content of many levels of decompression is no longer forced upon 
us. As we saw in the Zoom Our section of Chapter 8, terms like "great-grandfa-
ther," meaning "father of parent of parent" (which can be further chunked to 
"Gramps," for example), offer such relief from forced decompression while pre-
serving the human-sCale grammatical category. 
.-1 
~ 
tl 

'-
,.. -
== Eighteen 
THE WAY WE LIVE 
YOUNG CHILDRBN DBLIGHT AND frustrate us by spending hours working 
out connections that we find obvious. What is money? How many quarters is a 
dollar worth? What is this letter? Is it an M or a W? They turn pages in a book at 
random, sometimes going from back to front, sometimes "reading" the book up-
side down. The clock shows them nothing at first, and even later their ability to 
read it has strange gaps. Much later, they will struggle to understand what 1/3 
could be, and to see that 2/3 + 1/3 = 1. 
We adults, on the other hand, have complete m~stery of the conceptual 
blends of money, writing; and timepieces. W.e live directly in these blends: We 
manipulate these elaborate networks with no conscious attention to the topolo-
gies and projections across the network. Our attention is focused on running 
the blend itself and attending to the relevant material anchors-the dollar, the 
book, the wat,ch. Although it took us a long time to master the complex blends 
linked to a culnir3.1 activity like writing, once we have them, we have the great-
est difficulty escaping them even when we want to: Look at this page and try 
not to see words and letters, but only black shapes on white paper; that is, try to 
see only the original input that you had when you were a two-year-old. (It's not 
fair to unfocus your vision so the page is a blur-that wasn't your problem when 
you were a two-year-old.) 
The story that we have'been telling in this book runs along the following 
lines. Double-scope conceptual integration is crucial to the activities that make 
us what we are. Around 50,000 years ago, this level of blending was .achieved, 
presumably through neurological evolution, although that final evolutionary 
step need not have been a great biological leap. The biological evolution of con-
ceptual blending took evolutionary time, but once double-scope blending was 
achieved, culture as we know it emerged. Cultures could create specific double-
scope integration networks that then quickly showed up in languages, number 
systems, rituals and sacraments, art forms, representation systems, technologies 
(from advanced stone scrapers to computer interfaces), table manners, games, 
money, and sexual fantasies. 
Before the appearance of double-scope integration, obborate and powerful 
integrations were set up by biological evolution. When we see a blue cup, we are 
not and cannot be aware of the extremely complex neurobiological causes of our 
389 

,. 
390 
THE WAY WE THINK 
perception. The neurophysiologist might explain them, but in those explana-
tions we will see nothing that resembles a blue cup. Our very biology locks us 
into perceptual integrations of this sort. Such biologically given integrations ex-
ist throughout the animal world: Mere lizards are born with many very impres-
sive integration patterns into which every lizard is locked. 
Of course, human children are animals, and they too have biology that locks 
them into many integrations: They quickly develop visual acuity, they have color 
vision and develop color constancy, mey turn their heads to locate the origin of 
sounds they hear, and they see blue cups if there are blue cups to be seen. But 
given their powerful capacity for double-scope blending, children are born into a 
world richly structured by complex, entrenched, cultural conceptual blends, 
many of which they must master to function in society. Such blends are products 
of cultural-not biological-evolution, and they undergo continual change. 
Languages, for example, always change, even though their degree of formal com-
plexity stays relatively constant. The same holds for cultural models in general. 
During the first three years of life, a child constructs seemingly impossibly 
. complex system of elaborate blending networks. The child's biological capacity 
for double-scope integration meets the culture's offering of specific integration 
networks, and the two combine to impressive effect. 
Once a fundameIl;~ integration network motivated by culture is in place, its 
compressed, human-scale blend seems as obvious and inevitable as the percep-
tion of a blue cup. Communicating with language, making and recognizing rep-
resentations, and using a fork and a spoon come to seem· straightforward both 
for the child and the adults who interact with the child. That combinations of 
vocal sounds mean what they mean, that the marks on me paper are a dog, and 
that the fork is an instrument for eating are then taken as direct and inevitable. 
We can no longer see the marks without seeing me dog, or the fork without see-
ing its purpose and its etiquette. This learning is exceptionally difficult: A young 
human brain is the quickest, most plastic, and most capacious complex system 
in the universe, but it takes at least three years of constant working to bring it to 
mastery of all these culturally motivated blends. This development is almost en-
tirely unconscious for the child and mostly unobservable by adults, who see 
only superficial signs of the child's mental activity and take them for granted be-
cause adults do not remember the difficulty. Like biology, culture and learning 
give us entrenched integrations that we can manipulate directly. In bom cases, 
once we have the integration it is hard or impossible to escape it. We construe 
the physical, mental, and social worlds we live in by virtue of the integrations 
we achieve through biology and culture. There is no other way for us to appre-
hend the world. Blending is not something we do in addition to living in the 
world; it is our means of living in the world. Living in the human world is "liv-
ing in the blend" or, ramer, living in many coordinated blends. Even remember-
ing the world and our activity in it seems to depend upon me existence of the 
"'1 
I 
Th~ ~y we Live 
391 
kinds of blends three-year-olds have developed. We retain only fragmentary and 
unorganized conscious memories from before that stage. 
The story is no different for the learning of numbers, writing, history, social 
patterns, or any other integration, except that after about three years of age we 
can remember the work we went through to acquire the blend. We know when 
we look at writing that we are living directly in the blend and cannot escape it, 
but most of us can also remember the time when writing was only marks on a 
page. We can probably remember learning fractions, although as adults we ma-
nipulate the blend directly and cannot help seeing the relationship between 112 
and 1. Playing the piano, understanding sacraments, interpreting adult social 
actions, and using complex numbers all show this pattern. It is the pattern of 
human cultural learning worldwide. 
It is also the apparent pattern of human consciousness and memory. Con-
sciousness is dedicated to the products of blending. Once we have the blend of 
money or ·the watch or social action or ritual, we are not consciously aware of 
the different input spaces and the projections across the network. In the blend, 
the money has its value and the watch shows the time, and this is what we are 
aware of. It is also what we have conscious memory of: We remember that 
someone said something or that the watch showed a certain hour; we do not re-
member the integration networks. 
The capacity for double-scope integration confers several related aptitudes. 
Humans can build new integration networks that are not biologically given. We 
can operate by directly manipulating the blends of those networks. We can also 
focus attention on escaping the blends, investigating the connections, changing 
the network, and rebuilding the blend. 
If we look at the course of a human life, we see that until about age three, a 
child is engaged in building complex and difficult blends that count culturally 
as obvious and natural. After that, the child begins to build more and more 
blends that are recognized culturally as requiring work and learning-playing 
piano, reading, doing crossword puzzles, doing carpentry, learning a second lan-
guage, learning world history, government, biology, and computer systems. But 
also, beginning at about three years of age, the child focuses attention on de-
compressing, on learning to manipulate input spaces and projections independ-
ently. Perhaps one of the earliest domains of decompressing is intentionality: At 
first, objects that appear to be self-moving and that also appear to react appro-
priately to the right sorts of things (such as the baby's cry, other noises, foods, 
smells, voices) count as intentional beings in a primary and unanalyzed sense. 
But the child begins to decompress: Although the wind-up puppy can be re-
garded as intentional in the blend, once the child develops access to the input 
spaces she is able to regard it as purdy a dynamic physical object. 
Beginning early, blending and deblending, compression and decompres-
sion, go hand in hand. The early infant sees the voice-activated crib mobile as 

392 
THE WAY WE THINK 
intentional. Later, it can decompress. But the adult who has no confusion 
about the status of the mobile can still achieve the intentional blend, and in 
fact create and understand many blends that bestow intentionality upon ob-
jects like computers, buildings, clouds, and flowers. The child is considered 
immature for not seeing that the mobile is not alive, but the adult is consid-
ered smart for using metaphor to create intentionality, where it is not. The 
culture requires the child to achieve the right coordinated complex blends. 
Only then will the child be able to live in the blend as a member of the cul-
ture. But, paradoxically, it is also essential for the culture to support decom-
pression, so that the child can learn further skills and achieve greater overall 
flexibility. To learn to read and write, the child must not only blend but also 
deb lend, not only compress but also decompress. Specifically, the child must 
decompress spoken language in order to manipulate the input space of gram-
matical forms with some independence of the blend in which they are fused 
with vocal sounds or gestures. To learn fractions, one must decompress the 
concept' of number, in which for each number there is a next number ("and 
what comes next, Betsy?"), each number has a name, and each number is asso-
ciated with a countable quantity of objects. The child has to be able to make a 
selective projection that leaves those properties behind. In the new blend of 
rational numbers, numbers have an order but there is never a "next" number, 
every number has an infinite number of names, and "most" numbers (such as 
17/232) do not correspond to a countable set of objects. The new integration 
network uses blending to create rational numbers but at the same time, as part 
of that blending, decompresses the previous numbet input by projecting only 
selectively from it. Once the student learns rational numbers, she can work di-
rectly in that blend, but she is also able to work in the old space of what are 
now called "whole" numbers. The student has the blends but can also manip-
ulate the input spaces independently. The effect of blending and deblending, 
compressing and decompressing, is to create much richer networks, with the 
greater flexibility of going from outer space to inner space and back; but this 
does not incapacitate or overwhelm the mind because we can still work in one 
blend at a time. The lizard is trapped in the integrations it has and cannot 
make new ones, but those integrations work very efficiently. The human be-
ing, like the lizard, has some biologically given blends it cannot escape, but it 
also has powerful culturally motivated blends that it has at least the chance of 
escaping, to decompress and reblend. It may also create new culturally moti-
vated blends out of inputs not previously integrated. Strikingly, the human 
being has for these flexible culturally motivated blends some of ' the power the 
lizard has only for its biologically given blends: Once we have built a blend, 
we can inhabit it and manipulate it directly. 
Why do we not teach the child rational numbers directly at age two? Because 
the child can learn these advanced blends only by going through processes of 
Th~~y~L;v~ 
393 
simultaneous blending and deb lending, to create new blends out of old. Blend-
ing creates emergent structure, but it is also conservative, working from inputs 
that it has. In this way, conceptual knowledge develops step by step, through the 
cascade of blends. So does cultural and scientific knowledge. Firm intermediate 
blends are needed before the advanced ones can be created. Creating the ad-
vanced blends typically requires decompressing the intermediate ones. 
Culture elaborates blends that are complex and hard to discover but relatively 
easy to manipulate and learn. The cultural search for an optimal blend, which 
can last for many years or even centuries, explores huge numbers of possibilities 
and retains only those that fit the governing principles optimally for the purpose 
at harid. This ensures that conceptual blends transmitted culturally to a new 
generation have excellent design, from the culture's point of view, but also that 
the culture will regard them as difficult, since they were a long time coming and 
still run up against the difficulty of the decompression that children must per-
form in order to learn them. Complex numbers, for instance, would typically be 
viewed as "hard" for children, because they are a notion developed late in the 
history of mathematics and one that requires severe decompression of previous 
conceptions of numbers such as whole, rational, and real. But the blend that 
needs to be manipulated for the use of complex nllIIJ"bers (vectors in a plane) is 
not formally of any obviously higher magnitude of difficulty than the blend for 
fractions. Writing also developed relatively late in human history, and was in 
fact at one time regarded as an exceptionally difficult and specialized skill (the 
domain of expertise of scribes or highly revered priests). But in many countries 
today, most people learn to write when they are children, and so they live in the 
blend, where written words and sentences are apprehended automatically and 
effortlessly. The history is remote, so it looks to us as if writing has always been 
around. The impression of complexity is lost in this case, and adults find it 
much harder to see why children might have trouble in getting from the spoken 
to the written word. And yet, the decompression and remapping required to 
learn writing are possibly more extensive than what is needed for numbers. 
If constructing a useful network takes such complex activations, projections, 
and blendings and decompressions, how does the child do it? 
Part of the answer is that we have powerful brains; part of the answer is that 
we are embedded in a rich world and exploit what it provides; part of the an-
swer is that culture provides every assistance. But there are two other crucial 
parts of the answer. 
First, children are built to trust and imitate. A two-year-old trying to open 
the locked door of a'store hears "It's Sunday" and, without knowing what Sun-
day is, remarks "It's Sunday" when he discovers that the next store is locked up. 
He picks up a pocket calculator and walks around talking into it as if it were a 
mobile telephone. As everyone since Aristotle has noticed, human beings are 
distinguished from other animals in having fantastic and equipotential powers 
.I 

394 
,. 
THE WAY WE THINK 
of mimicry. We pick up many pieces from our culture without knowing their 
useful connections, but then, once we have picked them up, there they are, 
ready to fall into place as the networks are achieved. This is the story, too, of 
grammar. 
Second, we do not learn the domains of human life separately. We do not 
learn meaning, language, and reasoning separately. The child picks them up and 
puts them ,together all at once. From the beginning, she is building vital rela-
tions and compressions under governing principles. At any stage, the child is 
building integration networks that simultaneously serve form, meaning, emo-
tion, and reasoning. Just as cultures naturally build up further blends on exist-
ing blends, the child builds up further blends from the ones she has already set 
up. The child's brain is not attempting to capture regularities of form in the 
adult way of speaking and then find out under what conditions they count as 
true, and then use them for logical inference, and then suffuse them with emo-
tion. On the contrary, mappings; projections, and dynamic emergent structure 
in integration networks operate without regard for such distinctions. This puts 
the child's learning in a very different light from what is usually assumed by na-
tivists and non-nativists alike. 
For the nativists, what needs to be learned is just too hard and, therefore, 
must be largely inborn. This view seriously underestimates the extraordinary 
double-scope creativity of the child, the richness of the social and physical , 
world, and the richnes~ of the child's own mental world. Aspects (e:g., syntax or 
truth-conditions) that adult experts have isolated (through decompressions of 
their own) are not learned separately; Formal aspects of syntax or logic might in-
deed be unlearnable in isolation, but they are emergent in a system of concep-
tual integration networks that does not separate conceptual and formal blend-
ing. This is true of learning in general-a fact that severely undermines the 
"poverty of stimulus" argument that a child's experiences are too thin to account 
for learning. Far from being deprived of adequate stimulus, the child is under 
heavy bombardment all the time from the surrounding world, which is itself a 
massively blended physical, mental, and social complex. Data keep pouring in 
for the construction and dynamic elaboration of conceptual integration net-
works that the child is actively engaged in. 
For non-nativists, what needs to be learned is indeed very hard to learn but 
can be learned through sufficiently powerful mental capabilities of statistical ex-
traction. This view does not take account of the species-specific capacity for 
double-scope integration, which drives both human ontogeny and human cul-
cure. This human capacity includes, in our view, the governing principles for 
achieving human-scale blends through operations on the inner-space and outer-
space topology of mental space configurations. 
Our mental world is not an amorphous collection of relations and formal 
structures. Rather, it is inherently shaped by the rich topology of conceptual 
'1 
The way ~ Live 
395 
integration networks and mental spaces, including vical relations and their com-
pressions. This landscape of conceptual integration networks is not something 
that gets superimposed onto the child's apprehension of basic meaning and 
form. It is the very way in which meaning and form, and hence the mental 
world itself, are constructed: The child with double-scope capacity latches onto 
the blending networks of its culture, which are themselves mental constructions 
built through double-scope creativity. 
Consider a child building something with a Lego construction set. When the 
child is finished playing, we can see all the places where something new can be 
added. So can she. In fact, she knows all the building that went into it, all the 
fracture lines and components. She can instantly add something new, pick up a 
tower and move it from one place to another, or separate the building into two 
and join the halves with a bridge. There are clear constraints on the set and the 
construction: The physical objects accept only some actions. They cannot be di-
vided, they cannot be put together just any way, they will not stay together if 
they are unbalanced and gravity pulls them apart. These constraints are inherent 
in the objectS'and their manipulation; it is the design of the pieces, not Mom 
and Dad or a set of rules, that imposes these limitations. No one has to tell the 
child that the Legos will not go together in the ways they will not go together. 
She ends up building a very wide variety of objects that all satisfy the Lego con-
straints, even though she may previously have seen almost no Lego construc-
tions. The child has plenty of stimulus to make all these objects, because she is 
integrating the Lego construction set with objects she sees, vehicles she rides in, 
animals from stories, houses and rooms she knows, bridges she has been told 
about. Things made out of Legos are not the major stimulus for making things 
out of Legos, any more than linguistic expressions the child hears are the major 
stimulus for her making other linguistic expressions. 
If the only constraint were "making something out of this amount of plastic," 
and the child had at her disposal every method of melting and molding plastic, 
the Lego constructions themselves would be only the tiniest fraction of the pos-
sible products, and constraints that would limit the child's productions co such 
Lego constructions would look factitious and unmotiv~ted. But evolution is im-
pervious to such accusations. Just as the culture gives the child the Lego set, so 
evolution gives the child double-scope integration, with its very strong con-
struction principles. 
The theory we have presented of the way we think and live has many intricate 
technical details in complex interactions, and many deployments over the ranges 
of human thoughfand action. The massive and repeated application of blending 
in diverse areas of human endeavor has led to realms of distinctive richness and 
complexity. But the story that this theory tells is, in hindsight, a simple one. 
From mammals to primates to hominids, there was a biological development of 
increasing capacity for conceptual integration. Once that biological development 

396 
THE WAY WE THINK 
reached the stage of double-scope integration, cognitively modern human beings 
were born. The distinguishing behaviors of humans are products of that biologi-
cal ability for double-scope conceptual integration. 
Conceptual integration is strongly conservative: It always works from stable 
inputs and under the constitutive and governing principles. But conceptual inte-
gration is also creative, delivering new emergent structure that is intelligible be-
cause it is tied to stable structures. The bubble chamber of the brain runs c:>n-
stantly, making and unmaking integration networks. Cultures, too, running a 
bubble chamber over the collection of their members' brains, develop integration 
networks that can be disseminated because the members of the culture all have 
the capacity for double-scope integration. Very few of the networks tried out in 
these bubble chambers of brain and culture actually survive. A network that does 
survive takes its place in individual or collective memory and knowledge. 
From weaponry to ideology, language to science, art to religion, fantasy to 
mathematics, human beings and their cultures have, step by step, made blends, 
unmade them, reblended them, and made new blends, always arriving at hu-
man-scale blends that they can manipulate directly. This progression from 
blends to newer blends, blending and deblending, compressing and decom-
pressing, is the pattern of child learning, too. 
The story of human beings-50,000 years ago, now, for the infant, the child, 
the adult, the novice, the expert, for tile many different cultures we have devel-
oped-is always the same story, with the same operations and principles. That is 
the story we have tried to tell in this book. 
• 1: 
== NOTES 
PREF"ACE 
VI 
"cognitive fluidity": Mithen 1996. 
vi 
"roughly 50,000 years ago": Mithen'ted.) 1998. 
CHAPTER 1 
3 
"by looking inside oursdves": Donald 1994, p. 538. 
5 
"Eliza": See Weizenbaum 1966. Eliza Doolittle is the woman in Pygmalion 
and My Fair Lady who pretends to be more than she)s. 
9 
"Mathematics may be defined": Russell 1918, ch. 4. 
9 
"a science of algebra": Kline 1972, p. 259. 
10 
"sum of the two surd roots": Translated by Kline 1972, p. 186. 
10 "this quasi-symbolic style": Kline 1972, p. 186. 
10 
"Cardan wrote": Kline 1972, p. 260 . 
11 
"Smolensky and Shastri": Smolensky 1990, Shastri 1996. 
14 
"analogical thinking": Gentner, Holyoak, & Kokinov 2001, Gentner 1983, 
Gentner 1989, Hofstadter 1995, Mitchell 1993. 
14 
"mental images": Shepard and Cooper 1982, Kosslyn 1980. 
15 
"metaphor": Pepper 1942, Black 1962, Sacks 1979, Ortony 1979, Lakoff 
& Johnson 1980, McNeill 1992. 
CHAPTER 2 
17 
"How can two ideas be merged?": Boden 1994, p. 525. 
17 
"Conceptual framing": Goffman 1974, Bateson 1972. Special cases of what 
we refer to here as the general notion of conceptual blending have been discussed 
insightfully by Koestler 1964, Goffman 1974, Talmy 1977, Fong 1988, Moser & 
Hofstadter n.d., Hofstadter and Moser 1989, Hofstadler et al. 1989, and Kunda, 
Miller, & Claire 1990. Fauconnier 1990 and Turner 1991 also provide analyses of 
such phenomena. All of these authors, however, take blends to be somewhat exotic, 
marginal manifestations of meaning. 
J 
397 

398 
.. 
Notes 
22 
"an enchanted loom": Sherrington 1940, p. 225. 
25 
"There is no fixed property of 'safe"': Fillmore & Atkins 1992 presents an 
analysis of "risk" that can be reinterpreted as a blending analysis. On "safe," see 
Turner & Fauconnier 1995, Fauconnier & Turner 1998, and Sweetser 1999. 
26 
"the variety of possible roles": Turner & Fauconnier 1995, Turner & Fau-
connier 1998, Sweetser 1999. 
27 
"c;.olor adjectives": See the discussion of "black kettle" in Travis 1981 and 
the sections on "active zones" in Langacker 1987/1991 and 1990. 
27 
"racism": Mithen 1996, pp. 196-197. 
28 
"image club": The newspaper chose to report the facts in a winking style 
of titillation: "TOKYO, April I-With a shy, quivering glance that she had 
practiced a thousand times, eyes slightly downcast but luminous with innocence 
and apprehension, Kaori sat at her desk in her prim school uniform, framed by 
a blackboard, waiting for a 'teacher' to walk into the classroom and rip her 
clothes off. 
"It looks like a real classroom, and baby-faced Kaori looks just like a real Japa-
nese schoolgirl. But it is all make-believe, for here in Japan the best way for a prosti-
tute to recruit clients is to put on a school uniform and adopt the naive anxiety of a 
frightened schoolgirl. 'Japanese men tend to be obsessed by schoolgirls,' said Kaori, 
who would not give her last name but cheerfully conceded she is really 26. 'The 
men who come here are looking for submissive schoolgirls.' 
"This is an 'image <;tub,' one of several hundred in Tokyo where Japanese men pay 
about $150 an hour to live OUt their fantasies about schoolgirls. In this club, customers 
can choose from 11 rooms, including classrooms, a school gym changing room, and a 
couple of imitation railroad cars where to the recorded roar of a commuter train, men 
can molest straphangers in school uniforms" (Nicholas D. Kristof. April 1, 1997). 
30 
"the sexiest vehicle on the road": Paratk, October 3, 1999, p. 18. 
31 
"no fussy little grammatical exercise": Goodman 1947, p. 113. 
32 "Most of the analytic claims in the social sciences": Tetlock & Belkin 1996, 
Roese & Olson 1995. 
33 
"metaphor in the design of interfaces": See, for example, Hutchins 1989 
and Wozny 1989. 
33 
"every child can master grammar": See also Sweetser 1990, end of ch. 2. 
34 
"yield the wrong results": Norman 1981, Sellen & Norman 1992. 
36 
"Nay, shame, 0 Philomela": See section 1406b. 
37 "special cases": See Goffman 1974, Talmy 1977, Fong 1988, Moser & Hof-
stadter n.d., Hofstadter 1989, and Kunda, Miller, and Claire, 1990. (We, too, in 
earlier works, gave analyses of such local and seemingly exceptional phenomena; see 
Fauconnier 1990 and Turner 1991.) 
38 
"particular individuals in particular circumstances": Mithen 1998, pp. 
168-169. 
1 
" 
Notes 
399 
CHAPTER 3 
I 
39 
"the two separate journeys?": A version of this riddle appears in Koestler 
1964, pp. 183-189; Koestler attributes its invention to Carl Dunker. 
40 
"dynamic mappings in thought and language": Fauconnier 1994, Faucon-
nier 1997, Fauconnier & Sweetser 1996. 
49 
"entrenched mappings and frames": Something is entrenched if it is rou-
tinely manipulated and resists displacement. An example of an entrenched frame is 
going to a restaurant, with its places for menu, server, payment, food, and so on. 
Knowing this frame allows us to dine out in foreign cities. An entrenched frame can 
also be elaborated in novel ways, as when we encounter, say, a drive-through sushi 
restaurant in Westwood. Similarly, when the American astronauts dock at the Russ-
ian space station and enter it to eat, they can refer to it as "dining out," and we all 
know they are prompting us to construct a highly novel elaboration of the restaurant 
frame. They can then make remarks like "Send the bill to Uncle Sam," "My compli-
ments to the chef," "The best restaurants are always off the beaten path," and so on. 
An example of an entrenched cross-space mapping is the identity mapping of per-
sons or objects across temporally distinct mental spaces. When we say, "Paul was a 
teenager in the 1960s," we automatically map Paul today onto the teenager in the 
1960s. When we say, "The book you were reading has gone back to the library," we 
automatically map the book in the library onto the book that you were reading. 
51 
"Micronesian navigators": Hutchins 1995a. 
51 
"ETAK and Ngatik": Lewis 1972. 
51 
"mysterious Micronesian system": Hutchins & Hinton 1984. 
52 
"meet yourself coming down the street": Rodriguez 1998. 
52 
"meet myself coming down the street": Ibid. 
52 
"Spanish short story": Zarraluki 1993, pp. 299-314. We thank Mikkel 
Hollaender Jensen for bringing this passage to our attention. 
56 
"metaphor is nOt part of the study of meaning": Davidson 1978. 
CHAPTER 4 
59 
"Syntax": Harris 1957, 1968; Chomsky 1957. 
59 
"invisible blending becomes visible": We thank Gerald Graff for bringing 
such examples to our attention. 
71 
"une issue heureusc": "Besides," as Jose Fort points out, "you never deal 
with murderers; you fight them, you isolate them; you stop them from doing harm. 
But these accords are doing just the opposite." "No, France has no reason to blame 
itself," Alan Danjou answers back in Coumer de /'Ouest. "France has supported the 
return to a rype of government that is more attentive to human rights, and the ne-
gotiations that were started could have led to a good outcome." 

400 
72 
"The method ofloci": Hutchins (in preparation). 
72 
"the speaker's own house": See Yeats 1966 and Carruthers 1990. 
CHAPTER 5 
75 
"one global idea": Hadamard 1945, p. 65. 
80 
"the Baby's Ascent": Sweetser 2001. 
CHAPTER 6 
91 
"explained by so few assumptions": Dawkins 1995, p. ix. 
Notes 
93 
"Identity and Change are compressed into Uniqueness": We capitalize 
Identity, Change, and so on when they are used in a strict technical sense to refer to 
vital relations in a network. 
94 
"My tax bill gets bigger every year": Sweetser 1996,1997. 
99 
"Disanalogy is grounded on Analogy": Gentner & Markman 1994, 1997. 
104 
"scales, force-dynamic patterns, image-schemas" and vital relations": On 
scales, see Coulson 2001; on force-dynamics, see Talmy 2000; and on image-
schemas, see Johnson 1987. 
105 
"the case of analogy": Hofstadter 1995. 
109 
"back to our starting point": Dawkins 1996, p. 36. 
CHAPTER 7 
.• ,j ' 
113 
"I see my life": Excerpt from Yeats's "Fergus and the Druid." 
120 
"captured formally in predicate calculus notation": See also Sweetser 1987 
and 1999. 
131 
"You are digging your own grave": See Coulson 2001. 
CHAPTER 8 
139 
"the Father of some Strategem": Henry the Fourth, Part Two, 1.1. 
160 
"Milton's portrayal of Satan as father": Discussed in Turner 1987. 
161 
"These yelling Monsters": Paradise Lost, I1.795-802. 
161 
"all my nether shape thus grew Transform'd": Paradis; Lost, 11.781-785. 
166 
"the bathwater of traditional religion": Charles Fillmore (personal com-
munication). 
\ 
CHAPTER 9 
171 
"we are symbol-using, networked creatures": Donald 1991, p. 382. 
172 
"each step small enough to have been produced by a random mutation or 
recombination": Pinker & Bloom 1990. 
Notes 
173 
"statistical inferencing": See Elman et al. 1996: 
173 
"the unusual nature of symbolic learning"l Deacon 1997, p. 142. 
173 
"One line of thinking": Calvin & Bickerton 2000. 
173 
"preadaptations for language": Wilson 1999. 
173 
"co-evolutionary proposals": Deacon 1997. 
174 'Mt makes a dramatic appearance":Mithen 1998, p. 165. 
178 
"the resultative construction in English": See Goldberg 1994. 
401 
186 
"these neurologically advanced human beings": "Thus," says Klein, "the 
text argues that after an initial human dispersal from Mrica by 1 million years ago, 
at least three geographically distinct human lineages emerged. These culminated in 
thre~ separate species: Homo sapiens in Africa, Homo neantkrthalensis in Europe, and 
Homo erecOO in eastern Asia. Homo sapiens then spread from Mrica, beginning per-
haps 50,000 years ago to extinguish or swamp its archaic Eurasian contemporaries. 
The spread was prompted by the development of the uniquely modern ability to in-
novate and to manipulate culture in adaptation. This ability may have followed on a 
neural transformation or on social and technological changes among Africans who 
already had modern brains. Whichever alternative is favored, the fossil, archeologi-
cal, and genetic data now show that Mrican R sapiens largely or wholly replaced 
European ,R neanderthalensis" (1999, p. xxiv). Klein .further argues that "only fully 
modern humans after 50 Icy [kiloyears] ago possessed fully modern language ability, 
and that the development of this ability may underlie their modernity" (1999, p. 
348). He also writes: "But even if important details remain to be fixed, the signifi-
cance of modern human origins cannot be overstated. Before the emergence of 
modern people, the human form and human behavior evolved together slowly, 
hand in hand. Mterward, fundamental evolutionary change in body form ceased, 
while behavioral (cultural) evolution accelerated dramatically. The most likely ex-
planation is that the modern human form--<>r more precisely the modern human 
brain-permitted dte full development of culture in the modern sense and that cul-
ture then became the primary means by which people responded to natural selective 
pressures. As an adaptive mechanism, not only is culture far more malleable than 
the body, but cultural innovations cal,l accumulate far more rapidly than genetic 
ones, and this explains how, in a remarkably short time, the human species has 
transformed itself from a relatively rare, even insignificant large mammal to the 
dominant life form on the planet" (1999, p. 494). In an earlier work, Klein simi-
larly notes that "[t]he archeological record is geographically uneven, but where it is 
most complete and best-dated, it implies that a radical transformation in human 
behavior occurred 50,000 to 40,000 years ago, the exact time perhaps depending 
on the place. Arguably, barring the development of those typically human traits that 
produced the oldest known archeological sites between 2.5 and 2 million years ago, 
this transformation represents the most dramatic behavioral shift that archaeologists 
will ever detect" (1992, p. 5). "Thus, while both Mousterians and Upper Paleolithic 
people buried their dead, Upper Paleolithic graves tend to be significantly more 
elaborate. These graves are the first to suggest a bu'rial ritual or ceremony, with its 

,. 
Notes 
402 · 
obvious implications of religion or ideology in the ethnographic sense of the term" 
(1992, p. 7). "The list of contrasts can be extended, and in each case the conclusion 
is not just that Upper Paleolithic people were qualitatively different, but also that 
they were behaviorally more advanced than Mousterians and earlier people in the 
same way that living people are. The evidence does not demonstrate that every 
known Upper Paleolithic trait was present from the very beginning. It is, in fact, 
only logical that many features, particularly those involving advances in technology, 
took time to accumulate. What the evidence does show is that, compared to their 
antecedents, Upper Paleolithic people were remarkably innovative and inventive; 
this characteristic, more than any other, is their hallmark. In the broad sweep of Eu-
ropean prehistory, they were the first people for whom archeology clearly implies 
the presence of both 'Culture' and 'cultures' (or ethnicity) in the classic anthropo-
logical sense" (1992, p. 7). 
186 
"advanced form of vocalization": Mithen 1996, p. 142. 
187 
"mitochondrial DNA": We quote from "Out of Mrica: Part 2," a website 
press release from Nature Gmetics dated November 29, 1999: "Fossil evidence indi-
cates that modern humans originated in Mrica and then expanded from North 
Mrica into the Middle East about 100,000 years ago. Silvana Santachiara-Benere-
cetti (of the University of Pavia) and colleagues now provide evidence that supports 
a second route of exit from Mrica, whereby ancient peoples dispersed from eastern 
Mrica and migrated along the coast to South Asia. 
"Mitochondria are tih'y intracellular bodies that generate the energy needed to 
drive the activities of a cell. They have their own DNA, distinct and independent 
from nuclear DNA. Mitochondrial DNA can be 'fingerprinted' according to small 
variations in sequence and, because mitochondria are only inherited from the 
mother, used to trace maternal ancestry. Closely related mitochondrial DNA se-
quences fall within the same 'haplogroup', and insinuate-but do not prove-a 
close genetic relationship between the people who carry them. People in Asia and 
Ethiopia carry the 'M' mitochondrial haplogroup, which raises the question: how 
has this come about? Have their mitochondrial DNAs evolved independently, but, 
through coincidence, converged onto the same haplotype? Or does the similarity re-
flect a genetic relationship? 
"On scrutinizing the region of mitochondrial sequence in Africans and Indians, 
Santachiara-Benerecetti and coworkers ruled out the possibility that the M hap-
logroups in eastern-Mrican and Asian populations arose independently-rather, 
they have a common Mrican origin. These findings, together with the observation 
that the M haplogroup is virtually absent in Middle-Eastern populations, support 
the idea that there was a second route of migration out of Mrica, approximately 
60,000 years ago, exiting from eastern Mrica along the coast towards Southeast 
Asia, Australia, and the Pacific Islands (p. 437). 
187 
"Y chromosomes": "We focused on estimating the expected time to the 
most recent. common ~cestor and the expected ages of certain mutations with 
. '1JII""" 
Notes 
403 
interesting geographic distributionS. Although the geographic structure of the inferred 
haplotype tree is reminiscent of that obtained for other loci (the root is in Africa, and 
most of the oldest non-African lineages are Asian), the expected rime to the most re-
cent common ancestor is remarkably short, on the order of 50,000 years. Thus, al-
though previous studies have noted that Y chromosome variation shows extreme geo-
graphic structure, we estimate that the spread of Y chromosomes out of Mrica is 
much more recent than previously was thought" (Thomson et aI. 2000, p. 736). 
187 
"language as an invention of behaviorally modern human beings": Cavalli-
Sforza 2000. 
187 
"weaving and cord-making": As reported in Angier 1999. 
CHAPTER 10 
195 
199 
201 
203 
207 
207 
207 
208 
cion). 
208 
209 
209 
p.244. 
210 
212 
212 
215 
"everyday objects as material anchors": l-Iutchins (in preparation). 
"aviation dials": Hutchins 1995b, p. 274. 
"blue hockey stick": Holder 2000. 
"what do we mean by worth?": Gordon 2000. 
"the idea of the Gothic cathedral": Scott (in press). 
"creation of a habitat for the sacred": Ibid. 
"method ofloci": Ibid. See also Hutchins (in preparation). 
"emergent property of this compound blended space": Hutchins (in prepara-
"long narratives": Ibid. 
"imaginary spaces": Scott (in press); emphasis added. 
"a space in which to meditate": Scott (in press), quotirig Carruthers 1990, 
"Automated Teller Machine": Holder 1999. 
"the modality of sign": Liddell 1998, Van Hoek 1996, Poulin 1996. 
"the blended Garfield": Liddell 1998, pp. 293-294. 
"How to build a baby": Mandler 1992 . . 
CHAPTER · 11 
218 
218 
77-79. 
218 
218 
219 
p. 11. 
"no fussy little grammatical exercise": Goodman 1947, p. 113. 
"no form of causal inference": King, Keohane, and Verba 1994, pp. 
"fundamental problem of causal inference": Ibid., p. 79. 
"everything remains the same": Ibid., p. 77; emphasis added. 
"all counterfactual conditions are causal assertions": Roese & Olson 1995, 
219 
"Would she be pro-life?": Law professor Goldberg, quoted in the Los Ange-
les Times. 

404 
221 
"abortion debates": Coulson 2001. 
223 
"Bishop Berkeley would have preferred": Penrose 1994, p. 417. 
224 
"wonderful and absurd counterfactual": Moser, 1988. 
232 
"anosognosia" : Ramachandran 1998, pp. 127-130. 
232 
"Mrs. Macken": Ibid., pp. 143-146. 
232 
"her arm was fine": Ibid., pp. 149-150. 
233 
"lottery depression": Kahneman, Slovic, & T versky 1982. 
234 
"non-Euclidean geometry": Kline 1972 and Bonola 1912. 
236 
"most credit must be accorded to Saccheri": Kline 1972, p. 869. 
244 
"the absence of number": Ibid., p. 184. 
Notes 
244 
"blending in the development of mathematics": Lakoff & Nunez 2000. 
CHAPTER 12 
250 
"condemned him to be, magnificently, only a man": From "La Tour de 
France Comme Epopee" in Barthes 1957, pp. 125, 129. 
256 
"I would have liked to have met me": Michel Charolles (personal commu-
nication), Eve Sweetser (personal·communication). 
. 
256 "His Ancient Philosophy professor": Jeff Pelletier (personal communication). 
256 
"I would have been his widow": Nili Mandelblit (personal communication). 
257 
"if she were not my wife": "First Lady" 1999, p. 18A. 
257 
"Consider a dialogue· from the movie": See Fauconnier 1997, pp. 
120-126. 
265 
"Todd Oakley discusses": Oakley 1995, Spiegelman 1991. 
266 
"Erving Goffman observes": Goffman 1974. In particular, see the chapter 
on theatrical framing. 
CHAPTER 1:3 
272 
"Wallis provided geometric constructions": See Kline 1980. 
274 
"just as alive as biological viruses": John Markoff, "Beyond Artificial Intel-
ligence, a Search for Artificial Life." Ntw York Timts, Week in Review Section, p. 5, 
February 25, 1990. 
CHAPTER 14 
279 
"then death had died today": King Hmry tht Sixth, Part Ont, 4.7. 
280 
"The Dracula crowd will scream":Reeves 1993. (This example was 
pointed out to us by Bill Gleim.) 
280 
"These health care vampires": The interpretation we are analyzing here is 
the one most people get in isolation, but it has been reported to us that at the time 
Notts 
405 
the newspaper editorial was published, there was a television commercial paid for 
by the health care industry in which two actors playa couple who are afraid that 
Clinton's proposed changes to the health care system will deprive them of what 
they need. 
289 
"the following excerpt from a letter": Coulson 2001, pp. 238-241. 
292 
"the Grim Reaper": Some points of our analysis are prompted by the 
analysis of the Grim Reaper in Lakoff & Turner 1989. These authors, in discussing 
"Death-in-general" as the abstract cause behind all individual deaths, implicitly de-
tect the causal tautology involved in the blend of the Grim Reaper. They also detect 
and analyze the pattern of conception whereby Death is personified. They name 
this pattern EVENTS ARE AcrIONS, and it consists, in part, of a cross-space mapping . 
between an actor in an action and a nonactor in an event: The nonactor in the event 
is understood metaphorically by projection from the actor in the action. Finally, 
Lakoff and Turner discuss constraints on such projections, which we build on in the 
following analysis. 
293 
"withering into old age": Analyzed in Lakoff & Johnson 1980. 
293 
"computer desktop": See Fauconnier 2001. 
, j 
CHAPTER 15 
299 
~'folk models of anger": Lakoff [and Kovecses] 1987. 
303 
"buildings, companies, and people": Nunberg 1979. 
306 
"college dormitory with a wastebasket": This example is based on Coulson 
2001. 
308 
"evil magician": Lakoff & Turner 1989. 
CHAPTER 16 
310 
"consider football and language": Searle 1969. 
316 
"the Bastille": Mailer 1968, p. 113. (We thank Jennifer Harding for bring-
ing this passage to our attention.) 
318 
"likely to give an interview": Sweetser 1999. 
326 
"not identical to them": Ramachandran & Blakeslee 1998. 
333 
"already active in the context of communication": Douglas Hofstadter 
(personal communication). 
333 
"make their communications relevant": Grice 1975, Sperber & Wilson 
1986. 
340 
"trashcan essentially never fills up": Ricardo Maldonado (personal com-
munication). 
343 
"exist only in the imagination": Kline 1972, p. 594. 
343 
"irrational numbers had no existence": Kline 1980, p. 114. 
• 
.I 

406 
,. 
344 
"imaginary quantities": Kline 1972, p. 252. 
344 
"greater than infinity": Kline 1980, p. 116. 
345 
"a general process": Lansing (personal communication). 
345 
"remarkable analogies": Hofstadter 2000. 
Nous 
349 
"EVENTS ARE ACTIONS": "Lakoff & Turner 1989. 
349 
"Fictive motion": Fictive motion is studied in Talmy 1995 and 2000. 
CHAPTER 17 
353 
p.48. 
355 
359 
359 
"Linguistics is arguably the most hotly contested property": Rymer 1992, 
"Following Charles Travis": Travis 1981. 
"fire oflove": Brooke-Rose 1958. 
"the bathwater of traditional religion": Charles Fillmore (personal com-
munication). 
361 
"likely candidate": Sweetser 1999. 
361 . "fake": Coulson 1997, Coulson & Fauconnier 1999. 
365. "The most sophisticated analysis of size terms": Langacker 1987, p. 118; 
Langaeker 1988, p. 70. 
367 
"Vallejo 94": These pictures appear on pages 116 and 117 of the June 
1994 issue. 
370 
"The caused-mqrion construction": Goldberg 1994. 
374 
"French offers three complex blends": Fauconnier & Turner 1996. 
375 
"the verbal system of Hebrew": Mandelblit 1997,2000. 
377 
"basic reference is to motion": Talmy 2000, p. 104. 
379 
"The bakery is across the street from the bank": "Ibid., p. 136. 
379 
"The palm trees clustered": Ibid., p. 134. 
380 
"paint spots": Ibid., p. 128. 
380 
"shadow": Ibid., p. 114. 
381 
"way construction": Kemmer & Israel 1994, Israel 1996. 
382 
"single conceptual package": Ibid., p. 226. 
382 
"this usage shrank" : Ibid., p. 221. 
... 
II REF ERE NeE S 
Angier, Natalie. 1999. "Furs for Evening, But Cloth Was the Stone Age Standby." 
The New York Times on the ~b, December 14. 
Barsalou, Lawrence W. 1999. "Perceptual Symbol Systems." Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 22, pp. 577-609. 
Barthes, Roland. 1957. Mythologies. Paris: Editionsdu Seuil. 
Bateson, Gregory. 1972. Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York: Ballantine Books. 
Black, Max. 1962. Models and Metaphors. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press 
1962. 
Boden, Margaret. 1994. "Precis of The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms." Be-
havioral and Brllin' Sciences, 17, pp, 519-570. 
___ , 1990, The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms, London: Weidenfeld & 
Nicholson. 
Boden, Margaret (ed,). 1994. Dimensions of Creativity. Cambridge, Mass,: MIT Press, 
Bonola, Roberto. 1912. Non-Euclidean Geometry:A Critical and Historical Study of 
Its Development. Translated by H. S. Carslaw. Chicago: Open Court Publish-
ing Company. [Reprinted in 1955.] 
Brooke-Rose, Christine, 1958. A Grammar of Metaphor. London: Seeker & Warburg. 
Brugman, Claudia. 1990. "What Is the Invariance Hypothesis?" Cognitive Linguis-
tics, 1:2, pp. 257-266. 
Calvin, William, and Derek Bickerton. 2000. Lingua ex Machina: Reconciling Dar-
win and Chomsky with the Human Brain. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Carruthers, Mary. 1990. The Book of Memory: A Study of Memory in Medieval Cul-
ture. Cambridge, U.K.: CariJ.bridge University Press. 
Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi Luca. 2000. Genes, Peoples, and Languages. New York: Farrar, 
Straus, and Giroux. 
Chomsky, Noam. 1957. Syntactic Structures. Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruycer. 
Coulson, Seana. 2001. Semantic Leaps: Frame-Shifting and Conceptual Blending in 
Meaning Construction. New York/Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
___ . 1997. "Semantic Leaps: Frame-Shifring and Conceptual Blending." Ph.D. 
dissertation, University of California, San Diego. 
___ . 1995. "Analogic and Metaphoric Mapping in Blended Spaces." Center for 
Research in Language Newsletter, 9:1, pp. 2-12. 
407 

408 
Reformm 
Coulson, Seana, and Gilles Fauconnier. 1999. "Fake Guns and Stone Lions: Con-
ceptual Blending and Privative Adjectives." In B. Fox, D. Jurafsky, and L. 
Michaelis (eds.), Cognition and Function in Languagt. Stanford: Center for 
the Study of Language and Information. 
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. 1991. Flow: Tht Psychology of Optimal Experimct. New 
York: HarperCollins. 
Davidson, Donald. 1978. "What Metaphors Mean." Critical Inquiry, 5: 1. 
Dawkins, Richard. 1996. Climbing Mount Improbablt. London/New York: Norton. 
___ . 1995. Rivtr Out of Eden. New York: Basic Books. 
Deacon, Terrence. 1997. The Symbolic Specits: Tht Co-Evolution of Languagt and tht 
Brain. New York: W. W. Norton. 
Donald, Merlin. 1994. "Computation: Part of the Problem of Creativity." Bthav-
ioral and Brain Scimcts 17:3, pp. 537-538. 
___ . 1991. Origins of the Modem Mind: Thrtt Stages in tht Evolution of Culturt 
and Cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Education Excelle~ce Partnership website: www.edex.org. 
Elman, Jeffrey L., Elizabeth A. Bates, Mark H. Johnson, Annette Karmiloff-Smith, 
Domenico Parisi, and Kim Plunkett. 1996. Rethinking Innateness: A Conntc-
tionist Perspective on Development. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Fauconnier, Gilles. 2001. "Conceprual Blending and Analogy." In Dedre Gentner, 
Keith Holyoak, and Boicho Kokinov (eds.), Tht Analogical Mind: Perspectivts 
from Cognitivt Science (pp. 255-286). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
___ . 1997. Mappings in Thought and Languagt. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge 
University Press. 
___ . 1994. Mental Spacts. New York: Cambridge University Press. [Originally 
published in 1985 by MIT Press.] 
___ . 1990. "Domains and Connections." Cognitive Linguistics 1: 1. 
Fauconnier, Gilles, and Eve Sweetser (eds.). 1996. Spaw, Worlds, and Grammar. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Fauconnier, Gilles, and Mark Turner. 1998. "Principles of Conceptual Integration." 
In Jean-Pierre Koenig (ed.), Discourse and Cognition (pp. 269-283). Stanford: 
Center for the Study of Language and Information. 
___ . 1996. "Blending as a Central Process of Grammar." In Adele Goldberg 
(ed.), Conceptual Structurt, DiscourSl!, and Language. Stanford: Center for the 
Study of Language and Information. 
___ . 1994. Conceptual Projtction and Middle Spaces. San Diego: University of 
California, Department of Cognitive Science Technical Report 9401 (avail-
able on-line at blending.stanford.edu and mentalspace.ntt). 
Fillmore, Charles J., and Beryl T. Atkins. 1992. "Toward a Frame-Based Lexicon: 
The Semantics of RISK and Its Neighbors." In Adrienne Lehrer and Eva Feder 
Kittay (eds.), Frames, Fitlds, and Contrasts: NtW Essays in Stmantic and Ltxical 
Organization (pp. 75- 102). Hillsdale, N .].: Lawrence Erlbaum Associ;ues. 
ReflrmCtS 
409 
Fillmore, Charles J., and Paul Kay. n.d. "On Grammatical ·Constructions." Unpub-
lished ms., University of California at Berkeley. 
"First Lady Looks Closer to Senate Run." 1999. Reuters, San Jose Mtrcury Ntws, 
October 24. 
Fong, Heatherbill. 1988. "The Stony Idiom of the Brain: A Study in the Syntax and 
Semantics of Metaphors." Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, San 
Diego. 
Forbus, Kenneth D., Dedre Gentner, and Keith Law. 1994. "MAC/FAC: A Model 
of Similarity-Based Retrieval." Cognitive Scimet, 19, pp. 141-205. 
Frazer, Sir James George. 1922. Tht GoUm Bough: A Study in Magic and Rtligion. 
New York: Macmillan. 
French, Robert Matthew. 1995. Tht Subtlety ofSammm: A Thtory and Computer 
Model of Analogy-Making. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Gentner, Dedre. 1989. "The Mechanisms of Analogical Reasoning." In S. Vosni-
adou and A. Ortony (eds.), Similarity and Analogical Reasoning. Cambridge, 
U.K.: Cambridge University Press. 
___ . 1983. "Structure-Mapping: A Theoretical Framework for Analogy." Cog-
nitivt Scimet, 7, pp. 155-170. 
Gentner, Dedre, Keith Holyoak, and Boicho Kokinov (OOs.). 2001. Tht Analogical 
Mind: Pmptctivts from Cognitivt Scimet. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Gentner, D ., and A. B. Markman. 1997. "Structure Mapping in Analogy and Simi-
larity." Ammcan Psychologist, 52, pp. 45-56. 
___ . 1994. "Structural Alignment in Comparison: No Difference Without 
Similarity." PsychologicalScimet, 5:3, pp. 152- 158. 
Gibbs, R. w., Jr. 1994. Tht Potties of Mind: Figurativt Thought, Languagt, and Un-
derstanding. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press. 
Goffman, Erving. 1974. Framt Analysis: An Essay on tht Organization of Expmmet. 
New York: Harper & Row. 
Goguen, Joseph. 1999. "An Introduction to Algebraic Semiotics, with Application 
to User Interface Design." In Chrystopher Nehaniv (ed.), Computation for 
Mttaphor, Analogy, andAgmts (pp. 242-291). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. [A vol-
ume in the series Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence.] 
Goldberg, Adele. 1994. Constructions: A Construction Grammar Approach to Arxu-
mmt Structurt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Goldberg, Adele (ed.). 1996. Conceptual Structure, Discourse, and Languagt. Stan-
ford: Center for the Srudy of Language and Information. 
Gombrich, E. H. 1965. "The Use of Art for the Study of Symbols." Amtrican Psy-
chologist, 20, pp. 34--50. 
Goodman, Nelson. 1955. Fact, Fiction, and Fortcast. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill. 
___ . 1947. "The Problem of Counter factual Conditionals," Journal of Philo so -
phy, 44, pp. 113-128. 
Gordon, Mary. 2000. Tht NtW York Tzmts on tht Wt-b, J~ne 4. 

410 
,. 
Refn-mus 
Grice, H. P. 1975. "Logic and Conversation." In Peter Cole and Jerry L. Morgan 
(eds.), Syntax and Smlantics. Vol. 3: Speech Acts (pp. 41-58). New York: Aca-
demic Press. 
Hadamard. Jacques. 1945. The Psychology of Invention in the Mathematical Field. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Harris, Zellig. 1968. Mathematical Structures of Language (Int~rscience Tracts in Pure 
and Applied Mathematics, Vol. 21). New York: Interscience Publishers/John Wi-
ley & Sons. 
___ . 1957. "Co-Occurrence and Transformation in Linguistic Structure." Lan-
guage, 33:3, pp. 283-340. 
Hodder, Ian. 1998. "Creative Thought: A Long-Term Perspective." In Steven 
Mithen (ed.), Creativity in Human Evolution and Prehistory (pp. 61-77). Lon-
don/New York: Routledge. 
Hofstadter, Douglas R. 2000. "The Ubiquity and Power of Analogy in Discovery in 
Physics." The Ninth Annual Hofsradter Lecture (in memory of Richard Hof-
stadter), Stanford University, February 29. 
___ . 1995. Fluid Concepts and Creative Analogies. New York: Basic Books. 
___ . 1985. "Analogies and Roles in Human and Machine Thinking." In Dou-
glas R Hofstadter, Metamagical Thmlas. New York: Bantam Books. 
Hofstadter, Douglas R, Liane Gabora, Salvatore Attardo, and Victor Raskin. 1989. 
"Synopsis of the Workshop on Humor and Cognition." Humor: Inte.rnational 
Journal of Humor Research, 2:4, pp. 417-440. . 
. . 
Hofstadter, Douglas R:'and DavidJ. Moser. 1989. "To Err is Human; To Study Er-
ror-Making Is Cognitive Science." Michigan Quarurly Review, 28:2, pp. 
185-215. 
___ . n.d. "Errors: The Royal Road." Unpublished manuscript. 
Holder, Barbara. 2000. "Conceptual Blending in Airbus A320 Displays." Sensation 
and Perception Seminar, Department of Cogni~ive Sciences, University of 
California, Irvine, November 15. 
___ . 1999. "Blending and Your Bank Account: Conceptual Blending in ATM 
Design." Newsletter of the Center for Research in Language, 11:6 (available on-
line at crLucsd.edu). 
, 
Holland, J. H., Keith James Holyoak, R E. Nisbett, and Paul Thagard. 1986. In-
duction: Processes of Inference, Learning, and Discovery. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Bradford Books/MIT Press. 
Holland, Paul. 1986. "Statistics and Causal Inference." Journal of the American Sta-
tisticaiAssociation, 81, pp. 945-960. 
Holyoak, Keith James, and Paul Thagard. 1995. Mental Leaps: Analogy in Creative 
Thought. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
___ . 1989. "Analogical Mapping by Constraint Satisfaction." Cognitive Science, 
13, pp. 295:-355. 
,. 
Reftrences 
411 
Hummel, John, and Keith Holyoak. 1997. "Distributed Representations of Struc-
ture: A Theory of Analogical Access and Mapping." Psychological Review, 
104:3, pp .. 427-466. 
Hutchins, Edwin (in preparation). "Material Anchors for Conceptual Blends." 
--_. 1995a. Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
---' 1995b. "How a Cockpit Remembers Its Speeds." Cognitive Science, 19:3, 
pp. 265-288. 
---' 1989. "Metaphors for Interface Design." In M. M. Taylor, F. Neel, and D. 
G. Bouwhuis (eds.), The Structure of Multimodal Dialogue (pp. 11-28). Am-
sterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers. 
Hutchins, Edwin, and Geoffrey Hinton. 1984. "Why the Islands Move." Percep-
tio~ 13,pp.629-632. 
Indurkhya, Bipin. 1992. Metaphor and Cognition: An Interactionist Approach. Dor-
drecht: Kluwer. 
Israel, Michael. 1996. "The way Constructions Grow." In Adele Goldberg (ed.), 
Conceptual Structure, Discourse, and Language (pp. 217-230). Stanford: Cen-
ter for the Study of Language and Information. 
Johnson, Mark. 1987. The Body in the Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Kahneman, Daniel. 1995. "Varieties of Counterfactual Thinking." In Neal J. Roese 
and James M. Olson (eds.), What Might Have Been: The Social Psychology of 
Counterfactual Thinking. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Kahneman, .Daniel, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky. 1982. Judgment Under Uncer-
tainty: Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Kay, Paul. 1995. "Construction Grammar." In Jef Verschueren, Jan-ala Ostman, 
and Jan Blommaert (eds.), Handbook of Pragmatics. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: 
John Benjamins. 
Kay, Paul, and Charles Fillmore. 1995. "Grammatical Constructions and Linguistic 
Generalizations: The Whats X doing Y? Construction." Unpublished ms., De-
partment of Linguistics, University of California at Berkeley. 
Keane, Mark T., Tim Ledgeway, and Stuart Duff. 1994. "Constraints on Analogical 
Mapping: A Comparison of Three Models." Cognitive Science, 18, pp. 
387-438. 
Kemmer, Suzanne, and Michael Israel. 1994. "Variation and the Usage-Based 
Model." In Katie Beals et aI. (eds.), Papers from the Parasession on Variation 
and Linguistic Theory. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society. 
King, Gary, Robert O. Keohane, and Sidney Verba. 1994. Designing Social Inquiry: 
Scientific Inference in Qualitative Research. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press. 
Klein, Richard G. 1999. The Human Career: Human Biological and Cultural Ori-
gim, 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999. 

412 
&ftrmus 
___ . 1992. "The Archeology of Modern Human Origins." Evolutionary Anthro-
pology, 1:1, pp. 5-14. 
Kline, Morris. 1980. Mathmllltics: The Loss of Ctrtainty. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
___ . 1972. Mathmzatical Thought .from Ancitnt to Modern Times. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Koestler, Arthur. 1964. The Act ofCrtation. New York: Macmillan. 
Kosslyn, Stephen M. 1980. Image and Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press. 
Kunda, Ziva, Dale T. Miller, and Theresa Clare. 1990. "Combining Social Con-
cepts: The Role of Causal Reasoning." Cognitive Scimct, 14, pp. 551-577. 
LakofT, George. 1993. "The Contemporary Theory of Metaphor." In Andrew 
Ortony (ed.), Metaphor and Thought, 2nd ed. (pp. 202-251) (Cambridge, 
U.K: Cambridge University Press). 
___ .1990. "The Invariance Hypothesis." Cognitive Linguistics, 1:1, pp. 39-74. 
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors we .Live By. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press. 
Lakoff, George [and Zoltan Kovecses). 1987. WOmtn, Hire, and Dangerous Things. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Lakoif. George, and Rafael N ufiez. 2000. · Whtre Mathematics Comes From: How the 
Embodied Mind Brings Mathematics into Being. New York: Basic Books. 
Lakoff, George, and Mark Turner. 1989 .. More Than Cool Reason: A Field Guidt to 
Poetic Metaphor. Chicago: University of Chicago· Press. 
Langacker, Ronald. 1990. Concept, Image, and Symbol: The Cognitive Basis ofGram-
mar. Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 
___ . 1988. ''A View of Linguistic Semantics." In Brygida Rudzka-Ostyn (ed.), 
Topics in Cognitive Linguistics (pp. 49-90). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins. 
___ . 1987-1991. Foundatiom of Cognitive Grammar, Vols. 1 and 2. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press. 
Lewis, David. 1973. Counttrfactuals. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
___ . 1972. we, the Navigators. The Ancitnt Art of Landfinding in the Pacific. 
Honolulu: The University Press of Hawaii. 
Liddell, Scott. 1998. "Grounded Blends, Gestures, and Conceptual Shifts." Cogni-
tive Linguistics, 9:3, pp. 283-314. 
Mailer, Norman. 1968. Armies of the Night. New York: New American Library. 
MandelbJit, Nili. 1997. "Grammatical Blending: Creative and Schematic Aspects in 
Sentence Processing and Translation." Ph.D. dissertation, University of Cali-
fornia, San Diego. 
___ . 2000. "The Grammatical Marking of Conceptual Integration: From Syn-
tax to Morphology." Cognitive Linguistics 11:314, pp. 197--:-252. 
&ftrences 
'413 
Manddblit, Nili, and Ocon Zachar. 1998. "The Notion of Dynamic Unit: Concep-
tual Developments in Cognitive Science." Cognitive Scitnce 22:2, pp. 229-268. 
Mandler, Jean. 1992. "How to Build a Baby." Psychological Review, 99:4. pp. 
587-604. 
Maslow, Abraham. 1968. Toward a Psychology of Being. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold. 
McNeill, David. 1992. Hand and Mind: What Gestures Reveal About Thought. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Mitchell, M. 1993. Analogy-Making as Perception. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Mithen, Steven. 1998. "A Creative Explosion? Theory of Mind, Language, and the 
D'isembodied Mind of the Upper Paleolithic." In Steven Mithen (ed.), Cre-
ativity in Human Evolution and Prthistory (pp. 165-191). London/New York: 
Routledge. 
__ 
. 1996. The Prthistory of the Mind: A Search for the Qrigim of Art, Scimct 
and Religion. London/New York: Thames & Hudson. 
Mithen, Steven (ed.). 1998. Creativity in Human Evolution and Prehistory. Lon-
don/New York: Routledge. 
Moser, David. 1988. "If This Paper Were in Chinese, Would Chinese People Un-
derstand the TItle?" Unpublished ms., Center for .Research on Concepts and 
Cognition, Indiana University. 
Moser. David, and Douglas Hofstadter. n.d. "Errors: A Royal Road to the Mind." 
Unpublished ms., Center for Research on Concepts and Cognition, Indiana 
University. 
Norman. D. A. 1981. "Categorization of Action Slips." Psychological Review, 88, pp. 
1-15. 
Nunberg, G. 1979. "The Non-Uniqueness of Semantic Solutions: Polysemy." Lin-
guistics and Philosophy. 3:2. 
Oakley, Todd. 1995. "Presence: The Conceptual Basis of Rhetorical Effect." Ph.D. 
dissertation. University of Maryland. 
Ortony, Andrew (ed.). 1979. Metaphor and Thought. Cambridge/New York: Cam-
bridge University Press. 
Pavel, Thomas. 1986. Fictional Worlds. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press. 
Penrose, Roger. 1994. Shadows of the Mind.' A Search for the Missing Scitnct of Con-
sciousness. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Pepper, Stephen. 1942. "Root Metaphors." In Stephen Pepper, World Hypotheses. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Perkins, D. 1994. "Creativity: Beyond the Darwinian Paradigm." In Margaret Boden 
(ed.), Dimemiom ofCrtativity (pp. 119-142). Cambridge. Mass.: MIT Press. 
Pinker, Steven, and Paul Bloom. 1990. "Natural Language and Natural Selection." 
Behavioral and Brain Scitnces. 13, pp. 707-784. 
.I 

414 
,. 
Rejmmm 
Poulin. Christine. 1996. "Manipulation of Discourse Spaces in ASL." In Adele 
Goldberg (ed.). Conceptual Structure. Discourse. and Language (pp. 421-433). 
Stanford: Center for the Study of Language and Information. 
Ramachandran. V. S .• and Sandra Blakeslee. 1998. Phantoms in the Brain. New 
York: Morrow. 
Reeves. Richard. 1993. "Best Performance by a Politiciail." Los {tngeks TImes. 
Robert. Adrian. 1998. "Blending in the Interpretation of Mathematical Proofs." In 
Jean-Pierre Koenig (ed.). Discourse and Cognition. Stanford: Center for the 
Study of Language and Information. 
Rodriguez. Paul. 1998. "Identity Blends and Discourse Context." Unpublished 
ms .• University of California. San Diego. 
Roese. Neal. and James Olson (eds.). 1995. The Social Psychology ofCounterfoctual 
Thinking. Hillsdale. N.].: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Russell. Bertrand. 1918. Mysticism and Logic and Other Essays. London/New York: 
Longmans. 
Rymer. Russ. 1992. "Annals of Science: A Silent Childhood-I." New Yorker. April 13. 
Sacks. Sheldon (ed.). 1979. On Metaphor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Santachiara-Benerecetti. Silvana. 1999. "Out of Mrica: Part 2." website press release 
from Nature Genetics. November 29. 
Schwartz. Daniel L.. and John B. Black. 1996. "Shuttling Between Depictive Mod-
els and Abstract Rules: Induction and Fallback." Cognitive Science. 20. pp. 
457-497. 
Scott. Robert A. (in pres!5. The Gothic Enterprise: The Idea of the Cathedral and Its 
Uses in Medieval Europe. 1134-1550. Berkeley/Los Angeles: University of Cal-
ifornia Press. 
Searle. John. 1969. Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language. London: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Sellen. A. J .• and D. A. Norman. 1992. "The Psychology of Slips." In B. J. Baars 
(ed.). Experimental Slips and Human Error: Exploring the Architecture of Vol i-
tion. New York: Plenum Press. 
Shastri. Lokendra. 1996. "Temporal Synchrony. Dynamic Bindings. and SHRUTl-
A Representational But Non-Classical Model of Reflexive Reasoning." Behav-
ioral and Brain Sciences. 19:2. pp. 331-337. 
Shepard. Roger. and Lynn A. Cooper. 1982. Mental Images and Their Transforma-
tions. Cambridge. Mass.: MIT Press. 
Smolensky. Paul. 1990. "Tensor Product Variable Binding and the Representation 
of Symbolic Structures in Connectionist Systems." Artificial Intelligence, 
46:1-2. pp. 159-216. 
Sperber. Dan. and Deirdre Wilson. 1986. Relevance: Communication and Cognition. 
Cambridge. Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Spiegelman. Art. 1991. Maus II, a Survivor's Tak. New York: Pantheon Books. 
, , 
References 
415 
Sweetser. Eve. 2001. "Blended Spaces and Performativity." Cognitive Linguistics, 
11 :3/4. pp. 305- 334. 
___ . 1999. "Compositionality and Blending: Semantic Composition in a Cog-
nitively Realistic Framework." In Theo Janssen and Gisela Redeker (eds.). 
Cognitive Linguistics: Foundations, Scope and Methodology (pp. 129-162). 
Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 
___ . 1997. "Role and Individual Readings of Change Predicates." In Jan Nuyrs 
and Eric Pederson (eds.). Language and Conceptualization. Oxford University 
Press. 
___ . 1996. "Changes in Figures and Changes in Grounds: A Note on Change 
Predicates, Mental Spaces, and Scalar Norms." Cognitive Studies: Bulletin of 
the Japanese Cognitive Science Society, 3:3 (September), pp. 75-86. [Special is-
sue on cognitive linguistics.] 
___ . 1990. From Etymology to Pragmatics: Metaphorical and Cultural Aspects of 
Semantic Structure. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press. 
___ . 1987. "The Definition of Lie: An Examination of the Folk Theories Un-
derlying a Semantic Prototype." In Dorothy Holland and Naomi Quinn 
(eds.), Cultural Models in Language and Thought (pp. 43-66). Cambridge, 
U.K.: Cambridge University Press. 
Talmy. Len. 2000. Toward a Cognitive Semantics. Vol. 1: Concept Structuring Systems; 
Vol. 2: Typology and Process. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
___ . 1995. "Fictive Motion in Language and 'Ception.'" In Paul Bloom, Mary 
Peterson, Lynn Nadel, and Merrill Garrett (eds.), Language and Space (pp. 
307-384). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
___ . 1977. "Rubber-Sheet Cognition in Language." Proceedings of the 13th Re-
gional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society. 
Tetlock, Philip, and Aaron Belkin (eds.). 1996. Counterfoctual Thought Experiments 
in World Politics. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Thomson, Russell, Jonathan Pritchard, Peidong Shen, Peter Oefner, and Marcus 
Feldman. 2000. "Recent Common Ancestry of Human Y Chromosomes: Ev-
idence from DNA Sequence Data." Proceedings of the NationalAcademy of Sci-
ences, 97:13 (June), pp. 7360-7365. 
Travis, Charles, 1981 . The True and the False: The Domain of the Pragmatic. Amster-
dam: John Benjamins. 
Turner. Mark. 1996a. "Conceptual Blending and Counrerfactual Argument in the 
Social and Behavioral Sciences." In Philip Tetlock and Aaron Belkin (eds.). 
Counterfoctual Thought Experiments in World Politics. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press. ' 
_ __ . 199Gb. The Literary Mind. New York: Oxford University Press. 
___ . 1991. Reading Minds: The Study of English in the Age of Cognitive Science. "'-
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 

416 
Reforenus 
___ . 1990. "Aspects of the Invariance Hypothesis." Cognitive Linguistics, 1:2, 
pp. 247-255. 
___ . 1987. Death Is the Mother of Beauty: Mind, Metaphor, Criticism. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Turner, Mark, and Gilles Fauconnier. 1998. "Conceptual Integration in Counter-
factuals." In Jean-Pierre Koenig (ed.), Discourse and Cognition (pp. 285-296). 
Stanford: Center for the Study of Language and Information. 
___ . 1995. "Conceptual Integration and Formal Expression." Journal of 
Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, 10:3, pp. 183-204. 
Van Hoek, Karen. 1996. "Conceptual Locations for Reference in American Sign 
Language." In Gilles Fauconnier and Eve Sweetser (eds.), Spaces, Worlds, and 
Grammar (pp. 336-350). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Weisberg, R. W. 1993. Creativity: Beyond the Myth of Genius. New York: W. H. 
Freeman. 
Weizenbaum, Joseph. 1966. "ELIZA-A Comp~ter Program for the Study of Nat-
ural Language Communication Between Man and Machine." Communica-
tions of the ACM, 9:1, pp.36-45. 
. 
Westney, D. Eleanor. 1987. Imitation andjnnovatio'n. Cambridge, Mass.~ Harvard 
University Press. 
. 
Wexo, John Bennett. 1992. Dinosaurs. A .v~lume· of Z~obooks. San Diego: Wildlife 
• 
.
. ~
, 
r 
Education, Limited. 
.' 
Wilson, Frank R. 1999. The H~nd. Ne~ York:' Vintage. 
Wozny, Lucy Anne. 1989. "The Applicati~n of Metaphor, Analogy, and Concep-
tual Models in Computer Systems." Interacting with Computers, 1:3, pp. 
273-283. 
Yeats, Frances. 1966. The Art of Memory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Zarraluki, Pedro. 1993. "Paginas Inglesas." In Cumto Espanol Contempordneo. Edi-
cion de Ma. Angeles Encinar y Anthony Percival. Madrid: Ediciones Catedra. 
FURTHER IMPORTANT WORK 
ON CONCEPTUAL BLENDING 
THE LAST FIVE YEARS HAVE seen an explosion of remarkable work on concep-
tual blending, with fascinating applications to art, literature, poetics, mathemat-
ics, poHticai science, musicology, Hnguistics, t!teology, psychoanalysis, and film. 
It would have taken a book ten times the size of this one to do justice to the 
rich new avenues of investigation that have been opened in all these domains, 
and we regret that the present book, focused as it is on theory, cannot carry a re-
view of this stimulating work. Below is a partial list of additional recent and on-
going work on blending. Some additional work is presented on the web at 
blending.stanford. edu. 
,) 
BOOKS 
Turner, Mark. 2001. Cognitive Dimensions of Social Scienu. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. 
Zbikowski, Lawrence. 2001. Conceptualizing Music: Cognitive Structure, Theory, and 
Analysis. New York: Oxford University Press. 
ARTICLES AND TALKS 
Bizup, Joseph. 1998. "Blending in Ruskin." Paper presented at the Annual Meeting 
of the Modern Language Association. 
Brandt, Per Aage. 1998. "Cats in Space." The Roman Jakobson Centennial Sympo-
sium: International Journal of Linguistics Acta Linguistica Hafoiensia Volume 
29. C. A. Reitzel: Copenhagen. Uakobson and Levi-Strauss's structuralist 
reading of Baudelaire's "Les Chats" is reconsidered in light of cognitive rheto-
ric and conceptual blending theory.) 
Bundgard, Peer F. 1.999. "Cognition and Event Structure." Almen Semiotik, 15, 
78-106. [A review of conceptual integration theory.) 
Casonato, Marco M. 2000. "Scolarene sexy: processi cognitivi standard nella scena 
della perversione." Psicoterapia: clinica, epistemologia, ricerca, 20-21, Spring. 
[An analysis of the role of blending in sexual imagination and realized fantasy, 
including but not restricted to "perverse" scenes.] 
417 

418 
Further WOrk 
,. 
Casonato, Marco, Gilles Fauconnier, and Mark Turner. 2001. "Limmaginazione e il 
cosiddetto 'conflitto' psichico." Annuario di Itinerari Filosofici, Vol. 5 (SlTUt-
ture deli'tsptrienza), No.3 (Mente, linguaggio, esprtssione). Milano: Mimesis. 
Chen, Melinda. 2000. "A Cognitive-Linguistic View of Linguistic (Human) Ob-
jectification." Paper presented at the 5th Conference on Conceptual Struc-
ture, Discourse, and Language. [A discussion of blends in objectifying hu-
man beings.] 
Cienki, Alan, and Deanne Swan. 1999. "Constructions, Blending, and Metaphors:· 
Integr~ting Multiple Meanings." Paper presented at the 6th International 
Cognitive Linguistics Conference. 
Collier, David, and Stephen Levitsky. 1997. "Democracy with Adjectives: Concep-
tual Innovation in Comparative Research." WOrld Politics, 49:3 (April), pp. 
430-451. 
Coulson, Seana. 1999. "Conceptual Integration and Discourse Irony." Paper pre-
sented at Beyond Babel: 18th Annual Conference of the Western Humanities 
Alliance. 
Csabi, Szilvia. 1997. "The Concept of America in the Puritan Mind." Paper presented 
at the 5th Conference of the International Cognitive Linguistics Association. 
Evans, Vyvyan. 1999. "The Cognitive Model for Time." Paper presented at Beyond 
Babel: 18th Annual Conference of the Western Humanities Alliance. 
Fauconnier, Gilles. 2000. "Methods and Generalizations." In T. Janssen and G. Re-
deker (eds.), Cognitive Linguistics: Foundations, Scope, and Methodology (pp. 
95-127). The Hag4~: Mouton de Gruyter. [A volume in the Cognitive Lin-
guistics Research Series.] 
___ . 1999. "Embodied Integration." Paper presented at the 6th International 
Cognitive Linguistics Conference. 
Fauconnier, Gilles, and Mark Turner. 2000. "Compression and Global Insight." 
Cognitive Linguistics, 11 :3-4, pp. 283-304. 
___ . 1999a. "Metonymy and Conceptual Integration." In K1aus-Uwe Panther 
and Gilnter Radden (eds.), Metonymy in Language and Thought (pp. 77-90). 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. [A volume in the series Human Cognitive 
Processing.] 
___ . 1999b. "Polysemy and Conceptual Blending" (available on-line at blmding. 
stanfordedu). 
___ . 1998. "Conceptual Integration Networks." Cognitive Science, 22:2 (April-
June), pp. 133-187. 
Forceville, Charles. 2001. "Blends and Metaphors in Multimodal Representations." 
Paper presented at the 7th International Cognitive Linguistics Conference. 
' 
Freeman, Donald. 1999. "'Speak ~f me as I am': The Blended Space of Shake-
speare's Othello." Paper presented at Beyond Babel: 18th Annual Conference . 
of the Western Humanities Alliance. 
Further WOrk 
419 
Freeman, Margaret. 1999a. "The Role of Blending in an Empirical Study of Liter-
ary Analysis." Paper presented at the 6th International Cognitive Linguistics 
Conference. 
___ . 1999b. "Sound Echoing-Sense: The Evocation of Emotion Through 
Sound in Conceptual Mapping Integration of Cognitive Processes." Paper 
presented at Beyond Babel: 18th Annual Conference of the Western Human-
ities Alliance. 
___ . 1998. "'Mak[ing] new stock from the salt': Poetic Metaphor as Conceptual 
Blend in Sylvia Plath's 'The Applicant.'" Paper presented at the Annual Meet-
ing of the Modern Language Association. 
___ . 1997. "Grounded Spaces: Deictic-Self Anaphors in the Poetry of Emily 
Dickinson." Language and Literature, 6:1, pp. 7-28. [Contains a blended-
space analysis of Dickinson's "Me from Myself-to banish-."] 
Grady, Joseph., Todd Oakley, and Seana Coulson. ·1999. "Conceptual Blending and 
Metaphor." In G. Steen and R. Gibbs (eds.), Metaphor in Cognitive Linguis-
tics. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Grea, Philippe. 2001. "La theorie de I'integration conceptuelle appliquee 11 la me-
taphore et la metaphore filee." Doctoral dissertation, Universite de Paris. 
Grush, Rick, and Nili Mandelblit. 1998. "Blending in Language, Conceptual 
Srructure, and the Cerebral Cortex." In Per Aage Brandt, Frans Gregersen, 
Frederik Stjernfelt, and Martin Skov (eds.), The Roman Jakobson Centennial 
Symposium: International Journal of Linguistics Acta Linguistica Hafoiensia, 
Vol. 29 (pp. 221-237). Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzel. 
Herman, Vimala. 1999. "Deictic Projection and Conceptual Blending in Epistolar-
iry." Poetics Today, 20:3, pp. 523-542. 
Hiraga, Masako. 1999. "Blending and an Interpretation of Haiku." Poetics Today, 
20:3, pp. 461-482. 
___ . 1999. "Rough Sea and the Milky Way: 'Blending' in a Haiku Text." In 
Chrystopher Nehaniv (ed.), Computation for Metaphor, Analogy. and Agents 
(pp. 27-36). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. [A volume in the series Lecture Notes in 
Artificial Intelligence.] 
___ . 1998. "Metaphor-Icon Links in Poetic Texts: A Cognitive Approach to 
Iconiciry." Journal of the University of the Air, 16. ["The model of 'blending' 
. .. provides an effective instrument to clarifY the complexiry of the metaphor-
icon Iink."] 
Hofstadter, Douglas. 1999. "Human Cognition as a Blur of Analogy and Blend-
ing." Paper presented at Beyond Babel: 18th Annual Conference of the West-
ern Humanities Alliance. 
Holder, Barbara, and Seana Coulson. 2000. "Hints on How to Drink from a Fire 
Hose: Conceptual Blending in the Wild Blue Yonder." Paper presented at the 
5th Conference on Conceptual Structure, Discourse, and Language. 
\ 
,. , 

" 
420 
Further Wt,rk 
Jappy, Tony. 1999. "Blends, Metaphor, and the Medium." Paper presented at the 
6th International Cognitive Linguistics Conference. 
Kim, Esther. 2000. "Analogy as Discourse Process." Paper presented at the 5th 
Conference on Conceptual Structure, Discourse, and Language. [Includes a 
discussion of blending in discourse.] 
Lakoff. George, and Rafael E. Nufiez. 1997. "The Metaphorical Structure of Mathe-
matics: Sketching Out Cognitive Foundations for a Mind-Based Mathemat-
ics." In Lyn English (ed.), Mathematical Reasoning: Analogies, Metaphors, and 
Images. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum. [Analyzes blending in the invention ofvari-
ous mathematical structures.] 
Lee, Mark, and John Barnden. 2000. "Metaphor, Pretence, and Counterfactuals." 
Paper presented at the 5th Conference on Conceptual Structure, Discourse, 
and Language. [Includes a discussion of blending in counterfactuals.] 
Maglio, Paul P., and Teenie Matlock. 1999. "The Conceptual Structure ofInforma-
tion Space." In A. Munro, D. Benyon, D., and K. Hook (eds.), Personal and 
Social Navigation of Information Spau. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. [Includes a 
section on "Conceptual Blends in Information Space."] 
Maldonado, Ricardo. 1999. "Spanish Causatives and the Blend." Paper presented at 
the 6th International Cognitive Linguistics Conference. 
Mandelblit, Nili. 1995. "Beyond Lexical Semantics: Mapping and Blending of 
Conceptual and Linguistic Structures in Machine Translation." Prouedings of 
the Fourth International Confirenu on the Cognitive Science of Natural Lan-
guage Processing. Dublin. 
Mandelblit, Nili, and Gilles Fauconnier. 2000. "Underspecificity in Grammatical 
Blends as a Source for Constructional Ambiguity." In A. Foolen and F. van 
der Leek (eds.), Constructions. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Narayan, Shweta. 2000. "Mappings in Art and Language: Conceptual Mappings in 
Neil Gaiman's Sandman." Honors thesis, University of California Berkeley. 
Oakley, Todd. 1998. "Conceptual Blending, Narrative Discourse, and Rhetoric." 
Cognitive Linguistics, 9, pp. 321- 360. 
Olive, Esther Pascual. 2001 . "Why Bother to Ask Rhetorical Questions (If They Are 
Already Answered)? A Conceptual Blending Account of Argumentation in Le-
gal Settings." Paper presented at the 7th International Cognitive Linguistics 
Conference. 
Ramey, Lauri. 1998. "'His Story's Impossible to Read': Creative Blends in Michael 
Palmer's Books Against Understanding." Paper presented at the Twentieth Cen-
tury Literature Conference, University. of Louis vi lIe. 
_ __ . 1997a. "A Film Is/Is Not A Novel: Blended Spaces in Sense and Sensibil-
iry." Paper presented at the Popular Culture Association/American Culture 
Association in the South Conference. 
Further WOrk 
421 
--- ' 1997b. "What n'er was Thought and cannot b'e Expres't: Michael Palmer 
and Postmodern Allusion." Paper presented at the 9th Annual Conference on 
Linguistics and Literature. 
---' 1996. "The Poetics of Resistance: A Critical Introduction to Michael 
Palmer." Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago. [See especially Chapter 4.] 
---' 1995. "Blended Spaces in Thurber and Welty." Marian College Humani-
ties Series. 
Ramey, Martin. 2000. "Cognitive Blends and Pauline Metaphors in 1 Thessaloni-
ans." In Proceedings of the 2000 World Congress on Religion, organized by the 
Society of Biblical Literature. 
--' 1997. "Eschatology and Ethics," Chapter 4 of "The Problem of the Body: 
The Conflict Between Soteriology and Ethics in Paul." Doctoral dissertation, 
Chicago Theological Seminary. [Contains a discussion of blending in 1 Thes-
salonians.] 
Recanati, Fran~ois. 1995. "Le present epistolaire: une perspective cognitive." L'infor-
mation grammatica/e, 66 Oune}, pp. 38-45. [Recanati applies the earliest work 
on blended spaces to problems of tense. He translates "blended space" as "es-
pace mixte."] 
. j
. 
. 
Rohrer, Tim. "The Embodiment of Blending." Paper p'~esented at the 6th Interna-
tional Cognitive Linguistics Conference. 
Sinding, Michael. 2001. "Assembling Spaces: The Conceptual Structure of Alle-
gory." Paper presented at the Annual American Comparative Literature Asso-
ciation Conference. 
Sondergaard, Morten. 1999. "Blended Spaces in Contemporary Art." Paper pre-
sented at Beyond Babel: 18th Annual Conference of the Western Humanities 
Alliance. 
Sovran, Tamar. 1999. "Generic Level Versus Creativity in Metaphorical Blends." 
Paper presented at the 6th International Cognitive Linguistics Conference. 
Steen, Francis. 1998. "Wordsworth's Autobiography of the Imagination." Auto/Bi-
ography Studies, Spring. [Includes a discussion of blending in, e.g., memory, 
perception, dreaming, and pretend play, and consequences for literary in-
vention.] 
Sun, Douglas. 1994. "Thurber's Fables for Our Time: A Case Study in Satirical Use 
of the Great Chain Metaphor." Studies in American Humor, 3: 1 (new series), 
pp.51- 61. 
Swan, Deanne, and Alan Cienki. 1999. "Constructions, Blending, and Metaphors: 
The Influence of Structure." Paper presented at the 6th International Cogni-
tive Linguistics Conference. 
Sweetser, Eve. 1999. "Subjectivity and Viewpoint as Blended Spaces." Paper pre-
sented at the 6th International Cognitive Linguistics Conference. 
.. 

422 
,. 
. ......... - ... _ I, . • 
"-:'. 
- - _ .... __ . 
Furth"W0rk 
Sweetser, Eve, and Barbara Dancygier. 1999. "Semantic Overlap and Space-
Blending." Paper presented at the 6th International Cognitive Linguistics 
Conference. 
Tobin, Vera. 2001. "Texts That Pretend to Be Talk: Frame-Shifting and Frame-
Blending Across Frames of Utterance in Mystery Science Theater 3000." Pa-
per presented at the 7th International Cognitive Linguispcs Conference. 
Turner, Mark. 2002. "The Cognitive Study of Art, Language, and Literature." Poet-
ics Today. 
___ . 2000. "Backstage Cognition in Reason and Choice." In Arthur Lupia, 
Mathew McCubbins, and Samuel L. Popkin (eds.), Ekments of Reason: Cogni-
tion, Choice, and the Bounds of Rationality (pp. 264-286). Cambridge, U.K.: 
Cambridge University Press. 
___ . 1999a. "Forbidden Ftuit." Paper presented at the 6th International Cogni-
tive Linguistics Conference. 
___ . 1999b. "Forging Connections." In Chrystopher Nehaniv (ed.), Computa-
tion for Metaphor, Analogy. and Agents (pp. 11-26). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
[A volume in the series Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence.] 
Turner, Mark, and Gilles Fauconnier. 2000. "Metaphor, Metonymy, and Binding." 
In Antonio B~rcelona (ed.), Metonymy and Metaphor at the Crossroads (pp. 
264-286). Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter. [A volume inthe series 
Topics in English Linguistics.] 
___ . 1999a. "A Mechanism of Creativity". Poetics Today, 20:3, pp. 397-418. 
Reprinted as "Lit~ on Mars: Language and the Instruments .0fInvention." In 
Rebecca Wheeler (ed.), The W0rkings of Language (pp. 181-200). Westport, 
Conn.: Praeger. 
___ . 1999b. "Miscele e metafore." Pluriverso: Biblioteca delle idee per la civilta 
planetaria, 3:3 (September), pp. 92-106. [Translation by Anna Maria 
Thornton.] 
Veale, Tony. 1999. "Pragmatic Forces in Metaphor Use: The Mechanics of Blend 
Recruitment in Visual Metaphors." In Chrystopher Nehaniv (ed.), Computa-
tion for Me~phor, Analogy. and Agents (pp. 37-51). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
[A volume in the series Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence.] 
___ . 1996. "Pastiche: A Metaphor-Centred Computational Model of Concep-
tual Blending, with Special Reference to Cinematic Borrowing." Unpub-
lished ms. 
Veale, Tony, and Diarmuid O'Donogue. 1999. "Computational Models ofConcep-
tual Integration." Paper presented at the 6th International Cognitive linguis-
tics Conference. 
Vorobyova, Olga. "Conceptual Blending in Narrative Suspense: Making the Pain of 
Anxiety Sweet." Paper presented at the 7th International Cognitive linguis-
tics Conference. 
Furth"W0rk 
423 
Zbikowski, Lawrence. 1999. "The Blossoms of'Trockne Blumen': Music and Text 
in the Early Nineteenth Century." Music Analysis, 18:3 (October 1999), pp . 
. 307-345. 
___ . 1997. "Conceptual Blending and Song." Unpublished ms. 
Zunshine, Lisa. "Domain Specificity and Conceptual Blending in A. L. Barbauld's 
Hymns." Unpublished ms. 
' ...... 

II INDEX 
Act ofCrtation (Koesder), 37 
activation, patterns of, 22 
Adjective-Noun compounds 
form and meaning, 360-365 
overview of, 353-356 
algebra, 9-10 
American Pronghorn, 115-119, 237 
American Sign Language (ASL), 212 
analogy 
bodily action and, 21-22 
comparing conceptual blending 
with,35-36 
overview of, 11-14 
principles of, 314-315 
scientific discovery and, 25 ' 
Analogy Vital Relation, 98-99 
anger, understanding of, 299-302 
Aristode, 8-9, 36-37 
ashes, material anchor of, 204-206 
ASL (American Sign Language), 212 
asymmetric integration network, 70 
aviation dials, gauges, 199 
Baby's Ascent, 80-81 
Bickerton, Derek, 185 
biomorph computer program, 109 
Birth Stork, 285-286 
blended space, conceptual integration, 
41-43,45-46 
blending, conceptual, 17-38 
analogy and, 35-36 
complex numbers and. 25 
compressions and, 30-31 
computer, desktops and, 22-24 
constitutive principles of, 315-318 
counterfactuals and, 31-32 
creating new meanings through, 20 
defined, 18 
definition of, 37 
finding correspondences for, 
19-20 
human sexual practices and, 28-29 
imaginary scenarios and. 20-21 
imagination and, 6 
incompatibilities and, 29-30 
motor actions and, 21-22 
nonarbitrary nature of, 24 
overview of, 17-18 
psychological study of errors and, 
34-35 
racism, genocide and, 27-28 
simple language and, 25-27 
source ofJanguage and, 185 
blending, double-scope 
building new aptitudes from, 
391-392 
425 
culture emerging from capacity for, 
389-391 
form and meaning and, 353-360 
multiple-scope creativity in, 305 
origin of language and, 182 
origins of human cognition and, 
186-187 
overview of, 179-180 
social language and, 189-191 
blending, elements of, 39-58. see also 
conceptual integration 
buildins netwo,rk for, 44-49 

426 
,. 
blending. elements of, (continued) 
conceptual integration network 
model and. 40-44 
falsifiable predictions and. 55-56 
science of, 53--55 
uniformity of. 52-53 
visibility and. 56-57 
wild cognition and. 50-52 
blends 
efflorescence of, 262 
emergent structure in. 85 
blends. cause and effect. 75-88 
contradictory representations in. 
84-85 
creativity in relations of, 302-303 
implicit counterfactual spaces of, 87 
living in the blend. 83-84 
motivations in human rituals and. 
80-81.85-86 
overview of, 75-78 
perception and sensation in. 78-80 
persuasion and revelation in. 81-83 
/. 
blends. emergent structure 
Debate with Kant. 61 
double-scope network and. 133 
network model of conceptual 
integration. 42-46. 48-49 
ritual projections and. 85-86 
unpredictability of, 307 
writing/reading as. 211 
blends. megablends 
compositionality and. 151-153 
compounding mapping schemes 
and. 165-166 
metaphoric integrations of, 
156-157 
~lends. multiple. 279-298 
Birth Stork. 285-286 
causal tautology. 292-293 
counterfactual blends. examples of, 
290-291 
Index 
counterpart structure in. 281 
Dracula and his patients. 279-;284 
empty causes. example of. 292-293 
four-space. 284-289 
generic spaces. 297-298 
Grim Reaper example. 292- 295 
metaphoric integration networks. 
279-284 
metaphoric mappings. 287 
overview of, 279 
President Bush on third base, 
284-289 
Story of Life. 287-288 
Unwanted Child Myself example. 
289-292 
blends.XYZ 
constructing meaning in. 147 
examples of, 143-145 
metaphoric integrations and. 
154-157 
Y expression in. 148-153 
blue hockey stick. gauges. 199-201 
borrowed compression. 321. 324 
brain 
activation patterns in. 22 
optimaliry principles and. 72. 
321-322 
origins of cognition and. 186 
time compressions and. 317 
Buddhist Monk riddle 
overview of, 39-40 
. 
wild cognition and. 50-52 
Bypass. 65-67.70 
' 
caffeine headache network 
counterfactual networks and. 
227-229 
Calvin. William. 185 
category compression. 318 
category metamorphosis. 269-278 
complex numbers as. 270- 274 
Intkx 
computer virus as. 274-275 
overview of, 269 
same-sex marriage as. 269-270 
words and extensions as. 275-277 
cathedrals. 206-210 
causal inference. 218 
cause and effect blends, 75-88 
contradictory representations in. 
84-85 
creativity in relations of, 302-303 
implicit counterfactual spaces of. 87 ' 
living in the blend, 83-84 
motivations in human rituals and. 
80-~1, 85-86 
overview of. 75- 78 
perception and sensation in. 78-80 
persuasion and revelation in, 81- 83 
Cause-Effect Isomorphism 
origins of cognition and. 184 
overview of, 175-176 
scientific fallacies in. 189 
Cause-Effect Vital Relation. 96 
'" 
caused mo'tion construction. 370-373 
Cavalli-Sforza. Luigi Luca. 187 
cemeteries, 205 
Change Vital Relation, 93-95 
character. su identity. character and 
chemistry. conceptual integration and. 
89-91 
children 
building of vital 
relations/compressions. 394 
complex learning of, 390-393 
language use of, 191-192 
material objects and, 214-216 
chimpanzees 
sign language in. 190-191 
vocabulary limits of, 179 
clashes. mirror networks and. 125 
Clinton. Bill 
Dracula and his patients. 279-284 
427 
fundraising example. 257 
Titanic example. 221-222 
co-evolutionary proposals. language. 
173-174 
cognition. wild. 50-52 
cognitive fluidity 
conceptual integration and, 
174-175 
origin of language and. 182 
racism and. 27 
cognitive neuroscience. 7-8 
completion 
conceptual integration. 48 
,emergent structure of blends, 43 
complex numbers 
blending and. 25 
category metamorphosis in, 
270-274 
as double-scope network. 134 
compositionality. 146-153 
conceptual integration and. 48 
meanings and, 147 
mega blend operations in. 151-153 
regularity of. 146-147 
ways of thinking about, 162- 165 
Y expressions and. 148-153. 
165-166 
compression 
by creation. 320 
governing principles of. 346 
graduation as. 30-31 
of one vital relation into another. 
92-93.107-108.312-314 
scientific fallacies and. 188-189 
compression, principles of. 312-325 
borrowed. 320-321 
converting to human scale. 
322-324 
creating new relation through, 
319- 320 
highlights. 320, 325. 348 
I' 
'I 
(, 
l' 

428 
compression, principles of, (continued) 
of one vital rdation inco another, 
314-319 
optimality and, 321-322 
of single rdation, 312-314 
compression/decompression, 113-138 
double-scope networks, 131-135 
frame-co-values connection, 120, 
122 
Fregean logic, 120-122 
identity and, 115-119 
integration networks, 119 
mirror networks, 122-126 
overview of, 113-115 
simplex networks, 120-122 
single-scope networks, 126-131 
computer 
modeling, 109 
virus, 274-275 
computer desktop interface 
as blending, 22-24 
double-scope network as, 131 
examples of, 340-342 
multiple inputs of, 295 
conceptual blending, 17-38 , 
analogy and, 35-36 
computer desktops and, 22~24 
creating new meanings through, 20 
definition of, 37 
human sexual practices and, 
28-29 
imaginary scenarios and, 20-21 
incompatibilities and, 29-30 
motor actions and, 21-22 
nonarbitrary nature of, 24 
psychological study of errors and, 
34-35 
racism, genocide and, 27-28 
source oflanguage and, 185 
conceptual categorization, 7 
conceptual framing, 17 
conceptual integration 
analogy with chemistry, 89-91 
analogy with evolution, 91 
Buddhist Monk, 39-40 
building network for, 44-49 
Bypass, 65-67 . 
Indtx 
children using, 214-216 
cognitive fluidity and, 174-175 
complex numbers and, 272-273 
conservative nature of, 396 
double-scope, 179-180 
Grice's Error example of, 68-69 
identity/character and, 253-255 
imagination and, 70-71, 89 
network model of, 40-44 
non-compositional, 27 
projection and, 69-70 
Regatta, 63-65 .' 
selective projection, 71~73 
conceptualization, principle of, 87 
conditioning, stimulus-response, 76-77 
consciousness, controversy on, 56-57 
constitutive principles, 309-311, 345 
constraints, principles and, 350-352 
continuity, behind diversity, 139-168. 
see also compositionality 
compounding mapping schemes 
and, 165-166 
freedom/limits of interpretation , 
and, 166-168 
language and, 143 
metaphoric integrations and, 
153-160 
metaphorical expressions and, 
142-143 
origins of language and, 139-140 
overview of, 139 
I 
Paradist Lost and, 160-162 
word projection and, 141 
XYZ blend and, 143-145 
contradictory representations, 84-85 
Indtx 
coordinate planes, complex numbers, 
271 
counterfactuals 
cause and effect and, 87-88 
cultural compressions of, 246-247 
defining, 230-231 
entire networks as, 239 
examples of, 29-30, 219-223, 
289-292 
explicit, 224-230 
falsifiable predictions and, 55-56 
as grammatical phenomenon, 
238-239 
mathematics and, 233-236 
nothings as, 241-246 
overview of, 31-32 
reasoning behind, 218-219 
creation'through compression 
constitutive principles, 320 
governing principles, 324 
creativity. see multiple-scope creativity 
cross-space mapping 
Debate with Kant and, 61 
network model of conceptual 
integration, 41 
same-sex marriage as, 269-270 
single-scope networks and, 128 
culture 
conceptual integration and, 396 
cultural compressions, 246-247 
double-scope blending in, 389-393 
evolution oflanguage in, 381-382 
Cyclic Day network, 196-198 
Dawkins, Richard, 109 
Deacon, Terrence, 184-185 
death 
Grim Reaper representation of, 
292-295,302-303 
material anchors of, 204-206, 207 
nonpeople and, 263-266 
Death the Magician, 308 
decompression. see 
compression/decompression 
desktop interface. Stt computer 
desktop interface 
disanalogy 
429 
Clinton fundraising example, 257 
If I Were You example, 255-258 
Disanalogy Vital Relation, 99 
diversity. see also continuity, behind 
diversity 
blending and, III 
unity of process and, 137 
DNA genetic studies, 187 
double-scope blending 
building new aptitudes from, 
391-392 
culture emerging from capacity for, 
389":391 
examples of, 221-223, 274-275 
form and meaning and, 353-360 
human activities crucial to, 389 
multiple-scope creativity in, 305 
origin of language and, 182 
origins of human ~ognition and, 
186-187 
overview of, 179-180 
social language and, 189-191 
double-scope networks 
governing principles and, 340-345 
grammatical constructions and, 180 
with high asymmetry, 134-135 
multiple-scope creatiyity in, 299 
nonclashing, 135 
overview of, 131-135 
Dracula and his patients, 279-284, 296 
drama connectors, 266-267 
daboration 
conceptual integration, 48-49 
emergent structure of blends, 44 
J 

430 
,. 
Eliza effect. 190 
avoiding traps of, 108-110 
computer interfaces with, 23 
computer. program, 5 
illusions generated by form and, 
7-8,11 
Kanzi fallacy, in, 190 
emergent blend structure 
Debate with Kant, 61 
double-scope network and, 133 
network model of conceptual 
integration, 42-46, 48-49 
ritual projections and, 85-86 
unpredictability of, 307 
writing/reading as, 211 
emergent syntax, form and meaning, 
373-376 
emotions 
body and, 300-302 
complex falsehoods and, 231-233 
empty cause, blending, 292-294 
entrenchment, blend structure, 49 
equipotentiality, 179 
I .. 
errors, psychology of, 34-35 
essences, characters manifesting, 249 
event integration, blend structure, 49 
evolution 
advances in human capacity, 184 
conceptual integration's analogy 
with,91 
language and, 381-382 
language theory and, 175-177 
limitations of modeling, 109-110 
fallacies 
isomorphism, 176 
Kanzi fallacy, 190 
scientific, 188-189 
false blended space, American 
Pronghorn, 237 
falsehood. S/!( unreal. constructing 
Index 
falsifiable predictions, blending, 55-56 
flthn- of, 140-143 
intricate blending in Paradise Lost, 
160-162 
fictive motion, 379-380 
force, human-scale ~onstructions for, 
376-380 
form, 1-8. see also for~ approaches 
Eliza effect and, 7-8 
manipulation of, 3-4 
meaning constructed through, 5-6 
form and meaning, 353-387 
adjective-noun compounds, 
360-365 
caused motion, 370-373 
complex grammatical structures, 
369-370 
cultural evoluti~n of language~ 
381-382 
double-scope compression, 
353-360 
emergent syntaX~, 373-376 
formal blending, 365:'369 . 
human scale constructions, 
376-380 
' 
recursion in grammar. 384-387 
form approaches, 8-15 
analogy and, 11-14 
development of, 9-11 
generative grammar and, 13-14 
metaphors and, 14-15 
overview of; 8-9 
parallel distributed processing and, 
11 
problems of, 12-13 
formal blending, 365-369 
frame-to-values connection, 120, 122 
frames, identities and, 251-253. 
261-262 
framing. see simplex networks 
Fregean compositionality, 164 
Index 
,I 
Fregean logic, 120-122 
French language 
causative verbs, 373-374 
emergent syntax in, 373-374 
evolution oflanguage, 381 
Function-Organ Isomorphism 
origins of human cognition and, 
184 
Garfield example, 213 
gauges, 198-201 
blue hockey stick, 199-201 
oven, 198 
thermostats and aviation dials, 
199-200 
generative grammar, 13-14 
generic space, 41 
genetic studies, DNA and, 187 
genocide, 27-28 
gestures an~ pointirig, non people and, 
264 
ghost ' 
, 
. 
AmeriCan Pronghorn, 11 5-119 
nonpeople·arid. 264-265 
Global Generics ' 
multiple-scope creativity in, 
301-302 
overview of, 296-298 
Goodman, Nelson. 31 
governing principles, 309-352 
compression, 312-325 
compression, borrowed, 320-321 
compression, converting to human 
scale. 322-324 
compression, creating new relation 
through, 319-320 
compression, highlights, 320 
compression, of single relation, 
312-314 
compression, of vital relations into 
another, 314-319 
compres~ion. optimality and, 
321-322 
constraints associated with. 
350-352 
cooperating/competing with 
constitutive principles. 336 
governing principles and. 336 
human scale, 346-347 
Integration, 328-329 
overview of, 309-312 
Panern Completion, 328 
promoting vital relations. 
329-330 
Relevance, 333-334 
431 
scaling and creating intentionality, 
348-349 
summary of, 345-246 
Topology, 325-328 
Unpacking. 332 
Web,331-332 . 
working in networks. double-scope. 
340-345 
working in networks, mirror, 
337-338 
working in networks. single-scope, 
339 
graduations. 30-31 
, grammar. see also form and meaning 
metaphoric integrations and. 154 
origin oflanguage and, 178-179, 
181 
principles of, 311 
recursion in, 384-387 
graves, as material anchor, 204-206 
Grice's error 
asymmetric integration network 
and, 70 
conceptual integration, examples, 
68-69 
The Grim Printing Press, 303-305 
Grim Reaper, 292-295 

432 
Grim Reaper (continued) 
highlights compression in, 348 
recursion in, 334-335 
Hebrew language, emergent syntaX in, 
374-376 
highlights compression 
constirutive principles, 320 
governing principles, 325 
Grim Reaper example, 348 
Hindu notation, 10 
honor, 261 
human action, human space 
consuuctionsand,378 
human scale 
achieving, 346 
constitutive/ governing principles 
and,336 
constructions, 376-380 
converting to, 322-324 
as goal of all principles, 312 
time warps through compression, 
347-348 
human space constructions 
fictive-motion expression, examples 
of,379-380 
human action, basic structure of, 
378 
space, force and motion, 376-381 
trajectory of, 378 
humans 
networks of non people, 263-266 
origins of cognition in, 183-187 
Hutchins, Edwin, 195-198 
identity,6 
compression/decompression and, 
115-119 
constitutive principles of, 314-315 
death and, 205 
projection to the blend and, 70 
Index 
identity, character and, 249-268 
blending of frames, 261-262 
conceptual integration of, 253-255 
frames and, 251-253 
If! Were You, 255-258 
meaning of blends and, 262 
overview of, 249-250 
redemption, vengeance, and honor, 
258-261 
relating to dramatic performances, 
266-267 
relating to non people, 263-266 
Identity Vital Relation, 95-96 
IfI Were You, disanalogy example, 
255-258 
illusions, Eliza effect and, 7, 11 
imagination. see also form; form 
approaches 
conceptual integration at heart of, 89 
freedom and limits of, 166-168 
nature and mechanisms of, 8 
as optional ability, 70-71 
recombination ~nd, 146 
scientific study of, 110 
words as triggers for, 146 
incompatibilities, conceptual blending 
and,29-30 
inner-space 
achieving scalability, 319 
vital relations, 305 
input spaces 
compression/decompression and, 
119 
conceptual integration, 40-41, 
45-46 
specificity and familiarity of, 
103-104 
i 
integration. see also conceptual 
integration 
defi~ed, 6 
I 
principle of, 328-329 
Index 
integration mapping, 179 
integration networks, 391 
Intensification of Vital Relations 
Principle, 330 
intentionality 
scaling and creating, 348-349 
Intentionality to Categoty, 318 
Intentionality Vital Relation, 100-101 
interpretation 
freedom and limits of, 166-168 
multiple mapping schemes, 166 
isomorphism 
fallacy associated with, 176 
scientific fallacies and, 188 
Kant, Debate with 
conceptual integration of, 253-255 
example of, 59-62 
projection to the blend and, 69-70 
visibility to consciousness of, 68 
Kanzi fall,acy, 190 
Klein, Richard, 185-187 
Kline, Morris, 9-11 
Koestler, Arthur, 37 
language. see also form and meaning; 
linguistics 
central problem of, 177 
children's use of, 191-192 
chimpanzee vocabulary, 179 
complex blending in, 25-27 
cultural evolution of, 381-382 
emergent syntaX in French and 
Hebrew, 373-376 
form approaches to, 9 
as integration prompt, 143 
principles of, 311 
XYZ blend and, 143-145 
language origin, 171-194 
blending leading to errors, 188-189 
children and, 191-192 
433 
continuity and, 139-140 
existing theories of, 172-174 
gradients of conceptual integration 
and, 180-183 
mental blending and social 
language, 189-191 
modern humans and, 183-187 
overview of, 171-172 
problem oftanguage and, 178-179 
range of human singularities, 
174-175 
riding a bicycle and, 192-193 
theory of, 175-177 
linguistics. see also form and meaning; 
language 
comparing conceptual systems with, 
277 
complexity of form in, 4 
counterfactuals and, 31-32 
literal meaning, 69 
living in the blend, 83-84 
loci, method of, 207-210 
lottery, depression, 231-233 
mapping. see also cross-space mapping 
analogical, 356 
Anger blend and, 300-302 
spaces, 105-106 
mapping schemes 
compositionality in, 164-165 
interpretations of, 166-168 
metaphoric integrations, 154-157 
predictability of,· 147 
Y expressions in, 150-153 
matches 
bodily action through, 21-22 
conceptual integration, 47 
imaginary scenarios and, 20 
material anchors 
children, born with, 215 
objects, use of, 195 
.I 

434 
material objects, 195-216 
cathedrals'and,206-210 
,. 
children learning to use, 214-216 
gauges, 198-201 
money, 201-204 
nonpeople and, 263-266 
overview of, 195-198 
remains ot the dead, 204-206 
sign language and. 212-214 
speech as, 211-212 
writings, 210-211 
mathematics. itt also complex numbers 
blending complex numbers, 25 
counterfactuality in, 233-236, 
239-240 
forms assisting meaning in, 
9-10 
learning complex blends and, 
392-393 
rational numbers and, 244-245 
recursion in. 335-336 
role of noth,ings in, 24~-245 
unity behind diversity and. 137 
Maxim of Quality. Grice's Error, 69 
Maximization of Vital Relations 
Principle, 330 
meaning. itt also form and meaning 
constructing through form, 5-6 
construction of, 309-310 
core, 15 
creation of new, 20 
diversity from unity, 137 
double-scope compression and, 
353-360 
forms assisting, 9-10 
language forms and. 178 
literal,69 
predictability of, 168 
truth-conditional compositionality 
and, 163-164 
meanings. unpredictability of, 147 
lndtx 
megablends 
compositionality and, 151-153 
compounding mapping schemes 
and, 165-166 
four-space multiple blend. 284-289 
metaphoric integrations of, 156-157 
memory 
Intentionality to Category and, 
318-319 
time and space and, 317 
mental spaces 
compression of vital relations and. 
92-93 
network model of conceptual 
integration, 40-42 
overview of, 102-103 
sign language and, 212-213 
topology of, 104-105 
metaphoric integration networks. 
280-281 
metaphoric integrations, 154-160 
defined, 154 
grammar and, 154 
mapping schemes and, 154-159 
megablends. 157-158 
XYZ blends, 154-157 
metaphoric mappings 
caused motion, 372 
multiple blends example, 280-282, 
287 
meuphors 
expressions in language. 142-143 
form approaches. 14-15 
method ofloci, 207-210 
Milton, John, 160-162 
mirror networks 
conceptions of time as. 195-198 
governing principles and, 337-338 
language and, 145 
overview of, 122-125 
principles of, 337-338 
lndtx 
/ 
missing persons, 263-266 
Mithen, Stephen 
cognitive fluidity and. 37-38 
origins of human cognition and, 
184, 186 
Tht Prthistory of tht Mind, 27 
modification. blend structure, 49 
modus tollens. 239-240 
money, as material anchor. 201-204 
history of, 202 
worth and. 203 
'motion, human-scale constructions for, 
376-380 
motor actions 
learning, 21-22 
, , 
psychological study of errors and. 
34-35 
multiple blends, 279-298 
Birth Stork example, 285-286 
causal tautology, 292-293 , 
, counterfactual blends, examples of, 
290-291 
counterpart structure in, 281 
Dracula and his patients example, 
279-284 
empty causes, example of, 
292-293 
examples of, 295-296 
generic spaces, 297-298 
Grim Reaper example, 292-295 
metaphoric integration networks, 
279-284 
metaphoric mappings, 287 
overview of, 279 
President Bush on third base, 
284-289 
Story of Life example, 287-288 
Unwanted Child Myself example, 
289-292 
multiple mapping schemes. grammar 
and, 166 
435 
multiple-scope creativity, 299-308 
cause-effect relations in, 302-303 
conceptual projection, as dynamic 
process, 305 
death, as empty cause, 303 
Death the magician, 308 
double-scope blend structures and, 
305 
double-scope networks and, 299 
emergent structures and, 307, 308 
Grim newspaper, 303-305 
Grim Reaper, 302-303 
inner-space vital relations and, 305 
Ttashcan Basketball, 306-307 
Two-Edged Sword, 306 
understanding of anger, 299-302 
nativist theories, origin of language, 172 
network, Cyclic Day, 196-198 
networks 
caffeine headache network, 241 
caffeine headache network, 
counterfactual networks and. 
227-229 
double-scope networks, governing 
principles and, 340-345 
double-scope networks, 
grammatical constructions and, 
180 
double-scope networks, multiple-
scope creativity and, 299 
double-scope networks, 
nonclashing, 135 
double-scope networks, overview of, 
131-135 
double-scope networks, with high 
asymmetry, 134-135 
governing principles of,337-345 
integration networks, 391 
integration networks, metaphoric, 
280-281 

436 
networks (continued) 
mirror networks. conceptions of 
time as. 195-198 
mirror networks. governing 
principles in, 337-338 
mirror networks, language and. 
145 
mirror networks. overview of, 
122-125 
mirror networks. principles of, 
337-338 
simplex networks, continuity 
behind diversity and. 140 
simplex networks, language and. 
144-145 
simplex networks. overview of, 
120-122 
single-scope networks. example of. 
135-137 
single-scope networks. governing 
principles and, 339 
singl~-scope networks, overview of, 
126-131 
Y networks. 151-152 
nonevents. 245-246 
nonpeople, 263-266 
nonthings 
examples of, 241-245 
nonevents and. 245-246 
rational numbers and. 244-245 
role in everyday thinking, 241 
role in science and math, 242- 245 
Noun-Adjective compounds. 354 
Noun-Noun compounds 
compression rypes provided by, 
357-360 
overview of. 353-356 
noun-phrase ofY expression. 14·8-153 
numbers 
complex numbers. as double-scope 
network. 134 
complex numbers. blending of. 25 
Index 
complex numbers. category 
metamorphosis in. 270-274 
rational numbers. 244-245 
recursion in. 335-336 
objects. as material anchors. 195. set: 
also material objects 
open-ended connectors. Y expressions. 
149. 156-157 
optimality 
bubble chamber of brain and. 
321-322 
principles of, 311 
origin theories. language, 177 
outer-space links, compre.ssion. 92-93 
oven gauge. 198 
Paradise Lost (Milton). 160-162 
Parallel Distributed Processing (PDP). 
11 
Part-Whole Vital Relation. 97, 315 
partial vital-relation connections, 
multiple blends and, 287 
Pattern Completion principle, 328 
Pavlov's dog, stimulus-response 
example, 76-77 
Penrose, Roger, 223 
perception, 77, 78-80 
perceptual categorization, 7 
periodic conception, of time, 195 
persuasion, 81-83 
philosophy, form approaches to, 9 
physical spaces, compression of, 113 
Plan of St. Gall, monastic community 
example, 209 
pointing and gesture, ponpeople and, 
264 
The Prehistory o/the Mind (Mithen), 
27 
President Bush on third base 
megablend example, 285 
multiple blend example, 284-289 
Index 
principles. Ut also constitutive 
principles; governing principles 
constitutive and governing. 
309-312 
. 
constraints and. 350-352 
of grammar. 311 
human scale and. 312 
optimality principles of brain. 72. 
321-322 
projection 
conceptual integration and. 
69-70 
conceptual projection. as dynamic 
process; 305 
multiple-scope creativity and. 305 
ritual projections and. 85-86 
selective projection. conceptual 
integration and. 47-48 
selective projection. Debate with 
Kant. 61 
selective projection. overview of, 
71-73 
selective projection. using words, 
276 
sensory projection. 79-80 
word projection and. 141 
projection to the blend. 70 
pronghorn 
false blended space and. 237 
identity and. 115-119 
property compression. combining with 
category compression. 318 
Property Vital Relation. 99-100 
protolanguages. 188-189 
Pythagorean theorem. 77 
racism, 27-28 
radical associative theories, 172-173 
rational numbers, 244-245 
reading, 210-211 
recognition, 7-8 
recombination, 146 
recursion 
examples of, 334-336 
in grammar, 384-387 
redemption, 259-260 
reductio ad absurdum, 233-236, 
239-240 
Regatta, example, 63-65 
437 
Relevance Principle, 333-334 
representation, constitutive principles 
of, 315 
Representation Vital Relations, 97-98 
Return of the Grim Reaper, example, 
302-303 
revelation, 81-83 
revenge, 260 
Rhetoric (Aristotle). 36 
rituals 
cause alld effects blends in, 80-81 
projections in, 85-86 
Role Vital Relations, 98 
Saccheri, Gerolamo, 235 
sacred, creating habitat for, 207 
same-sex marriage, 269-270 
Santachiara-Bene~ecetti, Silvana, 187 
scalability, governing principles, 324 
science 
of blending, 53-55 
emotions from complex falsehood 
and,231-233 
fallacies in, 188-189 
regularities of operation in, 139 
role of nonthings in, 142-245 
social sciences, approach to, 9 
study of imagination and, 110 
Scott, Robert, 206-207 . 
selective projection. see also projection 
conceptual integration and, 47-48 
Debate with Kant, 61 
overviewof,71-73 
using "!Prds, 276 
semantics, 163 

438 
sens~ry projection, 79-80 
sexual practices, 28-29 
sign language 
,. 
chimpanzees using, 190-191 
as material object, 212-214 
networks of non people and, 264 
Similarity Vital Relation, 100 
simplex networks 
continuity behind diversity and, 
140 
language and, 144-145 
overview of, 120-122 
single relations, compression of 
constitutive principles in, 312-314 
governing principles in, 324 
single-scope networks 
example of, 135-137 
governing principles in, 339 
overview of, 126-131 
single vital relations, scale of, 312-314 
singularities, human, 1 ~1--175 
social interaction, language and, 
189-191 
social sciences, approaches to, 9 
Socrates, 77 
space 
blended space, conceptual 
integration, 41-43, 45-46 
blended space, false, 237 
cross-space mapping, Debate with 
Kant and, 61 
cross-space mapping, network model 
of conceptual integration, 41 
cross-space mapping, same-sex 
marriage as, 269-270 
cross-space mapping, single-scope 
networks and, 128 
generic space, conceptual 
integration, 45-46, 47 
generic space, overview of, 41-42 
human scale constructions, 376-381 
Index 
inner-space, achieving scalability, 
319 
inner-space, vital relations, 305 
input spaces, 
compression/decompression and, 
119 
input spaces. conceptual 
integration, 40-41,45-46 
input spaces. specificity and 
familiarity of, 103-104 
mapping, 105-106 
mental spaces. compression of vital 
relations and. 92-93 
mental spaces. network model of 
conceprual integration. 40-42 
mental spaces. overview of, 
102-103 
mental spaces, sign language and, 
212-213 
mental spaces. topology of, 104-105 
outer-space links, compression, 
92-93 
physical spaces, compression of, 113 
Space Vital Relations, 96 
speech 
children and, 215 
overview of, 211-212 
statistical inferencing, 173 
Story ofUfe, 287-288 
string, defined, 114 
Supernatural Fathers, 160-162 
syncopation 
definition of, 114 
of single vital relation, 314, 324 
syntax 
caused motion and, 370-373 
emergent, 373-376 
study of, 369-370 
Talmy, Len, 376-380 
Thatcher, Margaret, 18-21 
--
Index 
/ 
! 
things. su material objects 
time 
conceptions of, 195-198 
constitutive principles of, 
315-317 
periodic experience of, 195 
warps, 347-348 
Time Vital Relations, 96 
Titanic example, Bill Clinton and, 
221-223 
Toblerone, example 
counterfactuality and, 239 
fallacy and, 189 
overview of, 135-137 
tombs, 204-206 
Topology principle, 325-328 
Trashcan Basketball, 306-307 
truth 
from falsehood, 240-241 
truth-conditional compositionality, 
162-164 
Two-Edged Sword, 306 
Uniqueness Vital Relations, 101 
unity, 137 
Unpacking Principle, 332-333 
unreal, constructing, 217-247 
conventional counterfactual 
compressions, 246-247 
counterfactual blends, reasoning 
behind,218-219 
counterfactual blends, varieties of, 
219-223 
counterfactual networks and, 
224-231 
counterfactuals, overview of, 
238-240 
nonevents and, 245-246 
nonthings and, 241- 245 
overview of, 217 
reprisal and, 236-238 
science and emotions from, 
231-236 
truth coming from falsehood, 
240-241 
Unwanted Child Myself, example, 
289-292 
vengeance,258-261 
verbs, emergent syntax, 373-374 
viruses, computer, 274-275 
visibilitY, to consciousness 
blending and, 56-57 
Debate with Kant and, 68 
visu;U-gestural modality, of sign 
language, 212 
vital relations 
439 
children building, 394 
compression of, 92-93, 107-108, 
324,326-327 
death representions of, 302-303 
identity and, 115 
mirror networks and, 125-126 
multiple blends and, 282-284, 287 
principles behind diversity in, 111 
promoting, 329-330 
scaling of, 312-314 
strings in, 114 
structures and connections of, 
102-106 
traps of Eliza in, 108-110 
types and subtypes of, 93-102 
weak connections and, 137 
Wallis, John, 271-272 
watches, 195-198 
Watergate/Nixon blend, 225-226, 251 
Web Principle, 331-332 
words 
as activation patterns, 22 
extensions of, 275-277 
projection of, 141 

440 
writing 
learning complex blends and, 393 
overview of, 210-211 
XYZ blend 
constructing meaning in, 147 
examples of, 143-145 
metaphoric integrations and, 
154-157 
Y expression in, 148-153 
Ind(x 
Y expression 
compounding mapping schemes 
via, 165-166 
metaphoric integrations in, 
154-157 
noun-phrase form of, 148 
open-ended connectors in, 
149-150 
in XYZ blend, 148-153 
Y networks, 151-152 
~ 
.. 

