GUIDING WARFARE 
TO REACH 
SUSTAINABLE PEACE
CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS
No 1 (b) 2016
Conference: International Humanitarian Law
in Capacity Building of Security Forces
David Vestenskov & Line Drewes

Conference Proceedings No 1 (b) 2016 
Conference: International Humanitarian Law 
in Capacity Building of Security Forces
GUIDING WARFARE 
TO REACH SUSTAINABLE PEACE
Implementing International Humanitarian Law in the Education of 
Security Forces in Afghanistan and Pakistan
Report and policy recommendations based on the conference organized by 
the Royal Danish Defence College in Copenhagen, November 2015
By David Vestenskov, Consultant, Dean’s Office, RDDC
 & Line Drewes, Project Researcher, RDDC
Royal Danish Defence College
2016

Conference Proceedings No 1 (b) 2016 
Conference: International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building of 
Security Forces.
Guiding Warfare to Reach Sustainable Peace.
David Vestenskov, Consultant, Dean’s Office, RDDC & 
Line Drewes, Project Researcher, RDDC
© Royal Danish Defence College
All rights reserved. Mechanical, photographic or other reproduction or 
photocopying from this book or parts thereof is only allowed according 
to agreements between The Danish Defence and CopyDan. 
Any other use without written consent from the Royal Danish Defence 
College is illegal according to Danish law on intellectual property right. 
Excepted are short extracts for reviews in newspapers or the like.
Copenhagen, March 2016
Royal Danish Defence College
Ryvangs Allé 1
DK-2100 Copenhagen
Phone: +45 728 17000
Editor in Chief: Dean Royal Danish Defence College, Ole Kværnø
Printed in Denmark by Rosendahls A/S
Cover photo: Sergent Course in the Afghan Army, Flightline, Camp Bastion 
2012. (Archive, Danish Defence)
Layout: Royal Danish Defence College
ISBN: 978-87-7147-140-3
Number printed: 200
This publication can be downloaded for free from www.rddc.dk

3
Foreword................................................................................................................................ 5
Introduction........................................................................................................................... 7
Critical considerations...................................................................................................... 9
Executive Summary............................................................................................................10
Policy Recommendations...............................................................................................10
Values as a precondition for lasting peace ............................................................10
The importance of IHL and HRL to the post-conflict capacity building.................11
Continuing, progressive and integrative education ...............................................11
Cultural, contextual and local awareness ..............................................................12
The relationship between IHL and HR: ROE............................................................13
Workshop recommendations............................................................................................15
Workshop 1: Sustainability versus idealism ................................................................15
Workshop 2-3: IHL at the front & Lessons learned – transfer of knowledge ............16
Workshop 4: Universal IHL ............................................................................................18
Workshop 5: International Humanitarian Law and 
International Human Rights Law ..................................................................................19
Summary of Conference Presentations...........................................................................22
Opening Session.............................................................................................................22
Key note address: Professor Gary D. Solis, “Changing the Military Culture”.............27
Session 1 - IHL – Universal understanding & context driven implementation...........31
Professor Charles Garraway, “The interplay between IHL and HR”.......................31
Muhammad Oves Anwar, “International Humanitarian Law and 
Human Rights Law: Pakistan’s Domestic Legal Framework”................................33
Programme Director Knut D. Asplund, “Teaching HR and 
IHL to the Indonesian armed forces – a case study in capacity building”............35
Session 2 - IHL in a domestic & UN perspective – cases of UN, Afghanistan 
and Pakistan...................................................................................................................37
Analyst Kristoffer Nilaus Tarp, “Danish experiences in integrating 
International Humanitarian Law (IHL) in capacity development” .........................37
Director Mohammad Musa Mahmodi, “International Humanitarian law 
and internal conflict” ...............................................................................................39
Professor Adeel Khan, “The Implementation and education of IHL in Pakistan” .41
Session 3 - IHL at the international level – strategic guidance...................................43
Commander Kenneth Øhlenschlæger Buhl, “Sustainability versus Idealism”.....43
Lieutenant Colonel Jerry Lane, ”The impact of IHL in Law Enforcement 
and Peace Support Operations”..............................................................................45
Professor Frederik Harhoff, “IHL – A path toward reconciliation”.........................46
Dr. Annemarie Peen Rodt, “UN perspective – protection of civilians” .................48
Contents

4
Closing Session...............................................................................................................50
Key note address: Ambassador Franz Michael-Mellbin, 
“EU perspective on implementation of IHL in ANSF”.............................................50
Closing Remarks.......................................................................................................51
Aftermath............................................................................................................................54
Way Ahead: Perspectives on IHL in the capacity building of security forces..............54
Reflections in the wake of the conference by key note speaker and 
workshop leader Professor Charles Garraway..............................................................54
Perspective from Kabul: Lessons learned and way ahead..........................................56
Perspective from Pakistan: Lessons learned and way ahead.....................................58
Contributors (in order of appearance)..............................................................................60
Conference Programme.....................................................................................................63

5
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
Foreword
Over the last decade Danish armed forces have been engaged in intervention and 
stabilization operations in Afghanistan, where the training of local security forces and 
observation of international law have been crucial to success. This aspect of the role 
of our military forces is likely to remain relevant in the future. Without a doubt we 
share a common interest with the states of Afghanistan and Pakistan and their armed 
forces in this respect. I also believe that improved relations at the lower level levels 
(track ll) between the two countries are necessary in order to promote a sustainable 
path to regional stability. 	
The project International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building of Security 
Forces: Implementing International Humanitarian Law in the Education of Security 
Forces in Afghanistan and Pakistan was launched early in 2015. Its aim is to promote 
the shared interest mentioned above and to identify areas of common ground between 
Afghan and Pakistani military officers, officials and researchers. The report at hand 
builds on the talks and workshops held in Copenhagen in November 2015 and 
represents the output of the overall project. In my view the policy recommendations, 
along with the specific recommendations made in each workshop, contribute not 
only to the area of IHL but also serve as indicators of innovative trust building used 
to advance the objective of regional stability and reconciliation.  	
The Peace and Stabilization Fund (PSF) located at the Danish Ministry of 
Defence and the Joint Danish Defence Command, provided the financial resources 
for enhancing dialogue and trust building in order to facilitate regional dialogue, 
thereby promoting stability in the Central Asian Region. The conference was one of 
two larger projects funded by the PSF in 2015, and on behalf of the RDDC, I would 
like to thank the PSF for its financial support. A special thanks is also addressed to the 
Danish embassies, and especially the defence attachés, in Islamabad and Kabul for their 
organizational and logistical support in assembling the delegations from Afghanistan 
and Pakistan respectively. The two delegations were brought to Copenhagen, along 
with key international experts on International Humanitarian Law, in order to engage 
in dialogues and discussions from different starting points, different experiences, 
different perceptions and even different objectives of attending. It was my hope and 
ambition with this conference that recommendations in relation to sustainability 
would be part of the output, and though a silver bullet solution was not part of the 
result, many steps were taken in the right direction. The report at hand underlines 
these steps, and at the same time it shows that progressive discussions can be achieved 
in spite of oppositional perceptions. 

6
Conference Proceedings
I am aware that military opponents may not always feel obliged to follow the laws of 
armed conflict and international humanitarian law. In the short run, this may create 
an imbalance, and an advantage for the enemy in relation to military effectiveness. 
The rapid progression of ISIS or Daesh in Syria and Iraq is an example of this. In the 
long run, though, their campaign will face limitations in relation to sustainability. As 
all other actors, they also need support from the civil population in the areas they 
operate in, and the only way they attempt to obtain this support is through intimidation 
and fear. Though fear can be a terrifying and effective tool, it does not provide a firm 
foundation. provide a firm foundation. It will break – if not by being defeated then 
by another being replaced by another fear. The tool of fear also requires maintenance, 
and in the long run it will never last.    	
Many theoretical approaches to this subject have been pursued in recent history, 
and too many of these approaches have resulted in conflicts rather than solutions. 
The conference in itself was therefore designed within a dynamic frame, where the 
representatives from Afghanistan and Pakistan had an active role and were specifically 
tasked with contributing to a sustainable and progressive development of IHL. I am 
aware that this level of ambition was rather high, but on the other hand, if progress 
and development within this area is to be made, dialogue is not an option – it is a 
prerequisite, and all states and organizations can learn from this process.	
The combination of leading international experts, researchers and practitioners, 
and officials is in my view the combination needed for providing results – and even 
though this might add a bit of pressure on all participants, this turned out to be the 
very foundation for the constructive output which this report represents. 	
Last I would especially like to thank the Afghan and Pakistani delegations for 
their participation in the conference. They were invited in order to share experiences 
and ideas in relation to how international humanitarian law should be implemented 
in a sustainable manner to provide better conditions for educating soldiers. I believe 
that the strategic approach of a sustainable peace will benefit from development within 
the implementation of international humanitarian law in capacity building of security 
forces. As a regional key player, Pakistan cannot only share its experiences in the area, 
but it can also provide an opportunity for enhanced cooperation with Afghanistan. 
Such a development would be beneficial for stability in the region, and in the long run 
create a sound foundation for further cooperation between the two regional actors 
and with the international community.
Ole Kværnø
Dean, RDDC

7
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
Introduction
The implementation of international humanitarian law (IHL) in the education of 
security forces in Afghanistan and Pakistan is a topic which has not, till now, received 
significant regional or international attention. Meanwhile, the implementation of 
IHL is central to common perceptions of how security forces should behave. This is 
why addressing this topic contains great potential for inter-state learning. Moreover, 
developing best practice in the education and implementation of IHL serves to 
strengthen the capacity building of security forces.
The objective of the conference was to address how IHL is implemented in the 
education and training of host-nation security forces in Afghanistan, as well as 
domestically within the Pakistani military.  Topics treated at the conference concerned 
the relationship between human rights law (HR) and IHL, as well as the role of Rules 
of Engagement and the various social, economic and cultural conditions that influence 
the education in IHL/HR. By focusing on the case of Afghanistan, important lessons 
were derived in order to generate operative tools of best practice in future training 
missions. By focusing on Pakistan, an important regional actor was included in the 
process of deriving best practice. Furthermore, the conference served to strengthen 
the relationship between the two countries’ educative military institutions, hopefully 
paving the way for further cooperation on regional stability through dialogue and 
trust building.
Though the topic of this conference has been a focal point for many international 
conferences, this conference took a different approach in relation to its design. RDDC 
was aware that bringing delegations from Afghanistan and Pakistan respectively, would 
create an environment of tension which placed great demand on the shoulders of the 
speakers and especially those who was also designated with the role of leading the 
workshops. In the view of the organizers this this resulted in a very tense but lively 
atmosphere during the sessions, and furthermore framed presentations as well as 
discussions towards very specific and contemporary issues in relation to the security 
development in the Central Asian Region.

8
Conference Proceedings
At the official conference dinner, former Danish Minister of Foreign Affairs Per Stig Møller 
delivered the dinner speech at Frederiksberg Castle. (Archive of RDDC, 2015).
The present Conference Report constitutes the primary outcome of the conference 
“International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building of Security Forces”. It is based 
on excerpts from the conference presenters and workshop discussions. Furthermore, 
the report contains policy recommendations and key findings, with the ambition of 
developing best practises in the education and implementation of IHL in capacity 
building of security forces. 
The Conference Report will proceed as follows: First, a few critical considerations 
are derived from experiences at the conference. These serve to highlight the practical 
and methodological challenges faced when engaging with the topic. Second, an 
executive summary outlines the main outcome as derived from the presentations and 
in particular from the workshops. This includes five policy recommendations. Third, 
the recommendations of each workshop are presented. Fourth, short summaries of the 
opening remarks are presented. Fifth, a summary of the keynote speech by Gary D. 
Solis is given. Sixth, a large part of the report contains the summaries of presentations 
from each session; “IHL – Universal understanding & context- driven implementation“, 
“IHL in a domestic & UN perspective – cases of UN, Afghanistan and Pakistan” and” 
IHL at the international level – strategic guidance”. Six, short presentation summaries 

9
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
in the closing session are presented. Finally, concluding remarks and considerations 
on the way ahead are suggested. 
Critical considerations
The conference met with a few significant challenges. At the very beginning of the 
conference, tensions between the Pakistani and Afghan representatives were evident 
as expected. 
However, this improved during the day, and on the second day, the significance of the 
topic and professionalism of the participants far outshone the tensions of the first day. 
With regards to the workshops, these were faced with a practical challenge. During the 
workshop phase, the distribution of representatives from Afghanistan and Pakistan 
was not equal across the workshops. This resulted in workshops that differed in 
the number of participants and in the number of relevant actors. This affected the 
broadness of discussions and the outcomes of some workshops. 
On a more methodological note, a considerable challenge for the conference derived 
from different perceptions of the origins and philosophical underpinning of IHL. 
While the present professors adopted a traditional approach to the definition and 
history of IHL, others disagreed. This was a challenge in as far as it is difficult to 
see how one can discuss how IHL can contribute to capacity building until there is 
agreement on what constitutes IHL. 
Moreover, very different approaches to the topic were presented at the conference. 
Some looked mainly at the legal frameworks, while others addressed the political and 
cultural environment in which the law functions. Mostly, this was helpful, in terms 
of contextualizing and operationalizing IHL. However, it also meant that there was 
a broad scope of topics, which sometimes diverted the particular focus on educative 
efforts and IHL.

10
Conference Proceedings
Executive Summary
Policy Recommendations
The opening remarks of the conference touched upon its unusual topic. By unusual 
is meant the merging of political, practical and legal issues in a conference setting 
bringing together politicians, academic experts and practitioners. In particular the 
focus on international law in the education of armed forces is a rare topic. Although, 
often referred to as a tool of politics, international law reflects a rigid framework that 
must be aligned with practicalities on the ground, albeit this is not always easily done. 
Arguably, this is also the reason why it is healthy to discuss international law amongst 
academic experts and practitioners. 
In relation to the execution of the conference, an important lesson from the conference 
was that focussing on important theoretical and practical matters forged constructive 
dialogue and minimized political tensions. In that regard IHL functioned as a common 
ground of understanding between very different countries. Moreover, in the context 
of the conference, theoretical matters related to international law were not allowed to 
remain theoretical, but were adjusted to real life and political realities. 
Reoccurring topics and considerations at the conference may be summarized into five 
policy recommendations. In particular, these reflect the spontaneously emerged, but 
constant need to bring in practical concerns. While the focus is on IHL, the practical 
dimension places emphasis on the conditions necessary to make IHL function. As 
mentioned during the conference, “The law can only take us thus far”. The law coexists 
with the context of the conflict and therefore IHL in capacity building, to be effective, 
must be assessed with regards to surrounding contexts.
The policy recommendations are summarized under the subheadings below.
Values as a precondition for lasting peace 
As mentioned in the introduction to this section, IHL functions as a common ground 
of understanding. IHL is universally endorsed and taught by militaries all over the 
world. However, for IHL to fully function, it must be applied not just as a set of rules 
but also as a dynamic set of values that guide warfare. Proposals for grooming soldiers 
to understand IHL and to internalize values came from all parties to the conference. 
The internalisation of values is understood not just as learning the rules of IHL but 
also as adhering to the principles upon which IHL is founded. This is what enables 
the individual soldier to act in accordance with IHL in all situations. Perhaps more 

11
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
importantly, this is what grants the soldiers the respect of the society. The latter is 
crucial to the post-conflict cohesion of societies, trust and respect that must go hand 
in hand with rebuilding efforts. It is about the integrity of security forces and the need 
for people to feel justly treated. 
The values themselves must be adopted to the specific country and the relevant 
historical, political and cultural contexts. The internalisation of values must be an effect 
of contextualisation and integration of IHL in the thinking of all capacity building 
efforts. Crucially, values of IHL must be owned by the society as a whole.
The importance of IHL and HRL to the post-conflict capacity building
The importance of IHL/HRL is sometimes thought to be challenged by the move away 
from conventional warfare and towards what is sometimes termed “modern conflicts”. 
This, it was argued at the conference, is a misconception. Indeed the importance of 
IHL/HRL continues into modern conflict. In particular, the legitimacy of security 
forces, able to support the transition into stable and peaceful societies, are dependent 
on the continuing focus on IHL/HRL. As mentioned during the conference, “winning 
the peace can be very difficult depending on how you won the war”. What this means 
is that if soldiers manage to behave in accordance with IHL, they will also find it easier 
to maintain peace and stability in the future.
Crucially, in concurrence with the findings of Workshop 1, it was pointed out that there 
is a need for firm legal frameworks and compliance to pave the way for post-conflict 
capacity building. Soldiers on the ground have a substantial position as role models 
upholding the law; for this they need the support of good training and well-developed 
legal frameworks. This is likely to include a better and clearer understanding of the 
relationship between IHL and HRL in situations of armed conflict.
In sum, there is a need for a continuous focus on how to ensure the focus on the 
education in IHL in capacity building strategies. The focus on IHL is challenged by 
its altruistic nature. Hence, it is easily deprioritized in the context of building other, 
practical skills of soldiers. However, neglecting IHL will come at the cost of the greater 
capacity building objectives of achieving stable and peaceful societies. 
Continuing, progressive and integrative education 
The need for continuing, progressive and integrative education must be viewed in 
the light of the already described policy recommendation. Hence education includes 
an element of grooming, which concerns the internalization of values into the 
organizational culture. These values are essential to the legitimacy of the forces and 
the contribution of these to the establishment of a stable and peaceful society. 

12
Conference Proceedings
During the conference, experiences with education were shared. It was generally ag-
reed that education must be continuous, progressive and integrative. It is important 
to follow up on education, to challenge and motivate soldiers with new lessons and to 
apply various methods of learning by integrating IHL in the education, for instance 
the integration of new technology or the use of legal advisers during exercises. 
Some issues received a lot of attention at the conference. As illustrated by soldiers 
present at the conference, the continuous dialogue on issues of IHL help keep up 
soldier morale and counter misuse of force. This goes beyond the discussion of the 
use of IHL. Examples from Danish soldiers illustrated how the general language of 
soldiers must be continually nurtured to agree with IHL and HRL. Otherwise degra-
ding language about local people and conditions may lead to disrespect of status and 
standards reflected in the law. 
Furthermore, education and use of the dynamic body of IHL must be tested and ap-
plied by soldiers in training and exercises. This applies to all soldiers, perhaps even 
for all military personnel. In particular, it was requested that military lawyers and 
military leaders take part in exercises as well as in actual military manoeuvres outside 
the campsite, in order for these to fully understand the challenges faced by leaders.
Another reoccurring proposal concerned the teaching in evidence collection in order 
to strengthen the role of IHL and the potential post conflict legal processes. It was 
suggested that soldiers should take part in evidence collection, in order to strengthen 
their ability to engage with legal dimensions of the conflict and to facilitate the post 
conflict prosecution of war crimes, e.g. war crimes by former leaders against their 
populations. 
Cultural, contextual and local awareness 
Cultural, contextual and local awareness may be determining for the successful 
education and general compliance with IHL/HRL. This sets high demands for actors 
operating in a mission area. Among other things it includes awareness of traditions, 
ways of life, political, social, individual, and economic interests. It includes all that 
motivates and drives the actors of the conflict and influences their behaviour toward 
IHL/HRL. To successfully adapt to IHL and HRL, this context must be understood 
and actively applied in the translation of a legal framework to the local context.
Achieving the best possible understanding of and compliance with IHL should be a 
high priority. This awareness is not only important to local security forces but also 
to foreign security forces. Local forces that operate among their own people must 
face their own people. If local understanding of the law is violated, this increases 
the difficulties for soldiers to establish the necessary legitimacy. Outside forces must 

13
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
keep this sensitive relationship of local forces and local populations in mind. For the 
same reason, it was noted that air raids cause problems for local forces on the ground.
In terms of education, combining universal education of all ranks and all branches 
of IHL with military-ethics and contextual understanding provides a starting point. 
Furthermore, at the conference it was argued that a committed military leadership 
and accountability of all ranks could not be underestimated.
The relationship between IHL and HR: ROE
A reoccurring topic at the conference concerned the request for clarity between IHL 
and HRL and the development of workable Rules of Engagement (ROE). In order to 
strengthen education, this clarity and workability of law is necessary. 
More clarity on the use of IHL/HRL does not suggest that IHL/HRL cannot be flexible 
or adaptable to changing contexts. Nor does it mean that IHL/HRL is not adaptable 
to the changing environment of conflicts, the new realities of warfighting, the non-
international character of most conflicts or the development of new technologies. 
However, there is a need for further research and development on the applicability 
of law to new challenges.
In particular, concerns were expressed with the relationship between IHL and HRL. 
Arguably, the untraditional character of internationalized intra-state conflicts has 
further complicated this relationship. At the conference there seemed to be no broad 
agreement that IHL and HRL apply alongside each other, but then how exactly do 
they apply? A principle of distance to the conflict/violence was suggested, but clarity 
on this issue is needed. 
Noticeably, it was emphasized at the conference that dilemmas of a legal character 
must be treated in the light of difficulties encountered at the tactical level. There is a 
need for competent staff on the ground, who know the rules and are equipped with 
clear and workable ROE.

14
Conference Proceedings
Opening Session speakers. From the left: Rear Admiral Nils Wang, Brig. Muhammed Nadeem 
Aslam, General Peter Bartram & Mr. Amrullah Saleh. (Archive of RDDC, 2015) 
Overview of conference hall and audience during sessions. (Archive of RDDC, 2015)

15
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
Workshop recommendations
Workshop 1: Sustainability versus idealism 
Workshop 1 on sustainability versus idealism concerned the balancing of local realities 
and the ideals of IHL. In the case of Afghanistan, the difficulties of this balancing act 
were exemplified by the meeting of forces bound by the law and insurgents disregarding 
the very same law. It was questioned whether a set of rules can be accepted, if the 
enemy does not buy in. The workshop findings were as follows:
•	
First, the workshop participants found that it is easier to apply IHL, when IHL is
closely related to norms in the local society. All experience shows that knowledge 
of cultural contexts reduces casualties. Direct contact with local population and
a better understanding of local lives ease operations and increase the likelihood
of living up to standards of IHL. In general it should be recognized that the in-
terpretation of IHL is closely related to local norms.
•	
Second, awareness must be granted to the different conditions for outside forces as
compared to local forces. Local forces that operate among their own people must
face their own people. Outside forces must keep this sensitive relationship of local 
forces and local populations in mind, if aiming at handing over responsibilities
to local forces. One implication deriving from this is the necessity of reducing
collateral damage to gain trust among local populations.
•	
Third, operational/tactical realities cannot be underestimates. Current air opera-
tions by outside forces must be made with constant considerations of the realities 
that local forces meet on the ground in the aftermath of raids. Air forces must
take care to avoid civilian losses, which may hamper the work of the army on
the ground.
•	
Fourth, a strong institutional structure promotes the integration of IHL. As
such, the presence of well-functioning institutions, with rules and procedures to
follow, facilitates the implementation of IHL. Institutional cohesiveness is often
a precondition for successful education, in particular in areas that demand the
development of common approaches or a common mindset.

16
Conference Proceedings
Workshop 1: Participants working on policy recommendations. (Archive of RDDC, 2015)
Workshop 2-3: IHL at the front & Lessons learned – transfer of 
knowledge 
Workshop 2-3 were aimed at a transfer of knowledge between officers in the Danish 
military with practical experience within the field and officers in the Afghan and 
Pakistani militaries who are part of the educative environment implementing IHL. A 
central point of discussion in these workshops was with the practical, and continuous, 
use of IHL on the ground in conflict areas. Other recurring subjects dealt with the 
diverging conditions and legal and cultural contexts of international and national 
forces. In the end the discussions resulted in several findings grouped under the 
following subheadings: 
•	
Training soldiers in IHL is an essential part of the implementation of IHL. Work-
shop participants agreed that training in IHL should take place prior to mission
deployments, during mission and post-mission. This training must reach troops
as well as officers. The training must include contextual elements, such as reading 
of the mandate, engagement with any particular legal challenges encountered by
the forces, and the local context and understanding of the law. It must include
practical examples and be made available to illiterate and educationally challenged 
forces. Crucially, training includes an element of grooming, which concerns the
instilment of values into the organizational culture. These values are essential to
the legitimacy of the forces and the contribution of these to the establishment of

17
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
a secure and viable society. Finally, it was argued that legal advisors must be more 
visible and take greater part in the different stages of the mission. 
•	
Group dynamics were discussed in relation to the importance of language and
discipline among officers and troops. Examples delivered by Danish soldiers
showed how language must be continually nurtured to agree with IHL and HRL.
Otherwise degrading language about local people and conditions may lead to
disrespect of status and standards reflected in the law. Examples were also used
to illustrate the importance of discipline. It was argued that while discipline is
needed, there is a need for well-informed soldiers who can take responsibility
and who are not afraid to act according to what they know is right.
•	
Legal considerations must be integrated into all processes. Legal knowledge and
use may for instance be part of exercises, training and planning. Moreover, the legal 
considerations must be part of strategy. In particular, compliance with legal ideals 
is crucial to the establishment of legitimate post-war authorities. As an element
of this post-war rebuilding of society, it was moreover suggested that battlefield
forensics become part of ROE. As such, military forces should be trained to col-
lect evidence and have it properly registered. This could have huge effects on the
post war reconciliation and potential trials.
•	
The contextual why is an interdisciplinary concern. There was broad consensus that 
the context of conflict and deployment of military force is crucial to compliance
with IHL and HRL. The context determines the adaptability of IHL and HRL
with local legal frameworks and legal history. Moreover, the context reflects the
political, individual and economic motivations that drive the actors of the conflict 
and influence their behaviour toward IHL/HRL. To successfully adapt to IHL and 
HRL, this context must be understood and actively applied in the translation of
a legal framework to the local context.

18
Conference Proceedings
Workshop 2-3: Participants working on policy recommendations. (Archive of RDDC, 2015)
Workshop 4: Universal IHL 
Workshop 4 concerned the universality of IHL. This included the role of international 
and regional institutions, e.g. the UN and EU, in creating sustainable progress in 
implementing IHL in fragile states. In particular the responsibility and manoeuvrability 
of institutions was discussed in relation to how IHL may be incorporated in capacity 
building efforts. The workshop also engaged with a central challenge to universality, 
namely the changing nature of conflicts. The findings of the workshop are anchored 
within two main subjects: 1) the role of international organisations, and 2) the need 
for changes in military culture.
•	
The workshop found that international institutions have – or ought to have – an 
important role in the implementation of IHL in fragile states. Responsibilities of 
IHL lie with the state and with international institutions. If the state itself is not 
capable, then international organizations should be enabled to take over responsi-
bilities. The legitimacy of international institutions flows from the universality of 
international law and the international community, which they represent. Regional 
and non-international bodies may reflect the same universality, enabling them 
to take on similar responsibilities. The legal basis for interference with capacity 
building, hereunder IHL, in fragile states is found in the UN Charter’s Articles 
52 and 53, or alternatively in the UN Charter’s Chapter VII, and must be carried 
out with the consent of the state in question, or invoked by the Security Council.

19
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
•	
The workshop called for a change in military culture. The changing character 
of conflicts causes this need for change. The changing character of conflicts is 
revealed in the difficulties of matching the legal framework of IHL to the status 
of the conflict, status of combatants and to modern technology. Because of these 
changes, a more intellectual understanding of conflicts is required. Changes must 
be matched with a greater understanding of processes and clearly articulated goals 
in relation to HL. Universal education of all ranks and all branches to include 
IHL and military-ethics combined with cultural understanding provides a star-
ting point. Furthermore it was found that a committed military leadership and 
accountability of all ranks could not be underestimated. Notably, the changing 
nature of conflicts has caused a greater focus on post-conflict situations and ca-
pacity building of fragile states, to which a sense of justice and compliance with 
IHL is essential. 
Workshop 4: Participants working on policy recommendations. (Archive of RDDC, 2015)
Workshop 5: International Humanitarian Law and International 
Human Rights Law 
Workshop 5 treated the interplay and applicability of IHL and HRL in situations 
of armed conflict. The debate was centred on two main issues. First, the theoretical 
discussion about the relationship between the bodies of law and when to apply 
which legal framework was -. Second, the real-life impact of developments in the 
legal frameworks applying to soldiers on the ground in conflict areas was discussed. 

20
Conference Proceedings
Third, the matter of education and the ability to live up to demands and potential 
future demands of evidence collection was discussed. The findings were as follows:
•	
The workshop pointed out the need for international law to adapt to the ever-
changing environment of conflicts. New realities of war-fighting, the characteristic 
non-international character of most conflicts, development of new technologies, 
etc., make it increasingly difficult to recognize the law that applies to a specific 
situation. In particular, concerns were expressed with the relationship between 
IHL and HR. arguably, IHL and HR apply alongside each other, but how exactly 
do they apply? Clarity on this issue is needed. Meanwhile clarity on these matters 
must be shaped to meet the demands of changing conflict environments. 
•	
The workshop found that the needs of soldiers acting on the ground in conflict 
situations should be at the centre of concern in any of developments of the legal 
framework. A central concern was with the ability of soldiers to live up to the 
legal standards. Arguably, the law becomes self-defeating the moment soldiers 
are forced to apply standards that are too high. In the UK there is a tendency to 
think that if you go to war as a British soldier, you will be regarded as a potential 
war criminal, who will need to be investigated. This is not a sustainable develop-
ment if we want to be able to launch humanitarian interventions in the future. 
Therefore, dilemmas of a legal character must be treated in the light of difficulties 
encountered at the tactical level.
•	
Another finding of the workshop pointed towards the need for competent staff on 
the ground. Essentially this is a matter of education and willingness to be “on the 
ground”. From this perspective, the present soldiers and personnel best observe 
IHL and HR compliance and evidence of deviation. Meanwhile some challenges 
of education exist. Educating soldiers in laws of non-international conflicts is 
time-consuming and expensive. Additional training in collection of evidence is 
a further cost. However, in concurrence with Workshop 1, it was pointed out that 
there is a need for firm use of and compliance with IHL/HRL in order to pave the 
way for post-conflict capacity building. Soldiers on the ground have a substantial 
role as role models upholding the law and creating the legitimacy needed for future 
cooperation in capacity building. 

21
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
Workshop 5: Participants working on policy recommendations. (Archive of RDDC, 2015)

22
Conference Proceedings
Summary of Conference Presentations
Opening Session
Rear Admiral Nils Wang, Denmark 
Rear Admiral Nils Wang started out by thanking all guest, including national officers for 
attending and for making the conference possible. He called the conference an important 
contribution to approach the field of international humanitarian law from a very 
different and – in his view – very ambitious perspective. This perspective is ambitious 
both in terms of the composition of actors at the conference and in terms of the focus and 
expected outcome. From the perspective of the Rear Admiral, an important opportunity 
of the conference was the bringing together of international and regional actors who 
have a common interest in the education of IHL. The diversity of the people attending 
the conference reflects the reality encountered by soldiers, and the reality needed to direct 
strategies and training toward sustainable solutions.
Rear Admiral Nils Wang stressed the exceptionality of the topic of the conference. 
He did not expect a normative conference, focussed on education and IHL, and not 
only on critical remarks on where IHL is not being followed, or examples of soldiers 
violating the law. Rather, he argued that the conference was ambitious as the there 
was an expectation of ideas, creative inventions, dialogue, and interaction between 
actors who are not usually brought together. 
Rear Admiral Wang stated that the conference is a part of a general effort to promote 
stability and trust building in the Central Asian Region, and more specifically in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan. The Danish Defence and the Peace and Stabilization Fund 
have prioritized the project and provided the financial resources, because they see 
opportunities for stability and reconciliation. Of course, this is not only a question 
of IHL but also a question of bringing regional and international actors together in 
order to address regional and international problems. 
Rear Admiral Wang turned to take a purely Danish viewpoint. Even though Pakistan 
and Afghanistan are not located in Denmark’s backyard, in terms of security and 
economics, Denmark still has great interests in a progressive region with stability and 
reconciliation. Denmark will pursue a path of stabilization in the region and as the 
commander of the institution responsible for educating future military officers, Rear 
Admiral Wang argued that he will pursue a path of equipping officers to the highest 
level possible. This includes knowledge on how actors in the region approach IHL. 
Rear Admiral Wang stated that participants have been invited to improve educational 

23
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
goals. As the first designed solutions rarely survive very long, other solutions have to 
be identified, and complex problems require complex solutions
Finally, it was noted that disagreement is expected, but that this is also a way of 
broadening perspectives and a consequence of sharing knowledge. Importantly, the 
general strengthening of cooperation between educative military institutions, be they 
of NATO, Afghan or Pakistani origin, will help consolidate the understanding between 
actors, and act as a positive influence on all countries involved. 
General Peter Bartram, Denmark
General Peter Bartram welcomed all guests. He then went on to point out the different 
characteristics of today’s conflicts in comparison to earlier conventional wars. In particular 
he noticed the change from inter-state to intra-state and so-called internationalized intra-
state conflicts. From this, he argued, derives a range challenges related to modern trends, 
such as globalization, technology and capacity building. Issues of IHL were visible in 
the difficulty of determining civilian status and in difficulties of determining principles 
of distinction and proportionality.  General Bartram emphasized the need to strike a 
balance between sustainability and idealism in the implementation of IHL. Moreover, 
he noticed the potential benefit of international and regional cooperation and common 
understanding in the field of IHL.
General Bartram started out by pointing to the changing character of conflicts. 
Wars of today are rarely a confrontation of conventional strength between states. 
According to the Uppsala Conflict Database, most conflicts are intra-state or so-called 
internationalized intra-state conflicts. A distinct feature of intra-state wars is that 
hostilities are conducted in populated areas, and this trend of contemporary armed 
conflicts is only likely to continue with growing urbanization. Features of warfare 
challenge the very cornerstone obligation of IHL: the ability to distinguish between 
what is a civilian object and what is a targetable military object. The notion of hybrid 
warfare adds another challenge to contemporary warfare. Recent events have shown 
that clear distinctions between whether an armed conflict exists or not have become 
increasingly blurred. This is a challenge to the applicability of IHL, which only exists 
when the threshold of hostilities has passed a level constituting an armed conflict. 
Another set of interlinked key challenges of warfare of today is the globalization and 
the technological development in terms weapon systems and their capabilities. General 
Bartram went through challenges related to both globalization and technology.

24
Conference Proceedings
Opening Session. From the left: Mr. Amrullah Saleh, Rear Admiral Nils Wang, General Peter 
Bartram & Brig. Muhammed Nadeem. (Archive of RDDC, 2015)
Overall, General Bartram argued that to act as a legitimate and accountable state 
in conflicts puts pressure on a state’s ability to balance military necessities with 
humanitarian obligations. The constant attention by commanders and officers shown 
to training, acceptance and doctrinal development in order to maintain the ability 
to fight within these constraints while still achieving the military objectives is key.
Finally, General Bartram argued that capacity building idealism and sustainability 
need to be balanced in order to implement the principles of IHL. Moreover, soldiers 
have to manoeuver within seconds and under the influence of the fog of war, as 
Clausewitz put it. All soldiers understand this and understand the challenge that this 
poses. Furthermore, General Bartram stated that the conference is about engaging in 
dialogue and discussions from different starting points, different experiences, different 
perceptions and even different objectives of attending. Hopefully, the outcome would 
result in recommendations that include thoughts on sustainability.
In his concluding remarks, General Bertram emphasized the importance of including 
experience from Afghanistan and Pakistan and of enhancing cooperation between 
parties.

25
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
Mr. Amrullah Saleh, Afghanistan
Mr. Amrullah Saleh introduced an Afghan perspective by placing the subject of the 
conference within the historic and contextual challenges faced by Afghanistan. Focussing 
on ANSF he went through the national, regional and international challenges. Finally, 
the importance of cooperation and the importance of the legitimacy enjoyed by ANSF 
were highlighted. 
Mr. Amrullah Saleh started his presentation by addressing the history of Afghanistan. 
He argued that elements of IHL and HRL could be traced to what he termed the 
national tragedy of Afghanistan. This national tragedy is one of state collapse, of which 
Afghans are not responsible. Rather Afghans have suffered from siding with the West. 
In the 1980s Afghans fought against communism but were abandoned by the West. 
It was not until the 9/11 terrorist attack that Afghanistan regained the West’s interest. 
Mr. Saleh then turned his attention to the ANSF. These, he explained, enjoy pan-
Afghan support and respect from all ethnic groups in the country. The ANSF is one 
of the most resilient and committed forces. However, it face enormous challenges. 
The Afghans are suffering from attacks on a daily basis. Thousands are being killed 
in the fighting. Despite this, the Afghan people do not protest. They know that the 
forces need all the support they can get in order to enhance the state and avoid the 
collapse of the 1990s. The memories of the horrors of the 1990s drive the support of 
the ANSF. In support of his arguments, Mr. Saleh used an example based on his own 
experience with ANSF fighting insurgents. 
Mr. Saleh went on to place the challenges of the ANSF in a national, regional and 
international context. He noted that it was not his intention to digress from the subject 
of IHL, but argued that contextualisation is important. 
First, on a national level the ANSF suffer from various challenges, such as poverty, 
illiteracy and poor logistics. Meanwhile, the ANSF experiences up to 68 attacks per 
month. This reality enhances the need for dialogues creating understanding and 
support for the ANSF. Second, at the regional level, cooperation is a must. People are 
suffering because of the lack of cooperation between Afghanistan and Pakistan. To 
encounter the need for regional cooperation, the government of Afghanistan must be 
recognized as the only Afghan authority by its neighbours. Third, at the international 
level, cooperation with NATO is important. That said, the international level has not 
always lived up to expectations. For instance, the implementation of resolution 1373, 
criminalising all sorts of acts related to terrorist activities has failed. 

26
Conference Proceedings
Mr. Saleh expressed a hope that the conference would lead to a better understanding of 
challenges and gaps felt by the ANSF. He, moreover, declared his ambition to find out 
how to enhance and improve cooperation and dialogue among conference participants.
As a closing remark, Mr. Saleh mentioned that Afghans are grateful for the support in 
consolidating the state. Afghanistan, he argued, will not resemble other states in the 
region, in terms of sectarianism. He noted the importance of the ANSF in respecting 
civilians and human dignity. The ANSF is winning because of the legitimacy that 
follows from this and from the noble message of being the protector of the people 
and the state. Importantly, Mr. Saleh noted that, unlike the Taliban, the ANSF does 
have a political message.
Brigadier Nadeem Aslam, Pakistan
The introductory presentation by Mr. Aslam made the universality of the legal frameworks 
of IHL and HR his point of departure. The roots of IHL in Islamic laws, as well as its 
current consolidation in the Geneva Conventions were noted. However, modern trends 
connected to globalisation and technological developments and terrorism challenges IHL. 
In particular, Mr. Aslam argued, the threat of terrorism must be engaged with without 
compromising people’s respect for the law.
Mr. Aslam emphasized the focus of the conferences as being both on IHL and HRL 
in their function as legal frameworks for security forces. He noted the need to uphold 
universal rights, as these define the global community. Moreover, universal rights, he 
argued, can be traced back in Islamic law, for instance, to the principle of distinction. 
After having placed IHL and HRL in an international and regional context, Mr. Aslam 
pointed out the need to understand and respond to the challenges faced by IHL and 
HR. He divided the challenges into four groups. First, some challenges are related to 
the inability or lack of will by states to meet the demands of IHL and HRL. Second, new 
technologies of warfare pose a challenge. IHL applies to these technologies. However, 
there are both legal and practical challenges that must be dealt with. Third, the misuse 
of conventional weapons poses a problem in a region where weapons are continuously 
being circulated, and where new weapons are constantly produced. Fourth, terrorism 
as a way of conducting war is a well-known challenge to IHL. While several bodies 
of law apply, terrorism is a major threat to stability in the region. Pakistan is one of 
the most exposed victims of terrorism. As such, terrorism in Pakistan claims huge 
human- and resource-related losses. 
Mr. Aslam elaborated on the fourth point of the role of terrorism in Pakistan. Following 
the 2014 terrorist attack at a school in the city of Peshawar the government made a new 
legal framework and commitment to fight terrorism. A crucial point is that this legal 

27
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
and political framework must not become a pretext for violating rights. Mr. Aslam 
stated that a few cases of terrorism should not be allowed to affect the rights of all. It is 
important that universal rights exist and that people respect and are bound by the law. 
Brig. Muhammed Nadeem Aslam at his opening speech. (Archive of RDDC, 2015)
Key note address: Professor Gary D. Solis, “Changing the Military 
Culture”
The presentation by Professor Solis was concerned with “Changing the Military Culture”. 
The subject was approached with regard to the training of frontline combatants in IHL, 
in terms of adapting to the changes in the IHL sphere. In the end, Professor Solis called 
for new approaches and new methods of training involving modern technology and 
creative tools (e.g. apps and comic books). Meanwhile, he urged a constant awareness 
of the dynamic character of IHL in the face of modern battlefield challenges.
Professor Solis began by noting the difficulty of the task faced by the conference 
participants, namely that of building security. Before moving on to the theme of 
military culture, professor Solis clarified a few central concepts. 
•	
The terms IHL, Law of Armed Conflict and Laws of War are essentially the same
and would be used interchangeably throughout his remarks;
•	
“Non-International Armed Conflict” would be used to describe any armed conflict 
involving a State versus a non-state armed opposition group;

28
Conference Proceedings
•	
“Opinio juris” describes the point in time where States begin to follow a particular 
custom out of a sense of legal obligation, even though the custom has not been
codified.
Professor Solis then turned to the subject of changing the military culture in the sense 
of effectively training junior combatants in international humanitarian law (IHL).  
He suggested that military culture might advantageously change its instructional 
course. The argument was advanced by an assessment of: 1) the teaching of IHL to 
junior frontline combatants; and 2) the changes in battlefield tactics and technology 
faced by IHL.
First, with regard to the teaching of IHL to junior combatants, Professor Solis urged 
that in the interests of greater effectiveness in its teaching, IHL instruction should 
change to fit contemporary modes of information-sharing, such as personal electronic 
devices and popular media content. This view was advanced through the background 
of historical and contemporary analysis of IHL and how it has been taught. Modern 
instructional trends, he suggested, offer both challenges and opportunities in relation 
to the effective teaching of IHL. Never before has IHL been the subject of such 
international attention from civilians, as well as combatants. Additionally, increased 
academic interest works to promote IHL through writings and public discussion. 
At the same time, the flexible and changing nature of IHL reveals it to be a vibrant, 
changing and ever-maturing body of law. However, there are hurdles for the effective 
communication of IHL which, if it is to be understood and respected, must be 
communicated to all. 
Meanwhile, the expectations and capabilities of the frontline combatant must be 
examined and appreciated. Professor Solis referred to his military background during 
the Vietnam War. Then, the law of war was taught to combatants in a manner very 
different than today. This is due, in part, to changes shaped by 9/11 and the many legal 
questions that have arisen from that event.  Drawing on his own experience, Solis, 
described how, during the Vietnam War, by order of the US Department of Defence, 
law of war instruction was given to every US combatant every year. The instruction was 
influenced by the difficulties of recruitment. Recruits gained through the draft were, 
at best, a mixed crowd of widely varying character and intellect. Formal instruction 
in the law of war through mandatory group “classes” was not well-received. Today, 
US volunteer soldiers are better educated and are more receptive to guidance and 
instruction. However, combatants still constitute a different type of student, which 
continues to pose challenges.

29
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
In the light of this illustrative experience, it must be questioned how Afghans will 
receive mandatory IHL training? By regional comparison, the International Committee 
of the Red Cross (ICRC) recently instituted IHL classes for HAMAS, a well-known 
armed opposition group. The New York Times published an article explaining how 
the fighters progressed through the use of case studies and role-play. Ultimately, the 
Times article indicated that the instruction was not notably successful. Among frontline 
Pakistani forces there is already an awareness of basic IHL – less so for junior Afghan 
combatants.  Notably, neither Pakistani nor Afghan armed forces enjoy the wealth 
of legal advisors that Western forces do. Therefore, there is an even greater need to 
better communicate IHL and seek the most effective instructional methods and tools. 
Professor Solis suggested the active use of modern technology and information-sharing. 
These tools offer great potential for alternative (and possibly more effective) teaching 
methods. He noted the disadvantages that follow from law of war misinformation, 
which is likewise possible with new untested technologies and methodologies, but he 
went on to argue that there are ways for instructors to use new teaching techniques to 
improve training. He offered the example of the US Marine Corps’ six-month “Basic 
School” that is mandatory for every newly commissioned officer.  Solis found that the 
school was not particularly effective and not very popular. Among new approaches 
to teaching, the use of interactive video games, mobile phone apps, graphic novels 
and even comic books were mentioned. Video games are not well-received among 
academics, as fictional killings may generate false impressions of warfare, as well as 
dismissive views of serious moral issues etc. For such reasons, mobile phone IHL 
instructional apps may be a better suggestion. Four IHL apps are already available. 
One of them, “Fighter not Killer” originated by a Geneva-based NGO, tests one’s 
knowledge of IHL through a series of lessons consisting of questions followed by a 
multiple-choice test. If employed in a class, soldiers could be directed to download 
the free app and take one lesson and test per class session. Illustrated graphic novels 
and war-themed comic books are another alternative to consider, particularly in 
geographic areas where illiteracy might be an issue. 
Second, it is clear that we are in a unique and dynamic period of IHL evolution. For 
instance, today, international law, including IHL, evolves with exceptional rapidity. 
State practice can become custom and then achieve opino juris within a very brief 
period. There are even asserted examples of so-called “instant” customary law. 
Moreover, there are several evolving areas of IHL, e.g. autonomous weapons systems, 
battlefield detention and cyber warfare. Not all of these will be of concern to the 
teaching of frontline combatants, but teachers of IHL should observe developments 
and keep apace. 

30
Conference Proceedings
All fields of law require constant intellectual and operational refinement. For instance 
the individual civilian status of “continuous combat function” (CCF) poses interesting 
and challenging questions. CCF refers, of course, to members of an armed opposition 
group, which employs armed fighters on a regular and continuing basis, effectively 
making such fighters the armed force of said armed opposition group. Since these 
fighters, albeit civilian, are effectively an armed force, they may lawfully be targeted 
and killed. The ICRC, which originated the concept in a 2008 Report, supports and 
advocates CCF status.  Numerous US writers and academics, on the other hand, 
criticize the concept, arguing that it exempts some armed opposition group members 
and thus does not go far enough in allowing targeting of armed opposition group 
membership. Among the several questions asked are whether CCF is only relevant 
to those who employ armed drones to target those with CCF designation? How likely 
is the fact of CCF designation to eventually become customary, and then opino juris, 
in terms of international law? Is there international agreement as to exactly who may 
be considered to have CCF? Another contentious IHL issue is raised by technological 
battlefield developments, such as the use of so-called autonomous weapons, such as 
drones. Are “signature” drone strikes equally as lawful as “personality” drone strikes? 
Indeed, some ask if any drone strikes are lawful. Can so-called autonomous weapons, 
which are already largely computer-controlled, meet the subjective requirements of 
distinction and proportionality? As a final example, Solis mentioned cyber warfare. 
So far, there is no multi-national treaty that defines what constitutes a cyber-intrusion, 
as opposed to a cyber-attack, even though events that clearly are major cyber-attacks 
have been experienced. 
Key note address by Professor Gary D. Solis. (Archive of RDDC, 2015)

31
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
In the end, Professor Solis emphasized the need for a state’s military culture to apply 
new techniques and methods of teaching that incorporate today’s fast-changing 
IHL. In conclusion, he noted that the basis for this need is found in the 1949 Geneva 
Convention common Article 1, which expresses the daunting task that State Parties 
must ensure respect for IHL. 
Session 1 - IHL – Universal understanding & context driven 
implementation
Professor Charles Garraway, “The interplay between IHL and HR”
The presentation by Professor Charles Garraway concerned the interplay between 
IHL and HR. Professor Garraway described the historical, philosophical and practical 
differences between IHL and HR. Meanwhile, he argued that differences and practical 
application is being challenged by the changing character of conflicts providing for a 
gradual overlap between the two bodies of law. Finally, Professor Garraway argued 
that there is a pressing need for clarity and a legal framework that fits hybrid situations. 
Professor Charles Garraway started out by describing IHL and HR as two great tectonic 
plates of international law rubbing against each other. IHL goes back millennia. 
Elements of IHL can be found in Chinese, Islamic and Christian writing and tradition. 
There is nothing new about IHL. Over time it has been developed by states. Basic 
tenets such as the conduct of hostilities and protection of civilians are associated with 
the international law framework under which state relations work. Meanwhile, he 
argued, there was always reluctance from states to allow international law to interfere 
with domestic laws. A gradual overlap between IHL and HRL is confronting that 
reluctance and pushing the limits of each body of law.
Human rights are a much more modern body of law than IHL. Although, it can be 
found in the writings of philosophers, it did not find its international manifestation till 
after the Second World War. Essentially, it was seen as part of the new age of peace and 
law, advanced by the UN. HRL is understood to apply at all times. However, certain 
rights can be derogated from. The UN did not want to mention war as an excuse for 
derogation because of its own principles. However, the European Convention on 
Human Rights does mention war in its Article 15. Thus, the European Convention 
recognises the coexistence of IHL and HRL. 
Although IHL and HR from the outset were seen as applying to different contexts, there 
has been a gradual overlap.  IHL has expanded into the area of non-international armed 
conflict. This is apparent in the Additional Protocol II (to the Geneva Conventions), 

32
Conference Proceedings
in the Tadic case1 in the 1998 Rome Statute and in the 2005 ICRC Customary Law 
Study, all of which work towards narrowing the gap between international and non-
international armed conflicts. Meanwhile, there is a clear extension of HRL compliance 
mechanisms. For instance fact-finding missions exist in areas where IHL and HR 
sit side by side. Here, violations of both HR and IHL are investigated together. The 
International Court of Justice agrees that there is an overlap between IHL and HR 
(Barrier Advisory Opinion 2004). However, the work of the Court is not very helpful, 
as it does not say anything substantial about the nature of this overlap.
Importantly, Professor Garraway noted the philosophical differences dividing the two 
bodies of law. Where HRL is based on the interests of the individual, IHL is about 
balancing between the necessities of war and humanity, exemplified by the protection of 
victims of war. The difference is particularly visible in the principle of proportionality, 
which, in IHL, accepts that even innocent people can die in military operations. The 
same difference is to be found in targeting, which recognises the legitimacy of killing 
people on the basis of their status rather than their conduct. Both legal concepts seem 
to be in opposition to the basic human right to life. Therefore, claiming that the two 
branches are complementary is not always helpful or correct.
The rise of global terrorism challenges the relationship between IHL and HRL in new 
ways. Should terrorism be treated as criminal acts or as acts of war? Before 9/11 the 
issue clearly came within the remit of criminal law. The War on Terror changed much 
of that, although Madrid 2004 and London 2005 were treated as criminal acts. The 
rise of ISIL/DAESH is changing the attitude of states again. The attacks on Metrojet 
9268, Beirut and Paris in 2015 bring forth strong feelings and reactions from states 
fighting ISIL, talking of “acts of war”. From an alternative perspective, it might be 
argued that if states bomb you from the air and you cannot defend against this, the 
only thing you can do is to send in “terrorists” to attack the homeland of the states. 
How is attacking targets, civilian or military, different from hitting command centres 
from the air, if you lack the capability to do the latter? The question is whether French 
President Francois Hollande would have acted differently had he been on the other 
side? There is a need to clarify what rules apply to the general situation. For instance, 
there is a need to know what rules apply if terrorists are captured?  Is it IHL or HRL 
as reflected in domestic criminal law?
Professor Garraway argued that there is a pressing need for a legal framework that 
fits hybrid situations. He is himself involved in attempts to put together a book 
seeking to clarify the relationship between IHL/HRL. On a final note, he confirmed 
(1)   http://www.icty.org/cases/party/787/4

33
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
the importance of establishing clarity by arguing that “The most critical point of all 
is that those who wish to uphold the law must be subject to the law, but in order to 
do this we must know the law”.
Session I. From the left: Professor Charles Garraway, Research Fellow Muhammed Oves Anwar, 
Program Director Knut D. Asplund & Dean Ole Kværnø. (Archive of RDDC, 2015)
Muhammad Oves Anwar, “International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights 
Law: Pakistan’s Domestic Legal Framework”
Mr. Muhammad Oves Anwar gave a thorough presentation on Pakistan’s criminal 
justice system and how the national legal system copes with varying levels of violence. 
His presentation focussed on the deployment of the armed forces for actions in assistance 
of the civil power under Article 245 of the Constitution of Pakistan and their powers to 
use force and detain persons pursuant thereto. 
Mr. Muhammad Oves Anwar began by outlining the salient features of Pakistan’s 
criminal justice system. He noted that the system is strongly rooted in British colonial 
legal heritage. The system is underpinned by colonial era legal codes – the Code 
of Criminal Procedure 1898 and the Pakistan Penal Code 1860 – which have been 
modernized to some extent. In the case of terrorism, Mr. Anwar noted, that the primary 
legal tools available to the State are the Anti-Terrorism Act of 1997 and the Protection 

34
Conference Proceedings
of Pakistan Act of 2014. Human rights protections are found in the Constitution of 
Pakistan in Articles 8-28 and include the right to life and liberty, safeguards as to 
arrest and detention, the right to a fair trial and due process, prohibition from torture 
and the freedom of assembly. He noted that these rights are enforced through the 
mechanism found in Article 199, which confers jurisdiction upon provincial High 
Courts to hear grievances.  
He noted the various mechanisms found under Pakistani law that allow for such 
deployment. In cases of dispersal of unlawful assemblies and combatting terrorism, 
the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1898 and the Anti-Terrorism Act of 1997 both 
provide mechanisms for invoking Article 245. These deployments are carried out 
in peacetime, and therefore the entire gamut of fundamental rights enshrined in 
the Constitution of Pakistan applies. However, in cases of heightened violence akin 
to a non-international armed conflict, the domestic legal regime allows for Article 
245 of the Constitution to be directly invoked. This has the effect of suspending the 
application of fundamental rights for the duration of the conflict, allowing the lawful 
targeting of fighters, internment, and prosecution for certain offences. Mr. Anwar 
referred to Article 245 of the Constitution concerning actions in aid of civil power. 
This article authorizes the deployment of the Armed Forces of Pakistan against external 
aggression as well as internal violence. Article 245, effectively, allows the armed forces 
to operate by suspending the human rights enforcement mechanism found in Article 
199. However, Pakistani jurisprudence has developed to protect fundamental rights 
by creating various mechanisms for the invocation of Article 245 during peacetime 
that do not suspend Article 199. Two of these mechanisms include provisions in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure of 1898 and the Anti-Terrorism Act of 1997.
Under the 1898 Code, the Armed Forces may be called in to disperse unlawful 
assemblies. However, since fundamental rights govern their conduct, there are strict 
limitations as to how force is to be used to disperse such assemblies. The Manual 
of Pakistan Military Laws goes into significant detail on how the Armed Forces are 
to employ lethal force in such situations, and at all times must remain under the 
direction of civilian authorities. Similarly, the Anti-Terrorism Act authorizes the use 
of lethal force only as a last resort and after various factors have first been determined. 
Mr. Anwar also noted that the Anti-Terrorism Act allows for preventive detention 
within the confines of Constitutional Article 10, providing ‘safeguards as to arrest 
and detention’.
In situations of heightened levels of violence, Article 245 may be directly invoked by 
the Federal Government of Pakistan to suppress militancy or rebellion. Such situations 
would fall outside the peacetime legal paradigm and, therefore, the targeting of fighters 

35
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
and their internment is authorized through the suspension of the mechanism for 
enforcing fundamental rights. Mr. Anwar noted that the Actions (in Aid of Civil Power) 
Regulations of 2011 govern the conduct of ongoing operations in the Federally and 
Provincially Administered Tribal Areas of Pakistan (FATA/PATA). Under Regulation 5 
an elaborate set of precautions are to be taken before targeting fighters with lethal force. 
Furthermore, the Regulations allow for the internment of persons for the duration of 
the actions in aid of civil power as well as their subsequent criminal prosecution. Mr. 
Anwar concluded by noting that the Article 245 framework acted as Pakistan’s domestic 
Humanitarian Law and was generally in line with prevailing standards of international 
humanitarian law, as the framework applied to Non-International Armed Conflicts.
Overview of the conference hall during a Q&A session. (Archive of RDDC, 2015)
Programme Director Knut D. Asplund, “Teaching HR and IHL to the Indone-
sian armed forces – a case study in capacity building”
Knut D. Asplund presented his contribution to the conference under the headline “Love 
All, Serve All”. Mr. Asplund, as the Director of the Indonesian Programme under the 
Norwegian Centre for Human Rights (NCHR), shared his insight into the NCHR 
approach to teaching HRL and IHL to the Indonesian armed forces.
Before moving on to the specific programme, Mr. Asplund provided some background 
knowledge. First of all, the Norwegian Centre for Human Rights is a Multi-Disciplinary 
Research Centre under the University of Oslo. The Centre employs both HRL and 

36
Conference Proceedings
IHL experts. Since the fall of the authoritarian Suharto regime in 2002, Indonesia 
and Norway have engaged in dialogue. Also in 2002, the pressure for an international 
tribunal to try gross human rights violations resulted in the establishment of national 
courts. Importantly, the training efforts in Indonesia must be viewed in the light of 
general security sector reform.
The teaching of HRL and IHL for the Indonesian army has taken place in Indonesia 
since 2007. So far more than 30 courses have been conducted. This comprises the 
training of approximately 1400 persons, including mid-ranking officers, some NGOs 
and a handful of private persons. A Jakarta based law firm supports the training.
The training’s target group is the army, including legal branches of the army. There 
is an emphasis on the “sharp end”, i.e., the operational troops, in particular Special 
Forces. Also territorial commands in conflict-prone areas are important. 
Mr. Asplund then turned to the aims of the training. These he argued are particularly 
concerned with proper conduct. There is a need to see the operational and legal 
realities as interrelated. Hence law has to be taught in the light of tactics and vice versa. 
This also means that norm compliance has to be rehearsed during impact training. 
Keeping this in mind, courses are designed as crash courses in IHL, emphasizing non-
international armed conflicts,  IHL principles, targeting, direct participation and self-
defence. Moreover courses contain instruction about the treaties to which Indonesia 
is a party, state responsibility and introductions to counterinsurgency theory. Finally, 
courses include a deep dive into the absolute prohibition of torture and other relevant 
human rights. The ROE are introduced, also exercising their use and teaching that 
strategic considerations may put more restraint on the use of force than the law. This 
part includes field simulation.
Mr. Asplund outlined a few key lessons. First, he explained that in practising the 
training activities, it is important to respect the host and how things are done in the 
host state. Over time trust building is imperative. This involves getting to know the 
military organisation, structures and culture. It is important to work with what is 
there. Mr. Asplund, furthermore, noted that what works back home may not work 
in the host state. Second, Mr. Asplund argued that training must be grounded in the 
context experienced by the soldier. This includes the tactics, weapons available, and 
the chain of command. Moreover, simulations and everyday cases encountered by 
the soldier must be used.
Among other lessons learned, some were to use colleagues as instructors, to use internal 
training capacities where possible and to take seriously and address reservations about 
the notion of human rights. Moreover, it is important to contribute to and rely on 

37
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
internal policies and doctrines. Arguably, personal experience from the field is the 
best place to reflect on why proper conduct is desirable. Human rights training should 
not substitute proper behaviour. 
As a final remark Mr. Asplund mentioned the importance of other, simultaneous 
efforts. These may ensure that doctrines and operational procedures are compatible 
to the legal norms that are being taught. In the end, soldiers will operate according 
to operational procedures that have become routine rather than listening to some 
random western persons teaching about law. 
Session 2 - IHL in a domestic & UN perspective – cases of UN, 
Afghanistan and Pakistan
Analyst Kristoffer Nilaus Tarp, “Danish experiences in integrating Internatio-
nal Humanitarian Law (IHL) in capacity development” 
The presentation by Kristoffer Nilaus Tarp concerned Danish experienced in integrating 
IHL in capacity development. Mr. Tarp outlined experiences from three to four countries 
to which Danish forces have been deployed. From these experiences, a range of lessons 
learned were derived. These concern both the general aspects of training and its conduct. 
Mr. Tarp first outlined several methodological challenges that he had met during 
his studies into the Danish experiences in integrating IHL in capacity development. 
Among these was the fact that there is no written documentation on the training in 
IHL. Consequently, evidence and experiences stay with those involved. Moreover, 
most initiatives on the subject had a decoupled and ad hoc character. On top of that, 
the impact of any efforts is hard to measure. Therefore the study is a collection of 
challenges, remedies and examples.
Mr. Tarp first addressed the integration of IHL in Afghanistan. The main focus was 
on the Danish Special Operations team, SWAT Team training and on the Afghan 
National Army Officers’ Academy (ANAOA). The Danish Special Operations team 
was constantly trying to build in IHL examples into training efforts. Meanwhile, at 
ANAOA IHL was being taught at the same time as efforts were being directed at 
building institutions that could sustain a focus on IHL. 
In 2003 in Iraq, Denmark helped train recruits from the local security forces. Training 
included technical assistance but also focussed on inducing a mind-set amongst the 
recruits to ensure that forces would be trustworthy and helpful. Many recruits were 
illiterate and had to go to work after just a few weeks of training. Therefore, trainers 
sometimes moved away from talking about IHL to drawing and illustrating events. 

38
Conference Proceedings
In 2007, in Iraq, Danish military lawyers offered modules focussed on the day-to-
day work of Iraqi military lawyers. Danish military lawyers learned that interactive 
teaching was not successful. Participants were more comfortable with simply listening, 
observing and taking notes. 
Finally, in Iraq, the Danish military police trained the Iraqi military police throughout 
the Danish deployment. Training related to IHL includes code of conduct and guidance 
on the use of force. Sometimes training included more IHL than other times. Recently, 
as part of training initiatives, a Danish Soldiers Card was translated into Arabic. 
In Somalia, as part of the Cutlass Express Exercise, Danish frogmen have been training 
Kenyan forces in how to board ships. As they exercised boarding, Danish frogmen 
would observe and advise forces, also pointing out IHL and HRL violations.
In Kenya, IHL and HRL are being integrated in training and operations by the 
Eastern African Standby Force (EASF) with the support of the Nordic Advisory and 
Coordination Staff seconded to the EASF headquarters. A variety of courses have been 
taught. These include elements of IHL and IHR such as Civil Military Cooperation 
Courses, Protection of Civilians and Protection of Children. Moreover, IHL and HRL 
concerns are incorporated into exercises planned by the EASF. 
Mr. Tarp turned to address the lessons learned from the mentioned experiences. With 
regards to skills and resources, several challenges were highlighted. Mr. Tarp argued 
that many legal experts, including military legal advisors, are not capacity building 
or development experts. Hence, development experts should help advise legal experts 
on how best to approach the training of IHL in a capacity building context. Another 
challenge relates to the complexity of realities on the ground, including different legal 
traditions, language barriers and interfering power structures. In the end, there is a 
need for context-specific training and mixed skills teams.
With regards to impact and sustainability, Mr. Tarp again outlined a range of 
challenges and lessons learned. First, challenges include competing priorities. Hence, 
legal considerations may not always be granted top priority. Second, there is a lack 
of relevance of what is being taught, sometimes caused by a struggle to contextualize 
and reflect realities in the training. Third, there is often no sustainability strategy, 
meaning that training in knowledge of the law is ad hoc and that only few efforts are 
sustained. Fourth, difficulties exist in documenting the impact of training efforts. The 
last three points were directed at future needs. As such, the fifth lesson concerned 
a need for capacity assessments. Six, a sustainability and hand-over strategy should 
be incorporated from the beginning. Seven, there must be a focus on the baseline, 
including monitoring and evaluating efforts. 

39
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
With regards to training design and modalities, Mr. Tarp, highlighted six challenges 
or lessons learned. These were first of all, a lack of incentive caused by soldiers’ general 
approach to learning as learning by doing. Second, challenges related to different 
educational and pedagogical traditions. Third, trainers learned that offering trainees 
diplomas, in order to improve the incentive for learning, worked well. Fourth, learning 
concerned the use of visuals to contextualise and to make training more real. Fifth, 
it can be derived from experiences that subject matters should be integrated into the 
scenarios used in the training. Six, learning through exercises and learning through 
doing proved efficient.
Finally, Mr. Tarp noted, that lessons learned from Iraq had shown that a focus on 
context, everyday situations and on internalisation of laws, in particular, had proven 
successful. Moreover, the use of visuals, tweaking language and following up on 
learning supported the training. 
Director Mohammad Musa Mahmodi, “International Humanitarian law and 
internal conflict” 
The presentation by Mohammad Musa Mahmodi, from the Afghan Independent Human 
Rights Commission, addressed IHL and internal conflicts. Mr. Mahmodi described the 
historical situation and challenges of IHL and HRL compliance and moved on to explain 
the current challenges and prospects. Finally, Mr. Mahmodi underlined the importance of 
institutions, such as the Human Rights Commission, in highlighting issues and promoting 
IHL and HRL in an Afghan context.
Mohammad Musa Mahmodi, started out with reviewing the history of the war in 
Afghanistan and the lack of respect for IHl and the laws of war. Expressing his mixed 
feelings about the history and future of Afghanistan, he conveyed that he as a lawyer 
in Afghanistan is confused and disappointed, but as a human rights opponent he is 
both hopeful and optimistic. 
Mr. Mahmodi referred to the history of Afghanistan. Three decades of war, starting 
with the Soviet intervention, followed by the Taliban’s rule and finally the War 
on Terror, has affected the application of IHL in Afghanistan.  During the Soviet 
intervention entire villages were hit, leaving no room for principles of IHL. After the 
collapse of the communist regime, warring factions started a long civil war, which 
again resulted in violations of IHR and IHL. During the Taliban rise to power and 
rule, international law was not observed and the Taliban showed no tolerance with 
regards to human rights. Mass killings of civilians, razing entire villages of every 
element and discriminating against women were examples of some of their policies. 

40
Conference Proceedings
When the international community intervened, Afghans were hopeful that they would 
help bring those who committed human rights violations, war crimes and crimes 
against humanity and criminal groups to justice. Unfortunately, there was no stomach 
to restore justice. The international community and the Karzai administration preferred 
short-term peace over justice. This Mr Mahmodi argued is very unfortunate, as justice 
cannot be compromised for peace. Today, the effects of the lack of justice are felt in 
Afghanistan. Issues that were experienced during the Taliban rule are resurfacing. 
Meanwhile, Afghanistan is party to the Geneva Conventions and their additional 
protocols and has also ratified the Rome Statute establishing the International Criminal 
Court. These strong legal frameworks apply in Afghanistan. Moreover, the constitution 
proclaims the rights and freedoms of the citizens. In that context the Afghanistan 
Independent Human Rights Commission was established to monitor the state and 
individuals and to counter any incidents. The Commission thereby provides something 
that is otherwise missing in Afghanistan, the monitoring of human rights and the 
protection and promotion of them. It also provides a critique of the government on 
violations and abuses of human rights. The Commission reports to the president 
and parliament and is honoured and pleased to see some results. Among the tasks 
of the Commission is reporting about IHL and its application. He further elaborated 
on some of the elements of IHL in Afghanistan’s context and how IHL has not been 
observed and largely violated. He also explained the legal and practical challenges of 
IHL in the country context and the lack of respect for the law on the part of both the 
anti-government and pro-government forces.  Moreover, the Commission is involved 
in investigations, e.g. in relation to the recent incidents in Kunduz, and it sometimes 
assists the international community in establishing and engaging in dialogues. In 
that regard Mr. Mahmodi mentioned that there is a degree of implementation of 
international law in Afghanistan, however, gross and serious violations of human 
rights remain, mentioning the Kunduz case.  
Mr. Mahmodi turned his attention to the Afghan security forces. He mentioned the 
role of the Commission in training activities at the Afghan National Army Officers’ 
Academy (ANAOA). In general, the Afghan security forces face a tremendous challenge 
and have to confront numerous kinds of criminal behaviour. In this context, institutions 
like the Independent Human Rights Commission have an important role to play. He 
also commented on some of the actions taken against members of the Army who have 
committed crimes against civilians.  As a final comment, Mr Mahmodi emphasized 
the importance of the values and principles underpinning IHL and that IHL must be 
enforced and protected in Afghanistan. 

41
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
Session II. From the left: Analyst Kristoffer Nilaus Tarp, Director Mohammed Musa Mahmodi, 
Professor Adeel Khan & Major Steen Kjærgaard. (Archive of RDDC, 2015)
Professor Adeel Khan, “The Implementation and education of IHL in Paki-
stan” 
The presentation by Professor Adeel Khan bore the title “the implementation and 
education of IHL in Pakistan”. However, Professor Khan soon departed from the subject 
of IHL and instead spent time outlining one of his aspects of his presentation which was 
about the greater picture of the security situation. Professor Khan believes that nowadays 
IHL principles and rules have entered the public domain and it is in large part because 
of the strong relationship between armed conflict and acts of terrorism. It was questioned 
whether IHL has a role to play in addressing terrorism and what that role is.  Further 
Professor Khan emphasized that the tremendous challenge posed by terrorism in Pakistan 
and the importance of understanding the local context when asking how to create stable 
states in compliance with IHL/HR. 
Professor Adeel Khan clarified his background as a social scientist. He has studied IHL 
and HRL, but he argued that as long as the context is not taken into account, IHL and 
HRL are merely words. In all societies, realities about how the average human being 
thinks about how to conduct his or her life provides a starting point for everything 
else. Professor Khan argued that the bigger picture is missing in the discussion on 
IHL and HRL, Civilians still bear the brunt of armed conflicts and have remained the 
primary victims of violations of IHL committed by both State parties and non-State 
armed groups. Pakistan has a population of 190 million people. In Denmark there 
are 5.5 million. 140 million people in Pakistan are young people. This means that if 

42
Conference Proceedings
1% of Pakistani youth were extremists or terrorists, it would amount to 1.4 million. 
These realities provide the source of an ongoing conflict.
Professor Khan argued that awareness of realities as those described above are not based 
on scholarly analysis, but rather awareness is based on common sense. The amount of 
people and the presence of conflict inevitably create frictions in Pakistani society. For 
instance, the number of displaced persons is enormous and for decades Pakistan has 
been hosting the largest Refugee population, currently more than 2.5 million Afghan 
refugees live in Pakistan. One example concerning internal displacement in one out 
of eleven districts showed that, while more than hundred thousand have returned to 
their homes, almost two hundred thousand remain displaced. Nationally in Pakistan 
up to eight hundred thousand persons are internally displaced. The magnitude of 
scales in Pakistan make it difficult to apply the rules in letter and spirit. However, the 
Pakistani case can also teach the rest of the world about the challenges. 
Using his own experiences, Professor Khan gave an example of an attack against 
a university and illustrated the gravity of the situation with private photos. He, 
furthermore, explained how he goes through seven checkpoints in order to reach his 
workplace in Islamabad. Combined with the huge issue of displaced people and the 
problems connected to providing these with the necessary food, water, education, 
etc., Professor Khan argued that in such circumstances IHL and HRL is not the first 
priority. He stated that “we cannot always go into the use of the best practices of IHL 
and HRL in extreme situations like this”. 
Turning to the violent attacks experienced by the Pakistani population, Professor 
Khan, gave an example of an American drone strike killing 22 people at a funeral. He 
stated that Pakistan has no problem with Americans conducting GWOT, but a with 
the misuse of force. He then described the challenge of terrorism within Pakistan. 
Statistically Pakistan being second only to Afghanistan as the country with most 
terrorist attacks in the region Terrorist attacks started long before 9/11. Most attacks 
are unattributed, and therefore no single movement or terrorist organisation can be 
held responsible. This automatically creates problems for the law enforcing agencies if 
they follow strictly legalistic approaches while dealing with suspects involved in such 
activities Than there is the issue of rest of the attacks being attributed to 18 different 
perpetrators. 
In the end Professor Khan argued that there should be a universal use and good 
practise of international law. However, the local picture must be kept in mind while 
implementing IHL. 

43
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
Session 3 - IHL at the international level – strategic guidance
Commander Kenneth Øhlenschlæger Buhl, “Sustainability versus Idealism”
The presentation by Commander Kenneth Øhlenschlæger Buhl concerned sustainability 
versus idealism in IHL. By applying political science theories of international relations, in 
particular Classical Realism and the English School, different perspectives on IHL were 
discussed. In the end, Commander Buhl argued that IHL can only be fully understood 
if it is viewed in the broader context of the function it serves in the international society 
of states.
Commander Kenneth Øhlenschlæger Buhl started by introducing the term 
sustainability. Sustainability, in a military context is a term often used in relation to 
logistics. However, in a legal context relevant to IHL, the term can be defined as the 
process of implementing and maintaining norms that are accepted as the basis for 
the use of force, even when the opponent is not adhering to the same rules, especially 
non-state actors in non-international armed conflicts.
A helpful tool to discuss sustainability in IHL is found in political science debates 
between the schools of realism and idealism or liberalism. Realism, which is reflected 
in IHL principle of military necessity, emphasises state centrism, sovereignty, 
power and state interest in an international society absent of an “international 
central government”. In this regard, restrictions in war fighting may be perceived as 
detrimental to survival of the state. Liberalism on the other hand emphasises human 
progress, individual rights and limitations of the powers of the state. 
From a liberalist perspective, an advanced civilization spares the lives of unarmed 
civilians, whereas a primitive civilization does not. Different doctrines and arguments 
about IHL reveal an inherent balance between the two schools of thought, which for 
example is reflected in Pictet’s efficiency doctrine that states that “The validity of the 
Geneva Conventions “(D)oes not depend only on their being the expression of a moral 
ideal transcending all purely legal considerations; it depends also on the reciprocal true 
interests of States….”.
Digging deeper into the schools of political science, Commander Buhl, gave an 
introduction to Classical Realism and the English School. A Classical Realist’s 
argument in favour of international law would be that it reduces risk, as it increases the 
ability to calculate the behaviour of other states. States will observe international law 
from a cost/benefit perspective. They will only violate the law, when their fundamental 
interests are at stake, and perhaps not even then. Other Classical Realist rationales 
would be that international law provides a language for dialogue and reconciliation 
based on the point that “all wars must come to an end”. 

44
Conference Proceedings
Session III. Commander Kenneth Øhlenschlæger Buhl giving his presentation. (Archive of RDDC, 
2015)
While Classical Realism takes a unilateral state perspective, the English School focuses 
on the system of states. Within this school, it can be argued that order (among states) 
is essential in maintaining the international society, and international law is one of 
many elements that promotes order.  IHL promotes order by maintaining an exclusive 
position for states in comparison to non-state actors; it facilitates states’ interests by 
providing a legal basis for the use of force in non-international armed conflict; it 
offers a common set of norms and it facilitates a quick return to peace after conflict. 
Conclusively, IHL establishes norms that promote the maintenance of the system of 
states.
The application of these theories to IHL shows that IHL has a function in international 
relations that goes far beyond fulfilling realist ideas of humanity. It provides a 
benchmark for what is considered acceptable behaviour, both in the relations between 
states in international armed conflicts and towards a state’s own population in intra-
state wars. IHL reduces risks in war and promotes the peace process that will eventually 
have to take place. Moreover, although it is sometimes claimed that IHL is out-dated, 
it has been capable of adapting to developments in armed conflicts. 

45
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
In his concluding remarks, Commander Buhl claimed that IHL can only be fully 
understood if it is viewed in its broader context of the function it serves in the 
international society of states.
Lieutenant Colonel Jerry Lane, ”The impact of IHL in Law Enforcement and 
Peace Support Operations”
Lieutenant Colonel Jerry Lane gave a thorough introduction to IHL, the challenges faced 
by IHL in today’s conflicts and the importance of IHL for the future. He emphasized 
the characteristics of today’s conflict and how these complicate the work of lawyers. 
Meanwhile, he stated that there is no legal vacuum in any of these conflicts and that a 
continued focus on IHL is important to enhance public support and prevent degeneration 
into savagery. 
Lieutenant Colonel Jerry Lane first noted his own subjectivity. As a lieutenant 
colonel, he works for the military and deals with tactical matters in relation to IHL. 
This provides for an inevitable institutional partiality and a professional focus that 
will affect a presentation, even if the presenter tries to find a balance and seeks to 
be nuanced about the subject. Having clarified this point, Lieutenant Colonel Lane 
went on to introduce IHL, its contemporary challenges, its theoretical and practical 
implications, as well as its future prospects. 
JP Morgan summarized a general caveat in a quote that grasps the environment of 
dilemma, in which IHL often needs to be applied: “I don’t hire a lawyer to tell me what 
I cannot do…” This illustrates a challenge of the legal professions, which is enhanced 
by the contemporary conflict environment. Today’s asymmetrical warfare departs 
from traditional warfare on which laws are built. Whereas traditional institutions 
must behave strictly within the law, the enemy does not. Furthermore, the enemy 
takes pleasure in the fact that institutions sometimes depart from legal regimes. 
Characteristic of today’s threats are actors who do not have a territory to defend, 
who survive amongst the population and exploit them, and who are not welcome 
parties to negotiations with a state actor. Moreover, these actors are potentially more 
violent; they are particularly occupied with “destroying the West”; they are financed 
and trained; they are difficult to penetrate; they effectively make use of technology and 
social media; and there is fear that they may gain access to WMD. These characteristics 
result in fear and increased security tensions. This leads to soldiers on the streets and 
other signals that the political systems, as we know them, are failing. 
That said, there is nothing new about asymmetry in warfare, but there is a great 
challenge as to how to apply IHL to asymmetrical contexts. Counterinsurgency 
(COIN) strategies that encounter asymmetrical enemies face various challenges. For 

46
Conference Proceedings
instance, insurgents hide in and amongst the population, they must be found and 
targeted without alienating the population, and the targeting must be legal, precise, 
proportionate and discriminate.
In theory a range of laws applies to COIN that limit the violence of warfighting. A 
minimum standard of protection for combatants and non-combatants and several 
provisions of a lex speciales for the conduct of conflict apply. However, in reality, laws 
are often honoured more in the breach than in the obligation. Moreover, a complicated 
legal architecture is necessary, For instance, there is considerable insecurity about how 
to apply laws to new weapon technologies. In general, it is questioned whether IHL 
enjoys full confidence as an effective legal regime.
Lieutenant Colonel Lane went on to note the different kinds of conflicts and which legal 
regimes apply to these. In particular he pointed to the increased applicability of human 
rights law and different national legal regimes. This also means that, for instance, in 
peacekeeping and peace support operations, no ready-made body of international 
law exists. Often several legal regimes apply at the same time. Importantly, Lieutenant 
Colonel Lane stated, there is no legal vacuum. A minimum standard of protection 
always applies and the police and military are the guarantors of this protection. He 
then elaborated on the enhanced role of soft law and human rights, as well as the role 
of ROE. The latter, he argued, incorporates strategic and tactical concerns into the 
legal regime. ROE is essential in guiding the behaviour of the soldier to comply with 
the law, while enhancing difficult tasks of today’s warfare. 
Finally, Lieutenant Colonel Lane discussed the future of IHL, arguing that a continued 
focus on IHL is important for various reasons. These included IHL as a way to maintain 
public support, as a safeguard for fundamental human rights, as a way to diminish 
adverse effects of conflict and as a way to prevent degeneration into savagery.
Professor Frederik Harhoff, “IHL – A path toward reconciliation”
The presentation by Professor Frederik Harhoff concerned “IHL - a path toward 
reconciliation”. Professor Harhoff presented and discussed different approaches to the post-
conflict situation, including the establishment of truth and reconciliation mechanisms 
and war crime tribunals. Importantly, he argued that the myths that drive conflicts are 
often overlooked in the post-conflict situation. The drafting of UN mandates and the role 
of the military should be more adept at breaking down these myths.
Professor Frederik Harhoff started out by clarifying that the role of IHL in reconciliation 
is limited. Often other concerns take up greater space in post-conflict situations. 
Professor Harhoff went on to explain his background, including seven years as a judge 
for the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. He stated that his 

47
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
presentation concerned general considerations of reconciliation, and not Afghanistan 
or Pakistan specifically. 
When a conflict ends, the intensity of violence is lowered. Consequently, a degree of 
peace exists, within which society must find its footing and re-establish, if possible, 
a feeling of normality; this is the period and process of so-called Transitional Justice. 
In this process a whole range of measures may be considered. In some cases priority 
is given to the establishment of dialogue by using regional or international mediators 
to facilitate discussions between the former warring parties. In some cases priority 
is given to financial inputs to re-establish and rebuild institutions. In other cases, the 
placement of peacekeeping forces may be deployed to keep violence from reappearing. 
Truth and reconciliation mechanisms may also be established to confront perpetrators 
and victims with one another and thereby reconcile the parties. Finally, in some cases 
criminal prosecutions in domestic or international war crime tribunals are put in 
place to deal with atrocities and provide justice and judicial acknowledgement of the 
victims’ suffering. 
Out of these options described above, which is the better solution? The context of the 
conflict must be taken into consideration. Arguably, the degree of physical violence and 
the existence of foreign interests in the conflict may influence the speed by which the 
wounds of the war are healed. The advantage of truth and reconciliation procedures 
is that they are voluntary, constructive, informal and cooperative; here the focus is 
on establishing a dialogue. Criminal trials, on the other hand, are involuntary, guilt-
driven, formal and confrontational with no room for dialogue between the perpetrator 
and the victim.
Professor Harhoff turned to the case of former Yugoslavia. In this case, the entire 
conflict was based on myths about the intentions of the warring parties. Professor 
Harhoff argued that everybody was led to believe that they hated the other side and 
eventually the myths gradually became the perceived reality. This leads to an important 
point, namely, that when armed forces enter a conflict area they must support the 
breakdown of myths that drive the conflict. Often this need to break down myths is 
overlooked. 
Professor Harhoff explained that when dealing with post-conflict situations, the 
negotiators often tend to deal with one side, typically the winning side; they focus on 
one understanding of the conflict and disregard the other. The better option, obviously, 
is to focus on the unified vision of the state which may allow for both parties to 
cooperate in the process of building up the country. This was the process in Finland 
following the First Word War. 

48
Conference Proceedings
In Former Yugoslavia, all three parties claimed that they were the victims and that 
they were victims of the same crimes. This shows the need for careful consideration 
of how to proceed in the post-conflict situation. Professor Harhoff argued that from 
a military perspective, concerns should begin with the deconstruction of myths. Such 
myths are currently present in Syria, Afghanistan and in Pakistan; if possible, they 
must be addressed and broken down. In this context, the drafting of mandates for the 
UN Peacekeeping missions is important to the extent in which they can specify the 
role of the peace-keepers in various confidence-building measures. 
Dr. Annemarie Peen Rodt, “UN perspective – protection of civilians” 
Dr. Annemarie Peen Rodt started out by noting the importance of combining studies of 
politics and law. She then turned to the specific issue of Protection of Civilians (POC) in 
a UN context. She explained how the meaning of POC is debated. It may refer to the very 
broadly defined ability to live one’s life, or it may be narrowly defined as the protection 
of civilians against certain crimes. Hence POC is both about the building of ‘protective 
environments’ in partnership with local and regional actors, and it is about the physical 
protection of civilians under threat, e.g. by robust (military) means. 
In a UN context, explicit civilian protection mandates have been assigned by the 
Security Council since 1999. For instance, a POC mandate was seen in Sierra Leone. In 
practice mandates include unarmed and armed strategies, civilian and military means. 
They involve local, regional and international actors. Often POC mandates are seen 
in the context of UN peace operations. As such POC applies to 98% of peacekeepers. 
Moreover, peacekeepers are increasingly mandated to protect civilians. Some succeed 
in doing this while others struggle to manage the task. This latter challenge illustrates 
a need to be specific about what POC is in a given context and how it is achieved.
Dr. Rodt went on to address the current debate on POC. Among POC advocates are 
Western donors, African troop contributing countries, UN practitioners, and the 
UN Secretary-General and regional organisations. Every couple of years (at least) the 
Secretary-General reports on how the UN is doing with regards to POC. Advocates 
argue that there is a need for the UN to take on a robust role in relation to POC. Sceptics 
include Latin American and Asian troop contributing countries. These actors often 
point to the limited feasibility in implementing increasingly ambitious UN mandates, 
i.e. the lack of resources and the gap between capabilities and expectations.

49
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
Session III. Dr. Annemare Peen Rodt giving her presentation. (Archive of RDDC, 2015)
Interestingly, although sceptics exist, the debate on POC is not so much about whether 
we should protect civilians, but how we should protect them. Several institutions 
have made recommendations on how to conduct or improve the implementation of 
POC. Dr. Rodt went through different examples. Among these was the High-Level 
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO) recommendations. These state 
that UN POC mandated missions should work more closely with local communities 
and NGOs to build ‘protective environments’, provide frank, clear and well-informed 
assessments (incl. resource requirements) to the SC and advice on mandate adjustment, 
where resources and capabilities do not match mandates. Contributing countries must 
train, equip and command to enable POC, advise the SC on obstacles (e.g. delayed 
deployment) and request appropriate support, provide regular updates to the SC, incl. 
necessary changes to plans, mandates and resources. National caveats beyond those 
accepted by the Secretariat should be considered as disobedience of a lawful command. 
The SC should establish reporting and accountability requirements for non-UN forces 
authorized to POC. The Secretary-General has further emphasized wide and universal 
participation in missions as vital to their effectiveness and credibility. Moreover, he 
has called on Member States to contribute to peace operations by providing practical 
and political support. Dr. Rodt, finally, referred to the work of the Danish Institute 
for International Studies on POC implementation. In the end, she argued, political 
will to engage with POC is essential. 

50
Conference Proceedings
Closing Session
Key note address: Ambassador Franz Michael-Mellbin, “EU perspective on im-
plementation of IHL in ANSF”
Representing the EU perspective and experience of training, Ambassador Franz Michael 
Melbin provided insight into the training of Afghan police forces in IHL and HRL. Starting 
from the outset of the EU as a security and development actor, the Ambassador discussed 
the present training doctrines and the difficulties that follow from different and coexisting 
doctrines. Several issues and challenges were highlighted, and the role and view of the 
EU as a proponent of a HRL approach to the training was emphasized.
Ambassador Franz Michael Melbin presented the EU perspective on training. He 
started by pointing out the character of the EU as a security actor and its role in 
Afghanistan. Importantly, the ambition of the EU is to act in a comprehensive manner, 
combining security and development strategies. In Afghanistan, more than anywhere 
else, the EU has been able to explore the comprehensive approach through its normative 
and operational activities.
Ambassador Melbin went on to discuss the training of police forces by the EU. In 
the context of IHL, the ICRC (International Committee of the Red Cross) has made 
a special case of Afghanistan. Interestingly, not a single word mentions the police 
forces. Meanwhile, the police forces are important. These deal with 75% of all incidents 
involving insurgents in Afghanistan. Therefore they are key to the ongoing fight. 
Concurrently, the number of civilian casualties in Afghanistan is on the rise. The 
incidents, the Ambassador specifies, are related to the ANSF and a lack of guidance 
by NATO at the operational level. There is need for further debate on this matter. 
With regards to policing, there are two doctrines. One is an internationally imposed 
and funded doctrine. This doctrine emphasizes counterinsurgency. Hence, the US 
trained tens of thousands in a manner designed to take part in counterinsurgency. 
Consequently, these forces are in fact combat forces. Another doctrine has been 
pushed forward by the EU, concerned with civilian police and funded by development 
funds. From the EU perspective, police forces must apply HRL and national police 
enforcement frameworks. Whereas, the US doctrine is likely to embrace a more IHL 
related framework. The biggest distinction between the doctrines may be found in 
how to apply force and whether it should be case specific or threat specific. Indeed this 
concerns whether activities should be based on an HRL or IHL mindset. Inevitably, 
having the two doctrines function simultaneously creates confusion.
Ambassador Melbin argued that the dilemma of legal frameworks is related to a 
question of whether the ANSF is legally sound and morally astute. The fact is that the 

51
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
role of ANSF is difficult to fit in one or another legal framework. Sometimes forces 
may have to move from an HRL to IHL frameworks. Recent events in Kunduz provide 
an example. Here police forces floated from one role to another. Such situations are 
incredibly difficult and Afghan forces struggle with this reality. The only real way to 
solve it is for the Afghan government to make up its mind about what to do. Moreover, 
international donors have to set high standards for funding and demand development 
in certain directions. However, there is a challenge related to how to balance high 
standards and realities in Afghanistan. 
In practise the presence of different doctrines create a schism between what may be 
termed Green Police Forces and Blue Police Forces. Green Police Forces are forces 
that have added a few weeks of training against terrorists to their training. Blue Police 
Forces are forces that have been through a more comprehensive policing school. The 
EU is pushing towards a blue policing strategy. Meanwhile the two doctrines have to 
work alongside each other. 
The EU has tried to focus on training the core level of police. Efforts include the 
development of a curriculum, meanwhile incorporating several issues of national 
law, HRL and public statements. Moreover, the EUs efforts include a focus on specific 
cases in order to contextualize the learning. Apart from these training efforts, the EU 
actively asserts its role as a political actor. Hence, the EU tries to induce and inspire 
in terms of values and policies.
Closing Remarks
Head of the Pakistani delegation Brigadier Sarfraz Muhammad from and head of the 
Afghan delegation Mr. Mohammad Munir Ghiyasi delivered the closing remarks at the 
conference.
Brigadier Sarfraz Muhammad
Brigadier Muhammad noticed that in particular the workshop proceedings had 
substantiated the need for training in the present security environment. He emphasized 
that to deal with strategic issues, ROE constitute an important starting point. He was, 
furthermore, convinced that separately the ambitions of IHL and training cannot be 
reached, but together they can. These were words of optimism, pointing to a light at 
the end of the tunnel.
Brigadier Muhammad argued that IHL constitutes a modern dimension of warfare 
illustrating that warfare is not only about killing, but that warfare is also about morality. 
It is, as he mentioned, the application of politics by other means. This also means that 
it is possible to work together to minimize and mitigate negative effects.

52
Conference Proceedings
IHL, Brigadier Muhammad stated, is not a fixed endpoint. Rather it is a constantly 
evolving body of law. This is crucial, as war and technology are likewise evolving. In 
order to deal with tomorrow’s threats, IHL must remain flexible. Engaging with IHL 
includes working with common and recurring threats, as well as with progressive and 
new threats. Keeping this in mind, Pakistan has an elaborate training regime and a 
Centre of Excellence for Human Rights. The training curriculum encompasses IHL/
HRL. Moreover, IHL/HRL functions at both the strategic and conceptual level in 
Pakistan. It is believed to be a noble cause and a moral task.
Brigadier Muhammad turned to address the involvement of external actors. He 
noted the tendency of Denmark to base its foreign policy on coalitions, to create 
partnerships and involve stakeholders. Policies towards other countries are about 
proportionality, about building capacity, while keeping the capacity, influence and 
scope of the contribution in mind. To engage in partnerships and coalitions, it is 
important to understand one another. Moreover, it is important to have a common 
legal framework, while also having an understanding for local laws. While all of us 
are human beings, we are all our own and we all have distinct backgrounds. 
The peace process in Afghanistan must be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. This 
statement has implications of importance to partnering countries. It demands that 
Afghans are trained in a manner that makes it possible for them to take over. This 
regards the transfer of technologies and it regards the more substantial transfer of 
IHL, including bureaucracy and legal advisors. The trained Afghans must be asked 
to train other Afghans. This will enable the gradual handing over of responsibilities. 
Meanwhile strategic guidance must be offered on a continuing basis. 
Finally, Brigadier Muhammad mentioned his appreciation and gratefulness toward 
the RDDC. The conference had succeeded in making all participants better informed. 
Perhaps most important, the conference had made a contribution through bringing 
together actors to share and gain from each other’s knowledge. He ended his closing 
remark on the note that “together we can, together we will”.
Mr. Mohammad Munir Ghiyasi
Mr. Mohammad Munir Ghiyasi started out thanking the RDDC for hosting the 
conference. He then showed great appreciation for the Danish involvement in the 
Afghan conflict and expressed his condolences for the Danish families that have lost 
their loved ones to the conflict.
Mr. Ghiyasi then turned to the core challenge faced by Afghans in terms of IHL. As 
such, the ANSF are implementing IHL 95 percent of the time. At the same time the 

53
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
Taliban is violating IHL 95 percent of the time. Meanwhile, the IHL training program 
is one of the successful programs in Afghanistan. 
Having laid out the general picture of IHL in Afghanistan, Mr. Ghiyasi outlined 
three issues. First, with regards to bilateral relations, he emphasized the need for real 
cooperation between Pakistan and Afghanistan. Progress is hampered because of 
attacks. With regards to regional relations, Afghans are intent on enhancing regional 
cooperation. Afghans should achieve the peace in Afghanistan, but the Asian programs 
represent important and useful achievements. With regards to the international level, 
Mr. Ghiyasi emphasized that there should not be any difference in the attention and 
responses that attacks generate. He stated, that failure in Afghanistan means failure 
in the region.

54
Conference Proceedings
Aftermath
Way Ahead: Perspectives on IHL in the capacity building of security 
forces
As expressed during the conference, capacity building is essential to achieve stable 
societies and lasting peace in countries, which have and are suffering from violence. 
It remains a priority of Danish foreign engagements, for instance, in Afghanistan.
The focus of the conference on the education in IHL/HRL provided interesting 
perspectives on capacity building of security forces. Arguably, the success of security 
forces subject to capacity building will be measured against the ability to create stability 
combined with the ability to live up to international standards of IHL and HRL. As 
pointed out several times during the conference, the achievement of long-term peace 
is believed to derive from both these measures.
The policy recommendations outlined in the beginning of the Conference Report 
point to the broadness of the subject. Among various considerations were an emphasis 
on the role of values, the role of IHL/HRL to the post-conflict situation, the need for 
continuing education, the need for contextual and local awareness and the need for 
clarity on which laws to apply. 
Altogether, the conference was a welcomed initiative, considering the debate at the 
conference and the importance attached to the topic by participants. Meanwhile, these 
initial engagements with the implementing of IHL in the education of security forces in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan highlighted the topic’s potential in terms of capacity building 
efforts and ambitions of upholding international standards of law. On several occasions 
during the conference, further efforts and research were requested. This concerns the 
link between IHL and objectives of achieving legitimate forces leading to stable and 
peaceful societies, the methods of training and the internalisation of values able to 
create institutional cohesion and support standards of IHL/HRL.
Reflections in the wake of the conference by key note speaker and 
workshop leader Professor Charles Garraway
As is known, I had expressed concern early in the concept development process of 
this Conference in that I was not convinced that sufficient attention had been paid to 
the wider geo-strategic picture in the region.  Neither Afghanistan nor Pakistan are 
homogeneous communities – even within Government and military circles – and 
therefore there was a need to identify the “right” target audience.  Even then, fortunes 

55
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
change quickly.  I had pointed out an earlier UK initiative involving a nearby country 
where the UK had identified a key military figure who had been brought to the UK, 
convinced of the need for the rule of law – and then sacked on his return!  
My concerns were increased on arrival in Copenhagen when the two delegations 
seemed to be “lop-sided” in that the Pakistan delegation appeared to consist principally 
of military, supported by academics, whilst the Afghan delegation seemed to have 
no military and be made up primarily of Government officials.  The problems here 
became apparent when the opening Afghan speaker almost openly accused Pakistan of 
supporting the Taliban insurgency.  However, the Pakistan delegation, most of whom 
seemed to come from line regiments with an almost British view as to the role of the 
military in politics, did not rise to the bait.  
However, that was almost the low point.  From that point on the Conference atmosphere 
improved markedly, helped by the very clear attempts by the “home team” to make 
the participants feel at home and relaxed.  By the end, whilst tensions remained, there 
was a much more cooperative atmosphere.  The comment was, however, made by 
one Workshop Rapporteur that his Workshop had suffered from not having a single 
Afghan representative and, whilst I do not have the details, I wonder whether most of 
the Workshops were similarly divided.  There was little to no Afghan representation 
in my Workshop either.
The headline subject was “international humanitarian law” (IHL) but there seemed 
to be some disagreement as to exactly what was referred to.  Whilst Gary Solis and I 
adopted a traditional approach to the definition of IHL, I came under some criticism 
for claiming that the principles of IHL went back millennia as far as ancient China 
and were to be found in all the great philosophies and civilizations of the world.  It 
was argued by one academic, based in Denmark, that IHL was a Christian concept 
coming from St Augustine and St Thomas Aquinas whilst another Pakistani academic 
argued that IHL was a regional concept and thus Islam could pick and choose what 
they found compatible with Islamic belief.  This was such a basic issue that it is difficult 
to see how one can discuss how IHL can contribute to capacity building until there 
is agreement on what IHL consists of.  Not only is this basic but it is also a crucial 
matter as it flows into the increasing attempt to create an Islamic/Christian divide, 
precisely the dialogue that many in the extremist community want.  Furthermore, if 
there is disagreement as to the application of the “western concept” of IHL to Islamic 
States, then there is a difficulty in Western States seeking to persuade Islamic States 
as to the usefulness of IHL since they will inevitably approach it from a traditional, 
universal angle.

56
Conference Proceedings
My overall impression of the Conference was that, whilst it may not have achieved 
the aims of the organisers, it was useful in that it encouraged discussion and raised 
a number of key issues, such as the nature of IHL, which will need to be considered 
further.  The problem is that this is essentially a debate amongst Islamic scholars.  There 
are those at the extreme end (Daesh, Al Qaeda etc.) who adopt a 7th Century view of 
Islamic law;   there are those more in the middle (as represented at the Conference) 
who consider that Islamic law is separate from IHL in its “Western” form and it is 
to Islamic law that they must look for guidance; and there are those who consider 
that IHL and Islamic law are compatible and that Islamic law is reflected in IHL. 
Unfortunately, that view was not expressed by any of the Islamic scholars whom I 
spoke to at the Conference though it is strongly argued by many Islamic scholars in 
the West.  I heard an excellent presentation recently by Dr Anicée Van Engeland (part 
Iranian, part-French) from Cardiff University.2 
It was discussed whether the project should be extended further in the region to 
include India and Sri Lanka.  Bearing in mind, the basic issue that I have raised as to 
the relationship of IHL and Islamic Law, I would advise against this at this stage as it 
would bring in yet further religious and doctrinal complications.
Charles Garraway
12th of December 2015
Perspective from Kabul: Lessons learned and way ahead
By the Danish Embassy in Kabul
General Remarks:
•	
Generally the conference was perceived positively by the Afghan delegation,
including the practicalities and arrangement of the conference.
•	
Useful discussion on the IHL from different angles in a more relaxed atmosphere
than the previous one that was held in Islamabad.
•	
Time for discussions needs to equal the number of participants in the dialogue
and the Afghan delegation could be better prepared in the future conferences.
An Afghan delegation took part in the conference on International Humanitarian Law 
(IHL) in capacity building of security forces in Copenhagen from November 24 – 27, 
2015. The focus of the conference was on “Implementing IHL in the education of 
(2) 
 http://www.law.cardiff.ac.uk/contactsandpeople/VanEnglanA

57
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
security forces in Afghanistan and Pakistan”, given the lessons learned from the past 
military engagements of Pakistan and Afghanistan against terrorism/insurgency, as 
well as the experiences gained during the Danish forces’ deployment in Afghanistan. 
The Afghan delegation consisted of 11 independent researchers and government 
officials, including Mr. Amrullah Saleh who had received a special invitation to the 
conference. The Royal Danish Embassy in Kabul partook with one member of the 
local staff and the Defence Attaché.
Given the experience from the previous conference in Islamabad, the Afghan delegation 
had prepared for tough discussions; however, it felt that the Pakistani delegation tried 
to avoid unfruitful comments while, according to the Afghan delegation, some of 
the Pakistani speakers in the Islamabad conference were perceived to be one-sided 
in unfruitful way.
As a whole, the Afghan delegation found the conference useful in terms of promoting 
IHL values in the military structures; it perceived the seminar also as a good 
opportunity to discuss issues related to mainly, but not exclusively, International 
Humanitarian Law practices in Afghanistan and Pakistan. 
Critical remarks:
1) The Afghan delegation felt that a wider role had been considered for Pakistan in the 
panel, thereby allowing the Pakistani moderator to take advantage of the opportunity 
and handle the session in a partial manner by giving fewer chances for Afghans to
express themselves.
2) The Afghan delegation also recognized that they could participate more actively
and robustly; therefore, the members, at a future opportunity like this one, will be
selected with circumspection, so that people with better knowledge on the subject
and with the language capacity to communicate their knowledge will be chosen to
represent Afghanistan.
3) The Afghan side also felt that the time, given the number of participants in the
conference, was short and hence suggested that future conferences of this sort be
planned in accordance with the number of participants. Meanwhile, the Afghan
delegation suggested that if conferences like this one were held in the countries that
have a robust role in the Afghanistan-Pakistan region, the result would prove even
more fruitful.

58
Conference Proceedings
Perspective from Pakistan: Lessons learned and way ahead
By the Danish Embassy in Islamabad
General remarks:
•	
The delegation from Pakistan was well composed of participants who all had a
substantial interest in the conference subjects, which all were perceived as both
relevant for the Pakistani military and the region in general.
•	
The content of the conference was at a high level.
•	
The conference was successful in generating new contacts for the Pakistani edu-
cation environment.
•	
The organizers of the conference had managed gather many prominent Danish
speakers such as the Danish Defence Commander and a former secretary of state.
•	
The workshop track and discussions in minor groups was highly valued as op-
posed to having it at a large conference hall
Way ahead:
It is essential that the results of the collaboration between the Pakistani military and 
academic environment within the frames of the Peace and stabilization Fund program 
is anchored at the RDDC. Furthermore, anchoring projects with the same person, 
ensures the continuity and promotes trust building when planning with the Pakistani 
authorities. It further ensures that the embassy does not get directly engaged in the 
development of the program, academic contents, practical planning and the evaluations 
of the activities. This strengthens the collaboration between Denmark and Danish 
authorities and corresponding institutions in Pakistan which is a most beneficial side 
effect of the stabilization program in general. This was further underlined by a request 
from the British defense attaché in Islamabad, a British officer who participated in the 
conference and is responsible for the British stability program in Pakistan. The officer 
was thrilled as to how the conference was planned and underwent. He extended a wish 
to use the conference design for future British conferences and suggested Denmark 
and Britain could execute joint activities or coordinate them forwardly.
It is therefore recommended that the same work division continues to further enhance 
trust building among the regional states in the stability program between the different 
authorities.

59
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
In relation to the planning process it is important that the initial steps takes place well 
ahead of the conference in accordance with the longer Pakistani decision and approval 
process. Especially if specific participants or content is requested for the conference. 
It created some problems when the Pakistani Ministry of Defense backed out in the 
last in the last moment, since they had to give a presentation. Finding a replacement 
was extremely difficult with such a short notice within the Pakistani approval process. 
We succeeded in the last moment, thanks to a great flexibility from the Pakistan’s 
Defense Academy.
Critical remarks:
The composition of delegates from Pakistan and Afghanistan was unfortunate for 
several reasons:
•	
It resulted in unevenly perspectives on the presentations and especially the pos-
sibilities for the subsequent discussion. The afghan approach was more political 
and overall while the Pakistani focused more on how the theoretical part could 
be implemented in their education of officers and military units.
•	
It can cause problems within the Pakistani military when their officers only 
meet political, bureaucratic or civil-academic participants, as there exist a sharp 
separation between these groups in Pakistan. To accommodate the continued 
collaboration with the Pakistani military we should therefor strive for a more 
balanced participation between Afghan and Pakistani participants.

60
Conference Proceedings
Contributors (in order of appearance)
Professor Gary Solis is a retired United States Military Academy professor of 
law, as well as a retired Marine Corps lieutenant colonel with two tours of duty in 
Vietnam.  His doctorate (law of war) is from the London School of Economics & 
Political Science, where he later taught for three years.  He now teaches the law of war 
at Georgetown University Law Center, in Washington D.C. 
Professor Charles Garraway was for 30 years an officer in the British Army Legal 
Services before retiring as a Colonel to become the Stockton Professor of International 
Law at the United States Naval War College in 2004/5.  He is now a Fellow of the 
Human Rights Centre at the University of Essex.  He has extensive experience in both 
the academic and practical sides of operational law.
Team Leader Oves Anwar, at the Conflict Law Centre, Research Society of International 
Law, Pakistan. Mr. Anwar leads a research team focusing on the application of IHL 
in Pakistan. He has been involved in the reform of counter-terrorism and criminal 
justice sector laws. He has also served as a lecturer at the National Defence University, 
Islamabad, the Police College, Sihala, and The Institute of Legal Studies, Islamabad.
Knut D. Asplund heads the Indonesia Programme of the Norwegian Centre for 
Human Rights, University of Oslo . An anthropologist by training who has conducted 
extensive field work in Indonesia. He has worked on a range of human rights topics 
with specific relevance for Indonesia. He has been in charge of the Programme’s 
work addressing security sector reform and trainings for military (TNI) personnel 
in human rights and the law of armed conflict since 2006. Other fields of interest 
includes violent conflicts and their solutions; security sector reform; legal traditions 
and comparative law; the relationship between traditional belief systems and world 
religions (particularly Islam); indigenous traditions of knowledge.
Dean Ole Kværnø has been the dean of the Royal Danish Defence College since 2013. 
Prior to this in his latest assignments he served as dean of the Baltic Defence College 
and later director of the Institute for Strategy at the Royal Danish Defence College. 
His latest operational tour was to Afghanistan in 2009 and 2010  as Chief Governance 
in Regional Command South of ISAF.
Analyst Kristoffer Nilaus Tarp is a researcher at the Danish Institute for International 
Studies currently focusing UN peace operations; International Humanitarian Law and 
Human Rights in military training and capacity building; and South-South cooperation 

61
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
in fragile and conflict-affected states.. Before joining DIIS he worked as an advisor 
to the United Nations in numerous countries and contexts and as a policy adviser to 
the European Union’s Special representative to Afghanistan.  
Director Mohammad Musa Mahmodi is the Executive Director of the Afghanistan 
Independent Human Rights Commission (AIHRC). He is a committed Human Rights 
activist and lawyer with over 10 years of experience in the field of promotion and 
protection of human rights in Afghanistan. He has worked as Director of Bamyan 
Regional Office of the AIHRC and Deputy Country Director of National Democratic 
Institute for International Affairs (NDI) in Afghanistan. Mohammad Musa Mahmodi 
is also a board member of the Free and Fair Election Foundation of Afghanistan 
(FEFA). He holds a law degree from Kabul University and earned his MPA and MAIR 
from Maxwell School of Syracuse University, USA. 
Professor Adeel J Khan, Esquire is Adjunct Professor at NDU (Pakistan & USA) 
and visiting professor at ten Pakistani/international universities, NDU’s.  Currently 
honorary consultant to the Office of the German Special Envoy on AFPAK Affairs, and 
a long time expert on regional issues in South/Central Asia and the Middle East. He 
also works as an independent researcher and as practising lawyer.  He has on several 
occasions been advisor to national and foreign entities, and worked as advisor for 
EU, Asian Development Bank and World Bank. 
Major Steen Kjaergaard, aged 45, is a Military Analyst at the Royal Danish Defense 
Colllege (RDDC), Institute for Strategy. His field of research is International law, 
Strategy and intra-state conflicts. His military background is in Armored Recce, 
Mechanized Infantry and Intelligence. The Major is an external lecturer  to the 
International Institute of Humanitarian Law, in San Remo, Italy and the Norwegian 
Center for Human Rights (NCHR).
Commander Kenneth Øhlenschlæger Buhl, researcher at the Institute for Strategy, 
Royal Danish Defence College. Kenneth Øhlenschlæger Buhl holds a Ph.D. and has 
been with the Institute for Strategy since 2014 after he returned from Afghanistan 
from his fifth tour in international missions as legal advisor. His research area covers 
international law focusing on laws of war and laws of the sea. He will participate with 
a speech, as a panel moderator and as work shop leader. 
Lieutenant Colonel Jerry Lane is a serving military lawyer with twenty eight years’ 
service in the Infantry Corps and more recently the Defence Forces Legal Service of 
the Defence Forces of Ireland. He is currently posted to the Defence Forces Training 
Centre with responsibility for military legal advice and with additional responsibility 
for instruction in military law, international humanitarian law, ethics and ethical de-

62
Conference Proceedings
cision making. He has been the Director of the Conduct of PSO Course at the IIHL, 
Sanremo since 2010. 
Professor Frederik Harforff works at University of Southern Denmark. He has many 
years of experiences within the research fields of International Humanitarian Law, 
Law of Armed Conflicts, International Criminal Legal Procedure, Legal Philosophy, 
Law and Religion. Professor Harhoff has published numerous articles on public 
international law and international humanitarian law and he was a former judge on 
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia 2007-2013.
Associate Professor Annemarie Peen Rodt works at the Institute for Strategy, Royal 
Danish Defence College. Her research appraises Protection of Civilians (POC), 
Responsibility to Protect (R2P) and Prevention of Mass Atrocities – primarily in 
wider Europe and Sub-Saharan Africa. Ongoing H2020 research: ‘Preventing and 
Responding to Conflict: Developing EU Civilian Capabilities’ and ‘Improving 
Effectiveness of Capabilities in EU Conflict Prevention’. Recent books: The European 
Union and Military Conflict Management: Defining, Evaluating and Achieving Success; 
and with Stefan Wolff, Self-determination after Kosovo. Collaborative activities include 
establishing the Nordic Protection Platform and participating in the Task Force on 
EU Prevention of Mass Atrocities.
Ambassador Franz Michael-Mellbin is EU’s Special Representative (EUSR) in 
Afghanistan. He was appointed to this position as of 1 September 2013. He was 
until recently Special Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan for the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, Denmark. He served as Danish Ambassador to Afghanistan and 
Japan. Mr. Franz Skjold Mellbin has a long and prosperous carrier within the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, where served as head of the Stabilization Unit under the Danish 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Head of deputy in Brasilia, Bonn and Beijing. Mr. 
Franz has a master degree of law from University of Copenhagen where he has taught 
Human Rights and Constitutional Law.

63
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
Conference Programme
INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW IN CAPACITY BUILDING OF 
SECURITY FORCES
Venue: DGI-byen, Copenhagen, November 24-27, 2015
Day 0 – November 24th3
Time
Speaker
Country
Activity
Venue
1900-2100
Icebreaker3 
DGI-
byen
Day 1 - November 25th
Opening Session 
Time
Speaker
Country
Activity
Venue
0815-0900
Coffee and registration 
/ dividing participants in 
workshops 
DGI-
byen
0900-0910
Rear Admiral
Nils Wang, RDDC
DK
Opening Remarks
0910-0925
Danish Chief of 
Defence, General 
Peter Bartram
DK
The importance of IHL in 
capacity building of security 
forces
0925-0940
Mr. Amrullah 
Saleh, Former 
chief NDS
AFG
Sustainable IHL-
implementation in ANSF
0940-0955
Brig. Muhammad 
Nadeem Aslam, 
Director Plans, 
JSHQ
PAK
Pakistani experiences in IHL 
0955-1000
Small Break
(3)  Dress code: All: Lounge suit
Point of contacts: 	Conference Coordinator, David Vestenskov, Phone: +45 4131 9576	
Assisting Conference Coordinator, Mads G. Pedersen, Phone: +45 4131 6960	
Coordinator of Logistics, Jan Kragh, Phone: +45 2125 8103 
 Dress code for academic programme: Civil: Lounge suit. Military: Uniform

64
Conference Proceedings
Day 1
Keynote address
Time
Speaker
Country
Activity
Venue
1000-1040
Professor Gary D. 
Solis, Georgetown 
University
U.S.
“Changing the military culture”
DGI-
byen
1040-1100
Q & A
1100-1130
Coffee Break
Day 1 
Session 1
IHL – Universal understanding & context driven implementation  
Time
Speaker
Country
Activity
Venue
1130-1200
Keynote address: 
Professor Charles 
Garraway
UK
“The interplay between IHL 
and HR” 
DGI-
byen
1200-1220
Oves Anwar, 
Conflict Law 
Centre,
Research Society 
of International 
Law, Pakistan
PAK
International Humanitarian 
Law and Human Rights Law: 
Pakistan’s Domestic Legal 
Framework
1220-1240
Programme 
Director Knut 
D. Asplund, 
Norwegian Centre 
for Human Rights
NO
The Norwegian Centre for 
Human Rights approach to 
teaching Human Rights & 
IHL to the Indonesian Armed 
Forces (TNI) - a case study of 
Capacity Building
1240-1315
Moderator: Dean 
Ole Kværnø 
(RDDC)
DK
Panel discussion / Q & A
1315-1400
Lunch

65
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
Day 1
Session 2 
IHL in a domestic & UN perspective – the cases of UN, Afghanistan and Pakistan
Time
Speaker
Country
Activity
Venue
1400-1420
Analyst Kristoffer 
Nilaus Tarp, 
Danish Institute 
for International 
Studies
DK
Status on implementation of 
IHL in Afghanistan
DGI-
byen
1420-1440
Mohammad Musa 
Mahmodi, AIHRC
AFG
International Humanitarian 
law and internal conflict
1440-1500
Professor Adeel 
Khan, NDU 
Pakistan, Quaid-e. 
Azam University, 
International Islamic 
University
PAK
Implementation and education 
of IHL in Pakistan
1500-1545
Moderator, Major 
Steen Kjærgaard 
(RDDC)
DK
Panel discussion / Q & A
Day 2 – November 26th
Session 3 
IHL at the international level – strategic guidance
Time
Speaker
Country
Activity
Venue
0830-0900
Coffee, registration of new 
participants
DGI-
byen
0900-0920
Commander 
Kenneth 
Øhlenschlæger 
Buhl, RDDC
DK
“Sustainability vs. idealism”
0920-0940
Lieutenant Colonel 
Jerry Lane, Irish 
MoD
IR
The impact of IHL in Law 
Enforcement / Peace Support 
Operations.
0940-1000
Professor Frederik 
Harhoff, University 
of Southern 
Denmark 
DK
IHL – A path toward 
reconciliation 
1000-1020
Dr. Annemarie Peen 
Rodt, RDDC
DK
UN perspective – protection 
of civilians

66
Conference Proceedings
1020-1105
Moderator: 
Professor Adeel 
Khan
PAK
Panel discussion / Q & A
1105-1115
Outline & practical remarks, 
Workshops
1115-1145
Coffee Break
Day 2
Session 4 - Workshops
Time
Speaker
Country
Activity
Venue
1145-1300
Workshop 
DGI-
byen
1300-1400
Lunch
1400-1545
Workshop
1545-1600
Closing Remarks, Outline of 
Workshop presentations
Day 2
Dinner45
Time
Speaker
Country
Activity
Venue
1800-22004
Dinner speaker:
Per Stig Møller, 
Former Danish 
Minister of Foreign 
Affairs
DK
Sightseeing and dinner5 
Frederiks- 
berg 
Castle
Day 3 – November 27th
Session 5 – Presentation of conclusions
Time
Speaker
Country
Activity
Venue
0900-0910
Workshop leader 1
Presentation of conclusions 
DGI-
byen
0910-0920
Workshop leaders 
2+3
Presentation of conclusions 
0920-0930
Workshop leader 4
Presentation of conclusions
0930-0940
Workshop leader 5
Presentation of conclusions
0940-1020
Workshop leaders
Panel discussion Q & A
1020-1115
Coffee break
(4)  Pick-up time at DGI at 1730
(5)  Dress code: All: lounge suit

67
International Humanitarian Law in Capacity Building
Day 3
Closing session
Time
Speaker
Country
Activity
Venue
1115-1145
Ambassador 
Franz Michael 
Melbin, EU Special 
representative in 
Afghanistan 
DK
“EU perspective on 
implementation of IHL in 
ANSF”
1145-1155
Brigadier Sarfraz 
Muhammad, 
Pakistan GHQ
PAK
Closing remarks
1155-1205
Mr. Mohammad 
Munir Ghiyasi, 
Afghan MoFA
AFG
Closing remarks
1205-1215
Dean Ole Kværnø, 
RDDC
DK
Final words
1215-1300
Farewell lunch
Workshops
1) Sustainability versus idealism. This workshop will emphasize the importance
of context-driven implementation of educative tools, which sometimes requires
compromises in relation to Western interpretation of IHL. (Workshop-leader: Kenneth
Øhlenschlæger Buhl, RDDC)
2-3)  IHL at the front & Lessons learned – transfer of knowledge. Knowledge transfer 
between Danish military officers with practical experience within the field and Afghan 
and Pakistani officers who are part of their respective militaries’ educative environment. 
Implementation of IHL Integration of legal advisors in the military organizations will 
also serve as a key element in lessons learned. How much responsibility can one
expect the common soldiers to show when operating in a theatre of war? (Workshop
leaders: Adeel Khan, NDU Pakistan, Quaid-e. Azam University, International Islamic 
University; Afghan researcher TBD, and Steen Kjærgaard, RDDC)
4) Universal IHL. The role of international institutions, such as the UN and EU, in
creating sustainable progress when implementing IHL in fragile states – Changing the 
military culture – How to? (Workshop-leader: Gary D. Solis, Georgetown University)
5) International Humanitarian Law & International Human Rights Law. The
interplay between IHL and HR in situations of armed conflict. Case: Counter-
insurgency operation, including the capture of insurgents. (Workshop-leader: Charles 
Garraway)

Conference Proceedings No 1 (b) 2016
Conference: International Humanitarian Law
in Capacity Building of Security Forces
Guiding Warfare to Reach Sustainable 
Peace
Implementing International Humanitarian Law in 
the Education of Security Forces in Afghanistan 
and Pakistan
Report and policy recommendations based on the 
conference organized by the Royal Danish Defence 
College in Copenhagen, November 2015
By David Vestenskov, Consultant, Dean’s Ofﬁ ce, 
RDDC  & Line Drewes, Project Researcher, RDDC

