XIV
CONIC SECTIONS. APOLLONIUS OF PEEGA
A. HISTORY OF CONICS UP TO APOLLONIUS
Discovery of the conic sections by Menaechmus.
WE have seen that Menaeehmus solved the problem of the
two mean proportionals (and therefore the duplication of
the cube) by means of conic sections, and that he is credited
with the discovery of the three curves; for the epigram of
Eratosthenes speaks of ' the triads of Menaechmus', whereas
of course only two conies, the parabola and the rectangular
hyperbola, actually appear in Menaechmus's solutions. The
question arises, how did Menaechmus come to think of obtain-
ing curves by cutting a cone ? On this we have no informa-
tion whatever. Democritus had indeed spoken of a section of
a cone parallel and very near to the base, which of course
would be a circle, since the cone would certainly be the right
circular cone. But it is probable enough that the attention
of the Greeks, whose observation nothing escaped, would be
attracted to the shape of a section of a cone or a cylinder by
a plane obliquely inclined to the axis when it occurred, as it
often would, in real life; the case where the solid was cut
right through, which would show an ellipse, would presum-
ably be noticed first, and some attempt would be made to
investigate the nature and geometrical measure of the elonga-
tion of the figure in relation to the circular sections of the
same solid; these would in the first instance be most easily
ascertained when the solid was a right cylinder; it would
then be a natural question to investigate whether the curve
arrived at by cutting the cone had the same property as that
obtained by cutting the cylinder. 
As we have seen, the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DISCOVERY OF THE CONIC SECTIONS 
111
observation that an ellipse can be obtained from a cylinder
as well as a cone is actually made by Euclid in his Phaeno-
mena: 'if, says Euclid, 'a cone or a cylinder be cut by
a plane not parallel to the base, the resulting section is a
section of an acute-angled cone which is similar to a dvpeo?
(shield).' 
After this would doubtless follow the question
what sort of curves they are which are produced if we
cut a cone by a plane which does not cut through the
cone completely, but is either parallel or not parallel to
a generator of the cone, whether these curves have the
same property with the ellipse and with one another, and,
if not, what exactly are their fundamental properties respec-
tively.
As it is, however, we are only told how the first writers on
conies obtained them in actual practice. We learn on the
authority of Geminusx that the ancients defined a cone as the
surface described by the revolution of a right-angled triangle
about one of the sides containing the right angle, and that
they knew no cones other than right cones. Of these they
distinguished three kinds; according as the vertical angle of
the cone was less than, equal to, or greater than a right angle,
they called the cone acute-angled, right-angled, or obtuse-
angled, and from each of these kinds of cone they produced
one and only one of the three sections, the section being
always made perpendicular to one of the generating lines of
the cone; the curves were, on this basis, called ' section of an
acute-angled cone' (= an ellipse), c section of a right-angled
cone' (= a parabola), and 'section of an obtuse-angled cone '
(= a hyperbola) respectively. These names were still used
by Euclid and Archimedes.
Menaechmus's probable procedure.
Menaechmus's constructions for his curves would presum-
ably be the simplest and the most direct that would show the
desired properties, and for the parabola nothing could be
simpler than a section of a right-angled cone by a plane at right
angles to one of its generators. Let OBC (Fig. 1) represent
1 Eutocius, Comm. on Conies of Apollonius.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

112
CONIC SECTIONS
a section through the axis OL of a right-angled cone, and
conceive a section through AG (perpendicular to OA) and at
right angles to the plane of the paper.
FIG. 1.
If P is any point on the curve, and PN perpendicular to
AG, let BO be drawn through N perpendicular to the axis of
the cone. Then P is on the circular section of the cone about
BG as diameter.
Draw AD parallel to BG, and DFy GG parallel to OL meet-
ing AL produced in Fy G. Then AD, AF are both bisected
by 01.
PN = y, AN= 
x,
If now
But B, A, G, G are concyclic, so that
Therefore
= AN.AF
= AN.2AL.
%f = AN. 2 A L
= 2AL.x,
and 2 AL is the c parameter' of the principal ordinates y.
In the case of the hyperbola Menaechmus had to obtain the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MENAECHMUS'S PROCEDURE
113
particular hyperbola which we call rectangular or equilateral,
and also to obtain its property with reference to its asymp-
totes, a considerable advance on what was necessary in the
case of the parabola. Two methods of obtaining the particular
hyperbola were possible, namely (1) to obtain the hyperbola
arising from the section of any obtuse-angled cone by a plane
at right angles to a generator, and then to show how a
rectangular hyperbola can be obtained as a particular case
by finding the vertical angle which the cone must have to
give a rectangular hyperbola when cut in the particular way,
or (2) to obtain the rectangular hyperbola direct by cutting
another kind of cone by a section not necessarily perpen-
dicular to a generator.
(1) Taking the first method, we draw (Fig. 2) a cone with its
vertical angle BOC obtuse. Imagine a section perpendicular
to the plane of the paper and passing through AG which is
perpendicular to OB. Let GA produced meet CO produced in
A\ and complete the same construction as in the case of
the parabola.
FIG. 2.
In this case we have
PN* = BF.
= AN.NG.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

114 
CONIC SECTIONS
But, by similar triangles,
NG:AF=NC:AD
= A'N:AA'.
A W
Hence 
PN* = AN. A'N. 
~
= ^k. AN. A'N,
which is the property of the hyperbola, AA' being what we
call the transverse axis, and 2 AL the parameter of the principal
ordinates.
Now, in order that the hyperbola may be rectangular, we
must have 2 AL: A A' equal to 1. The problem therefore now
is: given a straight line A A', and AL along A'A produced
equal to %AA',to find a cone such that L is on its axis and
the section through AL perpendicular to the generator through
A is a rectangular hyperbola with A'A as transverse axis. In
other words, we have to find a point 0 on the straight line
through A perpendicular to AAr such that OL bisects the
angle which is the supplement of the angle A'OA.
This is the case if A'O : OA = A'L: LA = 3:1;
therefore 0 is on the circle which is the locus of all points
such that their distances from the two fixed points A', A
are in the ratio 3:1. This circle is the circle on KL as
diameter, where A'K: KA = A'L: LA = 3:1. 
Draw this
circle, and 0 is then determined as the point in which AO
drawn perpendicular to AAr intersects the circle.
It is to be observed, however, that this deduction of a
particular from a more general case is not usual in early
Greek mathematics; on the contrary, the particular usually
led to the more general. Notwithstanding, therefore, that the
orthodox method of producing conic sections is said to have
been by cutting the generator of each cone perpendicularly,
I am inclined to think that Menaechmus would get his rect-
angular hyperbola directly, and in an easier way, by means of
a different cone differently cut. Taking the right-angled cone,
already used for obtaining a parabola, we have only to make
a section parallel to the axis (instead of perpendicular to a
generator) to get a rectangular hyperbola.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MENAECHMUS'S PROCEDURE
115
Q
M
/
\
A
N
For, let the right-angled cone HOK (Fig. 3) be cut by a
plane through ArAN parallel
to the axis OM and cutting the
sides of the axial triangle HOK
in A', A, N respectively. Let
P be the point on the curve
for which PN is the principal
ordinate. Draw OG parallel
to HK. We have at once 
H/- 
-\ 
^TT-^
\
FIG. 3.
= CN2-CA\ 
since MK = OM, and MN = OG = CA.
This is the property of the rectangular hyperbola having A'A
as axis. To obtain a particular rectangular hyperbola with
axis of given length we have only to choose the cutting plane
so that the intercept A'A may have the given length.
But Menaechmus had to prove the asymptote-property of
his rectangular hyperbola. As he can hardly be supposed to
have got as far as Apollonius in investigating the relations of
the hyperbola to its<asymptotes, it is probably safe to assume
that he obtained the particular property in the simplest way,
i. e. directly from the property of the curve in relation to
its axes.
FIG. 4.
If (Fig. 4) CR9 CR' be the asymptotes (which are therefore
12
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

116 
CONIC SECTIONS
at right angles) and A'A the axis of a rectangular hyperbola,
P any point on the curve, PN the principal ordinate, draw
PK} PK' perpendicular to the asymptotes respectively. Let
PIT produced meet the asymptotes in R, R'.
Now, by the axial property,
= RN2-PN2
= RP.PR'
= 2PK.PK\ 
since LPRK is half a right angle ;
therefore 
PK .PK' = ±CA2.
Works by Aristaeus and Euclid.
If Menaechmus was really the discoverer of the three conic
sections at a date which we must put at about 360 or 350 B.C.,
the subject must have been developed very rapidly, for by the
end of the century there were two considerable works on
conies in existence, works which, as we learn from Pappus,
were considered worthy of a place, alongside the Conies of
Apollonius, in the Treasury of Analysis. 
Euclid nourished
about 300 B.C., or perhaps 10 or 20 years earlier; but his
Conies in four books was preceded by a work of Aristaeus
which was still extant in the time of Pappus, who describes it
as ' Bve books of Solid Loci connected (or continuous, <rvvexrj)
with the conies \ 
Speaking of the relation of Euclid's Conies
in four books to this work, Pappus says (if the passage is
genuine) that Euclid gave credit to Aristaeus for his dis-
coveries in conies and did not attempt to anticipate him or
wish to construct anew the same system. In particular,
Euclid, when dealing with what Apollonius calls the three-
and four-line locus, ' wrote so much about the locus as was
possible by means of the conies of Aristaeus, without claiming
completeness for his demonstrations \ l We gather from these
remarks that Euclid's Conies was a compilation and rearrange-
ment of the geometry of the conies so far as known in his
1 Pappus, vii, p. 678. 4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

WORKS BY ARISTAEUS AND EUCLID 
117
time, whereas the work of Aristaeus was more specialized and
more original.
'Solid loci' and 'solid problems'.
' Solid loci' are of course simply conies, but the use of the
title ' Solid loci' instead of ' conies' seems to indicate that
the work was in the main devoted to conies regarded as loci.
As we have seen,c solid loci' which are conies are distinguished
from ' plane loci \ on the one hand, which are straight lines
and circles, and from ' linear loci' on the other, which are
curves higher than conies. There is some doubt as to the
real reason why the term ' solid loci' was applied to the conic
sections. We are told that k plane ' loci are so called because
they are generated in a plane (but so are some of the higher
curves, such as the quadratrix and the spiral of Archimedes),
and that ' solid loci' derived their name from the fact that
they arise as sections of solid figures (but so do some higher
curves, e.g. the spiric curves which are sections of the aireipa
or tore). But some light is thrown on the subject by the corre-
sponding distinction which Pappus draws between ' plane',
' solid' and (linear' problems.
* Those problems ', he says, ' which can be solved by means
of *a straight line and a circumference of a circle may pro-
perly be called plane; for the lines by means of which such
problems are solved have their origin in a plane. Those,
however, which are solved by using for their discovery one or
more of the sections of the cone have been called solid; for
their construction requires the use of-surfaces of solid figures,
namely those of cones. There remains a third kind of pro-
blem, that which is called linear; for other lines (curves)
besides those mentioned are assumed for the construction, the
origin of which is more complicated and less natural, as they
are generated from more irregular surfaces and intricate
movements/1
The true significance of the word 'plane' as applied to
problems is evidently, not that straight lines and circles have
their origin in a plane, but that the problems in question can
be solved by the ordinary plane methods of transformation of
1 Pappus, iv, p. 270. 5-17.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

118 
CONIC SECTIONS
areas, manipulation of simple equations between areas and, in
particular, the application of areas; in other words, plane
problems were those which, if expressed algebraically, depend
on equations of a degree not higher than the second.
Problems, however, soon arose which did not yield to ' plane'
methods. One of the first was that of the duplication of the
cube, which was a problem of geometry in three dimensions or
solid geometry. Consequently, when it was found that this
problem could be solved by means of conies, and that no
higher curves were necessary, it would be natural to speak of
them as ' solid' loci, especially as they were in fact produced
from sections of a solid figure, the cone. The propriety of the
term would be only confirmed when it was found that, just as
the duplication of the cube depended on the solution of a pure
cubic equation, other problems such as the trisection of an
angle, or the cutting of a sphere into two segments bearing
a given ratio to one another, led to an equation between
volumes in one form or another, i. e. a mixed cubic equation,
and that this equation, which was also a solid problem, could
likewise be solved by means of conies.
Aristaeus's Solid Loci.
The Solid Loci of Aristaeus, then, presumably dealt with
loci which proved to be conic sections. In particular, he must
have discussed, however imperfectly, the locus with respect to
three or four lines the synthesis of which Apollonius says that
he found inadequately worked out in Euclid's Conies. The
theorems relating to this locus are enunciated by Pappus in
this way:
cIf three straight lines.be given in position and from one and
the same point straight lines be drawn to meet the three
straight lines at given angles, and if the ratio of the rectangle
contained by two of the straight lines so drawn to the square
on the remaining one be given, then the point will lie on a
solid locus given in position, that is, on one of the three conic
sections. And if straight lines be so drawn to meet, at given
angles, four straight lines given in position, and the ratio of
the rectangle contained by two of the lines so drawn to the
rectangle contained by the remaining two be given, then in
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ARISTAEUS'S SOLID LOCI 
119
the same way the point will lie on a conic section given in
position.'*
The reason why Apollonius referred in this connexion, to
Euclid and not to Aristaeus was probably that it was Euclid's
work that was on the same lines as his own.
A very large proportion of the standard properties of conies
admit of being stated in the form of locus-theorems; if a
certain property holds with regard to a certain point, then
that point lies on a conic section. But it may be assumed
that Aristaeus's work was not merely a collection of the
ordinary propositions transformed in this way; it would deal
with new locus-theorems not implied in the fundamental
definitions and properties of the conies, such as those just
mentioned, the theorems of the three- and four-line locus.
But one (to us) ordinary property, the focus-directrix property,
was, as it seems to me, in all probability included.
Focus-directrix property known to Euclid.
It is remarkable that the directrix does not appear at all in
Apollonius's great treatise on conies. The focal properties of
the central conies are given by Apollonius, but the foci are
obtained in a different way, without any reference to the
directrix; the focus of the parabola does not appear at all.
We may perhaps conclude that neither did Euclid's Conies
contain the focus-directrix property; for, according to Pappus,
Apollonius based his first four books on Euclid's four books,
while filling them out and adding to them. Yet Pappus gives
the proposition as a lemma to Euclid's Surface-Loci, from
which we cannot but infer that it was assumed in that
treatise without proof. If, then, Euclid did not take it from
his own Conies, what more likely than that it was contained
in Aristaeus's Solid Loci ?
Pappus's enunciation of the theorem is to the effect that the
locus of a point such that its distance from a given point is in
a given ratio to its distance from a fixed straight line is a conic
section, and is an ellipse, a parabola, or a hyperbola according
as the given ratio is less than, equal to, or greater than unity.
1 Pappus, vii, p. 678. 15-24.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

120 
CONIC SECTIONS
Proof from Pappus.
The proof in the case where the given ratio is different from
unity is shortly as follows.
Let 8 be the fixed point, SX the perpendicular from 8 on
the fixed line. Let P be any point on the locus and
A
K A N SK' 
A'
A K N 
K'S
perpendicular to SX, so that SP is to NX in the given
ratio (e);
thus 
e2 = (PJV* + SN2): NX\
Take K on SX such that
then, if Kr be another point on SN, produced if necessary,
such that NK =. NK'y
The positions of N", K, Kf change with the position of P.
If Ay A' be the points on which N falls when K, K' coincide
with X respectively, we have
SAiAX = SN.FK =:e:l= SN:NKf= 
8A':A'X.
Therefore 
SX:SA = SK:SN= (l+e):e,
whence 
(1 + e): e = (SX - SK): (SA - SN)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

FOCUS-DIRECTRIX PROPERTY 
121
Similarly it can be shown that
(1 ~e):e = XK':A'N.
By multiplication, XK. XK':AN. A'N = (1 - e2): e2;
and it follows from above, ex aequali, that
PN2:AN.A'N=(l~e2):l,
which is the property of a central conic.
When e < 1, A and Af lie on the same side of X, while
JVUies on AA\ and the conic is an ellipse; when e > 1, A and
A' lie on opposite sides of X, while N lies on J/.4 produced,
and the conic is a hyperbola.
The case where e = 1 and the curve is a parabola is easy
and need not be reproduced here.
The treatise would doubtless contain other loci of types
similar to that which, as Pappus says, was used for the
trisection of an angle: I refer to the proposition already
quoted (vol. i, p. 243) that, if A, B are the base angles of
a triangle with vertex P, and /.B = 2LA, the locus of P
is a hyperbola with eccentricity 2.
Propositions included in Euclid's Conies.
That Euclid's Conies covered much of the same ground as
the first three Books of ApoUonius is clear from the language
of ApoUonius himself. Confirmation is forthcoming in the
quotations by Archimedes of propositions (1) 'proved in
the elements of conies', or (2) assumed without remark as
already known. The former class include the fundamental
ordinate properties of the conies in the following forms:
(1) for the ellipse,
PN2: AN. A'N = P'N'2: AN'. A'N' = BC2: AC2;
(2) for the hyperbola,
PN*: AN. A'N = P'N'2: AN'. A'N';
(3) for the parabola, PN2 
=pa.AN;
the principal tangent properties of the parabola;
the property that, if there are two tangents drawn from one
point to any conic section whatever, and two intersecting
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

122 
CONIC SECTIONS
chords drawn parallel to the tangents respectively, the rect-
angles contained by the segments of the chords respectively
are to one another as the squares of the parallel tangents;
the by no means easy proposition that, if in a parabola the
diameter through P bisects the chord QQ' in F, and QD is
drawn perpendicular to PV, then
QQ 
PPa
where pa is the parameter of the principal ordinates and p is
the parameter of the ordinates to the diameter PV.
Conic sections in Archimedes.
But we must equally regard Euclid's Conies as the source
from which Archimedes took most of the other ordinary
properties of conies which he assumes without proof. Before
summarizing these it will be convenient to refer to Archi-
medes's terminology. We have seen that the axes of an
ellipse are not called axes but diameters, greater and lesser;
the axis of a parabola is likewise its diameter and the other
diameters are 'lines parallel to the diameter', although in
a segment of a parabola the diameter bisecting the base is
the ' diameter' of the segment. The two ' diameters' (axes)
of an ellipse are conjugate. In the case of the hyperbola the
(diameter' (axis) is the portion of it within the (single-branch)
hyperbola; the centre is not called the ' centre', but the point
in which the ' nearest lines to the section of an obtuse-angled
cone' (the asymptotes) meet; the half of the axis (CA) is
' the line adjacent to the axis' (of the hyperboloid of revolution
obtained by making the hyperbola revolve about its' diameter'),
and A' A is double of this line. Similarly CP -is the line
' adjacent to the axis' of a segment of the hyperboloid, and
P'P double of this line. It is clear that Archimedes did not
yet treat the two branches of a hyperbola as forming one
curve; this was reserved for Apollonius.
The main properties of conies assumed by Archimedes in
addition to those above mentioned may be summarized thus.
Central- Conies.
1. The property of the ordinates to any diameter PP',
QV2:PV.P'V 
=
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

CONIC SECTIONS IN ARCHIMEDES 
123
In the case of the hyperbola Archimedes does not give
any expression for the constant ratios PN2\AN .A'N and
QV2:PV.P'V 
respectively, whence we conclude that he had
no conception of diameters or radii of a hyperbola not meeting
the curve.
2. The straight line drawn from the centre of an ellipse, or
the point of intersection of the asymptotes of a hyperbola,
through the point of contact of any tangent, bisects all chords
parallel to the tangent.
3. In the ellipse the tangents at the extremities of either of two
conjugate diameters are both parallel to the other diameter.
4. If in a hyperbola the tangent at P meets the transverse
axis in T, and PN is the principal ordinate, AN > AT. 
(It
is not easy to see how this could be proved except by means
of the general property that, if PP' be any diameter of
a hyperbola, QV the ordinate to it from Q, and QT the tangent
at Q meeting P'P in T, then TP: TP' = 
PV.P'V.)
5. If a cone, right or oblique, be cut by a plane meeting all
the generators, the section is either a circle or an ellipse.
6. If a line between the asymptotes meets a hyperbola and
is bisected at the point of concourse, it will touch the
hyperbola.
7. If x, y are straight lines drawn, in fixed directions respec-
tively, from a point on a hyperbola to meet the asymptotes,
the rectangle xy is constant.
8. If PN be the principal ordinate of P, a point on an ellipse,
and if NP be produced to meet the auxiliary circle in p, the
ratio pN: PN is constant.
9. The criteria of similarity of conies and segments of
conies are assumed in practically the same form as Apollonius
gives them.
The Parabola.
1. The fundamental properties appear in the alternative forms
: P'N/2= AN: AN\ or PN2 = pa. AN,
Q'Vf*=PV:PV', 
or 
QV*=p.PV.
Archimedes applies the term parameter (a irap av Svvavrat
at dirb ras TOfxa?) to the parameter of the principal ordinates
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

124 
CONIC SECTIONS
only: p is simply the line to which the rectangle equal to QV2
and of width equal to PV is applied.
2. Parallel chords are bisected by one straight line parallel to
the axis, which passes through the point of contact of the
tangent parallel to the chords.
3. If the tangent at Q meet the diameter PV in T} and QV be
the ordinate to the diameter, PV = PT.
By the aid of this proposition a tangent to the parabola can
be drawn (a) at a point on it, (6) parallel to a given chord.
4. Another proposition assumed is equivalent to the property
of the subnormal, NG = %pa*
5. If QQ' be a chord of a parabola perpendicular to the axis
and meeting the axis in M, while QVq another chord parallel
to the tangent at P meets the diameter through P in V, and
RHK is the principal ordinate of any point It on the curve
meeting PV in H and the axis in K, then PV:PH> 
or
= MK: KA ; ' for this is proved' (On Floating Bodies, II. 6).
Where it was proved we do not know; the proof is not
altogether easy.1
6. All parabolas are simila'r.
As we have seen, Archimede's had to specialize in the
parabola for the purpose of his treatises on the Quadrature
of the Parabola, Conoids and: Spheroids, Floating Bodies,
Book II, and Plane Equilibriums, Book II; consequently he
had to prove for himself a number of special propositions, which
have already been given in their proper places. A few others
are assumed without proof, doubtless as being easy deductions
from the propositions which he does prove. They refer mainly
to similar parabolic segments so placed that their bases are in
one straight line and have one common extremity.
1. If any three similar and similarly situated parabolic
segments BQX, BQ2, BQ3 lying along the same straight line
as bases (BQ1 < BQ2 < BQ3), and if E be any point on the
tangent at B to one of the segments, and EO a straight line
through E parallel to the axis of one of the segments and
meeting the segments in iJ3, R<l,,R1 respectively and BQ3
in 0, then
R3R2: 
R2RX 
= (Q2Q3 : BQ3). (BQ1: Q1Q2).
1 See Apollonius o/Perga, ed. Heath, p, liv.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

CONIC SECTIONS IN ARCHIMEDES 
125
2. If two similar parabolic segments with bases BQX, BQ2 be
placed as in the last proposition, and if BRXR2 be any straight
line through B meeting the segments in Rl9 R2 respectively,
BQ1:BQ2 = 
BR1:BR2.
These propositions are easily deduced from the theorem
proved in the Quadrature of the Parabola, that, if through E,
a point on the tangent at B, a straight line ERO be drawn
parallel to the axis and meeting the curve in R and any chord
BQ through B in 0, then
ER:R0 = B0:0Q.
3. On the strength of these propositions Archimedes assumes
the solution of the problem of placing, between two parabolic
segments similar to one another and placed as in the above
propositions, a straight line of a given length and in a direction
parallel to the diameters of either parabola.
Euclid and Archimedes no doubt adhered to the old method
of regarding the three conies as arising from sections of three
kinds of right circular cones (right-angled, obtuse-angled and
acute-angled) by planes drawn in each case at right angles to
a generator of the cone. Yet neither Euclid nor Archimedes
was unaware that the 'section of an acute-angled cone', or
ellipse, could be otherwise produced. Euclid actually says in
his Pkaenomena that ' if a cone or cylinder (presumably right)
be cut by a plane not parallel to the base, the resulting section
is a section of an acute-angled cone which is similar to
a 6vpeo$ (shield) \ 
Archimedes knew that the non-circular
sections even of an oblique circular cone made by planes
cutting all the generators are ellipses; for he shows us how,
given an ellipse, to draw a cone (in general oblique) of which
it is a section and which has its vertex outside the plane
of the ellipse on any straight line through the centre of the
ellipse in a plane at right angles to the ellipse and passing
through one of its axes, whether the straight line is itself
perpendicular or not perpendicular to the plane of the ellipse;
drawing a cone in this case of course means finding the circular
sections of the surface generated by a straight line always
passing through the given vertex and all the several points of
the given ellipse. The method of proof would equally serve
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

126 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
for the other two conies, the hyperbola and parabola, and we
can scarcely avoid the inference that Archimedes was equally
aware that the parabola and the hyperbola could be found
otherwise than by the old method.
The first, however, to base the theory of conies on the
production of all three in the most general way from any
kind of circular cone, right or oblique, was Apollonius, to
whose work we now come.
B. APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
Hardly anything is known of the life of Apollonius except
that he was born at Perga, in Pamphylia, that he went
when quite young to Alexandria, where he studied with the
successors of Euclid and remained a long time, and that
he flourished (yiyoi/e) in the reign of Ptolemy Euergetes
(247-222 B.c). Ptolemaeus Chennus mentions an astronomer
of the same name, who was famous during the reign of
Ptolemy Philopator (222-205 B.C.), and it is clear that our
Apollonius is meant. As Apollonius dedicated the fourth and
following Books of his Conies to King Attalus I (241-197 B.C.)
we have a confirmation of his approximate date. He was
probably born about 262 B.C., or 25 years after Archimedes.
We hear of a visit to Pergamum, where he made the acquain-
tance of Eudemus of Pergamum, to whom he dedicated the
first two Books of the Conies in the form in which they have
come down to us; they were the first two instalments of a
second edition of the work.
The text of the Conies.
The Conies of Apollonius was at once recognized as the
authoritative treatise on the subject, and later writers regu-
larly cited it when quoting propositions in conies. Pappus
wrote a number of lemmas to it; Serenus wrote a commen-
tary, as also, according to Suidas, did Hypatia. 
Eutocius
(fl. A.D. 500) prepared an edition of the first four Books and
wrote a commentary on them ; it is evident that he had before
him slightly differing versions of the completed work, and he
may also have had the first unrevised edition which had got
into premature circulation, as Apollonius himself complains in
the Preface to Book I.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE TEXT OF THE G0NIG8 
127
The edition of Eutocius suffered interpolations which were
probably made in the ninth century when, under the auspices
of Leon, mathematical studies were revived at Constantinople;
for it was at that date that the uncial manuscripts were
written, from which our best manuscripts, V (= Cod. Vat. gr.
206 of the twelfth to thirteenth century) for the Conies, and
W (= Cod. Vat. gr. 204 of the tenth century) for Eutocius,
were copied.
Only the first four Books survive in Greek; the eighth
Book is altogether lost, but the three Books V-VII exist in
Arabic. It was Ahmad and al-Hasan, two sons of Muh. b.
Musa b. Shakir, who first contemplated translating the Conies
into Arabic. They were at first deterred by the bad state of
their manuscripts; but afterwards Ahmad obtained in Syria
a copy of Eutocius's edition of Books I-IV and had them
translated by Hilal b. Abi Hilal al-Himsi (died 883/4).
Books V-VII were translated, also for Ahmad, by Thabit
b. Qurra( 826-901) from another manuscript. 
NasJraddm's
recension of this translation of the seven Books, made in 1248,
is represented by two copies in the Bodleian, one of the year
1301 (No. 943) and the other of 1626 containing Books V-VII
only (No. 885).
A Latin translation of Books I-IV was published by
Johannes Baptista Memus at Venice in 1537; but the first
important edition was the translation by Commandinus
(Bologna, 1566), which included the lemmas of Pappus and
the commentary of Eutocius, and was the first attempt to
make the book intelligible by means of explanatory notes.
For the Greek text Commandinus used Cod. Marcianus 518
and perhaps also Vat. gr. 205, both of which were copies of V,
but not V itself.
The first published version of Books V-VII was a Latin
translation by Abraham Echellensis and Giacomo Alfonso
Borelli (Florence, 1661) of a reproduction of the Books written
in 983 by Abu 1 Fath al-Isfahani.
The editio princeps of the Greek text is the monumental
work of Halley (Oxford, 1710). The original intention was
that Gregory should edit the four Books extant in Greek, with
Eutocius's commentary and a Latin translation, and that
Halley should translate Books V-VII from the Arabic into
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

128 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
Latin. Gregory, however, died while the work was proceeding,
and Halley then undertook responsibility for the whole. The
Greek manuscripts used were two, one belonging to Savile
and the other lent by D. Baynard; their whereabouts cannot
apparently now be traced, but they were both copies of Paris,
gr. 2356, which was copied in the sixteenth century from Paris,
gr. 2357 of the sixteenth century, itself a copy of V. For the
three Books in Arabic Halley used the Bodleian MS. 885, but
also consulted (a) a compendium of the three Books by 'Abdel-
melik al-Shirazi (twelfth century), also in the Bodleian (913),
(b) Borelli's edition, and (c) Bodl. 943 above mentioned, by means
of which he revised and corrected his translation when com-
pleted. Halley's edition is still, so far as I know, the only
available source for Books V-VII, except for the beginning of
Book V (up to Prop. 7) which was edited by L. Nix (Leipzig,
1889).
The Greek text of Books I-IV is now available, with the
commentaries of Eutocius, the fragments of Apollonius, &c,
in the definitive edition of Heiberg (Teubner, 1891-3).
Apollonius's own account of the Conies.
A general account of the contents of the great work which,
according to Geminus, earned for him the title of the ' great
geometer' cannot be better given than in the words of the
writer himself. The prefaces to the several Books contain
interesting historical details, and, like the prefaces of Archi-
medes, state quite plainly and simply in what way the
treatise differs from those of his predecessors, and how much
in it is claimed as original. The strictures of Pappus (or
more probably his interpolator), who accuses him of being a
braggart and unfair towards his predecessors, are evidently
unfounded. 
The prefaces are quoted by v. Wilamowitz-
Moellendorff as specimens of admirable Greek, showing how
perfect the style of the great mathematicians could be
when they were free from the trammels of mathematical
terminology.
Book I. General Preface.
Apollonius to Eudemus, greeting.
If you are in good health and things are in other respects
as you wish, it is well; with me too things are moderately
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE GONICS 
129
well. During the time I spent with you at Pergamum
I observed your eagerness to become acquainted with my
work in conies; I am therefore sending you the first book,
which I have corrected, and I will forward the remaining
books when I have finished them to my satisfaction. I dare
say you have not forgotten my telling you that I undertook
the investigation of this subject at the request of Naucrates
the geometer, at the time when he came to Alexandria and
stayed with me, and, when I had worked it out in eight
books, I gave them to him at once, too hurriedly, because he
was on the point of sailing; they had therefore not been
thoroughly revised, indeed I had put down everything just as
it occurred to me, postponing revision till the end. Accord-
ingly I now publish, as opportunities serve from time to time,
instalments of the work as they are corrected. In the mean-
time it has happened that some other persons also, among
those whom I have met, have got the first and second books
before they were corrected; do not be surprised therefore if
you come across them in a different shape.
Now of the eight books the first four form an elementary
introduction. The first contains the modes of producing the
three sections and the opposite branches (of the hyperbola),
and the fundamental properties subsisting in them, worked
out more fully and generally than in the writings of others.
The second book contains the properties of the diameters and
the axes of the sections as well as the asymptotes, with other
things generally and necessarily used for determining limits
of possibility (SiopLafjLot); and what I mean by diameters
and axes respectively you will learn from this book. The
third book contains many remarkable theorems useful for
the syntheses of solid loci and for diorismi; 
the most and
prettiest of these theorems are new, and it was their discovery
which made me aware that Euclid did not work out the
synthesis of the locus with respect to three and four lines, but
only a chance portion of it, and that not successfully; for it
was not possible for the said synthesis to be completed without
the aid of the additional theorems discovered by me. The
fourth book shows in how many ways the sections of cones
can meet one another and the circumference of a circle; it
contains other things in addition, none of which have been
discussed by earlier writers, namely the questions in how
many points a section of a cone or a circumference of a circle
can meet [a double-branch hyperbola, or two double-branch
hyperbolas can meet one another].
The rest of the books are more by way of surplusage
(7r€pLovo-ia(TTiK<0T€pa): one of them deals somewhat fully with
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

130 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
"minima and maxima, another with equal and similar sections
of cones, another with theorems of the nature of determina-
tions of limits, and the last with determinate conic problems.
But of course, when all of them are published, it will be open
to all who read them to form their own judgement about them,
according to their own individual tastes. Farewell.
The preface to Book II merely says that Apollonius is
sending the second Book to Eudemus by his son Apollonius,
and begs Eudemus to communicate it to earnest students of the
subject, and in particular to Philonides the geometer whom
Apollonius had introduced to Eudemus at Ephesus. There is
no preface to Book III as we have it, although the preface to
Book IV records that it also was sent to Eudemus.
Preface to Book IV.
Apollonius to Attalus, greeting.
Some time ago I expounded and sent to Eudemus of Per-
gamum the first three books of my conies which I have
compiled in eight books, but, as he has passed away, I have
resolved to dedicate the remaining books to you because of
your earnest desire to possess my works. I am sending you
on this occasion the fourth book. It contains a discussion of
the question, in how many points at most it is possible for
sections of cones to meet one another and the circumference
of a circle, on the assumption that they do not coincide
throughout, and further in how many points at most a
section of a cone or the circumference of a circle can meet the
hyperbola with two branches, [or two double-branch hyper-
bolas can meet one another]; and, besides these questions,
the book considers a number of others of a similar kind.
Now the first question Conon expounded to Thrasydaeus, with-
out, however, showing proper mastery of the proofs, and on
this ground Nicoteles of Cyrene, not without reason, fell foul
of him. The second matter has merely been mentioned by
Nicoteles, in connexion with his controversy with Conon,
as one capable of demonstration; but I have not found it
demonstrated either by Nicoteles himself or by any one else.
The third question and the others akin to it I have not found
so much as noticed by any one. All the matters referred to,
which I have not found anywhere, required for their solution
many and various novel theorems, most of which I have,
as a matter of fact, set out in the first three books, while the
rest are contained in the present book. These theorems are
of considerable use both for the syntheses of problems and for
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE C0N1CS 
131
diorismi. 
Nicoteles indeed, on account of his controversy
with Conon, will not have it that any use can be made of the
discoveries of Conon for the purpose of diorismi', he is,
however, mistaken in this opinion, for, even if it is possible,
without using them at all, to arrive at results in regard to
limits of possibility, yet they at all events afford a readier
means of observing some things, e.g. that several or so many
solutions are possible, or again that no solution is possible;
and such foreknowledge secures a satisfactory basis for in-
vestigations, while the theorems in question are again useful
for the analyses of diorismi. 
And, even apart from such
usefulness, they will be found worthy of acceptance for the
sake of the demonstrations themselves, just as we accept
many other things in mathematics for this reason and for
no other.
The prefaces to Books V-VII now to be given are repro-
duced for Book V from the translation of L. Nix and for
Books VI, VII from that of Halley.
Preface to Book V.
Apollonius to Attalus, greeting.
In this fifth book I have laid down propositions relating to
maximum and minimum 
straight lines. You must know
that my predecessors and contemporaries have only super-
ficially touched upon the investigation of the shortest lines,
and have only proved what straight lines touch the sections
andj conversely, what properties they have in virtue of which
they are tangents. For my part, 1 have proved these pro-
perties in the first book (without however making any use, in
the proofs, of the doctrine of the shortest lines), inasmuch as
1 wished to place them in close connexion with that part
of the subject in which I treat of the production of the three
conic sections, in order to show at the same time that in each
of the three sections countless properties and necessary results
appear, as they do with reference to the original (transverse)
diameter. The propositions in which I discuss the shortest
lines I have separated into classes, and I have dealt with each
individual case by careful demonstration; I have also con-
nected the investigation of them with the investigation of
the greatest lines above mentioned, because I considered that
those who cultivate this science need them for obtaining
a knowledge of the analysis, and determination of limits of
possibility, of problems as well as for their synthesis: in
addition to which, the subject is one of those which seem
worthy of study for their own sake. Farewell.
K 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

132 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
Preface to Book VI.
Apollonius to Attalus, greeting.
I send you the sixth book of the conies, which embraces
propositions about conic sections and segments of conies equal
and unequal, similar and dissimilar, besides some other matters
left out by those who have preceded me. In particular, you
will find in this book how, in a given right cone, a section can
be cut which is equal to a given section, and how a right cone
can be described similar to a given cone but such as to contain
a given conic section. And these matters in truth I have
treated somewhat more fully and clearly than those who wrote
before my time on these subjects. Farewell.
Preface to Book VII.
Apollonius to Attalus, greeting.
I send to you with this letter the seventh book on conic
sections. In it are contained a large number of new proposi-
tions concerning diameters of sections and the figures described
upon them; and all these propositions have their uses in many
kinds of problems, especially in the determination of the
limits of their possibility. Several examples of these occur
in the determinate conic problems solved and demonstrated
by me in the eighth book, which is by way of an appendix,
and which I will make a point of sending to you as soon
as possible. Farewell.
Extent of claim to originality.
We gather from these prefaces a very good idea of the
plan followed by Apollonius in the arrangement of the sub-
ject and of the extent to which he claims originality. The
first four Books form, as he says, an elementary introduction,
by which he means an exposition of the elements of conies,
that is, the definitions and the fundamental propositions
which are of the most general use and application; the term
1 elements' is in fact used with reference to conies in exactly
the same sense as Euclid uses it to describe his great work.
The remaining Books beginning with Book V are devoted to
more specialized investigation of particular parts of the sub-
ject. It is only for a very small portion of the content of the
treatise that Apollonius claims originality; in the first three
Books the claim is confined to certain propositions bearing on
the ' locus with respect to three or four lines'; and in the
fourth Book (on the number of points at which two conies
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE GONIGS 
133
may intersect, touch, or both) the part which is claimed
as new is the extension to the intersections of the parabola,
ellipse, and circle with the double-branch hyperbola, and of
two double-branch hyperbolas with one another, of the in-
vestigations which had theretofore only taken account of the
single-branch hyperbola. Even in Book V, the most remark-
able of all, Apollonius does not say that normals as' the shortest
lines' had not been considered before, but only that they had
been superficially touched upon, doubtless in connexion with
propositions dealing with the tangent properties. He explains
that he found it convenient to treat of the tangent properties,
without any reference to normals, in the first Book in order
to connect them with the chord properties. It is clear, there-
fore, that in treating normals as maxima and minima, and by
themselves, without any reference to tangents, as he does in
Book V, he was making an innovation; and, in view of the
extent to which the theory of normals as maxima and minima
is developed by him (in 77 propositions), there is no wonder
that he should devote a whole Book to the subject. 
Apart
from the developments in Books III, IV, V, just mentioned,
and the numerous new propositions in Book VII with the
problems thereon which formed the lost Book VIII, Apollonius
only claims to have treated the whole subject more fully and
generally than his predecessors.
Great generality of treatment from the beginning.
So far from being a braggart and taking undue credit to
himself for the improvements which he made upon his prede-
cessors, Apollonius is, if anything, too modest in his descrip-
tion of his personal contributions to the theory of conic
sections. 
For the 'more fully and generally* of his first
preface scarcely conveys an idea of the extreme generality
with which the whole subject is worked out. This character-
istic generality appears at the very outset.
Analysis of the Conies.
Book I.
Apollonius begins by describing a double oblique circular
cone in the most general way. Given a circle and any point
outside the plane of the circle and in general not lying on the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

134 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
straight line through the centre of the circle perpendicular to
its plane, a straight line passing through the point and pro-
duced indefinitely in both directions is made to move, while
always passing through the fixed point, so as to pass succes-
sively through all the points of the circle; the straight line
thus describes a double cone which is in general oblique or, as
Apollonius calls it, scalene. Then, before proceeding to the
geometry of a cone, Apollonius gives a number of definitions
which, though of course only required for conies, are stated as
applicable to any curve.
' In any curve,' says Apollonius, ' I give the name diameter to
any straight line which, drawn from the curve, bisects all the
straight lines drawn in the curve (chords) parallel to any
straight line, and I call the extremity of the straight line
(i.e. the diameter) which is at the curve a vertex of the curve
and each of the parallel straight lines (chords) an ordinate
(lit. drawn ordinate-wise, rerayfihcos 
KarfjyOai) to the
diameter/
He then extends these terms to a pair of curves (the primary
reference being to the double-branch hyperbola), giving the
name transverse diameter to any straight line bisecting all the
chords in both curves which are parallel to a given straight
line (this gives two vertices where the diameter meets the-
curves respectively), and the name erect diameter (6p6ia) to
any straight line which bisects all straight lines drawn
between one curve and the other which are parallel to any
straight line; the ordinates to any diameter are again the
parallel straight lines bisected by it. Conjugate diameters in
any curve or pair of curves are straight lines each of which-
bisects chords parallel to the other. Axes are the particular
diameters which cut at right angles the parallel chords which
they bisect; and conjugate axes are related in the same way
as conjugate diameters. Here we have practically our modern
definitions, and there is a great advance on Arehimedes's
terminology.
The conies obtained in the most general way from an
oblique cone.
Having described a cone (in general oblique), Apollonius
defines the axis as the straight line drawn from the vertex to
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONICS, BOOK I 
135
the centre of the circular base. 
After proving that all
sections parallel to the base are also circles, and that there
is another set of circular sections subcontrary to these, he
proceeds to consider sections of the cone drawn in any
manner. Taking any triangle through the axis (the base of
the triangle being consequently a diameter of the circle which
is the base of the cone), he is careful to make his section cut
the base in a straight line perpendicular to the particular
diameter which is the base of the axial triangle. (There is
no loss of generality in this, for, if any section is taken,
without reference to any axial triangle, we have only to
select the particular axial triangle the base of which is that
diameter of the circular base which is
at right angles to the straight line in
which the section of the cone cuts the
base.) Let ABO be any axial triangle,
and let any section whatever cut the
base in a straight line DE at right
angles to BC; if then PM be the in-
tersection of the cutting plane and the
axial triangle, and if QQ' be any chord
in the section parallel to DE, Apollonius
proves that QQ' is bisected by PM. 
In
other words, PM is a diameter of the section. Apollonius is
careful to explain that,
f if the cone is a right cone, the straight line in the base (DE)
will be at right angles to the common section (PM) of the
cutting plane and the triangle through the axis, but, if the
cone is scalene, it will not in general be at right angles to PM,
but will be at right angles to it only when the plane through
the axis (i. e. the axial triangle) is at right angles to the base
of the cone' (I. 7).
That is to say, Apollonius works out the properties of the
conies in the most general way with reference to a diameter
which is not one of the principal diameters or axes, but in
general has its ordinates obliquely inclined to it. The axes do
not appear in his exposition till much later, after it has been
shown that each conic has the same property with reference
to any diameter as it has with reference to the original
diameter arising out of the construction; the axes then appear
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

136
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
as particular cases of the new diameter of reference. The
three sections, the parabola, hyperbola, and ellipse are made
in the manner shown in the figures. In each case they pass
through a straight line DE in the plane of the base which
is at right angles to BC, the base of the axial triangle, or
to BC produced. The diameter PM is in the case of the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONICS, BOOK I 
137
parabola parallel to AG\ in the case of the hyperbola it meets
the other half of the double cone in P'; and in the case of the
ellipse it meets the cone itself again in P\ 
We draw, in
the cases of the hyperbola and ellipse, AF parallel to PM
to meet BG or BG produced in F.
Apollonius expresses the properties of the three curves by
means of a certain straight line PL drawn at right angles
to PM in the plane of the section.
In the case of the parabola, PL is taken such that
= BC2:BA.AC;
and in the case of the hyperbola and ellipse such that
PL:PP' = BF.FGiAF2.
In the latter two cases we join P'L, and then draw VR
parallel to PL to meet P'L, produced if necessary, in R.
If HK be drawn through V parallel to BG and meeting
AB, ACiuH.K 
respectively, HK is the diameter of the circular
section of the cone made by a plane parallel to the base.
Therefore 
QV2 = HV. VK.
Then (1) for the parabola we have, by parallels and similar
triangles,
HV:PV=BC:GA,
and 
VK:PA = BC:BA.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

138 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
Therefore 
QV2:PV.PA = HV.VK :PV.PA
= BC2:BA.AC
= PL: PA, by hypothesis,
= PL.PV:PV.PA,
whence 
QV2 = PL . PV.
(2) In the case of the hyperbola and ellipse,
HV:PV=BF:FA,
VK:P'V=FC:AF.
Therefore 
QV2: PV. P'V = HV. VK: PF. P'V
= BF.FC:AF*
= PL: PP\ by hypothesis,
= ?F. VRiPV.P'V,
whence 
QV2 = PV. VK
New names, 'parabola\ lellipse\ 
'hyperbola'.
Accordingly, in the case of the parabola, the square of the
ordinate (QV2) is equal to the rectangle applied to PL and
with width equal to the abscissa (PV);
in the case of the hyperbola the rectangle applied to PL
which is equal to QV2 and has its width equal to the abscissa
PV overlaps or exceeds (vnepfidWti) by the small rectangle LB
which is similar and similarly situated to the rectangle con-
tained by PL, PP';
in the case of the ellipse the corresponding rectangle falls
short (eXXetTrei) by a rectangle similar and similarly situated
to the rectangle contained by PL, PP'.
Here then we have the properties of the three curves
expressed in the precise language of the Pythagorean applica-
tion of areas, and the curves are named accordingly: parabola
(trapafioXri) where the rectangle is exactly applied, hyperbola
(direpPoXr]) where it exceeds, and ellipse (eAAe^ij) where it
falls short
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONICS, BOOK I 
139
PL is called the latus rectum (opOia) or the "parameter of
the ordinates (nap* fjv Svvavrai al Karayofievat reray/xei/coy) in
each case. In the case of the central conies, the diameter PP'
is the transverse (rj irXayia) or transverse diameter) while,
even more commonly, Apollonius speaks of the diameter and
the corresponding parameter together, calling the latter the
latus rectum or erect side (opOia nXevpd) and the former
the transverse side of the figure (elSos) on, or applied to, the
diameter.
Fundamental properties equivalent to Cartesian equations.
If p is the parameter, and d the corresponding diameter,
the properties of the curves are the equivalent of the Cartesian
equations, referred to the diameter and the tangent at its
extremity as axes (in general oblique),
y2 = px (the parabola),
y2 = px ±-7x2 (the hyperbola and ellipse respectively).
(Ju
Thus Apollonius expresses the fundamental property of the
central conies, like that of the parabola, as an equation
between areas, whereas in Archimedes it appears as a
proportion
y2:(a2±x2) 
= b2:a\
which, however, is equivalent to the Cartesian equation
referred to axes with the centre as origin. The latter pro-
perty with reference to the original diameter is separately
proved in I. 21, to the effect that QV2 varies as PV. P'V', as
is really evident from the fact that QV2 :PV.P'V=PL: 
PP\
seeing that PL: PP' is constant for any fixed diameter PP'.
Apollonius has a separate proposition (I. 14) to prove that
the opposite branches of a hyperbola have the same diameter
and equal latera recta corresponding thereto. As he was the
first to treat the double-branch hyperbola fully, he generally
discusses the hyperbola (i.e. the single branch) along with
the ellipse, and the opposites, as he calls the double-branch
hyperbola, separately. 
The properties of the single-branch
hyperbola are, where possible, included in one enunciation
with those of the ellipse and circle, the enunciation beginning,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

140 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
c If in a hyperbola, an ellipse, or the circumference of a circle';
sometimes, however, the double-branch hyperbola and the
ellipse come in one proposition, e.g. in I. 30: 'If in an ellipse
or the opposites (i. e. the double hyperbola) a straight line be
drawn through the centre meeting the curve on both sides of
the centre, it will be bisected at the centre/ The property of
conjugate diameters in an ellipse is proved in relation to
the original diameter of reference and its conjugate in I. 15,
where it is shown that, if DD' is the diameter conjugate to
PP' (i.e. the diameter drawn ordinate-wise to PP'), just as
PP/ bisects all chords parallel to DD', so DD' bisects all chords
parallel to PP'; also, if DU be drawn at right angles to DD'
and such that DL'. DD' — PP'2 (or DL' is a third proportional
to DD', PP'), then the ellipse has the same property in rela-
tion to DD' as diameter and DL' as parameter that it has in
relation to PP' as diameter and PL as the corresponding para-
meter. Incidentally it appears that PL. PP' = DD'2, or PL is
a third proportional to PP', DD', as indeed is obvious from the
property of the curve QV2: PV. PV'= PL : PP' = DD'2: PP'2.
The next proposition, I. 16, introduces the secondary diameter
of the double-branch hyperbola (i.e. the diameter conjugate to
the transverse diameter of reference), which does not meet the
curve; this diameter is defined as that straight line drawn
through the centre parallel to the ordinates of the transverse
diameter which is bisected at the centre and is of length equal
to the mean proportional between the ' sides of the figure',
i.e. the transverse diameter PP' and the corresponding para-
meter PL. The centre is defined as the middle point of the
diameter of reference, and it is proved that all other diameters
are bisected at it (I. 30).
Props. 17-19, 22-9, 31-40 are propositions leading up to
and containing the tangent properties. On lines exactly like
those of Eucl. III. 16 for the circle, Apollonius proves that, if
a straight line is drawn through the vertex (i. e. the extremity
of the diameter of reference) parallel to the ordinates to the
diameter, it will fall outside the conic, and no other straight
line can fall between the said straight line and the conic;
therefore the said straight line touches the conic (1.17, 32).
Props. I. 33, 35 contain the property of the tangent at any
point on the parabola, and Props. I. 34, 36 the property of
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE C0NIC8, BOOK I 
141
the tangent at any point of a central conic, in relation
to the original diameter of reference; if Q is the point of
contact, QV the ordinate to the diameter through P, and
if QT, the tangent at Q, meets the diameter produced in T,
then (1) for the parabola PV = PT, and (2) for the central
conic TP:TP/ = PV: VP'. 
The method of proof is to take a
point T on the diameter produced satisfying the respective
relations, and to prove that, if TQ be joined and produced,
any point on TQ on either side of Q is outside the curve: the
form of proof is by reductio ad absurdum, and in each
case it is again proved that no other straight line can fall
between TQ and the curve. The fundamental property
TP:TP' =PV:VP' 
for the central conic is then used to
prove that CV.GT = GP2 and QV2: CV. VT = p:PP' 
(or
CD2: GP2) and the corresponding properties with reference to
the diameter DD' conjugate to PP/ and v, t, the points where
DD' is met by the ordinate to it from Q and by the tangent
at Q respectively (Props. I. 37-40).
Transition to new diameter and tangent at its extremity.
An important section of the Book follows (I. 41-50), con-
sisting of propositions leading up to what amounts to a trans-
formation of coordinates from the original diameter and the
tangent at its extremity to any diameter and the tangent at
its extremity; what Apollonius proves is of course that, if
any other diameter be taken, the ordinate-property of the
conic with reference to that diameter is of the same form as it
is with reference to the original diameter. It is evident that
this is vital to the exposition. The propositions leading up to
the result in I. 50 are not usually given in our text-books of
geometrical conies, but are useful and interesting.
Suppose that the tangent at any point Q meets the diameter
of reference PV in T, and that the tangent at P meets the
diameter through Q in E. 
Let R be any third point on
the curve; let the ordinate RW to PV meet the diameter
through Q in F, and let RU parallel to the tangent at Q meet
PV in U. Then
(1) in the parabola, the triangle RUW"= the parallelogram
EW, and
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

142
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
E F
T U 
P\W 
V
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONICS, BOOK I 
143
(2) in the hyperbola or ellipse, ARUW = the difference
between the triangles GFW and CPE.
(1) In the parabola 
ARUW: AQTV = RW2 : QV2
= 
PW:PV
= E3EW:C3EV.
But, since TV = 2PF, AQTV=^ E3EV:
therefore 
A R UW = • EW.
(2) The proof of the proposition with reference to the
central conic depends on a Lemma, proved in I. 41, to the effect
that, if PX, VY be similar parallelograms on OP, OF as bases,
and if VZ be an equiangular parallelogram on QVas base and
such that, if the ratio of GP to the other side of PX is m, the
ratio of QF to the other side of VZ is m . p/PP'> then F ^ is
equal to the difference between VY and PX. 
The proof of the
Lemma by Apollonius is difficult, but the truth of it can be
easily seen thus.
By the property of the curve, QV2: GV2 
~GP2=p:PPr\
PP'
therefore 
CV2 ~CP2 = ~ . Q F2.
Now E3PX = fi. GP2 /m9 where \i is a constant depending
on the angle of the parallelogram.
Similarly
CJVY=fi. 
CV2/mi and EJVZ = p.
It follows that D VY - CJPX = a VZ.
Taking now the triangles GFW, CPE and RUW in the
ellipse or hyperbola, we see that GFW, CPE are similar, and
RUW has one angle (at W) equal or supplementary to the
angles at P and F in the other two triangles, while we have
whence 
QV: VT=(p: PP'). {GV: QV),
and, by parallels,
RW: WU=(p: PP') . (OP: PE).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

144 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
Therefore RUW, CPE, CFW&re the halves of parallelograms
related as in the lemma;
therefore 
ARUW = A CFW - A CPE.
The same property with reference to the diameter secondary
to CPV is proved in I. 45.
It is interesting to note the exact significance of the property
thus proved for the central conic. The proposition, which is
the foundation of Apollonius's method of transformation of
coordinates, amounts to this. If CP, CQ are fixed semi-
diameters and R a variable point, the area of the quadrilateral
GFRU is constant for all positions of JB on the conic. Suppose
now that CP, CQ are taken as axes of x and y respectively.
If we draw RX parallel to CQ to meet CP and RY parallel to
CP to meet CQ, the proposition asserts that (subject to the
proper convention as to sign)
ARYF+ C3CXRY+ARXU= 
(const.).
But since RX, RY, RFy RU are in fixed directions,
ARYF varies as RY2 or x2, OJCXRY as RX . RY or xy,
and ARXU as RX2 or y\
Hence, if x, y are the coordinates of R,
ocx2 + (3xy + yy2 = A,
which is the Cartesian equation of the conic referred to the
centre as origin and any two diameters as axes.
The properties so obtained are next used to prove that,
if JJR meets the curve again in Rr and the diameter through
Q in M, then RR is bisected at M. (I. 46-8).
Taking (1) the case of the parabola, we have,
ARUW=E3EW,
and 
AR'UW'=C3EW'.
By subtraction, 
{RWW'R') = EJF'W,
whence 
ARFM = AR'F'M,
and, since the triangles are similar, RM = R'M.
The same result is easily obtained for the central conic.
It follows that EQ produced in the case of the parabola,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONICS, BOOK I 
145
or GQ in the case of the central conic, bisects all chords as
RBf parallel to the tangent at Q. Consequently EQ and GQ
are diameters of the respective conies.
In order to refer the conic to the new diameter and the
corresponding ordinates, we have only to determine the para-
meter of these ordinates and to show that the property of the
conic with reference to the new parameter and diameter is in
the same form as that originally found.
The propositions I. 49, 50 do this, and show that the new
parameter is in all the cases pf, where (if 0 is the point of
intersection of the tangents at P and Q)
0Q:QE = p':2QT.
(1) In the case of the parabola, we have TP = PV = EQ,
whence 
AEOQ = APOT.
Add to each the figure POQF'W;
therefore 
QTW 'F' = COEW = AR'UW',
whence, subtracting MUW'F' from both, we have
AR'MF' = CJQU.
Therefore 
R'M. MF' = 2QT. QM.
But R'M: MF' = 0Q:QE = p':2 QT, by hypothesis;
therefore 
R'M2: R'M. MF' = pf.QM:2QT. QM.
And R!M.MFf = 2QT. QM, from above;
therefore 
R'M2 = p'. QM,
which is the desired property.1
1 The proposition that, in the case of the parabola, if p be the para-
meter of the ordinates to the diameter through Q, then (see the first figure
on p. 142)
0QQE
has an interesting application; for it enables us to prove the proposition,
assumed without proof by Archimedes (but not easy to prove otherwise),
that, if in a parabola the dia/nieter through P bisects the chord QQ' in F,
and QD is drawn perpendicular to PV, then
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

146 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
(2) In the case of the central conic, we have
AR'UW = ACF'W - ACPE.
(Apollonius here assumes what he does not prove till III. 1,
namely that A CPE = AGQT. This is proved thus.
We have 
CV: CT = CV2 : CP2; 
(I. 37, 39.)
therefore 
AGQV: ACQT = ACQV: ACPE,
so that 
AGQT = A CPE.) •
Therefore 
AR'UW' = ACF'W' - ACQT,
and it is easy to prove that in all cases
AR'MF' = QTTJM.
Therefore 
R'M. MF' = QM(QT + MU).
Let QL be drawn at right angles to CQ and equal to p'.
Join Q'L and draw MK parallel to QL to meet Q'L in K.
Draw CH parallel to Q'L to meet QL in H and MK in N.
Now 
R'M: MF' =OQ:QE
= QL : 2QT, by hypothesis,
= QH:QT.
But 
QT:MU=CQ: 
CM=QH:MJSr,
so that 
(QH+MN):{QT + MU) = QH-.QT
= R'M:MF'} from above.
where pa is the parameter of the principal ordinates and p the para-
meter of the ordinates to the diameter
PV.
If the tangent at the vertex A meets
VP produced in E, and PT, the tangent
at P, in 0, the proposition of Apollonius
proves that
7YI 
/
But 
OP=iPT;
therefore 
PT2 
=p.PE
= p.AN.
Thus 
QV2: QD2 = PT2: PN2, by similar triangles,
= p.AN:pa.AN
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONICS, BOOK I 
147
It follows that
QM(QH+ MN): QM(QT+ MU) = R'M*: R'M. MF';
but, from above, QM(QT+MU) = R'M. MF';
therefore 
R'M2 = QM(QH+ MN)
= QM.MK,
which is the desired property.
In the case of the hyperbola, the same property is true for
the opposite branch.
These important propositions show that the ordinate property
of the three conies is of the same form whatever diameter is
taken as the diameter of reference. It is therefore a matter
of indifference to which particular diameter and ordinates the
conic is referred. 
This is stated by Apollonius in a summary
which follows I. 50.
First appearance of principal axes.
The axes appear for the first time in the propositions next
following (I. 52-8), where Apollonius shows how to construct
each of the conies, given in each case (1) a diameter, (2) the
length of the corresponding parameter, and (3) the inclination
of the ordinates to the diameter. In each case Apollonius
first assumes the angle between the ordinates and the diameter
to be a right angle; then he reduces the case where the angle
is oblique to the case where it is right by his method of trans-
formation of coordinates; i.e. from the given diameter and
parameter he finds the axis of the conic and the length of the
corresponding parameter, and he then constructs-the conic as
in the first case where the ordinates are at right angles to the
diameter. Here then we have a case of the proof of existence
by means of construction. 
The conic is in each case con-
structed by finding the cone of which the given conic is a
section. The problem of finding the axis of a parabola and
the centre and the axes of a central conic when the conic (and
not merely the elements, as here) is given comes later (in.II.
44-7), where it is also proved (II. 48) that no central conic
can have more than two axes.
L 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

148 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
It has been my object, by means of the above detailed
account of Book I, to show not merely what results are
obtained by Apollonius, but the way in which he went to
work; and it will have been realized how entirely scientific
and general the method is. When the foundation is thus laid,
and the fundamental properties established, Apollonius is able
to develop the rest of the subject on lines more similar to
those followed in our text-books. My description of the rest
of the work can therefore for the most part be confined to a
summary of the contents.
Book II begins with a section devoted to the properties of
the asymptotes. They are constructed in II. 1 in this way.
Beginning, as usual, with any diameter of reference and the
corresponding parameter and inclination of ordinates, Apol-
lonius draws at P the vertex (the extremity of the diameter)
a tangent to the hyperbola and sets off along it lengths PL, Pi!
on either side of P such that PL2 = PL'2=±p. 
PP' [=CD%
where p is the parameter. He then proves that CL, Clf pro-
duced will not meet the curve in any finite point and are there-
fore asymptotes. II. 2 proves further that no straight line-
through G within the angle between the asymptotes can itself
be an asymptote. II. 3 proves that the intercept made by the
asymptotes on the tangent at any point P is bisected at P, and
that the square on each half of the intercept is equal to one-
fourth of the ' figure' corresponding to the diameter through
P (i.e. one-fourth of the rectangle contained by the 'erect'
side, the latus rectum or parameter corresponding to the
diameter, and the diameter itself); this property is used as a
means of drawing a hyperbola when the asymptotes and one
point on the curve are given (II. 4). II. 5-7 are propositions
about a tangent at the extremity of a diameter being parallel
to the chords bisected by it. Apollonius returns to the
asymptotes in II. 8, and II. 8-14 give the other ordinary
properties with reference to the asymptotes (II. 9 is a con-
verse of II. 3), the equality of the intercepts between the
asymptotes and the curve of any chord (II. 8), the equality of
the rectangle contained by the distances between either point
in which the chord meets the curve and the points of inter-
section with the asymptotes to the square on the parallel
semi-diameter (II. 10), the latter property with reference to
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONICS, BOOK II 
149
the portions of the asymptotes which include between them
a branch of the conjugate hyperbola (II. 11), the constancy of
the rectangle contained by the straight lines drawn from any
point of the curve in fixed directions to meet the asymptotes
(equivalent to the Cartesian equation with reference to the
asymptotes, xy = const.) (II. 12), and the fact that the curve
and the asymptotes proceed to infinity and approach con-
tinually nearer to one another, so that the distance separating
them can be made smaller than any given length (II. 14). II. 15
proves that the two opposite branches of a hyperbola have the
same asymptotes and II. 16 proves for the chord connecting
points on two branches the property of II. 8. II. 17 shows that
1 conjugate opposites' (two conjugate double-branch hyper-
bolas) have the same asymptotes. Propositions follow about
conjugate hyperbolas; any tangent to the conjugate hyper-
bola will meet both branches of the original hyperbola
and will be bisected at the point of contact (II. 19); if Q be
any point on a hyperbola, and GE parallel to the tangent
at Q meets the conjugate hyperbola in E, the tangent at
E will be parallel to CQ and GQ, GE will be conjugate
diameters (II. 20), while the tangents at Q, E will meet on one
of the asymptotes (II. 21); if a chord Qq in one branch of
a hyperbola meet the asymptotes in R, r and the conjugate
hyperbola in Q\ q\ then Q'Q.Qq' = 2 CD2 (II. 23). Of the
rest of the propositions in this part of the Book the following
may be mentioned: if TQ, TQ' are two tangents to a conic
and V is the middle point of QQ', TV is a diameter (II. 29,
30, 38); if tQ, tQ' be tangents to opposite branches of a hyper-
bola, RR' the chord through t parallel to QQ', v the middle
point of QQ'y then vR9 vR' are tangents to the hyperbola
(II. 40); in a conic, or a circle, or in conjugate hyperbolas, if
two chords not passing through the centre intersect, they do not
bisect each other (II. 26, 41, 42). 
II. 44-7 show how to find
a diameter of a conic and the centre of a central conic, the
axis of a parabola and the axes of a central conic. The Book
concludes with problems of drawing tangents to conies in
certain ways, through any point on or outside the curve
(II. 49), making with the axis an angle equal to a given acute
angle (II. 50), making a given angle with the diameter through
the point of contact (II. 51,53); II. 52 contains a Siopicr/AO? for
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

150 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
the last problem, proving that, if the tangent to an ellipse at
any point P meets the major axis in T, the angle GPT is not
greater than the angle ABA', where B is one extremity of the
minor axis.
Book III begins with a series of propositions about the
equality of certain areas, propositions of the same kind as, and
easily derived from, the propositions (I. 41-50) by means of
which, as already shown, the transformation of coordinates is
effected. We have first the proposition that, if the tangents
at any points P, Q of a conic meet in 0, and if they mefet
the diameters through Q, P respectively in E, T, then
AOPT = AOQE (III. ], 4); and, if P, Q be points on adjacent
branches of conjugate hyperbolas, AGPE = ACQT (III. 13).
With the same notation, if R be any other point on the conic,
and if we draw RU parallel to the tangent at Q meeting the
diameter through P in U and the diameter through Q in M,
and RW parallel to the tangent at P meeting QT in H and
the diameters through Q, P in F, W, then AHQF = quadri-
lateral HTUR (III. 2. 6); this is proved at once from the fact
that ARMF= quadrilateral QTUM (see I. 49, 50, or pp. 145-6
above) by subtracting or adding the area HRMQ on each
side. Next take any other point R', and draw R'U\ 
F'R'R!W
in the same way as before; it is then proved that, if RU, R'W
meet in / and R'U', RW\n J,the quadrilaterals F'IRF, lUU'B!
are equal, and also the quadrilaterals FJR'F', JU'UR (III. 3,
7, 9, 10). The proof varies according to the actual positions
of the points in the figures.
In Figs. 1, 2 
AHFQ = quadrilateral HTUR,
AH'F'Q = H'TU'R'.
By subtraction, FHH'F'= IUU'Rf + {IE))
whence, if IH be added or subtracted, F'IRF = IUU'R\
and again, if / / be added to both, FJR'F' = JU'UR.
In Fig. 3 
AR'U'W = ACF'W'-ACQT,
so that 
ACQT = CU'R'F'.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONICS, BOOK III
151
E F ' F
ML.
T U
FIG. 1.
FIG. 2.
FIG. 3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

152 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
Adding the quadrilateral CF'H'T, we have
AH'F'Q = H'TU'R',
and similarly 
AHFQ = HTUR.
By subtraction, F'H'HF= 
H'TU'R'-HTUR.
Adding H'IRH to each side, we have
F'IRF = IUU'R'.
If each of these quadrilaterals is subtracted from IJ,
FJR'F' = JU'UR.
The corresponding results are proved in III. 5, 11, 12, 14
for the case where the ordinates through RR' are drawn to
a secondary diameter, and in III. 15 for the case where P, Q
are on the original hyperbola and R, R' on the conjugate
hyperbola.
The importance of these propositions lies in the fact that
they are immediately used to prove the well-known theorems
about the rectangles contained by the segments of intersecting
chords and the harmonic properties of the pole and polar.
The former question is dealt with in III. 16-23, which give
a great variety of particular cases. We will give the proof
of one case, to the effect that, if OP, OQ be two tangents
to any conic and Rr, R'r' be any two chords parallel to
them respectively and intersecting in J, an internal or external
point,
then 
RJ. Jr : R'J. Jr' = OP2 : OQ2 = (const.).
We have
RJ.Jr 
= RW2^JW2
f 
and RW2: JW2 = ARUW: AJU'W;
therefore
RJ.Jr: 
RW2 = (RW2 - JW2): RW2 = JU'UR : ARUW.
But 
RW2: OP2 = ARUW: A OPT;
therefore, ex aequali, RJ.Jr: 
0P2*= JU'UR : A OPT.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONICS, BOOK III 
153
Similarly R'M'2: JM'2 = AR'F'M': AJFM',
whence 
R'J. Jr': R'M'2 = FJR'F': 
AR'F'M'.
But 
R'M'2: OQ2 =-- AR'F'M' :AOQE;
therefore, ex aequali, R'J. Jr': OQ2 = FJR'F': A OQE.
It follows, since FJR'F' = JU'UR, and AOPT = AOQE,
that 
iJJ. Jr : OP2 = R'J. / / : OQ2,
or 
RJ. Jr:R'J. Jr' = OP2 : OQ2.
If we had taken chords Rr1% R'rx' parallel respectively to
OQ, OP and intersecting in /, an internal or external point,
we should have in like manner
RI. Irx: R'l. Ir{ = OQ2 : OP2.
As a particular case, if PP' be a diameter, and Rr, R'r' be
chords parallel respectively to the tangent at P and the
diameter PP' and intersecting in /, then (as is separately
proved)
The corresponding results are proved in the cases where certain
of the points lie on the conjugate hyperbola.
The six following propositions about the segments of inter-
secting chords (III. 24-9) refer to two chords in conjugate
hyperbolas or* in an ellipse drawn parallel respectively to two
conjugate diameters PP', DD', and the results in modern form
are perhaps worth quoting. If Rr, R'r' be two chords so
drawn and intersecting in 0, then
(a) in the conjugate hyperbolas
RO.Or 
R'O .Or' _
CP* * 
CD*
and 
(RO2 + Or2): (R'O2 + Or'2) = OP2: CD2;
(b) in the ellipse
RO2 + Or2 
R'O2 + Or'2 _
"CP2 
+ 
CD2 
~ *
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

154
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
The general propositions containing the harmonic properties
ot the pole and polar of a conic are III. 37-40, which prove
that m any conic, if TQ, Tq be tangents, and if Qq the chord
ot contact be bisected in F, then
(1) if any straight line through T meet the conic in R\ R and
Qq in 7, then (Fig. l) RT.TR 
= RI: 
IR';
E F'
T U'>JJ PVW
w
q
FIG. 1.
(2) if any straight line through Fmeet the conic in fi,
the parallel through T to Qq in 0, then (Fig. 2)
F'
theorem (2) for the ellipse.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE GONIGS, BOOK III 
155
To prove (1) we have
R'l2:IR2=H'Q2: 
QH2 = AH'F'Q: AHFQ=H'TU'R':HTUR
(III. 2, 3, &c).
Also R'T2: TR2 = R'U'2: UR2 = AR'U'W': ARUW,
and 
R'T2: TR2 = TW'2: TW2 = ATH'W': ATHW,
so that R'T2:TR2 = ATH'W' - AiZ'tTF': AiTfiF- AEfrr
= H'TU'R':HTUR
= R'l2 : IE2, from above.
To prove (2) we have
RV2: VR'2 = i?6T2: i?rCr/2 = Ai?CTF: AR'U'W',
and also
= ilQ2: Qlf/2 = AHFQ: AH'F'Q = HTUR *: H'TU'R\
so that
RV2: FJR/2 = 5TC7i? + ARUW.H'TU'R' 
+ AR'U'W'
= ATHW: ATH'W'
= TW2:TW'2
= RO2:OR'2.
Props. III. 30-6 deal separately with the particular cases
in which (a) the transversal is parallel to an asymptote of the
hyperbola or (b) the chord of contact is parallel to an asymp-
tote, i.e. where one of the tangents is an asymptote, which is
the tangent at infinity.
Next we have propositions about intercepts made by two
tangents on a third: If the tangents at three points of a
parabola form a triangle, all three tangents will be cut by the
points of contact in the same proportion (III. 41); if the tan-
gents at the extremities of a diameter PP' of a central conic
are cut in r, r' by any other tangent, Pr. P'r' = CD2 (III. 42);
if the tangents at P, Q to a hyperbola meet the asymptotes in
* Where a quadrilateral, as HTUR in the figure, is a cross-quadri-
lateral, the area is of course the difference between the two triangles
which it forms, as HTW* RUW.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

156 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
Z, U and M, M' respectively, then L'M, LM' a>ve both parallel
to PQ (III. 44).
The first of these propositions asserts that, if the tangents at
three points P, Q, R of a parabola form a triangle pqr, then
Pr:rq = rQ:Qp = ^p :pi2.
From this property it is easy to deduce the Cartesian
equation of a parabola referred to two fixed tangents as
coordinate axes. Taking qR, qP as fixed coordinate axes, we
find the locus of Q thus. Let x, y be the coordinates of Q.
Then, if qp = xl, qr = yv qR = h, qP = k, we have
=^Q 
= Vvzl _ k-Vi _ 
xi
Q 
h
^
x1-x 
Qp 
y 
yx
From these equations we derive
x1
2 = hx> y^ = ky;
also, since — = —^1— > we have 
h — = 1.
« 
2/i-2/ 
^i 
2/i
By substituting for ic1? yx the values V(hx), V(ky) we
obtain
©'+©*-•
The focal properties of central conies are proved in
III. 45-52 without any reference to the directrix; there is
no mention of the focus of a parabola. The foci are called
'the points arising out of the application' (ra £K rrjs irapa-
fio\r\s yivojxtva crjpeTa), the meaning being that S, S' are taken
on the axis AA' such that AS. SA' = AS'. S'A' = \pa. AA'
or OB2, that is, in the phraseology of application of areas,
a rectangle is applied to A A' as base equal to one-fourth
part of the ' figure', and in the case of the hyperbola ex-
ceeding, but in the case of the ellipse falling short, by a
square figure. The foci being thus found, it is proved that,
if the tangents Ar9 A'r' at the extremities of the axis are met
by the tangent at any point P in r, v' respectively, rr' subtends
a right angle at $, S'\ and the angles rr'S, A'r'S' are equal, as
also are the angles r'rS', ArS (III. 45, 46)s. It is next shown
that, if 0 be the intersection of rS', r'S, then OP is perpen-
dicular to the tangent at P (III. 47). These propositions are
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONICS, BOOK III 
157
used to prove that the focal distances of P make equal angles
with the tangent at P (III. 48). In III. 49-52 follow the
other ordinary properties, that, if SY be perpendicular to
the tangent at P, the locus of Y is the circle on A A' as
diameter, that the lines from G drawn parallel to the focal
distances to meet the tangent at P are equal to CA> and that
the sum or difference of the focal distanced of any point is
equal to A A'.
The last propositions of Book III are of use with reference
to the locus with respect to three or four lines. They are as
follows.
1. If PP' be a diameter of a central conic, and if PQ, P'Q
drawn to any other point Q of the conic meet the tangents at
P', P in R', R respectively, then PR.P'R' 
= 4CD2 (III. 53).
2. If TQ, TQ' be two tangents to a-conic, Fthe middle point
of QQ', P the point of contact of the tangent parallel to QQ\
and R any other point on the conic, let Qr parallel to TQ'
meet Q'R in r, and Q'r parallel to TQ meet QR in r'; then
Qr. QV: QQ'2 = (PV2: PT2). {TQ. TQ': QV2). 
(III. 54, 56.)
3. If the tangents are tangents to opposite branches of a
hyperbola and meet in t, and if ii, r, r' are taken as before,
while tq is half the chord through t parallel to QQ\ then
Qr . Q'r': QQ'2 = tQ. tQ': tq2. 
(III. 55.)
The second of these propositions leads at once to the three-
line locus, and from this we easily obtain the Cartesian
equation to a conic with reference to two fixed tangents as
axes, where the lengths of the tangents are h, k, viz.
Book IV is on the whole dull, and need not be noticed at
length. Props. 1-23 prove the converse of the propositions in
Book III about the harmonic properties of the pole and polar
for a large number of particular cases. One of the proposi-
tions (IV. 9) gives a method of drawing two tangents to
a conic from an external point T. Draw any two straight
lines through T cutting the conic in Q, Q' and in R, R' respec-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

158 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
tively. Take 0 on QQ' and 0' on RR' so that TQ'} TR' are
harmonically divided. The intersections of 00' produced with
the conic give the two points of contact required.
The remainder of the Book (IV. 24-57) deals with intersecting
conies, and the number of points in which, in particular cases,
they can intersect or touch. IV. 24 proves that no two conies
can meet in such a way that part of one of them is common
to both, while the rest is not. The rest of the propositions
can be divided into five groups, three of which can be brought
under one general enunciation. Group I consists of particular
cases depending on the more elementary considerations affect-
ing conies: e.g. two conies having their concavities in oppo-
site directions will not meet in more than two points (IV. 35);
if a conic meet one branch of a hyperbola, it will not meet
the other branch in more points than two (IV. 37); a conic
touching one branch of a hyperbola with its concave side
will not meet the opposite branch (IV- 39). IV. 36, 41, 42, 45,
54 belong to this group. 
Group II contains propositions
(IV.-25, 38, 43, 44, 46, 55) showing that no two conies
(including in the term the double-branch hyperbola) can
intersect in more than four points. Group III (IV. 26, 47, 48,
49, 50, 56) are particular cases of the proposition that two
conies which touch at one point cannot intersect at more than
two other points. Group IV (IV. 27, 28, 29, 40, 51, 52, 53, 57)
are cases of the proposition that no two conies which touch
each other at two points can intersect at any other point.
Group V consists of propositions about double contact. A
parabola cannot touch another parabola in more points than
one (IV. 30); this follows from the property TP = PV. 
A
parabola, if it fall outside a hyperbola, cannot have double
contact with it (IV. 31); it is shown that for the hyperbola
PV>PT, while for the parabola P'V = P'T; therefore the
hyperbola would fall outside the parabola, which is impossible.
A parabola cannot have internal double contact with an ellipse
or circle (IV. 32). A hyperbola cannot have double contact
with another hyperbola having the same centre (IV. 33);
proved by means of CV. CT — GP2. If an ellipse have double
contact with an ellipse or a circle, the chord of contact will
pass through the centre (IV. 34).
Book V is of an entirely different order, indeed it is the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONICS, BOOKS IV-V 
159
most remarkable of the extant Books. It deals with normals
to conies regarded as maximum and minimum straight lines
drawn from particular points to the curve. Included in it are
a series of propositions which, though worked out by the
purest geometrical methods, actually lead immediately to the
determination of the evolute of each of the three conies; that
is to say, the Cartesian equations to the evolutes can be easily
deduced from the results obtained by Apollonius. There can
be no doubt that the Book is almost wholly original, and it is
a veritable geometrical tour de force.
Apollonius in this Book considers various points and classes
of points with reference to the maximum or minimum straight
lines which it is possible to draw from them to the conies,
i. e. as the feet of normals to the curve. He begins naturally
with points on the axis, and he takes first the point E where
AE measured along the axis from the vertex A is ^p, p being
the principal parameter. The first three propositions prove
generally and for certain particular cases that, if in an ellipse
or a hyperbola AM be drawn at right angles to A A' and equal
to \p, and if GM meet the ordinate PN of any point P of the
curve in if, then PN2 = 2 (quadrilateral MANH); this is a
lemma used in the proofs of later propositions, V. 5, 6, &c.
Next, in V. 4, 5, 6, he proves that, if AE = \p> then AE is the
minimum straight line from E to the curve, and if P be any
other point on it, PE increases as P moves farther away from
A on either side ; he proves in fact that, if PN be the ordinate
from P,
(1) in the case of the parabola PE2 = AE2 + AN2
y
(2) in the case of the hyperbola or ellipse
AA'±p
' AA' 
'
where of course p = BB'2/AA\ 
and therefore (AA' 
±p)/AA'
is equivalent to what we call e2, the square of the eccentricity.
It is also proved that EA' is the maximum straight line from
E to the curve. It is next proved that, if 0 be any point on
the axis between A and EyOA is the minimum straight line
from 0 to the curve and, if P is any other point on the curve,
OP increases as P moves farther from A (V. 7).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

160
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
Next Apollonius takes points G on the axis at a distance
from A greater than •§p, and he proves that the minimum
straight line from G to the curve (i.e. the normal) is (?P,
where P is such a point that
(1) ill the case of the parabola NG = 
\p;
(2) in the case of the central conic NG : GN = p: A A';
and, if P' is any other point on the conic, P'G increases as P'
moves away from P on either side; this is proved by show-
ing that
(1) for the parabola P'G2 = PG2 + NN/2;
(2) for the central conic P'G2 = PG2 + NN'*. 
fV •
As these propositions contain the fundamental properties of
the subnormals, it is worth while to reproduce Apollonius's
proofs.
(1) In the parabola, if G be any point on the axis such that
AG > \p, measure GN towards A equal to \p. 
Let PN be
the ordinate through N9 P' any other point on the curve.
Then shall PG be the minimum line from G to the curve, &c.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE C0NIC8, 
BOOK V 
161
We have 
P'N'2 = p. AN' = 2NG. AN';
and 
N'G2 = NN'* + NGP±2NG. NN',
according to the position of N'.
Therefore 
P'G* = 2NG.AN+ 
NG2 + NN'2
and the proposition is proved.
(2) In the case of the central conic, take G on the axis such
that AG > \p, and measure GN towards A such that
NG:CN = p:AA'.
Draw the ordinate PN through N, and also the ordinate P'N'
from any other point P'.
We have first to prove the lemma (V. 1, 2, 3) that, if AM be
drawn perpendicular to AA' and equal to \p, and if CM,
produced if necessary, meet PN in H, then
PN2 = 2 (quadrilateral MANH).
This is easy, for, if AL (= 2 AM) be the parameter, and A'L
meet PN in R, then, by the property of the curve,
PN2 = AN.NR
= AN(NH + AM)
= 2 (quadrilateral MANH).
Let GH, produced if necessary, meet P'N' in H'. 
From H
draw HI perpendicular to P'H'.
Now, since, by hypothesis, NG : GN = p: AA'
= AM:AG
= HN:NC,
NH=NG, 
whence also 
H'N'=N'G.
Therefore NG2 = 2AHNG, N'Q* = 2&H'N'G.
And 
PN2 = 2(MANH);
therefore 
PG* = NG2 + PN2 = 2 (AMHG).
1523.2 
M
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

162 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
Similarly, if CM meets P'N' in K,
= 2(AMHG) + 2AHH'K.
Therefore, by subtraction,
P'G2-PG2 = 2AHH'K
= HI.(H'I±IK)
= HI.(HI±IK)
CA±AM
"" 
CA
- Tvnvr/2 
AA'±P.
-** 
' AA' '
which proves the proposition.
If 0 be any point on PG, OP is the minimum straight line
from 0 to the curve, and OP' increases as P' moves away from
P on either side; this is proved in V. 12. (Since P'G > PGr
Z GPP' > Z GP'P; therefore, a fortiori, Z OPP' > Z OP'P,
and OP' > OP.)
Apollonius next proves the corresponding propositions with
reference to points on the minor axis of an ellipse. If p' be
the parameter of the ordinates to the minor axis, 
p'=AA'2/BB',
or ij/= CA2/GB. If now E' be so taken that BE' = ±p',
then BE' is the maximum straight line from E' to the curve
and, if P be any other point on it, E'P diminishes as P moves
farther from B on either side, and E'B' is the minimum
straight line from E' to the curve. It is, in fact, proved that
E'B2-E'P2 
= Bn2.P ~D,B , where Bn is the abscissa of P
tin
(V. 16-18). If 0 be any point on the minor axis such that
BO > BE', then OB is the maximum straight line from 0 to
the curve, &c. (V. 19).
If g be a point on the minor axis such that Bg > BC, but
Bg < \ p', and if Cn be measured towards B so that
then n is the foot of the ordinates of two points P such that
Pg is the maximum straight line from g to the curve. Also,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE C0NIC8, BOOK V 
163
if P' be any other point on it, P'g diminishes as P' moves
farther from P on either side to B or B\ and
TS 2
-P'g2 
=
or
If 0 be any point on Pg produced beyond the minor axis, PO
is the maximum straight line from 0 to the same part of the
ellipse for which Pg is a maximum, i.e. the semi-ellipse BPBf,
&c. (V. 20-2).
In V. 23 it is proved that, if g is on the minor axis, and gP
a maximum straight line to the curve, and if Pg meets A A'
in G, then GP is the minimum straight line from G to the
curve; this is proved by similar triangles. Only one normal
can be drawn from any one point on a conic (V. 24-6). The
normal at any point P of a conic, whether regarded as a
minimum straight line from G on the major axis or (in the
case of the ellipse) as a maximum straight line from g on the
minor axis, is perpendicular to the tangent at P (V. 27-30);
in general (1) if 0 be any point within a conic, and OP be
a maximum or a minimum straight line from 0 to the conic,
the straight line through P perpendicular to PO touches the
conic, and (2) if 0' be any point on OP produced outside the
conic, O'P is the minimum straight line from 0' to the conic,
&c. (V. 31-4).
Number of normals from a point.
We now come to propositions about two or more normals
meeting at a point. If the normal at P meet the axis of
a parabola or the axis A A' of a hyperbola or ellipse in G, the
angle PGA increases as P or G moves farther away from A,
but in the case of the hyperbola the angle will always be less
than the complement of half the angle between the asymptotes.
Two normals at points on the same side of AAf will meet on
the opposite side of that axis; and two normals at points on
the same quadrant of an ellipse as i 5 will meet at a point
within the angle ACB' (V. 35-40). In a parabola or an
ellipse any normal PG will meet the curve again; in the
hyperbola, (1) if AAf be not greater than p, no normal can
meet the curve at a second point on the same branch, but
M2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

164 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
(2) if AA' > p, some normals will meet the same branch again
and others not (V. 41-3).
If Pfly P2G2 be normals at points on one side of the axis of
a conic meeting in 0, and if 0 be joined to any other point P
on the conic (it being further supposed in the case of the
ellipse that all three lines 0Plt 0P2, OP cut the same half of
the axis), then
(1) OP cannot be a normal to the curve;
(2) if OP meet the axis in K, and PG be the normal at P, AG
is less or greater than AK according as P does or does not lie
between Pt and P2.
From this proposition it is proved that (1) three normals at
points on one quadrant of an ellipse cannot meet at one point,
and (2) four normals at points on one semi-ellipse bounded by
the major axis cannot meet at one point (V. 44-8).
In any conic, if M be any point on the axis such that AM
is not greater than \p, and if 0 be any point on the double
ordinate through M, then no straight line drawn to any point
on the curve on the other side of the axis from 0 and meeting
the axis between A and M can be a normal (V. 49, 50).
Propositions leading immediately to the determination
of the evolute of a conie.
These great propositions are V. 51, 52, to the following
effect:
If AM measured along the axis be greater than \p (but in
the case of the ellipse less than AC), and if MO be drawn per-
pendicular to the axis, then a certain length (y> say) can be
assigned such that
(a) if OM > y, no normal can be drawn through 0 which cuts
the axis; but, if OP be any straight line drawn to the curve
cutting the axis in K, NK < NG, where PN is the ordinate
and PG the normal at P;
(b) if OM = y, only one normal can be so drawn through 0,
and, if OP be any other straight line drawn to the curve and
cutting the axis in K, NK < NG} as before ;
(c) if 0M< y, two normals can be so drawn through 0, and, if
OP be any other straight line drawn to the curve, NK is
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE C0NIC8, BOOK V 
165
greater or less than NO according as OP is or is not inter-
mediate between the two normals (V. 51, 52).
The proofs are of course long and complicated. The length
y is determined in this way:
(1) In the case of the parabola, measure MH towards the
vertex equal to \p, and divide AH at Nx so that HNX = 2N1A.
The length y is then taken such that
where P ^ ! is the ordinate passing through JVj;
(2) In the case of the hyperbola and ellipse, we have
AM>^p, so that OA :AM<AA/ 
:p\ therefore, if H be taken
on AM such that OH: HM = AA'ip, H will fall between A
arid Jf.
Take two mean proportionals CJSF19 01 between OA and OH,
and let P1N'1 be the ordinate through N'1.
The length y is then taken such that
yiP^ 
= (OM:MH). (Htf^NiC).
In the case (&), where OM = y, 0 is the point of intersection
of consecutive normals, i. e. 0 is the centre of curvature at the
point P; and, by considering the coordinates of 0 with reference
to two coordinate axes, we can derive the Cartesian equations
of the evolutes. E.g. (1) in the case of the parabola let the
coordinate axes be the axis and the tangent at the vertex.
Then AM = x, OM = y. Let p = 4 a; then
HM=2a, 
-#!#=!(a?-2a), and ANX = £ ( a -
But 
y2: P ^ 2 = J^Jff2: HM2, by hypothesis,
or 
y2:4:a.AN'1 = N'1H
therefore 
ay2 = ANX. NXH\
or 
27 ay2 = 4(#— 2 a)3.
(2) In the c^se of the hyperbola or ellipse we naturally take
OA, GB as axes of x and y. The work is here rather more
complicated, but there is no difficulty in obtaining, as the
locus of 0, the curve
= (a2±b2)K
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

166 
APOLLONIUS O F PERGA
The propositions V. 53, 54 are particular cases of the pre-
ceding propositions.
Construction 
of 
normals.
The next section of the Book (V. 55-63) relates to the con-
struction of normals through various points according to their
position within or without the conic and in relation to the
axes. It is proved that one normal can be drawn through any
internal point and through any external point which is not
on the axis through the vertex A. 
In particular, if 0 is any
point below the axis A A' of an ellipse, and OM is perpen-
dicular to AA\ then, if AM>AC, 
one normal can always be
drawn through 0 cutting the axis between A and C, but never
more than one such normal (V. 55-7). 
The points on the
curve at which the straight lines through 0 are normals are
determined as the intersections of the conic with a certain
rectangular hyperbola. 
The procedure
of Apollonius is equivalent to the fol-
lowing analytical method. 
Let AM be
the axis of a conic, PGO one of the
normals which passes through the given
point 0, PN the ordinate at P; and let
OM be drawn perpendicular to the axis.
Take as axes of coordinates the axes in the central conic and,
in the case of the parabola, the axis and the tangent at the
vertex.
If then (x, y) be the coordinates of P and (x19 yx) those of 0
we have 
y 
_ 
NG
Therefore (1) for the parabola
V 
=
or 
ay-(*i
(2) in the ellipse or hyperbola
b2
The intersections of these rectangular hyperbolas respec-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONICS, BOOKS V, VI 
167
tively with the conies give the points at which the normals
passing through 0 are normals.
Pappus criticizes the use of the rectangular hyperbola in
the case of the parabola as an unnecessary resort to a ' solid
locus'; the meaning evidently is that "the same points of
intersection can be got by means of a certain circle taking
the place of the rectangular hyperbola. We can, in fact, from
the equation (1) above combined with y2 = px} obtain the
circle
(* 
2 
) 
= 0.
The Book concludes with other propositions about maxima
and minima. In particular V. 68-71 compare the lengths of
tangents TQ, TQ', where Q is nearer to the axis than Q'.
V. 72, 74 compare the lengths of two normals from a point
0 from which only two can be drawn and the lengths of other
straight lines from 0 to the curve; V. 75-7 compare the
lengths of three normals to an ellipse drawn from a point
0 below the major axis, in relation to the lengths of other
straight lines from 0 to the curve.
Book VI is of much less interest. The first part (VI. 1-27)
relates to equal (i. e. congruent) or similar conies and segments
of conies; it is naturally preceded by some definitions includ-
ing those of 'equal' and 'similar' as applied to conies and
segments of conies. Conies are said to be similar if, the same
number of ordinates being drawn to the axis at proportional
distances from the vertices, all the ordinates are respectively
proportional to the corresponding abscissae. The definition of
similar segments is the same with diameter substituted for
axis, and with the additional condition that the angles
between the base and diameter in each are equal. 
Two
parabolas are equal if the ordinates to a diameter in each are
inclined to the respective diameters at equal angles and the
corresponding parameters are equal; two ellipses or hyper-
bolas are equal if the ordinates to a diameter in each are
equally inclined to the respective diameters and the diameters
as well as the corresponding parameters are equal (VI. 1. 2).
Hyperbolas or ellipses are similar when the 'figure' on a
diameter of one is similar (instead of equal) to the ' figure' on
a diameter of the other, and the ordinates to the diameters in
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

168 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
each make equal angles with them; all parabolas are similar
(VI. 11, 12,13). No conic of one of the three kinds (para-
bolas, hyperbolas or ellipses) can be equal or similar to a conic
of either of the other two kinds (VI. 3, 14, 15). Let QPQ',
qpq' be two segments of similar conies in, which QQ', qq' are
the bases and PV, pv are the diameters bisecting them; then,
if PT, pt be the tangents at P, p and meet the axes at T, t at
equal angles, and if PV: PT = pv: pt, the segments are similar
and similarly situated, and conversely (VI. 17, 18). If two
ordinates be drawn to the axes of two parabolas, or the major or
conjugate axes of two similar central conies, as PN, P'N' and
pn, p'n' respectively, such that the ratios AN: an and AN': an'
are each equal to the ratio of the respective latera recta, the
segments PP', pp' will be similar; also PP' will not be similar
to any segment in the other conic cut off by two ordinates
other than pn, p'n', and conversely (VI. 21, 22). If any cone
be cut by two parallel planes making hyperbolic or elliptic
sections, the sections will be similar but not equal (VI. 26, 27).
The remainder of the Book consists of problems of con-
struction; we are shown how in a given right cone to find
a parabolic, hyperbolic or elliptic section equal to a given
parabola, hyperbola or ellipse, subject in the case of the
hyperbola to a certain Siopio-fios or condition of possibility
(VI. 28-30); also how to find a right cone similar to a given
cone and containing a given parabola, hyperbola or ellipse as
a section of it, subject again in the case of the hyperbola to
a certain Siopta-pos (VI. 31-3). 
These problems recall the
somewhat similar problems in I. 51-9.
Book VII begins with three propositions giving expressions
for AP2 (= AN2 + PN2) in the same form as those for PN2 in
the statement of the ordinary property. In the parabola AH
is measured along the axis produced (i. e. in the opposite direc-
tion to AN) and of length equal to the lotus rectum, and it is
proved that, for any point P, AP2 = AN.NH 
(VII. 1). In
the case of the central conies A A' is divided at H, internally
for the hyperbola and externally for the ellipse (AH being the
segment adjacent to A) so that AH: A'H = p: A A', where p
is the parameter corresponding to A A', or p =. BB'2 /AA', and
it is proved that
AP2: AN.NH = A A': A'H.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONICS, BOOKS VI, VII
169
The same is true if A A' is the minor axis of an ellipse and p
the corresponding parameter (VII. 2, 3).
If AA' be divided at H' as well as H (internally for the
hyperbola and externally for the ellipse) so that if is adjacent
to A and H' to A', and if A'H: AH = AH': A'H' = AA' :p,
the lines AH, A'H' (corresponding to p in the proportion) are
called by Apollonius homologues, and he makes considerable
use of the auxiliary points H, H' in later propositions from
VII. 6 onwards. Meantime he proves two more propositions,
which, like VII. 1-3, are by way of lemmas. First, if CD be
the semi-diameter parallel to the tangent at P to a central
conic, and if the tangent meet the axis AA' in T, then
PT2: CD2 = NT: OK 
(VII. 4.)
Draw AE, TF at right angles to CA to meet CP, and let AE
meet PT in 0. Then, if p' be the parameter of the ordinates
to CP, we have
^p':PT=OP : PE 
(I. 49, 50.)
or
Therefore
\p' 
.PF=PT\
PT2: CD2 = \p'. PF-.^p'. CP
= PF:CP
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

170 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
Secondly, Apollonius proves that, if PN be a principal
ordinate in a parabola, p the principal parameter, p' the
parameter of the ordinates to the diameter through P, then
pf = p + 4:AJ!f (VII. 5); this is proved by means of the same
property as VII. 4, namely \p' :PT=0P: 
PE.
Much use is made in the remainder of the Book of two
points Q and M, where AQ is drawn parallel to the conjugate
diameter CD to meet the curve in Q, and M is the foot of
the principal ordinate at Q; since the diameter OP bisects
both -AA' and Q£, it follows that A'Q is parallel to OP.
Many ratios between functions of PP', DD' are expressed in
terms of AM, A'M, MH, MH', AH, A'H, Sec. The first pro-
positions of the Book proper (VII. 6, 7) prove, for instance,
that PP'2: DD'2 = MH'.MH.
For PT2: CD2 = NT:CN = AM: A'M, by similar triangles.
Also OP2:PT2= 
A'Q*:AQ2.
Therefore, ex aequali,
CP2: CD2 = (AM-. A'M) x (A'Q2: AQ2)
= (AM: A'M) x (A'Q2: A'M. ME')
x (A'M. MH': AM. MH) x (AM. MH: AQ2)
= (AM: A'M) x (AA': AH') x (A'M: AM)
x (MH'.MH) x (A'H: A A'), by aid of VII. 2, 3.
Therefore 
PPf2: DD'2 = MH': MH.
Next (VII. 8, 9, 10, 11) the following relations are proved,
namely
(1) AA'2:(PP' + DD')2 = A'H.MH': 
{MH'± 
V(MH.MH')}2,
(2) AA'2:PP'TDU 
= A'H: 
V(MH.MH')~
(3) A A'* : (PP'2 + DD'2) = 
A'H:MH±MH'.
The steps by which these results are obtained are as follows.
First, 
A A'2: PP'2 = A'H: MH' 
(a)
= A'H. 
MH'.MH'2.
(This is proved thus:
AA'2:PP'2=CA2:OP2
= A'M. A9A : A'Q2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONIGS, BOOK VII 
171
But 
A'Q2: A'M.MH' 
= AA':AH' 
(VII. 2, 3)
= AA':A'H
= A'M.AA':A'M.A'H,
so that, alternately,
A'M. AA': A'Q2 = A'M. A'H: A'M. ME'
= A'E: ME'.)
Next, 
PP'2: DD'2 = ME': ME, as above, 
(/8)
= ME'2: ME. ME',
whence 
PP': DD' = ME':V(ME. 
ME'), 
(y)
and PP'2: (PP' + DD')* = ME'2: {ME' + 
V{ME.ME')f;
(1) above follows from this relation and (a) ex aequali;
(2) follows from (a) and (y) ex aequali, and (3) from (a)
and (/3).
We now obtain immediately the important proposition that
PP'2 + DD'2 is constant, whatever be the position of P on an
ellipse or hyperbola (the upper sign referring to the ellipse),
and is equal to AA'2 + BB'2 (VII. 12, 13, 29, 30).
For 
AA'2: BB'2 = AA':p = A'E: AE = 
A'E:A'E,
by construction;
therefore 
AA'2:AA'2± 
BB'2 = A'E: EE';
also, from (a) above,
AA'2:PP'2 = 
A'E:ME';
and, by means of (/?),
PP'2: (PP'2 + DD'2) = ME': ME' + ME
= 
ME':EEf.
Ex aequali, from the last two relations, we have
AA'2: (PP/2±DD'2) = A'E: EE'
= AA'2: A A'2 + BB'2, from above,
whence 
PP'2 + DD'2 = A A'2 + BB'2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

172 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
A number of other ratios are expressed in terms of the
straight lines terminating at A, A', H, H', M, M' as follows
(VII. 14-20).
In the ellipse A A'2: PP'2 - DD'2 = A'H: 2 CM,
and in the hyperbola or ellipse (if p be the parameter of the
ordinates to PP')
AA'2:p2 = A'H.ME': 
MH2,
AA/2: (PP' + <pf = A'H. MH': (MH+ MH')2,
AA'*:PP'.p 
= A'H:MH,
and 
A A'2: (PP'2±p2) = A'H . MH': (MH'2 + MH2).
Apollonius is now in a position, by means of all these
relations, resting on the use of the auxiliary points H, H', M,
to compare different functions of any conjugate diameters
with the same functions of the axes, and to show how the
former vary (by way of increase or diminution) as P moves
away from A. 
The following is a list of the functions com-
pared, where for brevity I shall use a, b to represent A A', BB' \
a', V to represent PP', DD'; and p, p' to represent the para-
meters of the ordinates to AA', PP' respectively.
In a hyperbola, according as a > or < b; a' > or < b', and the
ratio a':b' decreases or increases as P moves from A on
either side; also, if a = 6, ay= b' (VII. 21-3); in an ellipse
a:b > a':b', and the latter ratio diminishes as P moves from
A to B (VII. 24).
In a hyperbola or ellipse a + b < a' + b', and a' + b' in the
hyperbola increases continually as P moves farther from A,
but in the ellipse increases till a', V take the position of the
equal conjugate diameters when it is a maximum 
(VII.
25, 26).
In a hyperbola in which a, b are unequal, or in an ellipse,
a^bxi'^b', 
and a'^b' diminishes as P moves away from A,
in the hyperbola continually, and in the ellipse till a', b' are
the equal conjugate diameters (VII. 27).
ab < a'b', and a'b' increases as P moves away from A, in the
hyperbola continually, and in the ellipse till a', V coincide with
the equal conjugate diameters (VII. 28).
VII. 31 is the important proposition that, if PPr, DD' are
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE G0NIG8, BOOK VII
173
conjugate diameters in an ellipse or conjugate hyperbolas, and
if the tangents at their extremities form the parallelogram
LL'MM\ then
the parallelogram LIJMM' = rect. AA'. BB'.
The proof is interesting. Let the tangents at P, D respec-
tively meet the major or transverse axis in T, T'.
Now (by VII. 4) 
PT2: CD2 = NT: GN\
therefore 
2 A OPT: 2 A TBC = NT: GN
But 
2AGPT:(GL) = PT.CD,
= GP: DT'} by similar triangles,
= (CL):2AT'DC.
That is, (GL) is a mean proportional between 2AGPT and
2 AT DC.
Therefore, since V(NT.CN) 
is a mean proportional between
NT and GN,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

174 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
2AGPT: (GL) = V(ON. NT): GN
(1.37,39)
= 
2AGPT:CA.GB;
therefore 
(GL) = GA . GB.
The remaining propositions of the Book trace the variations
of different functions of the conjugate diameters, distinguishing
the maximum values, &c. The functions treated are the
following:
pf, the parameter of the ordinates to PPf in the hyperbola,
according as A A' is (1) not less than ^p, the parameter corre-
sponding to A A', (2) less than p but not less than \p, (3) less
than \p (VII. 33-5).
PP'«±>p\ as compared with AA'~»p in the hyperbola (VII. 36)
or the ellipse (VII. 37).
PP'+p' 
„ 
„ 
AA'+p 
in the hyperbola (VII
38-40) or the ellipse (VII. 41).
PP'.p' 
„ 
„ 
AA'.p 
in the hyperbola (VII. 42)
or the ellipse (VII. 43).
PP'2+p'2 
„ 
„ 
AA'2+p2 in the hyperbola, accord-
ing as (1) AA' is not less than
p, or (2) J.J/<p,but A A'2 not
less than ^(AA'^p)2, 
or (3)
AA'2<\(AA'~p)2 
(VII. 44-6).
PPf2+p/2 
„ 
„ AA'2+p2 
in the ellipse, according
as AA/2 is not greater, or is
greater, than (AA'+p)2 (VII.
47, 48).
PP'2~p'2 
„ 
„ 
A A'2 ~p2 in the hyperbola, accord-
ing as A A' > or < p (VII.
49, 50).
PPf2 - p/2 
„ 
„ A A'2 - p2 or BB'2^ph
2 in the ellipse,
according as PP' > or < p'
(VII. 51).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE CONICS, BOOK VII 
175
As we have said, Book VIII is lost. The nature of its
contents can only be conjectured from Apollonius's own
remark that it contained determinate conic problems' for
which Book VII was useful, particularly in determining
limits of possibility. Unfortunately, the lemmas of Pappus
do not enable us to form any clearer idea. But it is probable
enough that the Book contained a number of problems having
for their object the finding of conjugate diameters in a given
conic such that certain functions of their lengths have given
values. It was on this assumption that Halley attempted
a restoration of the Book.
If it be thought that the above account of the Conies is
disproportionately long for a work of this kind, it must be
remembered that the treatise is a great classic which deserves
to be more known than it is. What militates against its
being read in its original form is the great extent of the
exposition (it contains 387 separate propositions), due partly
to the Greek habit of proving particular cases of a general
proposition separately from the proposition itself, but more to
the cumbrousness of the enunciations of complicated proposi-
tions in general terms (without the help of letters to denote
particular points) and to the elaborateness of the Euclidean
form, to which Apollonius adheres throughout.
Other works by Apollonius.
Pappus mentions and gives a short indication of th*e con-
tents of six other works of Apollonius which formed part of the
Treasury of Analysis} 
Three of these should be mentioned
in close connexion with the Conies.
(a) On the Cviting-off of a Ratio (\6yov anoroiiri),
two Books.
This work alone of the six mentioned has survived, and
that only in the Arabic; it was published in a Latin trans-
lation by Edmund Halley in 1706. It deals with the general
problem, ' Given two straight lines, parallel to one another or
intersecting, and a fixed point on each line, to draw through
1 Pappus, vii, pp. 640-8, 660-72.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

176 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
a given point a straight line which shall cut off segments from
each line (measured from the fixed points) bearing a given
ratio to one another! Thus, let A, B be fixed points on the
two given straight lines AC, BK, and let 0 be the given
point. It is required to draw through 0 a straight line
cutting the given straight lines in points M, N respectively
D 
M (D)A
such that AM is to BN in a given ratio. The two Books of
the treatise discussed the various possible cases of this pro-
blem which arise according to the relative positions of the
given straight lines and points, and also the necessary condi-
tions and limits of possibility in cases where a solution is not
always possible. 
The first Book begins by supposing the
given lines to be parallel, and discusses the different cases
which arise; Apollonius then passes to the cases in which the
straight lines intersect, but one of the given points, A or B> is
at the intersection of the two lines. Book II proceeds to the
general case shown in the above figure, and first proves that
the general case can be reduced to the case in Book I where
one of the given points, A or B, is at the intersection of the
two lines. The reduction is easy. For join OB meeting &.C
in B\ and draw B'Nf parallel to BN to meet OM in N\ 
Then
the ratio B'N': BN, being equal to the ratio OB': 0By is con-
stant. Since, therefore, BN.AM 
is a given ratio, the ratio
B'N': AM is also given.
Apollonius proceeds in all cases by the orthodox method of
analysis and synthesis. 
Suppose the problem solved and
OMN drawn through 0 in such a way that B'N': AM is a
given ratio = X, say.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

OF THE CUTTING-OFF OF A RATIO 
177
Draw OG parallel to BN or 5 T to meet AM in 0. Take
D on ^Lilf such that OG: AD = X = .B'lV:
Then 
AM: AD = 
B'N':0C
= B'M:CM',
therefore 
MD:AD = B'C: CM,
or 
CM. MZ) = J4Z) . ^V, a given rectangle.
Hence the problem is reduced to one of applying to GD a
rectangle (CM. MD) equal to a given rectangle (AD. B'C) hut
falling short by a square figure. In the case as drawn, what-
ever be the value of A, the solution is always possible because
the given rectangle AD - CB/ is always less than GA . AD, and
therefore always less than %GD2; one of the positions of
M falls between A and D because CM. 
MD<GA.AD.
The proposition III. 41 of the Conies about the intercepts
made on two tangents to a parabola by a third tangent
(pp. 155-6 above) suggests an obvious application of our pro-
blem. We had, with the notation of that proposition,
Pr :rq = rQ:Qp — qp :pR.
Suppose that the two tangents qP} qR are given as fixed
tangents with their points of contact P, R. 
Then we can
draw another tangent if we can draw a straight line
intersecting qP,qR in such a way that Pr:rq=qp:pR 
or
Pqiqr = qR :pR, i. e. qr :pR = Pq:qR 
(a constant ratio);
i.e. we have to draw a straight line such that the intercept by
it on qP measured from q has a given ratio to the intercept
by it on qR measured from R. 
This is a particular case of
our problem to which, as a matter of fact, ApoUonius devotes
special attention. In the annexed figure the letters have the
B' 
CM
same meaning as before, and N'M has to be drawn through 0
such that B'N': AM = A. In this case there are limits to
1523.2 
N
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

178 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
the value of X in order that the solution may be possible.
Apollonius begins by stating the limiting case, saying that we
obtain a solution in a special manner in the case where M is
the middle point of CD, so that the rectangle CM. MD or
GB'. AD has its maximum value.
The corresponding limiting value of A is determined by
finding the corresponding position of D or M.
We have 
B'G :MD = CM: AD, as before,
= 
B'M:MA;
whence, since MD = GM,
B'C:B'M=GM:MA
= B'M: B'A,
so that 
B'M* = B'C.B'A.
Thus M is found and therefore D also.
According, therefore, as A is less or greater than the par-
ticular value of OG: AD thus determined, Apollonius finds no
solution or two solutions.
Further, we have
AD = B'A + B'G- (B'D + B'C)
= 
B'A+B'C-2B'M
= B'A + B'G- 2 VB'A . B'G.
If then we refer the various points to a system of co-
ordinates in which B'A, B'N' are the axes of x and y, and if
we denote 0 by (x, y) and the length B'A by A,
A = OG/AD = y/(h + x- 2 Vhx).
If we suppose Apollonius to have used these results for the
parabola, he cannot have failed to observe that the limiting
case described is that in which 0 is on the parabola, while
N'OM is the tangent at 0 ; for, as above,
B'M: B'A = B'G: B'M = ^ 0 : N'M, by parallels,
so that B'A, N'M are divided at M, 0 respectively in the same
proportion.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON THE CUTTING-OFF OF A RATIO 
179
Further, if we put for A the ratio between the lengths of the
two fixed tangents, then if A, k be those lengths,
k 
y
which can easily be reduced to
©'+©'-••
the equation of the parabola referred to the two fixed tangents
as axes.
(/3) On the cutting-off of an area (x<opiov dTroro/xrj),
two Books.
This work, also in two Books, dealt with a similar problem,
with the difference that the intercepts on the given straight
lines measured from the given points are required, not to
have a given ratio, but to contain a given rectangle. Halley
included an attempted restoration of this work in his edition
of the Be sectione rationis.
The general case can here again be reduced to the more
special one in which one of the fixed points is at the inter-
section of the two given straight lines. Using the same
figure as before, but with D taking the position shown by (B)
in the figure, we take that point such that
OC.AB = the given rectangle.
We have then to draw ON'M through 0 such that
B'N'.AM=OC.AB,
or 
B'N':OC = AB:AM.
But, by parallels, B'N': OC = B'M: CM;
therefore 
AM: CM = AB: B'M
= MB:B'C,
so that 
B'M. MB = AB. B'C.
Hence, as before, the problem is reduced to an application
of a rectangle in the well-known manner. 
The complete
N 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

180 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
treatment of this problem in all its particular cases with their
Siopio-fjioi could present no difficulty to Apollonius.
If the two straight lines are parallel, the solution of the
problem gives a means of drawing any number of tangents
to an ellipse when two parallel tangents, their points of con-
tact, and the length of the parallel semi-diameter are given
(see Conies, III. 42). In the case of the hyperbola (III. 43)
the intercepts made by any tangent on the asymptotes contain
a constant rectangle. Accordingly the drawing of tangents
depends upon the particular case of our problem in which both
fixed points are the intersection of the two fixed lines.
(y) On determinate section (SLcoptafjievrj rofiri), two Books.
The general problem here is, Given four points A, B, C, D on
a straight line, to determine another point P on the same
straight line such that the ratio AP. CP: BP. DP has a
given value. It is clear from Pappus's accountx of the contents
of this work, and from his extensive collection of lemmas to
the different propositions in it, that the question was very
exhaustively discussed. To determine P by means of the
equation
AP.CP^X.BP.DP,
where A, B} C, D, A are given, is in itself an easy matter since
the problem can at once be put into the form of a quadratic
equation, and the Greeks would have no difficulty in reducing
it to the usual application of areas. If, however (as we may
fairly suppose), it was intended for application in further
investigations, the complete discussion of it would naturally
include not only the finding of a solution, but also the deter-
mination of the limits of possibility and the number of possible
solutions for different positions of the point-pairs A, 0 and
J5, D, for the cases in which the points in either pair coincide,
or in which one of the points is infinitely distant, and so on.
This agrees with what we find in Pappus, who makes it clear
that, though we do not meet with any express mention of
series of point-pairs determined by the equation for different
values of A, yet the treatise contained what amounts to a com-
1 Pappus, vii, pp. 642-4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON DETERMINATE 
SECTION 
181
plete Theory of Involution. 
Pappus says that the separate
cases were dealt with in which the given ratio was that of
either (1) the square of one abscissa measured from the
required point or (2) the rectangle contained by two such
abscissae to any one of the following: (1) the square of one
abscissa, (2) the rectangle contained by one abscissa and
another separate line of given length independent of the
position of the required point, (3) the rectangle contained by
two abscissae. We learn also that maxima and minima were
investigated. 
From the lemmas, too, we may draw other
conclusions, e. g.
(1) that, in the case where X = 1, or AP.CP = 
BP.DP,
Apollonius used the relation BP.DP = AB .BC :AD. DC,
(2) that Apollonius probably obtained a double point E of the
involution determined by the point-pairs A, C and B, D by
means of the relation
AB. BC.AD. DC = BE2: DE2.
A possible application of the problem was the determination
of the points of intersection of the given straight line with a
conic determined as a four-line locus, since A, B, 0, D are in
fact the points of intersection of the given straight line with
the four lines to which the locus has reference.
(S) 0)i Contacts or Tangencies (kira^ai), two Books.
Pappus again comprehends in one enunciation the varieties
of problems dealt with in the treatise, which we may repro-
duce as follows: Given three things, each^ of which may be
either a point, a straight line or a circle, to draw a circle
which shall pass through each of the given points (so far as it
is points that are given) and - touch the straight lines or
circles.1 The possibilities as regards the different data are
ten. 
We may have any one of the following: (1) three
points, (2) three straight lines, (3) two points and a straight
line, (4) two straight lines and a point, (5) two points and
a circle, (6) two circles and a point, (7) two straight lines and
1 Pappus, vii, p. 644, 25-8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

182 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
a circle, (8) two circles and a straight line, (9) a point, a circle
and a straight line, (10) three circles. Of these varieties the
first two are treated in Eucl. IV; Book I of Apollonius's
treatise treated of (3), (4), (5), (6), (8), (9), while (7), the case of
two straight lines and a circle, and (10), that of the three
circles, occupied the whole of Book II.
The last problem (10), where the data are three circles,
has exercised the ingenuity of man}7 distinguished geometers,
including Vieta and Newton. Vieta (1540-1603) set the pro-
blem to Adrianus Komanus (van Roomen, 1561-1615) who
solved it by means of a hyperbola. Vieta was not satisfied
with this, and rejoined with his Apollonius Gallus (1600) in
which he solved the problem by plane methods. A solution
of the same kind is given by Newton in his Arithmetica
Universalis (Prob. xlvii), while an equivalent problem is
solved by means of two hyperbolas in the Principia, Lemma
xvi. The problem is quite capable of a f plane' solution, and,
as a matter of fact, it is not difficult to restore the actual
solution of Apollonius (which of course used the 'plane' method
depending on the straight line and circle only), by means of
the lemmas given by Pappus. Three things are necessary to
the solution. (1) A proposition, used by Pappus elsewhere1
and easily proved, that, if two circles touch internally or
externally, any straight line through the point of contact
divides the circles into segments respectively similar. (2) The
proposition that, given three circles, their six centres of simili-
tude (external and internal) lie three by three on four straight
lines. This proposition, though not proved in Pappus, was
certainly known to the ancient geometers; it is even possible
that Pappus omitted to prove it because it was actually proved
by Apollonius in his treatise. (3) An auxiliary problem solved
by Pappus and enunciated by him as follows.2 Given a circle
ABC, and given three points D, E, F in a straight line, to
inflect (the broken line) DAE (to the circle) so as to make BG
in a straight line with GF\ in other words, to inscribe in the
circle a triangle the sides of which, when produced, pass
respectively through three given points lying in a straight
line. This problem is interesting as a typical example of the
ancient analysis followed by synthesis. Suppose the problem
1 Pappus, iv, pp. 194-6. 
2 Ib. vii, p. 848.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

OF CONTACTS OR TANGENCIES 
183
solved, i.e. suppose DA, EA drawn to the circle cutting it in
points B, C such that BC produced passes through F.
Draw BG parallel to DF; join GC
and produce it to meet DE in H.
Then
£BAC=£BGC
= /.CHF
= supplement of Z CHD;
therefore A, D,H,C lie on a circle, and
DE.EH=AE.EC 
o H K E 
F
Now AE.EC is given, being equal to the square on the
tangent from E to the circle; and DE is given; therefore HE
is given, and therefore the point H
But F is also given; therefore the problem is reduced to
drawing HC, FG to meet the circle in such a way that, if
HG, FG produced meet the circle again in 6?, By the straight
line BG is parallel to HF: a problem which Pappus has
previously solved.1
Suppose this done, and draw BK the tangent at B meeting
HF in K. 
Then
Z KBC = Z BGC, in the alternate segment,
= ICHF.
Also the angle CFK is common to the two triangles KBF,
GHF\ therefore the triangles are similar, and
CF:FH = KF:FB,
or 
HF.FK = BF.FC.
Now BF.FC is given, and so is HF)
therefore FK is given, and therefore K is given.
The synthesis is as follows. Take a point H on DE such
that DE. EH is equal to the square on the tangent from E to
the circle.
Next take K on ilFsuch that HF .FK = the square on the
tangent from F to the circle.
Draw the tangent to the circle from K, and let B be the
point of contact. Join BF meeting the circle in (7, and join
1 Pappus, vii, pp. 830-2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

184
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
HG meeting the circle again in G. It is then easy to prove
that BO is parallel to DF.
Now join EG, and produce it to meet the circle again at A ;
join AB.
We have only to prove that AB, BB are in one straight line.
Since DE.EH=AE.EC, 
the points A, D, H, G are con-
cyclic.
Now the angle GHF, which is the supplement of the angle
GHD, is equal to the angle BGC, and therefore to the
angle BAG.
Therefore the angle BAG is equal to the supplement of
angle DHC, so that the angle BAG is equal to the angle DAG,
and AB, BD are in a straight line.
The problem of Apollonius is now easy. We will take the
case in which the required circle touches all the three given
circles externally as shown in the figure. Let the radii of the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON CONTACTS OR TANGENCIES 
185
given circles be a, b, c and their centres A, B, C. Let D, E, F
be the external centres of similitude so that BD:DC=b:c, &c.
Suppose the problem solved, and let P, Q, R be the points
of contact. Let PQ produced meet the circles with centres
A, B again in K, L. Then, by the proposition (1) above, the
segments KGP, QHL are both similar to the segment PYQ;
therefore they are similar to one another. It follows that PQ
produced beyond L passes through F. Similarly QR, PR
produced pass respectively through _D, E.
Let PE, QD meet the circle with centre C again in My iVr.
Then, the segments PQR, RNM being similar, the angles
PQR, RNM are equal, and therefore MN is parallel to PQ.
Produce NM to meet EF in V.
Then 
EV: EF = EM:EP 
= EC.EA 
= c:a;
therefore the point V is given.
Accordingly the problem reduces itself to this: Given three
points V, Ey D in a straight line, it is required to draw BR, ER
to a point R on the circle with centre C so that, if DR, ER meet
the circle again in JV", M, NM produced shall pass through V.
This is the problem of Pappus just solved.
Thus R is found, and DR, ER produced meet the circles
with centres B and A in the other required points Q, P
respectively.
(e) Plane loci, two Books.
Pappus gives a pretty full account of the contents of this
work, which has sufficed to enable restorations of it to
be made by three distinguished geometers, Fermat, van
Schooten, and (most completely) by Robert Simson. Pappus
prefaces his account by a classification of loci on two
different plans. Under the first classification loci are of three
kinds: (1) efaKTiKot, holding-in or fixed; in this case the
locus of a point is a point, of a line a line, and of a solid
a solid, where presumably the line or solid can only move on
itself so that it does not change its position: (2) Siego-
SIKOL, passing-along: this is the ordinary sense of a locus,
where the locus of a point is a line, and of a line a solid:
(3) ava<TTpo<pLKoi, moving backwards and forwards, as it were,
in which sense a plane may be the locus of a point and a solid
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

186 
AP0LL0N1US OF PERGA
of a line.1 The second classification is the familiar division into
plane, solid, and linear loci, plane loci being straight lines
and circles only, solid loci conic sections only, and linear loci
those which are not straight lines nor circles nor any of the
conic sections. The loci dealt with in our treatise are accord-
ingly all straight lines or circles. The proof of the pro-
positions is of course enormously facilitated by the use of
Cartesian coordinates, and many of the loci are really the
geometrical equivalent of fundamental theorems in analytical
or algebraical geometry. Pappus begins with a composite
enunciation, including a number of propositions, in these
terms, which, though apparently confused, are not difficult
to follow out:
1 If two straight lines be drawn, from one given point or from
two, whiph are (a) in a straight line or (b) parallel or
(c) include a given angle, and either (a) bear a given ratio to
one another or (/3) contain a given rectangle, then, if the locus
of the extremity of one of the lines is a plane locus given in
position, the locus of the extremity of the other will also be a
plane locus given in position, which will sometimes be of the
same kind as the former, sometimes of the other kind, and
will sometimes be similarly situated with reference to the
straight line, and sometimes contrarily, according to the
particular differences in the suppositions/2
(The words' with reference to the straight line' are obscure, but
the straight line is presumably some obvious straight line in
each figure, e.g., when there are two given points, the straight
line joining them.) After quoting three obvious loci e added
by Charmandrus', Pappus gives three loci which, though con-
taining an unnecessary restriction in the third case, amount
to the statement that any equation of the first degree between
coordinates inclined at fixed angles to (a) two axes perpen-
dicular or oblique, (b) to any number of axes, represents a
straight line. The enunciations (5-7) are as follows.3
5. 'If, when a straight line is given in magnitude and is
moved so as always to be parallel to a certain straight line
given in position, one of the extremities (of the moving
straight line), lies on a straight line given in position, the
1 Pappus, vii, pp. 660. 18-662. 5. 
2 Ib. vii, pp. 662. 25-664. 7.
3 Ib., pp. 664. 20-666. 6.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PLANE 
LOCI 
187
other extremity will also lie on a straight line given in
position/
(That is, x = a or y = b in Cartesian coordinates represents a
straight line.)
6. 'If from any point straight lines be drawn to meet at given
angles two straight lines either parallel or intersecting, and if
the straight lines so drawn have a given ratio to one another
or if the sum of one of them and a line to which the other has
a given ratio be given (in length), then the point will lie on a
straight line given in position/
(This includes the equivalent of saying that, if x, y be the
coordinates of the point, each of the equations x = my,
x + my = c represents a straight line.)
7. ' If any number of straight lines be given in position, and
straight lines be drawn from a point to meet them at given
angles, and if the straight lines so drawn be such that the
rectangle contained by one of them and a given straight line
added to the rectangle contained by another of them and
(another) given straight line is equal to the rectangle con-
tained by a third and a (third) given straight line, and simi-
larly with the others, the point will lie on a straight line given
in position/
(Here we have trilinear or multilinear coordinates propor-
tional to the distances of the variable point from each of the
three or more fixed lines. When there are three fixed lines,
the statement is that ax + by — cz represents a straight line.
The precise meaning of the words 'and similarly with the
the others' or 'of the others'—KOU TS>V XOITT&V 6/JLOICO$—is
uncertain; the words seem to imply that, when there were
more than three rectangles ax, by, cz ..., two of them were
taken to be equal to the sum of all the others; but it is quite
possible that Pappus meant that any linear equation between
these rectangles represented a straight line. 
Precisely how
far Apollonius went in generality we are not in a position to
judge.)
The last enunciation (8) of Pappus referring to Book I
states that,
' If from any point (two) straight lines be drawn to meet (two)
parallel straight lines given in position at given angles, and
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

188 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
cut off from the parallels straight lines measured from given
points on them such that (a) they have a given ratio or
(b) they contain a given rectangle or (c) the sum or difference
of figures of given species described on them respectively is
equal to a given area, the point will lie on a straight line
given in position/1
The contents of Book II are equally interesting. Some of
the enunciations shall for brevity be given by means of letters
instead of in general terms. If from two given points A, B
two straight lines be ' inflected' (KXacrOaxnv) to a point P, then
(1), if AP2 *BP2 is given, the locus of P is a straight line;
(2) if AP, BP'&ie in a given ratio, the locus is a straight line
or a circle [this is the proposition quoted by Eutocius in his
commentary on the Conies, but already known to Aristotle];
(4) if AP2 is ' greater by a given area than in a given ratio'
to BP2, i.e. if AP2 = a2 + m. BP2, the locus is a circle given in
position. An interesting proposition is (5) that, ' If from any
number of given points whatever straight lines be inflected to
one point, and the figures (given in species) described on all of
them be together equal to a given area, the point will lie on
a circumference (circle) given in position'; that is to say, if
a. AP2 +/?. BP2 + y. CP2 + ... = a given area (where a,(3, y ...
are constants), the locus of P is a circle. (3) states that, if
AN be a fixed straight line and A a fixed point on it, and if
AP be any straight line drawn to a point P such that3 if PN
is perpendicular to AN, AP2 = a . AN or a . BN, where a is a
given length and B is another fixed point on AN, then the
locus of P is a circle given in position; this is equivalent
to the fact that, if A be the origin, AN the axis of x, and
x — AN, y = PN be the coordinates of P, the locus x2 + y2 = ax
or x2 + y2 — a(x — b) is a circle. (6) is somewhat obscurely
enunciated: ' If from two given points straight lines be in-
flected (to a point), and from the point (of concourse) a straight
line be drawn parallel to a straight line given in position and
cutting off from another straight line given in position an
intercept measured from a given point on it, and if the sum of
figures (given in species) described on the two inflected lines
be equal to the rectangle contained by a given straight line
and the intercept, the point at which the straight lines are
1 Pappus, vii, p. 666. 7-13.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PLANE 
LOCI 
189
inflected lies on a circle given in position/ 
The meaning
seems to be this: Given two fixed points A, B, a length a,
a straight line OX with a point 0 fixed upon it, and a direc-
tion represented, say, by any straight line OZ through 0, then,
if AP, BP be drawn to P, and PM parallel to OZ meets OX
in M} the locus of P will be a circle given in position if
where a, j8 are constants. 
The last two loci are again
obscurely expressed, but the sense is this: (7) If PQ be any
chord of a circle passing through a fixed internal point 0, and
R be an external point on PQ produced such that either
(a) OR2 = PR.RQ or (b) 0R2 + P0.0Q= 
PR.RQ, the locus
of R is a straight line given in position. (8) is the reciprocal
of this: Given the fixed point 0, the straight line which is
the locus of R, and also the relation (a) or (6), the locus of
P, Q is a circle.
(Q Nevcrec? (Vergings or Inclinations), two Books.
As we have seen, the problem in a vevcris is to place
between two straight lines, a straight line and a curve, or
two curves, a straight line of given length in such a way
that it verges towards a fixed point, i.e. it will, if pro-
duced, pass through a fixed point. Pappus observes that,
when we come to particular cases, the problem will be
(plane5, 'solid' or 'linear', according to the nature of the
particular hypotheses; but a selection had been made from
the class which could be solved by plane methods, i.e. by
means of the straight line and circle, the object being to give
those which were more generally useful in geometry. The
following were the cases thus selected and proved.1
I. Given (a) a semicircle and a straight line at right angles
to the base, or (b) two semicircles with their bases in a straight
line, to insert a straight line of given length verging to an
angle of the semicircle [or of one of the semicircles].
II. Given a rhombus with one side produced, to insert
a straight line of given length in the external angle so that it
verges to the opposite angle.
Pappus, vix, pp. 670-2.
i
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

190 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
III. Given a circle, to insert a chord of given length verging
to a given point.
In Book I of Apollonius's work there were four cases of
I (a), two cases of III, and two of II; the second Book con-
tained ten cases of I (&).
Restorations were attempted by Marino Ghetaldi (Apollonius
redivivus, Venice, 1607, and Apollonius redivivus . . . Liber
secundus, Venice, 1613), Alexander Anderson (in a Supple-
mentum Apollonii redivivi, 1612), and Samuel Horsley
(Oxford, 1770); the last is much the most complete.
In the case of the rhombus (II) the construction of Apollonius
can be restored with certainty. It depends on a lemma given
by Pappus, which is as follows: Given a rhombus AD with
diagonal BC produced to E, if F be taken on BC such that EF
is a mean proportional between BE and EC, and if a circle be
described with E as centre and EF as radius cutting CD
in K and AC produced in H, then shall B, K, H be in one
straight line.1
Let the circle cut AC in L, join LK meeting BC in M, and
join HE, LE, KE.
Since now CL, CK are equally inclined to the diameter of
the circle, CL = CK. Also EL = EK, and it follows that the
triangles ECK, ECL are equal in all respects, so that
LCKE = £CLE = /.CHE.
By hypothesis, 
EB:EF=EF:EC,
or 
EB:EK = EK:EC.
1 Pappus, vii, pp. 778-80.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

NETSEIS 
(VERGINGS OR INCLINATIONS) 191
Therefore the triangles BEK, KEG, which have the angle
BEK common, are similar, and
Z GBK = Z GKE = Z CHE (from above).
But 
LHGE = IAGB = IBCK.
Therefore in the triangles GBK, CHE two angles are
respectively equal, so that Z GEH = Z CiJTi? also.
But since Z CZ# = Z CHE (from above), Z", C} E, H are
concyclic.
Hence 
Z <?##+ Z CZ// = (two right angles);
therefore, since 
Z GEH = Z GKB,
Z CZ5 + Z GKH = (two right angles),
and BKH is a straight line.
It is certain, from the nature of this lemma, that Apollonius
made his construction by drawing the circle shown in the
figure.
He would no doubt arrive at it by analysis somewhat as
follows.
Suppose the problem solved, and HK inserted as re-
quired (= h).
Bisect HK in Nt and draw NE at right angles to KH
meeting BC produced in E. Draw KM perpendicular to BC,
and produce it to meet AC in i . Then, by the property of
the rhombus, LM = MK, and, since KN = NH also, MN is
parallel to LH.
Now, since the angles at if, N are right, M, K, N, E are
concyclic.
Therefore LCEK = LMNK = ACHK, so that C, K, H, E
are concyclic.
Therefore Z BCD = supplement of KCE = LEHK = IEKH,
and the triangles EKH, DCB are similar.
Lastly,
/.EBK=AEKH-£CEK=lEHK-£CHK=£EHC=£EKC;
therefore the triangles EBK, EKC are similar, and
BE:EK = EK:EC,
or 
BE.EC = EK2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

192 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
But, by similar triangles EKE, DCB,
EK:KH=DC:CB,
and, since the ratio DG.CB, as well as KH, is given, EK
is given.
The construction then is as follows.
If k be the given length* take a straight line p such that
apply to BG a rectangle BE. EG equal to p2 and exceeding by
a square; then with E as centre and radius equal to p describe a
circle cutting AG produced in H and CD in K. HK is then
equal to k and, by Pappus's lemma, verges towards B.
Pappus adds an interesting solution of the same problem
with reference to a square instead of a rhombus; the solution
is by one Heraclitus and depends on a lemma which Pappus
also gives.1
We hear of yet other lost works by Apollonius.
(77) A Comparison of the dodecahedron with the icosahedron.
This is mentioned by Hypsicles in the preface to the so-called
Book XIV of Euclid. Like the Conies, it appeared in two
editions, the second of which contained the proposition that,
if there be a dodecahedron and an icosahedron inscribed in
one and the same sphere, the surfaces of the solids are in the
same ratio as their volumes; this was established by showing
that the perpendiculars from .the centre of the sphere to
a pentagonal face of the dodecahedron and to a triangular
face of the icosahedron are equal.
(0) Marinus on Euclid's Data speaks of a General Treatise
(KCCOOXOV TrpayjxaTHa) in which Apollonius used the word
assigned (rerayyiivov) as a comprehensive term to describe the
datum in general. It would appear that this work must
have dealt with the fundamental principles of mathematics,
definitions, axioms, &c, and that to it must be referred the
various remarks on such subjects attributed to Apollonius by
Proclus, the elucidation of the notion of a line, the definition
1 Pappus, vii, pp. 780-4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

OTHER LOST WORKS 
193
of plane and solid angles, and his attempts to prove the axioms;
it must also have included the three definitions (13-15) in
Euclid's Data which, according to a scholium, were due to
Apollonius and must therefore have been interpolated (they
are definitions of KaTrjyfj.ii/r], di/rjy/jiii/r], and the elliptical
phrase irapa 0eera, which means 'parallel to a straight line
given in position3). Probably the same work also contained
Apollonius's alternative constructions for the problems of
Eucl. I. 10, 11 and 23 given by Proclus. Pappus speaks
of a mention by Apollonius ' before his own elements' of the
class of locus called ecpeKTiicos, and it may be that the treatise
now in question is referred to rather than the Plane Loci
itself.
(i) The work On the Cochlias was on the cylindrical helix.
It included the theoretical generation of the curve on the
surface of the cylinder, and the proof that the curve is
homoeomeric or uniform, i.e. such that any part will fit upon
or coincide with any other.
(K) A work on Unordered Irrationals is mentioned by
Proclus, and a scholium on Eucl. X. 1 extracted from Pappus's
commentary remarks that s Euclid did not deal with all
rationals and irrationals, but only with the simplest kinds by
the combination of which an infinite number of irrationals
are formed, of which latter Apollonius also gave some5.
To a like effect is a passage of the fragment of Pappus's
commentary on Eucl. X discovered in an Arabic translation
by Woepcke: ' it was Apollonius who, besides the ordered
irrational magnitudes, showed the existence of the unordered,
and by accurate methods set forth a great number of them \
The hints given by the author of the commentary seem to imply
that Apollonius's extensions of the- theory of irrationals took
two directions, (1) generalizing the medial straight line of
Euclid, on the basis that, between two lines commensurable in
square (only), we may take not only one sole medial line but
three or four, and so on ad infinitum, since we can take,
between any two given straight lines, as many lines as
we please in continued proportion, (2) forming compound
irrationals by the addition and subtraction of more than two
terms of the sort composing the binomials, apotomes, &c.
1523.2 
O
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

194 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
(A) On the burning-mirror (wept rov irvpiov) is the title of
another work of ApoUonius mentioned by the author of the
Fragmentum mathematicum Bobiense, which is attributed by
Heiberg to Anthemius but is1 more likely (judging by its sur-
vivals of antiquated terminology) to belong to a much earlier
date. 
The fragment shows that Apollonius discussed the
spherical form of mirror among others. Moreover, the extant
fragment by Anthemius himself (on burning mirrors) proves the
property of mirrors of parabolic section, using the properties of
the parabola (a) that the tangent at any point makes equal
angles with the axis and with the focal distance of the point,
and (6) that the distance of any point on the curve from the
focus is equal to its distance from a certain straight line
(our ' directrix'); and we can well believe that the parabolic
form of mirror was also considered in Apollonius's work, and
that he was fully aware of the focal properties of the parabola,
notwithstanding the omission from the Conies of all mention
of the focus of a parabola.
(ji) In a work called WKVTOKLOI/ (' quick-delivery3) Apollonius
is said to have found an approximation to the value of ir 'by
a different calculation (from that of Archimedes), bringing it
withm closer limits \1 Whatever these closer limits may have
been, they were considered to be less suitable for practical use
than those of Archimedes.
It is a moot question whether Apollonius's system of arith-
metical notation (by tetrads) for expressing large numbers
and performing the usual arithmetical operations with them,
as described by Pappus, was included in this same work.
Heiberg thinks it probable, but there does not seem to be any
necessary reason why the notation for large numbers, classify-
ing them into myriads, double myriads, triple myriads, &c,
i.e. according to powers of L0,000, need have been connected
with the calculation of the value of w, unless indeed the num-
bers used in the calculation were so large as to require the
tetradic system for the handling of them.
We have seen that Apollonius is credited with a solu-
tion of the problem of the two mean proportionals (vol. i,
pp. 262-3).
1 v. Eutocius on Arcbimedes, Measurement of a Circle,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

OTHER LOST WORKS 
195
Astronomy.
We are told by Ptolemaeus Chennus1 that Apollonius was
famed for his astronomy, and was called e (Epsilon) because
the form of that letter is associated with that of the moon, to
which his accurate researches principally related. 
Hippolytus
says he made the distance of the moon's circle from the sur-
face of the earth to be 500 myriads of stades.2 This figure
can hardly be right, for, the diameter of the earth being,
according to Eratosthenes's evaluation, about eight myriads of
stades, this would make the distance of the mobn from the
earth about 125 times the earth's radius. This is an unlikely
figure, seeing that Aristarchus had given limits for the ratios
between the distance of the moon and its diameter, and
between the diameters of the moon and the earth, which lead
to about 19 as the ratio of the moon's distance to the earth's
radius. Tannery suggests that perhaps Hippolytus made a
mistake in copying from his source and took the figure of
5,000,000 stades to be the length of the radius instead of the
diameter of the moon's orbit.
But we have better evidence of the achievements of Apol-
lonius in astronomy. In Ptolemy's Syntaxis3 he appears as
an authority upon the hypotheses of epicycles and eccentrics
designed to account for the apparent motions of the planets.
The propositions of Apollonius quoted by Ptolemy contain
exact statements of the alternative hypotheses, and from this
fact it was at one time concluded that Apollonius invented
the two hypotheses. This, however, is not the case. The
hypothesis of epicycles was already involved, though with
restricted application, in the theory of Heraclides of Pontus
that the two inferior planets, Mercury and Venus, revolve in
circles like satellites round the sun, while the sun itself
revolves in a circle round the earth; that is, the two planets
describe epicycles about the material sun as moving centre.
In order to explain the motions of the superior planets by
means of epicycles it was necessary to conceive of an epicycle
about a point as moving centre which is not a material but
a mathematical point. It was some time before this extension
of the theory of epicycles took place, and in the meantime
1 apud Photium, Cod. cxc, p. 151 b 18, ed. Bekker.
2 Hippol. Befut iv. 8, p. 66, ed. Duncker. 
3 Ptolemy, Syntaxis, xii. 1.
02
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

196 
APOLLONIUS OF PERGA
another hypothesis, that of eccentrics, was invented to account
for the movements of the superior planets only. We are at this
stage when we come jbo Apollonius. His enunciations show
that he understood the theory of epicycles in all its generality,
but he states specifically that the theory of eccentrics can only
be applied to the three planets which can be at any distance
from the sun. The reason why he says that the eccentric
hypothesis will not serve for the inferior planets is that, in
order to make it serve, we should have to suppose the circle
described by the centre of the eccentric circle to be greater
than the eccentric circle itself. (Even this generalization was
made later, at or before the time of Hipparchus.) 
Apollonius
further says in his enunciation about the eccentric that' the
centre of the eccentric circle moves about the centre of the
zodiac in the direct order of the signs and at a sjjeed equal to
that of the sun, while the star moves on the eccentric about
its centre in the inverse order of the signs and at a speed
equal to the anomaly \ It is clear from this that the theory
of eccentrics was invented for the specific purpose of explain-
ing the movements of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn about the
sun and for that purpose alone. This explanation, combined
with the use of epicycles about the sun as centre to account
for the motions of Venus and Mercury, amounted to the
system of Tycho Brahe ; that system was therefore anticipated
by some one intermediate in date between Heraclides and
Apollonius and probably nearer to the latter, or it may
have been Apollonius himself who took this important step.
If it was, then Apollonius, coming after Aristarchus of
Samos, would be exactly the Tycho Brahe of the Copernicus
of antiquity 
The actual propositions quoted by Ptolemy as
proved by Apollonius among, others show mathematically at
what points, under each of the two hypotheses, the apparent
forward motion changes into apparent retrogradation and
vice versa, or the planet appears to be stationary.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

