
Conspiracies and Conspiracy Theories  
in the Age of Trump

Daniel C. Hellinger
Conspiracies and 
Conspiracy Theories 
in the Age of Trump

Daniel C. Hellinger
International Relations
Webster University
St. Louis, MO, USA
ISBN 978-3-319-98157-4 	
ISBN 978-3-319-98158-1  (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98158-1
Library of Congress Control Number: 2018951556
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2019
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the 
Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights 
of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction 
on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and 
retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology 
now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this 
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are 
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and 
information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. 
Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, 
with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have 
been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional affiliations.
Cover credit: White House Photo/Alamy Stock Photo  
Cover design by Henry Petrides
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

v
Preface
In 1991 I published (with my co-author) The Democratic Façade1, an 
alternative, critical view of politics in the United States, mostly intended 
to be used as a companion to the main text for Introduction to American 
Politics. At the time, I was a regular contributor to the St. Louis 
Journalism Review, and I gave a copy of the new edition to the editor 
and publisher, Charles Klotzer.
Charles was enthusiastic about the book and said he was going to 
ask former U.S. Senator Thomas Eagleton to review it. I told Charles 
that Senator Eagleton, a thoughtful and genuinely liberal person, was 
going to hate the book. We were challenging the paradigmatic myths of 
American democracy. We argued, in the spirit of C. Wright Mills,2 that 
elites were well-networked and usually able to manage popular discon-
tent and, just as importantly, able to manage their differences among 
themselves. In a variety of ways, they could use their wealth to influence 
the media, maintain a consensus about defending capitalism at home and 
abroad, coopt elected officials through what even then seemed a cam-
paign finance sewer, and in other ways translate their wealth into political 
power. Both in domestic and foreign policy the record suggested much 
less respect for democratic norms than the mainstream view in the stand-
ard political science literature. In that view, the theory of pluralism, elites 
are competitive and not in accord with one another on policies. Just as 
important our book contended that in contrast to the pluralist argument, 
liberal democratic institutions in the United States do not keep elites 
responsive to public preferences.

vi     Preface
It is important here to specify that we were not arguing that liberal 
democratic theory and pluralism get American politics all wrong. And 
this book adopts that view as well. There are substantive differences in 
perspectives, to name some examples, on taxation, spending, trade pol-
icy and, to a less but still significant degree, foreign policy. But elite 
power circumscribes the policy alternatives put forward, much as Peter 
Bachrach argued.3 His remedy for this state of affairs is more participa-
tion in democracy. I agree with both of those propositions. However, I 
think anyone who has examined contemporary populism and especially 
conspiracism in the years since Donald Trump began his rise to the pres-
idency in 2013 would think that all kinds of participation are equally sal-
utary to democracy.
I hardly imagined that the theme of elite power would lead me to 
take more seriously the importance of conspiracies and conspiracy the-
ory in politics. My movement in that direction began with Eagleton’s 
review,4 which was even more damning than we expected. He honed 
onto a chapter in which we described how the CIA had intervened in 
Nicaragua and undermined the Sandinista revolutionary experiment, 
even after the revolutionary government had ratified its democratic legit-
imacy in an election largely hailed as free and fair by just about all inter-
national observers except the U.S. Department of State. Furthermore, 
U.S. military support of the Contra rebels continued in violation of 
international law and in violation of an express legislative prohibition by 
the U.S. Congress. We had cited it as example of the superficiality of the 
American ruling class’s commitment to democracy.
Senator Eagleton took issue, as I thought he would, with our por-
trayal of weak democracy in America. What I didn’t expect was that we 
would be proclaimed as “conspiracy theorists” for suggesting the CIA 
and elements of the U.S. national security state shared responsibil-
ity for the civil war in Nicaragua and the death squad government then 
ruling El Salvador. When the second edition of the book came out in 
1994 we formulated a response to the “conspiracy theory” allegation: 
Conspiracies existed, we said, but they do not take us very far toward 
understanding politics. This is a common reaction among academics who 
write critically about social justice and American foreign policy. The most 
widely-read radical theorist of our times, Noam Chomsky, has consist-
ently taken the same position.5

Preface     vii
It must have been about a year or two later when I was telling this 
story to a colleague, a professor who had emigrated from Central Asia.6 
Somehow, the conversation turned to the Kennedy assassination, and I 
casually asserted that alternatives to the “lone gunman” narrative were 
nothing more than “conspiracy theories.”
My colleague offered a response along these lines: “Do you mean to 
tell me that if the prime minister of Pakistan had been assassinated alleg-
edly by a killer known to the security service, who had sought to work 
for them, and that the next day the suspect was shot in plain view in a 
police station by a gunman associated with a shadowy criminal under-
ground; that despite all this you would believe the findings of a govern-
ment commission that the prime minister’s murder was carried out by 
the alleged assassin acting alone? And would you stand behind that idea 
even as it became clear that from the start the investigative commission 
was chosen by the successor of the slain leader to arrive at that opinion 
before it even began its work?”
Even today I do not discard the theory that Lee Harvey Oswald acted 
alone; nor on the contrary have I embraced any of the particular JFK 
conspiracy theory that has been advanced. Having listened to record-
ings of Lyndon Johnson cajoling politicians and judges to serve on the 
Warren Commission, as well as having reviewed other materials about 
his presidency, I believe theories regarding his alleged participation are 
completely unwarranted. However, I did begin to re-think the anoma-
lies of the assassination and to seek out perspectives critical of the usual 
views of conspiracy theories. It left me agnostic about the possibility that 
there was a conspiracy behind the assassination and especially concerned 
about the way the political class, the mainstream media, and most elites 
closed ranks around the Warren Commission, despite the evidence that 
the investigation, if not the assassination itself, was product of a conspir-
acy to hide something.
Just as importantly, I began to realize that I myself had been pan-
icked into dismissing the plausibility of a conspiracy. I simply rejected 
the notion that conspiracies could really matter in a politically devel-
oped country like the United States. I began to realize that being upset 
about being labelled a “conspiracy theorist” had to do with worrying 
about being relegated to the margins of the academy. I began to think 
that both conspiracies and conspiracy theory needed to be reconsidered 
within political science.

viii     Preface
As a specialist on Latin America politics, I began to think about how 
military coups, so common in the region’s history, require a conspiracy 
to be carried out. One of the best and most widely read books on coups, 
a case study of coups in Brazil by the highly respected Alfred Stepan, 
suggested to me that carrying off the military overthrow of a govern-
ment requires a conspiracy, and that this element of agency can be com-
bined with attention to larger forces, such as political polarization and 
the breakdown of consensus among political elites, to understand under-
lying forces of political instability in a society.7 To be clear, Stepan does 
not explicitly address conspiracism in his work; nor, to my knowledge, 
has any political scientist characterized this aspect of his work as “con-
spiracy theory.” But how can one not see coup making as anything but 
a project that requires secrecy and collusion to achieve a political goal? 
These are the elements of a conspiracy, I believe. And they apply to 
much more than just coup making. What we call today “fake news” is 
one example.
My desire to explore conspiracies as a form of doing politics has deep-
ened with Donald Trump’s ascent to the presidency. I cannot help but 
take note that political scientists are beginning to doubt American excep-
tionalism, and that concepts, such as the “Deep State,” once regarded by 
mainstream journalists only for paranoid conspiracy theorists, are begin-
ning to appear in editorial pages and news commentary. Also, another 
political phenomenon, populism, closely associated with conspiracy the-
ories in mainstream history and political science, has once again made an 
appearance, this time on a global level, and in the United States in the 
candidacies of Trump and Bernie Sanders. I began to recognize a form 
of conspiracy panic in the way that Sanders and left populism have been 
equated by some pundits to what historian Richard Hofstadter called 
nearly 60 years ago the “paranoid style in American politics.”8
Influenced as I have been by Marxist theory and especially by the 
Italian philosopher Antonio Gramsci,9 I began to rethink many positiv-
ist assumptions about history and explanations of social life. I am still 
searching for a satisfying synthesis between positivism and post-modern 
social science that sees history and politics as less patterned and deter-
mined. Political life does seem more chaotic and less likely to yield 
theories and laws comparable to those found in the natural sciences. I 
certainly cannot agree with Engels, who in his speech at the graveside of 
Mark said, “Just as Darwin discovered the law of development or organic 
nature, so Marx discovered the law of development of human history.”10 

Preface     ix
This book will not contribute any law-like theories about the root causes 
of conspiracies and conspiracy theory, but I hope it contributes to some 
re-thinking about how “conspiracy theory” is used to discredit journal-
istic and academic work that raises uncomfortable and unconventional 
views of liberal democracy. I hope readers will also find some help in its 
pages as they try to sort out facts from balderdash, progressive populists 
from political charlatans, and dangerous conspiracy theories from ones 
that point to needed reforms in our political institutions. 
St. Louis, USA
Notes
	
1.	 Daniel Hellinger and Dennis Judd, The Democratic Façade (1st ed., 
Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks Cole, 1991 and 2nd ed., Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth 1994).
	
2.	 C. Wright Mills, The Power Elite (New York: Oxford University Press, 
1960, original 1956).
	
3.	 See Peter Bachrach, The Theory of Democratic Elitism (Boston: Little, 
Brown Publishers, 1967).
	
4.	 Back issues of The St. Louis Journalism Review, now called the Gateway 
Journalism Review, unfortunately are not available electronically, and I 
have not been able to locate the exact issue in which Senator Eagleton’s 
review was published.
	
5.	 See Nathan J. Robinson, “Lessons from Chomsky,” Current Affairs 
(2017, July 30). Available at https://www.currentaffairs.org/2017/07/
lessons-from-chomsky (accessed October 30, 2017).
	
6.	 I prefer not to refer to the individual by his real name, as I am reaching 
far back in my memory banks, and the conversation was private.
	
7.	 Alfred C. Stepan, The Military in Politics: Changing Patterns in Brazil 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1971).
	
8.	 Richard Hofstadter, The Paranoid Style in American Politics (New York: 
Vintage Reprints, 1968). This is a collection of his essays related to the 
topic.
	
9.	 See Antonio Gramsci, Prison Notebooks, ed. and trans. Quentin Hoare 
and Geoffrey Nowell. Available at http://abahlali.org/files/gramsci.pdf.
	
10.	 Retrieved from www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1883/death/
burial.htm (accessed December 31, 2017).
Daniel C. Hellinger

xi
Acknowledgements
Readers will find that this book leans heavily on investigative journalism. 
In the face of difficult economic circumstances, in a difficult political 
environment, and often in dangerous contexts, reporters from a broad 
range of institutions, some of them mainstream corporate owned news-
papers and journals, others working in journalistic refuges from con-
stricting corporate environments, have uncovered troubling, concealed 
political activities—“conspiracies”, whether so-named or not. This book 
could not have been written without their work, and I hope it shows 
why this kind of work is essential to the practice of democracy. I want 
to thank my longtime friend and colleague, James Brasfield, for constant 
probing and questioning my claims and theories about the role of con-
spiracies in politics. My late friend and colleague, Arthur Sandler, ques-
tioned and encouraged my attempts to theorize conspiracy when I was 
not sure I wanted to go down this intellectual path toward views that 
will be seen as apostasy in some quarters of social science. Another col-
league, Mike Hulsizer, and my friend, John Sterling, helped me with the 
survey analyses presented in Chapters 4 and 5.
For more than a decade I have regularly taught Webster University 
students in an interdisciplinary seminar on conspiracy, and many of their 
research papers have pointed toward themes I might not otherwise have 
recognized as fruitful areas of inquiry about the role of conspiracies in 
history and politics. Teaching them also gave me valuable experience in 
tempering any tendency to go too far toward extremes in arguing for a 
more tolerant attitude toward conspiracy theories. Much harm can come 

xii     Acknowledgements
from embracing certain kinds of conspiracy theory; much good can come 
from removing certain taboos about naming secretive political plotting 
for what it is.
I want to thank Michelle Chen and John Stegner for their encour-
agement and especially for the patience in granting me more time than I 
originally estimated to bring this project together. Palgrave-Macmillan’s 
referee, Joseph Uscinski of the University of Miami, provided essential, 
constructive advice to make this book better. Joann Eng-Hellinger read 
and marked up drafts of some important chapters and as so often been 
the case supported me in ways too numerous to recount here. After 
nearly 50 years together, our journey still feels like it is still beginning. 
I thank her for her love and everything she has done in the service of 
peace and justice.

xiii
Praise for Conspiracies and Conspiracy 
Theories in the Age of Trump
“Hellinger presents a compelling argument that conspiracies are a way of doing 
politics, of reclaiming agency and of delegitimizing critics. As such, this book is 
a masterful exposition of why political science needs to engage with conspiracy 
theories, better problematize conspiracy and, as Hellinger argues, understand 
conspiracy as a symptom of political decay.”
—Julia Buxton, Professor, Comparative Politics, Central European University, 
Budapest, Hungary
“Conspiracy and Conspiracy Theory in the Age of Trump is not just a timely look 
at the swirling conspiracy and counter conspiracy theories involving the 45th 
President of the United States of America: it is also a deep dive into the kind 
of civic and intellectual culture which has produced these theories. Hellinger 
reframes both the debate on these things called ‘conspiracy theories’ and the 
kind of societal discourse which lends itself to conspiracy theorising by looking 
at the evidence. Focusing on how people use (and sometimes abuse) talk of the 
Deep State, Dark Money, and the effects of Globalisation when talking about 
Donald J. Trump’s rise to power, Hellinger rightly argues we should take the-
ories which cite conspiracies seriously, rather than just dismiss them because 
they have been labelled ‘conspiracy theories.’ His analysis of how people can 
be reluctant to embrace conspiracy theories despite a wealth of evidence, and 
also how conspiracy theories are sometimes weaponised in public debate is a 
refreshing antidote to the tired cliché that we should just ignore these theories 
and move on. Instead, Hellinger argues that rather than reject conspiracy the-
ories as emblems of a paranoid style, we should treat the phenomena seriously, 

xiv     PRAISE FOR CONSPIRACIES AND CONSPIRACY THEORIES IN THE AGE OF TRUMP
ask whether these theories are warranted on the evidence, and look at what their 
truth or falsity tells us about the kind of society we find ourselves in.”
—M. R. X. Dentith, Fellow, New Europe College, Romania
“This book offers a unique and unsettling take on the many conspiracy theories 
that now animate political discourse and influence politics in the United States. 
Hellinger argues that these theories run the gamut from the plausible and the 
outlandish, but all of them derive from a fundamental truth that a deep state is a 
sphere of politics that exists in all states to some degree. A transcendent question 
is whether populist paranoia about ‘how it all works’ may threaten democratic 
governance and institutions.”
—Dennis Judd,  Professor Emeritus, University of Missouri-St. Louis and 
University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
“Perhaps the first book to address conspiracy theories in the Trump era, and 
one of the first to attempt to connect the epistemology, philosophy, and politics 
together, Conspiracies and Conspiracy Theories in the Age of Trump makes a valu-
able contribution.”
—Joseph E. Uscinski, Associate Professor, Political Science, University  
of Miami, USA

xv
Contents
1	 Introduction: Conspiracy Theory Versus Theorizing 
Conspiracy	
	
1
The Return of the Paranoid Style to American Politics	
	
3
What We Know from Survey Research	
	
13
Conspiracies and Conspiracy Theories Defined	
	
21
Paranoid Style and Populism	
	
24
Trumpian Conspiracy Theories	
	
26
Outline of This Book	
	
30
Conclusion: The Need to Theorize Conspiracies	
	
32
2	 Paranoia, Conspiracy Panic, and the Regime of Truth	
	
39
I’m Not a Conspiracy Theorist, But…	
	
41
The Shadow of Hofstadter	
	
45
The Regime of Truth	
	
50
Historians, Social Science and “Proving” Conspiracy Theory	
	
54
A Typology of Conspiracy Theories	
	
57
JFK, 9/11, and the Regime of Truth	
	
66
Consequences and Summing Up	
	
72
3	 Trumpism, Fake News and the “New Normal”	
	
79
Populism, Paranoia, and Celebrity	
	
80
Fake News	
	
81
Mueller’s Conspiracy Theory and the Media	
	
88
Conspiracy Theory, Fusion, and the Alt-Right	
	
91

xvi     Contents
Normalcy and Disruption	
	
96
Conspiracism and Threats to Democracy	
	
99
4	 Suspicious Minds, the 2016 Election and Its Aftermath	
	 105
Reading Voters’ Entrails	
	 106
Populism and 2016 Election	
	 109
Fake News and Russian Intervention in Election 2016	
	 113
The Year of Voting Dangerously	
	 118
Partisan Conspiracy Beliefs	
	 121
Social Immobility and Unresponsive Elites	
	 124
Globalization, Economic Distress, and the Vote	
	 131
Suspicion and the Vote	
	 135
5	 Globalization, Populism, Conspiracism	
	 141
Suspicious Minds in the New World Order	
	 144
Immigrants, Nativism, and Trump	
	 151
Wall Street and Monessen PA	
	 156
Transnational Capitalism and the Nation State	
	 164
Populism Versus Transnational Capitalism	
	 171
Conclusion: The Great Disrupter	
	 178
6	 Dark Money and Trumpism	
	 185
Money, Politics, and Trump	
	 186
Dark Money and Billionaire Cabals	
	 191
Show Us the Dark Money Trail	
	 201
Conspiracy Panic and Muckraking	
	 204
Corruption in a Republic of Money	
	 206
Dark Money as a Sphere of Conspiracism	
	 209
Conspiracy or Just Plain Old Interest Group Politics?	
	 215
7	 The Deep State, Hegemony, and Democracy	
	 221
What Is the Deep State? What Is It Not?	
	 224
Parapolitics	
	 229
The Conspiratorial Roots of National Security Ideology and 
Institutions	
	 236
Institutionalized Conspiracy	
	 238
Donald Trump and the Deep State	
	 246
Conspiracy Fiction, Conspiracy Reality	
	 257
Parapolitics and Blowback	
	 264

Contents     xvii
8	 Conclusion: Conspiracy Theories and Political Decay	
	 275
Needed: A Regime of Truth of Truthfulness	
	 278
What We Can Learn from Conspiracism Abroad	
	 280
An Agenda for Research	
	 283
Last Words: No Time to Panic	
	 284
References	
	 287
Index	
	 297

xix
List of Figures
Fig. 1.1	
Trump Birther Tweet	
	
27
Fig. 1.2	
Trump Global Warming Denial Tweet	
	
28
Fig. 4.1	
Decline of trust in American government (Source Pew  
Research Center, Public Trust in Government, 1958–2017, 
available at www.people-press.org/2017/05/03/pub-
lic-trust-in-government-1958-2017 [accessed March 3, 2018])		
108
Fig. 5.1	
Graphic representation of aggregate vote and distress  
(Sources Economic Innovation Group, The 2017 Distressed 
Communities Distressed Communities Index, available  
at eig.org [accessed July 1, 2018]; US Election Atlas, at  
uselectionatlas.org, compiled by Dave Leip)	
	
162

xxi
List of Tables
Table 1.1	
Twenty conspiracy theories; percent holding  
and partisanship, March 2013	
	
15
Table 1.2	
Twenty conspiracy theories; percent holding and race,  
March 2013	
	
17
Table 2.1	
Subjective classification of conspiracy theories by scope  
and plausibility; percent believers in US public, where  
available	
	
60
Table 4.1	
Candidate committee and outside support, 2016  
presidential election	
	
116
Table 4.2	
Playing the “what if” Electoral College game	
	
119
Table 4.3	
Presidential voting, party ID, and suspicion	
	
123
Table 4.4	
Doubts about fairness in the electorate	
	
126
Table 4.5	
Toward a crisis of representation	
	
129
Table 4.6	
American’s confidence in political institutions, January 2018	 	
130
Table 4.7	
Slippage in democratic presidential vote in eight  
Midwestern states	
	
133
Table 5.1	
Nationalism, importance to being an American	
	
169
Table 5.2	
Attitudes on economic conditions and trade	
	
170

1
Like Berthold Brecht’s allegorical tale of Arturo Ui, ruthless gangster 
who takes control over the Cauliflower Trust in 1930’s Chicago, Donald 
Trump’s rise should have been “resistible.” Trump’s behavior was out-
right preposterous; an outlandish TV personality running for the highest 
office of the global hegemon. The possibility of a Trump presidency was 
not taken seriously by the vast majority of political scientists, the media, 
and campaign professionals until he had cut down his Republican pri-
mary opponents, one by one, ridiculing and verbally assaulting them, 
even to the point of strongly suggesting that Ted Cruz’s father had been 
involved in the assassination of John F. Kennedy. How did a political 
outsider, a celebrity real estate mogul, almost cartoonish in his reality tel-
evision program, manage to capture the presidency? How did he manage 
to get away with such wild conspiracy theories?
One answer lies in the myriad studies that demonstrate the decline 
of trust in American politics and institutions since the 1960s. With 
Trump, this mistrust has metastasized into vital organs of the body pol-
itic (see Chapters 4 and 5). The conspiracy theories that are Trump’s 
political stock in trade resonated with substantial portions of the citi-
zenry because alienated and resentful sectors in American society were 
“disposed” to believe them, and for the same reason they seemed after 
18 months of his presidency very indisposed toward believing that 
their avenging angel against the political class deserves impeachment or 
censure. At the same time, can we say with any certainty that charges 
of collusion between the Trump campaign and operatives linked to the 
CHAPTER 1
Introduction: Conspiracy Theory Versus 
Theorizing Conspiracy
© The Author(s) 2019 
D. C. Hellinger, Conspiracies and Conspiracy Theories in the Age  
of Trump, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98158-1_1

2   D. C. HELLINGER
Kremlin and President Vladimir Putin are not “conspiracy theories”? 
Should that term be used only for imagined conspiracies?
Despite the important role that conspiracism seems to be playing in 
politics today, political scientists have almost entirely eschewed serious 
study of conspiracies themselves. Within both the academic and jour-
nalistic worlds, a consensus has prevailed that the very term “conspiracy 
theory” should be reserved for populist ideology and is to be regarded 
as toxic to real understanding of social, economic, and political devel-
opments. However, in the last twenty years some new studies, ranging 
across a wide array of disciplines, feature more nuance about conspira-
cism and some debate about the singular perspective of conspiracism 
as a form of social pathology. Still today, however, this work is mostly 
relegated to the margins of academic discourse and punditry in the 
mainstream news. No few scholars, reports, columnists, and pundits 
characterize conspiracy beliefs somewhere on a continuum of misguided, 
at best, to highly dangerous, at worst. A good many of them reflect the 
viewpoint of Daniel Pipes, who thinks that the ideologies of fascism and 
communism are at their heart conspiracist and believes that conspirac-
ist political culture is uniquely and pathologically embedded through-
out the Middle East.1 Indeed, it is not difficult to show that some of 
the most abhorrent anti-Semitic conspiracy theories circulate widely 
in the Middle East, including in the region’s mainstream mass media. 
However, both anti-Semitism and belief in conspiracies are widespread 
in the world. Only recently have social scientists begun to experiment 
with ways to measure generic conspiracism, as opposed to specific the-
ories, across cultures. Even fewer are attempts to separate pathological 
conspiracism from conspiracy thinking that might be a rational political 
response to systematic injustices and inequalities in national and interna-
tional politics.
Conceiving conspiracism as irrational is not confined to right-wing 
analysts, like Pipes. Chip Berlet’s independent investigative journalism, 
often done in collaboration with the Southern Poverty Law Center, is 
focused on right-wing conspiracism, which he sees as especially threaten-
ing to democracy.2 But he also has little use for conspiracism on the left. 
Berlet regards left-wing conspiracism not so much as threatening but as 
a cul-de-sac for diagnosing and resisting pathological social and politi-
cal movements, a position with obvious implications for Trumpism’s 
relationship with alt-right movements and its attraction of support and 
approval from hate groups. Another example of “at best” can be found 

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   3
in a widely quoted characterization of conspiracy theory as “the poor 
man’s cognitive map,” made by Frederik Jameson, a Marxist cultural the-
orist.3 Jameson had little more to say about conspiracy theory, but the 
phrase resonated among radical critics as an affirmation that conspiracy 
theory should be regarded as a form of “false consciousness” that holds 
the oppressed class back from seeing the root of their exploitation in 
capitalism.
Rather than rejecting or embracing conspiracy theory, this book 
argues the need to problematize it; that is, we should subject conspiracy 
beliefs to examination on their logic and the weight of evidence, rather 
than a priori to reject all of them as false. Some conspiracy theories are 
bad theory and many serve to foster intolerance. Worse, in unfortu-
nately not so rare historical cases they contribute to scapegoating, ethnic 
cleansing, and even genocide. Donald Trump’s rhetoric, failure to repu-
diate hate groups, and policies bear hallmarks of what historian Richard 
Hofstadter identified in his highly influential articles as a recurring ten-
dency toward “the paranoid style in American politics.”4 I agree with 
the warning that conspiracy theories, when they pretend to full explain 
major historical events and political turning points, can distract us from 
addressing larger social and economic forces that contribute to the con-
ditions that encourage conspiracism. Addressing the threats to democ-
racy posed by Trumpism requires that we grapple with the difficult work 
of building global and national economies that foster social inclusion, 
address the anxieties fostered by world migrations, and reform demo-
cratic institutions to foster more active and participatory citizenship than 
typical in liberal democracies. Accomplishing these tasks requires us to 
recognize that conspiracies are among the tools used by elites who resist 
these changes.
The Return of the Paranoid Style to American Politics
With reason, many Americans and citizens in other wealthy liberal 
democracy suspect that the gross inequalities and socioeconomic disrup-
tions in our lives are not just unfortunate side effects of an a-political 
process of globalization but are actively fostered by wealthy and powerful 
elites who have little empathy for those who are losing out as a result 
of the inter-related processes of technological change and globalization. 
If they think that those who a winning are playing by a different set of 
political rules than they do, are they wrong?

4   D. C. HELLINGER
Hofstadter’s foundational writings on the paranoid style empha-
sized that populism has typically arisen in times in which concentrated 
economic power and the exercise of imperial policies threatened popu-
lar sovereignty—or at least were perceived to do so.5 Populism is not an 
ideology; it is a “discursive vessel,” a particular kind of rhetoric, which 
can be leftist, rightist, or even centrist. In the United States, populism 
has spawned the Tea Party and the Occupy Movement; Donald Trump 
and Bernie Sanders; and businessman Ross Perot. Perot achieved some 
political traction in 1992 and 1996 by opposing the North American 
Free Trade Association (NAFTA) as well as supporting gun control and 
electronic democracy, drawing about a fifth of the vote equally among 
liberals, conservatives, and moderates.6 Nor should we think that polit-
ical extremism and populism are provinces only of the “poor man.” 
Sociologist Seymour Martin Lipset famously argued on the basis of anal-
ysis of voting in Weimar Germany that the social base for fascism was 
mainly the center, that is, the middle class.7
One thing this book does not attempt is to catalogue and research the 
truth about the dozens of conspiracy theories that have appeared in the 
Trumpian era. My goal in this book is to situate them within a national 
context that has seen the weakening of liberal democratic institutions 
and within a global context that has seen the rise of populist resistance to 
globalization in a number of nations across the world. Trumpism shares 
certain origins and features with right-populist movements, especially 
those in Europe, most notably anti-Muslim prejudice, anti-immigrant 
discourse, and hypernationalism.
Rather than reject conspiracy theory altogether, this book sees con-
spiratorial activity as useful for understanding the evolution of what is 
sometimes called late capitalism, i.e., a capitalism characterized by global 
and technocratic changes that have undermined the culture and politics 
of industrial capitalism. I prefer the term “transnational capitalism” as 
more descriptive than “late capitalism.” Conspiracy theories—theories 
about how conspiracies work, their limits and their potential to shape 
political life—can help us bring more of political life from the deep and 
dark corners of our world to the surface.
One important roadmap for how to do this can be found in Michael 
Gray’s study of conspiracism in the Arab world. Most work in this field 
conjures up in the Western mind stereotypes of mobs of believers in the 
Protocols of the Elders of Zion and in the theory that Israel was behind 
the 9/11 attacks, and other anti-Semitic tracts. Gray acknowledges 

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   5
the prevalence of these views in the region, but his book, in his words, 
“…seeks to discredit the reductionist, often Orientalist, explanations 
for conspiracies in the region, especially the view that would argue for 
pathological explanations of conspiracy theories and their frequency in 
the Arab world.”8 Gray starts from the supposition that conspiracy theo-
ries in the Arab world stem from “political structures and dynamics,” i.e., 
the way social groups of different make-ups interact with one another 
and with the state; how elites interact with one another and the state and 
how local, regional, and economic conditions impact the outlook of peo-
ple in the region toward the outside world and each other. Importantly, 
he points out that conspiracies and betrayal by elites in the Arab world 
give rise to conspiracy theories that do have some significant foundation. 
The ideas and discourses that emerge from this stew of social and eco-
nomic forces are all influenced by history and the collective memory of 
Western intervention and people’s justified mistrust of political elites in 
the region. This aspect of his analysis goes beyond merely acknowledging 
that there are conspiracies; it incorporates the impact of elite conspiracies 
and collaboration with Western imperialism into a richer analysis than 
the “Why are those people so crazy?” viewpoint typical of most news 
coverage.
It is notable that in his Preface Gray comments that he was struck 
by the “many similarities” between conspiracism in the Arab world and 
conspiracism in the United States. Indeed, his work is highly sugges-
tive about how we might go about studying conspiracism—and what 
we might learn about our politics from conspiracism—in this age of 
Trump. For example, although collective memory of national humilia-
tion is quite different in countries recently emerged from colonial rule 
than in a country that exercises hegemonic power on a global level, in 
many respects Arabs and peoples in other post-colonial societies want 
to make their countries, perhaps their civilizations, “great again.” Such 
a comparative thesis requires much more elaboration and research than 
this book presents, but what it shares with Gray’s approach is an attempt 
to understand conspiracism in the United States on the basis of histor-
ical patterns, a sense of eroding national power, mistrust of elites more 
attuned to global than national social forces, and the way American 
elites interact with one another and their counterparts in other parts of 
the world.
Although he regards conspiracy theories as little more that misguided 
explanations for social, economic, and political change, Timothy Melley 

6   D. C. HELLINGER
appropriately associated conspiratorial impulses with “agency panic.” 
Agency panic refers, he says, to “intense anxiety about an apparent loss 
of autonomy, the conviction that one’s actions are being controlled by 
someone else,” very often external agents.9 That Melley feels it neces-
sary to characterize loss of autonomy as merely “apparent” suggests 
that he believes such anxiety is not justified. Indeed, when anxiety about 
loss of control encourages conspiracy theories as totalistic explanations10 
that reduce economic globalization to the machinations of the Trilateral 
Commission, the Illuminati, or the United Nations, they do much more 
harm than good in identifying and evaluating the tectonic changes 
at work globally over the past 40 years. They thereby attribute enor-
mous power and unity of intent to elite institutions that lack sufficient 
quotas of either to control historical forces in the way that the notori-
ous Alex Jones of InfoWar.com fame would have it. However, it is just 
as illusory to think that the only “hidden hand” guiding history is the 
global market, much less to think that it is benign and under no one’s 
control.
An illustration of the inadequacy of structural analysis, which I will 
explore in more detail in Chapter 5, is the notion that the economic 
distress being experienced in many rural counties and smaller cities in 
America is a product of global and technological changes beyond any-
one’s control. There seems to be a general consensus that areas of the 
country once firmly within the grasp of the Democratic Party, including 
the “blue wall” of states in the Upper Midwest, fell to Donald Trump 
out of exasperation with the political class. After all, the Republican Party 
had already offered in 2012 a presidential candidate who, in front of a 
crowd of wealthy donors at a private dinner, and thinking he was out 
of earshot of voters he needed to win over, said, “There are 47 percent 
of the people who will vote for the president no matter what…who are 
dependent upon government, who believe that they are victims…These 
are people who pay no income tax. …and so my job is not to worry 
about those people. I’ll never convince them that they should take per-
sonal responsibility and care for their lives.”11 And the winner of that 
election, President Barack Obama, who had campaigned in 2008 on 
“Keep hope alive,” said in June 2016,
When somebody says like the person [Trump] you just mentioned, who 
I’m not going to advertise for, that he’s going to bring all these jobs back. 
Well how exactly are you going to do that? What are you going to do? 

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   7
There’s uh-uh no answer to it. He just says. ‘I’m going to negotiate a better 
deal.’ Well how? How exactly are you going to negotiate that? What magic 
wand do you have? And usually the answer is, he doesn’t have an answer.12
Demanding that Trump explain how he would keep his promises 
makes sense, but was there no better answer than what Obama offered? 
And it is not hard to see that by failing himself to provide an answer 
to the hemorrhaging of jobs and wages in large swaths of the country, 
Obama suggested that there is no real political answer. This kind of 
response raises fundamental questions about the efficacy of representative 
democracy and citizenship in the nation-state. The right to citizenship in 
a liberal democratic order has been tightly identified with national iden-
tity. Is it possible for the political class to make such claims about the 
inevitability of globalization without raising questions about whose inter-
est they represent? Should it surprise anyone that for many people the 
forces of globalization raise existential questions of identity, encouraging 
nativism and retreats into religious fundamentalism, as Benjamin Barber 
identified in Jihad versus McWorld 25 years ago?13
Is it just possible that many key policies, that is, political system out-
comes, are made in secret and with minimum regard for transparency or 
public accountability? That conspiracies, if not capable of directly con-
trolling the world economy, do play some role in shaping it and how the 
United States deals with it?
Not all conspiracy theories warrant serious investigation; conspir-
acy theories can spur or reflect scapegoating, and much worse, from 
pogroms to genocide. There are indeed cases in which psychologically ill 
people act on fears to commit violence, whether an assault on an individ-
ual or a murderous rampage. These concerns were on display than in the 
fall 2016 campaign when ardent opponents of Hillary Clinton circulated 
on the Internet a far-fetched, malicious claim that emails of her cam-
paign manager (which had been passed on and released by Wikileaks) 
contained coded messages implicating the Democratic candidate in 
human trafficking, run through certain restaurants. Among them was the 
Comet Ping Pong, a Washington DC pizzeria. On December 4, a North 
Carolina man fired three shots with a rifle inside the Comet restaurant, 
fortunately wounding no one. The shooter, Edgar Maddison Welch, 
later told the New York Times that although he found no evidence in his 
self-authorized “investigation” of child trafficking at Comet, he rejected 
the idea the reports of trafficking were “fake news.”14

8   D. C. HELLINGER
But most people who hold conspiracy theories, even wild ones or evil 
ones, are not dangers to themselves or society. If they were, just about 
all of us need to be under some kind of surveillance or court restraint. 
Evidence from survey research suggests that just about all of us believe 
one or more conspiracy theories. Our concern, then, should be directed 
not toward all conspiracy theories but toward those, whether propagated 
from above by elites who find them political useful or from below by 
populist movements suspicious of elite power, are used to instill panic, 
stir pogroms, and motivate violence, usually against groups historically 
viewed as different or as outsiders, but sometimes as with Clinton, at a 
political opponent.
But conspiracy theories are not the sole province of the political right. 
Conspiracy theories are daily promoted in mainstream media, especially 
late at night in the living rooms and bedrooms of Americans watching 
the first twenty minutes of late-night comedians. Regardless of their 
truth value, and regardless of the fact that late-night political satire also 
has a salutary effect on our politics, these conspiracy theories too, like 
those of Trump and his enablers, are signs of political decay, of deterio-
ration in the political institutions upon which we rely to settle conflicts 
and make policies. The fact that the movements similar to those behind 
Trump have emerged virulently in a number of other countries, espe-
cially in Europe, seems linked to forces of economic exclusion fostered 
by neoliberal capitalist globalization and technological changes that have 
rocked the bases of political consensus in the West. These right-wing, 
nationalist movements show similarity to Hofstadter conception of the 
“paranoid style in American politics,” which includes, according to the 
historian, a strong proclivity toward conspiracy theories about immi-
grants, political dissidents, and a range of ethnic and religious groups.15
Undoubtedly, many readers will recoil at the notion that PizzaGate 
and Stephen Colbert’s (host of the CBS’s popular daily evening pro-
gram, The Late Show) insistence that Vladimir Putin has “compromat” 
to blackmail the president are comparable. They are comparable only to 
a degree. A key point of this book is that the narratives in both cases 
share certain defining features of what makes a belief a conspiracy theory. 
It is not just the highly implausible, unwarranted beliefs that should be 
considered “conspiracy theories.” As may already be evident, this book 
warns about the use of “conspiracy theory” as an epithet to discredit cer-
tain challenges to the myth of American exceptionalism and commitment 
to democracy.

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   9
Also at the core of this book is a concern that “conspiracy theory” 
is loosely used as a label to discredit populism in general, not just rac-
ist and hypernationalist populism associated today with the alt-right and 
Trumpism. The place where we must begin to rethink how we use the 
term “conspiracy theory” requires a reassessment of the seminal works 
on conspiracy theory, populism, and the meaning of “theory” in the 
social sciences. Hofstadter’s work on this subject continues to cast both 
shadow and light on conspiracism. The shadow is well captured by Rob 
Brotherton, who has developed an important new social science tool to 
measure predisposition toward conspiracy theories but who also, like 
most social scientists, subscribes to the view that, “Pretty much everyone 
seems to agree that there is a distinction to be made. Conspiracy theories 
are bogus; a claim of conspiracy that’s true isn’t really a conspiracy the-
ory at all.”16
Hofstadter’s essays on conspiracism were preceded by the influential 
works of Lasswell, who virtually created the field of political psychol-
ogy with his studies of the manipulative effects of propaganda in World 
War II and in “totalitarian” regimes. Lasswell’s psychological approach17 
shaped the post-World War II social scientific consensus in two key ways: 
(1) He placed the focus of social science research on the question of why 
some people more than others hold conspiracy theories, what a critic 
of this approach calls “dispositional” factors18; (2) he anticipated, well 
before Hofstadter, the near-unanimous view among mainstream jour-
nalists and academics that engaging in conspiracy theory is pathological. 
Hofstadter, in reaction to Barry Goldwater’s radical conservative cam-
paign in 1964 and what he saw as the erosion of reason in public dis-
course, applied and popularized Lasswell’s work on the subject.
The problem with the dispositional research by Brotherton and others 
is not that it is bad social science about who tends to adopt conspiracy 
beliefs; what is problematic is its framing the disposition as necessarily 
irrational at best, pathological at worst. It also limits research on con-
spiracism to what Jack Bratich, a media sociologist, calls a “symptomatic 
approach.”19 Bratich argues that this kind of research seeks to explain 
conspiracy theories as an “individual mental condition, collective delu-
sional state of mind, a cultural/political slackening.” Bratich provides 
a key here to understanding how the term “conspiracy theory” is often 
used to discredit a priori claims of a conspiracy behind world events, 
especially when those claims challenge the kinds of myths that rein-
force hegemony—or in more mainstream parlance, the legitimacy of the 

10   D. C. HELLINGER
political system. As we will see in Chapters 6 and 7, the recent muck-
raking and academic research on “Dark Money” and the “Deep State” 
have attracted the dreaded label of “conspiracy theory,” not only from 
expected quarters (e.g., wealthy conservative think-tanks) but also from 
sympathetic critics who charge that the authors, though themselves 
eschewing conspiracy theory, have veered into the realm of irrationality. 
This kind of criticism is what Bratich regards a “conspiracy panic.”
Conspiracism in America in the Trumpian era is not just about the 
president himself. Nor should every conspiracy theory circulating on 
the mainstream media, social media and the Internet to be considered 
an irrational, much less paranoid response to the disconcerting global 
changes of the last four decades. Whether undertaken by journalists, 
sociologists, psychologists, historians, or political scientists, most research 
on conspiracy theory fails to take seriously or to examine the role of con-
spiracy in political life. However, the last twenty years have seen some 
significant but under-appreciated efforts to revise our understanding 
of conspiracy theory. A number of recent works have highlighted how 
“conspiracy theory” is used as a meme to delegitimize discourse, jour-
nalism, or academic analysis that challenges prevailing “common sense,” 
that is, hegemony.20
At work in maintaining hegemony is what Bratich, borrowing from 
the French philosopher Michel Foucault, calls the “regime of truth.”21 
Bratich argues that “conspiracy theory” is used to discipline what is 
acceptable or not in our public discourse. “Conspiracy theory” is not a 
description of certain ideas; it is a term of disqualification. “If the mind,” 
says Bratich, “is that sphere that can distinguish between truth and false-
hood, then conspiracy theories are beyond that sphere.” The bounda-
ries, observes Foucault, are set by the means, techniques, and procedures 
we use to determine truth. My analysis of conspiracy theory in the age 
of Trump follows Bratich in asking not simply, “What is conspiracy the-
ory?” but also “What counts as conspiracy theory?”22
While I share Bratich’s critical perspective on how “conspiracy the-
ory” is a meme used to sow a kind of panic directed against work dis-
ruptive of hegemony, I would contest the implication, never fully made 
explicit in his work, that the “symptomatic” approach is inappropri-
ate or necessarily contributes to panic. My issue with symptomology is 
that the term itself reinforces the idea that a priori the object of expla-
nation, a conspiracy theory, is irrational or pathological. As a result, 
all social science research tends to narrow the focus of its gaze on bad 

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   11
behavior. For example, a recent collection of research by mostly Eastern 
European scholars focuses almost exclusively upon targets of scape-
goating and suspicion, in particular, Jews and in some countries of the 
region, Russians. Conspiracy theories, the editors say, consist of “look-
ing for causes of [social and political events] in clandestine plots, sup-
pressed knowledge, and secret actions [that] provide simple and logical 
answers to people’s doubts and uncertainties.” The editors assert that 
people in Eastern Europe need conspiratorial explanations because of the 
“extremely dynamic” processes of social change unleashed by the fall of 
Communism. This finding is consistent with the research showing that 
a sense of lack of control over the course of one’s life also increases the 
disposition toward conspiracism. Those most likely to adopt conspiracy 
theories in these circumstances are less neurotic and more socially agree-
able but also more closed-minded and with lower self-esteem.23 Though 
Hofstadter warns against taking the term “paranoid style” too literally, 
effectively this research is corroborates his interpretative analysis of con-
spiracism in the United States.
The problem here is that like most research on conspiracism, the 
symptomology is focused exclusively on right-wing conspiracism in a 
region with an especially dismal history of anti-Semitism and a recent his-
tory of dominance by a military superpower whose official ideology was 
Communism. No studies that I know of examine predispositions toward 
holding other conspiracy beliefs that might not fit the stereotype implied 
by “paranoid style.” For example, none of the Eastern European research-
ers cited or included as contributors seem to be interested in a group that 
perhaps has the most reason to hold a conspiracy theory, Jews. This is not 
to say that Jews as a group might be more disposed than others toward 
conspiracism in general so much as to point out that the particular suspi-
cions of a group of people are influenced by their lived as well as historical 
memory. For ethnic and religious minorities persecuted or oppressed in 
the past, to suspect that they are targeted by sinister state-sanctioned con-
spiracies is hardly irrational. Why, then, Jews in countries with histories of 
especially virulent anti-semitism not be more disposed to the belief that 
there are groups in the majority that may be conspiring to repress them?
One significant problem in assessing the importance of conspiracism 
in the age of Trump is that only recently have political scientists begun 
to use tools of attitudinal and behavioral research to explore public opin-
ion in this area. To be sure, there exist relevant opinion surveys, but 
these are mostly carried out by polling agencies for use by journalists, 

12   D. C. HELLINGER
most of whom treat conspiracy beliefs as quirky curiosities. Among social 
scientists, a growing body of research both inside the United States and 
abroad has focused on dispositional research, i.e., research searching for 
individual-level motivations for believing conspiracy theories, mostly of 
the paranoid variety. Most of these studies search for explanations that 
are psychologically based, with considerable attention to studies behind 
anti-Semitic and other scapegoating theories, much like the aforemen-
tioned studies in Eastern Europe.24 This kind of research consciously 
draws upon the legacy of Lasswell. His most important publications in 
this area spanned the era of the Great Depression and beginning of the 
Cold War, so it is not surprising that much of his attention was drawn 
to the “totalitarian” fascist and communist regimes of that era, both of 
which greatly impacted historical memory in Eastern Europe.25
In the United States a significant amount of research has examined 
proclivities toward conspiracy theories that seem to be widespread among 
African–Americans, such as suspicions that HIV and AIDS were deliber-
ately introduced into black communities, theories positing genocidal plots 
against Blacks, and beliefs that the assassinations of M.L. King and Malcolm 
X involved more than a lone killer. With a few exceptions,26 academics 
and journalists approach the topic with paternalism or dismissiveness. The 
best one can say is that researchers seem to want to explain away apparent 
irrational beliefs in the African–American community by citing historical 
wrongs, most notably the deliberate introduction of syphilis into African–
Americans in the 1932 Tuskegee medical study.27 Memory of this historical 
wrong has at times impeded important measures to protect public health, 
a fact frequently cited by critics of conspiracism. However, the influence 
of Tuskegee on the African–American community has also been used by 
analysts to dismiss theories that deserve closer examination. For example, 
Tim Golden, reporter for the New York Times, wrote off anger and con-
cern among African–Americans about the CIA’s role in the introduction of 
crack cocaine into Los Angeles to their historical experience of exploitation, 
oppression, and abuse.28 In fact, there was a basis for their suspicions.
The Los Angeles community was reacting at the time (1986) to a series 
of articles in the San Jose Mercury News that under the title “Dark Alliance” 
contended that the CIA’s complicity in the drug trade was an offshoot of 
US support for the Nicaraguan Contras, who were fighting to overthrow 
the Sandinista Revolution and its elected government in the 1980s. Golden 
dismissed the path-breaking investigative reporting by the News’ Gary 
Webb, the first muckraking to find a mass audience mainly through the 

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   13
Internet. Golden charged, “The force of the Mercury News account appears 
to have relatively little to do with the quality of the evidence that it marshals 
to its case.”29 Nine years later, the reporter for the Los Angeles Times, which 
mirrored Golden’s criticism, formally apologized for his articles,30 but the 
New York Times has never acknowledged that regardless of shortcomings, 
Webb’s investigative reporting stood up very well in the long run.31
The reaction of Golden and other mainstream journalists reflects the 
convergence of two factors converged to produce a panicked rations 
against a conspiracy theory that had some merit and went uncovered 
by establishment institutions: (1) the challenges posed to establishment 
journalists by the emergence of social media, exacerbated because this 
was an early case of its challenge to the mainstream media’s gatekeeper 
role32; and (2) a defensive institutional response, first denial and later no 
follow-up investigation, by national security reporters reluctant to con-
front their own failure to expose the secret collusion in between the CIA 
and the paramilitary forces it had armed in Nicaragua.
What We Know from Survey Research
Given that Hofstadter baptized populist conspiracism as the “paranoid 
style,” it is not surprising that much of the research about conspiracism is 
done in the subfield of political psychology and is “dispositional,” that is, 
aimed at identifying underlying psychological traits that dispose an indi-
vidual toward conspiracy theories, as opposed to the social and economic 
contextual variables that might impact peoples’ thinking. Despite its limi-
tations, this approach has led some researchers examining conspiracy the-
ory on the individual level to rethink just what they are trying to explain. 
In many cases what we call a “conspiracy theory” is better categorized 
as “conspiracy belief”—e.g., a belief that Oswald did not act alone in 
assassinating President John F. Kennedy; a belief that Russians rigged the 
2016 election; a belief that governments are covering up knowledge of 
visit by extra-terrestrials. This makes sense. We don’t call expressions of 
faith in the ability of divinities, such as the Judeo-Christian God, as “the-
ories” but “beliefs.”
Most of the social science research on conspiracism focuses on beliefs, 
but we will use the terms somewhat interchangeably because what 
interests us here is the role that a particular form of collective political 
activity—a conspiracies—play in shaping history and resolving conflicts. 
This question raises the question of political subjectivity, the question of 

14   D. C. HELLINGER
how many degrees of freedom human have in shaping the path of his-
tory. To think that conspiracies are singularly capable of determining the 
outcome of major political struggles is to magnify their importance; to 
think that they have no role to play at all is to discard entirely the role of 
power, secrecy, and deceit in human affairs.
Until recently, public opinion research on the prevalence of conspir-
acism in American society has been confined largely to survey compa-
nies whose findings are sporadically reported in the mainstream media. 
There is little coordination or consistency in questions asked. As one 
baseline for estimating views about conspiracy theories before the 2016 
election, we can consult a survey of 1247 registered voters carried out by 
Fordham University’s Public Policy Polling (PPP), March 27–30, 2013, 
just about the time that Donald Trump began to publically ponder run-
ning for president. We should note that this survey, then, excludes a sig-
nificant portion of the American population—those who have declined 
or failed to register to vote. One advantage, however, is that the survey 
breaks beliefs down by demographics, in including race, party ID, ide-
ology, age, and gender. Technically, the margin of error for this poll is 
plus or minus 2.8 percentage points, but PPP has a mixed track record 
for accuracy in predicting elections; it uses a combination of online and 
automated telephone responses. However, the results of the PPP sur-
vey were not radically different from a compendium of public opinion 
studies published six months later by the American Enterprise Institute 
(AEI).33 Used with caution, the PPP survey is reliable enough to 
draw some broad estimates of how widespread is belief in one or more 
­prominent conspiracy theories.34
Table 1.1 provides a breakdown of opinion regarding the 20 conspir-
acy theories studied in the PPP polls, with results ranging from 4% claim-
ing to believe in the “lizard people rule” theory (Perhaps not everyone 
took the survey seriously!) to 51% expressing belief that a conspiracy was 
at work in the Kennedy assassination. The PPP cites an Associated Press/
Roper poll’s finding of 56% expressing a similar belief. As many observ-
ers have noted, the persistence of rejection of the Warren Commission 
report’s single-gunman theory surpasses any other conspiracy belief 
both in terms of the high levels of endorsement and persistence over 
time. What is remarkable about the persistence of the JFK theory is that 
overwhelmingly academics and journalists resist giving any credence to 
doubts that Oswald acted alone.

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   15
Table 1.1  Twenty conspiracy theories; percent holding and partisanship, March 2013
Democrat (%)
Republican (%)
Independent/other (%)
All answering (%)
Global warming a hoax
11
58
41
37
Believe Bin Laden alive
2
6
10
6
Believe UFO crashed at Roswell
18
27
19
21
Secretive elite behind New World Order
15
34
35
28
Saddam Hussein involved in 911 attacks
22
33
28
28
Childhood vaccines linked to autism
16
26
18
20
Moon landing was faked
7
4
9
7
President Obama is the anti-Christ
6
20
13
13
Bush Administration deliberately lied about WMDs in Iraq
72
13
48
44
Believe aliens exist
27
28
32
29
CIA was instrumental in introducing crack cocaine into US cities
14
9
21
14
Government introduces fluoride in water for sinister reasons
8
9
9
9
Shape-shifting reptilian people in human form control world
3
5
6
4
Larger conspiracy at work in JFK assassination; Oswald not alone
52
55
44
51
Believe in Bigfoot or Sasquatch
14
15
13
14
Media adds mind-control technology to broadcast signals
15
17
13
15
Government sprays chemicals mixed in plane exhaust trailings
5
6
5
5
Pharmaceutical and medical industries create diseases for profit
12
18
14
15
Beatles’ Paul McCartney died in 1966 and replaced by look-alike
7
4
5
5
US government knowingly allow 911 attacks
14
8
12
11
Source “Democrats and Republicans Differ on Conspiracy Beliefs,” Public Policy Polling, News Release, April 2, 2013. Sample of 1247 registered voters, 
questioned March 27–30, 2.8% margin of error

16   D. C. HELLINGER
The JFK theory far outpaces the belief that the Bush administration 
knowingly allowed the 9/11 attacks to happen, which drew only 11% 
support in 2013. However, a Zogby poll in May 2006 found 48% agree-
ment (v. 42% disagreement) with the belief that the 9/11 Commission 
“concealed or refused to investigate critical evidence.” The AEI compen-
dium found somewhat higher support (14% in one case) for the 9/11 
theory in some polls, but still much below the support for the JFK con-
spiracy theory. However, the Bush/Cheney administration did generate 
considerable skepticism about its motives for going to war in Iraq, as 
44% (57% in a CNN poll cited by AEI) of the public believes it deliber-
ately lied about weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) in Iraq.
The PPP study is one of the few to break down opinions about con-
spiracy by race, and the results (See Table 1.2) are somewhat surprising. 
For example, most research assumes that African–Americans are more dis-
posed toward conspiracism than other groups in the population. What the 
survey suggests is that the gaps among African–Americans, whites, and 
Hispanics vary considerably from theory to theory. The gap between whites 
and blacks is almost nonexistent on 8 of the theories examined, and blacks 
are actually significantly less likely to believe hold conspiracist beliefs about 
global warming (as a hoax), a UFO crash at Roswell, elite origins of the 
New World Order, existence of aliens, Big Foot, and media mind control. 
Despite the legacy of the Tuskegee experiments, African–Americans are not 
more likely to endorse the theories about fluoride in water and connect-
ing autism to vaccines. Surprisingly, while there is a gap between white and 
black views on the CIA’s involvement with crack trafficking in the 1980s, 
only 22% of African–Americans endorsed the conspiracy theory—despite 
the strong reaction among African–Americans in Los Angeles at the time 
of the scandal. Unfortunately, the survey did not include questions about 
some other conspiracy theories that would likely attract African–Americans’ 
endorsements, such as the assassinations of Martin Luther King, Malcolm 
X, birther theory, and police misconduct in the OJ Simpson murder case.
Most public opinion studies about “conspiracy theories” do not char-
acterize the beliefs as such in survey questions. The characterization arises 
in the public reporting of the results. Even when the questions or analy-
sis remains neutral, surveys typically mix a variety of theories that range 
across two variables—level (i.e., magnitude) and plausibility. The national 
poll conducted by the PPP in spring of 2013 is typical in this respect.35 
The poll asked questions about 20 different theories, ranging from 
whether the respondent believed in lizard people (4%, yes) to whether 
they believed there was a larger conspiracy, beyond Oswald, involved in 

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   17
Table 1.2  Twenty conspiracy theories; percent holding and race, March 2013
Hispanic (%)
Whites (%)
African–Americans (%)
All (%)
Global warming a hoax
34
41
19
37
Believe Bin Laden alive
15
4
6
6
Believe UFO crashed at Roswell
27
22
6
21
Secretive elite behind New World Order
10
32
21
28
Saddam Hussein involved in 911 attacks
29
28
21
28
Childhood vaccines linked to autism
16
20
18
20
Moon landing was faked
15
5
8
7
President Obama is the anti-Christ
9
15
9
13
Bush Administration deliberately lied about WMDs in Iraq
42
41
54
44
Believe aliens exist
22
30
22
29
CIA was instrumental in introducing crack cocaine into US cities
15
13
22
14
Government introduces fluoride in water for sinister reasons
11
9
7
9
Shape-shifting reptilian people in human form control world
9
3
–
4
Larger conspiracy at work in JFK assassination; Oswald not alone
51
48
66
51
Believe in Bigfoot or Sasquatch
10
15
8
14
Media adds mind-control technology to broadcast signals
18
14
7
15
Government sprays chemicals mixed in plane exhaust trailings
8
5
–
5
Pharmaceutical and medical industries create diseases for profit
19
14
12
15
Beatles’ Paul McCartney died in 1966 and replaced by look-alike
8
4
–
5
US government knowingly allow 911 attacks
14
10
8
11
Source “Democrats and Republicans Differ on Conspiracy Beliefs,” Public Policy Polling, News Release, April 2, 2013. Sample of 1247 registered voters, 
questioned March 27–30, 2.8% margin of error

18   D. C. HELLINGER
the Kennedy Assassination (51%, yes). While the poll was conducted rea-
sonably scientifically given the cost constraints, it relied upon automated 
telephone interviews, which makes it more difficult to generate a repre-
sentative sample. Would people attracted to beliefs often characterized as 
“conspiracy theories” be more inclined to answer a lengthy automated 
questionnaire than those who see them as mental stigmata?
In what is still very much a young field of research in political science, 
the most complete sociological study of American conspiracy theories is a 
book with that title by Joseph E. Uscinski and Joseph M. Parent.36 They 
too tend to characterize a conspiracy theory as a pathological belief, ask-
ing (p. 6), “Who is most prone [my emphasis] to believing conspiracy 
theories?” On the other hand, Uscinski and Parent do not limit their 
quest for understanding to right-wing theories, and they make what to 
my knowledge is the first and only empirical measure of conspiracism 
over time. They rely upon a working definition of conspiracism that 
attempts to measure the concept not by beliefs in particular conspiracy 
theories but via a broader measure of “underlying conspiratorial predis-
positions.”37 The latter questions attempt to get at individual’s degree 
of prejudice against particular social groups and the degree to which 
an individual views events and circumstances as caused by conspiracies. 
Questions measuring these tendencies are used to create a scale ranging 
from extremely naïve to extremely critical. In the latter regard they asked 
respondents about their degree of agreement with three statements:
•	 Much of our lives are (sic)being controlled by plots hatched in 
secret places;
•	 Even though we live in a democracy, a few people will always run 
things anyway;
•	 The people who really ‘run’ the country are not known to the 
voters.
One virtue of this approach is that unlike specific questions about par-
ticular conspiracies these questions are pertinent to identifying conspir-
acist tendencies regardless of where people fall on a left-right spectrum.
Uscinski and Parent’s first cut at measuring the levels of conspiracism 
in America over time, specifically from 1890 to 2010, is based on a sam-
ple of more than 100,000 letters to the editor in the New York Times and 
Chicago Tribune. The letters were coded for conspiracism by research 
assistants trained to maximize inter-coder reliability (i.e., consistency in 

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   19
the coding). In this way they built what is probably the only archive of 
“conspiracy talk” over more than a century. To qualify as conspiracy talk, 
the writer had to cite a group to be acting in secret to cover-up or seek 
a political objective “at the expense of the public good.” The research-
ers supplemented this data with a file of 3000 articles and posts from 
Internet blogs and news sources. Among their findings is that over this 
120 year period the percentage of letters with “conspiracy talk” has actu-
ally been lower in the post-World War II era than it was in the 1890s and 
the first half of the century.38 There were only two periods when con-
spiracism in the letters spiked—in the early 1890s and in the very early 
1950s, the only times that the percentage of such letters surpassed 3%, 
with the latter period the only one to exceed 4%. Contrary to the com-
monly held belief that the Kennedy Assassination inaugurated a new age 
of conspiracism (with the X-Files TV show often cited as evidence), there 
is no empirical evidence for this claim from analysis of these letters.
Uscinski and Parent contend without much evidence that letter-writ-
ers generally differ little from nonwriters regarding political opinions 
and that professional norms would deter editors from excluding some 
number of conspiracy letters are cranks. Furthermore, we might won-
der how many letters get excluded because they more or less replicate 
one another’s concerns. For example, if an editor received 50 letters 
defending Oliver Stones’ JFK, how many might actually have been pub-
lished? Unfortunately, a year after the Trump election there still had 
not appeared (to my knowledge, after a search) any follow-up studies, 
though this is understandable given the cost and time need to replicate 
the methodology for studying letters.
An intriguing finding by Uscinski and Parent is that “conspiracy the-
ory is for losers.” That is, the authors suggest that the losing side in a 
presidential election is much more likely to suspect the system was rigged 
against them than are the losers.39 This finding has been reinforced by 
a team of political scientists who have found that conspiracy theories 
are more likely to be endorsed by less trusting and less knowledgeable 
respondents, especially among conservatives.40 In keeping with the “con-
spiracy theories are for losers” hypothesis, researchers found in a follow- 
up study41 done just after the November 2016 election that there was 
evidence of a reciprocal shift among partisans—of Democrats feeling 
more like losers and victims of an unfair system than Republicans, who 
were more likely to hold such sentiments after 2008 and 2012. The 
breakdown in Table 1.1 of partisan opinion about several conspiracy 

20   D. C. HELLINGER
theories is consistent with the idea that endorsement of conspiracy the-
ories is related to which party’s ox is being gored, but not unequivocally. 
Not surprising, the largest gaps in beliefs are on global warming, the 
New World Order, the 9/11 attacks, and President Obama’s character. 
The 72/13% gap between Democrats and Republicans on whether the 
Bush administration deliberately lied to get us into war is the most vivid 
example; but the finding that in 2013 one out of every five Republican 
identified Obama and the anti-Christ is striking. Chapters 4 and 5 use 
some available survey data to see whether the “conspiracy theory is for 
losers” hypothesis holds up post-2016. But we take a preliminary look 
here at the state of affairs in the pre-Trump era.
The “conspiracy theory is for losers” thesis may have a short shelf-life. 
The opinion research supporting it was conducted when, arguably, the 
nation still was living in “normal times,” i.e., pre-Trump presidency. The 
winners, if one considers Republican control over all three branches of 
government to be “winning,” were also crying conspiracy in 2017. One 
year subsequent to his victory in the Electoral College, President Trump 
was repeating Twitter assertions that he had actually won the popular 
vote (not just the Electoral College). He complained that his policy initi-
atives were being thwarted by the political establishment of both parties. 
Even before he was inaugurated, some of his supporters claimed that 
the “Deep State” was plotting to remove him from office, and by May 
2018 the president himself was making the claim. One might hypoth-
esize that initial feelings victory among conservatives and Republicans 
may be fading. It seems like both sides may be feeling as though they 
lost, Trumpistas because the legitimacy of his victory (and only in the 
Electoral College) is under attack; Democrats because they feel the elec-
tion was rigged by Russian interference. We will return to considering it 
in Chapters 5 and 6.
Many conspiracy theories seem to have a limited shelf-life; so this 
makes even more remarkable the persistence and degree of shared views 
regarding the Kennedy assassination across demographic groups. This is 
a testimony to the enduring doubts and mistrust about what the govern-
ment is capable of doing. Still, even as a new trove of government files 
about the assassination were released in October 2017, with thousands 
more still kept secret in direct violation of law, the New York Times once 
again dismissed public doubts. “The granddaddy of American conspiracy 
theories has re-emerged in the American psyche,” proclaimed the Times’ 
Lori Moore. Moore takes it upon herself to dismiss all doubts, claiming 

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   21
the evidence to be overwhelming. “Yet 25 years after the event, a major-
ity of the American public does not believe the truth. Rather, polls have 
shown that most Americans believe President Kennedy was assassinated 
as an outgrowth of a conspiracy.”42
Although motivated reasoning may inflate endorsements of theories 
with partisan implications, it is difficult to write off Americans’ doubts 
about what happened in Dallas on November 22, 1963, to partisanship. 
Chapter 3 takes up the issue in more detail, but readers will be disap-
pointed if they expect a clear-cut endorsement or rejection of conspiracy 
the JFK theories in this book. My focus is on why so many intellectual 
and journalistic elites are quick in the face of broad public doubts about 
the lone-gunman theory to be so dismisive conspiracy theories about the 
assasination. This type of conspiracy theory I think it is because the the-
ory raises serious implications about American exceptionalism.
By now it should be clear that this book takes the argument, “But 
that’s not a conspiracy theory because it has been proven to be true”, 
to be specious. As philosopher Matthew Dentith puts it, “The under-
lying question we should always ask when someone proposes a theory 
is, ‘What should I believe, given the evidence?”43 On the other hand, 
we should resist thinking that unmasking a conspiracy fully resolves any 
question about the root causes of major political events or historical 
watersheds. For example, even if evidence were to emerge to support the 
conspiracy belief holding that the Roosevelt Administration deliberately 
allowed the attack on Pearl Harbor to happen (a theory), this would not 
fully explain why and how the United States entered into World War II. 
It would, however, significantly alter the way we understand the path to 
warfare and eventually US hegemonic power.
The process by which we evaluate the degree to which a belief in a 
conspiracy or an explanation embodied in a conspiracy theory is valid 
requires judgments not unlike those that take place in a court of law. 
How we should go about distinguishing theories that are, respectively, 
warranted, plausible, or unwarranted (perhaps ridiculous) is taken up in 
Chapter 2.
Conspiracies and Conspiracy Theories Defined
I define political conspiracies as collective activity in which several actors 
plan and work together to achieve a political goal in a manner marked 
by three interrelated characteristics: (1) secrecy; (2) vulnerability to 

22   D. C. HELLINGER
defeat by exposure; and (3) illegal, deceptive, or unethical behavior. A 
conspiracy involving illegal or deceptive behavior (leaving aside unethical 
actions) does not necessarily mean a conspiracy or its goals is malevo-
lent. For example, one might see as fully justified by history the “gen-
erals’ plot” to kill Hitler, involving a conspiracy in 1944 among the 
German high command to end the Nazi regime via assassination. 
Whether ill-conceived or not, John Brown’s raid on Harper’s Ferry to 
foment a slave revolt in 1859 in the American South is generally framed 
as a heroic conspiracy, especially in popular culture. On the other hand, 
within a democratic republic conspiracies by their nature—the need for 
secrecy, vulnerability to defeat by exposure, and unlawful, deceptive and 
unethical behavior—are likely to be perceived, and accurately, as directed 
against the public interest or as Rousseau put it, the “general will.”
This latter concern became clearly visible as the very visible and hotly 
allegation of a secret, illegal political plot by Trump and his campaign 
gained traction early in the first year of his presidency. Nothing less than 
treason is implied in the claim that the Trump campaign colluded with 
Russian officials to tilt the playing field in the president’s favor in the 
2016 election. Most proponents of this theory deny that they are propa-
gating a conspiracy theory, “Russiagate”, especially the version claiming 
the Russian president Vladimir Putin has compromat (blackmail mate-
rial) on Trump, meets all the criteria of a conspiracy. So too do Trump’s 
counter theories: (1) that accusations of collusion have been fostered by 
deliberate leaks from the FBI and other security agencies to engineer his 
removal from office; and (2) that the Obama administration spied upon 
his campaign office with electronic eavesdropping and placement of FBI 
informants within the campaign. Trump’s conspiracy theories are put in 
the context of a larger claim that a “Deep State” is behind attempts to 
secure his removal from office. We examine the “Deep State”, which in 
the United States was largely, before Trump, associated with radical left-
ist conspiracy theory, in Chapter 7.
This book also chooses to highlight in Chapter 6 another theory 
that is sometimes characterized as a “conspiracy theory” by its critics, 
the claim that some of America’s wealthiest families have by stealth 
shifted the political playing field toward a radical libertarian poli-
cies and limits on majority rule well beyond those needed to protect 
minority civil rights. Unlike Russiagate, this conspiracy is not ille-
gal, as Courts have ruled that the alleged cabal’s its most important 
asset, Dark Money—i.e., massive funding of political campaigns and 

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   23
educational/cultural institutions, without disclosure of donors—has 
been ruled legally in-bounds. This has been achieved, as historian 
Zephyr Teachout shows, by redefining the meaning of corruption in 
politics from the early years of the American Republic, when even small 
gifts offered without a quid-pro-quo were seen as corrupting of civic 
virtue.44
Conspiracy theories may be perpetrated by elites or the state for 
purposes hiding uncomfortable truths or to further immediate objec-
tives, such as eroding citizens’ use of constitutional rights that stand in 
the way of economic or security goals. This is one reason why trans-
parency is usually counterpoised to conspiracy. Official actions to 
block release of information naturally give rise to suspicions of con-
spiracy among the public. Transparency, argue West and Sanders, has 
become a more conspicuous ideal in the neoliberal conception of the 
post-Cold War world, evident in the founding of organizations such as 
Transparency International, George Soros’ Open Society, and World 
Bank’s Transparency and Accountability Capacity Development Project. 
However, Mark Fenster, a sociologist who is relatively more open-
minded about legitimacy of conspiracy theories than most academics, 
argues that positing transparency as the antidote to conspiracism is ide-
alist.45 There is a range of circumstances in which secrecy, or more prop-
erly perhaps, “confidentiality”, may be justified.
We elaborate this concern further on in this book, but here it is worth 
noting that transparency and conspiracy are often linked to each other 
in concerns about “fake news”and the notion that we may be living in 
a “post-truth” society. In reaction to Donald Trump’s claim that main-
stream media outlets have deliberately manufactured untrue “facts’ and 
stories” to undermine his presidency, more “transparency” in journal-
ism has been posited as a remedy to regain public trust.46 A “fake news” 
story may occasionally be traced back to a single origin, but even in this 
case many of them are deliberately circulated throughout social media as 
part of what amounts to a conspiracy to secretly influence public opin-
ion. Clearly, a major concern in the Trump era is the systematic crea-
tion and diffusion of fake stories by groups and organizations, including 
foreign governments seeking to meddle in election outcomes. Most fake 
news stories, then, have origins in conspiracies, as we have defined them 
here. They require collaboration among plotters; secrecy, lest their expo-
sure undermine their credibility; and they can be characterized as illegal, 
embarrassing, or unethical.

24   D. C. HELLINGER
Paranoid Style and Populism
Conspiracy theories stand in a complex relationship to the global rise of 
neoliberal capitalism. Conspiracy theories can be used by ambitious, pop-
ulist politicians to mobilize populist support, but they can also gener-
ate protests against abuses of power. When they are based on outright 
fabrications by those who seek power or profit, they lend themselves 
to scapegoating and in the worst case actual pogroms of various types, 
including the internment of Japanese Americans during World War II 
and the Jewish Holocaust. Whether false or not, their proliferation 
and adoption by large proportions of the population are symptoms of 
political decay.
Trump’s appeal owes much to “the paranoid style” in American poli-
tics. Trump skillfully used his celebrity to promote “birther theory”, rac-
ist stereotypes of immigrants, and fear of Muslims, all of which represent 
a revival of nativism, which Hofstadter identified as a recurrent feature 
in populist episodes in America. Trump tied these strands of nativism 
together. His endorsement of birther theory lent credence to right-wing 
claims that Obama is a Muslim and by implication that he was unwilling 
to confront terrorism, or perhaps even that he was complicit with ter-
rorism. Trump told right-wing radio host Laura Ingram in 2011, “He 
doesn’t have a birth certificate or, if he does, there’s something on that 
certificate that is very bad for him. Now somebody told me, and I have 
no idea whether this is bad for him or not but perhaps it would be, that 
where it says ‘religion’ it might have ‘Muslim,’ and if you’re a Muslim, 
you don’t change your religion by the way, but somebody said, ‘Maybe 
that’s the reason he doesn’t want to show it.’ I don’t think so. I just 
don’t think he has a birth certificate and everybody has a birth certifi-
cate.”47 As late as August 2016, Trump said the President Barack Obama 
was the creator of ISIS. When a conservative radio host tried to soften 
the candidate’s accusation, suggesting he merely meant Obama’s policies 
had created a power vacuum to exploit, Trump doubled-down, claiming, 
“No, I meant he’s the founder of ISIS.”48
Conor Lynch argued in Slate that Trump “single-handily restored the 
paranoid style to the mainstream (on the right, at least); giving credibil-
ity to wacky conspiracy theories from the bowels of the blogosphere and 
creating an angry and fanatical movement.” The president sees behind 
every criticism and challenge he faces “…a cunning and calculated 
group of conspirators who want to destroy America and its culture.”49 
This book diverges from Lynch’s contention that Trump accomplished 

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   25
this feat “single-handedly”, though I would agree that his discourse have 
properly be characterized as the “paranoid style.” Furthermore, conspira-
cist discourse, paranoid or not, has spread across the political spectrum—
for example, in the way that Stephen Colbert has persistently promoted 
through his comedy monologues the claim that Vladimir Putin, president 
of Russia, has the power to blackmail the president because he is in posses-
sion of compromising video of a highly salacious sexual incident (“golden 
showers”) involving Trump and prostitutes in a Moscow hotel room. 
This constitutes, I propose, itself a form of conspiracism prevalent among 
Trump critics; as I write, it can neither to be dismissed nor accepted at face 
value. But we do not need to have certainty about this conspiracy theory 
to know that discourse around it signifies democratic decay.
My approach brings to bear on conspiracism in the age of Trump rela-
tively recent scholarship that questions the single-minded way that main-
stream news media and scholarship dismiss many uncomfortable realities 
of American politics as “conspiracy theory.” I argue that conspiracies are 
important political phenomena, a form of political behavior that in some 
(not all) circumstances help us put agency back into explanations of glo-
balization, technological change, and other explanations of widespread 
discontent about globalization, the quality of democracy, and the power 
of elites. Conspiracism can be a social pathology, but conspiracies are an 
important form of political behavior that contradict a major premise for 
democratic government—transparency.
Fenster has rightly argued that the goal of complete transparency in 
a democracy is something of a chimera,50 but regardless of the practical 
and moral limits on transparency, there can be little doubt that effective 
democratic government requires an information environment allowing 
citizens opportunities to deliberate and contribute to decision-making, 
as well as to hold government accountable for its policies and actions. 
Despite calls for more transparency, civic culture in America has become 
more, not less opaque since the era of Vietnam and Watergate, when 
more transparency and congressional oversight on security agencies was 
on the agenda. Both the Bush and Obama administrations attempted 
with success to roll back enforcement of legal protections of “whis-
tle blowers,” with Obama actually exceeding his predecessor’s zeal to 
limit transparency.51 The Trump administration has not hesitated to use 
obstructionism and obfuscation in dealing with the White House press 
corps. The circus-like atmosphere of daily news briefings attracted the 
attention of pointed satire on Saturday Night Live. Less noticed was the 
singularly uncooperative attitude of Trump appointees to the leadership 

26   D. C. HELLINGER
positions in the executive bureaucracy, especially the Pentagon and State 
Department. All across government access and communication with 
journalists were significantly reduced from previous administrations.52
Conspiracy theories are not always to be regarded as a sign of indi-
vidual or social pathology. They are not always dangerous, not always 
phantasms of overactive imaginations, not always wrong. And they are 
not found exclusively on the right; in the present era, they also tend to 
characterize much of the opposition discourse about Trump. Their pro-
liferation and content do, I will argue, signal serious problems with lib-
eral democracy. It is time to reconsider what we think we know about 
conspiracy theory, where it comes from and whether it still can be disre-
garded as the product of paranoid minds.
Trumpian Conspiracy Theories
It would not be difficult to organize this book around a compilation of 
Trumpian conspiracy theories, delving into each in a chapter. This book, 
however, is not intended as an encyclopedia of such theories. Here, 
anticipating that (as was the case with Watergate) some major aspects of 
scandals fade with time, I want to illustrate some prominent conspirac-
ist themes in his campaign and the early (first 18 months) of his presi-
dency, enough to indicate how prevalent conspiracy theories emanating 
or endorsed by the White House were in this period.53
•	 Trump significantly boosted birther theory, which claims that President 
Barack Obama was born in Kenya and ineligible to be president, long 
before he officially became a candidate but also when he began to hint 
at a political run. He first raised suspicion about Obama’s nationality 
in March 2011 on the popular daytime TV program, The View, asking, 
“Why doesn’t [Obama] he show his birth certificate? There’s some-
thing on that birth certificate that he doesn’t like?”54
•	 In December 2013 Trump upped the ante on the birther theory, 
suggesting in a tweet that a Hawaiian state official had been mur-
dered as part of the alleged conspiracy to hide the president’s true 
place of birth (Fig. 1.1).
•	 Trump frequently uses misdirection, raising suspicions but attrib-
uting conspiratorial ideas to others. After the death of Supreme 
Court Justice Antonin Scalia, he told right-wing radio host, Michael 
Savage, “Well I just heard today, just a little while ago actually, I just 

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   27
landed and I’m hearing it’s a big topic, the question, and it’s a hor-
rible topic but they say they found the pillow on his face, which is a 
pretty unusual place to find a pillow.”55
•	 Trump hyped the notion that vaccines have caused autism. “When 
I was growing up, autism wasn’t really a factor,” Trump said in 
2007, “And now all of a sudden, it’s an epidemic. Everybody has 
their theory. My theory, and I study it because I have young chil-
dren, my theory is the shots. We’ve giving these massive injections 
at one time, and I really think it does something to the children.” 
He repeated the charge in the second presidential debate. Trump 
accuses doctors of lying about the connection.56
•	 Typical of Trump’s view on global warming was a tweet on January 
1, 2014. “This very expensive GLOBAL WARMING bullshit has 
got to stop. Our planet is freezing, record low temps, and our 
GW scientists are stuck in ice.” Another regular theme is that the 
Chinese government is behind the “hoax” (Fig. 1.2).
•	 Trump contended numerous times during the campaign that the 
Democrats would steal the 2016 election; that it was “rigged.” 
His claims can be seen as capitalization of a longer standing claim 
of fraudulent voting, linked to efforts to pass more restrictive voter 
registration laws. Trump upped the ante by linking the questionable 
truth of fraudulent voting with his anti-immigration stance, having 
started his campaign with a promise to deport 11 million people. 
His allegation of voter fraud and a “rigged” election grew more 
persistent in October when polls showed Trump’s support tanking 
Fig. 1.1  Trump Birther Tweet

28   D. C. HELLINGER
and his chances of winning steadily receding. However, the theme 
of a conspiracy to rig the election outcome did not disappear, even 
after the election, as it served as a way for Trump to claim that he 
had actually won the popular vote, contradicting official results. 
And it continued to be an argument for his virulent anti-immigra-
tion policies.
•	 Throughout the campaign, Trump and his supportive media 
hammered away at the notion that Hillary Clinton has engaged 
in a cover-up of her culpability for the deaths of American dip-
lomats at the hands of Jihadi fighters in Benghazi, Libya. He 
accused Clinton and her husband, the ex-President, of destroy-
ing evidence and exerting influence over the Attorney General to 
obstruct the investigation of emails improperly stored on her pri-
vate server. To some observers, such as 538.com’s Nate Cohen, 
FBI Director James Comey’s letter announcing a reopening of the 
investigation (due to emails found on computer of disgraced for-
mer Democratic Representative Anthony Wiener), a week before 
the election, was a critical factor behind the decisive shift of unde-
cided voters in the last days before balloting.57 Trump led raucous 
crowds at campaign rallies in chants of “Lock Her Up,” revealing 
mass anger and breakdown of elite decorum not seen in American 
politics at least since the Great Depression (I would say since the 
Civil War).
The early months of the Trump presidency demonstrated that Trump 
would continue to trade in conspiracist discourse and attacks on per-
ceived enemies. Among the more astonishing claims were:
Fig. 1.2  Trump Global Warming Denial Tweet

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   29
•	 Trump tweeted on November 27, 2016, “In addition to winning 
the Electoral College in a landslide, I won the popular vote if you 
deduct the millions of people who voted illegally.” He claimed that 
massive numbers of immigrants cast ballots and also that busloads 
of voters moved across state lines from Massachusetts accounted for 
victories by Clinton and the Democratic Senatorial candidate.
•	 On March 4, 2017, Trump tweeted, “How low has President 
Obama gone to tapp [sic] my phones during the very sacred elec-
tion process. This is Nixon/Watergate. Bad (or sick) guy!”
•	 In response to the news stories suggesting collaboration between 
his campaign and the Russian government, Trump approvingly 
cited claims by Fox News and Breitbart News that members of 
national security bureaucracy, especially the CIA and FBI, were 
leaking information to the media—part of a coordinated campaign 
by the “Deep State” to oust him from office.58
•	 Major media organizations are “not my enemy,” they are “the 
enemy of the American people,” Trump tweeted on February 17, 
2017. He habitually refers to the mainstream news reports as “fake 
news,” charging not just media bias but deliberate deception by 
news organizations.
•	 Trumpian conspiracy theories are not always authored by the pres-
ident himself, but also by friendly media. In May 2016, Fox News 
Network carried an “investigative report” alleging that Seth Rich, 
a young Democratic Party staffer and victim of an unsolved mur-
der, had leaked Clinton emails to Wikileaks. The story was broad-
cast just as news media were carrying stories that the Wikileaks were 
orchestrated by Russian saboteurs of the Democratic campaign. Fox 
later retracted the story without apology.59
•	 Trump did not originate theories that his administration faced 
enemies in the “Deep State,” that is, the constellation of national 
security agencies that are often alleged (e.g., by Oliver Stone in 
two films, JFK and Nixon) to have conspired against constitutional 
authorities. He left it to close advisors, like Steve Bannon, to Fox 
News pundits, and to Internet conspiracy gurus, such as Alex Jones 
of InfoWars.com, to peddle it.60 However, the president himself 
re-tweeted a message (June 17, 2017) from Fox host Sean Hannity, 
who was promoting his speech to be given that evening on “the 
Deep States allies in the media.” Finally in May 2018, as the inves-
tigation of collusion between the Trump campaign and Russian 

30   D. C. HELLINGER
operatives, being carried out by Special Counsel Robert Mueller, 
a former FBI director and a registered Republican, began to yield 
indictments against Trump campaign officials and advisors, Trump 
began to speak openly of a Deep State conspiracy, coining the term 
“SpyGate” as a counterpart of “Russiagate.”
This book treats not only these Trumpian assertions (and others) as 
conspiracy theories, but also does the same with many of the claims of 
his opponents. This does not mean that Trumpian theories have equal 
epistemological status, that is, have equal plausibility or warrant as those 
of his critics. For example, the Trumpian claim of a politically motivated 
murder of a Hawaiian official cannot withstand the most cursory outside 
scrutiny—though it was only reluctantly retracted by its original promo-
tor (freerepublic.com). Many of the reports about Russian collusion with 
the Trump campaign were based on anonymous leaks, but the Special 
Counsel’s indictments in advance of his final report (not released as of 
this writing) provided significant substantiation for claims of at least 
some of the allegations. At the same time, some of Trump’s claims of 
conspiracies in the federal bureaucracy, though highly suspect, should 
not be casually dismissed. Whether as rogue agencies or under direction 
of constitutional authorities, military, intelligence, and police agencies 
have been involved in well-documented violations of citizen’s rights at 
home and in conspiring to manipulate politics and overthrow govern-
ments elsewhere in the world. A report issued by Office of the Inspector 
General, US Department of Justice, in June 2018 documented significant 
anti-Trump sentiment within the FBI and Department during the 2018 
election, including quotations that could be interpreted to show signifi-
cant prejudice on the part of officials and investigators against Trump.61
Outline of This Book
This book begins with this chapter’s call for a more serious theorizing 
about conspiracies and political phenomenon and a less dismissive atti-
tude toward conspiracy theory in mainstream social science. Chapter 2 
elaborates further on this theme, beginning not with Trump’s own con-
spiratorial discourse, but with an example of how opposition responses to 
Trump have often also taken on a panicky, conspiratorial overtone. The 
chapter presents some of the key concepts borrowed from relatively recent 
new research on conspiracy theory, with stress upon the way “conspiracy 

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   31
theory” is used to define a regime of truth. The chapter presents a two- 
dimensional framework for evaluating conspiracy theories. One dimension 
is a five-point scale for judging conspiracy theories across a range from 
“unwarranted” to “warranted,” with middle categories for theories about 
which we should remain agnostic to some degree. The second dimension 
concerns the level at which a conspiracy is hypothesized to impact social 
life. At most grand level are those which are global or “world” conspira-
cies, and at the opposite end of the three-point scale are petty conspiracies 
that proliferate throughout our everyday lives and in the political world. 
These are “petty” in the sense that any one of them alone only margin-
ally impacts the course of politics and history, but their proliferation and 
collective visibility can have an impact on public trust and erode politi-
cal legitimacy. Widespread, pervasive corruption, a form of political trans-
action that requires hidden collusion, comes to mind in this regard. In 
between petty and grand conspiracies are operational conspiracies, which 
is where the focus of political science ought to be directly. Here is where 
most consequential conspiracy theories of the Trump era to be found.
The heart of Chapter 3 looks more closely at conspiracy theories in 
the Trumpian era, evaluating how closely they fit the “paranoid style” 
but also making a critical evaluation of how the concept of “operational 
conspiracies” can be fruitfully applied, with a special focus on “fake 
news.” Chapter 4 examines the role played by conspiracy and conspir-
acy theory in the 2016 election and the first 20 months of the Trump 
presidency. Although the focus will be on Trump, our lens is widened to 
include some examination of discourse used more broadly by three most 
important candidates, i.e., Clinton, Trump and Sanders. Chapter 5 picks 
up where Chapter 4 leaves off, examining how populist movements, left 
and right, have emerged in reaction to neoliberal globalization and argu-
ing that not all populist leaders and movements should be stigmatized as 
practicing the “paranoid style.” However, the global surge of right wing 
populism merits such a designation. Research on the Brexit referendum 
in Great Britain, the emergence of the National Front in France, and 
other right-wing parties bear strong commonalities to the Trump phe-
nomenon. In both Chapters 4 and 5, an analysis of election results in 
Midwestern counties shows that where social and economic conditions 
are most “distressed” is where Democrats lost the “Blue Wall” that they 
expect would win them the Electoral College. Both chapters also dispute 
the tendency in much mainstream analysis to equate the populism associ-
ated with the Sanders campaign to that of Trump.

32   D. C. HELLINGER
Chapter 6 examines the theme of Dark Money, arguing that it is a 
sphere of politics that generates conspiracies. Chapter 7 takes a similar 
approach to the “Deep State,” treating it as a sphere of politics related 
to most of the epic scandals in post-War America. Both Dark Money 
and the Deep State are not conspiracy theories in themselves; they are 
spheres of politics where operational conspiracies are recurrent and inju-
rious to democratic, constitutional government. These chapters also con-
tent that too often muckraking journalism and radical academic research 
into these spheres of politics get labeled as “conspiracy theory,” a way 
of defining themselves outside the boundary of acceptable discourse as 
defined under the regime of truth.
Chapter 8 reprises the need to rethink how we use “conspiracy the-
ory” as a form of thought discipline and urges political scientists to 
develop it into a theoretical tool to understand the age of Trump. We 
can expect to find that conspiracism and conspiracist discourse oper-
ates differently in societies that have historical memories of both impe-
rial splendor and of humiliating colonialism than they do in the United 
State, a core, hegemonic society. However, there are also some striking 
similarities across cultures and nations that can help us understand both 
the roots of conspiracism not just as a mode of thought in the popula-
tion but as a way of “doing politics.”
Conclusion: The Need to Theorize Conspiracies
Instead of dismissing all conspiracy theories as pathology, this book 
argues for viewing conspiracies themselves (drawing on my earlier 
work) “as a form of collective, subjective behavior that deserves to be 
integrated into, not marginalized from explanations of a structural and 
historical character.”62 In fact, under some circumstances, conspiracy 
theories can be empowering when they are not elevated by their holders 
into holistic, comprehensive worldviews.
Most political science research and publishing involves theorizing just 
about every conceivable form of political behavior—except conspiracies. 
No one who refers to “voting behavior theory” would say that this body 
of work refers to “nonexistent voting.” No one who refers to “demo-
cratic peace theory” would say it refers to a nonexistent problem—war 
and peace. No one who refers to “game theory” would say that their 
“games” have no place in explaining political outcomes. Yet, most aca-
demics and journalists continue to treat “conspiracy theory” as, in the 

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   33
words of Daniel Pipes, “A conspiracy theory [italics in the original] is fear 
of a non-existent conspiracy.”63
I contend that conspiracies—like voting, civil disobedience, assassi-
nations, political campaigns, making war, among other forms of doing 
politics—should be taken seriously as a form of subjective behavior, as 
a way of doing politics. Even that most seemingly deterministic histor-
ical and political theorist, Karl Marx, acknowledged that human beings 
“make their own history.” That he added in the same sentence, “but 
they do not make it as they please.”64 Can conspiracies change his-
tory? Never by themselves, but are rarely absent entirely from historical 
accounts of watershed events. Are they relevant to politics? Now more 
than ever in the Trumpian era.
Notes
	
1.  Daniel Pipes, Conspiracy: How the Paranoid Style Flourishes and Where It 
Comes From (New York: The Free Press, 1997).
	
2.  See for one example Chip Berlet, “Clinton, Conspiracism and Civil 
Society,” Political Research Associates, 2009, available at http://www.
uni-muenster.de/PeaCon/conspiracy/networks-01.htm 
(accessed 
December 31, 2017).
	
3.  Frederic Jameson. “Cognitive Mapping,” in Marxism and the 
Interpretation of Culture, ed. C. Nelson and L. Grossberg, 347–360 
(Champaign–Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1960).
	
4.  Richard Hofstadter, The Paranoid Style in American Politics (New York: 
Vintage Reprints, 1968). The book expands on the original article in 
Harpers Magazine, November 1964, available at https://harpers.org/
archive/1964/11/the-paranoid-style-in-american-politics (accessed July 
18, 2017).
	
5.  Hofstadter, The Paranoid Style.
	
6.  See “How Groups Voted in 1992,” Roper Public Opinion Research, avail-
able at https://ropercenter.cornell.edu/polls/us-elections/how-groups- 
voted/how-groups-voted-1992.
	
7.  Seymour Martin Lipset, “Fascism—Let, Right and Center,” in Political 
Man (Garden City, NY: Anchor Books, 1960). That finding is contested 
by other scholars, but Lipset’s view is notable because of his standing as a 
founder of political sociology.
	
8.  Matthew Gray, Conspiracy Theories in the Arab World: Sources and Politics 
(London: Routledge, 2010): 3, 37.
	
9.  Timothy Melley, Empire of Conspiracy: The Culture of Paranoia in Post-
War America (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2000): vii.

34   D. C. HELLINGER
	
10.  Gray, Conspiracy Theories: 35.
	
11.  See Politfact.com, September 2012, available at http://www.politifact.
com/truth-o-meter/statements/2012/sep/18/mitt-romney/romney-
says-47-percent-americans-pay-no-income-tax (accessed June 12, 2018).
	
12.  See Reddit, available at https://www.reddit.com/r/The_Donald/com-
ments/8idyvj/obama_how_exactly_are_you_going_to_negotiate_that 
(accessed June 13, 2018).
	
13.  Benjamin Barber, Jihad vs. McWorld: Terrorism’s Challenge to Democracy 
(New York: Ballantine Books, 1996).
	
14.  Adam Goldman, “The Comet Ping Pong Gunman Answers Our 
Reporter’s Questions,” New York Times (December 7, 2016).
	
15.  Hofstadter, The Paranoid Style.
	
16.  Rob Brotherton, Suspicious Minds: Why We Believe Conspiracy Theories 
(New York: Bloomsbury-Signet, 2015): 64.
	
17.  See three works by Lasswell noted above: Propaganda Technique in the 
World War; Psychopathology and Politics; Power and Personality.
	
18.  Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: Political Rationality and Popular Culture 
(Albany: Sate University of New York Press, 2008).
	
19.  Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: 14–18.
	
20.  I use term in the sense employed by Antonio Gramsci, Selections from The 
Prison Notebooks (London: ElecBook, 1999), available at http://abahlali.
org/files/gramsci.pdf (accessed September 19, 2017).
	
21.  Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: 3–4.
	
22.  Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: 3–4.
	
23.  Michal Bilewicz, Aleksandra Cichocka, and Wiktor Soral, eds., The 
Psychology of Conspiracy (New York: Routledge, 2015): ix–xv.
	
24.  Bilewicz, et al., eds., Psychology of Conspiracy.
	
25.  See Harold Lasswell, Propaganda Technique in the World War (New York: 
Knopf, 1927); Psychopathology and Politics (New York: Viking Press, 
1930); Power and Personality (New York: Viking Press, 1948).
	
26.  See David Nivens Jr., “Why Black People Need Conspiracy Theories,” 
Complex.com, October 6, 2016.
	
27.  The Center for Disease Control Describes the Study, available at https://
www.cdc.gov/tuskegee/timeline.htm (accessed November 9, 2017).
	
28.  Tim Golden, “Though Evidence Is Thin, Tale of C.I.A. and Drugs Has 
a Life of Its Own,” New York Times, October 21, 1996, available at 
http://www.nytimes.com/books/98/09/27/specials/cia-thin.html 
(accessed December 7, 2017).
	
29.  Golden, “Though Evidence is Thin.”
	
30.  http://www.laweekly.com/news/ex-la-times-writer-apologizes-for-taw-
dry-attacks-2614004.

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   35
	
31.  See Kathryn Olmsted, Real Enemies: Conspiracy Theories and American 
Democracy, World War I to 9/11 (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2009): 188–193.
	
32.  See Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: Political Rationality and Popular Culture 
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 2008): 79–89.
	
33.  American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research (AEI), “Public 
Opinion on Conspiracy Theories,” November 2013.
	
34.  See, for example, Nate Silver, “Here’s Some Proof Some Pollsters Are 
Putting Thumb on the Scale,” Fivethirtyeight.com, November 14, 2014.
	
35.  http://www.publicpolicypolling.com/main/2013/04/conspiracy-theo-
ry-poll-results-.html.
	
36.  Joseph E. Uscinski and Joseph M. Parent, American Conspiracy Theories 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2014).
	
37.  The scale was developed through collaboration among a number of social 
psychologists and designed to permit cross culture measurement. See 
Uscinski and Joseph, American Conspiracy Theories: 161, fn. 67.
	
38.  Uscinski and Parent, American Conspiracy Theories: 110.
	
39.  Uscinski and Parent, American Conspiracy Theories: 130–153.
	
40.  Joanne M. Miller, Kyle L. Saunders, and Christina E. Farhart, 
“Conspiracy Endorsement as Motivated Reasoning: The Moderating 
Roles of Political Knowledge and Trust,” American Journal of Political 
Science 60, no. 4 (October 2016): 824–844.
	
41.  Joanne M. Miller, Kyle L. Saunders, and Christina E. Farhart, “The 
Relationship between Perceptions or Lower Status and Conspiracy 
Theory Endorsement,” Paper presented at eh Annual Meeting of the 
American Political Science Association, San Francisco, CA, August 31–
September 3, 2017.
	
42.  Lori Moore, “File: Decades of Doubts and Conspiracy Theories,” New 
York Times, October 25, 2017.
	
43.  Matthew Dentith, The Philosophy of Conspiracy Theories (London: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2014): 6.
	
44.  Zephyr Teachout, Corruption in America: From Benjamin Franklin’s 
Snuff Box to Citizens United (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
2014).
	
45.  See Harry C. West and Todd Sanders. “Power Concealed and Revealed 
in the New World Order,” in West and Sanders, eds., Transparency and 
Conspiracy: Ethnographies of Suspicion in the New World Order (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press): 1–37. Mark Fenster, The Transparency Fix: 
Secrets, Leaks, and Uncontrollable Government Information (Palo Alto, 
CA: Stanford University Press, 2017).

36   D. C. HELLINGER
	
46.  American Press Institute. Americans and the News Media: What They Do—
And Don’t—Understand About Each Other, The Media Insight Project, 
June 2018 (available for download from mediainsight.org, accessed June 
15, 2018).
	
47.  Broadcast posted on YouTube by BirtherReportDotCom, March 31, 
2011 (accessed December 5, 2016).
	
48.  CNN. “Donald Trump: I meant that Obama founded ISIS, literally,” 
August 11, 2016.
	
49.  Conor Lynch. “Paranoid Politics: Donald Trump’s Style Perfectly 
Embodies the Theories of Renowned Historian,” Salon, July 7, 2016, 
available at http://www.salon.com (accessed September 18, 2017).
	
50.  Mark Fenster, The Transparency Fix: 1–16.
	
51.  Tim Shorrock, “Obama’s Crackdown on Whistle Blowers,” The Nation, 
April 15, 2013.
	
52.  Jason Schwartz, “Pentagon Reporters Frustrated by Mattis,” Politico, 
September 19, 2017, and referring to George Schultz, “Former Secretary 
of State Weighs in on Rex Tillerson’s Aversion to the Press,” CBS News, 
September 19, 2017.
	
53.  Links to sources were found at “58 Donald Trump Conspiracy 
Theories (and Counting!),” available at http://www.alternet.org/
right-wing/58-donald-trump-conspiracy-theories-and-counting-defini-
tive-trump-conspiracy-guide (accessed December 5, 2016).
	
54.  “14 of Trump’s most outrageous birther claims,” CNN, September 16, 
2016.
	
55.  Clip available at https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//
api.soundcloud.com/tracks/247250427&color=ff5500&auto_play=
false&hide_related=false&show_comments=true&show_user=true&-
show_reposts=false (accessed December 5, 2016).
	
56.  Josh Hafenbrack, “Trump: Autism Linked to Child Vaccinations,” Sun-
Sentinel (West Palm Beach, December 28, 2007).
	
57.  Nate Cohen, “The Comey Letter Probably Cost Clinton the Election,” 
538, May 3, 2017, available at https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/
the-comey-letter-probably-cost-clinton-the-election (accessed June 28, 
2018).
	
58.  Julia Manchester, “Trump promotes Hannity’s ‘Deep State’ Monologue,” 
The Hill, June 16, 2017.
	
59.  David Folkenflik “Behind Fox News’ Baseless Seth Rich Story,” National 
Public Radio, August 1, 2017.
	
60.  Niall Stanage, “Is Trump a Victim of the Deep State?” The Hill, June 5, 
2017.
	
61.  Office of the Inspector General, U.S. Department of Justice. A Review of 
Various Actions by theFederal Bureau of Investigation and Department 

1  INTRODUCTION: CONSPIRACY THEORY VERSUS …   37
of Justice in Advance of the 2016 Election (Washington, DC, June 2018, 
available at https://int.nyt.com/data/documenthelper/39-justice-de-
partment-report-fbi-clinton-comey/5e54a6bfd23e7b94fbad/optimized/
full.pdf#page=1 (accessed June 15, 2018).
	
62.  Daniel Hellinger, “Paranoia, Conspiracy, and Hegemony in American 
Politics,” in Transparency and Conspiracy: Ethnographies of Suspicion in 
the New World Order, eds. Harry G. West and Todd Sanders (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2003): 205.
	
63.  Pipes, Conspiracy: 21.
	
64.  Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (1852) sought to 
explain that most conspiratorial of activities, a coup d’etat, available at 
www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/download/pdf/18th-Brumaire.
pdf (accessed September 19, 2019).

39
The impact of Richard Hofstadter’s essay and book1 on the “paranoid 
style” in American politics can be measured by the way the phrase is uti-
lized so freely in popular discourse. Entering the phrase in the popular 
search engine yields well over 1.7 million results. Of these, 1.3 million 
results appear when we add “conspiracy” to the search. The power of the 
phrase is also reflected in over 700,000 results obtained by entering “not 
a conspiracy theory.” The results largely consist of claims that challenge 
the “official story” about some event, that point toward wrongdoing 
by government, or toward myriad other types of claims whose propo-
nents fear will cause them to be labelled “conspiracy theorists.” Some of 
the links appearing in the first few pages are to a website, “notaconspir-
acytheory.com” that seeks to debunk theories, using independent but 
sophisticated discourse and high production values. The “bedrock the-
ory” of conspiracy theories, the series creator tells us, is based upon “the 
projection of human intentions on complex events.”2
The first part of this chapter provides an example of a prominent 
public intellectual who maintains that Russian operatives and important 
parts of the national security establishment interfered in the 2016 elec-
tions, yet who denies that he is engaged in promoting a conspiracy the-
ory. This serves as a useful case for assessing some of the new work on 
conspiracy in communication theory, revealing how the meme “conspir-
acy theory” and “paranoid style” are used to discipline discourse—what 
Foucault calls a “regime of truth.” The French philosopher maintained 
that each society has a “general politics” of truth: that is, has mechanisms 
CHAPTER 2
Paranoia, Conspiracy Panic,  
and the Regime of Truth
© The Author(s) 2019 
D. C. Hellinger, Conspiracies and Conspiracy Theories in the Age  
of Trump, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98158-1_2

40   D. C. HELLINGER
to determine what types of discourse it accepts as legitimate, the proce-
dures and norms used to distinguish true and false statements, the means 
for sanctioning violators, and the status of those who are charged with 
saying what counts as true.3 We can think of the regime as the rules and 
procedures by which a belief is considered beyond doubt, at one end of 
the scale, and “crackpot” on the other. To label an idea as “crackpot” 
and its holder as “paranoid” are typical of how conspiracy theories are 
dismissed—a technique all the more effective because some theories are 
indeed far-fetched, dangerous, or distracting from the underlying causes 
of social or economic stress in a society and the misfortune that falls 
upon a segment of the population, such as those living in once vibrant 
communities now experiencing economic ruin.
After reviewing the issues raised by relatively recent work on conspir-
acism (post-1990), I propose a way of categorizing conspiracy theories 
(1) according to the scale and scope of their propositions and (2) accord-
ing to whether these theories are warranted or not by the evidence pro-
vided, rather than a priori as paranoid or not worthy of serious debate, 
that is, whether they are a priori judged outside the “regime of truth.” 
Probably any social system has such a “regime” e.g., in the sense of rules 
of debate and civility. Even the most liberal regime should put certain 
propositions—such as justifications for genocide or eugenics—beyond 
the pale of serious deliberation. But a broadly liberal “regime of truth” (I 
use this term to describe tolerance, not a particular socioeconomic order, 
e.g., laissez-faire capitalism) can facilitate or limit the search for truth.
We then look more closely at the issues surrounding the assassination 
of President John F. Kennedy, an event that marked the beginning of pre-
cipitous decline of trust in American government. More briefly, we will 
also consider the level of operation and degree of plausibility of “truther” 
theories, i.e., conspiracy beliefs about the terrorist attacks of September 
11, 2001. Our goal is not to verify or refute the notion that a conspir-
acy lays behind these two very influential events. The goal is to use these 
cases to illustrate how “conspiracy theory” functions as a feature of a 
“regime of truth” to discipline what should be taken seriously by jour-
nalists, academics, and political pundits. Much of this book concerns itself 
with how Trump has disrupted this regime in the United States.
The literature theorizing about the uses and abuses of conspiracy the-
ory has grown more diverse and rich in the last two decades, challenging 
the stereotypes of who believes, why they believe, and whether they are a 
danger to democracy. Rather simply allow certain theories to be shunted 

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   41
aside as “conspiracy theories,” we need clearer notions of what con-
spiracy theories warrant our contention and which don’t; which further 
demands for more transparency and accountability from government and 
ruling elites in general, which are indeed dangerous, make us prone to 
scapegoating and even worse consequences.
I’m Not a Conspiracy Theorist, But…
Perhaps the clearest example of conspiracism in opposition to Trump can 
be found in the tweets and columns of Paul Krugman, the Nobel Prize win-
ning economist and star liberal columnist for the New York Times. First, a 
disclaimer: I am not arguing for equivalency between the conspiracist claims 
of Krugman and most of those of Trump and his acolytes at Fox News, 
Breitbart, Infowars.com, etc., especially regarding conspiracy theories trade 
in racist and sexist stereotypes. Krugman’s rhetoric eschews know-nothing 
and anti-immigrant sentiments. Far from dismissing his concerns about 
Russian interference in the 2016 campaign, my purpose is to show that they 
are plausible despite bearing many of the hallmarks of conspiracy theory. 
Even so, Krugman is at pains to deny that he is a conspiracy theorist. When 
it comes to judging the truth value of claims related to “RussiaGate,” we 
start with the acknowledgement that there is a plausible motive for Russian 
intervention, specifically in the Kremlin’s toward American involvement in 
the Ukraine and displeasure with US funding for non-governmental organ-
izations supporting opposition to its leader, Vladimir Putin. And by sum-
mer of 2018, there had accumulated considerable evidence for the claim 
that there was collusion between Trump campaign officials and Russians. 
Krugman is not simply fabricating fake news.
A second element that makes the charges against Trump and his 
campaign more credible is that there are some precedents for collusion 
between American presidential campaigns and foreign powers—by the 
Nixon campaign in 19684 and the Reagan campaign in 1980.5 In other 
words, the collaboration between an American campaign and a foreign 
power with a stake in the outcome is hardly new. It only seems new 
because the regime of truth has managed to dim historical memory of 
these incidents, a theme we will reprise in Chapter 6, on the Deep State.
Krugman denies that he is a conspiracy theorist, lest he be labeled “par-
anoid.” On November 22, 2016, referring to his endorsement of efforts 
to force recounts in Michigan, Wisconsin, and Ohio, he tweeted, “Truly 
last word: conspiracies do happen. You’re only a ‘conspiracy theorist’ 

42   D. C. HELLINGER
if—like voting fraud types—you won’t take no for an answer.” We will 
return to this point later in the chapter, but for now, let us consider the 
claim that Krugman wants to argue, a claim made even before ballots 
were cast. On November 7, he wrote, “Let’s be clear: this was in fact a 
rigged election.” Mostly, Krugman’s argument focused on claims that 
Russian hackers and dissemination of propaganda shaped the election, but 
he did not rule out the possibility of vote tampering. “The election prob-
ably wasn’t hacked,” he tweeted on November 23, “but Clinton should 
demand recounts just in case.”
On November 27, Krugman upped the ante, suggesting that Trump 
became president by the grace of the FBI and Russian President Vladimir 
Putin. “So Comey and Putin installed a crazy, vindictive can’t-handle-
the-truth” person in the White House.” Perhaps the Times columnist 
only meant that the combined but uncoordinated actions of the two 
resulted in Trump’s victory, but his column of January 16, 2017, was 
even more conspiratorial in tone and substance. “Did the Trump cam-
paign actively coordinate with a foreign power? Did a cabal within the 
F.B.I. deliberately slow-walk investigations into that possibility? Are the 
lurid tales about adventures in Moscow true? We don’t know, although 
Mr. Trump’s creepy obsequiousness to Vladimir Putin makes it hard to 
dismiss these allegations.” Once again he felt compelled to deny that 
his claims and hypotheses could be considered a conspiracy theory. 
“Remember, saying that the election was tainted isn’t a smear or a wild 
conspiracy theory; it’s simply the truth.”
Another clear example can be found in his column of December 15, 
2016, on reports that the Central Intelligence Agency holds that groups 
connected to the Russian government and Vladimir Putin were respon-
sible for hacking into Democratic Party campaign computers with the 
intention of favoring Trump. Krugman writes,
Let me explain what I mean by saying that bad guys hacked the election. 
I’m not talking about some kind of wild conspiracy theory. I’m talking 
about the obvious effect of two factors on voting: the steady drumbeat 
of Russia-contrived leaks about Democrats, and only Democrats, and the 
dramatic, totally unjustified last-minute intervention by the F.B.I., which 
appears to have become a highly partisan institution, with distinct alt-right 
sympathies.
It bears reflection for a moment on the last phrase of this quotation. 
A widely read columnist for the most important “newspaper of record” 

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   43
in the United States thinks that a major national security agency inter-
fered in domestic politics to advance the agenda of the alt-right, a move-
ment that includes fascist and racist tendencies.
In his column the next day (December 16), referring to FBI Director 
James Comey’s announcement just before the election that the agency 
was reopening its investigation into emails kept by Clinton on her private 
computer, Krugman commented,
And then there was the Comey letter. The F.B.I. literally found nothing at 
all. But the letter dominated front pages and TV coverage, and that cover-
age — by news organizations that surely knew that they were being used as 
political weapons — was almost certainly decisive on Election Day.
In effect, Krugman alleges that Comey deliberately allowed the FBI to 
be used to impact the election.
Krugman’s renunciation of the label “conspiracy theory” has 
everything to do with how the phrase has become associated with 
pathology rather than with “theory.” The phrase, “conspiracy theory” 
could alternatively be defined to mean (1) a theory about the causes and 
consequences of conspiracies in political life or, as Merriam-Webster does, 
(2) a theory that explains an event or situation as the result of a secret 
plan by usually powerful people or groups.6 Quite clearly, Krugman is 
concerned that his allegations will be interpreted as Daniel Pipes defines 
conspiracy theories, as “fears of non-existent conspiracies.”7
To reiterate, in singling out Krugman my point is not to reject, much 
less ridicule his warnings. What his tweets and columns show is that in 
the age of Trump conspiracy beliefs are not limited to unscrupulous pol-
iticians and to those “deplorables” who voted for a candidate whose rac-
ism, hypocrisy, and erratic behavior exceed just about anyone’s standards 
for decency in personal or political relationships. When it comes to the 
2016 presidential election, Krugman is a “Truther.” Conspiracism in the 
age of Trump is not just for ultra-conservatives.
In the current era of Trump, we should not be surprised that the right 
is trying to turn the tables on the left, accusing Krugman and other lib-
erals of conspiracist tendencies quite similar to ones that Hofstadter out-
lines.8 Certainly most readers of the New York Times, even if not entirely 
in agreement with Krugman, would reject labeling his views as conspir-
acy theory. Yet what Krugman and many Trump opponents expound 
is a theory suggesting that Russian invention significantly aided right-
wing political forces to seize a remarkable degree of institutional power, 

44   D. C. HELLINGER
power used to dismantle significant parts of the welfare and regulatory 
state, power over a nuclear arsenal that quite literally could end human 
life on earth. Perhaps this explains why Krugman and other prominent 
liberal intellectuals have embraced theories that only 18 months earlier 
would have earned them the scorn reserved in the past for Chomsky or 
Marxists.
Hofstadter described the paranoid style in American politics as a 
recurrent, right-wing populist phenomenon characterized by back-
lashes against immigration, which at the time he wrote (1964) he saw 
re-emerging in the Goldwater movement.9 Trump’s campaign can be 
viewed as yet another episode in this style. However, I contend that the 
“paranoid style” framework should not be applied to many claims of 
conspiracy in political life. I argue that conspiracist discourse is articu-
lated not only by the president and his supporters, but also by his oppo-
nents. Krugman may be right or wrong, but he is not paranoid. He is by 
many definitions a conspiracy theorist in the sense that he attributes an 
important political outcome to a conspiracy involving a foreign power 
and disloyal Americans. Even if we allow, as we should, that Krugman 
would acknowledge other factors behind Trump’s victory, it is unmis-
takable that he thinks the election’s outcome would have been different 
without collusion and foreign interference.
Krugman’s disavowal of conspiracy theory is the norm, not the excep-
tion, and it is just as widespread in academia as in journalism. Take, 
for example, the intellectual gymnastics of two political scientists who 
became perplexed when their research produced a finding that seemed to 
contradict their predictions about pre-dispositions toward conspiracism. 
Adam Enders and Steven Smallpage found evidence that a set disposi-
tions (a Generic Conspiracist Belief Scale, or GCBS) indicative of a suspi-
cious mind, taken to be linked to paranoid conspiracism, were predictive 
to some degree of the likelihood of believing each of the 9 of 10 theo-
ries: Birther Theory, Truther Theory, rejection of lone gunman in the 
JFK assassination, vaccination links to autism, airplane vapor trails (as 
CIA chemical experiments), faked moon landing, climate change denial, 
rejection of official story regarding the death of Princess Diana. But the 
authors were at a loss at first to explain the finding that the 10th theory 
tested, Russiagate, was generally negatively correlated with belief in the 
other conspiracies and with the GCBS. They ruminated,

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   45
Indeed, the GCBS scale employed here was designed to capture the 
general predisposition to see the world through the lens of conspiracy. 
As such, we are somewhat dismayed that it does not aid in classifying 
“Russiagate” beliefs. While it could be that the specific operationalization 
of conspiracy ideation (the GCBS) that we employ here is failing in this 
instance, we find it more likely that the simply is not much truly “conspira-
torial” content to the “Russiagate” conspiracy theory.10
Effectively, they “explain” the inconsistency of the GCBS by defining 
away the problem.
The Shadow of Hofstadter
There is no settled definition of what constitutes a “conspiracy”, much 
less a “conspiracy theory.” Daniel Pipes, a hawkish academic special-
ist on Middle Eastern affairs and author of one of the most widely read 
books on the subject, unhelpfully defines a conspiracy theory is “fear of a 
non-existent conspiracy.”11 Not that some conspiracy theories shouldn’t 
be considered as little more than fanciful, more suitable for entertain-
ment purposes than social science and history. Examples include that the 
Illuminati, a secretive group of Free Masons, was the author of major 
revolutions (including the American and French revolutions) and is cur-
rently carrying out plans to establish a New World Order.12 More alarm-
ing, given the persistence devastation wrought by anti-Semitism, is the 
theory that Jews have a secret plan to rule the world through domina-
tion of financial institutions.13 More humorous is the contention that 
Lizard people populate the US government, which one survey claims to 
be believed by 12 million Americans.14
It is Richard Hofstadter’s conception of conspiracy theories as the 
“paranoid style” of populist politics that has most informed students of 
conspiracy theory—though Pipes and many others who have embraced 
Hofstadter’s characterization seem to have forgotten that he allowed that 
such theories are held by “normal” people. Conspiracy theories, he says, 
are not an actual pathology but style of discourse. Though his concern 
was focused on the United States, his work dominates the study of con-
spiracism elsewhere in the world as well. He associates conspiracy theory 
with four traits: It is (1) a recurrent phenomenon associated with peri-
odic outbreaks of populism in US history; (2) recognizable by suspicion, 

46   D. C. HELLINGER
exaggeration, and fantasy; (3) starts from facts but then leaps up to 
broader and higher levels of explanation; and (4) attributes the outcomes 
of large impersonal forces to acts of will by elites.15
The notion of “normal” here is ambiguous, at best. Hofstadter 
wrote out of a sense that extremist ideas were dangerously on the rise 
in 1964, abetted by the Goldwater campaign. He could not have real-
ized that by associating conspiracy theory with paranoia, even if only in 
style, he defined the course of research that would treat conspiracy the-
ory as pathological and subject to investigation by psychologists. Still, 
there is an ominous tone when he warns, “Although the paranoid style 
(my emphasis) is always with us, it tends to wax and wane in relevance, 
lapsing into long periods of obscurity on the fringes of the political spec-
trum (left and right) and coming back when least expected.”16 By defi-
nition, being on the fringe is not “normal,” certainly not in a statistical 
sense. By using the term “paranoid” and associating it with populism 
Hofstadter’s approach cannot be entirely divorced from psychologically 
based explanations for conspiracy beliefs or from the tendency to associ-
ate populism with conspiracy theories.
This book is partly about revising Hofstadter’s legacy, most notably 
its role in branding, perhaps indelibly, “conspiracy theory” as “paranoia” 
and in linking populism to irrationality. However, his identification of the 
recurrent themes of that era harkening back to earlier eras of populism 
is highly relevant to the threats posed to democracy in America today by 
Trumpism. His concern was with right-wing populism, which spawned 
anti-immigrant prejudice, white supremacy, and what he famously coined 
the “paranoid style” in public discourse. His essays on the subject were 
inspired by his alarm at the right-wing discourse encouraged by Barry 
Goldwater, the Republican nominee for president in 1964. As I review 
and critique aspects of the book, there should be no mistaking that what-
ever its flaws, Hofstadter’s warnings about the recurrent origins and fea-
tures of right-wing populism in the United States remain highly relevant 
to Trumpism.
Without exception, everyone who studies and writes about conspiracy 
theory makes the disclaimer that “conspiracies exist.” They differ regard-
ing the status they accord to conspiracy theories. That is, they differ as 
to whether “conspiracy theory” should be about understanding the role, 
influence, and causes of conspiracism, or should be about understand-
ing why some people hold what most academics and journalists consider 
to be crazy or paranoid ideas. In contrast to those who see conspiracy 

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   47
theories as inherently dangerous, or at least posing obstacle to addressing 
social and economic issues, some new scholarly work, reviewed below, 
in communication theory warns that the label “conspiracy theory” is 
used to induce “conspiracy panic” against those who raise uncomfortable 
issues and question “prevailing understandings” and “simple facts.”
If conspiracies exist, why do so many studies devoted to “conspiracy 
theory” seek to deny their importance as political activities, or some-
times even their existence? Why are conspiracy theorists often portrayed 
as pathological, as afflicted with a mental illness? Chip Berlet, a prolific 
student of conspiracism whose research has exposed many of the most 
bigoted and violence-prone right-wing purveyors of conspiracy theo-
ries, denies any legitimacy to treating conspiracy theories as a method 
of political analysis. According to Berlet, “Even the most sincere and 
well-intentioned conspiracy theorists contribute to the dangerous social 
dynamics of demonization and scapegoating.”17
Something of this nature been a point of criticism of theories posit-
ing Kremlin intervention in the American election. Although they do 
not specifically refer to Krugman by name, two critics of Krugman who 
are unsympathetic to Trump warned that fears of Russian meddling 
and suspicions of malfeasance by the Trump administration are feeding 
“tyrannophobia” in the United States. They argue, “Americans have…
embraced…a new Cold War between totalitarianism and democracy.” 
Echoing a frequent theme in Berlet’s work, they charge that focusing on 
Russian collusion is “distracting from the deeply rooted forces that have 
been fueling right-wing populist politics, notably economic inequalities 
and status resentments.”18
While this depiction of conspiracy theories as worse than useless for 
people seeking to identify the causes and the political sources of their 
social and economic distress no longer goes unchallenged, it continues 
to prevail even among cultural critics who treat conspiracy theories as 
symptomatic of the “real” causes of popular discontent. For example, 
Peter Knight opens his insightful 2000 study of conspiracy theories in 
popular culture by acknowledging that they are “no longer the exclusive 
house-style of the terminally paranoid” and that they are found not only 
in popular culture but in elite culture as well. They are, he says, “now 
less likely to give bent to alarmist fears about an occasional irruption of 
the normal order of things, than to express a not entirely unfounded 
suspicion that the normal order of things itself amounts to a conspir-
acy.”19 As promising as this sounds, however, Knight goes on in much 

48   D. C. HELLINGER
of the book to suggest that using conspiratorial frameworks to address 
oppression is not fruitful. For example, though he praises Betty Friedan’s 
Feminine Mystique as “pioneering” in advancing feminism, Knight goes 
on to criticize Friedan and other feminists who claim that patriarchy 
requires conscious agency on the part of males. Knight acknowledges 
that Friedan herself rejects the “conspiracy theory” label, but he argues 
that she does in fact advance a conspiracy theory by referring to “brain-
washing” and contending that male professionals engage in all sorts of 
sexist practices and social advice to “manipulate” women back to domes-
ticity after World War II.20
Had Frieden reduced the explanation of how patriarchy is created and 
maintained to the machinations of a conspiracy among men one could 
indeed criticize her for oversimplifying the construction and mainte-
nance of patriarchy. But were men and, one could argue, women such 
as Phyllis Schlafly who abetted them, to be regarded as without any 
agency or responsibility in maintaining patriarchy? Were the men who 
monopolized, even more than today, positions of power in corporate, 
cultural and political life completely unconscious of the policies and 
actions they took, not to speak of the myriad little conspiracies (well-de-
picted in the popular HBO series Mad Men) that maintained glass ceil-
ings and required women to return to domesticity, whether they wanted 
to or not? Could a movie mogul such as Miramax’s Harvey Weinstein 
have assaulted so many Hollywood actresses and other female employees 
over 20 years before his comeuppance in 2017 without a conspiracy of 
silence among the nine men who served on the board of his production 
company?21
Cass Sunstein departs somewhat from the paranoid style approach in 
arguing that a conspiracy theory need not be a delusional explanation. 
He defines conspiracy theory as “an effort to explain some event or prac-
tice by referring to the secret machinations of powerful people who have 
also managed to conceal their role.” However, he finds conspiracy theo-
ries as unlikely to explain much because in “free societies” conspiracies 
with significant consequences are subject to exposure. Sunstein wants to 
explain “why rational people sometimes believe crazy conspiracy theo-
ries.”22 Like so many others he acknowledges that conspiracies exist, but 
he has no interest in exploring what consequences this has for policy, his-
tory, the exercise of policy. He acknowledges that some conspiracy the-
ories turn out to be true, but explains that his focus is on false theories 
and, within that set, dangerous ones.

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   49
Stressed undergraduates and busy professors will find popular sources 
for defining “conspiracy theory” tie it causally to the paranoid style. 
Wikipedia’s definition does not stray far from the paranoid style. Its 
definition of conspiracy is “an explanation of an event or situation that 
invokes a conspiracy without warrant, generally one involving an illegal 
or harmful act carried out by government or other powerful actors.” The 
online encyclopedia adds, “Conspiracy theories often produce hypoth-
eses that contradict the prevailing understanding of history or simple 
facts. The term is a derogatory one.”23 It should not escape the notice of 
a critical reader that Wiki’s definition is not far from that of Pipes. Even 
acknowledging that we can tell a “simple fact” when we see one, should 
a conspiracy theory be dismissed for contradicting a “prevailing under-
standing of history”?
Historian Kathryn Olmsted partly breaks from the academic consen-
sus in finding that conspiracy theories can sometimes be empowering for 
people with little influence over elites. One of her case studies of twen-
tieth-century conspiracy theory involved suspicions that the CIA had 
been complicit in the trafficking of crack from Central America, where 
the United States was involved in promoting insurgency against the 
leftist Sandinista government in Nicaragua, into Los Angeles. Another 
of her case studies involved a group of New Jersey housewives (“Jersey 
Girls”) who believed the Bush administration was conniving to prevent 
a full and impartial investigation into the 9/11 attacks on the World 
Trade Centers. Whether or not either effort ultimately exposed the 
“truth” behind the most heinous suspicions, in each case ordinary citi-
zens forced a degree of accountability that embarrassed and angered offi-
cials. In the first instance, the CIA Director felt it necessary to take the 
unprecedented step of meeting with community activists, whom he tried 
(unsuccessfully) to reassure that the Agency would fully investigate their 
charges. In the latter case, the Jersey girls mobilized public support that 
forced the Bush administration to form an independent commission to 
investigate the 9/11 attacks.24
In her introductory chapter Olmsted defines conspiracy as “when 
two or more people collude to abuse power or break the law” and a 
conspiracy theory as “a proposal about a conspiracy that may more may 
not be true; it has yet been proven.” In her conclusion, however, she 
admonishes readers that conspiracy theories have little use for correct-
ing abuses of power; their proper use is as case studies that may iden-
tify the “sources of the illness.” In other words, conspiracy theories may 

50   D. C. HELLINGER
uncover facts the government wants to hide, but at base they remain 
symptoms of social and political pathologies and are themselves more 
dangerous than useful.25 This conclusion needs to be reconciled with 
her Introduction and also needs to be problematized. It seems more 
persuasive when applied to theories that with a broad brush taint the 
federal government with heinous and perfidious acts; it is difficult 
to square with her accounts of how the Jersey Girls and the African-
American community forced a defensive response from the state and 
achieved some accountability from elites for actions that they preferred 
to remain in the dark.
The Regime of Truth
The potential for conspiracy theories to challenge “prevailing under-
standings” is at the heart of two works in communication theory raise 
important issues about the “paranoid style” meme in work on conspiracy 
theory. Mark Fenster’s 1999 book Conspiracy Theories Secrecy and Power 
in American Culture and Jack Bratich’s 2008 book Conspiracy Panics 
have especially influenced my approach.26 Fenster’s work was among the 
first to question the way that the term “conspiracy theory” is used to 
delegitimize political discourse that questions the assumptions associ-
ated with American exceptionalism and pluralist theories of democracy. 
Critical of both Hofstadter’s and Pipes’ treatment of conspiracy theory 
as pathology, Fenster contends that conspiracy theories should not be 
regarded as a form of paranoia and can have effects that are “wide rang-
ing and salutary.” Nonetheless, some of Hofstadter’s paranoia seems to 
creep into Fenster’s definition of conspiracy theory as an assertion that 
“a secret, omnipotent individual or group covertly controls the political 
and social order, or some part thereof.”27
“Omnipotent” captures the notion of awe that does characterize some 
of the most fantastic theories or quasi-religious political theories based 
on a particular hermeneutic, for example, millennialism. But omnipo-
tence is more likely to be found in conspiracy theories depicted in popu-
lar fiction (James Bond, Wonder Woman, etc.) whereby a hero struggles 
to save the world from a villainous super-criminal sometimes working 
on behalf of a Manichean enemy of humankind. Indeed, this theme pre-
dominates in many of the best-known theories, such as those associated 
with MCCarthyism, with its Manichean view of Communism. But are all 
conspiracy theories of this ilk?

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   51
Bratich’s critique focuses on how academics and journalists delegiti-
mate certain social criticism as “conspiracy theory,” arguing that instead 
of assuming that we know what is and is not a conspiracy theory, we 
“need to examine the very conditions of recognition,” i.e., how do we 
qualify some theories as worthy of serious consideration and dismiss 
others. Those who do this work and their practices constitute what he 
calls (drawing on the French philosopher, Michel Foucault) a “regime of 
truth.” Instead of dismissing theories, such as those which swirl around 
9/11 and the assassination of JFK, we should recognize that conspiracy 
theories “are portals to specific issues, but more importantly they collec-
tively function as doorways to a broader context” (ital. in original).28
Bratich (2008: 9) advises, “I would argue that rather than accept con-
spiracy theories as a real danger to the health of the body politics, we 
need to ask how the risky thought encapsulated in conspiracy theory is 
generated discursively, under what conditions, and to what ends.” Not 
all “conspiracy theory” is worthy of serious consideration; but there 
can be a chilling result from dismissing journalistic and scholarly work 
that warns of elite duplicity and networking, thereby questioning dem-
ocratic nature and legitimacy of the American state. Hence, most anal-
yses of conspiracy theories is, says Bratich, “symptomatic,” that is, for 
most academics the main reason to study conspiracism is to uncover the 
reasons why people believe the unbelievable, not to test the epistemo-
logical value of the theory itself.29 So, for example, although Olmsted 
allows that conspiracy theories may sometimes serve the interests of the 
less powerful in a society, her view is that conspiracy theories are sympto-
matic; that they are distracting at best, pathological at worst.
Bratich does not offer a definition of “conspiracy theory,” mainly 
because his book is devoted to showing how the term is used to discredit 
certain forms of knowledge. Rather than argue the truth or falseness of a 
particular conspiracy theory, Bratich argues that characterizing a particu-
lar interaction, analysis, or theory (“narrative”) as a conspiracy theory is 
a way of disciplining deviance. This practice is a form of “social panic” 
that he calls “conspiracy panic.” He continues, “’Conspiracy theory’ 
functions as an intolerable line and an antagonism…The scapegoating 
of conspiracy theories provides the conditions for social integration and 
political rationality. Conspiracy panics help to define the normal modes 
of dissent.”30
I have made a similar argument in a study of three conspiracy 
theories related to the exercise of American power to maintain its 

52   D. C. HELLINGER
hegemony. The three theories I explored were (1) that US National 
Security apparatus were responsible for the assassination of John 
F. Kennedy; (2) that the CIA was complicit in setting off the crack 
cocaine epidemic in African-American neighborhoods of Los Angeles; 
and (3) that power elites are conspiring to undermine sovereign, demo-
cratic power in the United States and elsewhere in order to replace with 
global government, often characterized as a “new world order.” While 
the truth value of these theories varies considerably, what they have in 
common is that in each case there is alleged to be a conspiracy that 
stands in contradiction to the democratic requirement for transparency 
in public affairs.31
This connection between transparency and democracy was well articu-
lated by Senator Richard Burr (R-NC), chair of Senate Select Committee 
on Intelligence, in setting the goals of his committee when it convened 
to take testimony from James Comey, who had been fired from his 
FBI directorship by President Trump, fueling suspicions that President 
Trump was guilty of obstructing justice. Burr said, “We will establish 
the facts, separate from rampant speculation, and lay them out for the 
American people to make their own judgment. Only then will we as a 
nation be able to move forward and to put this episode to rest.”32
Fenster calls this kind of faith in open government “the transparency 
fix”, that is, a belief that it can lead to knowledge and power for citi-
zens.33 It is an assumption that stands behind federal and state “sunshine 
acts” that require open meetings and deliberation of public policy, calls 
for stricter recording of campaign finance, and the press’s recourse to 
“fact checking” political claims. Transparency on the international level 
is the goal of financier George Soros’ Open Society Institute as well as 
the anti-corruption NGO, Transparency International. The explosion of 
interest in decentralized cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin, has been fue-
led by the notion that transactions in these currencies are more trans-
parent because they take place in ledgers, called “blockchains,” that are 
open to examination by all who trade them.34 However, John Griffin, a 
highly successful identifier of financial scams, found that about half of the 
exceptional rise in the value of Bitcoins in 2017 was actually the result of 
manipulation of the currency by Bitfinex, a large trading service, which 
took advantage of its servicing a number of different cryptocurrencies to 
use one of the latter to prop up the value of Bitcoins. Its trades were 
recorded, but it took months of investigation to understand just how the 
manipulation occurred.35

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   53
There is much to recommend in Fenster’s warnings about making a 
fetish of transparency. As the Bitcoin example shows, it is doubtful that 
in a complex society with rapid flows of information and large bureaucra-
cies, full transparency, even if attainable, would not necessarily bring all 
conspiracies into the daylight. And there are areas of diplomacy, security, 
and protection of privacy for which full transparency would be hurtful 
or counterproductive (see Chapter 1). However, there are strong indi-
cations that politics and social life are growing more and more opaque 
in contemporary America. To take two examples explored in Chapters 6  
and 7, respectively, national security agencies have a long history of 
engaging in counter democratic surveillance and operations that have 
no justification other than defense of state or elite interests; the flow of 
money in electoral politics has not only increased but become virtually 
untraceable, resulting in the pernicious influence of Dark Money.
Bratich sees “symptomology” as a form of “conspiracy panic.”36 
Given that “symptom” is so closely associated with disease, this is under-
standable. Insofar as symptomology is associated with the notion that all 
conspiracy theories are a priori irrational, this approach reinforces the 
hegemony defined by the regime of truth. I would argue, however, that 
almost all social science is symptomatic in the sense that social scientists, 
including political scientists, share with conspiracy theorists an agenda 
to reveal through our research patterns of power and influence that are 
not evident on the surface of things. Like conspiracy theorists, we social 
scientists seek to look below the surface of “reality” to get at patterns 
of social life that are not fully visible or understood. Perhaps this is why 
sociologist Fredric Jameson is hardly alone in regarding conspiracy the-
ory as the “poor man’s cognitive mapping.”37
At this point, we should take note that conspiracy theories are not 
solely the cognitive maps of the masses. They frequently originate in elite 
circles. A historical example can be taken from the American Revolution. 
Bernard Bailyn, a distinguished historian of the ideology of the American 
Revolution, examined conspiratorial ideas among the founders in the 
era of War for Independence and the writing of the Constitution. Bailyn 
wrote his most important works contemporaneously with Hofstadter, 
but he took a quite different approach to conspiracy. He argued that 
conspiracies theories spun by writers on both sides of the independ-
ence cause varied in degree of factual basis but simultaneously provide 
an important window into the thinking of the colonists. They played an 
important role in political mobilization and influencing political values.38

54   D. C. HELLINGER
Rather than blaming mass ignorance for some of the more paranoid 
conspiracy theories in circulation today, it makes more sense to see con-
spiracism as a complex phenomenon that requires a synergy between 
elites that have self-interested motives for dissembling such theories and 
mass publics that live in times of uncertainty and disruption. From the 
Salem Witch Trials to McCarthyism, political power or disenfranchise-
ment of certain groups has created conditions that can be exploited by 
propaganda. What is perhaps different today is that the Internet has 
made mass communication more accessible to non-elites. But even today 
the ability to spread false conspiracy theories for political or economic 
gain is limited without the economic and political clout of elites. While 
an individual in front of a computer scene can post something viral, one 
lesson of the 2016 election is that most widely disseminated false news 
on the Internet is, if not fabricated by political operatives, spread by the 
use of bot-software deployed by campaigns, interest groups, and foreign 
governments.
Historians, Social Science and “Proving”  
Conspiracy Theory
Central to the project of this book is the argument that the public, espe-
cially academics and journalists, be on-guard against dismissing all social 
and political criticism with conspiratorial undertones as “paranoid”, and 
to also be on guard against being panicked to abandoning radical crit-
icism by being charged with promoting a conspiracy theory. I will take 
this up further in chapters dealing with “Dark Money” and with the 
concept of a “Deep State.” To accomplish this, first I want to suggest 
separating theories and beliefs that have little warrant from those worthy 
on the basis of evidence to be considered plausible. Second, although I 
think that grand, world conspiracy theories are worthy of attention for 
the study mass behavior and psychology, I argue that there exist middle 
range conspiracy theories, which I will call “operational conspiracies,” 
that deserve a place in explanations of many political events, though they 
must always be placed within the context of historical context and socio-
economic structures.
Olmsted insists that we evaluate a conspiracy theory on the basis 
whether it has been “proven.”39 This places a requirement on conspir-
acy theories that goes beyond what is required of the social and natu-
ral sciences. The more salient criticism that Olmsted should level is that 

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   55
many conspiracy theories are not subject to disproof, that is, as Krugman 
put it, promoted by someone who won’t “take no for an answer.” It is 
fair to ask someone who advances a conspiracy theory what it would take 
to prove them wrong, but it exceeds what we ask of the scientists them-
selves to ask that a conspiracy theory be proved. Karl Popper, one of the 
most ardent critics of conspiracy, points out that science demands that 
hypotheses be put forward for disproof. Academic knowledge depends 
on a process of consensus, that is, upon acceptance of paradigms. But 
as Kuhn has shown, paradigms are largely schools of thought, some-
times competing, sometimes uncontested, about the way nature works. 
Conspiracy theories challenge key paradigms of mainstream political 
science.40
Jodi Dean has alerted us to the consensual nature of knowledge in 
his work on people who have reported UFO sightings or claimed to 
have been abducted. “This so-called consensus reality is exclusionary;” 
he writes, “it is based on the silencing and discrediting of real, every-
day people, people who want to be heard…As long as they are dismissed 
and objectified, as long as they don’t count as citizens whose voice and 
opinions are worth taking seriously, then the truth will only be a play of 
power.”41 In fact, after years of the media dismissing UFO sightings as 
paranormal, suddenly the news media on December 2017 was carrying 
reports that a major Pentagon program to study such phenomenon had 
existed for years behind the innocuous title, “Advanced Aviation Threat 
Identification Program”, and that its most important patron was Senator 
Harry Reid (D-Nevada), leader of the Democratic Party in the Senate. A 
former official who led the program, Luis Elizondo, resigned in protest 
from the Defense Department over what he regarded as excessive secrecy 
about the program and said, “There is very compelling evidence that we 
may not be alone.”42
Historians, especially those doing narrative history, share the aca-
demic reluctance to theorize about conspiracy, but it is sometimes 
impossible to tell the story without referring to conspiracy, sometimes 
by name. Conspiracies among Roman senators are relevant to under-
standing Rome’s transition from Republic to Empire. The Gunpowder 
Plot is relevant to understanding the politics of the English monarchy in 
Shakespeare’s day. The conspiratorial tactics of Lenin’s Bolsheviks help 
us understand how and why the Russian Revolution happened, if not 
“why.” The intervention of the CIA in Iran, Guatemala, and Chile help 
us understand how brutal dictatorships took hold in those countries. In 

56   D. C. HELLINGER
none of these cases can we be satisfied that conspiracy simply explains the 
outcome, but can conspiracy be left out of the narrative? It is hard to see 
how.
In some cases, conspiracies, such as persecution of witches, were 
important tools for stripping women of wealth and influence. Such 
malevolent conspiracy theories (anti-Semitic ones are another such case) 
are suitable not only for symptomatic analysis but also for actual investi-
gation. Conspiracy theories that have accompanied the rise of Trumpism 
can tell us much about American politics, especially as we uncover par-
allels in the past. We should expect conspiracies to be associated with 
efforts to reveal and explain recurrent corruption, dirty wars conducted 
by national security agencies, the massive and hidden transforma-
tion of wealth into political power, and other maladies of a threatened 
democracy. Conspiracies are not just symptoms of “something rotten in 
Denmark,” but a source of the stench.
We need to develop ways to parse unwarranted, often malevolent con-
spiracy theories from those that are at least plausible, if not warranted 
as true. My starting point is not that we must eliminate any “regime of 
truth” to accomplish this task so much as to develop ways to construct a 
regime that is more democratic and open to ideas on the margins. I want 
to begin by suggesting the criteria by which we should judge the plausi-
bility of a conspiracy theory. If the age of Trump is likely see more con-
spiracy theories arise across the political spectrum (not just on the right), 
we will need to think about how we identify the ones that should be 
taken seriously, and how we assess whether they are malevolent or, one 
the other hand, addressing malevolence.
A good example of misuse of “conspiracy theory” by a researcher 
can be found in how some important issues are characterized by Joseph 
Uscinski, even though his research is among the few examinations 
of conspiracy beliefs that can be credited with testing some common 
assumptions about conspiracism (e.g., that conspiracism reached unprec-
edented highs in American culture after the Kennedy assassination) (see 
Chapter 1). In a YouTube video raising concerns about the theory that 
we live in a post-truth world, Uscinski rightly points to some examples of 
conspiracy theories that are commonly associated with the paranoid style. 
He goes on, however, to suggest (perhaps unintentionally) that ques-
tioning the safety of vaccinations falls into the same irrational rejection of 
scientific fact as questioning the safety of Genetically Modified Foods or 
nuclear power.43

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   57
My objection is not to labeling such suspicions as conspiracy theories, 
assuming what is meant is that there are powerful corporate interests 
that might manipulate scientific examination of these theories. After all, 
there is plenty of evidence that this has happened with a range of corpo-
rate funding of research on tobacco and various foods. The question is 
whether it is appropriate to argue that the scientific and social facts about 
vaccination, nuclear power, and GMO seeds are sufficiently established 
to place concerns about safety as beyond question, outside the regime 
of truth. While these theories are not “proven,” and while refusals to 
have children vaccinated do pose risks to public health, should we regard 
questioning vaccinations as in some way pathological? Do all conspiracy 
theories share the same epistemological status—that is, all are based on 
fraudulent facts or very faulty logic and must be “proven” before taken 
seriously? And is the best way to combat a theory, such as resistance of 
parents to vaccinations or fears about fluoride in water, to alienate its 
holders by calling them, in effect, crazy?
A Typology of Conspiracy Theories
Conspiracy theories range from those about relatively petty affairs, such 
as office promotions, allocation of small grants, etc. to grand theories 
attributing to some cabal or secret organization the power to make a rev-
olution or engineer new world order. In the first category are conspira-
cies that singly have little impact on politics, though they may collectively 
erode confidence and trust in elites. Such is the case with corruption, 
as citizens that daily deal with minor bribes or read of suborned public 
officials are understandably likely to develop a jaundiced view of the rule 
of law. Grand theories pertain to claims that conspiracies operate on a 
world or civilizational level. The conspiracy theories that merit the most 
attention are those that fall into the middle ground—“operational con-
spiracies” that lie behind coups, rigged elections, lies about motives for 
war, destabilization of other nation’s politics, etc. Conspiracy theories at 
all three levels may be fanciful or grounded in reality; may give rise to 
scapegoating or identify wrongdoing; may expose the systematic attempt 
by elites to exploit ethnic or religious prejudice or be used to the incite 
violence or, in the worst cases, even genocide.
Thus, I propose that we evaluate the historical and political import of 
conspiracy theories along two axes: (1) level and (2) plausibility of the 
hypothesized conspiracy.

58   D. C. HELLINGER
Level or Scope of a Conspiracy
Level corresponds to the outcome sought by conspirators—world 
(sometimes called “grand”), operational, and petty. This categoriza-
tion is adapted from an approach recommended by Pipes. World con-
spiracies, he says, seek global power in order to “challenge the existing 
order or humanity at large.” By contrast, petty conspiracies have more 
limited objectives, says Pipes.44 Level might also be conceived to refer 
to the magnitude of the consequences posed by a particular conspiracy 
theory.
Pipes’ application of his categories is biased and inconsistent. In his 
view the Iran-Contra Affair was “petty,” even though it did have an 
ambitious (my term, not his) agenda: improving relations with one 
regime (the Iranian Revolution), funding the overthrow of another (the 
Sandinista Revolution in Nicaragua). Pipes categorizes Stalin and Hitler 
as authors of an operational conspiracy, but in other places he elevates 
both Communism and Fascism to the status of “world conspiracies.” 
Because Lenin saw the Russian Revolution as a precursor to a global, 
social order, Pipes says, “His was truly a world conspiracy.” He asserts, 
“The Russian Revolution was a real conspiracy carried out by Lenin and 
others; it was also subject to conspiracy theories involving everyone from 
the eighteenth-century Illuminati to contemporary German socialists and 
the Elders of Zion.”45 It is quite possible that Pipes means in the second 
part of this quotation to exclude such theories from the regime of truth, 
but in reality Pipes reveals himself to be a grand conspiracy theorist. It 
is one thing to recognize that the business of rebelling against an estab-
lished state requires conspiracy, but it is another to see conspiracy as the 
essence of Lenin’s political project.
Pipes’ ideological bias accounts for his confused categorizations. 
Conspiracy theories linked to Marxism and Muslim culture are usually 
seen as grand, comparable to theories attributing world-shaking events 
to the Illuminati, a tendency that also marks his other major work on 
conspiracism, Hidden Hand: Middle East Fears of Conspiracy. As 
Matthew Gray remarks in Conspiracy Theories in the Arab World, Pipes 
work is polemical and “flawed by Pipes’ pathological explanations for 
conspiracism, his preoccupation with anti-Semitism, and his oversimplifi-
cation.” Pathological explanations for conspiracism in the Arab world are 
too often, says Gray, “driven by Orientalist simplification of the region’s 
political culture.”46

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   59
Gray’s insights have considerable relevance for understanding conspir-
acism not only in other post-colonial societies, but in the United States 
itself (see Chapter 8). Here I mainly want to appropriate the usefulness 
of Pipes’ distinguishing not only between “grand” or “minor” conspira-
cies but to a third category that he also mentions, but confusingly con-
flates with grand conspiracy theories. This middle level is an “operational 
conspiracy theory,” referring “to circumstances in which conspiracy 
theories have an influence of policy decisions of governments or other 
powerful institutions.”47 Pipes uses this category to classify (in 1999) the 
states of Iran and Iraq. However inconsistent and biased his application, 
his differentiation of conspiracy theories (and conspiracies, by extension) 
by their scope (i.e., “level”) is useful. The rows of Table 2.1 differentiate 
some well-known conspiracy theories by level.
I concede that there is no precise way to categorize theories by scope. 
Many minor (or “petty’) conspiracies often have great consequences for 
those deceived or victimized—for example, for elderly people defrauded 
by various consumer scams. Those who placed bets on the Chicago 
Whites Sox to win the 1919 baseball World Series may have lost a good 
part of their personal fortunes; owners (like myself) of Volkswagen diesel 
automobile were deceived by the companies unlawful evasion of environ-
mental protection regulations, and a serious degree of harm was done to 
the environment. A great number of minor conspiracies can add up to 
more serious consequences on the same level as that of a single opera-
tional conspiracy. By contrast, a simple operational conspiracy can have 
a devastating consequence for enormous numbers of people, for exam-
ple, by unleashing weapons of mass destruction, ethnic cleansing, or 
genocide.
Plausibility
The second variable used here to classify conspiracy theories is even more 
subjective than level and requires wading into an epistemological mine-
field. Categorizing a conspiracy theory by its level of plausibility is to 
make a judgment not only about the truth value but about the degree 
to which a conspiracy theory should even be entertained. Even carrying 
out this exercise is in effect to participate in disciplining inquiry; that is, 
participate in shaping a regime of truth. The judgments I make can and 
should be contested. My guidelines and their application are intended to 
broaden rather than narrow the boundaries of the regime of truth.

60   D. C. HELLINGER
Table 2.1  Subjective classification of conspiracy theories by scope and plausibility; percent believers in US public, 
where available
Acceptance
Warranted, beyond 
reasonable doubt
Highly plausible
Plausible
Highly unlikely
Unwarranted, 
fictional or fanciful
Level
World/grand
None—By defi-
nition requires 
total control over 
historical, social, 
and economic  
circumstances
There is an interna-
tional communist 
conspiracy to rule 
the world (52% in 
1987)
The US govern-
ment is covering up 
knowledge of visits 
of extra-terrestrial 
beings at Roswell, 
New Mexico (21%)
A secretive global 
elite is conspiring 
to rule the world 
and establish a New 
World Order (28%)
Pope works with the 
Devil to bring the 
apocalypse and end 
times
 
Jews control the 
world economy
Operational
CIA has an opera-
tional bureau that 
has planned over-
throws of foreign 
governments
 
Tobacco companies 
manipulate data 
and information to 
hide the impact of 
tobacco on health 
(estimated 97%)
The Federal 
Emergency 
Management 
Administration has 
contingency plans 
to intern pro-testers 
under martial law
 
Russian operatives 
used social media 
in an attempt to 
further polarize 
American politics
A conspiracy was 
involved in the 
assassination of 
Pres. Kennedy  
(51%)
 
Deep State opera-
tives seek to remove 
Trump from the 
presidency (54%)
 
The Kremlin has 
compromat on Pres. 
Trump
Hitler did not die 
in a Berlin bunker 
and was spirited 
from Germany to 
Argentina (45% in 
1947)
 
The Bush adminis-
tration allowed or 
made 911 happen 
(11%)
 
Global warming is a 
hoax (37%)
Lizard People run 
the United States 
(4%)
 
The Holocaust is a 
fictional event prop-
agated by Zionists 
(1%)
(continued)

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   61
Unless otherwise indicated, percent believers taken from “Democrats and Republicans differ on conspiracy beliefs,” Public Policy Polling www.publicpoli-
cypolling.com, April 2, 2013
No opinion data found for Black Sox scandal, Shakespeare, CIA operational branch, FEMA camps (polls generally focus on FEMA, martial law, a bigger 
claim), moon as hologram; police infiltration, Pope/devil, Jews control world economy (much international survey data, but not on US opinion)
Holocaust denial: Kagay, M. “Poll on Doubt of Holocaust is Corrected.” New York Times, July 8, 1994
Deep State-Trump: Monthly Harvard-Harris Poll, June 2017
Hitler: 1947 Gallup Poll, cited in http://ropercenter.cornell.edu/nine-historical-polling-results-might-surprise/
OJ Trial: CNN poll http://www.cnn.com/US/OJ/daily/9-15/poll/index.html, says “police not prejudiced”
Tobacco Companies: No direct data on manipulation, but only 3% would “normally believe” a tobacco company statement. Harris Poll, December 12, 
2014
Communist conspiracy: Gallup poll, January 27–February 5, 1989. Text of question: “Communists are responsible for a lot of the unrest in the United 
States today.” Completely agree, 18%; mostly agree, 34%
Petty/minor
Several Chicago 
White Sox players 
conspired to throw 
the 1919 World 
Series (“Black Sox”)
Los Angeles police 
manipulated some 
of the evidence that 
was introduced 
(8% in 1995, time 
of trial, indirect 
measure)
Shakespeare never 
lived; he was a 
composite character 
made up of contem-
porary playwrights
Paul McCartney 
died in an auto 
accident in 1996 
and replaced by a 
look-alike (5%)
The moon is a holo-
gram, not an actual 
celestial object
Table 2.1  (continued)

62   D. C. HELLINGER
The philosopher Lee Basham urges that we adopt a “studied agnos-
ticism” about conspiracy theory, recognizing epistemological limitations 
on any kind of knowledge, but especially on social knowledge.48 We rely 
extensively for our data and interpretation on mediated sources for our 
information, that is, on accounts provided in particular by investigative 
journalists, social scientists, and historians, which are often very sus-
pect themselves. This is not a reason to throw up our hands about every 
ever approximating certainty, but it is a reason to refrain from “know-
ing something” simply because it appears in elite media sources, such as 
the New York Times, Washington Post, etc., and also of rejecting a pri-
ori something that has been dismissed in those sources as “conspiracy 
theory.”
Following Basham, in assessing plausibility, rather than using 
“proved” for the most credible theories and “disproved” or “paranoid” 
for those least credible, I have created a scale with “warranted” and 
“unwarranted” at the poles, with degrees of plausibility in between. In 
general, I have followed several criteria in making judgments: (1) parsi-
mony, (2) degree to which a theory is subject to disproof, (3) standards 
of proof adapted from civil and criminal law in liberal societies, and (4) 
evaluation of motive. Conspiracy theories typically rely on anomalies in 
the official story of an event to make a case and often lack positive evi-
dence linking the alleged conspirators to the event. In the weakest cases, 
they draw a conclusion based solely upon motive. On the other hand, 
our guardians of the regime of truth tend to disregard motive altogether 
and to write off anomalies as the result of chaos or chance.
It is not at all clear that the single gunman theory is more parsimo-
nious than the theory that Kennedy was the victim of a murderous con-
spiracy. One can quite systematically explain all of the myriad anomalies 
about the case—the zig-zag path of the “magic bullet” that pierced 
Kennedy’s throat, exited through body, and then wounded Governor 
John Connally alongside the president; the ability of Oswald to get off 
all the shots he is alleged to have taken; Oswald’s various brushes with 
intelligence and security agencies; the jerk of Kennedy’s head to the rear 
instead of forward upon being shot; the ease with which Oswald’s mur-
derer gain access to his victim in a police station; and others. Virtually all 
the anomalies can be explained hypothetically, and most of them were in 
Gerald Posner’s Case Closed, probably the most read book attempting to 
rebut conspiracy theories about the assassination.49 The various specific 
conspiracy theories proposed around the case have their own problems 

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   63
(e.g., how secrecy has been maintained), but considering the number 
of anomalies that Posner must address, theories that posit multiple gun-
men or deliberate negligence by government security agencies are argu-
ably more parsimonious. They remain plausible but are nonetheless not 
entirely convincing (fully warranted).
A theory that posits supernatural or divine intervention as an expla-
nation of an event is based on faith. My “studied agnosticism” does not 
extend to theories that posit miracles or other forms of spiritual inter-
ventions in human affairs. So I classify as “unwarranted” theories that 
draw upon imagined cosmologies. To cite an example especially relevant 
in the Trump era, this criteria brings into play the question of how mille-
narian and fundamentalist beliefs should be regarded. Supernatural inter-
vention, whether for evil (Satan) or for good (the angels), may be more 
parsimonious.
If it is unreasonable to demand absolute proof of conspiracy theo-
ries, it is reasonable to place the burden of proof on their proponents. 
Here, legal principles are useful. In the United States, civil cases rely 
upon preponderance of evidence, a weaker standard than that required 
in criminal cases, where the burden is proof beyond a reasonable doubt. 
In assessing the plausibility of various conspiracy theories, demonstrat-
ing their occurrence beyond a “reasonable doubt” requires much more 
evidence and consensus, analogous to the way a jury and/or judge can 
be said to enforce a “regime of truth” in a court. In similar fashion, we 
can find theories that marshal a preponderance of evidence less convinc-
ing but hard to dismiss.
The columns in Table 2.1 correspond to a variable operationalized as 
the plausibility of a particular conspiracy theory. I am not in this regard 
measuring how many people believe a theory but making a judgment 
about the degree to which a theory should be admitted within the 
regime of truth as a fitting subject for debate, analysis, and discussion. 
That is, rather than adopt Bratich’s relatively hands off approach, I side 
more with Fenster in acknowledging the need to make judgments. As 
an intellectual with a place in the educational academy, I play a role in 
imposing discipline over what should be admitted or not—though cer-
tainly with a relatively small quotient of power within that regime. In 
other words, I am accepting that we need to distinguish between con-
spiracy theories that are plausible from those that are completely out-
landish, such as the one claiming that lizard-people run America (see 
Chapter 1), which some claim is apparently believed by 12 million 

64   D. C. HELLINGER
Americans.50 Such ideas are best reserved for study by professional psy-
chologists or professional comedians. However, how we parse the realis-
tic from the outlandish demands more attention than typically accorded 
it in academia and journalism.
Categories of Conspiracy Theories
I propose, then, to classify conspiracies according to level (or scope) and 
plausibility. The three levels of conspiracy theorizing are:
•	 World or grand, corresponding to theories that purport to explain 
events that have an impact on at least a civilizational level, but espe-
cially on a global level.
•	 Operational, corresponding to theories that posit significant shifts 
in the nature of a political regime or (closely related) a major shift 
in relative power or distribution of wealth in a society, and also 
attempts to cover-up embarrassing or illegal abuse of authority and 
power.
•	 Petty, or minor, corresponding to typical corruption scandals, eva-
sion of laws (e.g., evasion of environmental regulations), ordinary 
criminal activity, abuse of bureaucratic sinecures; petty conspiracies 
individually do not aim or achieve major shifts in regime, power, or 
wealth distribution, but cumulatively they have a corrosive impact 
on public confidence in government and major institutions; also, 
attempts to cover-up such activity. They are, limited in ambition, 
even if together they may have great consequences.
Plausibility is a variable classifying conspiracy theories along a scale of 
plausibility with five points, ranging from warranted to unwarranted. 
Table 2.1 provides an example or two in each of the fifteen possibili-
ties that result when cross-listing conspiracy theories according to level 
(rows) and plausibility (columns). There is no pretension here to scien-
tific rigor in assigning the theories to different categories. The reader 
may wish to contest the judgments made. I will offer here a few com-
ments by way of explanation for some of the choices made.
One cell in Table 2.1 concerns revelations by Congress and by 
Investigative Reporters that during the Reagan administration that the 
Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) was to be in 
charge of an internment program that Lt. Col. Oliver North and other 

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   65
National Security officials envisioned as necessary to deal with pro-
test activities following escalation of American military intervention 
in Central America. These plans, explored in more detail in Chapter 7, 
were related to a larger project to declare martial law and were fortu-
nately quashed by Attorney General William French Smith, but we 
do not know whether they have been subsequently restored by other 
administrations.51
Undoubtedly there will be readers who find the conspiracy theo-
ries about the Kennedy assassination more highly plausible than I do 
or, on the other hand, find them totally unwarranted. The latter opin-
ion can be found on the left and on the right. Peter Dale Scott believes 
that the widespread rejection of the Warren Commission finding that 
Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone in assassinating Kennedy is “the legacy 
of the Enlightenment that has left us in this century with the unattractive 
choices of academic social science and scientific socialism,” also described as 
“rationalistic structuralism.”52 That is, a legacy of the Enlightenment’s faith 
in science and, applied to human affairs, to the discovery of laws that make 
history, society, and politics both understandable and subject to change.
The conspiracies regarded as plausible did not necessarily achieve 
their perpetrators’ objectives. For example, the “highly plausible” the-
ory about the Comintern’s objective is based upon the initial revolution-
ary ambitions of the Bolsheviks than its effectiveness or its functioning 
in the Cold War. What is highly plausible is not that the Comintern 
achieved the objective but that it developed a secretive network first to 
spread, later to defend the Communist regimes that emerged after the 
Bolshevik Revolution. That its power and objectives were exaggerated in 
anti-Communist conspiracy theories is another matter. Nor do I intend 
anything necessarily sinister about its aspirations given the tendency of 
revolutionary regimes to see their success as part of wave of history that 
they not only seek to ride but to actively encourage.
Once we attribute some measure of causation to conspiracy, we intro-
duce chance, agency, and perhaps chaos into history, unsettling the notion 
that social sciences and scientific history can unlock laws of social evolution, 
something that sociology in the Marxian and Webster traditions share with 
each other. Engels eulogy for Marx praise his friend for having “discovered 
the law of development of human history” and “the special law of motion 
governing the present-day capitalist mode of production.” Marxism as a 
school thought today includes quite variegated viewpoints on the viability 
of historical materialism to unlock understanding of human affairs.

66   D. C. HELLINGER
The very notion of a social science includes a commitment 
to ­presumptions of unchanging human nature, something that 
Peter Winch effectively demolishes with his observation about the 
“reflective” nature of the subject matter studied. That is, once social 
science uncovers a pattern of behavior, that same knowledge may lead 
to changes in those patterns. Conspiracy theories on the grand scale, 
whether formed by paranoid minds or not, do lack the explanatory 
power of the best social scientific theories, but operational conspiracy 
theories, if constructed with the intellectual honesty and openness 
to criticism of other social scientific and historical understanding of 
human affairs, can remind us that human beings make history—though 
not any way they want to.53
JFK, 9/11, and the Regime of Truth
Of the operational conspiracies listed in Table 2.1, the two that continue 
to resonate most persistently in American political discourse are:
1.  “Truther” theory about 9/11, i.e., the September 11, 2001 
attacks upon the World Trade Center towers in New York City and 
upon the Pentagon. One variation, “Made It Happen”, alleges the 
attacks were planned by the Bush Administration; the other alleges 
that the administration “Let It Happen.”
2.  “JFK”, the theory that Lee Harvey Oswald was not the lone assas-
sin of Kennedy in 1963. The staying power of this theory is indi-
cated that the first conspiracy theory mentioned in the popular 
series of debunking programs on the website “thisisnotaconspira-
cytheory.com” happened decades before the creation of the web—
the assassination of JFK and the killing of Oswald a day later by 
Jack Ruby.
In Table 2.1, I have classified the Truther theories as “highly unlikely,” 
partly on grounds that it makes little sense to me that the Bush admin-
istration would target the most conspicuous symbols of capitalism and 
US military power. To be sure, there remain anomalies in the official 
story about the attacks, but most of the anomalies have been to my mind 
more plausibly explained than in the case of JFK. My conclusion rests 
mainly on a close reading of the claims made by David Ray Griffin, a 
highly respected theologian who is the most prominent intellectual to 

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   67
have taken up the Truther cause, and a comparison of his critique with 
rebuttals offered by those who find more persuasive, despite its flaws, 
the account given in The 9/11 Report of the National Commission on 
Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States.
My assessment of Truther theories more or less conforms to accounts 
within the regime of truth, but this is not the case with JFK. To justify 
fully my conclusions would lead us too far astray from the central con-
cern of this book, conspiracism as it has unfolded since Donald Trump 
began his presidential quest by promoting the Birther theory in 2011. 
Still, a brief excursion into my reasons for challenging the regime of 
truth in the Kennedy case seems in order, both to demonstrate the util-
ity of the concept “regime of truth” and because JFK and the notion 
of a “deep state” challenges the myth of American exceptionalism (see 
Chapter 7), raising the possibility that coups, usually associated with 
Third World politics, can happen in the United States. I base my conclu-
sions largely on a close reading and comparison of Scott’s most persua-
sive book, Deep Politics and the Death of JFK and Gerald Posner’s Case 
Closed, which contends that despite its very serious flaws and pre-con-
ceived conclusion, the Warren Commission essentially got it right in 
concluding the Oswald acted alone. I have also attempted to fact-check 
the books, where possible using websites that seem to be willing to take 
“no” for an answer but remain open to the idea there was a conspiracy.54
Scott served as an adviser to Oliver Stone’s film, JFK, but unlike the 
case with the movie Deep Politics does not so much commit to a spe-
cific theory than examine anomalies that strongly suggest that the 
National Security agencies were complicit in a conspiracy. Scott advances 
hypotheses and demands public accountability for unexplained lacunae 
in the record. To some extent, one can say that more credible Truther 
spokespersons do much the same, but even the most prominent, widely 
read Truther, Griffin, goes much further in assuming the complicity of 
the Bush administration in the attack.55 Much less persuasively, Scott 
advances the proposition, with which I disagree, that Kennedy’s assas-
sination most likely altered the course of American involvement in 
Vietnam, deepening it—a view promoted as well in Stone’s film. What 
I find more persuasive is Scott’s and Stone’s contension that historians 
and social scientists are resistant to the theory that the deep state was 
involved in the assassination because if there was involvement of the 
security agencies the only conclusion possible would be that a coup d’ 
etat had occurred.

68   D. C. HELLINGER
Scott’s book was published by a major university press, but it has not 
received nearly the attention or academic and journalistic approval of 
Posner’s Case Closed. While Scott large promoted his book on various 
media channels with small audiences, Posner was widely featured on talk 
show circuit, boosting his book to best-seller status. Case Closed rose to 
best-seller status based on a wave of highly favorable reviews endorsing 
his thesis. The New York Times Book Review (Ward 1993) proclaimed 
in its headline, “The Most Durable Assassination Theory: Oswald Did 
It Alone.”56 Scott’s book is dismissed at the same time as the “opaque” 
meanderings of a literature professor. Posner, by contrast, is presented 
as a “former Wall Street lawyer,” a credential by which the Times seems 
to validate his research and reasoning skills. In another essay, the Times’ 
Christopher Lehmann-Haupt concluded, “The result is more satisfying 
than any conspiracy theory because at every step its [Posner’s] explana-
tion is clearer and more elegant. Posner’s use of evidence is often selec-
tive and certainly no more convincingly argued than that of Scott.” The 
Times Literary Supplement, American Heritage and Journal of American 
History all pronounced themselves convinced by Posner’s research. 
American Heritage (February–March 1994: 100) chimed in, “Adult 
Oswald simply wasn’t stable enough to have played a major role in an 
elaborate far-reaching conspiracy.” The Journal of American History lit-
erally raved that “the range and depth of Posner’s research is awesome. 
Nothing essential escaped him,” while simply dismissing Scott as just 
“a longtime leftist critics” writing “another conspiracy book.”57 A few 
reviews specializing in library recommendations (Choice, v. 31, March 
1994, p. 1210; Booklist, v. 90, September 15, 1993, p. 107) said kind 
things about Scott’s book, but these have considerably less influence 
than those gushing about Case Closed.58
Scott and others who challenge the Warren Commission findings bear 
the burden of proof for demonstrating a conspiracy; it is not enough to 
ask merely “what if” or fill in missing evidence with conjecture. On the 
other hand, in Case Closed the burden of proof falls on Posner to vindi-
cate the Warren Commission findings, especially since the Commission’s 
investigation has long been regarded as deeply flawed (as Posner admits). 
Is Posner’s case built more solidly than Scott’s? Space does not permit, 
perhaps mercifully, a full airing over the “who shot Kennedy” debate. 
Scott’s hypothesis of a conspiracy behind the Kennedy assassination cer-
tainly remains open to doubt, and Posner’s book does provide an expla-
nation for many of the anomalies. What I wish to demonstrate is only 

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   69
that Posner’s case is also not air-tight. His approving reviews have more 
to do with how his thesis conformed to the regime of truth.
Posner builds a portrait of Oswald as a loner, a psychological devi-
ant, and social misfit, absorbed in communism and resentful toward 
the United States. Scott, by contrast, depicts Oswald as a rational actor. 
The underlying assumption of both authors is that if Oswald was a mis-
fit, something of a joke among police and national security agencies, the 
Warren Commission finding that he acted alone is more credible. Why, 
however, should we assume a rational actor was less likely to have served 
as a triggerman or fall guy in a conspiracy to kill the president? Posner 
and Scott provide plenty of evidence that Oswald’s ideological positions 
were highly unstable, that he drifted through a shadowy world, filled 
with connections to communism and US national security institutions. 
Consider that Oswald defected to the Soviet Union and lived there for 
two years but was able upon return to use three different alias to buy 
firearms. He had contacts with both pro- and anti-Castro groups in New 
Orleans. None of this is inconsistent with the lone gunman theory, but 
it does suggest that Oswald moved socially among a dark network of 
employees and human assets of the national security agencies, American 
and others.
Like Scott, Posner relies extensively on the testimony of witnesses 
who have often changed their story (e.g., Oswald’s wife, Maria) or 
have close ties (often unacknowledged) to the CIA or other parts of 
the national security state. For example, Posner relies extensively on 
George de Mohrenschildt, described as Oswald’s “closest friend in 
Dallas,” to substantiate claims Oswald became interested in Marxism on 
his own—i.e., was not led to it by co-conspirators seeking to dupe him. 
But Mohrenschildt was, in fact, a CIA operative with underworld con-
nections going back to cover operations against Mussolini. He also was 
likely involved with Agency plots to overthrow Duvalier dictatorship in 
Haiti.59
Posner marshals evidence that Oswald’s inconsistent tendencies were 
recorded and were the cause for his rejection by intelligence services on 
both sides of the Iron Curtain. However, in documenting the attitude of 
the intelligence services, Poster also reveals the considerable extent that 
they monitored and used Oswald. Oswald was observed and befriended 
by figures within the national security apparatus and employed in fairly 
sensitive military activities. Scott asks how and why Oswald came to have 
such close associations (e.g., with Mohrenschildt). Oswald’s associations 

70   D. C. HELLINGER
do not constitute proof of a conspiracy, but it is reasonable to ask those 
who defend the Warren Commission why a “loner” had such associ-
ations. Much of Posner’s own research reinforces the idea that Oswald 
very much wanted to be employed for work in the security apparatus, 
and of course Oswald declared on the evening after the shooting that he 
was just a “patsy” for others.
In attempting to explain the failure of the Warren Commission to 
take seriously the testimony of a Soviet defector, much of Chapter 3 
of Case Closed is devoted to defending the credibility of Yuri Nosenko, 
a KGB defector. Nosenko was charged with overseeing American 
defectors in the USSR, and his testimony supports Posner’s conten-
tion that Oswald was not taken seriously by the KGB because he was 
mentally unstable. But Posner himself provides a chilling account of 
the brutal treatment and interrogation of Nosenko for several years 
by James Angleton, the CIA official charged with verifying the cre-
dentials of Soviet defectors. Angleton’s career included contacts with 
notorious mafia figures recruited to help the CIA in operations dur-
ing the first two decades of the Cold War. Posner acknowledges that 
Angleton and Richard Helms (former Director of the CIA) successfully 
kept Nosenko from testifying to the Warren Commission, which was 
interested in him because the FBI found the Soviet defector credible.60 
Again, these facts alone do not prove a conspiracy to kill Kennedy, but 
the portrait of Angleton demonstrates that those responsible for inter-
nal and foreign operations of the CIA at the height of the Cold War 
were collectively part of a dark, violent part of the state, a world of 
covert activities and charged with formulating operational conspiracies. 
It operatives were obsessed with its own grand conspiracy theory in 
the form of anti-communism, and they within that frame engaged in 
operations to which we will return when examing the theory of the 
Deep State in Chapter 7.
Posner’s most impressive analysis (Chapter 14) concerns marshal-
ling of scientific support for the Warren Commission contention that 
it was possible for two bullets (of at least three) fired from the Texas 
Book Depository (1) to have inflicted all the wounds Kennedy sus-
tained, (2) to have born a relatively light amount of damage sustained 
as a result of their path, and (3) to have been discharged within the 
time frame necessary. He also provides a scientific explanation why 
Kennedy apparently lurched backwards upon being struck by the fatal 

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   71
bullet in the back of his head. Posner’s objective is to resolve what 
appears as a serious problem in the Warren Commission account: the 
contention of critics Oswald could not have fired all the shots with 
accuracy, as the Commission contended. This claim has long been 
made in support of the popular notion that another assassin killed 
Kennedy with a shot from the infamous “grassy knoll,” a term that has 
entered the American lexicon. As mentioned above, Posner marshals 
evidence that the “magic” single bullet could have traveled the path 
it took, but he does not entirely convince that a jacketed, tumbling 
bullet would have changed directions so dramatically. Posner makes 
much of Oswald’s practicing making the bolt action on his rifle, but he 
fails to mention that Oswald was far from an expert shot. He attained 
“sharpshooter” status in the military in his first test, barely exceeding 
the lowest category (“marksman”) and far below the next highest cat-
egory, “expert” (lowest). In his later 1959 test, he barely qualified for 
marksman.61
Posner does demonstrate the physical evidence and much testimony 
can be interpreted to be consistent with the Warren Commission’s find-
ing, but this evidence is far from closing the case. Posner’s lone gunman 
scenario is possible but also less parsimonious than the hypothesis that 
bullets were fired from more than one location. Like conspiracy theorists, 
Posner takes what could have happened as proof of what did happen, and 
he substitutes a more complex explanation for a more parsimonious one, 
but his analysis is widely taken as conclusive and rational.
Ultimately, Posner’s book lies somewhere between the lucid, air-tight, 
logically argued, impeccably researched study seen by his admirers and 
the deliberately distorted apology posited by his critics. The Christian 
Science Monitor is among the few reviews that provided a more balanced 
assessment. It praised Posner’s forensic research but concluded that the 
issue of Oswald’s motivation leaves the case “far from closed.” If I have 
dwelled on explanations of the book’s shortcomings and flawed rea-
soning, it is only to ask why similar problems in Scott are taken as evi-
dence to dismiss his hypotheses as conspiracy mongering. Posner was 
made into a celebrity on the television talk show network while Scott 
was largely relegated to the college and dissident lecture circuits and later 
the Internet. Scott’s research has been marginalized, Posner’s largely 
depicted as decisively having debunked a pathological obsession, i.e., a 
conspiracy theory.

72   D. C. HELLINGER
Consequences and Summing Up
The last quarter century—coincidentally or not, since the release of Oliver 
Stone’s influential movie JFK—has seen some critical evaluation about 
thesis that conspiracy theories distract their believers from effectively 
demanding redress of their grievances. Olmsted finds that most conspiracy 
theories in twentieth century America, even more fantastical ones, may be 
rooted in real, past victimization by secretive activities of governments and 
corporations. Fenster goes further in arguing that conspiracy theory is not 
necessarily pathological and are a strident, populist call for transparency in 
government, but even he maintains that conspiracy theories “rarely lead 
to effective political engagement and are related often are directly or indi-
rectly to virulent forms of scapegoating, skepticism and fascism.”62
My view is that conspiracy theories can be positive forces for politi-
cal change, but they can also be used to advance the kind of repressive, 
authoritarian or even genocidal political events that Posner, Berlin, the 
Southern Poverty Law Center and other critics see as the only outcome 
to be expected of a conspiracy theory. The latter type of conspiracism 
is justly called the “paranoid style,” but the proliferation of conspiracy 
theories in the Trump era, both warranted and unwarranted alike, is a 
sign of political decay (see Chapter 8). Furthermore, they should give us 
pause about some conspiracy theories dismissed as paranoid in the past.
Conspiracism in the Trump era tells us much about the political decay 
of our political institutions, the decline of consensus among elites, the 
social distance between elites and ordinary people, and the advance of 
popular mistrust of representative institutions. If we are to face up to the 
underlying causes of this decay we need to acknowledge that theorizing 
about conspiracy can have a salutary impact on democracy, identifying 
whose interests clash with those of the general citizenry and uncovering 
one of the ways that power operates in a political system. Where plausi-
ble or warranted, exposure and correction of what is revealed is crucial 
not just to preservation but enrichment of democracy.
By showing the conspiratorial discourse in the words of Paul Krugman, a 
highly influential voice of American liberalism, I am not arguing for dismiss-
ing his claims. His allegations about the machinations of American politics 
in the Trump era cannot be reduced to petty levels. Consider the implica-
tion he drew in his December 19 column that focused on the Republican-
controlled North Carolina legislature stripping the newly elected Democratic 
governor of much of his power (later reversed by a court ruling). “Combine 

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   73
this sort of thing with continuing efforts to disenfranchise or at least discour-
age voting by minority groups, and you have the potential making of a de 
facto one-party state: one that maintains the fiction of democracy, but has 
rigged the game so that the other side can never win.”
No history of Nazism would be complete without acknowledgement 
of the role that anti-Semitic conspiracy theories played in the Holocaust. 
Acknowledging this factor is of course not a full explanation of this 
genocide. Nor can one leave out what was very possibly a “false flag” 
operation, the arson attack on the Reichstag (parliament building) in an 
account of Hitler’s ascent to power. No account of the Cold War can 
ignore Senator Joseph McCarthy’s allegations that the US government 
was packed with traitors and spies—i.e., Communists and fellow-travel-
ers, which produced a purge of the Left from the political and cultural 
influence it had gained in the previous two decades. It is difficult to 
argue that conspiracies play no role in politics when we review the recur-
rent political scandals, violations of constitutional rights, and foreign 
interventions carried out by US national security agencies.
Understanding important shifts in power and wealth in the world to 
conspiracies cannot be reduced to conspiracy theories. World level con-
spiracy theories are usually better left to analysis by political psychologists, 
but conspiracies should not be dismissed as irrelevant to understanding 
political life and historical events. The most useful approach to reincor-
porate conspiracy as an object of study by political science is to concen-
trate our theoretical attention on operational conspiracies, the study of 
which can help us develop of theories about the limits, potential, dangers 
of conspiracies in political life. We need to do this today more than at any 
time since the Civil War—even more than in the populist era or Cold War 
years. The Trump era is likely to be rife with both conspiracies and con-
spiracy theories, even after he is no longer President.
Notes
	
1.  Richard Hofstadter, The Paranoid Style in American Politics (New York: 
Vintage Reprints, 1968). The book expands on the original article in 
Harpers Magazine November 1964, available at https://harpers.org/
archive/1964/11/the-paranoid-style-in-american-politics (accessed July 
18, 2017).
	
2.  This Is Not a Conspiracy Theory Episode One: Premise, available on 
YouTube, Published January 24, 2015 (accessed September 28, 2017).

74   D. C. HELLINGER
	
3.  Michel Foucault, “Truth and Power,” in Michel Foucault: Power/
Knowledge, ed. Colin Gordon (New York: Vintage Pres, 1980): 131, 
109–133.
	
4.  Peter Baker, Nixon Tried to Spoil Johnson’s Vietnam Peace Talks in ’68, 
Notes Show, New York Times, January 2, 2017.
	
5.  Neil A. Lewis, “New Reports Say 1980 Reagan Campaign Tried to Delay 
Hostage Release,” New York Times, April 15, 1991.
	
6.  Available at https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/conspiracy% 
20theory.
	
7.  Daniel Pipes, Conspiracy: How the Paranoid Style Flourishes and Where It 
Comes from (New York: The Free Press, 1999): 1.
	
8.  For examples see “Paul Krugman Illustrates the Damaged Pyches of the 
Left,” Mises Wire, December 20, 2016, available at https://mises.org/
blog/paul-krugman%E2%80%99s-latest-conspiracy-trump-gold-bug; 
“The Left Is Pushing Conspiracy Theories to Feel Better about 2016,” 
The Federalist, December 23, 2016; http://thefederalist.com/tag/con-
spiracy-theories; and “Paul Krugman: Comey, Putin ‘installed’ the ‘Crazy, 
Vindictive’ Trump,” Washington Examiner, August 1, 2017, available at 
www.washingtonexaminer.com (all accessed August 22, 2017).
	
9.  Hofstadter, The Paranoid Style.
	
10.  Adam Enders and Steven Smallpage, “Who Are Conspiracy Theorists? An 
Exercise in Predicting Conspiracy Beliefs,” Prepared for presentation at 
the Annual Meetings of the American Political Science Association, San 
Francisco, CA, August 31–September 3, 2017.
	
11.  Pipes, Conspiracy: How the Paranoid Style Flourishes, 21.
	
12.  For a religious based version appearing on YouTube, see https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=ir2yVa0A9q4. For a more secular version, see 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NXFrmUCK7YI (both accessed 
August 19, 2017).
	
13.  See https://www.ushmm.org/wlc/en/article.php?ModuleId=10007058 
(accessed August 19, 2017).
	
14.  Available at https://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2013/04/ 
12-million-americans-believe-lizard-people-run-our-country/316706 
(accessed August 20, 2017).
	
15.  Hofstadter, The Paranoid Style in American Politics. The book expands 
on the original article in Harpers Magazine November 1964, available 
at 
https://harpers.org/archive/1964/11/the-paranoid-style-in-ameri-
can-politics (accessed July 18, 2017).
	
16.  Hofstadter, “The Paranoid Style,” Harpers Magazine, 1.
	
17.  Chip Berlet, Toxic to Democracy: Conspiracy Theories, Demonization, & 
Scapegoating. Political Research Associates. 2009 (updated): 3, available 
at http://www.publiceye.org/conspire/toxic2democracy/Toxic-2D-all-
rev-04.pdf (accessed August 17, 2017).

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   75
	
18.  Samuel Moyn and David Priestland. “Trump Isn’t a Threat to our 
Democracy. Hysteria Is.” New York Times, August 11, 2017.
	
19.  Peter Knight, Conspiracy Culture: From the Kennedy Assassination to the 
X-FILES (London: Routledge, 2000): 3.
	
20.  Knight, Conspiracy Culture: 118–124.
	
21.  See Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey, “Harvey Weinstein Paid Off Sexual 
Harassment Accusers for Decades,” New York Times, October 5, 2017.
	
22.  Cass Sunstein, Conspiracy Theories and Other Dangerous Ideas (New York: 
Simon & Schuster, 2004): 3–5.
	
23.  Available at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conspiracy_theory (accessed 
September 22, 2017).
	
24.  Kathryn Olmsted, Real Enemies: Conspiracy Theories and American 
Democracy (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009).
	
25.  Kathryn Olmsted, Real Enemies: 9, 234.
	
26.  Mark Fenster, Conspiracy Theories: Secrecy and Power in American Culture 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1st ed., 1999, 2nd ed., 
2008). Jack Z. Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: Political Rationality and 
Popular Culture (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2008).
	
27.  Fenster (1999): 1.
	
28.  Jack Bratich: Conspiracy Panics: Political Rationality and Popular Culture 
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 2008): 6.
	
29.  Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: 9, 14–18.
	
30.  Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: 9, 14–18.
	
31.  Daniel Hellinger, “Paranoia, Conspiracy, and Hegemony in American 
Politics,” in Transparency and Conpsiracy: Ethnographies of Suspicion in 
the New World Order, ed. Harry G. West and Todd Sanders (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2003).
	
32.  Available at https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/08/us/politics/sen-
ate-hearing-transcript.html?_r=0.
	
33.  Mark Fenster, The Transparency Fix: Secrets, Leaks, and Uncontrollable 
Government Information (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press, 2017).
	
34.  Farhad Manjoo, “Farhad’s Week in Tech: Bitcoin and the Scams Under 
Everything,” New York Times, June 15, 2018.
	
35.  Majooo, “Fahad’s Week in Tech: Bitcoin…”; John. M. Griffin and 
Amin Shams, “Is Bit-Coin Really Untethered,” Social Science Research 
Network (SSRN), available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=3195066 (accessed June 16, 2018).
	
36.  Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: 14.
	
37.  Frederic Jameson, “Cognitive Mapping,” in Marxism and the 
Interpretation of Culture, ed. C. Nelson and L. Grossberg (Champaign–
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1960): 347–360. Quoted from p. 9 
of version available at http://www.rainer-rilling.de/gs-villa07-Dateien/
JamesonF86a_CognitiveMapping.pdf (accessed September 26, 2017).

76   D. C. HELLINGER
	
38.  Bernard Bailyn, The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1967). See also Jeffrey 
Pasley, Jeffrey L. 2000. Conspiracy theory and American Exceptionalism 
from the Revolution to Roswell. Paper presented at Sometimes an Art: A 
Symposium Celebration of Bernard Bailyn’s Fifty Years of Teaching and 
Beyond. Harvard University, May 13, 2000, available at http://pasley-
brothers.com/conspiracy/CT_and_American_Exceptionalism_web_ver-
sion.htm (accessed August 25, 2017).
	
39.  Olmstead, Real Enemies: 239.
	
40.  Popper, Karl. “The Conspiracy Theory of Society,” in Conspiracy Theories: 
The Philosophical Debate, ed. David Coady (Burlington, VT: Ashgate): 
17–44. Thomas Kuhn. 1970. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2nd ed.).
	
41.  Jodi Dean, Aliens in America: Conspiracy Cultures from Outerspace to 
Cyberspace (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1998): 45.
	
42.  “Former Pentagon UFO Official: ‘We May not be Alone’,” CNN, 
December 19, 2017; “Glowing Auras and ‘Black Money’: The Pentagon’s 
Mysterious U.F.O. Program,” New York Times, December 18, 2017.
	
43.  The YouTube talk is available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T-
N16OBSb_BA (accessed February 21, 2018). On his research, see Joseph 
Uscinski and Joseph Parent, American Conspiracy Theories (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2014).
	
44.  Pipes, Conspiracy: 21.
	
45.  Pipes, Conspiracy: 102, 147, 217.
	
46.  Matthew Gray, Conspiracy Theories in the Arab World: Sources and Politics 
(New York: Routledge, 2010): 12.
	
47.  Pipes, Conspiracy: 26.
	
48.  Lee Basham, “Living with the Conspiracy,” in Conspiracy Theories: The 
Philosophical Debate, ed. David Coady (Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2006): 
61–117.
	
49.  Gerald Posner, Case Closed: Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of 
JFK (New York: Random House, 1993).
	
50.  “Conspiracy Theory Poll Results.” Public Policy Polling. April 2, 2013, 
available at http://www.publicpolicypolling.com/main/2013/04/con-
spiracy-theory-poll-results-.html (accessed August 7, 2017).
	
51.  “North Worked on Plan for Martial Law,” Knight-Ridder Newspapers, 
July 5, 1987.
	
52.  Peter Dale Scott, Deep Politics and the Death of JFK (Berkeley: University 
of California Press): 10; Posner, Case Closed.
	
53.  I formulate this proposition hoping it is consistent with Marx’s observa-
tion in Theses on Feuerbach, “The materialist doctrine that men are prod-
ucts of circumstances and upbringing, and that, therefore, changed men 

2  PARANOIA, CONSPIRACY PANIC, AND THE REGIME OF TRUTH   77
are products of changed circumstances and changed upbringing, forgets 
that it is men who change circumstances and that the educator must him-
self be educated,” and also his observation in the Eighteenth Brumaire of 
Louis Bonaparte, “Men make their own history, but they do not make it 
as they please.”
	
54.  Assessing the reliability of evidence and sources cited in both studies is to 
trod into a political mine field. A good list, clearly biased but carefully 
compiled, to be suspected more for the triviality of some of its claims 
than exaggeration, has been compiled by the editors of the Assassination 
Web (1997). An especially useful site that debunks some specific conspir-
acy theories about JFK, but remains open to possibility that one existed is 
http://dperry1943.com.
	
55.  See David Ray Griffin, The New Pearl Harbor Revisited: 9/11, the Cover-
Up, and the Exposé (Northampton, MA: Olive Branch Press, 2008).
	
56.  Geoffrey Ward, Geoffrey. “The Most Durable Assassination Theory: 
Oswald Did It Alone.” New York Times Book Review (November 21, 
1993).
	
57.  Geoffrey Ward, “The Most Durable Assassination Theory: Oswald Did It 
Alone,” New York Times Book Review, November 21, 1993. Christopher 
Lehmann-Haupt, “The Kennedy Assassination Answers,” New York Times, 
September 9, 1993. American Heritage, February–March, 1994: 101.
	
58.  Choice (v. 31, March 1994): 1210; Booklist (v. 90, September 15, 1993): 107.
	
59.  Scott, Deep Politics: pp. 59, 79–80 highlights this connection, relying 
on “George De Mohrenschildt”, Staff Report of the Select Committee 
on Assassinations, 1979. U.S. House of Representatives, Ninety-fifth 
Congress Second Session March 1979.
	
60.  Posner, Case Closed: 39.
	
61.  See Warren Commission evidence collected at https://www.maryferrell.
org/showDoc.html?docId=1133#relPageId=663 (accessed September 
27, 2017).
	
62.  Fenster, Conspiracy Theories, 1991: xvi.

79
On April 19, 2017, Stephen Colbert, host of CBS’s The Late Show, 
greeted comedian Lewis Black, known for his manic commentaries on 
culture and politics, with a rhetorical “How are you holding up?” Black 
paused, then responded, “I turn CNN on when I wake up, and, uh, it 
doesn’t help. Because something happens every day; every single day. 
That I go, What?!! What is this????”
Colbert agrees: “Every hour.”
Black: “Yeah. If we can get to noon, it’s a whole new landscape.”
Of course, Black was referring to the first three months of the pres-
idency of Donald J. Trump, a wealthy (maybe!), New York real-estate 
tycoon and TV celebrity previously known for bluster and “firing” con-
testants on his reality TV program, The Apprentice. Black probably had 
to shutter again the day after his appearance on Colbert, as Trump would 
welcome to the White House Ted Nugent, the right-wing rocker, who 
had posted on Facebook photos of former mayor of New York City, 
whom Nugent called “Jew York City mayor Mikey Bloomberg”, and New 
Jersey Senator Frank Lautenberg, with the inscription “Gave Russian Jew 
immigrants your tax money” (Washington Post, February 10, 2017).
It is a good bet that a large part of the world’s population feels much 
like Black does, but with Trump’s approval ratings in summer 2017 
hovering at their lowest (around 37–39%) for a first-year president,1 it 
was clear that a substantial percentage of Americans remained com-
fortable with Trump as president. His approval ratings dipped even 
CHAPTER 3
Trumpism, Fake News  
and the “New Normal”
© The Author(s) 2019 
D. C. Hellinger, Conspiracies and Conspiracy Theories in the Age  
of Trump, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98158-1_3

80   D. C. HELLINGER
further afterward, but in summer of 2018, despite a highly unpopular, 
visible, and cruel policy of separating children of immigrant families 
at the Mexican border and mass detentions in several in-land sites, his 
approval rating actually increased to over 40%. It is unlikely that these 
Americans get their late-night diversion from Colbert. Colbert’s mon-
ologues repeatedly endorsed the conspiracy theory that Vladimir Putin 
had surveillance tape of Trump engaged in lewd sexual behavior in a 
Moscow hotel room. In his July 20, 2017 telecast, as part of a week-long 
visit devoted to promoting the allegation that the Russian government 
had interfered in the American election, Colbert visited and showed the 
hotel room and bed where the alleged incident took place.
Colbert’s celebrity star took on its brilliance while he was a fake news-
caster, taking on the fictional persona of a right-wing pundit in the style of 
Bill O’Reilly and other bombastic purveyors of conservative populism on 
the Fox News Network. But in that role, Colbert was a satirist. Succeeding 
David Letterman on The Late Show, after initially faltering he hit his stride 
and ascended in the ratings by skewering first candidate and then President 
Trump directly. While his monologues and recurring bits retain much of 
their truth value and bite, by abandoning satire for the bright lights of Late 
Night Colbert seems more intent on instructing his fans on what to think. 
It may not be fake news, but the humor often seems intended more to 
polarize and rally than entertain, more randy than satirical.
A question I want to pose here is whether Colbert and his enthusias-
tic guests and audience should be considered “conspiracy theorists.” Are 
they exhibiting symptoms of paranoia? Are the widespread claims that 
Russia may have “hacked the election” less conspiratorial than the claims 
by Trump that the election was “rigged”?
Populism, Paranoia, and Celebrity
Only a handful of academic experts and media commentators anticipated 
Trump’s unconventional campaign could carry him to the presidency 
itself. I make no claim to having been among them, having also expected 
to see Hillary Clinton triumphant on election night. Though precedents 
for vicious smears and character assassinations can be found in the early 
years of the Republic and in bitter debates over slavery, no candidate 
since the age of electronic mass media began can match having been 
caught on tape bragging about molesting women, threatening to jail his 
opponent, ridiculing a disabled reporter, impugning the patriotism of a 

3  TRUMPISM, FAKE NEWS AND THE “NEW NORMAL”   81
war hero killed in action, and refusing to fully disclose his tax and finan-
cial dealings.
Trump’s political ascent was built in no small measure by capitaliz-
ing on partisan polarization and on mistrust of government. As in other 
episodes of right-wing populism, both in the United States and abroad, 
the Trump’s ascent has been linked to racism, anti-immigrant sentiment, 
anti-globalization, a cultural backlash against changing social mores, and 
lingering prejudices about gender roles. These too did not simply spring 
to life with Trump’s iconoclasm.
To illustrate the point, for now, consider the role of male patriarchy. 
A backlash against feminism, an ideology that Hillary Clinton has openly 
embraced throughout her career,2 can be traced back to the successful, 
last-minute campaign that began in 1977 against the Equal Rights 
Amendment, a campaign that smacked heavily of conspiracism. In 2014, 
Phyllis Schlafly, credited with leading the charge against the ERA, freely 
engaged in paranoid rhetoric in a new book, Who Killed the American 
Family? The back matter for the book warned that the nuclear family was 
under “concerted assault” by “feminists, judges, lawmakers, psycholo-
gists, school districts, college professors, politicians offering incentives 
and seeking votes…The wreckage of the American family leaves us with 
the inability to have limited government because government steps into 
perform tasks formerly done by the nuclear family.”3
Although Trump is divorced twice and never has disguised his misog-
ynist attitudes, during the campaign and shortly before her death Schlafly 
endorsed the real estate mogul right. It was right when he needed it 
most—following the release of a tape in which he bragged about “mak-
ing a move” on a married woman and about his habit of grabbing wom-
en’s genitals, that is, assaulting them. Grateful, Trump took time off 
the campaign trail to attend Schlafly’s funeral in the Cathedral of the 
Archdiocese of St. Louis. He praised her as someone who fought for the 
“little person” against a “rigged system.”4
Fake News
“Fake news” originally came into use to describe false stories, some-
times manufactured by a single individual, that would “go viral” on 
the Internet. While Trump’s hostility toward the media was frequently 
displayed during his campaign, the meme of “fake news” really became 
popular after the election.5 In past eras, we might have referred to such 

82   D. C. HELLINGER
stories as “propaganda” and connected them with the efforts of gov-
ernments in wartime. The spread of false, malicious information via 
the Internet about President Obama and notably the Clintons (even 
tying them to murders) attracted broader public attention, with much 
of it fostered by or originating from white supremacist groups identi-
fied with the “alt-right” and longstanding hucksters, such as Alex Jones 
(InfoWars.com). Trump did not create this media environment, but he 
knew how to exploit it. Far from erudite or even coherent as a speaker, 
he understood the power of social media, Tweeting above all else. As 
Donald Trump began his Shermanesque march to the Republican 
nomination, Jones, Steven Bannon (head of Breitbart.com at this 
time) and others brought their propaganda apparatus to the service of 
the real estate mogul’s campaign. False stories claiming that the Pope 
had endorsed Trump, that Clinton sold weapons to ISIS, that an FBI 
agent investigating Clinton’s emails may have been murdered, all out-
performed real news stories on Facebook feeds during the campaign, 
according to a study by BuzzFeed.6
After his electoral victory, facing the editorial hostility of the main-
stream media, Trump appropriated the “fake news” meme as a weapon 
in his attempt to undermine the regime of truth maintained by the main-
stream media. He was abetted not only by the alt-right networks on the 
Web but also by popular commentators on Fox News, most notably Sean 
Hannity, who on May 17, 2017 provided an example of how the “fake 
news” elides with conspiracism. “The deep state in Washington is target-
ing the president on a daily basis, by leaking information. That’s where 
the Washington Post got its latest fake news story,” pronounced Hannity.7
Much of the attention in the Trump era has been focused on 
Breitbart.com, founded by the right-wing agitator Andrew Breitbart 
and elevated to greater influence by Bannon; on Alex Jones’s InfoWars.
com; on alt-right Internet sites that promote white nationalist ideas; 
and on Fox News’ stable of firebrand conservative pundits. Fox News 
at least separates its newscasts from shows dedicated entirely to spin—
though ironically the most influential of the latter, hosted by O’Reilly 
(no longer with Fox), was called the “no-spin” zone. On pundit-shows, 
it is not hard to detect the right-ward slant, but deliberate propagandiz-
ing by Network executives is less easily detected when it spills into its 
news broadcasts. Fox’s news anchors have at times clashed with network 
management and deviated from the “line-of-the-day” technique pio-
neered for cable news by Roger Ailes, who honed his communication 

3  TRUMPISM, FAKE NEWS AND THE “NEW NORMAL”   83
skills as Richard Nixon’s main television advisor in the latter’s success-
ful 1968 presidential campaign. Ailes was especially influential in devel-
oping messaging for the “Southern Strategy,” which built upon Barry 
Goldwater’s success (despite his landslide loss) in winning Southern 
states by winnowing white voters away from the Democratic Party with a 
less than subtle appeal to their resentment over desegregation. In effect, 
the right-wing populist media strategy of the Goldwater era, which 
inspired Hofstadter’s warnings about the paranoid style,8 effectively 
became institutionalized at Fox News. What Hofstadter saw as a periodic 
surge of “know-nothingism” has through Fox now become a fixture of 
American politics. This is not to say that racism has never been far from 
the surface in American political culture; it is only to point out that how 
it is exploited and how its level of salience has been raised varied in the 
Trump era.
The institutionalization of outright propaganda in the form of “Fake 
News” through cable networks and the Internet tends to obscure the 
deeper structural relationships among government, the corporate world 
and the media. These work to maintain a “regime of truth” (see Chapters 1  
and 2) that limits criticism of the liberal democratic consensus (the welfare 
state, internationalism, etc.) associated with the international order that 
emerged after World War II. That consensus included (with significant con-
servative dissent) the policy of “containment” of Communis.
Corporate media contributed significantly to the maintaining Cold 
War anticommunism.9 That may seem like a harsh judgment, because the 
journalistic establishment did play a significant role in exposing Senator 
Joe McCarthy’s witch hunts, the lies of the Vietnam War, and the 
Watergate Scandal. On the other hand, mainstream newspapers were lax, 
if not complicit, in the Red Scare of the early Cold War, and it did not 
oppose the Vietnam War until quite late, after public opinion had already 
turned against it. While the media did aggressively pursue the Watergate 
scandal, afterward it celebrated Nixon’s resignation as a triumph of the 
political system rather than a signal that deeper causes lay behind the 
narrowly averted constitutional crisis. Since Watergate, the evolution of 
both media technology and erosion of the news media’s autonomy from 
corporate capital have weakened journalism’s ability to maintain a lib-
eral regime of truth on its right flank. Again, by “liberal” here I use the 
term not in the sense of “leftist” but in reference to the international and 
domestic consensus that emerged from the defeat of fascist and militarist 
regims in World War II.

84   D. C. HELLINGER
The first generation of TV news reporters and network anchors were 
drawn from the print media; newsrooms, local and national, and were 
relatively insulated from commercial pressures. News was not expected to 
be profitable; news operations operated within the post-World War lib-
eral consensus the welfare state, government regulation, free trade, etc. 
Mainstream republicans largely shared in the consensus, but more radical 
right dissent never fully disappeared and emerged visibly in the presiden-
tial campaign of the party’s nominee, Barry Goldwater, in 1964. Twenty 
years later the Fox mantra “fair and balanced” had success appealing to 
a significant segment (mostly white) of the mass TV audience that had 
supported Goldwater and resented the cultural revolutions of the 1960s. 
It is difficult today to recall that in the elections that took place between 
1968 and 1980, the most penetrating critiques of the news media were 
that it was too deferential to authority. In 1983, journalism professor W. 
Lance Bennett bemoaned that most reports on Presidents adhered to the 
rules of “normalized news.” Even ones that appeared critical, he argued, 
had “one of more” of three properties: They were rare; they were rit-
ualized, i.e., adversarial but rarely addressing “the merits of policies or 
substance of issues”; they were superficial, focused on personalism and 
drama, and fragmented.10
In this Trumpian era of fake news, there is a tendency in some quar-
ters to wax nostalgic for the era when three television networks virtually 
monopolized news transmission to a mass audience, with the most influ-
ential reporters having migrated from print journalism, the prototype 
being Edward R. Morrow. But if one wants to identify when fake news, 
as deliberate propaganda consciously designed to influence the public 
mind on a scale not seen since World War II began to appear, that would 
be in the Reagan era, starting with his 1980 campaign for the presidency, 
where a team of media revolutionaries devoted to rolling back the wel-
fare state and to reversing the so-called “Vietnam Syndrome” emerged.11 
As Bennett put it in the 1996 edition of his book (13 years after the 
one quoted above), they “wrote the textbook on how to manage the 
news.”12 What Reagan did not have yet was a clearly partisan television 
network, but that would be created by one of the key members of his 
Communications Office team, Roger Ailes, who got the media Tycoon 
Rupert Murdoch to finance the Fox News Cable Network. While social 
media would not emerge as a factor for another 25 years, in many ways 
the Fox phenomenon, made possible by cable, has been a long-last-
ing and most effective purveyor of not just of news influenced by 

3  TRUMPISM, FAKE NEWS AND THE “NEW NORMAL”   85
partisanship, but of partisanship itself. The basis by which a sitting pres-
ident could enjoy a direct line to a highly supportive and partisan base 
was laid by Ailes and others who recognized that new developments in 
commuications technology offered them an opportunity to move beyond 
manipulating the mainstream media to creating their own pipeline to a 
mass audience.
The first basic cable network (forerunner of Turner Broadcasting 
Network) of any consequence was launched in 1977, doing little more 
than simply carrying the programming of its parent, Atlanta-based 
broadcast network. In that same year, the fundamentalist televange-
list, Pat Robertson, launched his cable-based Christian Broadcasting 
Network, bringing conservative religious propaganda into many more 
living rooms than television could reach before. In 1980, the year 
Reagan became president, there were 16 million cable subscribers, but 
few networks had programing that could compete with the established 
broadcast networks—CBS, NBC, and ABC. Home Box Office (HBO) 
began its pay service in 1972, but it would not be until the Cable 
Regulatory Act of 1984 that networks capable of challenging the influ-
ence of the established broadcasting companies came into existence. 
Commercial Internet Service began to gather momentum in the Bush 
I era (1988–1992), when more narrow but still large audiences could 
be reached with news feeds. The full potential of the Internet for rev-
olutionizing mass communication, especially the potential uses of social 
media for advertising and political messages, began to reveal itself after 
the World Wide Web began to supplant text-based Usenet groups, which 
had first appeared in 1989. Meanwhile, preceding the full scale revolu-
tion of social media, the conservative right weaponized talk radio, with 
Rush Limbaugh inaugurating his broadcasts in 1992, creating a syndi-
cated network and stimulating dozens of imitators, reaching conserv-
ative suburbs, rural areas and small towns, all of which would become 
redoubts of Trumpism in the latter part of the Obama years.
The Reagan communication team’s focus was to influence the main-
stream news at the outset, not to create an actual alternative conduit. But 
the team deployed other innovations that would be felt as the new com-
munication technologies evolved. The campaign and the White House 
Communications Office implemented new polling techniques, focus 
groups, and media messaging heretofore used mainly in presidential cam-
paigns and usually to monitor more than shape public opinion between 
elections. The Reagan team created synergy among these public relations 

86   D. C. HELLINGER
tools.13 Of the brilliant team that gave Reagan his “Teflon coating”, 
Ailes was one of the key member of the team member that broke the 
hegemony of broadcast and print news media and brought the commu-
nications synergy of the Reagan/Bush administrations era into the cable 
and Internet era.
In 2006, Glen Beck, a radical right talk show host with a particu-
lar penchant for the theory that a global elite was at work implanting 
a “New World Order,” began trading in related conspiracy theories on 
Headline News Network (HLN), and then took his show to Fox, where 
until June 2011 he continued to broadcast hype-charged nationalist 
rants and used his show to promote Tea Party rallies and demonstrations. 
Why Beck left Fox has never been entirely clear. It appears to be a mix-
ture of Beck’s belief that he could independently build a more lucrative 
media operation and his chafing at Ailes’ discipline over the message to 
be delivered by Fox hosts. Beck had played a significant role in linking 
the right-wing Tea Party movement to Fox, but he overestimated his 
role. While Beck was still a ratings success for Fox, he was a loose can-
non who didn’t easily accommodate the tightly disciplined and coordi-
nated messaging (such as issuing “line of the day” memos) imposed on 
the Network’s commentators by Ailes, who had developed this propa-
ganda technique during his service to Presidents Richard Nixon, Ronald 
Reagan, and George Bush (the elder).14
Beck’s departure from Fox in 2011 provided space for Alex Jones to 
assume a more prominent role, though not on Fox but on his website, 
InfoWars.com. Jones attracted widespread notoriety as a “conspiracy 
theorist” after claiming that the mass murder of 20 elementary school 
students and six staff members on December 14, 2012, at Sandy Hook 
School in Newtown, Connecticut, was a hoax—though it was hardly his 
first excursion into the paranoid style. Jones’s radio programs in 2016 
were syndicated to 160 radio stations and his InfoWars website attracted 
over 7 million independent visitors per month. In December 2015, 
Trump appeared with Jones on InfoWars for a 20-minute interview 
and promised the host, “Your reputation is amazing. I will not let you 
down.”15
This dramatic shift in the information environment of American poli-
tics prepared the way for a celebrity candidate like Trump to trade on his 
media fame for political purposes. To be clear, Trump’s surge should not 
be entirely attributed to this mass media revolution. Also, while there 
is an important genealogical thread linking the important campaign 

3  TRUMPISM, FAKE NEWS AND THE “NEW NORMAL”   87
and propaganda techniques of, respectively, the Reagan/Bush era, the 
George W. Bush era, and the Trump era, the conservatism characteristic 
of each of these presidential administrations also evolved steadily more 
toward the right. The early news and propaganda innovations of Ailes 
took place during the “rise of the Vulcans,” the neoconservatives who 
were much less radically libertarian (on domestic policy) that the Koch 
brothers, who brought a broader strategy to shift the center of American 
political culture (see Chapter 6). The Reagan coalition in the 1980s was 
a broader conglomeration of conservative forces, including (like Reagan 
himself) defectors from the Democratic Party. While they wanted to “roll 
back” the welfare state, their ambition at the time was not to achieve the 
radical libertarian agenda of the Bradleys, Kochs, Scaifes, etc.
Communication strategies in the Reagan and the younger Bush 
administrations were used effectively to promote the neoconservative 
agenda of rebuilding the capacity of the United States to project its 
world power. This capacity, both in terms of military capability and pub-
lic support for deploying forces abroad, had been eroded in the after-
math of defeat in Vietnam and Watergate. The Carter years had seen the 
rise the OPEC and the Arab oil boycott; the completion of most anti-co-
lonial liberal struggles in Africa, the Middle East, and Asia; revolutions 
in Iran and Nicaragua; and the emergence of Japan and the European 
Union as relatively strong economic units, competing with the United 
States in the global economy. Prematurely, some saw a new era defined 
by the relative decline of American hegemony. The Reagan and Bush 
administration rejected that judgment, and their response included 
reshaping the information environment. Ailes and the rest of Reagan’s 
communications team were a crucial part of this effort. The propa-
ganda techniques’ potential reached its height after 9/11 with deliberate 
deceptions by neoconservatives, especially Donald Rumsfeld and Dick 
Cheney, Secretary of Defense and Vice President during the presidency 
(2000–2008) President George W. Bush designed to generate support 
for the invation of Iraq in 2003.
Leaving aside the highly questionable theory that the Neocons delib-
erately planned or allowed the 9/11 attacks to happen, there can be little 
doubt that they engaged in a “fake news” campaign (the term was not 
then in use), deliberately manufacturing and dissembling the myth that 
Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction. There many remain 
questions about the actions that Cheney, Rumsfeld, and others took in 
the immediate aftermath of the 9/11 attacks themselves and in limiting 

88   D. C. HELLINGER
cooperation with the commission that investigated various facets of the 
attacks.16 We look more closely at this issue when considering the Deep 
State in Chapter 7.
Mueller’s Conspiracy Theory and the Media
“Fake news” is really a modern term for propaganda. What changed with 
the rise of social media was the ease with which stories could be planted 
and disseminated. Late in the 2016 election cycle, Trump began using 
the epithet “fake news” to characterize what he propagated to be delib-
erate falsification of facts by the mainstream media, intended to derail 
his campaign. His use of the term became more frequent in response to 
allegations that his campaign had colluded with Kremlin operatives to 
influence the election, and they accelerated again when the allegations 
were given more substance by Robert Mueller, a life-long Republican 
and former FBI director who was appointed Special Counsel to inves-
tigate Russian interference in the 2016 election and possible collusion. 
Breitbart.com, Sean Hannity of Fox News, and Alex Jones on InfoWars 
took up the message and repeatedly referred to Robert Mueller’s inves-
tigation as part of a Deep State plot to bring down Trump. In effect, we 
have warring conspiracy theories: Right-wing media outlets accusing the 
National Security apparatus and mainstream media of conspiring against 
Trump; mainstream media, especially late night celebrity hosts and 
guests (especially Stephen Colbert on NBC’s Late Show) promoting the 
conspiracy theory of collusion being investigated by Mueller.
The alleged collusion should be considered a conspiracy theory, but one 
that (rightly) is not considered emblematic of the paranoid style. Mueller’s 
indictment17 of several Trump associates on February 16, 2018, the Special 
Counsel’s investigation bears the hallmarks (laid out in Chapters 1 and 2) 
of a conspiracy theory: multiple persons working together secretly to bring 
about a political outcome, in a way that is either illegal, embarrassing and 
subject to defeat if exposed. Excerpts from the indictment include:
From in or around 2014 to the present, Defendants knowingly and inten-
tionally conspired with each other (and with persons known and unknown 
to the Grand Jury) to defraud the United States by impairing, obstruct-
ing, and defeating the lawful functions of the government through fraud 
and deceit for the purpose of interfering with the US political and electoral 
processes, including the presidential election of 2016.

3  TRUMPISM, FAKE NEWS AND THE “NEW NORMAL”   89
***
Defendants, posing as US persons and creating false US personas, oper-
ated social media pages and groups designed to attract US audiences. These 
groups and pages, which addressed divisive US political and social issues, 
falsely claimed to be controlled by US activists when, in fact, they were con-
trolled by Defendants. Defendants also used the stolen identities of real US 
persons to post on ORGANIZATION-controlled social media accounts.
***
Defendant ORGANIZATION had a strategic goal to sow discord in the 
US political system, including the 2016 US presidential election…Some 
Defendants, posing as US persons and without revealing their Russian 
association, communicated with unwitting individuals associated with the 
Trump Campaign and with other political activists to seek to coordinate 
political activities.
***
Starting at least in or around 2014, Defendants and their co-conspirators 
began to track and study groups on US social media sites dedicated to US 
politics and social issues. In order to gauge the performance of various 
groups on social media sites, the ORGANIZATION tracked certain met-
rics like the group’s size, the frequency of content placed by the group, 
and the level of audience engagement with that content, such as the aver-
age number of comments or responses to a post…They engaged in oper-
ations primarily intended to communicate derogatory information about 
Hillary Clinton, to denigrate other candidates such as Ted Cruz and Marco 
Rubio, and to support Bernie Sanders and then-candidate Donald Trump.
I have quoted at length for two purposes. First, Mueller’s indictment 
meets all the requirements of a conspiracy theory as outlined in the first 
two chapters of this book. It is a good example of a conspiracy theory 
that certainly does not merit a priori rejection. The indictment lays out 
detailed information that warrants a high degree of credibility—allowing 
for the presumption of innocence to which those indicted are entitled to 
by right. Mueller lays out what is neither a petty nor a grand world con-
spiracy; it best fits the category of a highly plausible operational conspir-
acy as define in Chapter 2.
My second purpose is to distinguish the conspiracy alleged in 
Mueller’s indictment from other, related alleged operational conspiracies 
that lack sufficient evidence but may prove warranted upon further inves-
tigation. These plausible theories include: (1) that Russian interference 

90   D. C. HELLINGER
determined the outcome of the 2016 election; (2) that Donald Trump 
himself “colluded” with others in this effort; (3) that Russian operatives 
have compromat, that is, embarrassing information that can be used to 
influence Trump; and (4) that Russian operatives have operated under 
tacit or explicit authorization of Russian President Vladimir Putin. As of 
June 2018, it was unclear what Mueller will conclude regarding Trump’s 
personal involvement in this conspiracy, but it is likely that whatever he 
reports will be the object of a contentious exchange of warring conspir-
acy theories in Congress and in the media. This represents a sea change, 
certainly, from the Watergate era, or even Iran-Contra.
The Fox Network’s service as a conduit for Trump’s conspiracism was 
not necessarily discernable before the election. In the 2016 primary sea-
son, Fox News had distanced itself somewhat from Trump, preferring 
neutrality and fearing divisiveness with conservative circles. But once 
Trump secured the nomination in June 2016, Fox re-established itself as 
the information silo of the populist right. Following Ailes’ forced retire-
ment after a sexual harassment scandal, Fox formally abandoned its “Fair 
and Balanced” motto in favor of “Most Watched, Most Trusted.” As the 
polarization of American politics proceeded apace in 2017, the network 
became even more unapologetically aligned with the president, taking 
dead aim at Mueller and the FBI, and embracing the conspiracy theory 
of a Deep State. Its pundits enthusiasticlly promoted the theory of a con-
spiracy against Trump on the part of the FBI and Mueller in collabora-
tion with the main stream media, which the president began to label “the 
fake news networks.” Fox News anchors maintained some distance from 
outright endorsement of Trump’s conspiracy theory and sometimes put 
difficult questions to administration spokespersons, but at the same time 
the network’s line-up of evening hosts (Sean Hannity, Tucker Carlson, 
and Laura Ingram) pummeled Mueller, mainstream news outlets, and the 
FBI’s former director, James Comey. Its daily morning program, Fox and 
Friends, became downright sycophantic, minute by minute broadcasting 
the president’s Tweets, which could come in blizzard fashion at times. 
Reports based on White House sources reported reliably that Trump’s 
mornings begin with him in bed watching Fox and tweeting commen-
tary.18 Often Trump would call or even visit the hosts, unannounced, for 
a friendly chat. For example, on June 18, 2018, with controversies raging 
and even some usually supportive Republicans critical about the adminis-
tration’s separation of illegal immigrant parents from their children, the 
Fox hosts preferred to ask the president how he had enjoyed his birthday.

3  TRUMPISM, FAKE NEWS AND THE “NEW NORMAL”   91
Breitbart.com just as enthusiastically amplifies Trump’s conspiracy 
theories. Despite its reputation for sensationalism, its front page typi-
cally includes a number of straightforward summaries of news drawn 
elsewhere, especially from the world of entertainment. Contrary to what 
one might expect, these reports do not selectively quote or distort these 
reports and commentaries. Breitbart’s working assumption, not necessar-
ily faulty, seems to be that celebrity condemnations of Trump will land 
on the eyes and ears of its audience as elitist rants. Of course, a straight-
forward quotation from rock guitarist Ted Nugent, infamous for his anti-
gun control rants, might have the same effect on a liberal audience, but 
there simply are not enough visible celebrities on the right to be used to 
this effect.
If in the Cold War and early post-Cold War era we Americans lived 
in an information environment characteristic by a single “liberal” media 
silo,19 in the Trump era we have transitioned, in a trend that can be 
traced back at least to Reagan years, if not the Goldwater candidacy, to 
media silos that separate us into camps.
Conspiracy Theory, Fusion, and the Alt-Right
Has the Internet played a significant role in the success of Trumpism? 
The answer seems obviously, “yes,” given Trump’s use of Tweets, the 
rapid growth of Alex Jones’s InfoWars, the widespread use of bots 
to spread misinformation, cyber technologies permitting micro-tar-
geting of audiences, and the ease with which anyone with a computer 
and Internet Service Provider can launch just about any kind of claim, 
including highly racist and patently fabricated ones, into the information 
environment. Revelations about how hackers and experts using bots (in 
particular, Cambridge Analytica; see Chapter 7) were able to target key 
groups in the electorate in swing states in the election have added to the 
suspicions of manipulation. Add to this stew of political cyber weapons 
the more generalized commercial practice of tracking Internet use and 
marketing of personal information, and there is probably more concern 
about psychological manipulation and brainwashing than in there was 
in the early era of television, when films like the Manchurian Candidate 
(1962) reflected acute social anxiety about the power of media.
It is logical to hypothesize that the Internet and World Wide Web, 
as well as developments in rapid transportation, would facilitate con-
spiracism. The relative anonymity that can be achieved on the Internet 

92   D. C. HELLINGER
also means that disseminators are less likely to be held responsible for 
disseminating false facts and wild theories. Conspiracy theory investiga-
tors, of widely varying opinions and rationality, focusing on the Kennedy 
Assassination and 9/11 attacks are kept in constant contact with one 
another and meet often face to face at conferences held to brief one 
another on the most recent debates and new information.
Despite the general assumption that the ease and speed of dissemi-
nating information facilitate conspiracy theories, there simply is no 
firm evidence that conspiracism is more pronounced today than in the 
past. As we saw in Chapter 1, a long-term study of letters to the editor 
provides little evidence that the paranoid style of conspiracism is more 
common today.20 Conspiracy theories about the Kennedy assassination 
flourished before the Internet came into public use. In the highly emo-
tional and conflicted period immediately after the Civil War, unsubstanti-
ated conspiracy theories (including one that accused Johnson—Andrew, 
not Lyndon—of involvement) around Lincoln’s assassination spread 
rapidly.21
Leftist critics like Noam Chomsky have long asserted that the 
American media has functioned to “manufacture consent” and failed to 
provide the kind of critical perspective necessary for a democracy. But 
Chomsky accepts with little qualification the school of thought that sees 
conspiracy theories as illusory and as threats to democracy, capable only 
of inspiring hatred and violence. Chomsky, perhaps the most respected 
radical thinker and widely diffused left thinker, acknowledges that there 
are conspiracies in political life but argues that they distract activists from 
“the real, structural causes of injustice.” If a group of elites get together 
to secretly plan initiatives to benefit themselves, this is just “the normal 
working of political structures.”22
Closely linked to this idea is the contention, quite common among 
historians, social scientists, and journalists, that conspiracy theories 
advanced on the left foster “fusion” of left and right paranoia, thereby 
empowering right-wing extremism. Chip Berlet, an independent, muck-
raking journalist, says that scandalous revelations of official wrong- 
doing pose “the dilemma for the left…that right-wing populist organiz-
ers [will] weave these systemic and institutional failures into a conspira-
cist narrative that blames ‘secret elites.’” This leads, he claims, to a kind 
of sensationalism widely diffused via “infotainment” and talk radio.23 
Michael Barkun uses a similar term, “fusion paranoia,” in arguing that 
arguments highlighting conspiracy, whether on the left or right, now 

3  TRUMPISM, FAKE NEWS AND THE “NEW NORMAL”   93
travel through media and foster apocalyptic and millenarian themes.24 
This “seepage” of conspiracism from the left to the right has swelled as a 
result of the Internet, say critics.
These concerns certainly cannot be dismissed out of hand, but is the 
solution to rule out from public discourse any talk of conspiracism, even 
where there may be plausible grounds to charge secretive collusion sub-
versive to democratic culture? Should muckraking journalists, revisionist 
historians, and critical social scientists simply remove “conspiracy” from 
their vocabularies? My own position closely resembles that of Fenster, 
who asserts that conspiracy theories can vary in the degree to which they 
are democratic and emancipatory or, on the opposite end of the scale, 
contribute to authoritarianism and violence.25
In their infancy, the Internet, the World Wide Web, Cable TV, and 
social media were each largely welcomed as providing alternative news 
and information outlets, fostering, it was presumed, a more vibrant dem-
ocratic culture. Contrary to common understanding, the idea for “alt” 
Internet did not originate with extreme rightist Richard Spencer’s char-
acterization of his white nationalist movement as the “alt-right.” Even 
before the Web, when Internet information was mostly text-based, those 
with a dial-up modem and internet savvy could find information not 
widely available in the mainstream print and broadcast media on text-
based “alt” networks of varying types.
In Chapter 1 we briefly reviewed the case of Gary Webb, the investi-
gative reporter who in 1996 unearthed the “Dark Alliance” between the 
CIA and the Nicaraguan contras, whose career was subsequently ruined 
(possibly contributing to his later suicide) by a conspiracy panic in the 
journalistic establishment.26 Subsequent documentation by the National 
Security Archive (a non-governmental organization housed at George 
Washington University) demonstrates that several US government offi-
cials were fully aware of the Contra organized drug trafficking to the 
United States.27
Something similar had occurred 12 years earlier during the Contra 
war itself when a Jesuit connected institute, the Christic Institute, 
charged that Contras trained and equipped by the CIA were responsi-
ble for the bombing in 1984 a press conference organized in Costa 
Rica by a dissident Contra. The bomb killed eight people and injured 
many more. The Christic Institute played an important role in investi-
gating and organizing support for a suit it brought around charges 
made by two journalists who were present at the bombing. Fusion 

94   D. C. HELLINGER
critics labeled the Christic campaign a “conspiracy theory” with little 
foundation.28 The Institute did not use “conspiracy” prominently in its 
campaign, but certainly implied a conspiracy was at work by referring 
to “The Secret Team” and the “Shadow Government.” But the major 
flaw of Christic’s campaign was not that it wrongly charged “conspiracy” 
but that it largely treated the team as a “rogue” operation, rather than 
a program secretly but clearly authorized by the Reagan administration  
(see Chapter 7).
After the case was dismissed, colleagues, relatives of the victims, and 
the plaintiffs themselves did express dissatisfaction with the way Christic 
politicized the case and went beyond the facts known at the time in its 
analysis and public relations campaign.29 On the other hand, many of the 
key facts in the case were later validated, by among others the respected 
English language Tico-Times in Costa Rica.30 Later the larger dimen-
sions of what by any reasonable definition was an operational conspir-
acy were more completely revealed in the congressional Iran-Contra 
hearings. Unfortunately for Christic, before vindication the Institute 
lost its tax exempt status when, in 1992, under pressure from conserv-
ative groups, the IRS decided that the Institute’s actions were “politi-
cal” rather than educational. (Christic activists later reorganized into 
the Romero Institute, name for the slain Salvadoran Archbishop Oscar 
Arnulfo Romero, killed by a right-wing death squad in 1980.) One won-
ders whether the IRS would make such a determination today in the 
age of Trump when large foundations funded with “Dark Money” (see 
Chapter 6) from billionaires are undertaking litigation and “education” 
around political issues.
The left critique of Christic’s tactics anticipates a contemporary con-
cern that the “alternative” moniker (“alt”) has opened the door for 
the entry of white nationalism into the mainstream, under the more 
benign-sounding “alt-right.” Spencer, who prefers the term “white 
identitarian” or even “white nationalist” to the label “white suprema-
cist”, is usually cited as the inventor of the term “alt”, however, the “alt” 
prefix was a common term for a variety of Use-net groups, not all of 
them political, formed in the early days of the Internet.31 Whether or 
not Spencer, formerly a Ph.D. student at Duke, who influenced Steven 
Miller, the hard-right advisor who was still within Trump’s inner White 
House circle in 2018, actually invented the term, he has used it effec-
tively to promote white race ideology under the more benign-sounding 
“alt-right” umbrella.

3  TRUMPISM, FAKE NEWS AND THE “NEW NORMAL”   95
What makes the “alt-right” an “alternative” is not its aversion to 
leftists and liberals, but its challenge to mainstream conservativism. 
According to George Hawley, a political scientist at the University of 
Alabama, the mainstream conservative movement has long served as an 
important gatekeep, “keeping certain right-wing tendencies out of view 
and under control.”32 The goal of “less radical voices” in the movement, 
says Hawley, is to end mass immigration and political correctness and to 
normalize white identity politics. While white supremacy has been deeply 
ingrained in American history, it has been maintained below the surface, 
but Trump’s campaign more open and persistent exploitation of fear of 
mass immigration and Muslims has enhanced the movement.33
Trump’s reaction to the “Unite the Right” rally in Charlottesville, 
Virginia in August 2017, staged by white supremacists and white nation-
alists, which included chants of “Jews will not replace us,” was revealing 
of just how instrumental his rise has been to the alt-right. The march-
ers boldly headed for a statue of Thomas Jefferson at the University of 
Virginia, where they encountered approximately 30 students who had 
locked arms and surrounded it. The mob directed monkey noises toward 
black students in the cordon. Thereafter a scuffle broke out, with injuries 
predominately among the students. As the rally continued in town, more 
violence occurred in encounters between the supremacists and coun-
ter-protesters, with the former group chanting, “Our blood, our soil,” 
on at least one occasion. Later in the day, a local citizens’ militia arrived, 
ostensibly to keep the peace, as police seemed to have abandoned any 
such role. However, before long counter-protesters were under attack 
from all sides, notably from the “militia.”34
Rather than condemn the supremacists, who marched in fascist style, 
Trump said at a news conference, “We condemn in the strongest possi-
ble terms this egregious display of hatred, bigotry and violence on many 
sides, on many sides. It’s been going on for a long time in our country.” 
He went on to congratulate the police and Virginia National Guard, 
“They’ve really been working smart and working hard. They’ve been 
doing a terrific job.”35
Hawley’s study treats the alt-right as dangerous, but he fears that 
identifying them with right-wing conspiracy theory is both inaccu-
rate and unwise. He argues that most who identify with the alt-right 
do not pay attention to Alex Jones and InfoWars; and he is concerned 
that Hillary Clinton’s campaign speech of August 25, 2016 that linked 
the alt-right more broadly to leaders of Brexit (the movement to take 

96   D. C. HELLINGER
the United Kingdom out of the European Union) and to Vladimir 
Putin only served to publicize the supremacist cause. Much like fusion 
theorists, Hawley sees a risk of legitimating rather than discrediting the 
movement. Hawley points out that the alt-right reacted favorably to 
the Clinton speech because of the attention it brought to their cause. 
Tim Stanley of London’s Daily Telegraph, commented, “There’s a risk 
of conflating various political projects into some grand movement, and 
deciding that the whole thing is a coherent conspiracy with a direct line 
to Trump. The alt-right would love you to think that, as would Hillary 
Clinton.”36
Normalcy and Disruption
It should be clear by now that I regard most conspiracy theories pro-
moted by Trump and his acolytes as qualifying as fitting the “paranoid 
style.” At the same time, I also have contended that independent of 
their truth-value, many of the media’s stories about collusion with the 
Russians, administrative cover-ups, financial conflicts of interest, etc., 
should be considered conspiracy theories. They are neither petty con-
spiracy theories, nor grand or world in the sense of full explanations of 
Trump’s appeal and electoral success.37 But they are significant, “oper-
ational” conspiracy theories, as defined in Chapter 2. Not all are plau-
sible; some have already achieved some warrant by virtue Mueller’s 
indictments.
Too often the very phrase “conspiracy theory” is utilized by academ-
ics and journalists to dismiss, deride, and disqualify claims about con-
spiracies that are worthy of analysis and investigation, that point toward 
secretive collaboration kept from public view because they are either ille-
gal, unethical, or politically embarrassing. My approach does not reject 
entirely the wisdom embodied in Hofstadter’s “paranoid style,” but this 
phrase should neither be associated with all conspiracy theories, nor with 
all forms of populism, as I will try to show in the next two chapters. We 
need in particular to take note of how frequently the exercise of power 
elites is conspiratorial. How we parse the realistic from the outlandish 
demands more attention to conspiratorial behavior than we have typi-
cally accorded it in academia and journalism. So too is what ramifications 
resort to conspiracy has for democratic politics.
I hold no brief for what Daniel Pipes calls “world conspiracy the-
ories,” that is, theories that attribute transformational events and 

3  TRUMPISM, FAKE NEWS AND THE “NEW NORMAL”   97
tendencies (e.g., revolutions, globalization, rise and fall of civilization, 
hegemonic rise and decline) exclusively or mainly to conspiracy. But I 
also want to argue that we need to theorize about conspiratorial behavior 
as meaning, impactful political activity. I hope to make a start on think-
ing about how we might theorize and answer questions, such as how and 
when (if ever) can a conspiracy alter the course of events? How and when 
(if ever) does exposure of conspiracies alter the course of events?
No suspicion of secretive, illegal conduct by a candidate has gotten 
more public attention than the allegation the Trump campaign, if not 
Trump himself colluded with powerful Russian politicians, including 
Vladimir Putin himself, to undermine the Clinton campaign and swing 
the election. Yet rarely is this allegation called a “conspiracy theory.” 
The reason why is because we reserve “conspiracy theory” for claims 
that are outlandish, beyond serious consideration by rational people. It 
is typically based on evidence that fails the test for being taken seriously, 
much less for carrying truth value. Yet, in many ways the “golden show-
ers” story and the claim that Putin possesses compromising information 
with which he can blackmail Trump continued for most of 2017 to rest 
upon quite shaky ground—on uncorroborated information provided by 
Christopher Steele, a former British spy, on anonymous leaks from US 
intelligence agencies, and on speculation about the activities of Russian 
cybersecurity officials and hackers.
This book was written in summer of 2018, so I am not in a posi-
tion to judge the degree to which Mueller’s investigation may lend 
credence to conspiracy theories about Russiagate. The dots may yet 
be connected by the Special Counsel, but many of the key allegations 
floated nightly in the 24-hour news cycle and late-night comedy mono-
logues are yet to be substantiated. At the time of writing, the situation 
described by Masha Gessen, a prominent Russian anti-Putin activist, 
remained valid: “The context, sequence, and timing of the leaks [from 
the national security sources and the White House] is determined by 
people unknown to the public, which is expected to accept anonymous 
stories on faith.”38
Trumpism has disrupted the power of the regime of truth to discipline 
political discourse in media, to challenge the “common sense” under-
standings of what is “normal” about American politics. This has global 
implications because Trump has dared question American exceptional-
ism and the key rationales for maintaining a garrison state and projecting 
American power abroad.

98   D. C. HELLINGER
It is remarkable how many story lines being pursued in the main-
stream media during the Trump presidency would have appeared out-
landish before Trump’s Electoral College victory—a phrasing I choose 
to use because he lost the popular vote by a sizable margin. An explo-
sive example can be seen in Trump’s response (February 4, 2016) to Fox 
News’ Bill O’Reilly’s question about positive comments the new presi-
dent had made about Russian President Vladimir Putin. After Trump 
affirming that he “respected” Putin, O’Reilly exclaimed, “But he’s a 
killer.”
“There are a lot of killers. You think our country’s so innocent?” 
replied Trump. The interview aired just before America’s great unde-
clared holiday, the football “Super Bowl,” the most watched telecast of 
any year and usually packed with jingoist displays of patriotism and sym-
bolic support for America’s military abroad. Yet here was the “leader of 
the free world” highlighting that the United States too had used tactics 
of assassination and thuggery. While I doubt that Donald Trump has a 
clue what “American exceptionalism” means, perhaps no president has 
given an interview, much less to Fox News, that so questions the underly-
ing assumptions about America’s role in the world.
My point is not to argue for or against the moral equivalence of the 
United States to Russia, but to point out that Trumpian discourse shares 
with conspiracy theory a certain disruptiveness of established order and 
hegemonic discourse. In some ways, this disruption may open new dia-
logues and debates. Bernie Sanders also disrupted the regime of truth 
by challenging the taboo discourse of “socialism.” Social movements 
protesting police violence have challenged both the substance and sym-
bols of racism. The difference is that in contrast to Sanders, Trump’s 
discourse severely undermines something positive, i.e., the way that the 
regime of truth has upheld civility in political discourse; its disruption 
can be dangerous to the kind of liberal culture that makes a book like 
this possible.
This disruptiveness helps explain why our neighbors and relatives, 
who seem like “good people,” engage in or tolerate deplorable words 
and behaviors, ones which would have mortally wounded campaigns of 
the past. These disruptions have already changed not only the rules of 
public discourse, but also the professional standards of the academic and 
journalistic world. Opposition to Trump, not least on the editorial page 
the most prestigious newspapers in the country, now includes commen-
tary and investigative reporting stories that would have been dismissed 

3  TRUMPISM, FAKE NEWS AND THE “NEW NORMAL”   99
in the past as mere “conspiracy theory.” Social science professors try to 
decide how partisan they should be in the classroom and how tolerant of 
darker sentiments expressed by students sympathetic to Trump.
Conspiracism and Threats to Democracy
Too often social scientists and journalists dismiss all theories alleging 
secretive exertions of power as paranoia. Conspiratorial behavior has 
been systematically ignored, or worse dismissed as without consequence, 
in my own discipline, political science. We need to examine conspiracies 
themselves, as a form of collective, subjective behavior that deserves to 
be integrated into, not marginalized from explanations of a structural 
and historical character. Under some circumstances, conspiracy theories 
can be empowering, even if they are only based on suspicions, when they 
demand accountability and transparency in political life; they have the 
opposite effect when elevated by their holders into holistic, comprehen-
sive worldviews.
Trump’s success in capturing the GOP nomination and then the pres-
idency itself surprised pundits, politicians, and political scientists alike 
(and I make no claim to having anticipated his success). However, he 
has not “single-handedly restored” the paranoid style, nor has it returned 
when “least expected.” Nativism and distrust of not only political 
authority but also of media, science, universities, etc., draws upon anxie-
ties that have been building in recent decades. The steady erosion of the 
moral and political certainties, the frayed welfare system, wealth concen-
tration, and celebrity culture are all contributing factors to the growth of 
conspiracy culture.
There is a good reason to worry, as Conor Lynch claims, that 
Trumpism “will permeate American politics for years to come.”39 
However, is it only only conspiracy theories that are proliferating, but 
actual conspiracies as well. Conspiracy culture is not just an attitudinal 
disposition toward belief in conspiracy theories, it is also rooted in actual 
conspiracies, that is, political practices that are deceptive, secretive, and 
oriented toward immoral or illegal ends. We err if we continue to dismiss 
the origins and consequences of conspiracies, not just conspiracy theory, 
in our political culture. The task is to develop frameworks to assess the 
truth value of conspiracy beliefs, to analyze what they review about the 
health of democracy, and the relationship of the state to society in the 
age of global capitalism.

100   D. C. HELLINGER
A good example of how we can accomplish this comes from an 
unlikely source, a book that examines conspiracism in a part of the world 
that currently stands at the geographic center of political decay and vio-
lence, the Middle East. Matthew Gray asserts “that for the most part 
conspiracism occurs in the Arab world as a result of political structures, 
which in turn are the result of historical impacts, the effects of exter-
nal dynamic, state-society relations, and political culture.”40 He offers 
three “main explanatory approaches” to understanding conspiracism in 
the Arab world: marginalization, that is, a sense of being ignored and 
excluded by global and national elites; the state–society relationship, that 
is, a sense that the state increasing responds to interests unrepresentative 
of society; and political dynamics and structures, that is, the institutions 
that incentivize the way political actors behave.
A few pages later, he argues that the Middle East’s…
… search for political and economic development and a place within the glo-
balization process have all helped to create an environment for conspiracism. 
Conspiracism can often be a discourse by marginalized elements that seeks to 
popularly deconstruct official or state versions of events, and it is a response 
to the failures of governments and leaderships to develop effective models of 
economic development and popular political participation. It is also a sign of 
diminishing state legitimacy and a breach between state and society.”41
Middle Eastern states, says Gray, typically respond to economic devel-
opment challenges and threat to legitimacy with “their own conspirac-
ist rhetoric.” Conspiracism becomes “a tool of symbolic manipulation, 
legitimation and control” (12). Put more simply and by way of example, 
states may find it useful to distract or rally the people through scapegoat-
ing, stereotyping, exaggerating, or actually creating external threats, usu-
ally with rhetoric suggesting that the “enemy” is within. In my work on 
Latin America, I see a similar process at work. Of course, conspiracism 
in a great, hegemonic state will differ from that of a nation-state that is 
much less powerful and wealthy. But I contend similar patterns can be 
identified in the United States (and Europe) in the Trump era.
In my contribution to Transparency and Conspiracy: Ethnographies of 
Suspicion in the New World Order42 I asked, “Within a political culture 
that is chauvinistic and militant in its claim to constitute the world’s 
greatest democratic experiment, what explains the widespread con-
viction that more sinister, conspiratorial forces control of the govern-
ment (or lurk behind it)?” That essay limited itself largely to the role 

3  TRUMPISM, FAKE NEWS AND THE “NEW NORMAL”   101
of intervention abroad in spurring suspicion, but the rise of Trump 
demands a more comprehensive approach, and it demands we evaluate 
not just origins but also consequences.
The mainstream media may have “manufactured consent” and played 
a key role in maintenance of the regime of truth in the era of liberal, 
international hegemony. Donald Trump’s campaign has disrupted that 
regime by convincing a significant part of the population not only that 
the New York Times, Washington Post, CNN, etc., are not fair and bal-
anced. It may very well be healthy for democracy for the public to be 
critical, even skeptical about news media. But this is not Trump’s project. 
What he has done, much like right-wing populists in other parts of the 
world, is promote cynicism about professional journalism. That is not his 
fault alone, but this particular conspiracy theory moves us further, not 
closer to an information order encouraging to democracy.
Notes
	
1.  “How Popular Is Donald Trump,” FiveThirtyEight.com, September 19, 
2017 (accessed September 19, 2017).
	
2.  See transcript of her speech at the United Nations Fourth World 
Conference for Women 1995, available at http://www.mfa.org/exhibi-
tions/amalia-pica/transcript-womens-rights-are-human-rights (accessed 
September 15, 2017).
	
3.  I am grateful to Samra Cordic, whose undergraduate paper for my seminar 
on conspiracy theory alerted me to the instrumental role that conspiracism 
played in the defeat of the ERA, especially in the rhetoric of Phyllis Schlafly 
and her Eagle Forum. Among several sources citing the panic created 
by Schlafly and others, two are Martha Weinman Lear, “You’ll Probably 
Think I’m Stupid,” New York Times archive (April 11, 1976): 192; Jane J. 
Mansbridge, Why We Lost the ERA (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1986). Phyllis Schlafly’s Who Killed the American Family was published by 
WND Books, based in Medford, Oregon, issued again in 2014.
	
4.  New York Daily News, September 11, 2016.
	
5.  “What Is Fake News? Its Origins and How It Grew in 2016,” The Telegraph 
(London, March 16, 2017) with a graph visible at www.telegraph.co.uk/
technology/0/fake-news-origins-grew-2016 (accessed September 19, 2017).
	
6.  “This Analysis Shows How Viral Fake News Stories Outperformed Real 
News on Facebook,” BuzzFeed.com, November 16, 2016.
	
7.  www.foxnews.com/opinion/2017/05/17/sean-hannity-trump-faces-alli-
ance-haters.html (accessed September 19, 2017).
	
8.  Richard Hofstadter, The Paranoid Style in American Politics (New York: 
Vintage Reprints, 1968).

102   D. C. HELLINGER
	
9.  For a wonderfully crafted website with examples of Cold War era propa-
ganda and historical reference works, see https://manspropaganda.word-
press.com/the-cold-war (accessed June 18, 2018).
	
10.  W. Lance Bennett, News: The Politics of Illusion (White Plains, NY: 
Longman Press, 1983): 23.
	
11.  The best of several books on the media’s performance during the Reagan 
presidency are Mark Hertzgaard, On Bended Knee: The Press and the 
Reagan Presidency (New York: Schocken Press, 1989); L. Lance Bennett, 
News: The Politics of Illusion.
	
12.  Bennet, News … Illusion: 96.
	
13.  See Daniel Hellinger and Dennis Judd, The Democratic Façade (Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth Publishing, 1994): 52–86.
	
14.  Glynnis MacNicol, “Here’s the Real Reason Glenn Beck and Fox News 
Are Parting Ways,” Business Insider, April 6, 2011.
	
15.  Andy Cush, “How the Donald Trump Campaign Turned America’s 
Greatest Conspiracy Theorist Into a Household Name,” Spin.com, 
October  26,  2016,  http://www.spin.com/featured/the-invisible- 
empire-of-alex-jones (accessed February 23, 2017).
	
16.  See Kathryn Olmsted, Real Enemies: Conspiracy Theories and American 
Democracy, World War I to 9/11 (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2009): Chapter 7.
	
17.  https://www.justice.gov/file/1035477/download (accessed February 
20, 2018).
	
18.  Andrew Marantz, “How Fox and Friends Rewrites Trump’s Reality,” The 
New Yorker Magazine, January 15, 2018.
	
19.  If it is not clear, I am referring to “liberal” in the sense of a broad ideol-
ogy of individualism and markets, not as “left of center.”
	
20.  Joseph E. Uscinski and Joseph M. Parent, American Conspiracy Theories 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2014).
	
21.  See http://rogerjnorton.com/Lincoln74.html (accessed June 18, 2018). 
Also, an archive of newspaper articles of the era shows considerable misin-
formation. See the Fords Theatre archive at http://rememberinglincoln.
fords.org (accessed June 18, 2018).
	
22.  Noam Chomsky (Interview). https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jir-
rKIQfOmk (accessed July 27, 2017).
	
23.  Michael Kelly, “The Road to Paranoia,” The New Yorker, June 19, 1995: 
60–70. Available at http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1995/06/ 
19/the-road-to-paranoia (accessed July 27, 2017); Chip Berlet, 
“Clinton, Conspiracism and Civil Society,” Political Research Associates, 
http://www.uni-muenster.de/PeaCon/conspiracy/networks-01.htm. 
February 12, 1998 (accessed July 27, 2017).
	
24.  Michael Barkin, A Culture of Conspiracy: Apocalyptic Visions in 
Contemporary America (Berkeley: University of California, 2003).

3  TRUMPISM, FAKE NEWS AND THE “NEW NORMAL”   103
	
25.  Mark Fenster, Conspiracy Theories: Secrecy and Power in American Culture 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2nd ed., 2012): 287–288.
	
26.  See Jack Z. Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: Political Rationality and Popular 
Culture (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2008): 79–89.
	
27.  See National Security Archive, The Contras, Cocaine, and Covert Operations, 
National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book No. 2 (1996), available 
at https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/ (accessed December 8, 2017).
	
28.  For example, Chip Berlet, “Big Lies, Spooky Sources,” Columbia 
Journalism Review (May/June 1993).
	
29.  Berlet accurately reports on this falling out, attributing the source to con-
spiracism, though grudgingly acknowledging that the Institute kept the 
story alive. See “Rightist Influences on the Christic Institute Theories,” 
(n.d., circa 1993), available from http://www.publiceye.org/rightwoo/
rwooz9-13.html (accessed December 8, 2017).
	
30.  “La Penca, 30 Years Later,” The Tico Times, San José, Costa Rica, http://
www.ticotimes.net/LaPenca30Years (accessed December 8, 2017).
	
31.  See Molly Osberg, “Not Just Nazis: Alt-Genres Have Always Been 
‘Safe Spaces’ for White People,” Splinternews.com, December 8, 2016 
(accessed June 18, 2018).
	
32.  George Hawley, Making Sense of the Alt-Right (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2017): 7.
	
33.  Hawley, Making Sense of the Alt-Right: 15, 115.
	
34.  This summary is taken from the eyewitness account of reporter Joe Heim, 
“Charlottesville Timeline,” Washington Post, August 17, 2018.
	
35.  Transcript 
at 
https://www.vox.com/2017/8/12/16138906/presi-
dent-trump-remarks-condemning-violence-on-many-sides-charlottes-
ville-rally (accessed June 18, 2018).
	
36.  Hawley, Making Sense of the Alt-Right: 124–125, including the Stanley quote.
	
37.  Daniel Pipes introduced the distinction between “grand” and “petty” 
conspiracy theory in Conspiracy: How the Paranoid Style Flourishes and 
Where It Comes From (New York: The Free Press, 1997).
	
38.  Masha Gessen, “Russia: The Conspiracy Trap,” New York Review of Books, 
March 6, 2017.
	
39.  Conor Lynch, “Paranoid Politics: Donald Trump’s Style Perfectly 
Embodies the Theories of Renowned Historian,” Salon, July 7, 2016. 
http://www.salon.com (accessed September 18, 2017).
	
40.  Matthew Gray, Conspiracy Theories in the Arab World: Sources and Politics: 
Sources and Politics (New York: Routledge, 2010): 2.
	
41.  Gray, Conspiracy Theories: 12.
	
42.  Daniel Hellinger, “Paranoia, Conspiracy, and Hegemony in American 
Politics,” in Transparency and Conspiracy: Ethnographies of Suspicion in 
the New World Order, ed. Harry G. West and Todd Sanders (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2003).

105
“Anger and resentment are not a governing party,” said Senator Jeff 
Flake, the Republican Senator from Arizona as he announced on 
October 24, 2017, that he would not seek re-election in 2018.1 Whether  
Flake was referring to President Donald Trump or broadly to his 
­followers is not entirely clear. Certainly, Trump’s tapped into anger 
and deep-seated resentment among white male voters. These feel-
ings coincide with considerable evidence of more generalized mistrust 
and suspicion of ruling elites in the electorate.2 These sentiments lend 
themselves to the kind of conspiracism that Hofstadter characterized as 
the “paranoid style,”3 which we have been critically evaluating in earlier 
chapters.
Conor Lynch offered a typical but accurate denunciation of Trump’s 
discourse, commenting:
With Trump, there is always a plot, and every conceivable prob-
lem — whether it be social, economic, political — can be traced back 
to a cunning and calculated group of conspirators who want to destroy 
America and its culture…Trump has single-handily restored the paranoid 
style to the mainstream (on the right, at least); giving credibility to wacky 
conspiracy theories from the bowels of the blogosphere and creating an 
angry and fanatical movement that will permeate American politics for the 
years to come.4
CHAPTER 4
Suspicious Minds, the 2016 Election  
and Its Aftermath
© The Author(s) 2019 
D. C. Hellinger, Conspiracies and Conspiracy Theories in the Age  
of Trump, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98158-1_4

106   D. C. HELLINGER
We certainly should not think that Trump “single-handedly” brought 
about this state of affairs. Whether we should put all Trump support-
ers into an “angry and fanatical” basket is another thing. It might be 
worth recalling that Barrack Obama won solid victories in several of the 
Midwestern industrial states that were together considered a “blue wall” 
for the Democrats. Trump’s margin, some polls suggest, was aided by 
white voters who had cast ballots for Obama in 2008 and 2012.5 It is 
worth noting that minority working-class voters remained loyal to the 
Democratic candidate, but turnout was lower among these groups.
The Trump campaign exploited racist and gender biases as well as 
anti-elitist sentiment. These attitudes were not created by Trump, but his 
campaign and his first 18 months in the presidency certainly amplified 
them. Though more than any other sector my analysis focuses on 
examining the shift among white working class, I do not pretend to say 
that the election was won or lost with their votes alone. Hillary Clinton 
won a sizable majority of votes nationwide; in fact, Democrats have won 
a plurality or majority of the vote in every presidential election since 
1992, excepting George W. Bush’s re-election in 2004, the first election 
after the 9/11 attacks. Institutional bias had a role in inflating the impact 
of racist and sexist prejudices, because the Electoral College system 
impacted the weight of votes in smaller states that are more heavily 
populated by whites. Even so, in the swing states of the upper Midwest, 
it was not just a shift in votes by poor and rural whites that delivered the 
crucial electoral votes, it took significant votes by whites in affluent sub-
urbs, as well as money from wealthy donors to deliver victory to Trump.
This chapter focuses on the longstanding, secular decline of confi-
dence in American institutions since the mid-1960s and how many sus-
picious minds turned not only to Trump but also to Bernie Sanders. 
Chapter 5 will look more closely at the role socioeconomic distress and 
globalization may have played and draws some comparisons to other 
well-noted cases, especially in Europe.
Reading Voters’ Entrails
A great deal of survey evidence, that is, individual-level data gathered by 
pollsters, suggests that gender and racial prejudices were the most pow-
erful motivating factors explaining crucial swing vote, with economics 
significant, but less so.6 However, that finding needs to be put in con-
text; after all, racial and gender prejudice were not new in the 2016 

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   107
election. Why did they become more salient to enough voters to enable 
Trump to win the vote in states that were presumed safely in the Clinton 
column before the election? Here is where the geographical context 
becomes relevant and can be assessed with aggregate level data, that is, 
the demographics of areas that swung away from Obama in 2012 and 
toward Trump in 2016.
Using statistical analysis of the likelihood of an individual voting for 
Trump, economic dissatisfaction increased the likelihood of voting 
for Trump by a factor of 0.13; hostile sexism increased the likelihood 
by 0.35; and economic dissatisfaction by 0.65.7 Another reason for 
Clinton’s loss, often overlooked in examinations of the voting behavior 
of residents of small cities and counties, is turnout. National turnout in 
2016 was about the same as it was in 2012, but in six states expected 
to go Democratic where Trump made large inroads (winning five) there 
were important declines in areas that Clinton needed to win handily. 
Where Clinton ran strongest (over 70% of the vote), turnout was down 
1.7% of the vote; where Trump was strongest, rural areas, voting was up 
2.9%.8 As we will see shortly rural counties and smaller cities tended to 
be most socioeconomically distressed, and that is where the white work-
ing class vote has most shifted away from Democrats.
There is little doubt, then, that on the individual level the factors best 
predicting a voter’s choice are, in order of importance, racist attitudes (by a 
considerable margin), then sexism, and then economic discontent. However, 
the statistical evidence does not tell the entire story. Obama, America’s 
first black president ran considerably stronger than did Clinton among 
white voters, especially in the areas of the country that have been aligned 
with Democrats but saw a shift toward Republicans. Why did race figure 
even more prominently in an election featuring a white Democratic candi-
date four years later? Few would argue that anyone who voted for Obama 
was thereby clearly not a racist. We could ask the rather impertinent ques-
tion, why did enough racist voters cast their ballots for Obama to make him 
president? For that matter, we could ask, why did enough sexist voters cast 
their ballots for Hillary Clinton to give a national majority? Statistical meth-
ods allow us to assess the impact of any one of the three variables (race bias, 
gender bis, economic status) independently of the others, but they are less 
useful for examining the interactive, dynamic nature of these social forces as 
they influenced individual voters. And they are a snapshot at a moment in 
time, so they do not completely capture cultural and economic shifts that 
may have reached a tipping point in 2016. I use “tipping” to refer to the 

108   D. C. HELLINGER
unanticipated, hugely consequential shift in political culture toward explicit, 
intolerant campaign discourse.
Consider political trust as an example. Many students of American 
politics have documented the precipitous decline in trust of the federal 
government since the Kennedy assassination. Data compiled by the Pew 
foundation in Fig. 4.1 shows that it was during the Johnson years, with 
the unpopularity of the Vietnam War and revelations of government per-
fidy (e.g., the Pentagon Papers) where distrust began its acceleration, 
gaining addition velocity in the Watergate years. Essentially, from 4 in 5 
Americans trusting the government in Washington always or most of the 
time to just one in 5 Americans expressing such trust in Obama’s second 
term and the first year of Trump.
One thing the survey data rarely do is to test whether measures of 
belief in conspiracy theories correlate with the voting tendencies. The 
exceptions here are a handful of questions drawn from major voting 
studies on a handful of conspiracies theories dealing with 9/11 and 
“rigged elections” included in the major nonpartisan, academic surveys.9 
Fig. 4.1  Decline of trust in American government (Source Pew Research 
Center, Public Trust in Government, 1958–2017, available at www.people-press.
org/2017/05/03/public-trust-in-government-1958-2017 [accessed March 3, 
2018])

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   109
Ideally these studies and other reputable survey institutions (Pew, Roper, 
Gallop, etc.) might include questions that examine broader “predispo-
sitions” about belief in conspiracy,10 but this kind of research has only 
recently begun to appear. Most of what exists continues to focus on 
explaining conspiracy beliefs as pathological, befitting the paranoid style, 
an approach critically examined in the first two chapters of this book.
Populism and 2016 Election
Populism and conspiracism are often twinned in analyses of voter 
rebellions against neoliberal globalization. However, the US election 
was characterized not only by Trump’s rise but also that of Senator 
Sanders, who openly identified his ideas with socialism, previously 
anathema to any serious candidacy in the US. Sanders’ campaign also 
drew upon anti-elitism and qualifies as populist, but Sanders’ rheto-
ric and appeal shares little with the “paranoid style.” Take, for exam-
ple, Sanders’ response to questions after Wikileaks dumped emails 
showing that Deborah Wasserman Schultz, Chair of the Democratic 
National Committee, had urged Hillary Clinton to raise doubts about 
Sanders’ religious background (Jewish) to advance her standing with 
Southern voters. Sanders expressed dismay but chose to emphasize that 
the DNC Chair’s actions showed the need for a political movement to 
transform the party and loosen its ties to wealthy donors. His rather tem-
perate statement on Wasserman was, “I don’t think she is qualified to be 
the Chair of the DNC.”11 Some of Sanders’ young male followers, the 
“Bernie Bros”, responded with less equanimity. Cenk Uygur, one of a 
group of young Sanders’ supporters dubbed “The Young Turks”, was 
found to have engaged in sexist and racist comments in his blog in the 
early 2000s. But even Uygur was relatively restrained about DNC influ-
ence. There was, he explained in a podcast, no clear plan to deploy DNC 
operatives to defeat Sanders.12 One could argue that the DNC had a right 
to work on behalf of Clinton, a declared Democrat, over Sanders, who 
has always run as an independent and caucused with Democrats. Still, the 
secrecy of the operation provides at the least conspiratorial overtones.
Sanders waged an energetic challenge to the well-funded Democratic 
Party favorite, doing so despite having been written off entirely by the 
media early in the campaign. Like Trump, Sanders’ discourse stressed 
inequality and the unfairness of globalization and free trade treaties. His 
candidacy attracted activists from the Occupy movement that had burst 

110   D. C. HELLINGER
on the national scene in September 2011, as well Black Lives Matter—
though he was less successful than clinton in mobilizing African-American 
voters in the primaries and caucuses. While Sanders’ longstanding per-
sonal identification with socialism may have enhanced his maverick repu-
tation, it is difficult to know much his appeal would have been sapped by 
a full-bore, red-baiting assault on his character and proposals.13
There may be some grounds to chastise Sanders’ for failing to curb sex-
ist criticism of Hillary Clinton,14 but this shortcoming pales in contrast to 
Trump’s repeated reliance on what Hofstadter identified as a central fea-
ture of the paranoid style in the United States, nativism and ethnic scape-
goating. As a candidate and then as president Trump repeatedly dismissed 
serious journalism as “fake news,” while simultaneously supporting or 
refusing to disavow unsubstantiated stories circulated on the Internet and 
right-wing broadcasters. Trump daily smashed taboos associated with civil-
ity and moderation, in particular through conspiratorial conjectures that 
the incumbent president was not a natural-born citizen (birther theory) 
and hence ineligible to be president—a kind of “Manchurian Candidate,” 
referring to a popular movie (1962) of the Cold War era.
Certainly, there were grounds to criticize Hillary Clinton’s record 
as Secretary of State, as well as a long list of troublesome issues about 
the Clintons’ brushes with unethical if not illegal relations with wealthy 
benefactors; but nonetheless was extraordinary and unprecedented for 
a major party candidate to attack an opponent by leading a crowd in a 
chant to “lock her up.” To judge from Trump’s discourse, it is no longer 
the communists or the Catholics that threaten America, as in the days 
of Know-Nothingism and the Cold War (respectively), but the Muslims, 
the Mexicans, the Chinese, the “PC” liberal media, and so on. This is 
not likely to simply disappear should Trump leave the stage. As Lynch 
contends, Trump’s resuscitation of the paranoid style will outlast him 
because he has brought “wacky conspiracy theories” out of the depth of 
the dark corners of the Internet, “creating an angry and fanatical move-
ment that will permeate American politics for the years to come.”
Trump and Sanders are both populists, but we should not equate 
the discourse of Sanders with that of Trump. Trumpian conspiracism 
traded not just on economic discontent but on racism, nativism, sexism, 
and jingoism in ways that better fits Hofstadter’s conception of a style 
that “evokes the sense of heated exaggeration, suspiciousness, and con-
spiratorial fantasy.” While Sanders may have targeted Wall Street and the 
Democratic National Committee for undue influence and favoritism, these 

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   111
themes were not central to his campaign. While the Sanders message may 
provide durable either in his own political future or in the discourse of pre- 
candidates such as Senator Elizabeth Warren, it is not nearly as dangerous 
as Trumpism, which, as Lynch warned, will be with us for years to come.
Most of the media and most political scientists (me among them) at 
first treated Trump’s dalliance with running for president as little more 
than a publicity stunt. Now, in retrospect, we can see that the launch 
point of his successful run for the presidency was his ability to use his 
celebrity to trade in unwarranted and toxic (“wacky” seems kind) con-
spiracy theories that triggered racist responses in portions of the elector-
ate that were ready to hear the message. Long before Trump began to 
use “fake news” as a defense against what should have in normal times 
sunk any candidate’s political aspirations, he was engaging in creating 
and spreading fake news, especially through frequent appearances on talk 
radio programs. He used the platform provided by stations (e.g., on the 
Howard Stern’s syndicated radio program) in big urban markets to reach 
suburban whites, as well as the platform provided by Alex Jones to reach 
the most disaffected among white voters to spread unwarranted conspir-
acy theories. Trump’s celebrity status allowed him to reach America’s 
must marginalized (mostly white) citizens in rural areas and small towns, 
as well as more affluent conservative white voters in suburbs.
Here it is worth reiterating that one of this book’s central arguments 
is that the term “conspiracy theory” is used to discipline political criti-
cism, in particular, to marginalize as “paranoid” radical challenges to the 
hegemonic consensus about American exceptionalism and the country’s 
role in the world. Chapter 2 argued that conspiracy theories should be 
treated like other kinds of theories and claims about social reality. But 
this book does not argue that all conspiracy theories are created equal. 
Those most deserving of being labeled “paranoid style” are deeply 
flawed logically or so poorly supported by evidence that they are com-
pletely implausible, and clearly some are tainted by the worst forms of 
scapegoating and prejudice. Some grand conspiracy theories are focused 
on the “new world order” so happily welcomed by President George 
Bush in his speech January 1991 after the invasion of Iraq,15 with the 
more outrageous ones reducing tectonic shifts in the global economy to 
one or another cabal (Jewish Banker, the Illuminati, The Rockefellers, 
etc.). These should be distinguished, however, from claims that elites 
have engaged in operational conspiracies to shape global outcomes, a 
claim I will take up in Chapter 5.

112   D. C. HELLINGER
What Trump did is to openly bring into a presidential campaign the 
paranoid style from which candidates in the past (disingenuously) dis-
tanced themselves by leaving the most outrageous slanders to outside 
groups or by playing the race card with implicit rather than explicit polit-
ical ads and discourse. An example of slander was the campaigning by the 
“Swift Boat Veterans for Truth” that wrongly impugned in 2004 John 
Kerry’s credentials as a war hero; an example of racism was the Willie 
Horton ad, which featured a still photo of William R. Horton (He never 
went by “Willie.”), who had committed a murder after being released 
under a parole program implemented by Michael Dukakis, the former 
governor of Massachusetts and the Democratic presidential candidate in 
1988. The point of the ad was not to criticize the parole program but to 
highlight Horton’s race (African-American) and play to the fear of white 
voters. The ad was produced by Roger Ailes, the man who would go 
on to head up Fox News. In both examples, the ads were not run by the 
campaign but by nominally independent groups.
Trump’s cozy relationship with Alex Jones and InfoWars served the 
purpose of identifying a most unlikely figure (a New York real estate 
tycoon) with anti-globalization conspiracy theories and with the para-
noid birther theory. Jones rise to national prominence largely coincided 
with Trump’s increased visibility as an Obama critic, exploiting fears that 
had been generated earlier by Glen Beck was the most infamous pur-
veyor of the paranoid style, with a particular appeal to Tea Party activists. 
In 2011, Fox News and Glen Beck parted ways (see Chapter 2), though 
Fox hardly stopped trading in the paranoid style. But the banishment of 
Beck from Fox opened the way for Jones to assume more prominence. 
In 2016, his InfoWars site attracted an estimated 4–7.5 million unique 
visitors per month, and his syndicated radio program was on 160 sta-
tions around the country, with more listeners getting the show on the 
Internet.16
Jones’ message certainly epitomizes the paranoid style, but contrary 
to the stereotypical image of those attracted to the paranoid style his 
popularity is not primarily among the lower social classes. According to 
Quantcast, a tracker of traffic on the World Wide Web, in February 2018 
Jones’ demographics were slanted toward white males, and also toward 
the wealthiest sectors of American society. The most common auto-
mobiles owned by visitors to InfoWars.com are Lincoln and Mercedes-
Benz. Many visitors to InfoWars do own entry-level compact vehicles, 
but even more own large SUVs. Their income skews toward six figures. 

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   113
Most visitors have college degrees, many graduate degrees. They are 
closely divided between Democrats and Republicans, with a slight major-
ity tending toward the former. What this data suggests is that those 
attracted to the paranoid variety of conspiracy theories include white 
working class and rural voters, but the base is not restricted to them 
alone.
Fake News and Russian Intervention in Election 2016
One popular theory among Democrats is that falsified news, tweets, and 
ads widely circulated through social media tipped the election to Trump. 
While so-called “fake news” originated domestically, not just from for-
eign sources, the fake news conspiracy theory posits that it was part of a 
broader plot on the part of the Russian government aimed, according to 
US intelligence agencies, at influencing the 2016 election and likely to 
be replicated for the 2018 midterm elections.
Dan Coats, Director of National Intelligence, told the Senate 
Intelligence Committee in February 2018, “We expect Russia to con-
tinue using propaganda, social media, false-flag personas, sympathetic 
spokespeople and other means of influence to try to exacerbate social 
and political fissures in the United States.”17 What neither the Director 
nor heads of other intelligence agencies have verified, we should note, is 
that the outcome of the election was much influenced by this operation. 
Their claim was that the aim of the Russians “to worsen the country’s 
political and social divisions.” That is, RussiaGate posits a conspir-
acy with consequences far beyond the objective of influencing a single 
election.
Technically, a fake news operation may not be a conspiracy if only 
one person creates the fiction, but the kinds of fake news that most 
impact politics, whether hatched by partisan amateurs or skilled propa-
gandists, require cooperation, at least in dissemination if not in fabrica-
tion. Manipulation of news media has long been undertaken by CIA and 
other Intelligence Agencies to influence political overseas. Best known in 
this respect is propaganda used to destabilize the democratically elected 
government of Salvador Allende in Chile. This operational conspiracy 
included using the country’s leading newspaper network, El Mercurio 
and its 19 regional editions and 32 radio stations, with the CIA writ-
ing articles, as well as paying journalists and editors to write many stories 
exaggerating economic shortages, mobilizing opposition street protests, 

114   D. C. HELLINGER
and encouraging military plots against the Allende government.18 Such 
operations were almost routine for the United States during the Cold 
War; now they are enhanced by cyber technologies for influencing the 
messages and ads people receive through social media. Each of the 
branches of the military has some role in Cyber Defense, but like so 
much else in the military, the distinction between defensive and offensive 
capability is slim.
A series of indictments in the first half of 2018, brought by Special 
Counsel Robert Mueller, alleging illegal Russian operations to under-
mine Hillary Clinton’s campaign and to worsen discord and polarization 
in American politics stopped short of claiming that these efforts swung 
the election or affected the vote count. Trump respond to Mueller’s 
actions with his own conspiracy theory alleging it was President Obama’s 
failure to act, not any culpability on the part of himself or his campaign, 
which merited investigation. And Trump alleged that the real collusion 
going on was between the FBI (with other Deep State operatives; see 
Chapter 7) and the “corrupt media,” the “failing New York Times,” and 
other mainstream media, calling them in one Tweet (November 11, 
2017) “the enemy of the people.”
Domestic distortion, as opposed to fabrication, of news is hardly new. 
Since the decline of a partisan press in the nineteenth century, distor-
tions in news largely emanated from biases in the way that journalists 
and editors choose which stories to cover and selectivity in choices of 
vocabulary (e.g. “terrorists” vs “guerrillas” vs “freedom fighters”) and 
of sources (official and elite ones having more credibility than protes-
tors or more leftist critics). This may be due simply to commercial pres-
sures or editorial bias, rather than actual fabrication of stories for political 
purposes, which takes us into the realm of conspiracy. News media may 
have transmitted many lies, but for the most they part did not manufac-
ture them, even on the editorial page. Before the rise of cable and social 
media, major newspapers and three national broadcasting networks, for 
better and for worse, performed a gatekeeping role that ensured that 
most Americans got their news from organizations operating under very 
similar professional standards. As discussed in Chapter 2, there is much 
to criticize about this model, but even harshest critics in this era rarely 
charged that false stories were fabricated by the very organizations that 
provided citizens with information. News might be censored or dis-
torted, but not outright faked. One problem today is that fewer citizens 
are opting to inform themselves from electronic and print sources that 

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   115
operate under the rules of the journalistic profession.19 This decline has 
opened the door for propaganda to be diffused and more readily circu-
lated via Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, and other forms of social media. 
The Obama campaign was the first to use social media to target prospec-
tive voters for donations and votes. The Sanders campaign demonstrated 
that it was possible to build a campaign run on small donors. The Trump 
campaign adapted micro-advertising techniques based on analytics, espe-
cially using Google analytics and Facebook, not only to fund raise but 
stage spectacular rallies and to circulate paranoid style type conspiracy 
theories.
“Fake news” entered our vocabulary not with Trump or the Russians 
but with social media, and sometime in 2016 the meme seemed to take 
root. Hillary Clinton used the term in a speech in December 2016, 
taking note of the “epidemic of malicious fake news and false prop-
aganda that flooded social media over the past year.”20 Where Donald 
Trump enters the history of fake news is not only by his campaign’s 
use of social media analytics to promote dubious stories; this strategy 
had to be combined with the celebrity mogul’s astute sense that there 
existed a right-populist resentment toward the mainstream media, and 
that the candidate could exploit this resentment and other disfactisfac-
tion to fuel his run for the presidency. He carried this strategy over into 
his presidency and his defense against charges of collusion. An example 
was his tweet of October 5, 2017 asking, “Why Isn’t the Senate Intel 
Committee looking into the Fake News Networks in OUR country to 
see why so much of our news is just made up-FAKE!.”
The ground had already been well tilled, we saw in Chapter 3, for 
Trump’s campaign by Fox News. Ailes, its CEO and news director until 
he fell to a sexual harassment scandal in 2016, originally co-founded the 
network with media mogul Rupert Murdoch as a partisan vehicle for the 
neoconservative wing of the Republican Party. The motives were and are 
not entirely lucrative. For Fox, audience loyalty generates high advertis-
ing revenues, estimated as $100–$200 million per year, and it is part of a 
media empire that generates more than $4 billion of revenue.21 And the 
network did not early embrace the Trump candidacy. But Fox, with Ailes 
still at the helm, and like other parts of the GOP establishment and the 
ultra-wealth donor-class, struck a Faustian bargain with the Trump cam-
paign once his victory in the primary season was secured.
Could fake news in the form of bogus stories circulating on social 
media swing an election? This is a difficult conspiracy theory to test. 

116   D. C. HELLINGER
Early studies are inconclusive. A New York Times Upshot article review-
ing some research claimed that most ads, in general, have a very limited 
effect, with a single TV ad impacting only two of every 10,000 votes 
cast. Furthermore, looking at the cumulative impact of all kinds of ads, 
advertising is a wash; so seemed to the consensus arising from studies.22 
Twitter estimates that Russian bots (fake owners of accounts or owners 
impersonating real people) tweeted 2.1 million times during the cam-
paign, only one percent of all election-related tweets. The Upshot author, 
a political scientist who has researched the area with two colleagues, sug-
gests that whether fake news influences people depends on a number of 
factors—whether people are disposed to be persuadable in the first place, 
how many people actually saw the ad, and how much of the total news 
taken in by recipients is bogus. Trump supporters visited on average 13.1 
fake stories on fake news sites, but only 40% of all his supporters visited 
such sites, and fake news sites were only six percent of all news sites they 
visited.23 These metrics reduce the likelihood that the fake news stories 
much influenced the vote, but given the narrowness of Trump’s margin 
of victory in some key states, and given that fake news is disseminated 
through social media, not just news organization, we can’t rule out its 
impact. That is, fake news may have been effective it it swung the unde-
cided votes in the key states that tipped the Electoral College to vote. 
Targeting those voters effectively was the job of analytics.
No shortage of research in political science shows that only a small 
proportion of the electorate is undecided (and therefore persuadable) 
before a presidential election. And as the presidential election is decided 
by Electoral College votes, paid advertising tends to be concentrated in 
key states, and toward key demographics in those states. Money’s influ-
ence in the campaign cannot be reduced to a matter of “whosoever has 
the most money wins.” As Table 4.1 shows, Clinton had more money 
at her disposal, but Trump, not counting his advantage in free media 
Table 4.1  Candidate committee and outside support, 2016 presidential 
election
Source Center for Responsive Politics, https://www.opensecrets.org/pres16 (accessed November 30, 
2017)
Candidate committee money
Outside money
Hillary Clinton
$563,756,928
$231,118,680
Donald Trump
$333,127,164
$75,269,043

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   117
exposure, had more than sufficient funds as well to run his campaign. 
Cambridge Analytics, a right-wing contractor whose work for the Trump 
campaign was paid with dark money from billionaire Robert Mercer pro-
vided significant targeting for Trump advertising and mobilization. In 
fact, the amount of distorted misleading advertising funded openly by 
candidates and political actions committee, and also in stealth by dark 
money (see Chapter 6) far outweighs the influence that Russian opera-
tives can bring to bear.
While we cannot say definitively that fake news influenced the elec-
toral outcome, it does constitute one more way in which the 2016 
campaign was the most poisonous campaign of the twentieth century. 
Campaigns in America have long featured villainous personal attacks and 
severe distortions of the record, but Trump’s disparagement of his rivals 
in the primaries showed a kind of audacious crudeness. His demeaning 
Carly Fiorina’s looks, accusation that Ted Cruz’s father may have par-
ticipated in assassinating Kennedy, belittling of Marco Rubio as “Little 
Marco” all might have ended other presidential campaigns, but in hind-
sight his mockery and audacious claims proved to be kind of disruptive 
discourse that some parts of the electorate embraced—and other parts 
tolerated to achieve policy objectives favorable to social conservatives, 
corporations, and the wealthy.
Why would his cultivation of anger and resentment have receded in 
the general election, or afterward in the presidency? Even in televised 
debates before the general election, he repeated promises to investigate 
and prosecute Clinton. At campaign rallies he prompted audiences to 
chant “lock her up” with every mention of “crooked Hillary.” Seemingly 
unperturbed by a succession of embarrassing revelations of his own 
abuse and actual assaults on women, Trump responded with frequent 
allusions to Bill Clinton’s affairs and disgraceful sexual behavior in the 
White House, for which Hillary herself was unfairly held to account for 
having stood by her husband. At one point a leaked video from 2005 
showing Trump graphically degrading women and bragging about grop-
ing (i.e., molesting) revealed the depth of his misogyny24 and seemed to 
have sunk his bid for the presidency. But in an atmosphere of mistrust, of 
polarization spurred by highly partisan and truly racist conspiracy theo-
ries about President Obama, of gender biases (even before the “Me Too” 
movement had taken off), and of “normalization” of Trump’s personal-
ity by late-night talk show hosts (Jimmy Fallon, host of NBC’s Tonight 
Show deserves special responsibility in this respect). Trump’s boast that 

118   D. C. HELLINGER
he could shoot someone dead on the street and still got elected proved 
prescient. Whether it would survive damage from Mueller’s investigation 
and a damaging result in 2018’s midterm elections was yet to be deter-
mined at this writing. 
Perhaps had FBI Director James Comey not announced that the FBI 
was reopening its investigation of Clinton’s use of her unsecured pri-
vate email server for State Department business, Clinton still would have 
won the election. Even so, Trump’s campaign still would have disrupted 
the regime of truth (however porous it already was) and demonstrated 
the disjuncture between the way the world had changed and the way 
national politics was being conducted.
The Year of Voting Dangerously
In the US elections, the presidency is decided not by majority or plural-
ity vote of citizens, but by the Electoral College. Votes in the Electoral 
College are not distributed proportional to the population of each state, 
putting more power in the hands of smaller and rural state voters, which 
in the present-day context skews the College votes more Republican 
and conservative. We owe this system in part to suspicions of popu-
lar democracy among the Founders of the Republic. In fact, there are 
elements of a conspiracy in the way the Constitution was written. The 
convention that took place in Philadelphia had been authorized only 
to reform the Articles of Confederation. Instead, the elites who gath-
ered there met in secret to draft a Constitution that summer of 1787 
in Philadelphia, and they did so after closing off the doors and win-
dows in sweltering heat. The course of human events that led to the 
Constitution cannot be reduced to a conspiracy; and certainly the cabal 
of planters, financiers, and merchants who met in Philadelphia produced 
something politically remarkable for the age. Nonetheless, “rules of the 
game” of politics in America today were negotiated clandestinely, and 
many of those rules, most notably the Electoral College, continue to 
shape our politics today.
Many analysts have tried to introduce an element of capriciousness 
into the election result by noting that a change of only 80,000 votes 
changed in a few key states could have resulted in a Clinton victory. 
That explanation is simply cherry picking. As Table 4.2 shows, a shift of 
fewer than 30,000 votes toward Trump could have offset Clinton had 
she competed more effectively in the Upper Midwest. The Electoral 

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   119
College not only favors rural, generally more conservative states, it 
makes the presidential sweepstakes just that—introducing a greater ele-
ment of chance in the outcome, increasing odds that the president would 
be elected without a majority, or even a plurality, of votes by citizens. 
Furthermore, if there were, as Trump charges, an attempt to rig the elec-
tion through illegal voting, his conspiracy theory takes on large conse-
quences, because only small number of shifts in a key state can determine 
mathematically the outcome.
Measured directly, racial bias and gender bias seem to have played a 
more pivotal role than economic bias in influencing white voters to sup-
port Trump. A study25 of trends in white voters’ intentions two weeks 
before the election found that when the influence of typical factors, such 
as ideology, age, party preference, income, gender were controlled, vot-
ers expressing dissatisfaction with their economic condition were signif-
icantly more likely to vote for Trump than a typical white voter—60% 
more so for those most dissatisfied. However, voters who expressed “hos-
tile” sexism and those who tended to deny the existence of racism were 
even more likely to vote for Trump—70% more likely in the case of vot-
ers most hostile toward minorities or most in denial about the existence 
of racism. Some analysts have apportioned some of the responsibility for 
Clinton’s defeat to defections by Sanders supporters to Trump or to the 
Green Party candidate, Jill Stein. Mathematically it does appear that the 
Democrat was hurt by leftist populism as well as the right-wing variety. 
However, these defections were generally below levels of earlier elections 
and tended toward older and more conservative supporters of Sanders.26
Table 4.2  Playing 
the “what if” Electoral 
College game
If Clinton had won MI, WI, PA and Trump wins any two of NH, 
NV, MN, he still wins Electoral College
State
Electoral 
votes
Winner
Winner’s 
margin
New Hampshire
4
Clinton
2326
Nevada
6
Clinton
27,202
Minnesota
10
Clinton
43,175
Total
20
72,703
Michigan
16
Trump
10,604
Wisconsin
10
Trump
22,648
Pennsylvania
20
Trump
44,292
Total
46
77,544

120   D. C. HELLINGER
It is not my intention to delve deeply into the voting patterns. Our 
main concern here is not whether or not voters who hold conspiracy 
beliefs were more likely to vote for Trump. We have only a few questions 
from voter surveys that are relevant to testing that hypothesis. We do 
have more survey data that can measure the influence of mistrust, suspi-
cion of elite power, and sense of powerlessness played a role in the elec-
tion. As we shall see, there is also some analysis based on contextual data, 
that is, on analysis examining aggregate voting patterns geographically, 
suggesting that Democratic attrition between 2012 and 2016, especially 
among white voters, was greater in geographic areas that were most dis-
tressed economically and socially.
Emily Jenkins, director of polling at the Cato Group, using opinion 
data generated by the Democracy Fund Voter Study group and a meth-
odology (latent class analysis) that sorts cases (in this case, Trump voters) 
into clusters, persuasively argues that rather one kind of Trump voter, 
there are five.27 In the following summaries of Jenkins’ description of 
each group, I am emphasizing what, from her analysis, may indicate a 
disposition toward conspiracist beliefs.
Staunch Conservatives or “loyalists” (31%): Characteristics: Loyal 
Republicans, most likely to own guns and belong to NRA, worried about 
immigration but not as much as those whom Jenkins calls American 
Preservationists. These loyalists have high levels of social trust and less 
likely to believe the system is rigged. However, they tend to express con-
cern about “discrimination against white people” and Muslim immigra-
tion, and they think that living most of your life in America and being 
a Christian are important to being a “real American.” In other words, 
these are Trumpistas to whom one can appeal on the basis of identity 
politics.
Free Marketeers (25%): These voters were more anti-Clinton than 
pro-Trump. Like Staunch Conservatives, they are fiscally conservative 
but more liberal on immigration and other identity issues. Jenkins calls 
them more “cosmopolitan,” a word often used by Trump’s right-wing 
supporters and advisers as an epithet, more so than by the more populist 
right voters, i.e., the American Preservationists.
American Preservationists (20%): Elkin’s description provides plenty 
of clues to think this group would be inclined toward right-wing con-
spiracism and the “paranoid style.” They “lean economically progressive, 
believe the economic and political systems are rigged, have nativist immi-
gration views, and a nativist and ethnocultural conception of American 

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   121
identity.” They think anti-white prejudice is widespread. They smoke 
and have health issues, yet support repeal of “Obamacare,” they seem 
to best fit the profile of Trump supporters that seem to stick with him 
on the basis of affect. They are skeptical about free trade, sympathetic 
to minorities, unhappy about unequal wealth, and see climate change 
as a real threat. By these traits, they have some commonality with many 
Democrats. As Jenkins puts it, they feel powerless against big money 
and the political class, and they have little social trust. Thus, we might 
conclude, this group would seem to have many of the attitudes that 
Hofstadter attributes to the “paranoid style.”
Anti-Elites (19%): This group shifted their views about Clinton in a 
negative direction between 2012 and 2016, says Jenkins, and they are 
most likely of these five groups to see political and economic systems 
as rigged. On the other hand, they are more moderate on issues such 
as gun control, and they are less likely to be religious. They express less 
concern about identity than many other Trump voters, but they do not 
have favorable views on immigrants and Muslims. Overall, based on 
Jenkins findings, we seem to have some but not all of the dispositions we 
would expect in those attracted to the paranoid style of conspiracism.
The Disengaged (5%): Less like to express themselves on most issues, 
but immigration and Muslims are exceptions. Like Anti-Elites they see 
the system as rigged against them.
The Trump supporters who raise concerns about the economic and 
political system being “rigged” are already “conspiracy theorists” by vir-
tue of their belief that the system is “rigged”, which implies a “rigger.” 
Many also espouse concerns about Identity issues, a not easily disentan-
gled set of attitudes about values and cultural change involving, among 
other things, gender (e.g., gay marriage, patriarchy), race (mainly white-
ness), language (mainly English), ethnicity (European descent), and reli-
gion (mainly Christianity), among other cultural markers. These identity 
issues also can lead to conspiracism, especially scapegoating. It is not 
hard to see how Trump’s endorse of the birther issue and immigrant 
bashing appeal to fear about a breakdown in social order.
Partisan Conspiracy Beliefs
Unfortunately, we have very limited direct research from the major vot-
ing studies on conspiracy beliefs, and despite the visibility of conspiracy 
theories in the campaign, relatively few surveys enter into the topic in 

122   D. C. HELLINGER
any depth. But we do have some clues about who is most receptive to 
some of the conspiracy theories floated in the election campaign. As we 
reviewed in earlier chapters, mistrust of Washington has soared over the 
past five decades. Empirical evidence, though scarcer than what we need 
to draw firm conclusions, shows that conspiracy beliefs in the 2000s up 
until 2010 were not necessarily more widespread than they have been 
since the 1890s.28 However, that research was concluded shortly before 
Trump’s quest for the presidency became serious. It is possible that con-
spiracism has spiked, much like it did in the 1890s and early cold War.
A Pew study in 2012 found already that confidence in the accuracy of 
the count in presidential elections was already only 48% in 2004, a year 
in which theories widely circulated that the voting machines had failed 
to accurate recorded votes in the crucial swing state of Ohio, won nar-
rowly by George W. Bush. Those very confident across the country fell 
to 43% in 2008 and then to 31% in 2012, with the winners, as predicted 
by the political scientists, more likely to express confidence than the 
losers. However, the Pew Center reported that confidence in the vote 
actually rebounded somewhat in 2016, with 45% expressing themselves 
as very confident that the vote was counted fairly (and 37% somewhat 
confident).29
One of the most potentially harmful conspiracy theories spread by 
Trump during the later stages of his campaign, when most polls were 
giving him little chance of winning, was that the election had been 
“rigged.” When it became clear that despite winning the Electoral 
College he had lost the popular vote, Trump continued to describe the 
national vote as “rigged.” In polling done late in the campaign, The 
Voter Study Group (VSG), based at George Washington University, 
found that overall 28% of voters were either not too confident or not at 
all confident that ballots were counted fairly across the country outside 
their own district (see Table 4.3). Using the same data, we break down 
the responses by presidential vote preference.
Political scientists Uscinski and Parent and others (see Chapters 1 
and 2) have demonstrated that conspiracy beliefs are often adopted on 
the basis of “motivated reasoning”—that is, influenced by partisanship 
and the tendency for electoral losers to be more susceptible to conspir-
acism.30 However, not only was the 2016 election the first in which a 
major party candidate claimed the election was “rigged,” it was the 
first where the winning candidate claimed it, both before and after the 

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   123
election. Still, Table 4.3 provides some support for the motivated rea-
soning hypothesis, as more Clinton voters expressed doubt about the 
vote count than did Trump voters, despite the president voicing his own 
skepticism.
Table 4.3 also looks at three questions related to popular conspir-
acy beliefs, one of which, that Barack Obama is a Muslim, is predictably 
and alarmingly higher among Trump voters. I say alarmingly not out of 
concern that they mistake Obama for a Muslim, but because of the way 
Trump and many of his prominent supports directly associated being 
Muslim with terrorism in the campaign. On 9/11 Truther theory, there 
is little difference between voters in different camps; Trump voters were 
almost as likely as Clinton voters to say the government knew about the 
attacks in advance. This is a shift from earlier findings (e.g., see Table 1.1 
in Chapter 1) that showed Democrats somewhat more likely to express 
some faith in 9/11 theories, presumably motivated by partisanship. The 
VSG survey shows relatively high overall endorsement of this theory 
compared to more recent surveys, though for a variety of reasons it is 
Table 4.3  Presidential voting, party ID, and suspicion
Source Democracy Fund Voter Study Group. Views of the Electoral Research Survey, December 2016. 
[Computer File] Release 1: August 28, 2017. Washington, DC: Democracy Fund Voter Study
Clinton voters
Percent
Trump voters
Percent
Did the US government know about 9/11 in advance?
–Definitely
95
7.6
70
6.2
–Probably
350
28.0
279
24.8
Is Barack Obama a Muslim?
–Don’t know
29
2.3
48
1.9
–Muslim
351
8.5
567
50.3
–Not a Muslim
1251
61.1
488
43.3
Do the rich buy elections?
–All the time
160
12.8
59
5.2
–Most of the time
334
26.7
233
20.7
–About half of the time
163
13.0
150
13.3
–Some of the time
466
37.3
519
46.0
–Never
115
9.2
158
14.0
Confident votes accurately counted across the country?
–Very confident
544
16.8
1414
44.5
–Somewhat confident
1255
38.8
1458
45.9
–Not too confident
920
28.4
246
7.7
–Not at all confident
518
16.0
58
1.8

124   D. C. HELLINGER
risky to directly compare surveys that used somewhat different sampling 
techniques and questions. Clinton supporters were more likely to see the 
rich as buying elections, although the margin (39.5–25.9% is not star-
tling). Larger numbers in both camps believe that the rich buy elections 
“half” or “some of” the time. A “glass half full” analogy is apt here—one 
can express relief that “only” about 30% of the electorate think the rich 
rountinely buy elections, or we can feel alarmed that around 70% believe 
this to be true “only” some, half or all the time.
Social Immobility and Unresponsive Elites
Academic research on conspiracy beliefs tends to be judgmental about 
such beliefs, especially in research on predispositions toward conspira-
cism, which almost ways focus only on conspiracy theories that indicate 
social pathologies, such as racial prejudice or anti-Semitism. These inves-
tigations usually find that conspiracists tend to feel alienated, powerless; 
they seek closure on questions that disturb them; they long for more 
control over their lives; most troubling, they tend toward authoritarian-
ism. Those disposed toward conspiracism are seeking to satisfy a need 
for order, certainty, and control in their lives. More often than not, the 
research focuses on the kinds of conspiracy theories that are indeed dan-
gerous, prone to scapegoating and even worse.
However, not all conspiracy theories, I have argued, are of this patho-
logical variety. What if feelings of alienation and powerlessness arise from 
a real distance between the representative institutions of liberal democ-
racy and the central concerns of their lives? What if they are wondering 
why the mythical American dream seems to be receding from their grasp 
as their economic situation deteriorates? What if the explanation for 
their personal hard times is that their jobs “are just not going to come 
back”—and no one really seems to care?
One might reasonably ask if unemployed or low-wage workers who 
have been economically excluded from any share in the expanding eco-
nomic pie in the post-Cold War era of technological advances and glo-
balization have not been empowered by insisting that someone be held 
responsible for their plight. The same pertains to other social sectors, 
such as African-Americans, who are often disposed from personal expe-
rience to suspect foul play by the police and other actors in the crimi-
nal justice system, or rural residents who think city dwellers sponge off 
the government and have interest in understanding their problems and 

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   125
lives. A sense that some people are unfairly benefitting from others may 
reflect the decline in social mobility, some of which had been building 
even before the end of the Cold War. Already by the 1970s, there were 
signs that the social contract that accompanied the birth of the liberal 
international order forged by the United States after World War II was 
coming undone.
Research by two Stanford University economists shows a steady, 
precipitous decline in the upper-mobility of children born since 1940–
1945, when 90% of more of those born could expect to earn more in 
their lifetime than their parents.31 The decline actually began with the 
baby boom generation and remained acute until the rate flattened out 
for those born in the late 1960s (those who would have been 46–50 
years old in 2016). The last year for which the economists have data is 
1985 (i.e., for people who were 31 years old in 2016), when only 50% 
could expect to earn more than their parents. Not surprisingly, the rate 
of mobility falls off drastically for everyone in the bottom 30% of income 
earners, regardless of when they were born. These were years, ironically, 
in which the United States had assumed the role of global hegemon 
and there is no doubt that these were overall years of prosperity in mac-
ro-economic terms, but it is clear that they were also years in which 
upward mobility, the defining characteristic of the “American Dream,” 
whether mythical or not, was in decline.
A Pew Center survey taken just before Election Day found that 
among likely voters, 72% Clinton supporters thought that “the gap 
between rich and poor” is a “very big problem,” compared to only 
33% of Trump supporters. However, Trump supporters, by a count of 
58–43%, were more likely to see “job opportunities for all Americans” as 
a very big problem, and the gap was even greater (63–45%) in regard to 
“job opportunities for working-class Americans.” More Clinton support-
ers (66–38) placed stress on the rising cost of a college education than 
did Trumpistas. This would seem to support the idea that Clinton and 
the Democrats appealed to the middle class, eliding this concept with 
“working class.” Data also show Trumpistas putting more emphasis on 
immigration.32
We take up the issue of how globalization and technological change 
in more detail in Chapter 5, but the tendency toward declining upward 
mobility certainly provide a plausible reason to think that suspicions 
about the fairness of American society would grow and eventually reg-
ister themselves in a populist political response—on the left or the right. 

126   D. C. HELLINGER
Table 4.4  Doubts about fairness in the electorate
a622 (47.8%) Trump primary voters were very confident in vote count; 555 (42.6%) were somewhat confident. General election figures differ somewhat 
from Table 4.3 because of cases dropped for some of the questions
Source Democracy Fund Voter Study Group. Views of the Electorate Research Survey, December 2016. [Computer File] Release 1: August 28, 2017. 
Washington, DC: Democracy Fund Voter Study. Group [producer] https://www.voterstudygroup.org/. Consult Voter Study Group for exact questions
Clinton general 
election
Trump general 
election
Trump primary 
voters
Sanders primary 
voters
Clinton primacy 
voters
America is a fair 
society where every-
one has a chance to 
get ahead
Strongly disagree
Disagree
Total
699
1430
2129
21.9%
44.7%
66.6%
91
431
522
2.9%
13.7%
16.6%
35
222
257
2.7%
17.3%
20.0%
327
463
790
29.8%
42.4%
72.2%
275
596
871
19.1%
30.1%
49.2%
Our economic 
system is biased in 
favour of the wealth-
iest Americans
Strongly agree
Agree
Total
2021
1009
3030
63.0%
31.4%
94.4%
450
1196
1646
14.3%
37.9%
52.2%
168
511
679
13.0%
39.5%
52.5%
803
225
1028
73.4%
20.6%
94.0%
824
541
1365
56.7%
37.3%
94.0%
You can’t believe 
much of what you 
hear from the main-
stream media
Strongly agree
Agree
Total
424
1187
1611
13.2%
37.0%
50.2%
2062
833
2895
65.8%
26.6%
92.4%
868
300
1168
67.8%
23.4%
81.2%
261
354
615
23.9%
32.4%
56.3%
188
520
708
13.7%
35.9%
49.6%
Elites in this country 
don’t understand 
the problems I am 
facing
Strongly agree
Agree
Total
1493
1238
2731
46.7%
38.7%
85.4%
1262
1321
2583
40.1%
41.9%
82.0%
522
522
1044
40.4%
40.4%
80.8%
600
373
973
55.0%
34.2%
89.2%
582
651
1233
40.1%
44.8%
84.9%
Confident vote in 
the 2016 election 
was accurately 
counted
Not at all
Not much
Total
a518
929
1447
16.0%
28.4%
44.4%
a58
246
304
1.8%
7.7%
9.5%
99
36
66a
7.6%
2.9%
5.3%
414
450
864
39.1%
42.5%
81.6%
560
456
1016
40.1%
32.6%
72.7%

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   127
Table 4.4 shows results of research by VSG consistent with this hypoth-
esis, but not without nuances. Again, our focus here is on what Clinton, 
Trump, and Sanders voters believe, not in explaining the choices made in 
the election; the column percentages reflect that objective.
On the one hand, for both the primary and general elections, those 
who voted for Clinton, along with those who voted for Sanders in the pri-
mary, show high levels of disagreement with the claim that everyone has a 
chance to “get ahead” in American society, though as one might expect, 
in the primaries a much higher proportion of Sanders than Clinton voters 
endorsed this opinion. What is surprising is that even those who voted for 
Trump in the primaries did not endorse this view in high numbers. Trump 
voters remained relatively optimistic as a group America is “fair society.” A 
similar distribution of opinion holds regarding the assertion that the eco-
nomic system is biased toward the rich—though on this question gap is 
less pronounced between Clinton and Sanders voters in the primary.
One possible explanation for the low percentage of Trump voters 
who agreed with these two statements is that Trump presented himself, 
despite the financial help he received early in his real estate career from 
his father, as a self-made man, whereas Sanders repeatedly hammered 
hard on the theme of economic fairness, access to higher education, and 
reform of the tax code in order to increase the contribution of corpora-
tions and the wealthy. We should also keep in mind that these questions 
are cutting close to one of a key cultural assumptions, that America is a 
land of opportunity, constantly reinforced in popular culture and com-
mercial advertising. As we will see, when we examine aggregate, geo-
graphic voting patterns with an eye on social context and events, we see 
that racism and gender biases most likely interacted with socioeconomic 
factors to generate Democratic Party losses in areas of the country where 
people have most suffered economic decline and social exclusion.
Across the board, supporters of Clinton, Trump, and Sanders alike 
tend to view elites as out of touch with ordinary people. In all cases, at 
least four out of five voters agreed that elites “don’t understand” their 
problems—reaching nine of every ten voters in the case of Sanders. And 
as might be expected, trust in the mainstream media takes a beating 
among all the voters; only among Clinton primary voters do even half of 
the respondents refrain from harshly judging the media. Trump’s bashing 
of the media seems to have had its effect, as over 90% of his voters in the 
general election express distrust, with two-thirds “strongly” agreeing that 
“You can’t believe much of what you hear from the mainstream media.”

128   D. C. HELLINGER
The case for “conspiracy theory is for losers” is strengthened some-
what in Table 4.4 when examining the attitudes of primary voters toward 
the election outcome. This makes sense, as we would expect voters in 
the primary to be more partisan and more strongly committed to the 
candidate for whom they voted. Sanders voters may also have felt them-
selves double losers, not only it being the case that most of them voted 
for the losing candidate in the general election, but having seen their 
preferred choice to the Democratic candidate lose the nomination fight. 
Their opinions may very well have been reinforced by one of the key 
revelations of the Wikileaks release of Democratic National Committee 
email—evidence that the national party took measures to help Clinton 
and hurt Sanders’ chances.
What the declining trust in institutions points toward is what polit-
ical scientists who study liberal democracy in the Global South call a 
“crisis of representation.” The last ten years have seen the phrase begin 
to be used to describe evidence of democratic decline in the European 
context,33 but although academic and media commentators have begun 
to sound an alarm about threats to democratic stability in the United 
States, neither the Voter Study Group or the American National Election 
Survey data banks have assessed directly public confidence in what have 
long been regarded as the key linkages between citizens and parties, the 
political party system and the parties themselves. In fact, the first two 
pages resulting from a Google search (February 23, 2018) on “United 
States crisis of representation” produced only two links to studies 
focused on the US party system or Congress—one a commentary arti-
cle focused on the Republican Party in the conservative National Review 
and the other a Huffington Post article focused on under-representation 
of women in Congress. A slightly different search, using “American crisis 
of representation,” produced seven articles on a crisis of representation 
in Latin America, but none on the United States.
We have already seen evidence of declining trust in government; this 
finding is reinforced again in Table 4.5, which displays results from the 
Voter Study Group survey and one additional question taken from the 
American National Election Study, with not more than 20% of voters in 
the general election expressing the view that government can be trusted 
to do what is right most of the time. Results are even more dismaying 
among those who voted for Trump or Sanders in the primaries. Most 
voters showed some agreement with the ideas that politicians cater to 
the rich and powerful and that public officials “don’t care” what people 

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   129
Table 4.5  Toward a crisis of representation
Clinton general 
election
Trump general 
election
Trump primary 
voters
Sanders primary 
voters
Clinton primacy 
voters
Trust government to do 
what is right (Data from 
ANES survey)
About always
Most of time
Some of time
33
489
2670
1.0%
15.3%
83.6%
24
200
2933
0.8%
6.3%
92.9%
6
85
1196
9.5%
6.6%
92.9%
6
132
934
0.6%
2.3%
87.1%
35
293
1122
2.4%
20.2%
77.4%
Most politicians do not 
care about the people 
(Data from VSG)
Strongly agree
Agree
Total
139
379
518
11.0%
35.2%
46.2%
135
460
595
12.0%
40.8%
52.8%
43
145
188
12.7%
42.9%
55.6%
51
121
172
15.5%
36.8%
52.3%
64
157
221
12.6%
31.0%
43.6%
Most politicians only care 
about interests of rich 
and powerful (VSG)
Strongly agree
Agree some
Total
232
602
834
18.5%
48.1%
66.6%
157
469
626
13.9%
41.6%
55.5%
56
140
196
18.6%
41.5%
60.1%
87
156
243
26.5%
47.6%
74.1%
94
224
318
18.7%
44.4%
63.1%
Most public officials do 
not care what people 
think (Data from VSG)
Strongly agree
Agree
Total
221
355
576
20.8%
33.5%
54.3%
255
440
695
22.6%
39.0%
61.6%
77
140
227
22.8%
41.5%
64.3%
87
125
212
26.5%
38.1%
64.6%
89
193
282
17.6%
38.2%
55.8%
Strong leader is good for 
U.S. even if bends rules 
to get things done (VSG)
Strongly agree
Agree
Total
96
302
398
7.7%
24.1%
31.8%
116
355
471
10.3%
34.4%
44.7%
44
100
144
13.1%
29.8%
42.9%
21
74
95
6.4%
22.6%
29.0%
89
193
282
17.6%
38.2%
55.8%
How widespread is cor-
ruption among politicians 
in the U.S.? (VSG)
Very widespread
Quite widespread
Total
313
572
885
25.0%
45.7%
70.7%
310
531
841
27.5%
47.1%
74.6%
94
170
265
27.9%
50.4%
78.3%
101
133
234
30.8%
40.5%
71.8%
114
234
348
22.6%
46.3%
68.9%
How satisfied with the 
way democracy works in 
the U.S.? (VSG)
Not at all
Not very
Total
79
351
430
6.3%
18.0%
24.3%
49
211
260
4.3%
18.7%
23.0%
11
63
74
3.3%
18.6%
22.9%
34
128
162
10.3%
38.9%
49.2%
30
109
139
0.9%
1.6%
2.5%
Sources Democracy Fund Voter Study Group. Views of the Electorate Research Survey, December 2016. [Computer File] Release 1: August 28, 2017. 
Washington, DC: Democracy Fund Voter Study Group [producer] https://www.voterstudygroup.org/. Consult Voter Study Group for exact ques-
tions. The first question (only) on Trust in government is taken from American National Elections Studies (ANES), University of Michigan and Stanford 
University, data release of May 7, 2017

130   D. C. HELLINGER
think. And across the board, seven of ten voters in general election and 
primaries think there is very or quite widespread corruption among poli-
ticians in the United States.
There is not unalloyed alienation from democracy, fortunately. In  
Table 4.6 we see that fewer than 25% of Trump and Clinton voters in 
the general election expressed themselves “not at all” or “not very satis-
fied” with democracy in the United States. Very few of those who voted 
for Clinton in the primary expressed dissatisfaction, but there is a strikingly 
high proportion (almost half) of Sanders supporters who do so. However, 
the relatively positive results for democracy is accompanied by the bad 
news that such a large percentage of the electorate endorses the idea that 
a strong leader who sometimes bends the rules would be good for the 
United States, with a surprisingly high proportion of Clinton primary voters 
agreeing. This suggests that the Sanders voters are not the kind of populists 
looking for a messiah figure. This ought to be a caution against the kind of 
sweeping negative characterizations being made about populism in general.
These survey results do not go fully to the question of representation, 
but the attitudes toward politicians and public officials confirm the deep 
chasm that has developed between the electorate and, respectively, their 
government, public officials, and the information environment. And 
Table 4.6  American’s  confidence  in  political  institutions,  January  2018
Do you have a great deal of confidence, quite a lot, not very much confidence or no 
confidence at all in ______?
A great deal 
(%)
Quite a lot 
(%)
Not very much 
(%)
No confidence 
(%)
Military
53
34
8
4
The Supreme Court
22
37
29
7
FBI
24
33
28
11
The Courts
16
35
33
12
The Presidency
19
24
28
26
Democratic Party
13
23
37
25
Media
11
19
38
30
Republican Party
10
19
37
31
Congress
8
17
49
22
Source NPR/PBS NewsHour/Marist poll of 1350 US adults conducted January 8–10. “Overall” results 
reflect all respondents, and the margin of error is ±2.7 percentage points. Party affiliation results reflect 
respondents who identified as registered voters (1092 respondents), and the margin of error is ±3.0 per-
centage points. Figures may not add up to 100% because of rounding. “Unsure” responses not shown

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   131
while large-scale studies of the electorate do not provide data for evalua-
tion of parties and other institutions, some general polling data led cre-
dence to the growth of suspicion of representative institutions. Table 4.6 
reveals that the institution in which Americans have the most trust, by a 
runaway margin over all the others is the military.
On the one hand, the military’s high standing can be attributed to 
the respect that most Americans have for soldiers in the field, for their 
sacrifice and willingness to put their lives on the line. However, the gap 
between the public regard for the military and that for other institutions 
takes on different implications when we consider how the military’s rela-
tionship to society has changed. Unlike the past, even in periods when 
there was no draft, the American military was more a citizen-soldier insti-
tution than it is today. As we explore in Chapter 7, through advertising, 
popular culture and effect public relations, soldiers today regarded as war-
riors—even if, despite growth in their ranks, the special operations forces 
who best fit the description are still a minority of military personnel.
In the early Trump presidency, two retired high officers occupied key 
positions in the White House—Chief of Staff John Kelly and Defense 
Secretary James Mattis. And a third officer, National Security Adviser 
H. R. McMaster, remained on active duty. By mid-2018, only Kelly 
remained, amid rumors that he would soon resign. Trump has contin-
ued a trend set by his two immediate predecessors of giving the military’s 
high command and even field commanders more autonomy in carrying 
out combat missions in the “War of Terror” and in advising. Given the 
dismal rating of Congress, the media, and each of the two political par-
ties, given the unstable nature of the president’s personality, and given 
the high esteem for the military in the public sphere, military influence in 
the executive should be understood as a danger—regardless of whether 
military officers are more judicious and rational than the president. This 
danger, through no fault of the officers themselves, is magnified by the 
atmosphere of palace intrigue, i.e., conspiracy, within the Trump White 
House and among the staff.
Globalization, Economic Distress, and the Vote
While survey data tells us something about insecurities and agency panic, 
ecological (analysis based on votes aggregated geographically) can reveal 
some tendencies less clear in individual level, opinion data. So next we 
ask if the geographical distribution of the Trump vote and possibly 

132   D. C. HELLINGER
the Bernie Sanders vote is similar to that in the cases of the Brexit ref-
erendum, Le Pen’s National Front in France, the AfD (Alternative for 
Germany) in Germany and other European right-wing populist electoral 
movements. A recent study of distressed communities in the U.S. can 
be used in combination with an archive of national primary and presi-
dential results to examine this question. Given that the Electoral College 
majority achieved by Trump largely resulted from his largely unexpected 
success in Midwestern states, I focus here on these states where the 
“Blue Wall” (states thought to be reliably Democratic) was breached or 
nearly breached. I also include West Virginia, a state that went heavily for 
Trump that once was rock-ribbed Democratic and a bastion of organized 
labor because of its heavy dependence on mining.
Relevant data for analysis was taken from the 2017 Distressed 
Communities Index, developed and compiled by the Economic 
Innovation Group and combined with data from Dave Leip’s Atlas of US 
Presidential Elections.34 The index was developed to measure the vital-
ity of communities in the United States. The report asserts, “Distressed 
communities are disconnected communities, and the findings…reveal 
the troubling extent to which the fates of their 52 million inhabitants 
are diverging from the rest of the country. These are places increasingly 
alienated from the benefits of the modern economy.”35 Seven indicators 
are combined into a single index. The indicators are:
•	No high school diploma. Percent of the population 25 years and 
older without a high school diploma or equivalent.
•	Housing vacancy rate. Percent of habitable housing that is unoc-
cupied, excluding properties that are for seasonal, recreational, or 
occasional use.
•	Adults not working. Percent of the prime-age population (ages 
25–64) not currently in work.
•	Poverty rate. Percent of the population whose household income 
falls below the poverty line.
•	Median income ratio. A geography’s median income expressed as a 
percentage of its state’s median income.
•	Change in employment. Percent change in the number of jobs from 
2011 to 2015.
Base data was compiled by zip code and then aggregated and made avail-
able to other researchers. As county voting records are the lowest level 
of consist data provided for all states, it is at this aggregate level that 

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   133
analysis is presented in the figures and the tables presented here in this 
section.
Clinton registered percentage gains only in some large counties in 
Illinois, Minnesota, Pennsylvania (and very marginally in Indiana), and 
a look at the data suggests that this is almost completely a result of 
strong showings in the large metropolitan areas of Chicago, Philadelphia, 
Pittsburgh, and Minneapolis (see Table 4.7). It is worth commenting 
here that even a cursory examination of voting patterns in these areas 
shows that the Clinton’s few gains were somewhat an artifact of com-
binations of minority voters and more highly educated white voters. Of 
course, many minorities live in highly distressed urban areas, but they 
are less likely to have moved to the Trump column than to have turned 
out in decreased numbers. Census data indicates that black turnout was 
down 7.1% in 2016 from 2012. The Hispanic vote was down 0.7%.
Table 4.7  Slippage in democratic presidential vote in eight Midwestern states
Sources Economic Innovation Group. The 2017 Distressed Communities Distressed Communities Index, 
available at eig.org (accessed July 1, 2018); US Election Atlas, available at uselectionatlas.org, compiled 
by Dave Leip
2016 vs 2012 percent change democratic votes
WV 
(%)
IA 
(%)
OH 
(%)
WI 
(%)
MI 
(%)
MN 
(%)
PA 
(%)
IL  
(%)
Size
Large
−6.3
−7.7
−8.5
−0.3
3.8
9.2
Distress level
1
0.8
−4.7
1.3
7.0
11.5
2
−2.8
−3.9
4.2
8.3
3
−8.5 −13.1
4
−12.8
5
−0.8
Size
Medium
−8.7 −11.8 −18.3 −14.5 −10.5 −11.6
−7.6
−5.0
Distress level
1
−9.7 −12.3 −13.6
0.5
−9.8
−0.4
−0.3
2
−3.8 −19.1 −17.7 −19.1 −14.9 −21.3
−5.0
−3.9
3
−13.0 −27.3 −37.3
−13.4
−16.8
−5.2
4
−24.0
−20.3
−24.3 −12.2
5
Size
Small
−24.9 −27.3 −32.2 −22.7 −22.0 −26.3 −20.7 −24.8
Distress level
1
−18.9 −21.2 −24.4 −17.6 −11.9 −22.1 −14.4 −16.5
2
−20.8 −30.6 −31.8 −26.9 −24.0 −28.3 −23.6 −23.9
3
−23.8 −33.6 −35.9 −27.9 −23.2 −32.2 −20.6 −25.7
4
−21.9 −36.4 −36.8 −33.2 −28.1 −32.7 −22.1 −26.0
5
Total
−20.8 −20.5 −15.3 −14.7 −11.5 −11.5
−2.1
2.4

134   D. C. HELLINGER
Table 4.7, though complex, illustrates the way that economic dis-
tress and social exclusion has played in shaping politics in the Midwest. 
Within midsized and small counties, in all 8 states considered there is 
a pattern of nearly consistent total secular decline in the vote between 
2012 and 2016 as one moves from least to most distressed counties. 
The Democratic Party has shown weakness across the board in these 
state over the last few decades, but it appears the party’s fortunes had 
not bottomed out. There are small digressions in the pattern of decline, 
but they are slight compared to the overall direction. For example, 
while the decline in Ohio was more pronounced in the third-most dis-
tressed midsized counties than in the fourth-most, the descent in both 
these categories is much more pronounced for those counties in the 
first and second categeories (relatively well-off counties). Of course, 
these counties have many fewer votes to influence in the election, but in 
close elections in critical states, the ability of Democrats to at least hold 
their own in these areas is important in statewide elections. While not 
more pronounced than in the other four states, the shifts in Michigan, 
Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, and Ohio cost Clinton victory in the Electoral 
College.
Here we see operating a contradiction between national political 
structures and their capacity to respond effectively to the challenges 
being posed by the inter-related processes of technological change and 
globalization. Mabel Berezin expresses this well in Illiberal Politics in 
Neoliberal Times, which primarily examines European right-wing pop-
ulism but seems to apply equally to the American context. She writes, 
“By moving the center of political gravity from the polity to the per-
son, from the state to the market, Europeanization has compromised 
the bonds of democratic empathy and provided an opportunity for 
rightwing populists to articulate a discourse of fear and insecurity.” The 
“front story” exploited by this kind of discourse is quite apparent in the 
individual level data about the relative weight of different factors, such 
as partisanship, gender, race, social class, occupation, etc. These factors 
operate in a “contextual space,” she reminds us that shapes receptivity 
to candidates and their messages.36 That context is shifting economic 
and social structures on a global scale that are discordant with national 
identity. We will return to this data in Chapter 5, where we consider 
globalization’s relationship to conspiracy theory and to the 2016 
election.

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   135
Suspicion and the Vote
Given the lack of available survey data, little can be done to explore 
how much conspiracism contributed to the outcome of the 2016 elec-
tion. Certainly, there are no shortages of incidents, events, and candidate 
rhetoric to show that conspiracy theories affected the outcome. What we 
know is that Clinton herself at times traded in conspiracy theories, the 
most famous incident being her 1995 memo complaining that she and 
her husband were being victimized by a “vast right-wing conspiracy,” a 
theory not entirely without some foundation. Then there was her refer-
ence to the influence of “fake news” after the 2016 election. Regardless 
of the plausibility of Clinton’s conspiracy theories, compared to Donald 
Trump’s claims that Obama had founded ISIS, promotion of birther 
theory, warnings that the election was fixed, repeated characterizations 
of credible news stories as deliberated faked, and charge that Clinton 
had acted criminally in regard to emails and the deaths of diplomats in 
Benghazi, Cllinton’s appeal to conspiracism pales in comparison.
“Trumpism” is more than Donald Trump. It is rooted in factors that 
point to continuing decay in American politics. Even if and when Trump 
leaves the political scene, we can expect politicians to “trump-up” fears, 
and to trump up concerns into fear. The likelihood that Trumpian con-
spiracism would persist beyond the election was illustrated after a gun-
man killed 17 students at a Parkland, Florida high school. Almost 
immediately theories began to fly across social media that students who 
afterward began to speak and organize for gun control measures were 
actually actors. A Facebook post to this effect was re-posted 100,000 
times. A video on promoting this message was viewed 2 million times 
before it was removed (only to be re-uploaded). Some of the responsi-
bility was attributed to Russian operatives, but this hypothesis is a con-
spiracy theory whose warrant is yet to be proved. In any case, Russian 
interference is insufficient to explain how eagerly a segment of the pop-
ulation felt motivated to pay attention and in some case distributes fabri-
cated conspiracy theories.37
While survey data analysis shows that on the individual level the evi-
dence points to racism and sexism as the most important influences over 
the outcome of the election, I contend that these interacted with eco-
nomic factors and with the growing disconnect between a liberalized 
global economy and political world still organized and legitimized by the 
ideal of a nation-state. In the next chapter will delve into the disjuncture 

136   D. C. HELLINGER
between national identity and sovereign, on the one hand, and on the 
other a globalized economic order marked in much of the world by ine-
qualities and populist responses.
Notes
	
1.  “Full Transcript: Senator Jeff Flake Announces He Won’t Seek reelection,” 
The Atlantic, October 24, 2017, available at https://www.theatlantic.
com/politics/archive/2017/10/full-transcript-senator-jeff-flake-announc-
es-he-wont-seek-reelection/543846 (accessed February 15, 2017).
	
2.  Two examples are Mark J. Hetherington, Why Trust Matters: Declining 
Political Trust and the Demise of American Liberalism (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2006); Pew Research Center, “Beyond 
Distrust: How Americans View Their Government,” available at www.
people-press.org/2015/11/23/beyond-distrust-how-americans-view-
their-government (accessed December 27, 2017).
	
3.  Richard Hofstadter, The Paranoid Style in American Politics (New York: 
Vintage Reprints, 1968).
	
4.  Conor Lynch, “Paranoid Politics: Donald Trump’s Style Perfectly 
Embodies the Theories of Renowned Historian,” Salon.com, July 7, 
2016, available at https://www.salon.com/2016/07/07/paranoid_
politics_donald_trumps_style_perfectly_embodies_the_theories_of_
renowned_historian/.
	
5.  Nate Cohn, “Why the Election Is Close, and What Trump and Obama 
Have in Common,” New York Times, November 6, 2016; James W. 
Ceaser, Andrew Busch, and John Pitney, Jr., Defying the Odds: The 2016 
Elections and American Politics (Lanham, MA: Roman & Littlefield, 
2017): 124–125.
	
6.  For this argument, see James W. Ceaser, et al., Defying the Odds; Matthew 
Fowler, Vladimir E. Medenica, and Cathy J. Cohen, “Why 41 Percent 
of White Millennials Voted for Trump,” The Monkey Cage, Washington 
Post, December 15, 2017; and Brian Schaffner, Matthew McWilliams, 
and Tatishe Nteta, “Explaining White Polarization in the 2016 Vote for 
President: The Sobering Role of Racism and Sexism,” Paper Prepared for 
Presentation at the Conference on the U.S. Elections of 2016: Domestic 
and International Aspects, January 8–9, 2017, IDC Herzliya Campus, 
available 
at 
http://people.umass.edu/schaffne/schaffner_et_al_IDC_
conference.pdf (accessed February 21, 2018).
	
7.  For this argument, see Matthew Fowler, Vladimir E. Medenica, and 
Cathy J. Cohen, “Why 41 Percent of White Millennials Voted for 
Trump,” The Monkey Cage, Washington Post, Decembert 15, 2017; 
Brian Schaffner, Martthew McWilliams, and Tatishe Nteta, “Explaining 

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   137
White Polarization in the 2016 Vote for President: The Sobering Role of 
Racism and Sexism,” Paper Prepared for Presentation at the Conference 
on The U.S. Elections of 2016: Domestic and International Aspects, 
January 8–9, 2017, IDC Herzliya Campus, available at http://people.
umass.edu/schaffne/schaffner_et_al_IDC_conference.pdf 
(accessed 
February 21, 2018).
	
8.  Based on YouGov study summarized in David Leonhardt, “The Democrats’ 
Real Turnout Problem,” New York Times, November 16, 2016.
	
9.  The American National Elections Study done bi-annually by the Stanford 
University and the University of Michigan, and the newer Voter Study 
Group survey, sponsored by the Democratic Fund.
	
10.  Rob Brotherton, Christopher French, and Allan Pickering, A. D. (2013), 
“Measuring Belief in Conspiracy Theories: The Generic Conspiracist 
Beliefs Scale. Frontiers in Personality Science and Individual Differences,” 
Frontiers in Psychology 4, available at https://www.frontiersin.org, 279.
	
11.  E.g., CNN, July 25, 2015, interview posted at www.youtube.com/
watch?v=gGrVF3WLm1E (accessed June 27, 2017).
	
12.  Podcast 
of 
July 
23, 
2016, 
available 
at 
www.youtube.com/
watch?v=fJS5M6irj5g (accessed June 27, 2017).
	
13.  Clinton, to her credit, chose not to redbait Sanders in the primary 
campaign.
	
14.  For example, see Susan Bordo, “The Destruction of Hillary Clinton: Sexism, 
Sanders, and the Millennial Feminists,” The Guardian, April 2, 2017.
	
15.  http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=19253 (accessed June 20, 
2018).
	
16.  Andy Cush, “How the Donald Trump Campaign Turned America’s 
Greatest Conspiracy Theorist into a Household Name,” Spin.com, 
October 26, 2016, available at http://www.spin.com/featured/the-
invisible-empire-of-alex-jones, (accessed February 23, 2017). See also 
Jones’ media kit for prospective advertisers at https://static.InfoWars.
com/partners/MediaKit2016.pdf (accessed February 24, 2018).
	
17.  Matthew Rosenberg, Charlie Savage, and Michael Wines, “Russia Sees 
Midterm Elections as Chance to Sow Fresh Discord, Intelligence Chiefs 
Warn,” New York Times, February 13, 2018.
	
18.  U.S. Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with 
Respect to Intelligence Activities, Staff Report, Covert Action in Chile 
(1963–1973) (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1975).
	
19.  See Eric Alterman, “No News is Bad News,” The Nation, May 14, 2018.
	
20.  Quoted in Mike Wendling, “The (Almost) Complete History of ‘Fake 
News’,” BBC.com, January 22, 2018.
	
21.  Anousha Sakqui, “Fox’s Profit Machine Seen Sturdy Enough to Endure 
O’Reilly Exit,” Bloomberg.com, April 20, 2017.

138   D. C. HELLINGER
	
22.  Brendan Nyhan, “Fake News is Troubling, But Its Effect Is Limited,” 
New York Times, February 14, 2018.
	
23.  Andrew Guess, Brendan Nyhan, and Jason Reifler, “Selective Exposure to 
Misinformation: Evidence from the Consumption of Fake News During 
the 2016 U.S. Presidential Campaign,” January 9, 2018, available at 
http://www.dartmouth.edu/~nyhan/fake-news-2016.pdf 
(accessed 
February 14, 2018).
	
24.  Of course, this should not have surprised anyone paying attention 
to his history. See Clare Cohen’s rundown of transgressions dat-
ing back to 1980 in the London Telegraph, November 9, available at 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/politics/donald-trump-sexism- 
tracker-every-offensive-comment-in-one-place/.
	
25.  Brian Schaffner and John A. Clark, Making Sense of the 2016 Elections 
(Thousand Oaks, CA: CQ Press, 2018): 26.
	
26.  According to Brian Schaffner of the University of Massachusetts, as 
reported by Jeff Stein, “The Bernie Voters Who Defected to Trump, 
Explained by a Political Scientist,” Vox.com, August 24, 2017.
	
27.  Emily Jenkins, The Five Types of Trump Voters, Who They Are and What 
They Believe (Washington, DC: Democracy Fund, Voter Study Group, 
June 2016).
	
28.  This is based largely on the work of Joseph Uscinski and Joseph Parent, 
American Conspiracy Theories (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2014). Uscincki and Parent compiled a huge archive of litters to the edi-
tor since 1890 to analyze and reach this conclusion. This is discussed in 
Chapter 1.
	
29.  Pew Research Center, “Low Marks for the 2012 Election,” November 
15, 2012, available at http://www.people-press.org/2012/11/15/sec-
tion-3-the-voting-process-and-the-accuracy-of-the-vote and “Low Marks 
for Major Players in the 2016 Election,” November 21, 2016, http://
www.people-press.org/2016/11/21/the-voting-process/ (both accessed 
February 21, 2018).
	
30.  Uscinski and Parent, American Conspiracy Theories: 130–153. Also, 
Joanne M. Miller, Kyle L. Saunders, and Christina E. Farhart, 
“Conspiracy Endorsement as Motivated Reasoning: The Moderating 
Roles of Political Knowledge and Trust,” American Journal of Political 
Science 60, no. 4 (October 2016): 824–844; and Joanne M. Miller, 
Kyle L. Saunders, and Christina E. Farhart, “The Relationship Between 
Perceptions or Lower Status and Conspiracy Theory Endorsement,” 
Paper Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Political Science 
Association, San Francisco, CA, August 31–September 3, 2017.

4  SUSPICIOUS MINDS, THE 2016 ELECTION AND ITS AFTERMATH   139
	
31.  Ray Chetty, et al., The Fading American Dream: Trends in Absolute 
Income Mobility Since 1940 (2016, The Equality of Opportunity Project, 
available at http://www.equality-of-opportunity.org).
	
32.  Pew Research Center, “A Divided and Very Pessimistic Electorate,”  
November 10, 2016, available at http://www.people-press.org/2016/ 
11/10/a-divided-and-pessimistic-electorate (accessed February 22, 2018).
	
33.  See among many examples, J. G. Shields, “Political Representation 
in France: A Crisis of Democracy?” Parliamentary Affairs, 59, no. 1 
(January 2006): 118–137; George Gabriel, “A Crisis of Representation,” 
OpenDemocracy.net, May 25, 2009, available at https://cdn.opendemoc-
racy.net/files/u555700/od-uk-x2_8.png (accessed February 23, 2018).
	
34.  Distressed communities data available free for academic use by request 
from EIG, Economic Innovations Group (eig.org, accessed March 1, 
2018). Electoral data purchased from David Leip, Atlas of American 
Presidential Elections, available at uselectionatlas.org (accessed March 1, 
2018).
	
35.  EIG (Economic Innovation Group), The 2017 Distressed Communities 
Index, available at http://eig.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/ISD-
Report.pdf (accessed March 1, 2018).
	
36.  Mabel Berezin, Illiberal Politics in Neoliberal Times: Culture, Security and 
Populism in the New Europe (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press, 2009): 8, 62, 193–200.
	
37.  Matt Pearce, “Conspiracy Theories About Florida School Shooting 
Survivors Have Gone Mainstream,” Los Angeles Times, February 21, 
2018; Paul Murphy and Gianluca Mezzofiore, “How the Florida School 
Shooting Conspiracies Sprouted and Spread,” CNN, February 22, 2018.

141
In 2016 globalizing elites gathered for their annual meeting at the 
Swiss resort at Davos had to take note that resistance to their vision of 
a transnational order was growing in the form of populist movements. 
By their 2017 meeting, they felt a little better when President Trump 
visited Davos for the first time and basked in their welcome. Perhaps the 
March Brexit vote was not as threatening as they feared. Their concerns 
about global inequality generating resistance faded. But they had not 
counted on mercurial personality occupying the White House. A full-
scale trade war was looming, and the European Union and NAFTA 
were in danger of collapse. In anticipation of Davos 2018, they felt com-
pelled to take a full page ad in the New York Times (July 1) promoting 
the upcoming meeting as a gathering of the wisest business and political 
leaders to grapple with global inequality. No longer could they assume 
that the world would keep spinning their way. Perhaps this explains 
why the super-rich were busy buying up old missile silos for conversion 
into luxury bunkers to be used in the event of nuclear war of natural 
mega-disasters!1
For more than seven decades since the end of World War II in 1945, 
the United States has been the most powerful nation in the world and 
used that power—economic, cultural, and political—to promote a liberal 
internationalist world order. Washington promoted international insti-
tutions to promote global financial stability (the International Monetary 
Fund), capitalist development projects in the Global South (the World 
Bank and foreign aid programs), free trade (the General Agreement on 
CHAPTER 5
Globalization, Populism, Conspiracism
© The Author(s) 2019 
D. C. Hellinger, Conspiracies and Conspiracy Theories in the Age  
of Trump, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98158-1_5

142   D. C. HELLINGER
Tariffs and Trade, GATT, superseded by the World Trade Organization, 
the WTO). By the 1990s, with the fall of the Soviet Union and Eastern 
Bloc countries and with China’s embrace of capitalist enterprise, the con-
tinued development of global order with a liberal business climate con-
ducive to transnational corporations seemed unstoppable. But signs of 
popular resistance had already appeared in the Clinton years, especially 
the 1999 protests that virtually shut down the Seattle WTO Ministerial 
Conference. A surge of populist electoral strength on both the left and 
the right in recent years has disrupted the sense of inevitability around 
globalization.
Matthew Gray outlines three factors linking globalization to conspira-
cism.2 They are:
1.  Globalization his diminished state sovereignty and in the eyes of 
citizens diminished the power of state itself. A “deficit of popu-
lar legitimacy” simultaneous with a sense of threat (economic and 
political) from abroad encourages a retreat in some large sectors of 
society to “substate units of allegiance”—racial, political, linguistic, 
ethnic, etc.
2.  Linked to the first factor is the increased symbolic power of trans-
national (my adjective, not Gray’s) corporations whose brands 
compete for allegiance. Certainly, this is more of perceived threat in 
places like the Middle East, but it is not absent even in the United 
States, as periodic consumer rebellions against foreign prod-
ucts shows, as well as the increased advertising by foreign coun-
tries, designed to show just how committed they are to American 
communities.
3.  Technological changes in transportation and communication that 
has the effect of “disjointing” many people from their transitional 
moorings. Technological changes have impacted labor and influ-
enced migration flows that have in turn increased tensions subject 
to exploitation by demagogues. In the Middle East, Gray notes, 
this has had the effect of creating more rootlessness and contrib-
uted to an Islamic revivalism constructed as a reaction against 
Westernization. One can find parallels in the increased political 
impact of fundamentalist Christianity in the United States.
Havoc for globalizing elites has arrived in the form of Donald Trump 
and a host of other right-populist leaders and parties throughout the 

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   143
developed West and post-Communist countries. But the populist surge 
was not just on the right. For a while, especially in Latin America, left 
populism seemed to be gathering strength, especially during the years 
(1999–2013) when Venezuela’s populist Hugo Chávez achieved success 
in rallying most of Latin America and some other parts of the post-co-
lonial world to resist neoliberal globalization. The near collapse of the 
Bolivarian Revolution after Chavez’s death in 2013 coincided with many 
other setbacks for left populism in the region, but July 2018 saw the 
specter reappear in Mexico, Latin America’s second-largest economy.
More ominous for the global business elite is the emergence of left 
populism in the form of Bernie Sanders in the United States and Jeremy 
Corbyn in Great Britain. In addition to Trumpism and Euroskepticism 
in the form of Brexit, socialism had reappeared on the political in neo-
liberalism’s backyard—the Anglo world. Pro-globalization intellectuals 
sometimes paint these left populists with the same brush as they apply to 
populists on the right. Evin McMullen of NBC News says, “Populism, 
whether from Donald Trump or Bernie Sanders, is destabilizing America,” 
and, he claims, they “appeal to bitter sentiments of fear and resentment to 
rouse and consolidate public support.” Early in 2016, Thomas Friedman 
asked in his influential daily column, “What if our 2016 election ends up 
being between a socialist and a borderline fascist—ideas that died in 2989 
and 1945, respectively.”3 Chapter 4 and other parts of this book dispute 
this assertion of equivalency between left and right populism.
Sanders and Trump both campaigned by appealing to the electorate’s 
resentment of the political class and more broadly with an anti-elitist 
appeal. Both campaigns challenged the notion that social and economic 
hardship is not something that has just passively happened, that it is not 
just an unfortunate byproduct of inexorable and ultimately beneficial 
changes in the global economic order. However, unlike Sanders, Trump 
accompanied his anti-elite message with nativist, racist, and sexist rheto-
ric, which were largely absent from the Sanders campaign. Trump’s pop-
ulism more closely Hofstadter’s notion of the paranoid style.4 Neither 
Sanders nor Trump gave a full-throated endorsement to New World 
Order conspiracy theories that resemble the unwarranted grand the-
ories about Freemasons and the Illuminati (see Chapter 2), but unlike 
Sanders, Trump pandered to the most notorious purveyor of similar the-
ories, Alex Jones of InfoWars.com.
One well-spring of conspiracism in the Western world is the celebratory 
speech that President George Herbert Walker Bush gave in 1991 when, in 

144   D. C. HELLINGER
the flush of victory after the First Gulf War, he christened the post-Cold 
War world system as “the new global order.”5 The phrase quickly assumed 
prominence in resistance to “free trade” and in related conspiracy theo-
ries, especially on the right, where it was quickly graphed onto earlier and 
recurring theories attributing great power to the Order of the Illuminati, 
Freemasonry, and (often with anti-Semitic intentions) cabals headed by 
the Rothschild Family. More recently the Rockefellers and the Council and 
Foreign Relations, the Trilateral Commission, the elites who intend the 
highly secretive meetings known as “Bilderberg,” and the quasi-closed meet-
ings at Davos are portrayed as the conspiratorial forces behind globalization.
While a good deal of the writing about elite meetings and cabals is fan-
ciful, if not paranoid, the “conspiracy theory” label is frequently applied as 
well to more serious sociological work on the way that elites network with 
one another on a global scale to advance and shape globalization in the 
Post-Cold War world. Just as often, on the other hand, globalization is seen 
has having been generated solely by technological leaps in communications 
and transportation, with little human agency involved. But these develop-
ments have not only restructured and disrupted national economic and 
social structures, they have also facilitated conscious planning and collabo-
ration among elites—and to some extent among social movements opposed 
to globalization in the form it has assumed since 1980. These movements 
are largely made up or represent those most displaced and excluded from 
its benefits, groups that have not settled for socio-economic, structural 
explanations that make capitalist globalization seem inevitable. They insist, 
“Another World is Possible.” But it has become clear that the discontent and 
disruption being wrought by a globalization has also stimulated a reaction 
that has generated the kind of xenophobic, right-wing populism associated 
with Trump and similar insurgent parties that bear some disturbing similari-
ties to the fascist movements and parties of the mid-twentieth century.
Suspicious Minds in the New World Order
“Globalization” need not mean neoliberal globalization. Generically, 
globalization should refer in general to the increased interdependency 
and interaction among the world’s peoples—economically, culturally, 
socially, and politically. However, most of time when both critics and 
defenders of globalization use the term, they are referring to neoliberal 
globalization, which has seen the deployment of the aforementioned 
technologies to facilitate the free movement of financial and other forms 

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   145
of capital across national boundaries, as well as the reorganization of 
production of goods and services in a way that has largely obeyed the 
logic of the global market. What makes it “neoliberal,” not just capital-
ist, is that there is relatively little globalized regulation of labor or finan-
cial markets or redistribution of accumulated wealth. The impact of this 
process has produced some winners, it should be acknowledged. On a 
global scale, a significant decrease in poverty and expansion of the mid-
dle class has occurred, especially in East and South Asia. But in the rest 
of the world, including the United States and other wealthy core coun-
tries in the world system, the free movement of capital and reorganiza-
tion of production has hollowed out the middle class and working class 
and deepened poverty for many already poor.
For convenience, when I refer to “globalization” in this chapter I am 
referring to what I have just described as neoliberal globalization. Neoliberal 
globalization has a political component in so far as it promotes “democrati-
zation,” emphasizing civil rights and free elections but it eschews social and 
economic rights as elaborated in, among other places, the United Nations 
Charter on Human Rights. The real foundation of neoliberal globalization is 
the elimination of barriers to free movements of financial investment, invest-
ment capital, and goods and service across national boundaries. While free 
movement of people—i.e., labor—might be the preference of some global 
elites, it is at best secondary to them. The attempts to advance neoliberal 
economic globalization are the subject of negotiations to extend and deepen 
treaties and agreements that are said to be about “free trade.” These agree-
ments are not, however, mainly about trade but about knocking down 
barriers further to the movement of capital freely across borders and the 
reorganization of the production of goods and services—what some critics 
call a “global assembly line,” what in the business world is known as “com-
modity chains.” Advancing this objective means dealing with intellectual 
property rights (patents, trademarks, copyrights), with reducing the exercise 
of national sovereignty in disputes about investment (especially in natural 
resources, such as mining and oil), and economic subsidies that are politi-
cally sensitive in national politics (e.g., in agriculture).
The increasingly globalized system of trade, finance, and production 
has as its counterpart in what William Robinson calls a “transnational cap-
italist class.”6 Most of the men and (many fewer) women who head the 
world’s largest corporations and financial institutions are sufficiently net-
worked with one another that they form a coherent class that responds to 
global market forces, not national ones. To even postulate the existence 

146   D. C. HELLINGER
of a transnational capitalist class may give rise to criticism that Robinson 
and other international political economists who adopt this approach term 
are “conspiracy theorists,” the latest in a line of critics who have seen glo-
balization is driven by the hidden hand of the Illuminati, a TransAtlantic 
ruling class (often associated with the secretive Bilderberg meetings), or 
the elites who gather annually at Davos. However, idea of transnational 
capitalism, whether it is apt or not, is really more of structuralist theory. 
That is, in the Marxist tradition, it sees capitalism as a constantly evolving 
economic system, operating something like what Joseph Schumpeter, an 
admirer of capitalism, called “creative destruction,” meaning a “process of 
industrial mutation that incessantly revolutionizes the economic structure 
from within, incessantly destroying the old one, incessantly creating a new 
one.”7 On the one hand, this is a result of the operation of market forces, 
not a conspiracy of greedy capitalists. On the other hand, structures have 
to be constructed and maintained by human forces, and in this regard 
agency enters into any historical account of how globalization has been 
evolving, and also what kind of globalization is under construction. This 
should become clearer as we examine how globalization has been pro-
moted, debated, and resisted in the United States and in other countries 
where populism has challenged the “common sense” idea that free trade 
and globalization is inevitable and beneficial to everyone.
Until the Trump campaign, resistance to globalization in the United 
States was mainly identified with leftist social movements, especially after 
widely visible protests in Seattle achieved the shutdown of an impor-
tant free trade conference. Most of the political leaders of the major 
political parties, including the Clintons, were enthusiastic supporters 
of free trade. Treaties and trade agreements encountered some resist-
ance in Congress, but a coalition of centrists in the two parties could 
always be cobbled together to achieve passage. NAFTA was negotiated 
by President George Bush and passed with the support of President Bill 
Clinton. The Seattle protests slowed the bandwagon; by 2016 major 
proposals, especially the attempt to revitalize stalled momentum toward 
a Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) were politically dead, even before 
Trump’s march to the White House. Even before the presidential pri-
maries were over, the idea that globalization was inevitable had fallen 
before the different but equally populist challenges posed by Trump and 
Senator Bernie Sanders.
Behind this development, which was part of a broader international 
resistance to the kind of globalization embodied in NAFTA, the TPP 

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   147
and other free trade agreements, was a clash between the way the world 
has been ordered politically, i.e., around the idea of national sovereignty, 
and the tectonic changes occurring in economic production fostered by 
globalization. Consistent with earlier chapters of that book, I hold con-
spiracy theories that attribute globalization entirely to the machinations 
of a tightly knit cabal to be unwarranted. However, the opposite of such 
world theories is the near consensus among mainstream journalists and 
academics that no one is responsible for globalization, that it has just 
happened, or that the accompanying technological changes mean that 
the dislocations and deterioration in the quality of life of the working 
and middle classes must be accepted as the price for progress.
Benjamin Barber in 1996 was among the first to analyze the contra-
dictions between global technological change, especially in communica-
tion and transportation, and the basic principles of political order built 
on the idea of national sovereignty. In his book, Jihad versus McWorld,8 
Barber argued that globalization was spurring a backlash in the form of 
a turn toward communalism—parochial and fundamentalist, drawing the 
world apart. Paradoxically the surge in communications technologies, 
most notably the Internet, responsible for accelerated cultural homog-
enization (McWorld) were also providing the capability for communal 
resistance. As Barber put it, one force is “driven by parochial hatreds, 
the other by universalizing markets, the one re-creating ancient subna-
tional and ethnic borders from within, the other making national borders 
porous from without. They have one thing in common: neither offers 
much hope to citizens looking for practical ways to govern themselves 
democratically.”9
Barber took inadequate notice of how social movements in different 
countries were using technology to a global network with one another, 
though in his defense this was not as evident when he wrote his book. His 
analysis nonetheless was onto a paradox that persists to this day. “Common 
markets demand a common language, as well as a common currency,” he 
wrote, “and they produce common behaviors of the kind bred by cosmo-
politan city life everywhere.” However, unchecked free market globaliza-
tion has put this assumption into question. On the global scale and the 
national scale, the New World Order has generated significant improve-
ment in social conditions, concentrated mostly in Asia and South Asia, but 
elsewhere it has left hundreds of millions of people excluded from the ben-
efits of growth, or in many cases in worse condition. This exclusion is one 
of the factors that enabled Trump to marshal vital votes in rural and former 

148   D. C. HELLINGER
industrial and mining centers in the northern midsection of the United 
States. This is where Trump, aided by the parochial, thinly veiled racist 
propaganda of extreme rightist media, cultivated voters who once were 
a reliable bastion for Democratic candidates. It is where resentment and 
exclusion have reinforced nativist elements of populism in America, much 
as Hofstadter described in the “paranoid style.”10
I have argued elsewhere11 that conspiracies and conspiracy theories are 
nurtured in the United States by tension between the exercise of global 
hegemony and liberal democratic legitimation. The advance of transna-
tional capital has added a new dimension to this tension because it increas-
ingly demands that the United States act in the interest of the global 
capitalism, not in defense or advancement of the national economic inter-
ests. This tension becomes visible in populist theories of conspiracy, but 
somewhat differently on the left and the right. For social movements and 
leftist politicians like Sanders, the rhetoric of resistance tends to revolve 
around the need to defend universal human rights, the need for inter-
national and diplomatic solutions to issues of climate change, redistribu-
tion of wealth and income. Contrary to critics who lump the populism 
of Sanders and Trump together, that of Sanders and “anti-globalization” 
movements does not seek to do away with internationalist ideals in foreign 
policy, nor even abandonment of American hegemonic power. Trump, by 
contrast, appeals to a more raw and dangerous rhetoric. “America First” 
and “Make America Great Again” directly confronts the idea of the United 
States as the indispensable nation in world affairs, melding with domestic 
policies on immigration and trade that smack of nativism and isolationism.
Whether the populist resistance to globalization means that conspir-
acism has spiked is harder to assess. The creative study by Uscinski and 
Joseph of conspiracist rhetoric in letters to the editor of the New York 
Times and The Chicago Tribune suggests that from 1890 to 2010 sug-
gests levels of conspiracy talk were relatively similar throughout that 20 
year period with only two exceptions: the 1890s and the early post World 
War II era. Otherwise, they find, “conspiracy talk” has been relatively 
constant and non-pervasive.12 There was no significant spike even in 
the era of the X-Files television series and in aftermath of Oliver Stone’s 
1991 film, JFK, whose success is often seen as indicative of rising con-
spiracism in American culture. What is of interest to us is that the two 
spikes in conspiracism bear some similarity to the present.
The two exceptional periods were, like the present era, ones in 
which great social and economic shifts seemed to have culminated. The 

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   149
1890s were such a period, the point at which the United States had 
begun to emerge as an expansionist power on the world stage, and a 
period when national politics were being impacted by shift from a rural, 
agrarian economy to an urban industrial one. And it was a period of 
great domestic migration and shifts in the origins of immigrants. The 
trigger for the spike in this populist era seems to have been a severe 
economic panic. The parallels with the shifts in demographics, technol-
ogy, and the changes in the US role in world affairs today are striking. 
The post-World War II era may not share with the present moment 
the 1890 a context of economic crisis, but like the present post 9/11 
moment, it was a time of heightened fear of an international conspir-
acy. It was also a time when internationalist elites here and abroad 
depended upon American hegemony to advance construction of a 
liberal world order.
Historian Kathryn Olmsted argues that in the twentieth-century 
American conspiracy theories shifted away from fears that alien forces 
were attempting to capture the American government (characteristic 
of conspiracy theories in the 1800s), toward the perception that “fed-
eral government itself was the conspirator.”13 Based on her case studies, 
beginning with claims that arms merchants and bankers colluded with 
government to get the United States into World War I to suspicions 
about the 9/11 attacks, Olmsted finds that inquiries generated by con-
spiracy theories rarely confirmed the particular allegations raised, but 
they did uncover other forms of deception, abuse of powers, and unlaw-
ful actions by government officials.
Olmsted characterizes conspiracy theories as irrational and counter-
productive, in contrast to the more sympathetic views of theorists like 
Mark Fenster and Jack Bratich,14 which we have examined in earlier 
chapters. Still, she contends there is a need to understand why conspir-
acy theories have become “endemic to American democracy.” Her view 
is that since World War I government officials have tilled fertile ground 
for conspiracy theories and provided “fodder” by plotting and conceal-
ing “real conspiracies;” they feed “anti-government paranoia by actively 
suppressing alternative views.”15 Olmsted acknowledges the existence of 
conspiracy in a valuable historical analysis that shows how ordinary peo-
ple have sometimes forced elites to respond to their concerns by advanc-
ing a conspiracy theory, but in the end (literally, in the last chapter) she 
warns only of danger, endorsing conspiracy theory in conformity with 
the paranoid style thesis.

150   D. C. HELLINGER
In the twenty-first century, this suspicion of government is entering 
a new phase in relation to the role of the United States in the world. 
The first four presidential administrations in the post-Cold War era (two 
Bushes, Clinton, and Obama) embraced globalization, broadening and 
deepening the internationalist thrust of American policy in the aftermath 
of World War II. These administrations put American hegemony into ser-
vice to build a neoliberal world order in the form of unrestrained flows 
of capital and trade coupled with promotion of liberal democracy—“pol-
yarchy,” as it is christened by political scientists and government officials 
most closely associated with the democratization project. Not coinciden-
tally, the term “globalization,” though not unheard of before, became a 
“buzzword” very shortly after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, two 
years before President George Bush (Sr.) coined “new world order.”
Technological changes, mainly in cyber sciences applied to communi-
cation and transportation, have not only promoted globalization but also 
contributed to a widening income gap that has stuck hardest at young 
people, minorities, and the manufacturing working class. These inequali-
ties have created a class cleavage that is less defined by global south versus 
global north (though certainly that continues to exist) than by an extraor-
dinary gap between the lifestyles and consumption of the world’s wealth-
iest elites, the so-called “one percent”, and everyone else in both the core 
nation-states and those in the poorer periphery.16 So large is the share of 
income and wealth of this global elite that a new service, Wealth X, with an 
online daily round-up of news about the wealthy, has come into existence 
to analyze shifts in its philanthropic, political, and consumption. The service 
provides free public access to an annual census of the world’s billionaires.17
At elite levels, Trumpism is based upon an uneasy alliance between sec-
tors of the American economic ruling class that embraces globalization 
and right-wing populists whose ideology is chauvinistic and nationalis-
tic. There are reasons to think that ultimately the Trump administration 
will be forced to retreat from its populist anti-globalization policies,18 but 
Trump’s decisions (as of June 2018) show little sign of that he was dis-
posed to renew negotiation of the TPP, his threat to do the same with 
NAFTA (he shifted to a posture of renegotiate “or else” later in the 
summer). Other Trump policies alarmed to globalizing elites were his 
encouragement of Euroskeptic, right-wing populism, and his imposition 
of protectionist tariffs without concern for a possible trade war. It may 
ultimately take an election defeat or impeachment for globalists to pre-
vail, but even in the event of Trump’s disposition from the presidency, 
the social forces that enabled his ascent will not simply go away.

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   151
The tensions between globalists and populists are likely to persist 
because the mass base is cultivated by Trump through an appeal to nativism 
and conspiracism, consitute the contents of a Pandora’s Box. Here is where 
left critics must take the “fusion” (see Chapter 2) critique of conspiracism 
seriously. The anti-globalist right shares with left populists who backed 
Bernie Sanders in 2016 a deep suspicion of elites, but among Trump vot-
ers this distrust melds with nativism, thinly disguised racism, and cultural 
chauvinism. Though there may be times when left and right voting blocs 
find themselves “strange-bedfellows” in congressional votes on trade agree-
ments, alliances for electoral or other political objectives risk legitimating 
the latter and conspiracy theories associated with neo-fascist tendencies.
Trump has, of course, eschewed language that blames capitalism as a 
system from the very real suffering and sense of exclusion felt by those 
Americans who want to know why they should settle for economic inse-
curity and who palpably feel loss of control over their personal live. He 
exploits anger about the country’s loss of blood and treasure overseas 
but simultaneously promotes hyper-nationalism and worship of military 
prowness. With the closing of the “American Century,” in the United 
States the exercise of global hegemony is increasing at odds with dem-
ocratic legitimation. This tension becomes visible in populist theories of 
conspiracy, both on the left and the right. We do not live in an age in 
which conspiracy theories are more profligate, but we do live in an age in 
which they offer a more profound challenge to constituted states in the 
core capitalist states of the world system than in earlier periods.
Economic globalization and technological change explain in part 
“why now” conpiracy theories are proliferating, but only partly. 
Trumpism and a more general surge in conspiracism have emerged in 
a symbiotic relationship to the decay of American political institutions, 
barely disguised corruption, and increasingly visible intrigue among 
politicians and wealthy patrons. Conspiracy theories are fed not just by 
delusions and panics that are nurtured by the economic and social dislo-
cations accompanying technological change and globalization, but also 
by a widespread sense that impunity and collusion among elites are the 
hallmarks of contemporary political life in America.
Immigrants, Nativism, and Trump
Immigration was a major theme of Trump’s campaign from the moment 
he announced his candidacy on August 1, 2015. “When Mexico sends its 
people, they’re not sending their best,” Trump said. “They’re sending 

152   D. C. HELLINGER
people that have lots of problems, and they’re bringing those problems 
with us. They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists. 
And some, I assume, are good people.”19 Trump toned down the rheto-
ric, but only a little in his Phoenix speech. “Countless innocent American 
lives have been stolen because our politicians have failed in their duty to 
secure our borders and enforce our laws like they have to be enforced. I 
have met with many of the great parents who lost their children to sanc-
tuary cities and open borders. So many people, so many, many people. 
So sad.”
After describing several grisly crimes allegedly committed by immi-
grants and blaming them for costing the jobs of “vulnerable American 
workers,” he accused liberals of a cover-up. “These facts are never 
reported. Instead, the media and my opponent discuss one thing and 
only one thing, the needs of people living here illegally. In many cases, 
by the way, they’re treated better than our vets.” It was time to throw 
out the red meat. Quoting from the transcript,
Trump: We will build a great wall along the southern border.
(APPLAUSE)
Audience: Build the wall! Build the wall! Build the wall!
Trump: And Mexico will pay for the wall.
(APPLAUSE)
Trump: One hundred percent. They don’t know it yet, but they’re going 
to pay for it. And they’re great people and great leaders but they’re 
going to pay for the wall.
Trump: On day one, we will begin working on an impenetrable, physical, 
tall, power [sic], beautiful southern border wall.
Atossa Araxia Abrahamian aptly captures the essence of Trump’s 
nativist rhetoric in her observation that it projects onto the imagination 
of the crowd the threatening image of a brownish “Glob.”
The Glob, the story goes, is illegally crossing your open border, then send-
ing the factory where you work to Mexico, because of NAFTA. He’s fixing 
your neighbor’s roof—illegally, and without paying his taxes, of course—
and foreclosing on her home, even though he can’t speak English. The 
Glob is raping your wife, indoctrinating your kids with ISIL propaganda, 
and donating to Hilary Clinton. The Glob works on Wall Street, but he’s 
definitely, like a communist, or something. Also: Benghazi.

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   153
The Glob, says Abrahamiam, is “an ingenious chimera of conspiracy.”20
Steve Bannon was one of the darkest, most powerful conjurers of this 
chimera. Bannon was, with Andrew Breitbart, a founding board mem-
ber of Breitbart News, the most influential member of what is loosely 
characterized as the “alt-right” media—though not everyone agrees 
whether Breitbart and Bannon belong in this movement (see Chapter 3). 
Bannon became Breitbart’s CEO after Andrew’s sudden death in 2012. 
In August 2016 he became Trump’s campaign manager, at a time when 
Trump’s past dalliances with the Democratic Party and liberal New York 
elites were raising doubts about his conservatism. Bannon’s assumption 
of a formal role in the campaign did much to qualm right-wing doubts 
about Trump’s bonafides. Breitbart News’ enthusiasm and support of 
the real estate mogul’s political ambitions go back at least to November 
2015, but a symbiotic relationship that already existed between Trump’s 
discourse, on the one hand, and on the other hand the kinds of stories 
that fed Breitbart’s audience growth.
Breitbart’s earliest breakthrough into public consciousness occurred 
in 2009 with a kind of conspiracy, a sting operation. A Breitbart mem-
ber channel, BigGoverment.com, produced and webcast a video a 
“sting” against Association of Community Organizers for Reform Now 
(ACORN), the community activist group. The video, made by James 
O’Keefe and Hannah Giles, alleged that the organization was engaged 
in the sex trade of underage girls, with apparently damning audio of 
ACORN organizers expressing interest in participating in trafficking. 
However, the video had been edited to make it seem that way. The 
motive for the sting was that ACORN organizers were deeply involved in 
minority voter registration efforts. Subsequent mainstream news reports 
debunked the Breitbart report, but not before Congress suspended fed-
eral funding for the organization. One detail about O’Keefe, reported 
but not widely noted at the time, was the O’Keefe’s Project Veritas 
was funded, among other sources, by a grant in 2015 from the Trump 
Foundation.21 Project Veritas had already carried out a similar fake 
news operation in 2006 and 2007 in which operatives baited Planned 
Parenthood personnel into statements (recorded secretly) that made it 
seem that the organization had ignored a statutory rape case and were 
interested in possible donation to fund abortions of African-American 
babies. While one can criticize the Planned Parenthood personnel for not 
categorically rejecting the overtures, but considerable editing had to be 
done to make the story as salacious as O’Keefe presented it.22

154   D. C. HELLINGER
Having achieved a political success, Breitbart had little reason to 
improve the accuracy of its reporting and jumped on the birther theory 
that Trump had already made notorious with his celebrity power. In 
2012, when Trump went on CNN with Wolf Blitzer to demand that 
Obama release his long form birth certificate, it was mostly Breitbart 
reports that provided his ammunition for casting doubt the America’s 
first African-American president was a native born citizen. Pundits 
thought Trump had made a fool of himself; obviously, Trump had 
intuited something they did not—that Obama’s name and race offered 
opportunities to make run for office based on nativism and racism.23
Although nativist appeals pandering to social conservatives have been 
the most notorious of Breitbart’s videos, it is not clear that stoking nativ-
ist, anti-immigrant sentiments are for Bannon his goal or merely the 
means to achieve polices more closely aligned with the billionaire liber-
tarianism of the Charles and David Koch (see Chapter 6). Timothy Egan 
compares Bannon to Thomas Cromwell, the notorious court advisor to 
King Henry VIII, and apparently the brains behind the lecherous mon-
arch’s transformative and brutal reign. Egan compares Bannon’s goal of 
dismantling the administrative state to Cromwell’s strategy of first con-
centrated power by using Henry’s desire for a divorce to remove the 
checks of the clergy on his power and then engineered the sweeping 
away of Church wealth and power. Bannon, argues Egan, seeks to over-
turn nothing less than “the existing international order of treaties, trade 
pacts and alliances that has kept the world relatively safe since World War 
II. Trump’s cabinet is stocked with people whose goal is to neuter the 
agencies they head.”24 On the other hand, Bannon’s populism is not 
entirely compatible with libertarianism. He has called for raising taxes on 
the wealthy and backed massive infrastructure spending, neither of which 
corresponds to the Koch agenda.
Bannon’s star continued rising in the transition period and early months 
of the new administration as he assumed the role of Chief White House 
Strategist. By April 2017, there were signs that his influence was waning 
within the White House, as he clashed with other staff members from 
the mainstream wing of the Republican Party. In August he resigned 
and returned to Breitbart, taking a leading role in extending the outlet’s 
influence in Europe, and personally campaigning for far-right candidates 
in Republican primaries and in the general election, including Judge Roy 
Moore, whose notorious admission that he approached and dated teen-
agers was only the most damaging of several scandals surrounding his 

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   155
candidacy. Bannon’s intemperate (though very possibly accurate) character-
ization of Trump’s ignorance and vulnerability to Special Counsel Robert 
Mueller’s investigation into his campaign’s possible collusion with Russian 
operatives finally earned him Trump’s explicit ex-communication from the 
president’s inner circle. On January 9, 2018, he parted ways with Breitbart, 
some of whose most important financial backers are aligned with Trump.
Bannon and other alt-right media stars (notably Alex Jones and the 
notorious Infowars.com) together contributed mightily to creating an 
outlandish celebrity presidency by aiding Trump in bringing to the sur-
face polarized, angry politics that the nation has not seen since the Great 
Depression, perhaps not since the Civil War era. Breitbart, Infowars, Fox 
News, and other outlets disrupted the regime of truth maintained by 
establishment media outlets, and whether as a means to an end or an 
end they have played a key role in constructing a media silo whose walls 
are difficult to break down. “When Trump makes wildly over-the-top 
claims — he’s going to build a wall and make Mexico pay for it — it has 
no effect on his supporters to point out that this is hyperbolic nonsense. 
Quite the reverse,” said the Washington Post’s Phillip Bump. “Trump’s 
claim moves them emotionally and persuades them precisely because it is 
hyperbolic nonsense. They are angry, and he’s showing that he is angry 
too — which is vastly more effective communications than the bland 
assertions by the professional politicians that they ‘understand’ there is a 
lot of anger out there.”25
Populism need not be demagogic, need not be built on prejudice and 
fear. In fact, though we identify populism with a charismatic leader, nei-
ther Trump nor Sanders fits that mold. I would suggest that the appeal 
of Bernie Sanders was that of a charisma-challenged outsider whose 
mobilization of voters relied upon criticizing globalization and the cor-
ruption of elites. Quite unlike Sanders, Trump articulated a vision of 
political and media elites in collusion—one could say, “conspiring”—
with one another to expand economic globalization at the expense of 
ordinary people. Despite these differences what both did by challeng-
ing the inevitability of globalization was to provide their followers with 
“agency.” They represented the instability and hopelessness of their 
social and economic conditions as more than the product of imper-
sonal economic forces and technological change. They identified elites 
as agents of globalization, making decisions and planning the future of 
the world economy behind closed doors, with little regard for young 
people with limited career prospects and for working class and poor 

156   D. C. HELLINGER
people living in communities left distressed by the force of untamed 
market forces. Trump and Sanders might be populists in the sense that 
both were outsiders challenging the consensus and disrupting the “nor-
mal” way of things, but they represent different types of populist anti-­
globalizaton. Trump’s celebrity allowed him to tap into discontent from 
the top; Sanders had to build from the bottom up.
Trump has used anti-immigration rhetoric as a cudgel against elites 
and the media—the latter an “enemy of the people,” he would say in 
the second month of his presidency. On September 1, 2016, he gave a 
major speech on immigration in Phoenix, Arizona. On this occasion, he 
eschewed his widely condemned characterization of Mexicans as rapists 
and criminals. His audience already had absorbed that message. This 
time he chose to use immigration as the theme of a broad conspiracy. 
He told a receptive audience, “The truth is our immigration system is 
worse than anybody ever realized. But the facts aren’t known because 
the media won’t report on them. The politicians won’t talk about them 
and the special interests spend a lot of money trying to cover them up 
because they are making an absolute fortune. That’s the way it is.”26
A good estimate of the size of Trump’s nativist can be gauged from an 
American Enterprise Institute (AEI) poll taken on the eve of President 
Trump’s retreat from his harshly and widely criticized policy to sepa-
rate families detained after illegally entering the country. While the poll 
estimated that nearly half of registered voters agree with prosecuting 
illegal entrants from Mexico, 18% strongly approved of separating fam-
ilies; another 12% somewhat approved. This would seem to suggest that 
20–30% of the electorate (though not necessarily by extension the gen-
eral population) occupy the nativist political silo. Trump may disappear 
from the scene, but the silo walls around his constituency will not neces-
sarily fall with him.27
Wall Street and Monessen PA
On June 28, 2016, in the midst of his presidential campaign, Trump 
addressed an enthusiastic rally of supporters in the Monessen, 
Pennsylvania, a hard scrapple, economically devastated former steel town 
with a long history of voting strongly Democratic.28 The Republican 
candidate, having just returned from Great Britain where he spoke 
approving of that country leaving the European Union (Brexit), railed, 
“Globalization has made the financial elite who donate to politicians 

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   157
very, very wealthy … but it has left millions of our workers with nothing 
but poverty and heartache.” Whether its globalization or technological 
change has most impacted employment and wages in the United States 
is a matter of dispute. However, it is technological change that has made 
possible the shift to commodity chains, so the two forces would be diffi-
cult to disentangle.
Bernie Sanders too made anti-globalization a major theme of his 
unsuccessful but remarkably resilient campaign to wrest the Democratic 
nomination from Hillary Clinton. Sanders’ rhetoric too was aimed 
mainly at economic elites and at the influence of concentrated wealth 
over politicians, but unlike Trump his campaign message revolved 
around a need to bolster, not weaken public trust in public authority. 
In an op-ed piece for the New York Times (June 29, 2016), Sanders 
wrote, “Let’s be clear. The global economy is not working for the 
majority of people in our country and the world. This is an economic 
model developed by the economic elite to benefit the economic elite. 
We need real change. But we do not need change based on the dema-
gogy, bigotry and anti-immigrant sentiment that punctuated so much 
of the Leave campaign’s rhetoric — and is central to Donald J. Trump’s 
message.”
There is little doubt that Hillary Clinton’s past association with her 
husband’s support for the North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA, upon which the TPP was modeled) and her support as a 
Senator for other agreements undermined her standing among impor-
tant sections of the Democratic Party’s base of support. The message on 
the center-left was similar around the world. Liberals, whether the clas-
sic variety who believe unfettered market forces function to everyone’s 
benefit or those with social democratic leanings who accept the need 
for government moderation of market forces, agreed: resistance is futile. 
Adaptation is the answer.
Political scientist Manfred Steger contends that already by the 
1990s elites had begun to portray globalization as something beyond 
anyone’s control. “The public discourse…describing its projected 
path was saturated with adjectives like ‘irresistible’, ‘inevitable’, ‘inex-
orable’, and ‘irreversible’”, he wrote.29 Frederick W. Smith, founder 
and CEO of FedEx Corporation, a global delivery service strategically 
located at the center of the apparent trend, holds that “Globalization 
is inevitable and inexorable and it is accelerating…It does not matter 
whether you like it or not, it’s happening, it’s going to happen.”30 

158   D. C. HELLINGER
Like many other transnational executives and corporate directors, 
Smith’s personal story gives him good reason to think that globali-
zation is on automatic pilot. According to the FedEx website, Smith 
perceived as a college student in 1965 that the time was coming for 
a service “designed to accommodate time-sensitive shipments such 
as medicine, computer parts, and electronics.” That is, he recog-
nized the coming of the global assembly line. Smith started FedEx 
with 14 planes in 1973, and after deregulation of the air cargo indus-
try (for which he strongly lobbied), the company’s annual revenues 
had reached $1 billion in 1983. It began to buy-out other companies 
around the world and its network incorporated 220 nations into its 
cargo services.
Thomas Friedman, at the time the chief foreign affairs columnist for 
the New York Times, set the tone in many of his writings, including in his 
best-selling The Lexus and the Olive Tree, where he wrote, ““That’s why 
I define globalization this way: it is the inevitable integration of markets, 
nation-states and technologies to a degree never witnessed before – in a 
way that is enabling individuals, corporations and nation-states to reach 
around the world farther, faster, deeper and cheaper than ever before and 
in a way that is enabling the world to reach into individuals, corporations 
and nation-states farther, faster, and deeper, cheaper than ever before.” 
Friedman did raise concerns about a backlash, but then too he also called 
it a “brakeless train wreaking havoc.”31
By 2016, as Steger had anticipated in his 2005 article, across the 
world a populist wave of reaction to various forms of globalization 
had begun to shake the confidence of globalists that the world was 
spinning their way. Threats to the survival of the European Union, 
stalled efforts to pass the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) in the 
United States, the emergence of left social movements challenging 
the “race to the bottom”, and right-wing ethno-nationalist resistance 
to mass global migrations, were signs that the train had lost momen-
tum. The surge of leftist populism (which also, it must be said, 
seemed unstoppable in the 2000’s) in Latin America had put a halt 
to creation of a Free Trade Association of the Americas, like the TPP, 
modeled on NAFTA, in 2005. All of these development, we should 
note, pre-dated the near collapse of the global economy in late 2008 
and 2009, which emasculated the living standards of the middle and 
working class across the developed world, further eroding mass confi-
dence in political and economic elites.

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   159
Hillary Clinton found that the message she was delivering to wealthy 
audiences on Wall Street behind closed doors resonated poorly among 
voters she needed to hold onto the nomination of the Democratic Party 
and, later, to win the general election. It hardly helped her when Wikileaks 
released transcripts of some of her Wall Street speeches. In one especially 
revealing speech to a group of housing construction executives, Clinton 
explained how the political game is played. “If everybody’s watching, you 
know, all of the back room discussions and the deals, you know, then peo-
ple get a little nervous, to say the least,” said Clinton. “So, you need both 
a public and a private position.”32 Challenged by Sanders, she attempted to 
put behind her a history of support for trade agreements by finessing the 
issue of the pending TPP, saying she could not vote for it without revisions. 
How would we know if that was her “public” or her “private” position?
Nor did it help Clinton when President Obama, fully committed to 
the TPP, at a rally in Indiana played the “globalization is inevitable” card 
to answer a question posed by an employee of Carrier Corporation wor-
ried about his employer’s plans to move production and 1000 jobs to 
Mexico. Said Obama.
For those folks who have lost their job right now because a plant went 
down to Mexico, that isn’t going to make you feel better. And so what 
we have to do is to make sure that folks are trained for the jobs that are 
coming in now because some of those jobs of the past are just not going to 
come back, and when somebody says, like the person you just mentioned 
[Donald Trump] who I’m not going to advertise for, that he’s going to 
bring all these jobs back, well how exactly are you going to do that? What 
are you going to do?33
At a conference in Malaysia in April 2014, Obama complained that 
critics claiming that the negotiations for the TPP were ignoring pop-
ular concerns reflected a lack of knowledge of what is going on in the 
negotiations. He failed to mention that the negotiations were going 
on in secret, with corporate interests periodically informed of develop-
ments, but no information disseminated to the general public. Then he 
played the conspiracy panic card, responding to a reporter’s question, 
“My point is you shouldn’t be surprised if there are going to be objec-
tions, protests, rumors, conspiracy theories, political aggravation around 
a trade deal. You’ve been around long enough, Chuck — that’s true in 
Malaysia; it’s true in Tokyo; it’s true in Seoul; it’s true in the United 

160   D. C. HELLINGER
States of America — and it’s true in the Democratic Party”—in all prob-
ability an allusion to Sanders.34
By contrast, Trump’s message and rhetoric emphasized elite agency; 
he eschewed any claim that globalization was historically or economically 
inevitable. At his campaign rallies, Trump played the anti-globalization 
theme in a way that put a human face on the momentum behind glo-
balization. In June 2016 in Monessen, he said, “This is not some natural 
disaster. It is politician-made disaster. It is the consequence of a leader-
ship class that worships globalism over Americanism.” Later, he added, 
“The TPP creates a new international commission that makes decisions 
the American people can’t veto. These commissions are great for Hillary 
Clinton’s Wall Street funders who can spend vast amounts of money to 
influence the outcomes.” Trump promised the Monessen workers to 
“make American independent again” from “day one” by renegotiating 
multilateral trade treaties. He would rebuild its infrastructure with capital 
investments requiring steel and aluminum made in America. And “it will 
be American workers who are hired to do the job.”35
It is not clear that resentment toward imports displacing jobs or low-
ering wages directly translates to resentment by voters in all parts of the 
country. One study of voting trends on the country level found that 
exposure to competition from Chinese imports was significantly corre-
lated with higher wages and a larger share of the vote in both the 2000 
and 2016 presidential election.36 However, this study only examines 
import competition, not outward investment by employers in the coun-
ties. Nor does it consider the logic that imports may have risen because 
of robust consumption in certain high-income counties, pushing them 
further into the Republican column on election day. In other words, 
counties attractive to exporters may very well be the kinds of counties 
where affluent voters are located. Economically and social distressed 
counties are most likely unattractive destinations for foreign exporters.
Trump’s critics miss the point when they ask why workers, such as the 
unemployed or threatened workers in Pennsylvania and Indiana would 
trust a real estate tycoon who bragged openly about his wealth and abil-
ity to game the political system. And most seem to have stuck by him 
throughout his first 18 months in office, despite few signs that they and 
their families will soon regain prosperity. No one can say that all of these 
swing voters will stay, but what seems to be operating in generating loy-
alty in the case of white, working-class men and women in small towns 
and rural areas of the Midwest is the vulnerability of their communities 

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   161
and families to technological change and globalization, coupled with their 
loss of status as challenges to patriarchy and white privilege have become 
more visible culturally. Timothy Melley calls such a reaction “agency 
panic,” a sense that powerful external forces beyond their control are 
shaping their lives. This agency panic is being exacerbated by the sense 
the external agents are foreign—that America’s political class owes alle-
giance to these outside actors rather than to the nation of which they are 
a member. They may not be naïve enough to believe that Trump has no 
foreign ties—Russian or otherwise, but alleged Russian interference in 
the election does not pose the same kind of threat to their living condi-
tions and to their social status. And it may very well be helpful to Trump 
that Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, projects an image fitting the 
traditional masculine prototype. And as we have already seen, nativism 
was deeply ingrained in past episodes of populism in America, so it should 
be no surprise that it too could be summoned again in a world where the 
nation-state no longer seems to offer security to foreign threats.
If we take into account the inter-relationship of the socioeconomic 
context with the backlash among parts of what America to the demo-
graphic changes (loss of majority status for whites) and cultural change 
(gay rights, emergence of transgender peoples, Me Too, etc.), we can put 
the statistical findings suggesting that racism and gender prejudice were 
more significant factors than economic discontent in determining the out-
come of the 2016 election into better. After all, in the last decade, the 
United States has seen its first African-American president, the first woman 
to win the presidential nomination of a major party, and the first serious 
challenge by a self-identified “socialist” in a century. To put the question 
in too-raw a fashion, we might ask, Why did some racist and sexist white 
voters shift their vote from Obama to Trump between 2012 and 2016?
Figure 5.1 provides a graphic representation of the analysis linking vot-
ing patterns in distress communities, which we examined in Chapter 4. It 
shows how clearly, especially in the medium and smaller counties of the 
upper Midwest Iron Belt and the mining country, votes shifted toward 
the Republicans from 2012 to 2016. What this suggests is that the core 
Trumpistas, those who inhabit the extreme right media silo, come dispro-
portionately from those areas that have been most distressed by the eco-
nomic shifts that have been brought about by “inevitable” globalization. 
We know that minority working-class members did not vote for Trump—
though their turnout did drop. The big defections were among white mem-
bers of the working and middle class in especially distressed areas; it is here 
that Trump finds the most receptivity to his message of disruption and the 

162   D. C. HELLINGER
paranoid style has greatest appeal, even as conspiracy theories in America 
today are not restricted only to the president’s supporters.
I do not at all mean to underplay the importance of race-baiting and 
outright misogyny in Trump’s 2016 campaign. The sudden emergence 
of a “Black Lives Matter” movement against police violence, combined 
with deliberate ambushes of police officers together brought racial ten-
sions to an all-time high. Certainly, whites in more affluent suburbs have 
little real reason to fear economic displacement. Race and economic gain 
mean more to them. I recall after the 2012 election being taken aback 
by a conservative friend who I never heard utter a racist epithet sud-
denly blurt out after Barack Obama’s re-election, “I don’t feel like this 
is my country anymore.” Another friend (I try to get out of my bubble) 
explained he didn’t much like Trump, but he liked the outcome of the 
2016 election because “Now we’re in control.”
Survey research, though persuasive on the role of racism and sexism 
in shaping the outcome of the 2016 election, is susceptible to underesti-
mating the role of economic forces in understanding the result. Tapping 
into the seamy underside of Know-Nothingism and white supremacy has 
historically been linked to period of economic dislocation in America. 
So it was in 2016. Barely disguised, hardline invectives against immi-
grants typically accompanied Trump’s denunciations of the conditions 
afflicting poor, working-class, and middle-class families. Trump warned 
his Monessen audience that if Hillary Clinton were to be elected, “The 
borders will remain open.” In full campaign mode, he promised walls 
-40.0%
-20.0%
0.0%
20.0%
WV
IA
OH
WI
MI
MN
PA
IL
IN
Democratic Presidential Votes:
Counties Aggregated by Level of 
Economic Distress
(% Chg 2016 Vs. 2012)
Ds 1
Ds2
Ds 3
Ds 4
Ds 5
Fig. 5.1  Graphic representation of aggregate vote and distress (Sources 
Economic Innovation Group, The 2017 Distressed Communities Distressed 
Communities Index, available at eig.org [accessed July 1, 2018]; US Election 
Atlas, at uselectionatlas.org, compiled by Dave Leip)

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   163
to be built and paid-for by Mexico; political swamps to be drained; and 
immigrants to be deported en-masse. Prosperity and jobs would return 
to these hard-pressed areas. “You’re gonna’ love it.” He would lead a 
robust military buildup and make hard-driving deals with other coun-
tries—in sum, “To make America great again.”
A lot of ink could be wasted attempting to dissect whether nativist 
movements originate in the masses or in the elite, both historically and 
in the present. A better approach may be to recognize that popular dis-
content with elites offers opportunities to political entrepreneurs to 
mobilize support for challenges to the prevailing ruling elites. William 
Kornhauser, an American sociologist specializing in the relationship 
between discontented citizens and ambitious leaders, contended that 
these two elements symbiotically work to pose a threat to free socie-
ties.37 As with Hofstadter’s “paranoid style” this approach tends to be 
highly pessimistic about popuism, viewing popular discontent and ambi-
tion in leaders as toxic in all its forms, a perspective this book disputes. 
However, the idea of a “political entrepreneur” is useful for understand-
ing the resistible rise of Donald Trump. Discontent can be mobilized 
into populism that advances progressive, democratic change or nativist 
demagoguery. Historically, as was the case of William Jennings Bryan, 
the populist firebrand of American populism of the last century, populist 
movements have mixed both types of appeals.
Bryan’s most famous quotaton, taken from his “Cross of Gold” 
speech at the 1896 Democratic Convention, which led to his being nom-
inated for president the next day, was, “You shall not press down upon 
the borrow of labor this crown of thorns. You shall not crucify mankind 
upon a cross of gold.” “You” in this sentence clearly referred to Eastern 
bankers and industrialists. The appeal was progressive in its insistence 
on redressing the inequalities that had accumulated over several decades 
of industrialization, with Bryan calling for Social Security, a progres-
sive income tax, and other reforms that would eventually follow, espe-
cially in the New Deal era. Bryan was also a leading voice in opposition 
to America’s emerging overseas imperialism in Central America and the 
Caribbean, and as Secretary of State for Woodrow Wilson he advanced, 
with some initial success, global disarmament. However, 1890s populism 
was deeply tainted by anti-semitism (“Jewish moneyed-interests”) and 
racism (defense of Jim Crow). Though motivated in part by the attempts 
to apply Darwin’s theories to explain class inequality (social Darwinism), 
the legacy of Bryan (an Evangelical Christian) was indelibly tarnished by 

164   D. C. HELLINGER
his hostility to science and his prosecution against a teacher of Evolution 
in the Scopes “monkey trial” of 1925. More recent studies of populism 
and Bryan paint a more nuanced view of the movement and its most suc-
cessful political entrepreneur.38 This is in contrast to Hofstadter, who, 
seeking to disassociate Bryan from Roosevelt, highlighted the anti- 
Semitism and anti-modernization features of populism, in a book pub-
lished eight years before the first “paranoid style” essay.39
Transnational Capitalism and the Nation State
The most pernicious conspiracy theory that stimulated Hofstadter’s con-
cern about the paranoid style was spawned not by the masses but instead 
by the ambitious and unscrupulous politicians of the ilk of Senator 
Joseph McCarthy. Far from repudiating anti-communist hysteria, across 
the partisan spectrum those favoring the construction of a permanent 
National Security state found it useful. That usefulness ended after 
McCarthy, the zealous political entrepreneur, attacked a sector of the 
security apparatus itself, the Army. Until that overreach, McCarthyism 
served to contain and roll back leftist influence that had risen during the 
New Deal and global war against fascism. Though not nearly as violent 
and tyrannical as the Stalinist variety, McCarthyite conspiracism effec-
tively constituted a purge Leftist influence from key sectors of the state 
(e.g., the State Department), the labor movement, cultural production 
(e.g., blacklisted Hollywood artists), and other public redoubts of the 
activist left in the Roosevelt era.
Alexander Dunst points out that one can easily construct a list of para-
noid conspiracy theories emanating from American political leaders, which 
should force us to ask “…how state and mainstream social actors have 
been systematically exempted from such diagnoses in a U.S. context.”40 
Indeed, in the Cold War period alone Americans were treated not only to 
McCarthyism, but also to similar episodes of fear mongering. Especially 
illustrative was Ronald Reagan’s “evil empire” rhetoric, used to justify epi-
sodes of military interventionism and covert operations against foreign 
states with a Manichean rhetoric about a global communist conspiracy. 
The “Great Communicator” once attempted to rally support for interven-
tion in Nicaragua in 1981 by arguing that the Communists (allegedly, the 
Sandinistas) were only two days away from Brownsville, Texas.
The tension between the exercise of hegemony and democracy in 
the United States is not entirely new; it was visible in conflicts between 

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   165
“isolationists” and “anti-imperialists”, on the one side, and advocates 
of US expansionism and global leadership, on the other in the period 
around the Spanish-American War (1898). It manifested itself more 
fully in the post-World War era, when the consolidation of US hegem-
ony was accompanied by the McCarthyite purge and later abuses of 
power in response to the anti-war and civil rights movements. But the 
ability to link together populist challenges to nation and to capitalism 
is more difficult today. The end of the Cold War ushered-in the new 
technologies that both drove and were driven by the freer movements of 
capital across national boundaries. Capital is no longer “multinational,” 
that is firms owned and directed largely by business tycoons from 
one (and most only one) of the world’s wealthy nation states; capital 
is “transnational” because the owners and directors of global corpora-
tions are themselves intertwined. According to an Oxfam study based 
on research by Forbes Magazine and a prominent Swiss Bank, the “one 
percent” wealthiest people in the world may still be disproportionately 
from the first world, but in 2009 only 35 of the 80 wealthiest people 
were (U.S.) Americans; 20 were from other “Trilateral” countries; 25 
were from “post-communist” countries or parts of what we once called 
the “Third World.”41
The resulting globalized market system is thus “transnational.” The 
term first emerged to describe mass immigration in the nineteenth and 
early twentieth century, an early indication that the global economic 
changes were pressing the frontiers of self-contained nation-states. 
It came into wider use when in reaction to the consequences of what 
appeared in the 1970s to be deteriorating US power and rising Third 
World power a “Trilateral Commission,” linking intellectual, politi-
cal, and business elites from North American, European, and Japanese 
elites. Leslie Sklair and Stephen Gill, respectively, responded to the 
Commission and other developments with criticism that included labe-
ling this more tightly networked international business elite as a “trans-
national capitalist class.”42 William Robinson took the idea a step further 
by distinguishing between an earlier history of corporate expansion 
abroad and today’s era of global capitalism. In the earlier period, “multi-
national corporations” referred to firms that did business through trade 
or through investments abroad, with ownership and boards of directors 
largely from the home nation; case today “transnational corporations” 
are increasing owned and governed by share- and stake-holders scattered 
among many nations.43

166   D. C. HELLINGER
Marx certainly failed in predicting the imminent demise of capitalism, 
but by now even his most vigorous detractors would have to concede 
that his characterization of capitalist economic change captures how the 
processes of globalization driven by the logic of neoliberal capitalism 
generate anxieties, including the kinds exploited by Alex Jones’ Infowars.
com and by Trump. In the Communist Manifesto, a document with a 
wildly optimistic view of the prospects of humanity, his analysis reads 
much more darkly today.
Constant revolutionizing of production, uninterrupted disturbance of 
all social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation distinguish the 
bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. All fixed, fast-frozen relations, with 
their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept 
away, all new-formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify. All 
that is solid melts into air; all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last 
compelled to face with sober senses his real conditions of life, and his rela-
tions with his kind.44
Marx followed this proclamation with myopically optimistic predic-
tion, “National one-sidedness and narrow-mindedness become more 
and more impossible.” He thought that capitalism and “the immensely 
facilitated means of communication, draws all, even the most barbarian, 
nations into civilization.” Would anyone espouse the faith that the com-
munications revolution of the post-Cold War era has made the world 
kindlier and gentler? In the Manifesto, Marx predicted that the forces of 
globalization unleashed by capitalism would compel us to face our “real 
conditions of life.” They do seem to have produced anger that in this 
global capitalist economy “all that is solid melts.” His vision of com-
munism seems more distant than ever, but at least in the United States a 
younger generation that did not live through the Cold War seems more 
open to making another world possible. And many of this generation are 
not afraid to call their ideas “socialist.”
As has been widely recognized, Trump’s rhetoric has “enabled” the alt-
right and white supremacy movements, well as other groups that make no 
effort to hide openly fascist and neo-fascist discourse, using salutes, sym-
bols, and paraphernalia associated with the Axis powers of World War II. 
Playing on a phrase, “Twenty-first century socialism,” popular with left-
ists seeking to differentiate contemporary socialist experiments from the 
Communist system of the last century, Robinson argues that Trumpism is 
a form of “Twenty-first century fascism,” which he describes as:

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   167
…a response to the grave and increasing crisis of global capitalism, which 
explains the turn toward the neo-fascist right in Europe, as much in 
the West and in the East, the resurgence of a neo-fascist right in Latin 
America, the turn toward neo-fascism in Turkey, Israel, the Philippines, 
Indian and in many other places. A key difference between fascism of 
the twentieth century and that of the twenty-first century is that now we 
are dealing with the fusion of national capital with reactionary political 
power, but with a fusion of transnational capital with reactionary political 
power.45
But one can question whether Trump himself consciously has the kind 
of agenda attributed to him by Robinson. On the one hand, Trump’s 
enterprises depend on immigrant labor. Who cleans the floors and makes 
up the beds in our hotels? Who tends to the fairways and greens on golf 
courses? Whether it is Trump’s intention or not, the result of his scape-
goating, nativist rhetoric and Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) sweeps contributes to maintaining an immigrant peonage, due to 
their vulnerability to exploitation while the work here under an illegal 
status. But reducing immigrant labor may also impact the labor in busi-
nesses that, like Trump’s depend on this part of the labor force.
Trump’s campaign promises to make the US economy ­competitive 
and to “bring back jobs” resonated especially strongly with white 
workers who have been losing privileges associated with living the 
“first world.” He has lowered taxes on corporations, but he also 
promised to spend billions on infrastructure. These expenditures, 
should they ever come about, would be closely linked to privatiza-
tion of government functions. Trump has buried neoliberal priorities 
for a Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal, a top priority of the Obama 
administration. On March 1, 2018, Trump announced his attention to 
levy new tariffs on steel and aluminum imports, moves that are threat-
ening to the stability of the global free trade order. None other than 
Forbes Magazine, while eschewing the “neofascist” label, warned of 
dire consequences of the rise of the global right and the seeming inca-
pacity of neoliberal capitalism and liberal democracy to address mass 
discontent. Anders Corr, a regular contributor to the Forbes, shortly 
after the US election warned,
Nationalism and racism in international politics lead to a Hobbesian anar-
chy that in the nuclear age would be nastier, more brutish, and shorter 

168   D. C. HELLINGER
than anything found in the state of nature. The wars of the 20th century 
were nothing compared to the high-technology wars that are now being 
prepared in the weapons laboratories of the world’s major powers…If 
major war is unleashed…(t)he main fighting could be over in a matter of 
hours, and could devastate the planet.46
A web search on “neoliberalism and the end of liberal democracy” 
brings up myriad articles, filling almost all on the first few pages, from 
both radical and mainstream sources, warning that the spread of global 
market forces has weakened the kind of politics and states that many 
expected would broaden and deepen with the end of the Cold War. 
Robert Reich, who professes himself a progressive liberal who seeks to 
save capitalism “for the many” called Trump “The American Fascist.”47 
As did the early twentieth-century fascists, Trump focused his campaign 
on the anger of white working people who have been losing economic 
ground for years, and who are easy prey for demagogues seeking to build 
their own power by scapegoating others.
Trumpian voters are more likely to link ethnicity to American national 
identity. The distribution of opinion in Table 5.1, based upon survey 
data made available by the Voter Study Group, shows that they were 
significantly more likely than others to think that having been born in 
America, speaking English, and being a Christian were important to 
“being an American.” These sentiments were even more pronounced 
among Trump primary voters, who might reasonably be considered his 
key base for keeping Republican elected official in line. Trump tapped 
into these sentiments in varying ways, in particular through his charac-
terization of Mexican immigrants as violent criminals, his exploitation of 
anti-Muslim sentiment, and his profession of evangelical religious con-
victions. The one area of American identity where Trump voters did not 
link in great numbers to being American, and only slightly more so than 
supporters of Clinton and Sanders, is of European heritage.48
It is worth noting, however, that while the number Trump voters 
endorsing English as a requirement to be an American outpaced Trump 
and Sanders supporters, more than a third of supporters of all three can-
didates, among both primary and general election voters, endorsed the 
language requirement, and particularly striking was the high percentage 
of Clinton primary supporters who tied speaking English to national 
identity. These results also speak to the false equivalence between the 
brand of populism advanced by Trump and Sanders, respectively. Sanders 

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   169
Table 5.1  Nationalism, importance to being an American
Source Democracy Fund Voter Study Group. Views of the Electorate Research Survey, December 2016 [Computer File] Release 1: August 28, 2017. 
Washington, DC: Democracy Fund Voter Study Group [producer] https://www.voterstudygroup.org/. Conflict Voter Study Group for exact questions
How  
important …
Clinton general 
election
Trump general 
election
Trump primary 
voters
Sanders primary 
voters
Clinton primacy 
voters
… to have 
been born in 
America
Very
Fairly
Not very
Not at all
690
618
782
917
21.8%
19.5%
24.7%
29.0%
1265
714
694
410
40.3%
22.7%
22.1%
13.1%
633
279
239
118
49.0%
21.6%
18.5%
9.1%
160
180
334
371
15.0%
16.8%
31.2%
34.7%
456
307
261
330
32.1%
21.6%
18.4%
23.2%
… to be 
able to speak 
English
Very
Fairly
Not very
Not at all
1227
930
578
129
38.7%
29.3%
18.2%
4.1%
2533
488
63
14
80.6%
15.6%
2.0%
0.4%
1099
154
172
85.3%
11.9%
1.3%
0.2%
361
343
224
122
33.7%
32.0%
20.9%
11.4%
692
361
215
115
48.5%
25.3%
15.1%
8.1%
… to be 
Christian
Very
Fairly
Not very
Not at all
369
314
461
192
12.4%
10.0%
14.7%
6.1%
1033
637
724
629
32.9%
20.3%
23.0%
20.0%
497
282
244
214
38.5%
21.8%
18.9%
16.6%
94
85
118
740
8.8%
8.0%
11.1%
69.4%
309
187
202
623
21.8%
13.2%
14.3%
44.0%
… to be of 
European 
heritage
Very
Fairly
Not very
Not at all
166
235
647
1896
5.3%
7.4%
20.5%
50.1%
270
385
1047
226
8.6%
12.3%
33.5%
7.2%
158
196
454
371
12.5%
15.4%
35.6%
29.1%
53
44
186
755
5.0%
4.1%
17.4%
70.6%
151
143
309
718
10.6%
10.1%
21.8%
50.6%

170   D. C. HELLINGER
Table 5.2  Attitudes on economic conditions and trade
Clinton general election
Trump general election
Trump primary voters
Sanders primary voters
Clinton primacy voters
Life in America 
today for 
respondent, v. 
50 years ago
Better
Same
Worse
1286
773
905
39.6%
23.8%
27.9%
542
494
1956
17.0%
15.5%
61.5%
209
182
856
16.0%
14.0%
65.7%
376
222
419
34.5%
20.4%
38.5%
616
397
350
41.9%
27.0%
38.5%
Affect of free 
trade on amount 
of products 
American busi-
nesses sell?
Increase
Decrease
No impact
1702
784
634
54.6%
25.1%
20.3%
1097
1459
533
35.5%
47.2%
17.3%
433
594
232
34.4%
47.2%
18.4%
505
363
178
48.3%
34.7%
17.0%
825
310
292
57.8%
21.7%
20.5%
Affect free trade 
will have on the 
number of jobs 
for Americans?
Increase
Decrease
No Impact
849
1559
702
27.3%
50.1%
22.6%
629
2122
360
20.2%
68.2%
11.6%
289
851
149
21.2%
67.1%
11.7%
192
701
152
18.4%
67.1%
14.5%
516
572
338
36.2%
40.1%
23.7%
Affect free 
trade will have 
on the wages 
of American 
workers?
Increase
Decrease
No impact
735
1532
842
23.6%
49.3%
27.1%
542
2023
537
17.5%
65.2%
17.3%
219
833
213
17.3%
65.8%
16.8%
177
687
189
16.8%
65.2%
17.9%
457
584
378
32.2%
41.2%
26.6%
Affect free trade 
will have on 
prices of prod-
ucts available 
for sale
Increase
Decrease
No Impact
887
1615
602
28.6%
52.0%
19.4%
93
264
64
22.1%
62.1%
15.2%
373
638
258
29.4%
50.3%
20.3%
270
621
156
25.8%
59.3%
14.9%
493
659
270
34.7%
46.3%
19.0%
Affect free 
trade will have 
on quality of 
products
Increase
Decrease
No Impact
970
1203
929
31.3%
38.8%
29.9%
650
1836
615
21.0%
59.2%
19.8%
285
764
238
20.9%
60.3%
18.8%
229
550
264
22.0%
52.7%
25.3%
554
453
416
38.9%
31.8%
29.2%
Source Democracy Fund Voter Study Group. Views of the Electorate Research Survey, December 2016 [Computer File] Release 1: August 28, 2017. 
Washington DC: Democracy Fund Voter Study Group [producer] https://www.voterstudygroup.org/. Please consult Voter Study Group for exact word-
ing of questions

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   171
supporters were by far the least likely, and by a large margin, to endorse 
any of these ethno-nationalist sentiments, and by far most likely to reject 
them—although even Sanders voters by a majority tied Americanism to 
English speaking. Given that Sanders is Jewish, it should not surprise 
that being Christian is of importance to every view of his primary voters.
The populist appeal of Trump and Sanders coincides and more in atti-
tudes about free trade, displayed in Table 5.2. Considered all together, 
the distribution of responses of primary voters to the five questions on 
free trade are remarkably similar and negative on the way that free trade 
affects three areas that most directly impact ordinary people’s well-being: 
wages, employment, and prices. While a plurality of Clinton primary vot-
ers also registers pessimism in this area, the percentages fall considerably 
short of the strong majorities found among of Trump and Sanders vot-
ers. A higher percentage of Sanders voters questioned whether American 
businesses would sell more products with globalization.
Trump voters are by far more likely than Clinton and even Sanders 
voters to believe that life in America today is worse than it was 50 years 
ago, a finding that suggests the appeal of Trump’s campaign motto, 
“Make America Great Again.” Combined with Trump’s nativist, eth-
no-nationalist appeal, one sees how the tycoon’s campaign for the nomi-
nation could be so impactful without the dark money support that went 
to his Republican rivals (see Chapter 6), none of whom drew so effec-
tively on the clash between national sovereignty and liberal free trade. 
Journalists and academics are expended considerable effort on the impact 
of sophisticated analytics, digital advertising, and Russian bots in the 
election, but the most “innovative” and effective tool to exploit popular 
discontent in the 2016 campaign may have been the humble baseball cap 
bearing the “Make American Great Again” slogan—a campaign tactic 
subject to no little scorn in cosmopolitan circles.
Populism Versus Transnational Capitalism
The most compelling reason to link globalization to populism, especially 
right-wing populism, is the simultaneous emergence of ethno-nationalist 
parties and movements in various parts of the developed world, and espe-
cially in North America and Europe, since the global financial crisis of 
2008–2009. A recent study comparing Tweets of French and American 
politicians showed remarkable similarity in the themes prevalent in those 
of Trump and France’s National Front leader, Marine Le Pen.49 The 

172   D. C. HELLINGER
common denominator in this development in the Western core nations 
is the appeal of radical right parties and movements in areas that have 
experienced social and economic distress, in urban areas from industri-
alization and in rural regions from the struggles of smaller scale agri-
culture.50 While it may be true that the economic underpinnings of this 
stress can be traced to technological change, those most impacted by the 
shift in technology and the relations of production (decline of the factory 
assembly line and rise of global assembly line production) perceive glo-
balization at the root. Earlier in the chapter, I argued against separating 
technological change and globalization in favor of recognizing that both 
processes are related closely to each other and to the shift globally away 
from nationally based capitalist economies to a transnational one.
The rise of Trump, the Brexit victory in Britain, the emergence of the 
National Front in France as a political contender, were early indications 
that the recent wave of right-wing populism is transnational, cropping up 
in one form or another in wealthy capitalist democracies and European 
post-communist states. As of this writing, the populist right, made up 
of leaders and political parties (the latter sometimes personalist organiza-
tions built around a charismatic leader) have accumulated enough power 
to control or strongly influence politics in just about every country in 
Europe. In some cases, the most important being Germany, these move-
ments have managed to pry away sectors of mainstream conservative 
parties to undermine leaders more committed to maintaining the wel-
fare systems, acceptance of free movement of people with the European 
Union, relatively liberal policies toward refugees, and further economic 
integration (“free trade”). The challenge was vividly demonstrated in 
June 2018 in Germany, where the Alternative for Germany (AfD) party 
significantly cut into the appeal of the more moderate, mainstream 
right. German Chancellor Angela Merkel, a Christian Democrat and the 
Western leader most identified with maintaining and extending a more 
globally integrated political and economic order, found herself fighting 
for her political life as a result of a revolt of the leader of a sister Christian 
Democratic party in Bavaria, demonstrating the growing unpopular-
ity of her willingness to accept migrants seeking asylum at the border of 
Bavaria and Austria.
These episodes seem to suggest that the “paranoid style” variety of 
populism, which Hofstadter lined to recurring nativism in the United 
States, could now be applied to the European context as well—though 
certainly the “paranoid” style of politics was visible in the fascist 

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   173
movements of the last century as well.51 It is legitimate to study the rise 
of fascism for lessons on resistance to the current wave of xenophobia 
and resentment toward international economic crisis; at the same time 
we must keep in mind how much Trumpism and its counterparts in 
Europe are animated by massive global migrations being spawned by 
transnational neoliberal economic forces, natural calamities (liked to 
global warming to some extent), and civil warfare in the Middle East 
and Africa, all throwing up difficult challenges to a world where barriers 
(passports, border checks, citizenship linked to ethnicity, etc.) to move-
ments of people remain quite firmly in place—except in Western Europe, 
where the EU has until now knocked down internal frontiers within its 
zone. However, the EU accomplishment has been put in jeopardy by the 
AfD’s success in forcing Merkel to roll back her relatively liberal policies 
on immigration.
Mabel Berezin ties the “rise of illiberal politics” in Europe to forces 
that clearly manifested themselves as well in the rise of Trump. European 
integration and globalization, she says, “have altered the social and polit-
ical landscape of contemporary Europe. Insecurity in both the public and 
private domain has been one response to these processes. Fear—of immi-
grants, crime, disease, unemployment–has become a recurrent theme in 
European public discourse.” Surveys only partly capture this phenome-
non. Not everyone who indulges in anti-immigrant and racist discourse 
and racist discourse necessarily has a “thick commitment” to the party 
or movement expressing these sentiments, she argues. Broader sup-
port for Le Pen’s National Front and parties of a similar ilk consists of 
people with only thin commitments, motivated by the erosion of secu-
rity in their lives and believing their national identity, their ontological 
status and “collectively defined way of being in the world” to be under 
attack.52 Her point is not to defend nativist politics but to point out how 
deeply ingrained national identity is in our everyday lives, clashing with 
the cosmopolitan liberal value of “global citizenship.” Even the most 
developed and institutionalized international organization, the European 
Union, is highly insulated from direct popular influence, and symbols 
on money and European flags on capitals cannot remedy the democratic 
deficit.
Although right-populism in Europe has its own roots, the right-wing 
forces aligned with Trump have begun themselves to take on a transna-
tional character. One good example is the World Congress of Families 
(WCF), which was founded in Russia to defend the “natural family,” 

174   D. C. HELLINGER
that is, the family made up of heterosexual pair of parents couple and 
their children. In 2016, the group held its international conference in 
Salt Lake City. Some “pro-family” US conservatives have embraced 
this Russian initiative, strongly supported by the Kremlin. The network 
includes social conservatives from European countries as well.53 These 
global links reflect an incipient alignment on the right, one that may to 
some degree be blunting the hostility of traditional conservatives toward 
Vladimir Putin.
Trumpism simultaneously reflects and fosters tension between democ-
racy and national sovereignty. While catch phrases like “global citizen-
ship” have entered popular culture and curriculums in our schools and 
universities, the institutions of representative democracy remain based 
closely tied to what historian Benedict Anderson calls the “imagined 
community” of a nation. That is, most commonly we think of a “com-
munity” as a group of human beings that spend a good deal of time with 
one another, whether in residential neighborhoods, small towns, work-
places, gathering points (coffee houses, pubs, etc.). Communities in our 
online era can be virtual, linking individuals into networks on Facebook, 
for example. But the nation, Anderson points, forms a “community” that 
is, in reality, a huge conglomeration of individuals that will never lay eyes 
on one another, never directly communicate.54 I live in St. Louis, but as 
an “American” I share an identity with residents on Riverside, California; 
Brooklyn; New York; Opelika, Alabama; etc.
While most coverage of the radical right, and much of this book, is 
focused on lower income people who generally fit Berezin’s profile, the 
nativist appeal can cross class boundaries. The media have failed to rec-
ognize, for example, that the German AfD’s support comes dispropor-
tionately from upper income, not lower income and uneducated voters. 
A University of Leipzig study showed that 81% of its voters were actu-
ally middle and upper income, not from those generally seen to be losers 
from globalization, the same social base of most of the party’s activists. 
However, the same study showed the supporters in general rejected glo-
balization and multiculturalism, and were also attracted to identity poli-
tics, the latter clearly related to issues about immigration and asylum.55 
And though the Leipzig study found the party strongly rooted in the 
upper class, its gains in 2017 were largely concentrated in areas that have 
most suffered economic decline and experience settling of refugees.56
The data reviewed earlier in this chapter do not allow us to directly tie 
Trump’s success in swinging key voters needed for an Electoral College 

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   175
victory to his conspiracist appeal. What they show, consistent with other 
voting patterns displayed in Fig. 5.1 in this chapter, is that his appeal 
was strongest where economic distress was greatest, areas that have been 
excluded from the benefits of economic globalization and technologi-
cal changes. This distress is not unlike the forces that theorists like Tim 
Melley have linked to agency panic, not only in the United States but in 
Europe as well.
It should not be surprising that Trump’s political success should call 
into question the theory that the issues such as environmentalism, qual-
ity of life and work, and other “post-materialist” matters are characteris-
tics of capitalist societies that have reached a high stage of development. 
Supposedly, such societies have left behind the class conflicts typical of 
industrial capitalism. While, as this theory predicts, higher levels of edu-
cation are correlated with voting for Clinton and rejection of Trump, 
the tycoon’s ability to attract significant sectors of the white working 
class and middle class from the Democratic base suggests deeper, more 
troubling contradictions in the wealthier capitalist world. Political soci-
ologists have acknowledged that “perceived cultural threats” have con-
tributed mightily to rise of authoritarian populism, but the idea that 
there might be material factors causing or accelerating this process is 
often downplayed in their analyses.57
Developments at both national and global levels that have intensi-
fied popular suspicions about the commitment of ruling elites in liberal 
democracies to pursuit of the national interest. We could spend consid-
erable time considering whether in fact there is such a thing as “national 
interest.” Certainly, Marx and his followers have long maintained that 
capitalists, i.e., the “bourgeoisie,” used nationalism as a false ideology to 
divide workers of different countries against one another. In the United 
States, a generation of “revisionist” historians questioned the assump-
tion of the realist school of international relations that the driving force 
behind diplomacy in the United States was maximization of national 
power and interests.
Charles Beard’s (1934: 3) critique of “national interest” noted, “The 
thinkers and statesmen who thus present the doctrine of national interest 
speak in the language of exact science, they apparent conceive of interest 
as a reality open to human understanding and as a kind of iron necessity 
which binds governments and governed alike. It binds them so closely 
that there is no escape, except possibly for an insignificant few minority; 

176   D. C. HELLINGER
it cuts across the social divisions reflected in political parties and compels 
a ‘united front’” against external enemies and competitors.58
Today, “national security” is more often invoked than “national inter-
est,” but often to the same effect. Take the official Obama White House 
communication efforts to achieve ratification of the TPP:
America’s trade policy has an enormous impact on the economic well-be-
ing of the American people, and the strategic interests of the United 
States. Trade can support American jobs, eliminate taxes on American 
exports, help American businesses reach new markets, protect the envi-
ronment, promote stronger labor standards, combat human trafficking, 
defend the intellectual property of American innovators, and shape a better 
future for our children — those are the types of agreements that President 
Obama has pursued.59
Of course, the same president also said, “Some of those jobs of the past 
are not gonna come back,”60 in partial response to a question to Eric 
Cottonham, an unemployed worker, a member of a Steel Workers union 
laid off by the Carrier Corporation in Indiana. “What can we look for-
ward to in the future,” asked Cottonham, an African-American, who 
directed himself to the President, not angrily but respectfully. Obama 
reeled off a series of facts about how many manufacturing jobs had been 
created by his administration. Obama said he was trying to negotiate 
trade treaties that would raise wages and working conditions abroad to 
level conditions. The president said that the real culprit was automa-
tion. Without mentioning Trump by name, Obama challenged the hotel 
mogul to explain how he would bring the jobs back. “There’s no answer 
to it,” he claimed.
The president had his economics right. Manufacturing production 
had been rising with only slight dips around 1998 and 2008 (both years 
of global financial crisis) for 35 years, resulting in almost 2.5 times the 
output being produced at the end of the period by almost 50% fewer 
workers.61 What the president failed to explain was why the benefits of 
automation—more production per unit of labor—had not been deployed 
to benefit the workers. He was fortunate in 2012 to have faced a 
Republican opponent, Mitt Romney, who was recorded62 telling a room-
ful of wealthy supporters behind closed doors that 47% of Americans 
“believe that they are victims, that the government has responsibility 
to care for them…I’ll never convince them they should take personal 

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   177
responsibility and care for their lives.” Certainly, this is a message was 
even less comforting to Americans like Cottonham, who were asking for 
a future. But did Obama provide any reason for them to think their dis-
tress was of any real importance to the president?
By the end of 2016, Obama’s hopes to achieve the TPP had been 
dashed, though many of the other countries that were to be party to it 
were working on forming an association without the United States. Two 
years later, no longer could a “united front” be held together in support 
of the neoliberal economic doctrines associated with globalization in the 
TransAtlantic, with or without US participation. Political uncertainties 
and suspicions have both proliferated and deepened as the nation-state 
finds itself buffeted by the forces of globalization. Technological devel-
opments and untamed market forces that have rent the social and eco-
nomic fabric of life for the working class and middle class in the core, 
wealthy countries of the world. This has contributed to a global surge of 
populism. Trumpism represents the reactionary variant of this surge, but 
Sanders, Corbyn and a few smaller European parties represent resistance 
to global neoliberalism rather than globalization per se.
The anti-globalization jeremiads, pronouncements, and proposals of 
Trump were those of a businessman who profits from retailing clothing 
made in China and approximately a dozen other countries. He has twice 
married immigrant women, has either built or brand luxury hotels and 
golf courses around the world, and in 2013 penned a piece for CNN 
(January 13) opining, “I think we’ve all become aware of the fact that our 
cultures and economics are intertwined. It’s a complex mosaic that cannot 
be approached with a simple formula for the correct pattern to emerge. In 
many ways, we are in unchartered waters…We will have to leave borders 
behind and go for global unity when it comes to financial stability.” But 
four years later there was little indication that Trump has fealty to those 
ideas today.
After the election Trump’s transition team got to work installing a 
coterie of business elites, generals, and ultra-conservative politicians 
into national security and key economic institutions. A tycoon from 
the fast-food industry would take over the Labor Department, placing 
a key opponent of a higher minimum wage and opponent of union-
ization in the department most responsible for defending workers. 
The Chief Executive Officer (Tillerson) of the world’s largest oil com-
pany was tapped for State—he would be replaced in 2018 by a hawkish 
Mike Pompeo. Three former officials of Goldman Sachs got three top 

178   D. C. HELLINGER
economic posts. A global warming denier was to be put in charge of the 
Environmental Protection Agency. And the list goes on.
Throughout the transition, Trump’s media operations continued to 
project images of power and nationalism. A deal, in works well before 
the election, to keep a portion of the Carrier jobs in Indiana was pro-
moted as success of the new administration through Twitter, Breitbart 
news, and other outlets as the first dividend to workers who tipped the 
scales to Trump in the vital Midwest rust belt states. Although the then 
president-elect toned down his own rhetoric, the crowd at a Trump 
“thank-you” rally in Wisconsin made known they had not lost enthu-
siasm; they cheered rapper Kanye West and booed Paul Ryan, GOP 
Speaker of the House.
What we have in Trump is a living, breathing contradiction who 
either radically shifted his worldview as expressed in 2013 or shifted only 
his rhetoric in order to fulfill his own vocation for power and narcissis-
tic personality needs. Either way, he fits the mold of a certain type of 
populist, a kind of political entrepreneur who trades on popular angst 
and prejudices, who exploits mistrust and anger among people who have 
been marginalized and take refuge in hypernationalism and religious 
zealotry. The populist appeal is built upon invoking the power of “the 
people” against corrupt insiders, elites who have only their own interest, 
not that of the nation at heart. What makes the appeal paranoid is when 
a politician with a thirst for power, not service, exploits this sentiment.
Conclusion: The Great Disrupter
It is hard to know if Trump and advisors deliberately planned to meat 
out embarrassment to well-known politicos of recent vintage, but the 
videos and photographs of supplicants visiting the triumphant, appren-
tice president in his gaudy New York tower after the election made 
for brilliant public theatre. Network news and late night talk show 
hosts gave exposure to former presidential nominees Al Gore and Mitt 
Romney meeting awkwardly with Trump, only to be subsequently 
spurned and scorned publicly for their naiveté. Gore’s hopes for mod-
erate policies on global warming and Romney’s aspirations to serve as 
Secretary of State were dashed soon after by the appointment of Scott 
Pruit, a climate denying Congressman, to head the Environmental 
Protection Agency and Tillerson, the Chief Executive Officer of Exxon-
Mobile, to Secretary of State.

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   179
In 1953, Charles Erwin Wilson, the CEO of General Motors 
Corporation, was asked at Senate Hearings regarding his nomination by 
President Dwight Eisenhower to serve as Secretary of Defense, how he 
could reconcile possible conflicts of interest between his company and 
his country. He responded, “For years I thought that what was good 
for our country was good for General Motors, and vice versa. The dif-
ference did not exist. Our company is too big. It goes with the welfare 
of the country. Our contribution to the nation is considerable.”63 That 
philosophy returned with a vengeance in the Trump presidency. Neither 
Trump nor Tillerson even bothered, as did Wilson, to argue that the 
corporate interests and national interests were identical. The conserva-
tive journal National Review lamented, “Sixty years later, where did the 
“America” in corporate America go? No longer committed to a particu-
lar place, people, country, or culture, our largest public companies have 
turned globalist while abdicating the responsibility they once assumed to 
America and its workers.”64
The first 20 months of the Trump presidency left unclear overall just 
how much neoliberal globalization was being set back. Tillerson did not 
even last half way through Trump’s presidential term. Pruitt would be 
forced to resign because of a serious of embarrassing revelations of his 
abuse of EPA funds, but not for his policies. By the middle of 2018, 
the Koch brothers were ready to commit millions of dollars in spend-
ing to fight Trump’s tariffs and retreat from free trade agreements. 
NAFTA talks produced a tentative agreement with Mexico, but not a 
radical overhaul. Countries that had planned to join the United States 
in the TPP were forming their own trade block, new tariffs were being 
announced (but not yet implemented) by the president. Yet Donald 
Trump made it a point to go to the 2018 Davos summit where he clearly 
enjoyed basking in the rock-star type of reception that the world’s rich 
had accorded him. Trump had put something of a stamp on his prom-
ises of reducing American international leadership, but there was little 
sign that special operations deployments and drone strikes had abated. 
Domestically, his minions in Congress had passed a tax “reform” that 
was heavily weighted toward the wealthy and the transnational corpo-
rate sector. All of these matters were subject to the whims of a world 
leader accustomed to pronouncements via tweeting, engaged in a fire-
fight of words over Russiagate, and presiding over a West Wing revolving 
door through which high White House Staff came and went. Conspiracy 
theory? Why wouldn’t opponents and supporters not have reason to 

180   D. C. HELLINGER
suspect that conspiracies, petty and grand in design, are a normal feature 
of doing politics in the toxic political atmosphere of the Trump White 
House?
Notes
	
1.  Yarra Elmasry, “Why the Super-Rich Are Buying Luxury Apocalypse-Safe 
Bunkers for Protection Against Natural Disaters and Nuclear Attack,” 
The Independent, July 10, 2017, London.
	
2.  Matthew Gray, Conspiracy Theories in the Arab World: Sources and Politics: 
Sources and Politics (New York: Routledge Conspiracy Theories, 2010): 
33–34.
	
3.  Evan McMullin, “Trump’s Rise Proves How Dangerous Populism Is to 
America,” NBCNews.com, October 11, 2017 (accessed June 22, 2018). 
See Thomas Friedman, “What If?” New York Times, January 20, 2016; 
John Cassidy, “Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump Ride the Populist 
Wave,” The New Yorker, February 10, 2016. A more nuanced perspec-
tive is Thomas Edsall, “The Trump-Sanders Fantasy,” New York Times, 
February 24, 2016.
	
4.  Richard Hofstadter, The Paranoid Style in American Politics (New York: 
Vintage Reprints, 1968).
	
5.  Available at http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=19253.
	
6.  William I. Robinson, A Theory of Global Capitalism: Production, Class, 
and State in a Transnational World (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 2004).
	
7.  Joseph Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (London: 
Routledge, 1994, original 1942): 82–83.
	
8.  Benjamin Barber, Jihad vs. McWorld: Terrorism’s Challenge to Democracy 
(New York: Ballantine Books, 1996).
	
9.  Barber, “Jihad vs. McWorld,” The Atlantic, March 1992, available at 
https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1992/03/jihad-vs-
mcworld/303882 (accessed July 18, 2017).
	
10.  Hofstadter, The Paranoid Style in American Politics.
	
11.  Daniel Hellinger, “Paranoia, Conspiracy, and Hegemony in American 
Politics,” in Transparency and Conspiracy: Ethnographies of Suspicion in 
the New World Order, ed. Harry G. West and Todd Sanders (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2003): 205.
	
12.  Uscinski and Parent, American Conspiracy Theories (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2014): 11.
	
13.  Kathryn Olmsted, Real Enemies: Conspiracy Theories and American 
Demodracy, World War I to 9/11 (New York: Oxford University Press): 4.

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   181
	
14.  Jack Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: Political Rationality and Poplar 
Culture (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2008). Mark 
Fenster, Conspiracy Theories: Secrecy and Power in American Culture 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1999).
	
15.  Olmsted, Real Enemies: 234.
	
16.  Among myriad reports on inequality, see Paul F. Campos, “White Economic 
Privilege is Alive and Well,” New York Times, July 29, 2017. Also, 
Ishwar Khatiwada and Andrew M. Sum, “The Widening Socio-Economic 
Divergence in the U.S. Labor Market,” in The Dynamics of Opportunity 
in America, ed. I. Kirsch and H. Braun (Cham: Springer), available at 
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-25991-8_7 
(accessed June 19, 2018).
	
17.  See https://www.wealthx.com/report/the-wealth-x-billionaire-census-2017 
(accessed June 19, 2018).
	
18.  Bill Robinson. “What is Behind the Renegotiation of NAFTA? Trumpism and 
the New Global Economy.” Truthout, July 24, 2017, available at http://
www.truth-out.org/news/item/41365-what-is-behind-the-renegotiation-
of-nafta-trumpism-and-the-new-global-economy (accessed July 27, 2017).
	
19.  Available at http://time.com/3923128/donald-trump-announcement- 
speech (accessed June 23, 2018).
	
20.  Atossa Araxia Abrahamian, “Donald Trump Hates Globalization, but 
Globalization is What Made Donald Trump’s Life Possible,” Quartz, 
November 7, 2016, available at qz.com (accessed June 23, 2018).
	
21.  Leigh Ann Caldwell, “Trump Foundation Paid Activist Filmmaker James 
O’Keefe,” NBC News, October 20, 2016, available at nbcnews.com 
(accessed June 23, 2018).
	
22.  Edited and unedited tapes are still available of YouTube.com as of June 
2018.
	
23.  An example of underestimating Trump is Media Matters critical review of 
his performance on Blitzer’s program. See “Trump’s Birtherism Fueled 
by Breitbart Reporting,” May 29, 2012, available at https://www.medi-
amatters.org/blog/2012/05/29/trumps-birtherism-fueled-by-breit-
bart-reporting/186305 (accessed March 2, 2018).
	
24.  Timothy Egan, New York Times, March 11, 2017.
	
25.  Phillip Bump, “A Glossary of Trump’s Rhetorical Shorthand.” 
Washington Post, July 22, 2017.
	
26.  A transcript can be found at http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/02/
u s / p o l i t i c s / t r a n s c r i p t - t r u m p - i m m i g r a t i o n - s p e e c h . h t m l  
(accessed December 19, 2016).
	
27.  Poll data available at https://www.aei.org/publication/immigration-is-
sues-public-opinion-on-family-separation-daca-and-a-border-wall 
(accessed June 23, 2018).

182   D. C. HELLINGER
	
28.  The text of speech can be found at https://theconservativetreehouse.
com/2016/06/28/donald-trump-policy-speech-monessen-pennsylva-
nia-230pm-live-stream/comment-page-1/ (accessed December 19, 2016).
	
29.  Manfred Steger, “Ideologies of Globalization,” Journal of Political 
Ideologies 10, no. 1 (February 2005): 18.
	
30.  Quoted in Steger, “Ideologies of Globalization”: 18.
	
31.  Thomas Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree (London: Picador Books, 
2012): 2.
	
32.  Lee Fang, et al. “Excerpts of Hillary Clinton’s Paid Speeches to Goldman-
Sachs Finally Leaked,” Theintercept.com, October 7, 2016 (accessed 
February 23, 2018).
	
33.  Available  on  YouTube,  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= 
CKpso3vhZtw (accessed February 24, 2018).
	
34.  From transcript available at https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/
the-press-office/2014/04/27/joint-press-conference-president-oba-
ma-and-prime-minister-najib-malaysia (accessed June 18, 2018).
	
35.  See note 1. Also available on YouTube, https://www.c-span.org/vid-
eo/?c4608283/trump-american-steel (accessed February 24, 2018).
	
36.  David Autor, David Dorny, Gordon Hanson, and Kaveh Majlesi, “A 
Note on the Effect of Rising Trade Exposure on the 2016 Presidential 
Election,” Revised version of March 2017, available at https://econom-
ics.mit.edu/files/12418 (accessed February 24, 2018).
	
37.  William Kornhauser, The Politics of Mass Society (Glencoe, IL: The Free 
Press, 1959).
	
38.  See Michael Kazin, A Godly Hero: The Life of William Jennings Bryan 
(New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2006).
	
39.  Richard Hofstadter, The Age of Reform: From Bryan to F.D.R. (New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf, 1955).
	
40.  Alexander Dunst, “The Politics of Conspiracy Theories: American 
Histories and Global Narratives,” in Conspiracy Theories in the United 
States and the Middle East: A Comparative Approach, ed. Michael Butter 
and Maurus Reinkowski (Boston: De Gruyter, 2015): 294–310.
	
41.  Oxfam International, An Economy of the 99%, January 2017, available at 
https://d1tn3vj7xz9fdh.cloudfront.net/s3fs-public/file_attachments/
bp-economy-for-99-percent-160117-en.pdf (accessed March 1, 2018).
	
42.  Leslie Sklair, The Transnational Capitalist Class (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2000). Stephen Gill, Stephen, American Hegemony and the 
Trilateral Commission (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991).
	
43.  Robinson, A Theory of Global Capitalism.
	
44.  Karl Marx, The Communist Manifesto, available at https://www.marx-
ists.org/archive/marx/works/download/pdf/Manifesto.pdf 
(accessed 
March 1, 2018).

5  GLOBALIZATION, POPULISM, CONSPIRACISM   183
	
45.  Robinson, William I. (Bill), “Trumpism, 21st-Century Fascism, and the 
Dictatorship of the Transnational Capitalist Class.” Social Justice Journal 
(January 20, 2017), available at http://www.socialjusticejournal.org/
trumpism-21st-century-fascism-and-the-dictatorship-of-the-transnation-
al-capitalist-class (accessed March 1, 2018).
	
46.  Anders Corr, “Liberal Democracy Against a World of Nationalist 
Happenstance,” Forbes Magazine, November 21, 2016.
	
47.  Robert Reich, “The American Fascist,” Saving Capitalism: For the Many, 
Not the Few (New York: Vintage, March 8, 2016), available at robertre-
ich.org (accessed March 1, 2018).
	
48.  It is not entirely clear why this criteria is less often endorsed, especially 
give the prejudice against Latinos and immigration from Muslim coun-
tries. It may be that despite the persistence of racism, the long, strongly 
rooted presence of African-Americans in the country has impacted 
national identity in this area.
	
49.  Peter Mauer, “What Kind of Populism, A comparison of Marine Le Pen’s 
and Donald Trump’s Tweets in the French and US election campaigns 
of 2016/2017.” Paper Presented at the 113th Meeting of the American 
Political Science Association, San Francisco, CA, August 2017.
	
50.  On France, see Peter Mauer, “What Kind of Populism.” On U.S. see 
the CNN/Kaiser Foundation collaborative study, “Working Class and 
Worried,” available at https://www.cnn.com/specials/politics/white-
working-class-and-worried (accessed March 2, 2018). On Brexit, Katrin 
Bennhold, “To Understand ‘Brexit,’ Look to Britain’s Tabloids” New 
York Times, May 2, 2017; On Germany’s AfD, Amanda Taub, “What 
the Far Right’s Rise May Mean for Germany’s Future,” New York Times, 
September 26, 2017 and “Germany’s Election Results in Charts and 
Maps,” Financial Times, September 25, 2017.
	
51.  Richard Hofstadter, The Paranoid Style in American Politics (New York: 
Vintage Reprints, 1968).
	
52.  Mabel Berezin, Illiberal Politics in Neoliberal Times: Culture, Security and 
Populism in the New Europe (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2009): 6, 46.
	
53.  Christopher Stroop, Russia Social-Conservatism, the U.S.-based WCF and 
the Global Culture Wars in Historical Perspective, February 16, 2016. 
Political Research Associated, available at https://www.politicalresearch.
org (accessed June 23, 2018).
	
54.  Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and 
Spread of Nationalism (London: Verso, 1991).
	
55.  The study is summarized in a video embedded in “The AfD is the New 
CSU’—How the Far-Right Won Big in Germany’s Bavaria,” DW Deutsch 
Welle, available at http://www.dw.com/en/about-dw/profile/s-30688 
(accessed October 4, 2017).

184   D. C. HELLINGER
	
56.  See “Germany’s Election Results in Charts and Maps,” Financial Times, 
September 25, 2017.
	
57.  See Pippa Norris and Ronald Inglehart, “Cultural Backlash: Values and 
Voting for Populist Authoritarian Parties in Europe.” Paper Presented 
at the Panel, “The Roots of the New Populism,” Annual Meeting of 
the American Political Science Association, San Francisco, August 30–
September 2, 2017.
	
58.  Charles Beard and George H. E. Smith, The Idea of National Interest: 
Analytical Study in American Foreign Policy (New York: Greenwood 
Press, reprint, original 1934): 3.
	
59.  Available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2016/05/04/why-pres-
ident-obamas-trade-deal-matters-us-national-security (accessed December 
24, 2016).
	
60.  Available 
at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CKpso3vhZtw 
(accessed July 11, 2017).
	
61.  Mark Muro. “Manufacturing Jobs Aren’t Coming Back.” MIT 
Technology Review (2017), available at https://www.technologyreview.
com/s/602869/manufacturing-jobs-arent-coming-back (accessed June 
11, 2017).
	
62.  Available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UrDYd7Agsfw.
	
63.  Available 
at 
https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Charles_Erwin_Wilson 
(accessed June 23, 2018).
	
64.  Available at http://www.nationalreview.com/article/352429 (accessed 
December 24, 2016).

185
An indication of the conspiracist mentality taking hold in discourse in 
the United States is the mounting number of news and academic ref-
erences to “dark” and “deep” forces operating within American politics 
today. The term “Dark Money,” refers to the way some of the country’s 
wealthiest families (notably, the Koch Brothers, Charles and David) have 
poured hundreds of millions (billions, collectively) not only into elec-
toral campaigns, but also into cultural and intellectual institutions in 
an attempt to realign the political culture. They have pursued a radical, 
libertarian agenda, seeking to dramatically reduce welfare programs and 
state regulation and limit the democratic power of popular majorities. 
The “Deep State” idea in the past was mostly identified with leftist criti-
cism of the military industrial complex. It was even less accepted in main-
stream discourse than “Dark Money,” and it was often associated with 
the paranoid style. That has changed somewhat, we shall see in the next 
chapter, but conspiratorial overtones remain, especially in the way it has 
been adopted by Donald Trump and his rightist supporters in the media, 
and it has found a receptive audience in 20–30% of the electorate.
Chapter 7 will take up the Deep State; this chapter focuses on Dark 
Money. I conceptualize both theoretical constructs not as referring 
to one or another overarching conspiracy, but as spheres of politics 
characterized by a high degree of opaqueness, i.e., where minimum 
transparency makes them a suitable spawning ground for political con-
spiracies. Dark Money constitutes a stealth weapon of the super-rich that 
is deployed in ways that are consistent with our working definition of 
CHAPTER 6
Dark Money and Trumpism
© The Author(s) 2019 
D. C. Hellinger, Conspiracies and Conspiracy Theories in the Age  
of Trump, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98158-1_6

186   D. C. HELLINGER
conspiracy, which in Chapter 1 I defined as collective activity in which 
several actors plan and work together to achieve a political goal in a man-
ner marked by secrecy, vulnerability to defeat by exposure, and involving 
illegal, embarrassing, or unethical behavior.
This chapter will layout the reasons why it is useful to view Dark 
Money operations as conspiracies. Consistent with Chapters 1 and 2, 
I do not propose that the billionaire cabals behind Dark Money are 
engaged in a “grand” or “world” conspiracy, but that the systematic 
stealth by which America’s wealthiest families have sought to influence 
American politics has a conspiratorial character and a sinister, corrupting 
impact on democracy. The Koch brothers and their network of wealthy, 
like-minded donors provide a good example of an operational conspiracy 
(see Chapter 2), neither petty nor grand in scale. Two books that have 
done much to expose the Dark Money operations eschew any associa-
tion with conspiracy theory, but that has not spared them being accused 
of endulging in conspiracy theory. Rather than rebut the accusation, 
the cause of limiting the pernicious influence of torrents of money in 
our politics would be served, I argue, if we recognized the billionaires’ 
stealth influence over elections and political culture as fostered by con-
spiracy. Conceiving this activity as an operational conspiracy usefully clar-
ifies that Dark Money politics is not just a form of interest group politics 
but a subversive influence over democracy.
Money, Politics, and Trump
Though muckraking reporters and academic researchers have unveiled 
much of the secretive planning and evasions of accountability by some 
of America’s wealthiest families, the rules of the political game continue 
to permit this miniscule segment of the citizenry to suborn represent-
ative democracy. Laundering their financing through complicated net-
works of “not-for-profit” organizations has permitted the super-rich to 
finance a planned a long-term strategy to impact educational and cultural 
institutions and support the growth of right-wing media. Trump may 
not have been the first choice of most of America’s super-rich; and he 
remains a less than ideal choice to lead their counterrevolution against 
the regulatory and welfare institutions constructed post-World War II. 
Trump’s foreign policy, especially his hostility to multilateral trade asso-
ciations and imposition of tariffs, have met with such disapproval of 
the Kochs and the powerful libertarian tendency among the rich that 

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   187
some of them have even turned to financing Democrats or more mod-
erate Republicans. Still, domestically their goals have been advanced by 
Trump’s opening the federal bureaucracy to their interests, by his judi-
cial appointments, and by his one significant legislative achievement 
in his first year—a tax “reform” that significantly prepares the way for 
downsizing government and checking democratic governance. The Koch 
network launched an offensive in July 2018, deploying several hundred 
million dollars of advertising aimed at seven Senators who had voted 
against President Trump’s $15.4 billion spending cuts, which failed by 
only 2 votes earlier in the year when two Republican Senators defected 
from their party’s congressional leadership. At the same time, the Koch’s 
Americans for Prosperity (AFP) sent a letter to congressional leaders 
demanding a freeze on discretionary spending for the fiscal year 2019 
and further “reforms” to cut spending on Medicaid, Medicare, and 
Social Security over the next 10 years.1
Conspiracies do not have to succeed to influence the course of events. 
While corporate and individual wealth continued to flow in torrents 
through the electoral system in 2016, there were two countertrends 
to the billionaire’s success. First, Bernie Sanders mounted a strong 
campaign against great odds, running openly as a “socialist.” Even if 
Sanders’ socialism is more in the European social democratic tradition 
than radical revolutionary style, his campaign broke a taboo and boosted 
movements seeking more activist government. Sanders raised over $226 
million, of which nearly $135 million came from small contributions. 
He spent no money of his own and received only $5621 (total) from 
political action committees.2 Sanders could hardly be accused of hiding 
his campaign financing. In this chapter we are more concerned with the 
candidates—virtually all of the other ones seeking major party nomina-
tions—who relied on personal wealth, large corporate contributions, and 
especially Dark Money.
The other anomaly is that Trump, apparently a very wealthy man him-
self, was outspent by his Republican opponents in seeking the nomina-
tion, defeating several much closer to the libertarian tendencies among 
the wealthy. That is, the Koch Dark Money was not successful in the 
phase of their campaign known as the “Money Primary”, when prospec-
tive candidates demonstrate their viability with large political donors. 
Trump was able to compete in the early caucuses and primaries that 
began in January 2016, even though his spending was only $24 million; 
in contrast, spending by Senators Ted Cruz and Marci Rubio amounted 

188   D. C. HELLINGER
to $60 million and $76 million, respectively. Trump was also outspent by 
Hillary Clinton in the general election, but this only takes into account 
officially reported spending by parties and candidates. After he secured 
the nomination, the great bulk of backdoor (not all of it “dark,” as 
some ads and other support efforts is openly identified) funding went 
toward Trump. One campaign spending watchdog estimates that when 
both outside money and candidate funds are summed, Trump outspent 
Clinton $794 million to $408 million.3 If one takes into account the 
ratio of spending in relation to the length of Trump’s rivals for the nom-
ination (i.e., when they dropped out, in all but Trump’s case), Trump 
spent less than all of his GOP rivals, except for Ohio Governor John 
Kasich.4
A charlatan, but no fool, Trump’s background in real estate specu-
lation and his celebrity fame as a “take-no-prisoners” entrepreneur and 
star of The Apprentice TV reality show were of his own making, not 
behind-the-scenes handlers. While candidates with the largest campaign 
treasure chests have not always won nor even proved themselves com-
petitive in seeking major party nominations, rarely has a candidate spent 
so little to gain a major party nomination. Of course, Trump had staff 
and volunteers, but he ran his campaign for the nomination, at least until 
the Republican convention, much like he seemed to prevail over all the 
contestants on The Apprentice. MediaQuant, a tracking firm, estimated 
Trump’s free media time to have been worth the equivalent of $5.2 bil-
lion in advertising.
Clinton did not do badly herself, totaling $3.2 billion. Both party 
nominees had a decided advantage in this regard over their opponents 
in the race for the nomination.5 Bernie Sanders could match neither the 
rating bonanza that Trump’s celebrity and crude behavior generated, nor 
the celebrity status of Clinton, who was not only (like Sanders) a Senator 
but also a highly visible influence in her husband’s presidency and a for-
mer Secretary of State in the Obama White House.6 That changed after 
the debates began and after Sanders broke through with a win in the 
New Hampshire primary. And one can argue as well that Clinton’s finan-
cial advantage was balanced by the baggage she carried into the nomina-
tion fight, having to deal with gender stereotypes and with prejudice in 
reporting on her appearance, clothing, and even her laugh.7 Even in the 
political sketches done by Saturday Night Live, where female members 
of the cast virtually endorsed her campaign, she was often depicted in 
a way that can be compared to Richard Nixon’s reputation as “Tricky 

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   189
Dick.” In 2007, in a Halloween sketch, SNL depicted Clinton as host-
ess of a Halloween Party for her rivals for the 2008 nomination. She is 
clearly dressed as a bride but is repeatedly mistaken for a witch by other 
candidates—except by then-Senator Barack Obama, the only one who 
appeared in the sketch as himself.
The need to raise mountains of money and to gain media access are 
antidemocratic facts of political life in the United States, but not all 
fundraising from the wealthy is hidden. Before the primaries begin the 
candidates have incentive to prove their viability by publicizing their suc-
cess at garnering a large campaign war chest. Many political scientists and 
liberal/left activists have focused on the pernicious effects of this “money 
primary,” but by and large contributors do not launder their contribu-
tions and attempt to hide their identity to citizens. Dark Money operates 
differently. These super wealthy donors are protected by a series of court 
decisions that allow them to influence politics through establishing tax 
exempt organization whose donors are not easily traceable. Incorporated 
as organizations to promote education and community welfare, these 
groups often engage in a different kind of partisanship in the form of 
ideological projects seeking to influence the political culture, not just win 
an election. This includes systematic funding of institutions and founda-
tions and amplification of the right wing, populist movements, such as 
the Tea Party.
The last major American political scandal that called the role of money 
in politics into question was Watergate, a broader set of crimes and cor-
ruption that unraveled after a group of operatives with links to the Nixon 
campaign broke into Democratic Party headquarters in the Watergate 
office complex in the capital. This was the catalyst for broad campaign 
finance legislation that among other things sought to limit the size of 
contributions to campaigns and to ensure more transparency reporting 
requirements to the newly established Federal Election Commission 
(FEC). Subsequently, Buckley v. Valeo (1976), Citizens United (2008), 
and other court decisions have frustrated public limits on money’s influ-
ence and allowed anonymity for ultra-wealthy donors under the guise of 
guaranteeing First Amendment rights of free speech.
Some political scientists believe that party insiders more than money 
usually decide the outcome of nomination fights, but at least as far as the 
GOP goes, the theory that “the party decides” did not fare well in 2016.8 
This theory seemed to hold in the 2008 and 2012 election cycles, and cer-
tainly the candidate of party insiders prevailed on the Democratic side in 

190   D. C. HELLINGER
2016, with Hillary Clinton gaining the nomination over Sanders, the pop-
ulist insurgent. Consistent with the “party decides” Clinton handily won a 
majority of primary votes, and she locked up the nomination with strong 
majority support of party appointed “superdelegates” at the convention. 
While there were tensions at times between the two main Democratic 
candidates, the primary debates were unusually civil and policy focused. 
Trump, on the other hand, took no prisoners among his Republican pri-
mary challengers and ran a general election campaign drawing on popular 
anger and mistrust of the entire political class, not just Democrats.
The nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics, which tracks both 
candidate committee funds and outside support, found that Hillary 
Clinton’s campaign outspent Trump’s campaign by $230 million, but 
outside groups supporting Trump outspent Clinton’s campaign by $256 
million (see Table 4.1, Chapter 4). What clearly happened is that despite 
running the most scorched-earth nomination campaigns in American 
history, a broad coalition of right-populist forces came together behind 
the Trump candidacy to snatch victory in an election run under rules 
originally concocted in the eighteenth century to protect slavery, check 
political ambition, and protect against “tyranny of the majority.” Today 
the rules of the game not only check majority abuse but enable major 
policies on taxation, abortion, environmental policy, labor union organ-
izing, etc., to be made by the minority party in the country. The system 
checks majority rule well short of tyranny. Dark Money is a key resource 
for elites to check democratic governance.
Trump’s campaign did include significant financial help from some 
of the wealthiest Americans, but not from the Koch brothers, Charles 
and David. They were disappointed with the GOP presidential choice—a 
New Yorker, a former Democrat, opponent of immigration, and one 
who was making promises both to launch a major government-spon-
sored infrastructure program and to “drain the swamp,” America’s most 
stealthy swamp critters had been expected to spend almost $900 mil-
lion on the 2016 campaign, but, as Slate’s Reihan Salam put it, “Instead 
of shaping the outcome of this or that political race, they’ve sought to 
amplify the voices of activists and intellectuals who share their suspicion 
of government power.”9 So they redirected their resources to where they 
already were proving effective, state and local elections and right-wing 
foundations. They may have failed to get one of their top choices in pres-
idency, their longer term stealth campaign considerably shaped the first 
year 18 months of Trump’s presidency.

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   191
Dark Money and Billionaire Cabals
The reforms invalidated by Buckley v. Valeo and Citizens United reo-
pened the funding spigot that was visibly flowing freely in the pre-Water-
gate era. The 1972 election had seen an unprecedented jump in money 
raised by both major party presidential candidates, and especially by 
President Richard Nixon. His fundraising activities included barely dis-
guised collusion with large donors. Campaign spending in 1972 was 4.5 
their levels in the 1960 campaign between Nixon and John F. Kennedy, 
with Nixon’s campaign having increased its expenditures from $10.1 
exceeded his 1960 to $61.4 million.10 Worse, funding was increasingly 
being tied to policy. For example, a dairy farmers’ cooperative that had 
previously supported Democratic candidates delivered $2 million in cam-
paign contributions to Nixon and his campaign staff in exchange for 
higher subsidies and higher milk prices.11 If influence peddling were not 
enough, the money found its way into the conspiratorial activities of the 
Committee to Reelect the President (aptly named “CREEP”) and the 
activities of the notorious “Plumbers,” a covert unit that included former 
CIA operatives and an FBI investigator. The Plumbers, an early mani-
festation of what later would be called the “Deep State,” was formed to 
carry out illegal surveillance and activities and stop leaking of classified 
information, including the Pentagon Papers.
In Buckley v. Valeo the Supreme Court severely limited the reach of 
the campaign finance reform legislation of 1971, largely on grounds that 
many key provisions limiting expenditures violated the First Amendment. 
In 2010, the rationale was extended in a new ruling in Citizens United 
v. Federal Election Commission, this time invalidating limits and disclo-
sure requirements for a special category of organizations operating under 
a provision (501c4) granting tax exempt status to such groups as long 
as they operate “not-for-profit” and “exclusively to promote social wel-
fare.” Unlike the case for 501c3 organizations, contributions to 501c4 
the foundations are not tax deductible, but the advantage is that they 
do not have to disclose donors to the Internal Revenue Service. Dark 
Money was born.
The Pulitzer Prize winning investigative journalist Jane Mayer of The 
New Yorker Magazine is most responsible for shining a light on the influ-
ence of “Dark Money” in several reports for the magazine and in her 
book by that title, which details the role played by the “billionaires behind 
the rise of the radical right.”12 Trump was decidedly not the favorite of 

192   D. C. HELLINGER
this elite circle of one-percenters, especially the ones most closely chron-
icled by Mayer, i.e., the Koch brothers. That honor goes to Senator Ted 
Cruz. Nonetheless, Trump attracted crucial support from at least one 
member of the billionaire’s club—Robert Mercer, whose funds signifi-
cantly aided the professionalization of the Trump campaign in the general 
election.
Citizens United, the plaintiff in the ruling that did much to unleash 
stealth political influence, was founded by a political consultant, Floyd 
Brown, with significant funding by the Kochs. Brown’s legal challenge 
involved an FEC ruling that said his group’s desire to distribute a film, 
Hillary, the Movie, before the 2008 election, was partisan advertising to 
influence the election, something not permitted for corporations and 
labor unions; Citizens United would be required to disclose its donors, 
as required for election advertising. At the time of the film’s release, 
Clinton was widely regarded as the leading candidate for the Democratic 
nomination for president. The “documentary” not only criticized her 
public record but featured various public figures on the right claim-
ing that she is “steeped in sleaze,” is “deceitful” and “will make up any 
story and will lie about anything as long as it serves her purpose at the 
moment”; is “venal, sneaky’; etc.
The Kochs seized on the ruling in favor of Citizens United to advance 
the project of a group of right-wing business people already embarked 
upon a careful and well-funded strategy to move their anti-statist views, 
according to Mayer, “from the fringe to the center of American political 
life.”13 The Koch fortune is derived mainly from industries and invest-
ments connected to fossil fuels, an industry that is subject to significant 
regulation, especially environmental protection laws. While this lends a 
pecuniary interest to this funding strategies, their economic interests are 
well married to an extreme libertarian ideology; in fact, their initial strat-
egy was a failed effort to transform the Libertarian Party into a vehicle 
for their goals. Although they were not fans of candidate Trump, Koch-
funded organizations went into action after the electon to pressure the 
Senate into confirming Scott Pruitt, Oklahoma attorney general, and a 
climate change denier, to head the Environmental Protection Agency 
and Betsy DeVos, whose family’s estimated worth is $45 billion, as 
Secretary of Education. The Devos Foundation makes charter schools 
and privatization of education their priority goal.14
Mayer’s book is densely packed with examples of how the Kochs and 
other billionaires consciously developed a strategy to use the 501c4 

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   193
provision to create front foundations. Given the source of their fortunes, 
it should not surprise that among the issues targeted by the brothers is 
climate change, especially the scientific consensus that human activity 
and emissions from fossil fuels play an important role. Stealing a page 
from the tobacco companies, the Kochs indirectly funded research 
and dissemination of “scholarly” articles challenging the consensus 
that human activity is contributing to global warming—and the exist-
ence of global warming itself. Many of the contributions were chan-
neled through a pair of affiliated organizations, DonorsTrust and 
Donors Capital Fund, which had been founded by arch-Conservatives. 
DonorsTrust made no secret that it offered donors anonymity, using its 
tax status (as a donor-advised, not “donor-run” foundation), providing 
the anonymity sought by wealthy contributors to prevent their being 
associated with controversial issues. In 2008, the Kochs’ Americans for 
Prosperity (AFP) launched a successful campaign to have GOP legisla-
tors sign a “no climate change” pledge, ensuring synergy between the 
stealth effort to distort public understanding of the issue with more pub-
lic lobbying (though donors behind AFP remained anonymous) that 
successfully erased substantial Republican support for “cap and trade” 
legislation.15 The conspiratorial intent was not at that time focused on 
getting Scott Pruitt appointed to head the EPA but to shift the overall 
political terrain in a way that made it possible to confirm a climate denier 
to the agency most responsible for protecting the atmosphere from car-
bon emissions. This type of operation was more than just normal interest 
group lobbying; it constituted a stealth propaganda operation.
By Mayer’s reckoning, between 1999 and 2015, Donors Trust dis-
tributed $750 million to right-wing causes. “What much of the stealth 
funding bought was dissemination of scientific doubt,” writes Mayer. 
Skeptical scientists were recruited and given public relations training. 
The purpose was never to carry out research putting the climate change 
science to the test but mainly to magnify the claims of a small coterie of 
dissenters and to question the idea that a consensus existed. And hiding 
the identity of those funding this effort was explicitly recognized as criti-
cal to the strategy.16
The Kochs were not the only super-rich, nor the wealthiest bene-
factors that have in stealth bankrolled stealth right-wing foundations. 
Mayer’s book exposes similar activity by the Mercer, Mellon Scaife, Olin, 
Bradley families, and others who followed a similar playbook. All were 
instrumental in founding and financing large conservative foundations 

194   D. C. HELLINGER
and political organizations. The history of their movement is now uncov-
ered, but for many years it was effectively cloaked. The stealth not only 
darkened the money trail behind these “educational” groups, but it also 
darkened the organizational model, training, and direction provided by 
these wealthy funders.
Mayer carefully eschews labeling the Koch operation a “conspir-
acy.” But her book provides a vivid description of the stealth planning 
that occurred after the 2008 Citizens United ruling at the January 2009 
edition of a biannual conference of wealthy contributors. According 
to Mayer, “billionaire businessmen, heirs to some of America’s great-
est dynastic fortunes, right-wing media moguls, conservative elected 
officials, and savvy political operatives” were joined at a Palm Springs 
resort by “eloquent writers and publicists” connected to well-heeled 
think-tanks and publications.17 It is at these conferences where key long-
range planning to shift the political playing field take place. As at Davos, 
the conferences include public events where key objectives are openly 
acknowledged, but as evidenced by a copy of the 2014 agenda obtained 
by The Nation,18 a good deal of important business is conducted in 
secret. Unlike Davos, the Koch conclave’s agenda includes not just gen-
eral exchanges of views but hard-nosed planning for coming political 
battles. The 2014 agenda, besides golf and a panel devoted to rescuing 
the reputation of President Calvin Coolidge, included breakout sessions 
on influencing the Senate, “changing the narrative” on Energy, “leverage 
science and the university,” and “Engaging Your Workforce in the Cause 
of Freedom.”
Although in her book Mayer carefully avoids referring to such activ-
ity as engaging in a conspiracy, though in an earlier article she refers to 
the Kochs’ activities as “covert operations.”19 Regardless, Dark Money 
describes activity that fits the definition of “conspiracy theory” laid out 
in this book in Chapter 1. The Kochs and their allies constituted a collu-
sion, planning and working together secretly with one another to achieve 
a political goal. Not all their activity would be vulnerable to defeat by 
exposure, and maintaining confidential one’s political strategy is not ipso 
facto engaging in conspiracy. But their stealth operations go well beyond 
a normal concern not to divulge political tactics to opponents. The pur-
pose of Dark Money operation is to prevent wealthy donors from being 
identified with promotion of partisan campaigns and controversial issues. 
Candidates and backers of causes would much rather have political 
advertising, “educational think-tanks,” and financial reports be identifed 

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   195
with “Americans for Prosperity” (who isn’t for that?) than “Charles and 
David Koch” as their source. Thanks to Citizens United their political 
activity is not illegal, but it is deceptive and unethical.
An even more controversial book by historian Nancy MacLean 
unveiled the deliberate secretive nature of Charles Koch and his super-
rich colleagues to reshape American politics via a plan that explicitly 
anticipated the need for secrecy and deception. The documentary evi-
dence was discovered almost accidentally by MacLean, already a dis-
tinguished member of her profession, by virtue of her research and 
publication on social movements in the American South. She was look-
ing in the archives of economist James Buchanan for material on an 
early attempt to implement a private school voucher plan in the state of 
Virginia. In 1954 Brown v. Board of Education had mandated desegre-
gation of schools, and Virginia politicians were looking for a way around 
it. Buchanan’s letters and manuscripts outlined the role that he played 
in providing intellectual cover for privatization of education, which was 
one way whites were (and still are) able to evade mandated intervention. 
His writings eventually attracted the attention of Charles Koch and led 
to Buchanan founding an institute that was generously funded by the 
billionaire. Although Buchanan’s direct influence over the legislation was 
limited, his “public choice theory” became a school of thought that pro-
vided a more general argument for a radical rollback of the role of gov-
ernment and in privatization of many of its functions, promoted as part 
of the long-range stealth plan to shift the political culture.
Buchanan, a Nobel Prize winning economist, did not begin this line 
of thought at the behest of the Kochs, and certainly his scholarly work 
was not conspiratorial. His academic research and writing was inspired 
by the ultra-liberal (in the classical sense of laissez faire) ideas of the 
Austrian school of economics. It is difficult today to remember that 
the idea of the public school to provide universal education was a great 
American idea, envied elsewhere in the world. But Buchanan regarded 
it as a state monopoly that lacked the efficiency imposed by market dis-
cipline, and in addition infringing on individual freedom of choice. For 
this reason he was an early advocate privatization of schools.20 Whether 
Buchanan advocated racially segregated schools, as MacLean contends, is 
disputed, but there is little doubt that after Brown the idea of privatizing 
schools had particular appeal in the South, including in Virginia, where 
Buchanan, who was born and raised in Tennessee, made his academic 
career.

196   D. C. HELLINGER
Buchanan came to the attention of Charles Koch in the 1970s, and 
the billionaire’s interest increased as he became more frustrated with 
the inability of the Libertarian Party to advance his goals. In 1982, 
Buchanan took his economic team to George Mason University, where 
with funding from Koch his public choice theories began to flourish. By 
MacLean’s reckoning, Buchanan may have been less well-known that 
Milton Friedman, the very visible public intellectual associated with lais-
sez faire economic thought in the Cold War era, but with Koch’s back-
ing Buchanan may have exercised even more influence over advancing 
the laissez faire political cause. His public choice theories provided the 
intellectual underpinning for academic studies by acolytes in foundations 
and other universities generously funded by the Kochs. Charles provided 
key support for Buchanan when he moved his Center for the Study of 
Public Choice (CSPC) from Virginia Tech to George Mason, which con-
tributed to that institution’s ascent to prominence as a first-tier research 
institution. The institute was renamed the Mercatus Center. Mercatus 
was among several George Mason institutions that, according to a let-
ter of apology from the University’s president in 2018, violated ethical 
norms in giving conservative donors influence over admissions, appoint-
ments, and other academic matters.21
Buchanan’s papers reveal practical political brilliance in advocating the 
kind of stealth organizing that the Kochs and their ilk have pursued with 
great success. They show, according to MacLean, “How and why stealth 
became so intrinsic to this movement. Buchanan had realized the value 
of stealth long before encountering Koch, while still trying to influence 
Virginia politicians. But it was Koch who institutionalized this policy.”22 
The problem, in Koch’s mind and in Buchanan’s public choice theory 
alike, was that electoral democracy had a built-in bias against the wealthy, 
who, much as Ayn Rand portrayed in her novels glorifying the individ-
ual against the bureaucratic state, were the real guarantors of freedom 
and prosperity in a society. Buchanan’s ideas complemented this liber-
tarian ideology long embraced by the Kochs. His public choice theory 
argued that in an electoral democracy politicians’ careers depend upon 
votes, so rationally politicians would have an incentive to tax the wealthy 
to provide benefits for the poor and working class. The theory under-
mines democracy, MacLean argues, because it views the essence of good 
government not as virtuous citizens influencing policy through major-
ity rule, but instead inefficiency and nothing less than the theft of the 
income and property of wealthier citizens. In addition, and something 

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   197
not articulated in his published work, Buchanan explicitly recommended 
stealth tactics to create momentum for reform and to undermine what 
he regarded as the self-interested motives of politicians and ordinary cit-
izens.23 To capture the idea that the central purpose was to strip citizens 
of their power to exercise majority rule for the public good, MacLean 
entitled her book Democracy in Chains.
The Kochs’ main political arm for promoting public choice politically 
has been AFP. AFP led all outside funders in political advertising in the 
2014 election cycle. As mentioned earlier, the Kochs had planned to 
spend close to $900 million for the 2016 cycle, but it reported spend-
ing only $13.6 million on the 2016 presidential election, mostly to its 
preferred candidate, Texas Senator Ted Cruz. Many other conservative 
groups followed the Koch example. They outspent liberal ones in 2012 
by the count of $235 million to $35 million, Their spending declined in 
2016 to $41.9 in that election. The decline can largely be attributed to 
lack of enthusiasm for Trump and their consequent shifting attention to 
down-ballot races.24
Like other groups funded by billionaires, AFP is registered as a 501c4, 
technically a foundation to promote social welfare. One might argue that 
what constitutes promoting social welfare versus partisan political cam-
paigning is in the eye of the beholder, but the large majority of organ-
izations so classified are not engaged in political activity or advocacy.25 
The IRS rules26 permit qualified organizations to engage in lobbying 
as their “primary activity,” but the regulations make it clear that this is 
not a pre-dispensation for them to undertake the kind of activity that 
we associate with partisan political influence or with advancing objectives 
that mainly benefit the members of the organization. So, for example, an 
organization of volunteer fire departments can lobby for increased sup-
port for fire-fighting. The promotion of social welfare does not include 
direct or indirect participation or intervention in political campaigns on 
behalf of or in opposition to any candidate for public office.
It is not very surprising that when, during the Obama administration, 
the IRS began to investigate the actual purpose and activity of some of 
the groups, both liberal and conservative, heavily involved in advocacy, 
especially those that engage in large-scale political advertising, the right-
wing media launched a campaign accusing the IRS of political harass-
ment. However, if the leaked agenda27 from the 2014 Koch brothers’ 
conclave is any guide, there is no question that rather than promoting 
community welfare the closed door sessions are devoted to prioritizing 

198   D. C. HELLINGER
political work—both long-term strategies for shaping the political cul-
ture and planning for the coming electoral cycle, including considerable 
attention to state and local politics.
While most of the billionaires were not enthusiastic about Trump, 
often overlooked in analysis of the election outcome is that Trump’s Vice 
President, former Indiana Governor Mike Pence, is a particular favorite 
of the Kochs. A large contingent of Republicans in Congress, key 
appointees in Cabinet and executive agencies, and GOP office holders at 
the state level have been heavily funded by the network of organizations 
put together and coordinated by the Kochs. If the tax code is further 
amended to permit churches and other political organizations to under-
take political activities, as the GOP’s bill before Congress in late 2017 
originally provided, an entirely new sector of organizations becomes 
available to front for conservative billionaires. While this provision did 
not make it through, the 2017 tax code, the proposal is far from dead.
Dark Money operations are not directed only at the federal govern-
ment. The Bradley Foundation is headquartered in Milwaukee and like 
other entities of the billionaires’ network has focused on a bottom-up 
strategy through ALEC, the American Legislative Exchange Council, 
originally founded by Scaife. One of the more recent campaigns funded 
by Bradley is an effort to maintain the privacy of donors in the Dark 
Money network. Many of ALEC’s activities involve anti-union initia-
tives, especially aimed at public employee unions. It is not just money 
that ALEC funnels to these efforts, but expertise, including ready-to-go, 
off-the-shelf model legislation for anti-labor and antigay legislation. One 
reason we know how Bradley’s Dark Money is used is that its computers 
were hacked, and a trove of internal documents was leaked to the Center 
for Media and Democracy.
Another “not-for-profit” group, the Barber Fund uses generous 
Bradley money intended for what the latter calls “state infrastructure 
grant making” to finance projects that go to right-wing organizations 
that show “quality and promise.” The Republican Party is not men-
tioned as the beneficiary of the projects, but any sensible interpretation 
suggests that Bradley, operating through Barber, is hardly a nonparti-
san organization. States are evaluated by Bradley for effective targeting 
of grants (through Barber), and it should hardly surprise that many of 
the upper “blue wall” states in the Midwest have been designated high 
priority.

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   199
Few analysts anticipated that Trump would choose a politician 
closely aligned with the white Christian right and the Dark Money oli-
garchs—former Indiana Governor Mike Pence, a longtime favorite of the 
Bradleys and the Kochs. News reports indicated that Trump was reluc-
tant to choose Pence but was persuaded otherwise by Paul Manafort, 
the man brought in to assume the campaign chair in order to tame 
party dissenters, and by Jerod Kushner, the man (Trump’s son-in-law) 
with the analytics. Mainstream news reports were so caught up in “ball-
game” reporting and personalities (in particular, the falling fortunes of 
New Jersey Governor Chris Christie and former Speaker of the House, 
Newt Gingrich) that they only secondarily did they note Pence’s close 
ties to the Christian right. Also virtually ignored were Pence’s close ties 
to Charles Koch, who tried to induce him to run for president in 2012,28 
and his connections to another powerful, anti-statist billionaire lobby, 
the Bradley Foundation, which with $835 million in assets is larger 
than three Koch foundations combined. Outside of the deep South 
and Kansas, in the Pence years as governor of Indiana the state was the 
only one rated to achieve the Bradley Foundation’s highest ranking for 
“receptive policy makers.”29
Pence’s history with Bradley includes his participation in a 
Foundation cosponsored conference on the Tea Party, which, Pence 
said, is about “going back to the source of our greatness, which is our 
character, our faith, our belief in limited government.”30 A major bene-
factor of the Foundation is the “Independent Women’s Forum,” whose 
board included Kellyanne Conway, one of Trump’s key media spokes-
persons and whose consulting firm did work for Pence in Indiana. One 
of Bradley’s major projects is promotion of voter fraud theories,31 and 
Pence, who championed the cause in Indiana, was been named the 
cochair of Trump’s (now defunct) voter fraud commission, investigating 
the president’s claim that 5 million votes were cast illegally in 2016.32
The influence of Dark Money was felt in the campaign by the way 
it enabled Trump campaign operatives to carefully target audiences on 
social media with misleading and fabricated stories. Especially active in 
this area was billionaire Mercer, who over 2011–2016 channeled tens 
of millions of dollars to several operations closely connected to Bannon, 
including Breitbart News and, especially valuable to the Trump general 
election campaign, Cambridge Associates, which provided crucial ana-
lytics that Trump lacked up to his securing the nomination. Cambridge 
worked closely with Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner. Forbes Magazine 

200   D. C. HELLINGER
reported that by the end of the campaign, the data operation determined 
decisions on “travel, fundraising, advertising, rally locations” as well as 
the topics and keywords Trump used in speeches. Business Week and 
Guardian reports linked Cambridge to voter suppression efforts. There 
are at least similarities in way analytics were used to the way that Russian 
sources were able to spread divisive messages on social media.33
Dark Money and the Deep State intersected at Cambridge, whose 
data mining analytics had been involved in “messaging and information 
services” on behalf of US forces in Pakistan and Afghanistan—that is, 
the company is experienced in propaganda operations. Mercer, a major 
stakeholder in the firm, worked on the Brexit campaign (the referendum 
that endorsed the United Kingdom leaving the European Union). His 
Mercer Family Foundation funds the Heartland Institute, a key force 
in the climate change denial movement. In other words, Mercer is not 
only a key player in the billionaire conspiracy to shrink the democratic 
state, he is a key enabler of conspiracy theories that have little to no war-
rant. Steve Bannon credits Mercer with having “laid the ground for the 
Trump Revolution,” more so than the Koch brothers.34
Mercer’s alliance with Bannon grew out of the billionaire’s finan-
cial support of Breitbart News, where Bannon first made his name and 
to which he returned after being cut loose by Trump from the White 
House in 2017. As discussed in Chapter 4, Breitbart has played a direct 
role in promoting the paranoid variety of conspiracy theory in the cul-
ture and the alt-right. Mercer, whose fortune was made in hedge funds, 
remained an ally of Breitbart and Bannon throughout most of 2017, 
holding an ownership share in Breitbart and providing some of the funds 
Bannon needed as he tried to expand the influence of the most radical 
right wing of the Republican Party.35 This effort, in turn, provoked a 
backlash from other wealthy elites who backed the party professionals, 
but Mercer’s daughter, Rebekah, remained supportive of Bannon until 
the latter’s vitriolic criticism of Trump became public through quota-
tions in a “tell-all” book released in early 2018 made the relationship 
untenable. Bannon subsequently resigned as CEO of Breitbart.
Dark Money stealth, both on the part of politicians and donors, is not 
limited to the federal level (as the aforementioned activities of ALEC 
showed). In January 2016, seeking the GOP nomination for governor 
of Missouri, which he eventually became in November, Eric Greitens, 
tried to separate himself from Republican rivals by promising that the 
sources of his political funding would always be public knowledge. He 

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   201
told St. Louis Public Radio, “The most important thing is that there is 
transparency around the money,” and he accused other candidates of 
having set up “secretive super PACs.” The people are able, he said, to 
“see every single one of our donors.’’ However, a post-election investiga-
tive report found that one single stealth donation to Greitens’ campaign 
alone totaled $1.975 million. The funding originated with a group, the 
American Political Coalition, but passed first through a super PAC called 
SEALS for Truth (Greitens was a veteran of the Navy SEALS) before 
landing in Greitens’ campaign fund, thereby evading state disclosure 
rules and hiding the true donor, who remains unknown. John Messmer 
of Missourians for Government Reform commented, “When drug deal-
ers do this, it’s called money laundering,” Greitens also used a list of 
donors to a veterans support organization he founded to raise $2 mil-
lion.36 He was undone and forced to resign in 2018 by a sexual scandal 
that made him more vulnerable to his political enemies (Republicans as 
well as Democrats), who pressed for an investigation into his campaign 
financing.
Show Us the Dark Money Trail
One might reasonably ask if exposure of the Koch strategy by Mayer, 
MacLean, news organizations and others means that the Koch network 
and others can no longer act conspiratorially. Dark Money institutions 
continue to spend prodigiously directly to influence legislative votes 
(increasingly on the state level) to support or oppose candidates, and to 
support or oppose state referendums. “Educational” advertising prior-
ities are calculated at secret sessions of the annual conference to influ-
ence elections and legislation. And while research by Mayer, MacLean, 
and others has exposed much about the billionaire “welfare” club, the 
lack of transparency in their operations and funding makes it extraordi-
narily difficult for watchdog organizations, much less the supine FEC, 
to determine the origin of money flowing through the system. By comb-
ing 501c3 reports, it is possible to detect some of the money trails. The 
Center for Responsible Politics and its sister organization, OpenSecrets.
org, can trace some of the money, but funds are often laundered through 
three or four different foundations and committees.
And of course, this task even much more difficult for ordinary citi-
zens. Readers of this book most likely would recognize AFP now as a 
Koch organization, but what about the general public? In some cases, it 

202   D. C. HELLINGER
is not difficult to identify the source of some of the largest contributors. 
The National Rifle Association and the NARAL Pro-Choice America are 
usually not difficult to identify when they take out ads. Both are 501c4 
organizations, which means they do not have to identify their donors, 
but there is little doubt what they stand for and that they have millions 
of members. They may sometimes move funds to other organizations or 
to their affiliated PACs, but as associations with a broad base of member-
ship they have an interest in seeing their donors see that they are defend-
ing their interests. No matter how you feel about them, a lot (but not 
all) of their ads and programs are funded openly, not in the dark.
Conservatives have often equated the funding of good govern-
ance organizations by George Soros and other wealthy liberals as virtu-
ally equally potent and deceptive. The data on campaign contributions, 
reviewed above, certainly suggests that some liberal groups have ben-
efitted from the largesse of Soros and others. Open Secrets has docu-
mented a significant increase in Dark Money flowing to liberal causes 
and the Democratic Party. A new liberal Dark Money fund was created 
by Senae democrats for the 2018 midterm elections. As with conserv-
ative Dark Money, this allows wealthy donors to hide their political 
associatons. However, little has surfaced suggesting the kind of coordi-
nation (e.g., at the bi-annual Koch conclaves) that conservative billion-
aires have engaged in. One can also legitimately question (though no 
definitive proof has emerged) whether the Clinton Foundation,37 which 
has attracted seven-figure donations from wealthy interests around the 
world, was used to enhance donors’ access to Hillary Clinton when 
she was Secretary of State. However, the Clinton Foundation has not 
sought, like the conservative billionaires’ club, to engage in political 
advertising, to influence policymaking, to reshape the Democratic Party, 
or shift the overall political climate.
Another favorite target of organizations highlighted by conservative 
critics are longstanding publications and organizations with a record on 
nonpartisan criticism of ethics and the influence of money. For example, 
in 2013 the right-wing Cyber News Network (formerly Conservative 
News Network) complained that Soros had contributed $6.1 million to 
organizations, including the Campaign Legal Center (CLC, a 501c3), 
Democracy 21 (a 501c4), and the Center for Public Integrity (CPI, a 
501c3), all of which have urged the IRS to investigate abuse of 501c4’s. 
The CLC’s avowed purpose is promoting enforcement of campaign 
finance laws. Democracy 21 is a similar organization that promotes 

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   203
limitations on money’s influence in campaigns and advocates for legal 
remedies. The CPI carries out nonpartisan investigations of alleged 
corruption.
On the other hand, consider the 45Committee, which suddenly 
emerged late in the 2016 campaign but was forced to cease operations 
after being hacked. The 45Committee says “It was founded in 2015 
and has been educating Americans about the challenges facing the 45th 
president of the United States.”38 That would be Donald Trump, but 
it didn’t do much to educate him apparently. OpenSecrets identifies 
45Committee as having spent $21.3 million in its few months of activ-
ity, almost all of it against one Democratic candidate—Hillary Clinton. 
In the final days of the campaign, as it became clear that Clinton’s 
lead in the polls had narrowed, the group spent $10 million dollars on 
anti-Clinton ads. It turns out that its main benefactor was Todd Ricketts, 
owner of the Chicago Cubs, who originally stood for “anybody but 
Trump” but later put his own and money collected from other latecom-
ers into the Trump campaign, anonymously, through 45Committee.39
It is logical that the campaign finance reform movement and good 
governance organizations are likely to shine a brighter spotlight on right-
wing Dark Money operations simply because the money flow is larger 
and because most of the super-rich seek anonymity. Far from ignoring 
liberal groups, watchdog organizations like OpenSecrets.org and the 
Committee for Responsible Politics zealously campaign for more trans-
parency in campaign finance, something hard to find as a goal of any of 
the conservative 501c3 and 501c4 organizations.
The Supreme Court itself has been shaped by Dark Money. When 
OpenSecrets looked into the financial muscle behind Judicial Crisis 
Network (JCN), which lobbied heavily and directed much of the con-
servative effort to block a vote on President Obama’s nominee to fill a 
Supreme Court vacancy nearly a year before the Democrat’s term was 
up, it found not a grassroots network of conservatives but yet another 
501c4 organization, the Wellspring Committee. That group provided 
more than 90% of JCN’s funds. Because Wellspring does not have to 
report its donor base, it is impossible to know exactly who was behind 
it today, but it was originally created by the Koch network. Among ben-
efactors of Wellspring’s funding is a public relations firm, BH Group, 
which has a mailing address in Arlington, Virginia.40 When OpenSecrets 
went to the address, there was only a mailbox. The mailbox apparently 
spent $7 million on blocking Merrick Garland, Obama’s nominee, and 

204   D. C. HELLINGER
then another $10 million to support confirmation of Trump’s nomi-
nee, Neil Gorsuch. Around the same time, BH Group made a $20 mil-
lion contribution to George Mason University, whose president later 
acknowledged in a letter of apology that the donation was one of several 
gifts from wealthy conservatives that inappropriately gave donors influ-
ence over university decisions.41
We need to keep in mind that watchdog organizations, such as Center 
for Responsible Politics and OpenSecrets.org, must spend extensive time 
and money to track down the true source of money in the political pro-
cess. The law permits the Kochs and other wealthy donors to create a 
highly complex labyrinth. Inadequate laws governing campaign finance, 
interpretations of the tax code that distort the meaning of educational 
philanthropy, and Court decisions treating spending as speech all provide 
cover for stealth political funding, making it necessary to make suppo-
sitions and carefully guarded conclusions about connections and donor 
identity. And that is just the point here about the conspiratorial nature 
of Dark Money in American politics. Yet, the “conspiracy theory” label 
is frequently used to denigrate or discredit the efforts of those who work 
to expose Dark Money’s origins, a classic case of what Bratich calls “con-
spiracy panic’ (see Chapters 1 and 2).42
Conspiracy Panic and Muckraking
Mayer and MacLean have in common that each in their respective 
books emphasizes the importance of agency and transparency in political 
activity. Mayer is less assertive and feels compelled in her introduction 
to acknowledge that there are internal differences among the super-
rich attendees at the Kochs’ conclaves. “They were not the predictable 
cartoon villains of conspiracy theories,”43 she writes. Mayer mistakenly 
believes that all participants in a conspiracy must be in full agreement 
with each other in their goals. What is necessary is that they agree to 
“breath together” to undertake action in common. And Mayer recog-
nizes conspiratorial elements in the Koch family. She notes that the Koch 
brothers’ father, Fred, was an early member of the far-right John Birch 
Society. Though Charles Koch saw the Birchers as a handicap to the con-
servative movement, he and his brother also joined the organization for 
a while. Appropriately, an overtone of conspiracism can be found in her 
writing about other billionaire donors as well. Richard Mellon Scaife, 
a billionaire who created the model that the Kochs would later follow, 

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   205
“had a lifelong infatuation with intrigue, conspiracy theories and inter-
national affairs.” William Simon, elevated by the billionaire John Olin, 
claimed that a “‘secret system’ of academics, media figures, bureaucrats, 
and public interest advocates ran the country.”44
Given the right’s hostility to organizations promoting campaign 
finance transparency, it hardly surprises that Mayer and MacLean have 
attracted the ire of publications and foundations linked to the super-rich. 
What is more surprising, perhaps, is that friendly reviews of their books 
sometimes criticize them, especially MacLean, for allegedly veering off 
into conspiracism. My defense of Mayer and MacLean is not a denial of 
this charge but a “so what.” Keeping the funding targets and strategies 
of Koch, Bradley, and other wealthy oligarchs hidden allows them to 
effectively “weaponized philanthropy.” Their organizational missions are 
supposed to be nonpartisan and in the broad public interest. The main 
reason we know something about their tactics is that investigative report-
ers, critical academics, and hackers have exposed their strategic planning 
and funding allocations. In the case of Bradley, a trove of documents 
were purloined in October 2016 and sent to reporters by hackers that, 
the FBI believes, also hacked the Democratic National Committee.45
Mayer nowhere claims that the Koch network and several other finan-
cial fronts of other billionaire donors constitute a conspiracy, but the title 
of her book refers to “dark” money, a “hidden” history, and the “billion-
aires behind the rise of the radical right.” The text is punctuated with 
references to legal money laundering to hide the true sources of funding 
for various political campaigns, strategic planning to fund the Tea Party 
and other AstroTurf movements, and various educational foundations 
and think-tanks to promote conservative criticism and sometimes to 
manufacture criticism without scientific foundation.
At the 2011 Koch gathering, when the brothers were confronted for 
the first time with protesters and exposure, the Kochs “spoke darkly and 
inaccurately about the Obama White House conspiring with reporters to 
smear them,” remarks that anticipated the routine response of President 
Trump to protests and criticism. Koch front organizations are tied to 
campaigns to spread various conspiracy theories, such as, that voter fraud 
was a factor in Democratic election victories, that a disinformation cam-
paign that Obama’s health care reform would set up “death panels,” that 
global warming was a hoax perpetrated by self-interested scientists.46
MacLean, despite a title that refers to a “deep history” and a “stealth 
plan for America” never outright claims that the collaboration between 

206   D. C. HELLINGER
Buchanan and the billionaires, especially Charles Koch, constitutes a con-
spiracy. Intentionally or not, by eschewing that term, which appears in 
the index of neither her book nor Mayer’s, both authors can stake a posi-
tion within Foucault’s notion of the “regime of truth.”47 (See Chapter 2) 
Though they eschew openly characterizing this “collaboration” as a 
conspiracy, what they document does point to a conspiracy as concep-
tually defined in this book. And in this case, we have a conspiracy that 
matters—keeping in mind, however, that even a conspiracy among such 
powerful, wealthy actors is only one part of the story, only one factor in 
an explanation of America’s move to the right and the rise of Donald 
Trump. That is, to propose that Mayer and MacLean are conspiracy the-
orists is only to judge that what their research has uncovered is an opera-
tional conspiracy, not entirely successful but with a significant impact on 
American politics. To name the activities of the Kochs and other Dark 
Money billionaires as conspiratorial is only to acknowledge that they are 
collectively the equivalent of Crassus, whose money played an important 
role in transforming the Roman Republic into an imperial system, an 
ancient real estate tycoon who backed Julius Caesar’s rise to power.
Corruption in a Republic of Money
Zephyr Teachout’s history of corruption in America does not deal 
directly with conspiracy, but it is relevant to the conspiratorial nature 
of corrupt dealings in a faltering republic. Her book examines how 
American conceptions of corruption have evolved from the early days of 
the Republic, when Benjamin Franklin’s acceptance of a jeweled snuff-
box from the King of France to commemorate his departure from his 
post of ambassador in Paris generated a scandal in America, to the con-
temporary era, when even massive donations to political campaigns are 
regarded as legal and normal methods of influencing politics. Franklin’s 
acceptance of a gift was not in any way tied to an explicit or obvious 
political objective. It was not a bribe. That it became a scandal in its 
time, tarnishing Franklin’s, is emblematic, according to Teachout, of 
how the early American concept of civic virtue recoiled against the prac-
tice of European politics at the time. Europe was viewed as corrupted 
by the influence of wealth. This view of what in Europe was non-cor-
rupt, normal behavior as corruption in America led in the young United 
States enact to laws and rules that were “structural, or antiprophylactic— 
cover[ing] innocent as well as insidious transactions.” Early Americans 

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   207
saw that “temptation and influence work in indirect ways, and that cor-
ruption is not merely transactional, or ‘quid pro quo.”48
Buckley v. Valeo and the Citizens United decision defined money 
as speech and recognized corporate entities as endowed with First 
Amendment rights, even though they are not biological human citi-
zens. However, the Constitution, Teachout argues, would not necessarily 
obstruct campaign finance limits and regulations by the standards of the 
Founders’ era. The key case determining that large gifts and contribu-
tions to political figures are not corruption came in 1999 in Supreme 
Court ruling involving Sun Diamond’s gift to Obama’s Secretary of 
Agriculture, Mike Espy, of two tickets and travel expenses for Espy to 
attend the United States Tennis Open. At the time, Espy’s Department 
was considering new programs to encourage agricultural exports, as 
well as new regulations governing the use of pesticides in agriculture. 
Both matters would be of interest to the donor of the tennis trip, Sun-
Diamond Growers, a trade organization. After a jury found that the 
association had sought to curry favor with Espy through the gifts, an 
Appeals decision upheld by the Supreme Court agreed with the Growers 
that the government had failed to prove that there was any quid pro quo 
involved. Though the timing might be suspicious, a trip to a tennis tour-
nament could not be connected to the matters on Espy’s plate at the 
time, “reasoned” the Court.49
An irony of the Court rulings that unleashed a torrent of money into 
the political system is that the majority Justices included several self- 
described “strict-constructivists.” Today that philosophy has been broad-
ened to “originalism”, the idea that not only should the Constitution be 
read strictly to the “letter of the law” but that we should search for the 
intent of the framers by consulting their writings in the context of their 
times. Had the Justices chosen to do so, argues Teachout,50 they could 
have relied upon Article I, Sect. 9, Clause 8 of the Constitution, which 
reads,
No Title of Nobility shall be granted by the United States: And no Person 
holding any Office of Profit or Trust under them, shall, without the 
Consent of the Congress, accept of any present, Emolument, Office, or 
Title, of any kind whatever, from any King, Prince, or foreign State.
This clause is not merely a quaint relic of colonial resentment against 
the old Aristocratic order but a provision meant to deal with the danger 

208   D. C. HELLINGER
of corruption in a system designed to let “ambition counteract ambi-
tion.” While it literally pertains only to foreign “gifts”, its presence in the 
Constitution reflects also the Founders’ fear of the corrupting influence 
of those who can afford to be benefactors of public officials. Teachout 
shows that during eras of heightened concerns about the influence of 
wealth over politics, such as the Progressive era and post-Watergate dec-
ade, many statutes sought not only to limit quid pro quo bribery but 
also restrict private influence in broader forms, the kind of beneficence 
that today gives the rich and lobbyists privileged access to the people’s 
representatives, the effluents that steam into public life and feed the 
“swamp” Trump promised to drain. In early 2018, Trump himself was 
facing three suits claiming that various of his family’s real estate deals and 
operations are in violation of the Emolument’s clause, but thanks to the 
Sun-Diamond case the plaintiffs will face the difficult hurdle of show-
ing a quid pro quo. Advocates of Trump’s impeachment often cite the 
Emoluments prohibition in Clause 8, which prohibits foreign gifts in the 
form of compensation for work or services rendered.51 Trump did not 
place his international hospitality and entertainment empire into a blind 
trust but instead entrusted it to his family. The Emoluments clause must 
appear to his supporters as little more than a technicality that penalizes 
an entrepreneur for entering public service.
Teachout’s argument about the original intent and application of 
the clause was not developed specifically to deal with Trump’s use of 
office potentially to enrich himself but more broadly with the relation-
ship between great concentrations of wealth and the political class. It is, 
for example, applicable not only to emoluments from Trump’s ongong 
business activity but also certain activities of the Clintons, in particular 
to the large donations from foreign princes and heads of state to the 
charitable Clinton Foundation when Hillary Clinton was Secretary of 
State. Similarly, this broader notion of corruption lends some credence 
to Trump’s complaints about one member of the team originally assem-
bled by Special Counsel Robert Mueller to investigate possible collu-
sion between Trump’s campaign and Russians. As indictments of former 
members of his campaign and transition team crept ever closer ever to 
the President’s family and perhaps himself, on December 23, 2017, 
Trump complained in a tweet to his 20 million Twitter followers,
How can FBI Deputy Director Andrew McCabe, the man in charge, along 
with leakin’ James Comey, of the Phony Hillary Clinton investigation 

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   209
(including her 33,000 illegally deleted emails) be given $700,000 for 
wife’s campaign by Clinton Puppets during investigation?
Trump was referring here to a campaign contribution made before 
his wife formally entered the race for a state Senate seat from Virginia 
Governor Terry McAuliffe and the Virginia Democratic Party. One 
might contend that his is far different from an Emolument from a for-
eign head of state (such as Russia’s Putin), but the larger question raised 
is whether McCabe’s impartiality should be judged on the basis of his 
record of integrity as a law enforcement officer or by the implications of 
his spouse having entered a race for a relative minor office and received 
$700,000 from a highly partisan source.
Dark Money as a Sphere of Conspiracism
Does it matter whether or not we use we consider the Dark Money story 
to be a conspiracy narrative? Although not all conspiracies have illicit 
goals, the kind of corruption involving bribery, influence peddling, and 
other forms of illicit relations between public officials (or candidates) and 
private parties are not carried out in the open. Surely, we need to distin-
guish corrupt practices from limited contributions to political campaigns, 
movements, and organizations that seek to influence policy. Increased 
transparency certainly is one remedy for corruption and undue influence 
of money on politics, but not every aspect of campaigns, policy delibera-
tions, diplomacy or effort is best conducted under the light provided by 
“Sunshine Laws.”52
Not all political activity conducted in secret, then, is conspiratorial. 
Sports analogies might be useful in this regard. It is part and parcel of 
the rules of the game that American football teams should huddle before 
each play; that signals in baseball be designed to not be transparent to 
the rival team; that practices and scouting reports be kept under wraps. 
None of these practices would be regarded as conspiratorial because they 
do not corrupt the game. Often enough, when a team is discovered to 
have found a way to violate the spirit of the game by gaining knowledge 
of opponent’s strategies, rules are redesigned to protect the integrity of 
competition. Returning to the broader conception of corruption that 
informed efforts to promote clean government in the early American 
Republic may be more effective than more narrowly focused campaign 
finance rules.

210   D. C. HELLINGER
Political parties plan campaign strategies in secret; legislative caucuses 
do not reveal their planned parliamentary moves before a debate; gov-
ernments do not reveal what they might settle for during a diplomatic 
negotiation; and nations do not make their military plans or their prepa-
rations to defend against a terrorist attack totally public. However, the 
civic campaigns and investigative (academic and journalistic) works that 
have provided raw data and insights for this chapter show that great con-
centrations of wealth operating mostly in darkness, requiring extraor-
dinary efforts from ordinary citizens to know their origins and true 
interests, constitute by the criteria offered in this book conspiratorial 
activities. If we treat such activities in the Dark Money sphere of politics 
as an operational conspiracies, as one form of political behavior, it can 
make a significant contribution to rolling back corruption of our demo-
cratic republic by putting this form of behavior in disrepute.
“Conspiracy theory” can be what Bratich calls a “portal concept,” 
that is, such theories serve as “doorways into the major social and polit-
ical issues defining the U.S. (and global) political culture since the end 
of the Cold War.”53 No wonder that the late Andrew Breitbart, founder 
of the radical right Internets news site so vital to Trumpism, recognized 
that “politics is downstream from culture.”54
Social scientists and mainstream journalists continue to deploy the 
term “conspiracy theory” to discredit radical critiques of American 
democracy, only to have the term thrown back in their faces when their 
research uncovers hidden, intentional plans to circumvent democracy, or 
worse to dismantle it. Resorting to “fusion theory,” liberal critics rein-
force conservative complaints that MacLean’s work is methodologically 
and epistemologically unsound, making all the more credible the anti- 
intellectualism common to the paranoid style. These friendly critics 
generally maintain that conspiracy theories can only poison mainstream 
politics and distract us from important organizing and political work to 
fight back against Trumpism55 (see Chapter 2 for a fuller elaboration).
The argument is well expressed in a piece on Vox, with the panicky 
headline, “Even the Intellectual Left is Drawn to Conspiracy Theories 
about the Right.”56 There Henry Ferrel and Steven Teles claim that 
MacLean’s book “has been hailed as a kind of skeleton key to the right-
ward political turn in American political economy.” Joining a chorus of 
similar criticism is Rick Perlstein, a historian of Southern conservativ-
ism, who on HistoryNews Network comments, “The foundation of the 
entire book is a conspiracy theory that suggests that if you understand 

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   211
THIS ONE SECRET PLAN [sic], you understand the rise of the right 
in America in its entirety.” He goes on to claim that MacLean ignores 
“any of a score of other important tributaries, some of them not top-
down conspiratorial at all but deeply, organically bottom up.” He says 
her book suggests “that you don’t need to read anything else. Which 
is actively dangerous to historical understanding.” A favorable National 
Public Radio review of Democracy in Chains drew criticism from a variety 
of perspectives, and some of it clearly falls into the “nastier” category, 
according to NPR’s ombudsman.57
MacLean has attracted pointed criticism (and much worse) for her 
unflattering narrative about the ideas of Buchanan and his collabora-
tion with the Kochs, in particular with Charles Koch. Some critics have 
called for her to lose tenure or even be fired. There is room for disa-
greement about how well MacLean builds her case that Buchanan’s ideas 
and his strategic vision for implementing them have guided the surge of 
anti-statist, antidemocratic politics on the Right. They same applies to 
her comparison of Buchanan’s ideas to defenders of slavery. Although 
MacLean builds a strong argument that the ideas and tactics champi-
oned by Buchanan bear similarity to those used in defense of slavery by 
Senator John C. Calhoun in the Jacksonian era, there is no real evidence 
that Buchanan or Charles Koch were directly influenced by Calhoun’s 
philosophy.
But neither Mayer nor MacLean actually ever make a claim that the 
Dark Money networks explain everything we need to know about the 
Right’s success. Their books focus on the stealthy collaboration of a 
relatively small group of people with extraordinary wealth to shape the 
country’s political future. MacLean acknowledges that public choice has 
some utility for understanding policymaking and bureaucratic behav-
ior. She puts the story of the ascent of Buchanan’s school of thought in 
the context of school desegregation, illuminating how racism and white 
supremacy has been used by the libertarian right to advance stealthily an 
agenda—dismantling of majority supported welfare and regulation.
Critics of MacLean have sought to absolve Buchanan of the stain of 
resistance to school desegregation after Brown v. Board of Education,58 
and indeed MacLean shows no smoking gun in the form of an explicit 
defense of segregation on his part, but there is compelling documenta-
tion to show Buchanan’s support of privatization of schools at a time 
when it was impossible to disassociate that goal from the worst forms 
of defense of segregation. As MacLean puts it, “Not surprisingly, then, 

212   D. C. HELLINGER
but with devastating consequences all around, attacks on federal power 
pitched to nonelites have almost always tapped white racial anxiety, 
whether overtly or with coded language.”59
Just as alarming to many of her critics is MacLean’s recounting of 
Buchanan’s visit to the Chile under the rule of the ruthless General 
Augusto Pinochet in 1980s, as well as the professor’s ongoing associa-
tion with Pinochet’s economic advisors, who implemented a market-ori-
ented economic shock treatment and implantation of a new constitution 
with exceptionally high barriers to any democratic tampering with neo-
liberal economic policies afterwards. Dan Mitchell, a founder of the 
Center for Freedom and Prosperity, defended Buchanan: “There’s no 
evidence, from what I can tell, that Buchanan endorsed or supported 
Pinochet’s bad record on human rights. His defenders say that Buchanan 
was simply ‘guilty’ of encouraging a bad government to adopt good pol-
icy.”60 But Buchanan never, even upon his return to the United States, 
expressed criticism of Pinochet. Chile was (and still is) the country in the 
Global South most closely associated with neoliberal economic thought 
and limits upon majoritarian rule. And Buchanan was most insistent on 
the need to implement neoliberal ideas through planning and promotion 
of its ideas through stealth.
The conservative broadsheet Reason goes so far as to claim that 
MacLean invented Buchanan’s 1973 Third Century document, where 
he advocated for stealth in advancing policies associated with Public 
Choice theory. In fact, Buchanan delivered “America’s Third Century 
in Perspective” at the first conference of the Atlantic Economic Society, 
held in Richmond, Virginia, on September 28–29, 1973. The paper was 
subsequently published in the Atlantic Economic Journal.61 MacLean, 
though never directly referring to Buchanan’s collaboration with Kochs 
and others as a conspiracy, quotes from the (apparent) earlier draft deliv-
ered in an address to his academic associates gathered at his private cabin 
that to succeed with plans to implement his ideas, “conspiratorial secrecy 
is at all times essential.”
The point here is not to paint Buchanan as a dark lord, master strat-
egist. Indeed, MacLean not only details his personal success in build-
ing libertarian institutions that would execute a long-term master plan 
to change American political culture, but also his personal downfall, as 
Koch eventually replaced Buchanan with one of the economist’s acolytes 
to lead Mercatur. And Koch himself must be “credited,” if that is the 
right world, with understanding the need for an elite vanguard, which 

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   213
explains how this ultra-conservative tycoon could list Vladimir Lenin as a 
major influence on his thinking.62
It hardly surprises that conservative reaction to the work of Mayer 
and MacLean should resort to conspiracy panic, that is, seeking to dis-
credit their work by labeling both authors “conspiracy theorists.” But 
both authors have taken some friendly fire from liberal reviewers as 
well. Theda Skocpol, a leading voice among political scientists warning 
of threats to democracy in the United States emanating from growing 
inequality, praises Dark Money as “magisterial analysis” but also says that 
Mayer “fails to put the efforts of the right-wing billionaires into a larger 
political and social context. By focusing on elite idea production and 
election messaging, Mayer overlooks divisions within the right and offers 
no insights that could help us understand the unruly Trump surge.” 
Skocpol acknowledges that the book “alerts us” to “secret, unaccount-
able machinations,” but she devotes little attention to Mayer’s account 
of how this occurs, as though this part of the book is of little impor-
tance. Skocpol compares these dark maneuvers with those of foundations 
that backed movements and progressive social policy in the 1960s to the 
1980s—as though these foundations, which were quite open about their 
goals, can be equated with the hidden torrents of money sent coursing 
through the body politic by the Dark Money lords.
Skocpol also characterizes the timing of the book’s appearance as 
“awkward” because the Koch’s preferred candidate, Ted Cruz, had fal-
tered and because, she judged, Donald Trump is more “statist” that 
the Koch brothers could possibly tolerate. Skocpol also contends that 
Mayer portrays the Tea Party movement as exclusively top-down initi-
ated and organized, instead of recognizing that the reality was a more 
complex, produced by an “interplay of top-down and bottom-up polit-
ical forces.”63 But Mayer neither denies nor ignores the broader social 
context in which stealth activities of the billionaires prospered. And 
though the Kochs continue to contest some issues and candidates 
favored by Trump in the Republican Party, as noted earlier in this chap-
ter, an important part of the Koch agenda (rolling back regulation, espe-
cially environmental legislation; shifting the judiciary further toward a 
more libertarian philosophy; tax reduction for the wealthy) has in fact 
advanced under Trump.
Investigative journalists, like Mayer, are muckrakers, and from Ida 
Tarbell to the present, these reporters have always sought to ferret out a 
good story, to look for those who should be held accountable for abuses 

214   D. C. HELLINGER
of power and authority. Narrative historians, like MacLean are story-
tellers (but not only this) whose accounts shine light on human agents, 
not just structures. MacLean makes clear that the key to ordinary peo-
ple prevailing over oligarchs is not to engage in conspiracy but to build 
social movements, permitting individuals “powerless on their own” to 
“use their strength in numbers to move government officials to hear 
their concerns and act upon them.”64 In describing how a group of 
black high school students managed to force the issue racially segregated 
Virginia schools onto the national agenda (as part of Brown v. Board of 
Education) she describes how they first “collaborated” secretly to plan a 
walk-out, aided by supportive teachers who had to hide their role to pro-
tect their jobs. Though MacLean does not refer to their secret planning 
as a “conspiracy,” it qualifies. Not all conspiracies, as argued in Chapter 1, 
have malevolent ends.
In his thoroughly reasoned response to MacLean’s critics, Andrew Seal 
points out that MacLean’s book has evoked such a virulent response from 
libertarian and conservative critics because they think erroneously that her 
point is that Buchanan was racist or evil. Quite rightly, Seal points out 
that MacLean’s book is of interest fundamentally because of Buchanan’s 
relationship to Charles Koch and her bold assertion that both of them 
believed less in gaining majority support of citizens for their ideas than 
in stealthily building political power to implement them. Her argument 
about stealth, Seal concludes, is “the one her critics must attack to shake 
the whole book and I would contend that disproving it would be the 
most significant way they could demonstrate that she has misunderstood 
Buchanan’s ideas. I do recognize that most of her evidence for the advo-
cacy of stealth is archival, but this is only a problem if we have reason to 
doubt that MacLean honestly represents her sources.”65
Skocpol’s criticism that Mayer over-simplifies the origins and influence 
of the Tea Party has some merit, but it is worth noting that the critic 
herself concedes at the end of her review that “Dark Money oligarchs…
have the entire Republican Party in their grasp.” The importance of this 
political fact is magnified, she acknowledges, by the fact that Trump 
was without his own policy team and would likely come to depend on 
Republican conservatives to craft and move legislation. Still, Skocpol 
failed to realize just how firm is the grasp, how large is its embrace, as 
Dark Money oligarchs or their acolytes came to populate key positions in 
the executive branch under Trump.

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   215
Conspiracy or Just Plain Old Interest Group Politics?
The working definition of this book (see Chapter 1) is that conspiracy 
theory ought to be about understanding the role in politics of activ-
ity (1) undertaken secretly; (2) is vulnerability to defeat by exposure; 
and (3) involves illegal, deceptive, or unethical behavior. Together, 
the research by Mayer, MacLean, and others seeks to demonstrate that 
there existed a significant stealth alliance between a highly influential 
intellectual and the powerful, wealthy patrons of a radical right agenda 
to cripple democracy in order to achieve a radical program of privatiza-
tion, elimination of welfare, and deregulation, and that this alliance was 
instrumental, even if not necessarily totally, in shifting the country in this 
direction.
A New York Times editorial66 just before Congress approved a tax bill 
the provided massive tax cuts for the wealthy and for corporations, put 
the process this way: “As a smaller and smaller group of people cornered 
an ever-larger share of the nation’s wealth, so too did they gain an ever-
larger share of political power. They became, in effect, kingmakers; the 
tax bill is a natural consequence of their long effort to bend American 
politics to serve their interests.” The Times notes that the Kochs and 
their network have “methodically” pushing these changes. It should have 
added that these groups, as Mayer, MacLean, and others have shown, 
have gone to great lengths to hide this operation, to misrepresent it as 
philanthropy.
If you want to make an argument that a small group (i.e., the radi-
cal right and billionaires) has worked surreptitiously (e.g., in the “dark”, 
“hidden”, in “stealth”) to subvert democracy, you might as well embrace 
rather than eschew the “conspiracy theory” label, because you are likely 
to be the target of a conspiracy panic in any case.
Notes
	
1.  Brian Schwartz, “Billionaire Koch Network to Unleash Attack Ads 
Targeting Senators Who Voted against Trump’s Tax Cuts,” CNBC, June 
28, 2018.
	
2.  https://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/candidate?id=n00000528.
	
3.  https://www.opensecrets.org/pres16.
	
4.  Michael Caputo, “Trump Was Outspent by His Closest Primary 
Opponents,” Politifact.com, July 1, 2016.

216   D. C. HELLINGER
	
5.  https://www.mediaquant.net/2016/11/a-media-post-mortem-on-the-
2016-presidential-election/.
	
6.  See Thomas Patterson, “Pre-Primary News Coverage of the 2016 
Presidential Race,” Harvard Kennedy School, Shorenstein Center on 
Media, Politics and Public Policy, June 13, 2016, available at shorenstein-
center.org (accessed December 27, 2017).
	
7.  While focused more on her unsuccessful race for the nomination in 2008, 
the obstacles she faced are well outlined in Regina D. Lawrence and 
Melody Rose, Hillary Clinton’s Race for the White House: Gender Politics 
and Media on the Campaign Trail (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2009).
	
8.  Marty Cohen, David Karol, Hans Noel, and John Zoller, The Party 
Decides, Presidential Nominations Before and After Reform (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2008).
	
9.  Reihan Salam, “The Koch Brothers Were Supposed to Buy the 2016 
Election. What happened?” Slate, May 18, 2016.
	
10.  http://metrocosm.com/the-history-of-campaign-spending.
	
11.  Richard Reeves, President Nixon: Alone in the White House (New York: 
Simon & Schuster, 1981): 309.
	
12.  Jane Mayer, Dark Money: The Hidden History of the Billionaires Behind the 
Rise of the Radical Right (New York: Doubleday, 2016).
	
13.  Mayer, Dark Money: 3.
	
14.  Union of Concerned Scientists, “Who’s Backing Scott Pruitt to Head 
the EPA? The Koch Brothers,” Got Science? February 2017, available at 
https://www.ucsusa.org/publications/got-science (accessed June 25, 
2018).
	
15.  Coral Davenport and Eric Lipton, “How G.O.P. Leaders Came to View 
Climate Change as Fake Science,” New York Times, June 3, 2017.
	
16.  Mayer, Dark Money: 206–209.
	
17.  Mayer, Dark Money: 1–4.
	
18.  https://www.scribd.com/document/230108736/The-Koch-Brothers- 
Secret-Billionaire-Summit.
	
19.  Jane Mayer, “Covert Operations: The Billionaire Brothers Who are 
Waging a War Against Obama,” The New Yorker, August 30, 2010.
	
20.  Nancy MacLean, Democracy in Chains: The Deep History of the Radical 
Rght’s Stealth Plan for America (New York: Viking, 2016).
	
21.  See letter from George Mason’s President at https://ia601504.us.ar-
chive.org/19/items/CabreraEmails1and2/CabreraEmails1and2.pdf. 
Though denying that the contributions impacted academic decisions, 
see analysis and original emails at http://www.unkochmycampus.org/
charles-koch-foundation-george-mason-mercatus-donor-influence-ex-
posed.
	
22.  MacLean, Democracy in Chains: xx.

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   217
	
23.  MacLean, Democracy in Chains: 117.
	
24.  https://www.opensecrets.org/outsidespending/summ.php?cycle= 
2016&chrt=V&disp=O&type=U.
	
25.  Jeremy Koulish, “There Are a Lot of 501(c)(4) Nonprofit Organizations. 
Most are Not Political,” The Urban Institute, 2013, available at www.
urban.org (accessed December 1, 2017).
	
26.  https://www.irs.gov/charities-non-profits/other-non-profits/
social-welfare-organizations.
	
27.  https://www.scribd.com/document/230108736/The-Koch-Brothers- 
Secret-Billionaire-Summit.
	
28.  Mayer, Dark Money: 306.
	
29.  “Weaponized Philanthropy,” Center for Media and Democracy, May 5, 
2017, available at www.exposedbycmd.org/2017/05/05/­documents-
detail-bradley-foundation-efforts-build-right-wing-infrastructure-
nationwide (accessed December 6, 2017).
	
30.  http://www.bradleyfdn.org/2010-Symposium.
	
31.  https://www.exposedbycmd.org/2017/06/16/bradley-foundation- 
bankrolls-art-pope-extreme-agenda-nc.
	
32.  http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2017/05/how-will-trump- 
turn-voter-fraud-accusations-voter-suppression/.
	
33.  Mary Bottari, “Fake News Machine Ready to Defend Trump White 
House Against Robert Mueller Center for Media and Democracy,” 
Center for Media and Democracy, November 8, 2017, available at www.
exposedbycmd.org/category/news/democracy (accessed December 6, 
2017).
	
34.  https://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php/Robert_Mercer.
	
35.  Robert Crilly, “Trump Donor Robert Mercer Denies He Is a White 
Supremacist as He Sells Stake in Breitbart News,” The Telegraph, 
London, November 2, 2017.
	
36.  Quoted in Kevin McDermott, “Greitens’ Onetime Vows of Transparency 
Now Lost Behind a Veil of Dark Money,” St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 
December 10, 2017.
	
37.  Steve Eder, “Email About Qatari Offer Shows Thorny Ethical Issues 
Clinton Foundation Faced,” New York Times, October 15, 2016.
	
38.  Available at 45.committee.com (accessed January 3, 2018).
	
39.  “Secret Money to Boost Trump,” Politico, September 28, 2016.
	
40.  Robert Maguire, “Web of Secret Money Hides One Mega-Donor 
Funding Conservative Court, OpenSecrets.org, November 21, 2017.
	
41.  Anemona Hartocollis, “Revelations Over Koch Gifts Prompt Inquiry at 
George Mason University,” New York Times, May 1, 2018.
	
42.  Jack Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: Political Rationality and Popular Culture 
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 2008).

218   D. C. HELLINGER
	
43.  Mayer, Dark Money: 12.
	
44.  Mayer, Dark Money: 63, 101–102
	
45.  “How Did the Bradley Files become Public,” ExposedbyCMD.com, n.d., 
(accessed December 14, 2017).
	
46.  Mayer: Dark Money: 279, 328–329, 351.
	
47.  As discussed in Jack Bratich, Conspiracy Panics.
	
48.  Zephyr Teachout, Corruption in America: From Benjamin Franklin’s 
Snuff Box to Citizens United (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
2014): 4.
	
49.  Teachout, Corruption in America: 227.
	
50.  Teachout, Corruption in America: 228.
	
51.  Teachout, Corruption in America: 227–245.
	
52.  The term refers to law requiring meetings be open and public records be 
maintained and available to journalists and the public.
	
53.  Jack Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: 6.
	
54.  Leif Weatherbe, “Politics is Downstream from Culture, Part 1: Right 
Turn to Narrative,” The Hedgehog Review, blog, the Infernal Machine, 
February 22, 2017, available at http://iasc-culture.org/THR/channels/
Infernal_Machine (accessed December 5, 2017).
	
55.  Michael Barkin, A Culture of Conspiracy: Apocalyptic Visions in 
Contemporary America (Berkeley: University of California, 2003). Chip 
Berlet, “Clinton, Conspiracism and Civil Society.” Political Research 
Associates, February 12, 2017, available at http://www.uni-muenster.
de/PeaCon/conspiracy/networks-01.htm (accessed July 27, 2017.)
	
56.  Henry Ferrel and Steven Teles, “Even the intellectual left is drawn to con-
spiracy theories about the right. Resist them,” Vox.com, Updated Version, 
October 9, 2017.
	
57.  https://www.npr.org/sections/ombudsman/2017/08/14/ 
542634650/readers-rankled-by-democracy-in-chains-review.
	
58.  Most prominently, Daniel Bernstein, a blogger for the Washington Post’s 
“Volokh Conspiracy.” See “Some Dubious Claims in Nancy Maclean’s 
‘Democracy in Chains’” and “yet More Dubious Claims in Nancy 
Maclean’s ‘Democracy in Chains’,” June 28 and July 26, 2017, available 
at https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/volokh-conspiracy (accessed 
December 12, 2017).
	
59.  MacLean, Democracy in Chains: 11.
	
60.  Dan Mitchell, “A Taxpayer-Funded Smear Job of Professor James 
Buchanan,” International Liberty, June 24, 2017, available at https://
danieljmitchell.wordpress.com (accessed December 12, 2017). Not 
surprisingly, Mitchell’s Institute for Freedom and Prosperity, which 
he founded, has the motto, “Restraining Government in America and 
Around the World.”

6  DARK MONEY AND TRUMPISM   219
	
61.  Brian Doherty, “What Nancy MacLean Gets Wrong about James 
Buchanan,” Reason, July 20, 2017, available at https://reason.com/
archives/2017/07/20/what-nancy-maclean-gets-wrong-about-jame/
print (accessed January 4, 2018). James M. Buchanan, “America’s Third 
Century in Perspective,” Atlantic Economic Journal 1, no. 1 (1973): 
3–12.
	
62.  Charles Koch, Good Profit (New York: Crown Press): 13.
	
63.  Theda Skocpol, “Who Owns the GOP,” Dissent Magazine, February 3, 
2016, available at www.dissentmagazine.org/online_articles/jan-mayer-
dark-money-review-koch-brothers-gop (accessed December 5, 2017). At 
a panel on inequality at the Meeting of the American Political Science 
Association in September, 2017, I began to raise a question to Skocpol 
about the extent to which Mayer’s book demonstrated the kind of 
secrecy and intentionality that might merit characterizing it as a “conspir-
acy;” she dismissed any suggestion that conceiving Dark Money as a con-
spiracy was valid.
	
64.  MacLean, Democracy in Chains: xxii.
	
65.  Andrew Seal, “The Controversy Over Democracy in Chains: A Review 
Essay,” Public Seminar.org, July 2017.
	
66.  New York Times Editorial Page, December 17, 2017.

221
As late as 2013, as Donald Trump began to ruminate publically that he 
might run for president, the concept of an American Deep State was still 
largely seen as a paranoid conspiracy theory, and certainly not one to be 
given a serious hearing by conservatives. Few would have guessed that it 
would be right-wing pundits and White House officials raising charges 
that an American Deep State was conspiring against a president. As with 
so many other things, Donald Trump’s presidency has disrupted the norm.
Long dismissed by mainstream political scientists and journalists as just 
another crazy conspiracy theory, the existence of an American Deep State 
can no longer be discarded cavalierly as paranoia. Many pundits and jour-
nalists still do, but the idea has gotten some traction in the mainstream 
press. In 2013, Mike Lofgren a long-time Capitol Hill staffer and author 
of the widely read and respected The Party’s Over, entitled a follow-up 
book, The Deep State: The Fall of the Constitution and the Rise of a Shadow 
Government.1 In the same year, two mainstream journalists co-authored 
Deep State: Inside the Government Secrecy Industry.2 Suspicion about a 
Deep State has begun also to take root more broadly in American polit-
ical culture. In response to a question defining the Deep State as the 
“existence of a group of unelected government and military officials who 
secretly manipulate or direct national policy,” a Monmouth University 
poll in March 2018 found that about a quarter of respondents thought 
that a Deep State definitely exists, and a little less than half thought it 
probably exists.3 And this was before Donald Trump himself explicitly 
endorsed the idea of its existence in May 2018.
CHAPTER 7
The Deep State, Hegemony,  
and Democracy
© The Author(s) 2019 
D. C. Hellinger, Conspiracies and Conspiracy Theories in the Age  
of Trump, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98158-1_7

222   D. C. HELLINGER
President Trump discerned conspiracy afoot in the National Security 
Agency’s surveillance of several of his associates and campaign staff-
ers and in leaks coming from within the intelligence community, the 
FBI, and possibly Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s office about pos-
sible collusion between his campaign and Russian operatives. Trump 
also fumed repeatedly about former director of the FBI, James Comey, 
whom he accuses of soft peddling an investigation into possible viola-
tions of national security laws by Hillary Clinton in her use of a private 
email server while she was Secretary of State. For a little more than a year 
Trump refrained from characterizing his alleged enemies within the secu-
rity establishment as a “Deep State,” but even before he began using the 
term several of his supporters, including his son, Eric, alleged that the 
“Deep State” was conspiring to bring down his presidency.
The more prominent discussion of a “Deep State” in American pub-
lic discourse rang alarm bells in some quarters that taking the theory 
seriously would undermine the country’s “soft power,” that is, its pos-
itive image as an attractive economic and political model for the rest of 
the world. In March 2018, the Voice of America, the official voice of 
US public diplomacy, tried to maintain a tone of dismissal about “inti-
mations of ‘Deep State’ conspiracies in the United States [that] have 
bubbled to the surface from the depths of the far left and right.” VOA 
featured politicians and academic experts warning of the folly of enter-
taining this idea.4 But on May 23, 2018, the president himself, refer-
ring to a Justice Department report critical of former Director Comey, 
tweeted, “Look how things have turned around on the Criminal Deep 
State. They go after Phony Collusion with Russia, a made up Scam, and 
end up getting caught in a major SPY scandal the likes of which this 
country may never have seen before! What goes around, comes around!”
Trump had plenty of motivation to raise the specter of a bureaucratic 
conspiracy against his presidency, one including sectors in the American 
security establishment. This message deflects attention from the fact that 
many of the leaks animating him seemed to originated within his own 
White House staff. But can we say there is no foundation to think that his 
radical shift in US policy toward European allies and NATO, his under-
mining of the liberal international trade order, his embrace of Russia, and 
his mercurial personality would motivate some within the security estab-
lishment to seek his downfall? A cloak of secrecy shrouds so much of the 
activity associated with “national security,” and its abuse has repeatedly 
been a central element of the most notorious American political scandals 
of the post-World War II era. Yet the dominant view in political science 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   223
has been that the American state is impervious to the kind of conspiracies 
carried out by military and intelligence operatives in other countries, even 
though many of these enjoyed significant encouragement or aid from the 
United States. Only recently have some political scientists question whether 
American state is immune to authoritarianism, with democracy now threat-
ened by a president little constrained by constitutional limits on his power.
However much many soldiers, spies, and intelligence analysts may 
be genuinely motivated by patriotism and personally committed to 
democracy, they exercise power in ways hidden from the public. Samuel 
Huntington, a conservative and close advisor to several presidents, includ-
ing President Jimmy Carter whom he served as Coordinator of Security 
Planning for the National Security Council, once wrote, “The architects 
of power in the United States must create a force that can be felt but not 
seen. Power remains strong when it remains in the dark; exposed to the 
sunlight it begins to evaporate.”5 What if power in the dark sees a threat 
in a president that does not share its worldview and openly questions its 
loyalty? This is at the heart of conspiracy theories about John Kennedy’s 
assassination and to some degree about how effectively the political system 
responded to Watergate and the issues raised by the Vietnam War. Now 
the theme of the Deep State is being raised out of the White House itself.
But Trump’s relationship with the national security estblishment is 
more complex and ambiguous than his public attacks suggest. While 
attacking the “Deep State” rhetorically, and although his 2016 campaign 
included criticizing the trillions of dollars spent on wars in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, in the first year of his presidency Trump increased deploy-
ment of troops in the Middle East and South Asia, sent new training 
missions into Africa, continued providing arms and assistance to Saudi 
Arabia’s bombing campaign in Yemen, and extended the same to the 
Philippines for its fight with Islamist insurgents. Like President Obama, 
Trump increased the drone strikes and missions by Special Forces under 
control of both military command and the Central Intelligence Agency 
(CIA). Though his Twitter criticism still sometimes impetuously targets 
the CIA or publically exposes sensitive secrets, in 2018 most of his invec-
tive was aimed at the criminal justice system and those investigating pos-
sible collusion of his campaign with the Russians. Domestically, Trump 
deployed the Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) agents in 
mass detentions of undocumented immigrants in operations violating 
due process. He has unambiguously sided with police and against the 
Black Lives Matter movement, repeatedly raising the specter of rampant 
criminal violence in American cities.

224   D. C. HELLINGER
These actions have raised the danger that parapolitics, dark politi-
cal activities closely associated with the concept of the Deep State, is 
becoming more deeply rooted in domestic politics in the United State. 
Parapolitics can be defined as political activity in violation of constitu-
tional and legal norms and characterized by secrecy and deceit, often 
carried out by groups in concert with but formally separate from mil-
itary, polices and other parts of the coercive apparatus of the state. Its 
normalization is being fostered, the latter part of this chapter will argue, 
by its increasing presence in pop-culture movies, games, and television 
programs.
As with “Dark Money,” I do not treat the “Deep State” as a con-
spiracy in itself but as an opaque realm of political power that gives rise 
to both conspiracies and to conspiracy theories. From the government 
military and security agencies and from allied forces in the private sector 
there has emerged a steady parade of scoundrels and profit-seekers mas-
querading as patriots but engaged in parapolitics. Their activities become 
somewhat visible in major scandals that have punctuated American 
politics with regularity since World War II; but the collective historical 
memory of what happened tends to fade, beginning with assurances that 
the system worked to bring the threat to a close. When public officials, 
elected representatives, and investigative journalists threaten the central 
institutions associated with the national security state, a kind of conspir-
acy panic has usually been employed to discourage digging too deep. 
To suggest that a Deep State exists under the surface of constitutional 
democracy, they are dismissed as paranoid style conspiracy theorists.
This chapter proposes that rather than a priori dismissing the Deep 
State and “parapolitics” as paranoid conspiracism, these themes ought to 
be serious part of a political science dedicated to democratic values. There 
are signs of political science turning in this direction (see Chapter 8),  
and this chapter argues that the concept of operational conspiracies can 
be useful tool for this purpose.
What Is the Deep State? What Is It Not?
Lofgren, a former senior Republican congressional staffer who worked 
16 years on the budget committees of both the House and Senate, 
broadly defines the Deep State to include almost the entire administra-
tive state and well-heeled lobbyists in the capital.6 So defined, the Deep 
State would envelope any bureaucratic agency positioned to obstruct, 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   225
delay, or mutate the policies put in place by Congress or the White 
House. For purposes of this chapter, I use the original conception of the 
Deep State, one well-articulated by Sonam Sheth in a critique of accusa-
tions made in several Breitbart articles alleging that Trump faces subver-
sion by a coalition of national security agencies and their allies in financial 
and the military–industry complex. In an article for Business Insider 
Sheth writes,
If we understand “real power” to mean not absolute, last word power then 
it is possible, even allowing for the obvious interest of Trump in portraying 
himself as a victim of dark force, to acknowledge that possession of license 
to coerce (much less kill or torture) is, to put it mildly a significant source 
of power subject to abuse.7
Conceptualizing the Deep State and parapolitics as together a sphere 
of politics prone to conspiratorial activity avoids treating the Deep State 
as monolithic or unchanging. It makes little sense to treat the Deep 
State as a unitary, coherent actor in carrying out a conspiracy—be it the 
alleged assassination of JFK, the transfer of arms sale money from Iran 
to the Nicaraguan contras, the implementation of warrantless surveil-
lance and “enhanced interrogation” after 9/11, or Trump’s claim that 
the “Deep State” is conspiring to bring down the Trump presidency. 
Bureaucratic infighting, ideological divisions, contentious or cooperative 
relations with colleagues in other domestic and foreign services, conflicts 
between professional and political obligations, all influence and com-
plicate the relationship of the American Deep State to the larger liberal 
democratic state to which it is supposed to be subordinate.
On the tenth anniversary of the 9/11 attacks on New York and 
Washington, the New Yorker Magazine asked its Pulitzer Prize win-
ning author, Jane Mayer (and other contributors to the magazine) a 
series of questions, including about how this seminal event—which has 
led to two major wars, was used to impose a state of emergence that in 
2018 entered into its seventeenth year, and unleashed widespread fear 
of Muslims—had affected her. The Pulitzer Prize winning journal-
ist responsible for bringing Dark Money into the light (see Chapter 6) 
had earlier authored The Dark Side: The Inside Story of How the War on 
Terror Turned into a War on American Ideals,8 which gathered together 
stories revealing the existence of “black site prisons” and warrantless 
domestic surveillance. Mayer’s book joined shelves of studies9 by other 

226   D. C. HELLINGER
investigators, including many who have served in the military and intel-
ligence sectors. They provide compelling reasons to doubt that clandes-
tine operations, propaganda campaigns, and intervention abroad defend 
democracy. Indeed, they provide clear evidence of how these kinds of 
operations in the “dark” threaten it.
Citing her heightened sensitivity to the “importance and frailty of 
human rights,” Mayer prefaced her concern with an acknowledgement 
that I want to keep in mind constantly as we move on to explore here 
the Deep State and its corollary, “parapolitics.” Mayer wrote,
I think all that I have seen and learned in this area has profoundly changed 
me, as it has many others. I developed huge admiration for those who 
protected the country’s laws and values, sometimes at great personal risk, 
including F.B.I. agents, military and C.I.A. officers, and civil liberties law-
yers who refused to degrade the country by engaging in torture.10
I share Mayer’s judgment and caution. The Deep State, as I conceive it, 
is not monolithic or all-powerful, and many working within it primarily 
see their function as defense and promotion of liberal democratic ide-
als. However, the professionalism and patriotism of many of those who 
work in military and intelligence and domestic security institutions do 
not prevent clashes between the national security state and democracy or 
invalidate President Dwight Eisenhower’s warning when in his farewell 
address he said, “In the councils of government, we must guard against 
the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, 
by the military–industrial complex. The potential for the disastrous rise 
of misplaced power exists, and will persist.”11
There seems to be a consensus, shared by critics and proponents alike, 
that the “Deep State” is derived from the Turkish derin devlet, which 
refers to an intricate network made up of government officials, often 
including those from the military and intelligence communities, whose 
primary goal is to subvert a democratically elected leader’s agenda or 
even conspire to remove that leader from power—by assassination if 
necessary. David Remnick, a skeptic that the idea applies to the United 
States, refers to the Deep State as “a network of embedded members of 
a government’s agencies or military…operate against a democratically 
elected government. It might work to undermine an elected president’s 
authority or legitimacy and has been common in countries such as Egypt 
and Turkey.”12

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   227
Another way to define the Deep State is to consider what it is to those 
who reject the idea that such a thing exists in the United States. Politico 
magazine weighed-in accordingly,
Like the Death Star, the American Deep State does not, of course, exist. 
An appropriation from countries such as Egypt, Turkey, Pakistan and 
Algeria, where real networks of intelligence, defense and interior ministry 
officials exercise real power to drive policy, sideline elected officials and 
eliminate opponents, the American Deep State is nothing more than an 
invention of President Donald Trump and his allies.13
There are good reasons to suspect Trump’s motives, but that does not 
mean we should dismiss from consideration the possibility of American 
security institutions wielding power to undermine presidential authority 
or even depose a president. The persistence of JFK assasination theories 
suggests that many Americans do not readily dismiss this notion.
The Deep State is often linked to the stubborn persistence of the the-
ory that Lee Harvey Oswald may not have acted alone, especially the var-
iant suspecting involvement of the CIA, as postulated in Oliver Stone’s 
movie JFK (1991). The dismissal of Stone’s portrayal of a plot to kill 
Kennedy often combines an admission of its superior cinematic qualities 
with complete contempt for its message, such as when The Guardian’s 
Alex Tunzelmann wrote, “JFK is a cleverly constructed, tightly written 
and sometimes breathtakingly well-acted movie – and one of the most 
appalling travesties of history you’re ever likely to see.”14
For the most part the notion of an American Deep State remains sub-
ject to “conspiracy panic.”15 Conspiracy panic (see Chapter 3) is a way 
of disqualifying certain modes of thought and discourses that challenge 
American exceptionalism and ultimately the hegemony of a particu-
lar political regime. As Bratich puts it, “The scapegoating of conspir-
acy theories provides the conditions for social integration and political 
rationality. Conspiracy panics help to define the normal modes of dissent. 
Politically it is predicated on a consensus ‘us’ over against a subversive 
and threatening ‘them’.”16 The “Deep State” has been pushing against 
the ramparts of the regime of truth, forcing doubters to discuss rather 
than to ignore it. The need to constantly and repeatedly dismiss the idea 
that a conspiracy of some kind was behind the assassination of Kennedy, 
to label it a “conspiracy theory,” demonstrates the panic among most 
intellectuals at the thought that it could be true.

228   D. C. HELLINGER
Greg Grandin, a progressive historian, writing in the leftist The Nation 
early in Trump’s first year, worries that focusing on Deep State will dis-
tract us from abuses of private power.
The problem with the phrase “Deep State” is that it is used to suggest that 
dishonorable individuals are subverting the virtuous state for their private 
ambitions…It’s this public virtue/private vice false opposition that makes 
so much of the “Deep State” writing slide into, if not noxious Bilderberg 
anti-Semitism, then “we are a republic, not an empire” idiocy.17
His critique includes an approving reference to Frederik Jameson’s 
widely cited assertion, “Conspiracy, one is tempted to say, is the poor 
person’s cognitive mapping in the postmodern age.”18 As we have seen 
(Chapters 4 and 5), there is little evidence that poor and working-class 
people are more likely attracted to conspiracy theory than the wealthy. 
Furthermore, the historian Kathryn Olmstead, while endorsing the 
Hofstadter view of conspiracy theories as the “paranoid style”, con-
cedes in her study of twentieth-century conspiracy theories in the United 
States that sometimes they empower ordinary people to obtain account-
ability from public officials. Even conspiracy theories that have little 
warrant, such as the belief that President Franklin Roosevelt knew in 
advance of Pearl Harbor, produced investigations that brought to light 
serious malfeasance and abuses of executive authority.19
Although he too sees conspiracy theory through the lens of the par-
anoid style, Tim Melley’s work on conspiracism in popular culture 
actually catches the essence of the concept of the Deep State by charac-
terizing the way movies, games, and TV depict what he calls the “covert 
sphere.”20 But Melley sees conspiracy theory only as a symptom com-
mon people’s uneasiness. He attributes their attraction to such enter-
tainment as a symptom of “agency panic,” their discomfort with the 
influence of hidden forces and institutions in their lives. Conspiracies 
expressed in fiction—elite and popular level cultural products—­
encourage irrational conspiracy theories to proliferate in a culture infused 
with “agency panic” (see in Chapter 1).
Melley shows that to a surprising degree the plots of popular fiction 
mirror how American intelligence operatives play the same spy games 
that other states do, and they bend the rules because the “the ticking 
bomb” justifies their actions. Even more surprising, many of these mass 
entertainment productions are actively created or supported by the 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   229
institutions of this “covert sphere” (a theme to which we will return later 
in this chapter). Likewise, Charles Knight, another keen observer of con-
spiracism in American culture, takes a similar view of conspiracy theories. 
“It is arguable that a culture of conspiracy has become an implicit mode 
of operation in American politics, with the rise of the national security 
state over the last half-century,” he says.21 Yet like Melley he regards 
conspiracy theory as ipso facto irrational, reflecting mass distrust of elites 
but not getting to the roots of people’s concerns.
Though skeptical of Deep State conspiracy theories, Melley himself 
shows in The Covert Sphere that fictional conspiracy theories can be a major 
part of what the most veiled institution of the national security state, the 
CIA, is charged to produce. The CIA, FBI, and other security agencies 
all carry out operational institutional conspiracies that are fodder for film 
television plots.22 Deep State networks include a more nefarious sector, 
organized criminals, and even terrorists, providing plenty of villains and 
ambiguous moral hazzards for plots. Many morally hazardous relationships 
arise out of covert operations and reliance upon informers, what the CIA 
calls “assets.” They involve the agencies in parapolitics abroad, and these 
often blowback into the United States. In the next four sections of this 
chapter discuss some of the ways this happens in reality before returning 
to how contemporary popular culture helps hide this reality in plain sight.
Parapolitics
As already indicated, closely related to the concept of the “Deep State” is 
the notion of “parapolitics.” Scott describes parapolitics as a level of pol-
itics that is “repressed and denied” by mainstream journalists, pundits, 
and academics. This is a sphere of politics where actors resort “to deci-
sion-making and enforcement procedures outside as well as inside those 
publicly sanctioned by law and society.”23 Elsewhere, he writes, some-
what evocative of Huntington but more ominously, “Power ‘in the dark’ 
is the essence of what I…[mean] by a Deep State: a power not derived 
from the constitution but outside and above it, ‘more powerful than the 
public state.’”24
Theorists associated with parapolitics the Deep State, see the exercise 
of elite power quite differently than envisioned by most political scien-
tists. The latter’s orthodoxy is embodied in pluralism, a paradigm that 
maintains elite politics to be not inherently undemocratic. In a demo-
cratic polity, say pluralists, elites are competitive, that is, they have 

230   D. C. HELLINGER
conflicting interests among themselves, and must ultimately appeal to the 
democratic processes of representative government, especially elections.25 
This school of thought has long been opposed by “elitism”, of which C. 
Wright Mills was and is the foremost exponent.
In his influential The Power Elite, Mills wrote, “America is now in con-
siderable part a formal political democracy than a democratic social struc-
ture, and even the formal political mechanics are weak.” Already in the 
middle of Eisenhower administration (1953–1960) Mills warned of “the 
decline of politics as genuine and public debate of alternative positions.” 
Mills avoided romanticizing the character of democracy American past, 
but he recognized that the erosion of what Deep State theorists would 
call the “public state” owed much to the changed role of the United 
States in international affairs and the growth of “military capitalism.”26 
Eisenhower expressed a similar sentiment in his famous farewell address 
warning about the unwarranted influence of the military–industrial 
complex.
Although Scott’s books have received positive reviews in some quar-
ters, his work is often stigmatized with the dreaded “conspiracy theory” 
label, especially his Deep Politics and the Death of JFK. Though not his 
first book on “deep politics”, his questioning of the “lone gunman” the-
ory in this book made what is still the most coherent, plausible case for 
investigating Kennedy’s murder as the result of a conspiracy. Perhaps 
better than the author himself, the moderator of a radio debate between 
Scott and Gerald Posner, whose Case Closed defended the Warren 
Commission’s finding that Oswald was the lone assassin, defined “deep 
politics” as “the links of mutual interest between [J. Edgar] Hoover and 
the FBI, organized crime, big business, and the intelligence community” 
that he believes led to McCarthyism, Watergate, Iran-Contra, as well as 
the JFK assassination.27 The typical reaction to Scott’s work, when it is 
given any attention at all, is summed up in a review by the progressive 
journalist, Max Holland, who characterized Deep Politics and the Death 
of JFK as “an unreadable compendium of ‘may haves’ and ‘might haves,’ 
non-sequiturs, and McCarthy-style innuendo, with enough documenta-
tion to satisfy any paranoid.”28
Scott’s style does bear some of the hallmarks of the paranoid variety 
of conspiracy theory, with unusually copious notes and a tendency some-
times to back controversial claims with shallow citations, sometimes of 
his own previous work. Yet, at the same time, Scott relies extensively on 
public record, scrutinizing primary sources, uncovering contradictions 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   231
and gaps in the public, asking reasonable questions about why they exist, 
and asking what might explain the anomalies in the record. Like other 
kinds of radical scholarship, the very nature of his hypotheses are contro-
versial by nature, but “innuendo”, as Holland puts it, is not part of his 
repertoire. And unlike many other conspiracy theorists, Scott does not 
hesitate to point out alternative interpretations to his own. He is often 
criticized for supposition, but supposition is difficult to avoid in research-
ing conspiracies. Exposing what is “hidden” almost inevitably comes 
with some whiff of conspiracism. Maintenance of official secrets, often 
long after any threat to security exists, requires a degree of speculation 
because so much of the record is unavailable, lost, destroyed, or forgot-
ten, and thus unavailable to researchers.
The secretive activities of military and intelligence institutions are not 
necessarily illegal. However, conspiracies are not solely defined by their 
being illegal. Some covert activities are legal under national laws but are 
done in secret mainly because they violate international norms or law. 
For example, in four of the many notorious interventions carried out by 
the CIA, such as the 1953 plot to overthrow Mohammad Mossadegh 
of Iran, the 1954 plot to oust President Jacobo Árbenz of Guatemala, 
the 1961 invasion Cuba, and the subsequent efforts to assassinate Fidel 
Castro (“Operatrion Mongoose”), all were authorized by the Executive 
Branch with its full consent and knowledge. In no way were these oper-
ational conspiracies carried out by rogue agents. What made them noto-
rious was their blatant violations of the code of conduct of international 
relations, specifically, respect of the sovereignty of other governments. 
That the first two leaders were democratically elected adds to the noto-
riety of the Agency’s operations. Nor were these operations authorized 
by fully disinterested parties. The Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles 
and his brother, Allen, Director of the CIA, both had done legal work in 
private practice for oil companies in Iran and the United Fruit Company 
in Guatemala.
As Scott puts it, “Covert operations, when they generate or reinforce 
autonomous political power, almost always outlast the specific purpose for 
which they were designed…To put it in terms I find more precise, para-
politics, the exercise of power by covert means, tends to metastasize into 
deep politics, an interplay of unacknowledged forces over which the original 
parapolitical agent no longer has control” (italics in original).29 In this way, 
the Deep State arises from the covert exercise of coercion and surveillance 
by the institutions entrusted with those powers in the name of security. 

232   D. C. HELLINGER
The covert nature of operations can lead to activites that exceed author-
ized boundaries. Off-the-books money, often generated by the drug trade 
and other forms of trafficking, create myriad opportunities for corruption. 
Undercover agents may engage in what otherwise would be criminally 
sanctioned behavior. This often makes it difficult to ascertain whether ille-
gal actions were corrupt, authorized, or undertaken by rogue actors.
One of the most notorious examples of metastasized corruption was the 
Bank of Credit and International Commerce (BCCI). The bank’s seamy 
operations were disclosed by investigative reporting and by scrutiny from 
the New York Federal District Attorney. Their revelations were summarized 
by the Washington Post: “BCCI made phony loans, concealed deposits, hid 
huge losses, and was the bank for a host of shady customers ranging from 
terrorists and spies to drug runners and dictators.”30 Another report, by 
the New York Times, was blunt: “The bank maintained secret accounts for 
a collection of people and institutions that reads like a list of characters and 
organizations for a spy novel: Saddam Hussein, Abu Nidal, Manuel Noriega, 
the CIA and an assortment of drug runners and arms merchants.”31 An 
estimated $5 billion was unaccounted for in bank records. The bank is 
estimated to have bribed prominent politicians in 71 different countries, 
prominent among them areas where American forces were involved in coun-
ter-insurgency, destabilization, or counter-criminal operations.
A US Senate Foreign Relations Committee investigation documented a 
long ongoing relationship between the CIA and the bank, but only after 
overcoming Agency resistance to providing information. The Committee 
report found that the CIA’s use of the bank began with its efforts to 
investigate narco-dollar laundering, but the Agency discovered its capa-
bilities might be of use for its own purposes. Even the Senate Foreign 
Relations Committee could not or would not draw a clear conclusion 
about whether the Agency’s use of the bank was authorized or not. “The 
unofficial story of BCCI’s links to U.S. intelligence is complicated by the 
inability of investigators to determine whether private persons affiliated 
with U.S. intelligence were undertaking actions such as selling U.S. arms 
to a foreign government outside ordinary channels on their own behalf, 
or ostensibly under sanction of a U.S. government agency, policy, or oper-
ation,” according to the report. The bank’s owners and clients were scat-
tered around the globe, but key mony came from Middle Eastern sources 
and management expertise was provided by Pakistanies.32
The BCCI might still be operating today were it not for the Iran-
Contra scandal. Space here does not permit a full exploration of the 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   233
giant reach of the scandal. Suffice it to say that according to the Senate 
report its tentacles reached not only into the CIA, but also into Hill 
and Knowlton, a public relations firm that played a key role in creat-
ing public support for the First Iraq War; to Kissinger Associates; and 
to Clark Clifford and Robert Altman, highly connected Washington 
lawyers. The Senate report said, “The correspondence also highlights 
BCCI’s focus on doing business with, and ability, given its $23 bil-
lion in reported assets and 73 countries of operation, to attract interest 
from some of the most politically well-connected people in the United 
States.”33
In the case of Iran-Contra) operations, National Security officials 
were careful to maintain “plausible deniability” for President Reagan. 
This tactic itself is a type of conspiracy—a kind of prophylactic cov-
er-up, but with the eyes of officials in the public state half open. Its pur-
pose is to limit damage to the presidency should their activities come 
to light. Reagan was known to have taken a keen interest in supporting 
the Nicaraguan Contra insurgency against the Sandinista government in 
Nicaragua. The operational conspiracy to bring down the democratically 
elected Sandinista government was, in fact, unlawful under international 
conventions to which the United States was a signatory, was a violation 
of an explicit Congressional prohibition on spending to support the 
Contras, and upon revelatin did subject its perpetrators to a high degree 
of domestic embarrassment, given that it was funded in part by arms 
sales to Iran and its revolutionary government. However, the operation 
was not “rogue.” It was carried out under the direction and approval of 
officials that otherwise were authorized to initiate covert activities. Here, 
the “Deep State” was not evading the authority of the executive branch 
but the democratic, constitutional authority of Congress.
If the belief that the CIA and other actors of the national security 
apparatus were part of a conspiracy to murder President Kennedy were 
ever to be fully substantiated (an unlikely prospect), this would con-
stitute a rogue operation more akin to the way that similar agencies 
often operate in Turkey, Pakistan, Egypt, and other politically unstable 
regimes. But “the Deep State did it” is not much of a hypothesis. Even 
if a “smoking gun” implicating the CIA or other national security actors 
in the assassination is ever found, this does not mean that these agencies 
and their employees acted in one coordinated manner to kill Kennedy 
or to set him up to be killed. In fact, the history of the US Intelligence 
Community is rife with bureaucratic rivalries and competition for turf 

234   D. C. HELLINGER
and resources. We should not assume that the 17 national intelligence 
organizations and their 70,000 employees34 would all be collectively 
guilty of such a major crime.
The Manichean logic of the Cold War and the fact that the first gen-
eration of CIA officials were employed in dirty operations rationalized by 
anti-communism lends some credence to the claim that many in the mil-
itary–industrial complex had motive to assassinate Kennedy. It is often a 
criticism of conspiracy theories that they rely on motive as proof; that is a 
fair point, but we should not regard motive as immaterial to a conspiracy 
belief. Perhaps no career illustrates this phenomenon more than of the 
CIA’s James Angleton. Testifying to the Church Committee, Angleton 
himself asserted, “It is inconceivable that a secret arm of the government 
has to comply with all the overt orders of the government.”35 His ruth-
lessness makes one wonder just what limits, if any there were on his ded-
ication to thwart anything he perceived (real or not) that might lead to 
retreat from victory over Moscow. His career illustrates how the secrecy 
and culture of the US intelligence community make it an incubator for 
conspiracies and conspiracy theories.
Angleton’s career began during World War II in Italy in the CIA’s 
predecessor, the Office of Strategic Services (OSS). In his training 
and service in that theater, he forged relationships with Allen Dulles, 
William Donavan, Richard Helms, and other major figures of the Cold 
War era CIA. In line with the priorities of American foreign policy in 
the post-World War II era (i.e., not acting as a rogue agent), Angleton 
played an important role in covert efforts to undermine the Communist 
Party, which had emerged as the single most popular political party in 
Italy, thanks in part to its leading role in the Resistance. To this end, 
he worked with the two most powerful institutions in Italian society, the 
Catholic Church and the Mafia, and he also rehabilitated many officials 
associated with Mussolini’s Fascist party to enlist them in the anti-com-
munist cause. From this milieu, he returned to the United States, and 
from 1954 to 1974 he headed the CIA’s Counter Intelligence Staff. 
Jefferson Morley, the most recent of several Angleton biographers, 
describes Angleton as a “dogmatic and conspiratorial operator whose 
idiosyncratic theories paralyzed the agency’s operations…at the height 
of the Cold War, and whose domestic surveillance operations target-
ing American dissidents had discredited the CIA in the court of public 
opinion.”36

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   235
One of the most chilling accounts of Angleton’s fanaticism and capac-
ity for cruelty comes from Gerald Posner’s Case Closed, which is dedicated 
to arguing that Oswald acted alone to assaasinate Kennedy.37 Angleton 
was obsessed with ferreting out Soviet plants inside the spy agency. He 
was convinced that a defector, Yuri Nosenko, who claimed that Oswald 
was little regarded by Soviet intelligence and therefore not likely to have 
acted on their behalf, was a double agent. Besides being convinced that 
Nosenko was a mole, Angleton thought the defector was hiding infor-
mation linking Oswald to the KGB during the former’s time in Russia. 
Angleton’s suspicions convinced Richard Helms, then a deputy director, 
to persuade the Warren Commission not to rely on Nosenko as a witness.
According to the Posner, the CIA denied the FBI access to Nosenko. 
Starting on April 4, 1964, after putting him through a lie detector test 
administered by a biased technician, Angleton had Nosenko subjected 
to a strip search and imprisoned in a tiny attic room in the capital, with 
nothing but a metal bed fastened to the floor for furniture. He was told 
he would be kept in the room, without heat or air conditioning, for 
25 years, fed minimally, and subjected to harsh interrogation. He was 
moved after 16 months to a CIA training camp and kept in a concrete 
bunker, with subsistence food only, and monitored by closed-circuit 
TV. He was finally allowed some exercise. Nosenko never broke, infu-
riating Angleton and his co-conspirator, Tennant “Pete” Bagley, who at 
one point urged liquidating the defector. In 1969, Nosenko was finally 
released and accepted as a real defector.
There have been disputes over the veracity of Nosenko’s account 
of his treatment and about his status, but the main point here is that 
Angleton’s paranoia about Soviet defectors trumped in his mind any 
need to have Nosenko provide information undermining the notion 
that the Soviets and Cuba might have been involved in Kennedy’s mur-
der. Kennedy was a Cold Warrior, and projections about how the Cold 
War could have come to a much earlier end and terminated the arms 
race, a theory mounted in the opening minutes of Oliver Stone’s JFK 
(1991) are wildly, speculatively optimistic. Less speculative, however, is 
the singular paranoia of Angleton, Hoover, and many of their contempo-
raries in the Cold War era who were convinced that Kennedy was mov-
ing toward what later, in the Nixon/Kissinger years, could be called a 
détente. They had fought communism by cooperating with Mafioso’s, 
funded rebel armies in Southeast Asia and corrupt warlords in Chine, 

236   D. C. HELLINGER
abetted drug running, carried out surveillance of private US citizens, 
carried out and attempted assassinations of Third World leaders, exper-
imented with brainwashing techniques and mind-altering drugs, among 
many other operations dedicated to that cause. That they participated in 
a conspiracy to assassinate Kennedy is far from proven, but neither can it 
be dismissed. That they participated in one conspiracy—obstruction of 
an investigation into the murder of the President of the United States—
is a fully warranted. Why remains unanswered.
The Conspiratorial Roots  
of National Security Ideology and Institutions
The origins of the national security complex are often traced to National 
Security Act of 1947, which provided the legal basis for coordina-
tion of the military services, the creation of the CIA and the National 
Security Agency, and the National Security Council, among other meas-
ures. However, planning for a large permanent military and intelligence 
establishment began even before the United States entered into World 
War II, and in quite conspiratorial fashion. In September 1939, more 
than two years before Pearl Harbor, the New York-based and Rockefeller 
Foundation funded Council and Foreign Relations approached the State 
Department about collaborating on a secret study of how various out-
comes of the ongoing European war would affect the interests of the 
United States. The 1947 legislation later linked the results of this study 
to the concept of “national security,” a phrase that was not part of 
American political language before World War II. The idea was linked in 
turn to “containment” of Communism, implying the need for a defensive 
response to a world conspiracy. The Department of War (as it had been 
called since 1789) was renamed the “Department of Defense.”
The foundational legislation for the national security state coincided 
with the unparalleled power enjoyed by the United States at the time 
and the determination of internationalist elites to use that power to lay 
the basis for a liberal international economic and political order. Having 
emerged from World War II with its economic infrastructure virtually 
unscathed, and with much of Europe and Japan (the only industrialized 
economy in Asia) in ruins, a mythology developed around the notion 
that in building a permanent military establishment and war econ-
omy the United States, unselfishly and without pretense to a territorial 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   237
empire of any size, simply found itself called upon to take up the bur-
den of world hegemony in defense of freedom and the quest for global 
peace and prosperity. It would thus seem that hegemony was thrust upon 
Americans, not sought after.
In contrast, the pre-war War-Peace Studies38 brought together cor-
porate elites, key State Department planners, and intellectuals from the 
nation’s top universities, all of whom constituted the vanguard of an 
internationalist elite that had been frustrated by the political obstacles 
posed by isolationists to expansion of American leadership after World 
War I. Among key conclusions drawn by the group two stand out. 
One was that the United States could cope with German domination 
of the European continent but could not permit the markets and natu-
ral resources of the European empires, especially the British Empire, to 
fall into German hands. The elites also rejected acceptance of Japanese 
competition for influence in Asia and recommended an embargo, which 
President Roosevelt implemented.
The other conclusion was that the United States would have to break 
with its tradition of dismantling its war economy and reducing the 
size and funding of the military after the conclusion of the war. Elites 
planned in secret, with absolutely no public consultation, to make per-
haps the most important decision about the country’s future after the 
war. The Study concluded that the “foremost requirement of the United 
States in a world in which it proposes to hold unquestioned power is the 
rapid fulfillment of a program of complete rearmament.” Rather bluntly, 
the elite made clear that the measures should be taken to ensure that 
war aims (already assuming the United States entry into the war) not be 
stated in a way that they “seemed to be concerned solely with Anglo-
American imperialism.” The interests of Africans, Latin Americans, and 
Asians, not only Europeans, should be stressed because “This would 
have a better propaganda effect.”39
The War-Peace project comes as close as we may ever see to fitting cri-
teria for that rare occurrence, a “grand” conspiracy to construct a world 
order (see Chapter 2). It was conducted in the strictest secrecy, and its 
results were maintained classified until well after the war. Even after 
publication, the collusion among some of the country’s most powerful 
economic and political elites as well as influential academics was largely 
ignored in post-War literature in political science and history; its presci-
ent pre-war consensus on militarization and propaganda remained veiled 
by the myth of the beneficent hegemon.

238   D. C. HELLINGER
One must admire the capacity of the internationalist-minded plan-
ners to envision a post-World order that would avoid the calamities 
that ensued after World War I. But like virtually all conspiracies, their 
project could not prosper in the absence of historical, social, and eco-
nomic conditions that suited the moment. Furthermore, not everything 
unfolded as the elite cabal anticipated or wished. Most importantly, we 
cannot attribute the emergence of the post-War order to the elite col-
lusion. Their secret planning must be categorized as an operational, not 
a grand conspiracy, despite scale of their vision for the post-War would. 
Besides the propitious social and economic forces, the scale of destruc-
tion helped make the War/Peace blueprint viable at the end of the war. 
The elites were not omniscient about the way the war would be con-
ducted. Certainly, they did not anticipate nuclear weapons. There would 
be significant divisions in elite circles about post-war relations with the 
Soviet Union, with President Roosevelt anticipating integration of the 
Soviet bloc into the new world order, and other liberal and conservative 
elites more bent on isolation or containment.
Absent historical accounts of the secret pre-War planning by interna-
tionalist oriented elites, we fail to capture the role of human agency in 
the process. Viewing the elite planning process as an operational con-
spiracy brings into question the kind of “manifest destiny” approach 
to American hegemony and the nation’s imagined role as a “beacon” 
showing the way to a liberal world almost utopian in its conception. 
Conspiracy theory serves as a gateway to recovering historical memory 
and our understanding of our place in history. It also highlights how 
effectively the processes of democracy were insulated from the transition 
of US political culture from one of suspicion of a military establishment 
to a permanent war economy and national security state. The pre-war 
origins of US international policy teach us to raise questions about the 
neoliberal “new world order” that President George Bush saw emerging 
in a speech after the First Gulf War in 1991, in particular about its “inev-
itability” (see Chapter 5).40
Institutionalized Conspiracy
The most secretive institution of American liberal democracy to come 
out of elite planning is the CIA. The CIA’s authorization to carry out 
covert operations, that is, conspiracies abroad, was not clearly authorized 
by its founding legislation, the National Security Act of 1947. That Act 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   239
charges the CIA only with various advising, evaluation, and coordinat-
ing function for the new National Security Council, plus assuming other 
functions and duties assigned it by the National Security Council. These 
latter assigned functions were subsequently interpreted to include covert 
operations; presidential directives and congressional budget authoriza-
tion provide some further legal grounding for covert operations.41
We can classify the CIA’s operational section’s activities as “institution-
alized conspiracy.” A recent use of “institutionalized” in another context 
may clarify its nature and distinctiveness. In December 2016, the World 
Doping Agency (WDA) produced a report detailing “systematic doping” 
of 1000 Olympic athletes in 30 different sports from 2011 to 2015, attrib-
uting the cheating to a conspiracy among the Russian Sports Ministry, 
national anti-doping agency, and the Federal Security Service (a domestic 
intelligence organization). This was a secret ongoing operation that clearly 
was sanctioned by the Russian state, not a rogue operation by coaches or 
bureaucrats in these agencies. No Russians laws were broken; the doping 
was undertaken for reasons of state, and it was secret. For this reason, the 
WDA has no hesitation in identifying the Russian operation as an institu-
tional conspiracy.42 So too can we say this about CIA covert activities. The 
thesis here is the Agency is an institutional incubator of conspiracies; most 
are authorized, but the environment also spawns rogue operations.
In The Covert Sphere, Melley provides a chilling account of several 
early operations and experiments carried out by the CIA, never really 
authorized through a deliberative democratic process, nor given signifi-
cant oversight by the elected Congress. Melley argues that a short-lived 
brainwashing episode of the early Cold War shaped the “cultural imagery 
of the covert sphere” in an emblematic way. The CIA’s obsession with 
brainwashing started with an unfounded belief that soldiers who chose 
to remain in North Korea at the end of the war must have been brain-
washed to make such a choice, and that some of those returning could 
be domestic plants. The Manchurian Candidate (1962) film would seize 
on this conspiracy theory as a plot device. The CIA programs to thwart 
the imagined Korean operation soon turned into an attempt by the 
Agency to gain the ability to brainwash and to refine methods of torture 
used in interrogations. Melley writes, “Brainwashing began as an orien-
talist propaganda fiction created by the CIA to mobilize domestic sup-
port for a massive military build-up. This fiction proved so effective that 
elements of U.S. intelligence believed it and began a furious search for 
a real mind-control weapon.”43 That search was futile, but, it provided 

240   D. C. HELLINGER
the model for “enhanced interrogation” that Trump, though he says he 
defers to the CIA’s rejection of its use, would support reinstituting.
Maintaining support for institutional conspiracy requires that the pub-
lic be convinced of its necessity. This can be demonstrated to the public 
in a number of way, through popular culture, leaked reports, and dram-
atization in hearings and trials. The trial of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg 
provided such an opportunity, says Melley. Acknowledging that Julius 
almost surely did pass secrets to the Soviets, Melley nonetheless shows 
that the court proceedings against both Rosenbergs were a show trial in 
which evidence of secrets allegedly passed to the Soviets had the prop-
aganda effect of demonstrating the need for and function of a covert 
sphere. What was most important about the atomic spying trials of the 
1950s, he says, “was not their secret content (italics in the original), but 
their purported revelation of the covert sector itself. They offered the 
public a window into the shadow world of spies and government agents 
and government agents operating beneath the rational public sphere.”44 
Though Melley eschews the concept, I contend that such a “shadow 
world” is emblematic of a Deep State.
Even the official histories or informed accounts of historians and ana-
lysts without an axe to grind against the CIA and other agencies reveal 
activities not only subject to moral and legal objections but also replete 
with plans and secret technological research that border on science fic-
tion. Many of these activities were revealed by the post-Watergate Senate 
investigations (the Church Committee).45 For a few years, less than a 
decade, the Committee’s work produced increased restraint and con-
gressional oversight. Temporarily, the Deep State became shallower. 
That state of affairs did not last long, beginning to disappear during the 
last years of the Carter administration with the decision in 1978 to sup-
port Mujahedeen fighters against the Soviet supported government in 
Afghanistan, and then it almost vanished in the Reagan years.
The Iran-Contra scandal generated congressional hearings but in ret-
rospect, we can see that compared to the post-Watergate investigations, 
these had much less impact on the resurgent Deep State. Consider the 
career of Elliot Abrams, who was one of the key orchestrators of Iran-
Contra and was convicted of withholding information from Congress 
about the affair. What he withheld was important information about one 
of the most notorious civilian massacres (El Mozote) by a US trained 
and armed Salvadoran military unit during the War in El Salvador. He 
also negotiated a $10 million contribution from the Sultan of Brunei to 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   241
the Contras, who were actively engaged in terrorist activities against the 
Nicaraguan people.46 As Assistant Secretary of State for InterAmerican 
Affairs, Abrams worked under William Casey, one of the veteran Cold 
Warriors of the CIA, who served as Reagan’s campaign treasurer and his 
CIA director from 1981 until 1987. Despite his key role in one of the 
most notorious scandals and as a key shaper of US policies in Central 
America in the 1980s, Abrams went on to serve in the Bush (jun-
ior) administration, and today he is a senior fellow at the Council on 
Foreign Relations and serves on the Committee of Conscience of the US 
Holocaust Museum.47 He has never expressed regret for his role.48
The attempt by Reagan officials to use the Federal Emergency 
Management Administration (FEMA), an agency vital to the capacity of 
the state to respond to catastrophes (natural or human-made), to suppress 
dissent illustrates the persistence of threats to liberal democratic norms 
posed by Deep State actors. The most visible human actor in this episode 
was Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North. North was joined by other adminis-
tration hawks in a plot that seems more like an updated remake of Sinclair 
Lewis’s 1935 novel It Can’t Happen Here49 than the serious, actual covert 
operation that its authors planned to carry out. But it was hardly fiction.
Reduced to its essentials, in 1984 North, while serving as the 
National Security Agency liaison to FEMA, drafted a plan to suspend 
the Constitution, impose martial law throughout the United States, put 
FEMA in control of the US government, and appoint military command-
ers to control the state and local governments. North’s plan built upon 
plans that already existed in the blueprint for continuity of government 
(COG) in case of nuclear attack or a widespread national catastrophe.50 
North at that time was also coordinating the illegal, secret aid and training 
program for the Nicaraguan Contras. North and his colleagues hatched 
a plan to use expanded FEMA authority to roundup and detain protest-
ers against American military intervention in Central America in agency 
camps. Anticipating that a direct American invasion in Central America 
could generate mass protests like those of the Vietnam War era, North 
wanted to be prepared. At the time he and his colleagues were also plan-
ning to have American troops invade the scarcely populated northeast cor-
ner of Nicaragua and place the Contra political leadership in control, then 
have the US recognize that group the legitimate government of Nicaragua.
Attorney General William French-Smith vetoed the plan, which had 
already been presented to President Reagan in the form of an Executive 
Order for him to sign—but not to reveal publicly until an actual 

242   D. C. HELLINGER
emergency would be declared. Whether Reagan ever actually signed it 
is not clear. The operation was scuttled when Attorney General William 
French-Smith became alarmed and protested the plan to National 
Security Advisor Robert McFarland.
Days before North was to appear before the Senate Iran-Contra 
Committee, Knight-Ridder Newspapers carried an investigative report 
detailing the plan based on a secret draft report compiled by the Senate 
Committees chief council, Arthur Liman.51 When North appeared, 
Congressman Jack Brooks (D-Texas) began to question the Lieutenant 
Colonel about the plan, but he was gaveled out of order by the chair-
man of the joint committee, Senator Daniel Inouye (D-Hawaii), who 
insisted that testimony on the matter could only be taken in closed ses-
sion, justifying his action on grounds that “continuity of government” 
(see below) was a sensitive national security priority.52 As a result, the 
Committee’s Iran-Contra report, while highly informative and detailed 
in many respects, never touched upon what its chief counsel regarded 
as a highly sensitive matter—and the full plot, though reported in a few 
newspapers, remained deeply submerged.
Institutional checks, specifically, the action of the Attorney General, 
scuttled the North plan on Nicaragua, but one can question whether 
they would have worked had Edwin Meese, Smith’s predecessor, who was 
involved in Central American planning and had a close relationship with 
General Efrain Rios Montt, Guatemala’s fierce dictator, been still in office. 
It is questionable whether any institutional check would have responded 
effectively once US troops were on the ground in Central America. 
Protests, which at already involved hundreds of thousands of opponents 
of US Central America policy, would have mobilized at even greater levels, 
but the repression would have been exercised more ruthlessly as well.
Liman’s report, according to the Knight-Ridder story, depicted 
North’s Central America planning group as a “government within a 
government,” effectively a rogue operation. However, as already noted, 
North directly reported to the National Security Advisor, and support-
ing the Contras was one of few policy matters (the other being “Star 
Wars” missile defense) that Ronald Reagan intensely cared about. His 
Vice President, former CIA director George H. W. Bush, was charged 
with special responsibility for Central America policy. In other words, 
the FEMA plan was an institutional conspiracy, not a rogue operation. 
Though it ultimately unraveled, this suppressed plan may be considered 
the most threatening conspiracy lending warrant to the theory presented 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   243
here that the Deep State is a product of a national security culture and an 
institutional milieu (“sphere”) that spawns conspiracies of this nature.
Given the nature of world nuclear armaments, increased threats of mass 
violence by non-state actors, and the scale of destruction and casualties that 
could occur from some plausible natural disasters (e.g., mass epidemics), 
the notion of planning for COG is rational. This is precisely why involving 
FEMA in surveillance and social control is not only threatening to democ-
racy but also threatening to one of the very basic functions of government, 
dealing with calamities that require social and national solidarity. One 
well-documented confounding of FEMA’s legitimate mandate with abuses 
of privacy and other rights was carried out in 1981, around the same time 
as the Iran-Contra operation, when FEMA and other government bureau-
cracies launched the secret Project 908. FEMA, the FBI and other agencies 
at all levels of government started systematically searching out facilities out-
side of anticipated blast zones in the event of war. Certainly, in this respect 
planning is prudent, but the program also, according to the journalist 
Garret Graff, included identifying possible counterintelligence and spying 
threats, assessing local immigrant populations, running background checks 
for possible criminal connections of owners of buildings and businesses, 
and investigating political affiliations.53 All of this was done in an era before 
terrorism replaced Communism as the enemy, and in a period where the 
American propensity toward “know-nothingism” was in relative abeyance. 
We cannot know whether similar plans exist in some version today.
We can draw a contrast between how the investigation of Russian col-
lusion has become so partisan with how the Congressional Committee 
investigating Iran-Contra of 1987 drew firm, bipartisan boundaries 
designed to wall off public debate about what should have been a very 
troublesome aspect of the affair, the COG/FEMA plans. This willing-
ness can be attributed to a bipartisan effort to protect the presidency as an 
institution. In 1992, President Clinton seemed to have ended COG plan-
ning altogether, but what his executive order did was only to end plan-
ning for a nuclear attack. President Reagan, in two executive orders of 
November 18, 1988, had already expanding COG and FEMA planning 
for any emergency and assigned the FEMA director to advise the National 
Security Council on preparedness.54 In fact, Donald Rumsfeld and Dick 
Cheney had continued to practice how COG would be implemented dur-
ing the Reagan years and later as civilian CEOs of major corporations. 
On September 11, 2001 they put some of that practice into motion and 
implemented a number of measures still available to the president and the 

244   D. C. HELLINGER
Deep State today, including readying Executive Order 13,224, authorizing 
the president independent of the courts to take measures against “persons 
who commit, threat to commit, or support terrorism.” Subsequent actions 
long before readied include putting together a legal team to implement 
more measure concentrating power in the executive branch and (led by 
John Yoo) a justification for torture (“enhanced interrogation”).55
Coming little more than a decade after the Vietnam debacle and 
Watergate, and after seven years under Reagan of restoration of 
American capacity to intervene with open use of force overseas, (begin-
ning with the invasion of Grenada in 1983 and continuing with deploy-
ment of American “trainers” in Central America), American elites were 
reluctant to fully expose the depth of the conspiracy conceived by North 
and company. Polarized partisanship is unlikely to spare the Trump pres-
idency in this same way, but this is counterbalanced by the staunch parti-
san defense of Trump by Congressional Republicans.
The questions about COG should have arisen in another important gov-
ernment investigation, that of the special commission to examine the 9/11 
attacks. Scott, who has not endorsed any version of Truther theory, has sug-
gested that “…[Vice President] Dick Cheney responded to 9/11 by using 
devious means to install a small cabal of lawyers – most notoriously John 
Yoo – who proceeded conspiratorially in the next weeks to exclude their 
superiors, while secretly authorizing measures ranging from warrantless 
surveillance and detention to torture.”56 Cheney and Rumsfeld, Secretary 
of Defense, were colleagues going back to the Ford administration (1974–
1976). Cheney was the ranking Republican Representative on the joint 
congressional Iran-Contra Committee, where he played an instrumen-
tal role in limiting the Committee’s investigatory reach. He and Rumsfeld 
have been ardent exponents of strengthening the executive prerogatives 
of the presidency. Scott’s article relies largely on the work of mainstream, 
respected investigative reporters and recently (2016) declassified files to 
make a strong circumstantial case that Cheney and Rumsfeld used 9/11 as 
a pretext for a declaration of emergency, now in its 18th year, having been 
extended by both Presidents Obama and (in September 2017) Trump.
We should not assume that the interests and motives of security agen-
cies have remained unchanged since their founding. Specifically, the kind 
of cutthroat, feverish anti-communism of the first decades of the Cold 
War, which make plausible (but not fully warranted; see Chapter 2) sus-
picions about involvement of security agencies in the assassination of 
John F. Kennedy, does not necessarily define the global perspective of 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   245
these agencies today. The collapse of the Berlin Wall and then the Soviet 
Union led to a shift for a decade away from spying to get the upper hand 
in geopolitical conflicts, as defined by the Cold War ideological rivalry, 
to intelligence to aid American business to compete in the new neolib-
eral global order that seemed to be taking root. The attacks on the Twin 
Towers and Pentagon on September 11, 2001, shifted priorities once 
again toward fighting an amorphous and war without end, baptized the 
“War on Terrorism.” The work of intelligence agencies has also been 
impacted by new challenges posed by cyber communications technology 
and by the debacle of the neoconservative-engineered second-Iraq War.
Trump’s use of executive power demonstrates how the failure of 
Congress to expose the North plan for martial law and abuse of FEMA 
authority during Iran-Contra may come back to haunt us. In reaction to 
Black Lives Matter protests and to protests aimed at blocking the contro-
versial North Dakota Access Pipeline, Trump issued an Executive Order 
calling for a review of laws stiffening criminal penalties, not only for alleged 
violent incidents at protests but also for illegal action in general. More than 
30 states by May 2017 had bills pending stiffening regulation of nonvi-
olent protests. Advanced in the context of mass demonstrations against 
police killings of blacks and several deadly ambushes of police officers, 
these bills cast a broad net that in some cases would reverse the burden 
of proof in some criminal cases, virtually requiring defendants to produce 
surveillance video to demonstrate their innocence of charges of obstructing 
not only police, but also in some cases civilian federal employees.57
Probably few readers need to be convinced that in many ways the 
rhetoric and some of the policy positions of Trump, should they come 
to be fully implemented, represent a dramatic break from the worldview 
articulated in the War-Peace Studies represents. The inconsistences and 
vagaries of Trump’s appointments and policies since the election portend 
not so much a break with American hegemonic pretensions so much as a 
confused and conflicted worldview. What is significant about Trumpism 
is not a clean break with internationalism so much as a threat to the 
domestic hegemony of American hegemonic leadership. It certainly 
represents a severe threat to the optimistic view of the post-Cold War 
world articulate by George H. W. Bush in 1991 in his speech heralding 
a New World Order—which subsequently and quickly, we should note, 
was appropriated as the moniker for revival and dissemination of conspir-
acy theories about United Nations black helicopter sightings and myths 
evocative of the Illuminati.

246   D. C. HELLINGER
Donald Trump and the Deep State
What does all this mean for the claims by Donald Trump that the 
Deep State has attempted to scuttle his presidency? The Deep State is 
not, I have argued, a “conspirator,” but an opaque sphere of politics 
where security agencies, the military, police, and (increasingly) actors to 
whom intelligence, military, and police functions have been privatized. 
To address the politics of the Deep State we must first ask in what ways 
Trump might threaten parts of the Deep State by his policies, rhetoric, 
decisions, and behavior, and how might the relevant Deep State actors 
respond. The fact that sectors of the Deep State might differ in this 
respect, as well as the opaque nature of politics in this sector, make the 
answers somewhat difficult to ascertain. Ultimately, any conspiracy the-
ory must show more than motive; it must address evidence.
The Deep State sphere of politics has acquired more prominence in 
our politics, but its relationship to Donald Trump is considerably more 
complicated than it has been with any past president, possibly except-
ing Kennedy. The theme of a Deep State became a weapon of discourse 
for an administration that even before Trump inaugurated presi-
dent. Without using the term directly at that time, the president-elect 
decided to go on the offensive against several national security institu-
tions, including the FBI, the National Security Agency, and the CIA. Yet, 
throughout his campaign and presidency, Trump has draped his positions 
and policies in the mantle of hypernationalism and sought to significantly 
increase the autonomy of police and military. He has placed high mili-
tary staff in positions, including Secretary of Defense, usually reserved 
for civilians. Trump has outsourced to theater commanders approval 
of both Special Forces operations and drone strikes in the territory of 
other sovereign countries to theatre commanders around the world. This 
autonomy may be something that military commanders resist returning 
in the future. At home, Trump regime encourages with its rhetoric alt-
right groups that include some sectors with paramilitary tendencies.
Trump repeatedly called for investigations of leaks from the FBI 
and of alleged illegal surveillance by the National Security Agency, and 
on multiple occasions suggested that the Agency’s finding of Russian 
interference in the election was fabricated to bring his legitimacy into 
question. Clearly, Trump has political motives to cast doubt on these 
agencies. Throughout 2017 and early into 2018, the headlines, when 
not generated by the words of the president himself, were dominated by 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   247
leaks from sources in the White House but also from the security bureau-
cracy and possibly investigators that are part of Special Counsel Robert 
Mueller’s team. Trump’s claims about leaks are not at all implausible—
even acknowledging that many seem to have originated within the White 
House itself. Cristopher Wray, appointed FBI Director after Trump 
replaced Comey, reassigned the agency’s top lawyer in a move that raised 
questions about leaks and about NSA surveillance.58
There is historical precedent for the security establishment to contrib-
ute to the fall of a president. Members of the national security apparatus, 
most notably within the FBI, contributed to President Richard Nixon’s 
fall by leaking information to the media about Watergate. In fact, Oliver 
Stone, who is most notorious among those who reject conspiracy theory 
for JFK, made a film, Nixon (1995), with a plotline in which Richard 
Helms, the Director of the CIA at the time, plays an instrumental role. 
Under threat of a lawsuit, the scene with Helms was withheld from the 
theatrical release, only to be reinstated in the subsequent video.
In the film, Nixon visits Helms, concerned that the CIA has main-
tained files stemming from the politician’s vice-presidency that would be 
politically embarrassing. The records have to do with Nixon’s chairing 
the “special operations” group that oversaw some the Agency’s most 
notorious projects, including efforts to overthrown Fidel Castro. In 
the film, Nixon wants Helms to gather up and deliver the files. Helms 
turns the tables, making it clear that Nixon’s constitutional authority is 
no match for the most powerful figure in the Deep State, a man accus-
tomed, despite his reputed skepticism about covert and paramilitary 
operations, to the exercise of authorized (under domestic, not interna-
tional law) covert power. Helms had been involved in ruthless and vio-
lent covert operations overseas in places like Vietnam, Guatemala, the 
Congo, Indonesia and myriad other bloody battlefields of the Cold War. 
Though there was no love lost between Helms and Nixon, this account, 
much like key scenes in JFK, consist mostly of Stone’s attempting to 
fill gaps in the historical record with a Deep State conspiracy theory. In 
fact, the CIA directorship is a civil service; its director is not subject to 
removal by the president. Ultimately Helms did resign at the beginning 
of Nixon’s second term, accepting an ambassadorship to Iran.
While Stone is an accomplished filmmaker, he is reviled in many cor-
ners, accused of disregard for historical fact and tagged with the dreaded 
label, “conspiracy theorist.” However, as Melley maintains in The Covert 
State, we largely rely upon fiction to depict the reality of the politics of 

248   D. C. HELLINGER
national security. And there is nothing fictional about the questiona-
ble constitutionality of the power wielded by Helms and Nixon as the 
CIA and other agencies carried out covert operations in the Cold War. 
Besides Helm’s involvement in overseas and destabilization operations 
abroad, it is noteworthy that under Helms directorship, according to 
reporting by the New York Times reporter Seymour Hersh in 1974, “[I]
ntelligence files on at least 10,000 American citizens were maintained by 
a special unit of the C.I.A. that was reporting directly to Richard Helms, 
then the Director of Central Intelligence.”59
There are indications that many career military and intelligence 
officers are deeply concerned about the Trump administration. Josh 
Campbell, a Special Agent in the FBI for ten years, wrote an op-ed col-
umn for the New York Times explaining that he was resigning, “So I can 
join the growing chorus of people who believe that the relentless attacks 
on the bureau undermine not just America’s premier law enforcement 
agency but also the nation’s security. My resignation is painful, but the 
alternative of remaining quiet while the bureau is tarnished for political 
gain is impossible.”60
American security has been associated closely with the exercise of 
hegemony, and Trumpian populism and policies have shaken the con-
sensus about these principles. Campbell’s claim, however, is also that the 
bureau’s reputation is being tarnished for “political gain.” This refrain, 
leaving aside its truth or falsity, is a common complaint of security forces 
in countries where political corruption is especially rampant. Political 
corruption may not be as pervasive in the US as in countries where epi-
sodes of military rule occur frequently. But the public dissension of some 
retired American security officials is a sign of divisions and discontent 
characteristic of countries undergoing decay of civilian control of the 
military and democratic political institutions.61
This chapter neither argue that the Deep State killed John F. 
Kennedy, nor does it find persuasive Truther theories about Bush 
administration involvement in the 9/11 attacks. They are certainly not 
“warranted” in the sense of having the credibility of Watergate conspir-
acy theories. However, I do agree with Scott, probably the prominent 
exponent of the claim that the United States has a Deep State, when he 
argues that recurrent scandals in American politics since World War II 
point to patterns of “parapolitics” carried out by agencies that operate 
activities undercover, engaging in institutional conspiracies and abuses of 
power that commissions investigating them and the representative organs 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   249
of Congress are unwilling or unable to fully bring to light.62 What serves 
us best is to research, as Scott advocated on the eve of the 2016 elec-
tion, “the politics of 911, Iran-Contra, the assassinations and duplicity of 
the Vietnam War era, and other large-scale Washington scandals.”63 The 
polarization of US politics Trump is likely to make that even harder to 
achieve regarding Russiagate and Spygate alike.
Transparency in all security matters may be an illusory ideal. 
Confidentiality and secrecy are justifiable in the face of actual threats 
to security, with respect to individual privacy, and in order to facilitate 
negotiations and in diplomacy. However, virtually every major scan-
dal in American politics since World War II has had a connection to the 
institutions associated with the Deep State. McCarthyism was enabled 
by the uncommon power and political autonomy of FBI Director J. 
Edgar Hoover. McCarthy’s chief counsel, Roy Cohn, served as Federal 
Prosecutor in New York, and played an instrumental role in Trump’s 
rise to national celebrity. The Watergate burglars were a team called 
the “White House Plumbers,” formed to “plug leaks” from inside the 
Nixon administration and included CIA veterans E. Howard Hunt 
and G. Gordon Liddy. The Iran-Contra operation, including the trans-
fer of receipts from arms sales to the Nicaraguan contras, was coordi-
nated out of the National Security Administration as a way of evading 
Congressional restrictions of funding for the insurgents, who used ter-
rorist tactics in their war against the Sandinistas.
Although Scott’s work has attracted considerable notoriety for the 
questions it has raised about the Kennedy assassination, his question-
ing of the handling anomalies and suspicions about 9/11, Watergate, 
and Iran-Contra have contributed to bringing out of the shadows the 
way that US military and intelligence agencies (and increasingly, privat-
ized security services) have worked closely with counterpart agencies and 
forces abroad that severely violate human rights, engage in paramilitary 
activities, and are entangled with various forms of trafficking and the 
underground economy. Referring to the likely involvement of Pakistan’s 
Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) with militants connected to the 9/11 
attacks, Scott writes,
[T]mystery of 9/11 must be unraveled at a deeper level, the ongoing 
groups inside and outside governments, in both Pakistan and America, 
which have continued to use groups like al Qaeda and individuals like 
Ahmad [referring to ISI chief, Lieutenant-General Mahmoud Ahmad], for 

250   D. C. HELLINGER
their own policy purposes…The ongoing collaboration of the ISI and CIA 
in promoting terrorist violence has created a complex conspiratorial milieu, 
in which governments now have a huge stake in preventing the emergence 
of truth.64
Going to a “deeper level” requires us to delve more deeply into the ori-
gins of the national security state, and also to ask why the serial scandals 
involving its institutions usually seem to disappear from our collective 
historical memory. It also is the kind of research that is subject to disci-
pline by the regime of truth, and it will be as long as terming secretive 
collaboration among elites is treated as taboo.
Many of Trump’s most passionate opponents hold the theory that 
he owes his occupancy of the presidential office to collusion between 
his campaign and Russian operatives acting under direction of President 
Vladimir Putin. Trump’s ability to avoid removal from office by 
Congress may ultimately depend upon him and his media allies’ attempts 
to discredit an investigation of his campaign’s collusion with Russians 
seeking to influence the election. To accomplish this goal, Trump sup-
porters responded with their own conspiracy theory, arguing that the 
collusion story has been hyped by the mainstream “fake” media and fed 
by leaks from a “Deep State” of Washington bureaucrats and national 
security agencies.
On March 9, 2017, Sean Hannity, the Fox News commentator and 
staunch Trump supporter, called for Trump to remove Obama era hold-
overs more rapidly from the federal bureaus. The Fox headline for his 
editorial read, “Opinion: Trump must purge deep-state bureaucrats 
now.” The next day, the administration dismissed 46 federal prosecu-
tors appointed by President Obama. The replacement of federal prose-
cutors by a new president is not itself unusual, but calling for a “purge” 
of all holdovers of the previous administration from the federal govern-
ment certainly is. One would have to go back to the McCarthy era to 
find right-wing media referring to career civil servants as political “sab-
oteurs,” as Hannity does. Perhaps not coincidentally, one of the fired 
prosecutors, New York’s Preet Bharara, had been asked by watchdogs 
from the federal bureaucracy to investigate Trump for allegedly violating 
the emoluments clause of the Constitution.
On June 6, 2017, Trump used a tweet to promote Hannity’s evening 
show referring to leaks to the Washington Post as the work of the Deep 
State. Trump’s son, Donald Trump Jr., tweeted on July 7, 2017, “If 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   251
there was ever confirmation that the Deep State is real, & endangers 
national security, it’s this. Their interests above all else [sic],” said Trump 
Jr., referring to an article in the right-wing Free Beacon claiming that 
leaks were happening on a daily basis.65 Throughout Trump’s first year 
in the presidency his supporters used the megaphone of Breitbart News, 
Fox News, and other right-wing outlets, including Alex Jones’ notori-
ously conspiratorial Infowars, to accuse the intelligence community of 
conspiring to remove Donald Trump from the presidency through selec-
tive leaks of damaging allegations about his campaign’s collusion with 
the Russian government to influence the 2016 election.
The response campaign was set in motion by Breitbart News when 
it published a warning of trouble four days before the members of the 
Electoral College were to vote. Entitled “The Deep State vs. Donald 
Trump” and written by “Virgil,” widely believed to be Steve Steve 
Bannon’s pen name, the editorial contended that the Democratic 
Party, the mainstream media, and “affluent residents of the Washington 
swamp” were “operating behind the scenes” to block, or at least delegit-
imize and “cripple” Trump’s presidency. The article warned readers that 
the CIA had twisted and exaggerated evidence to promote the theory 
that Russia’s Vladimir Putin had his “hand of the scale.” Virgil alleged 
that the agency had been coopted by “liberal apparatchiks” implanted 
during the Obama years; establishment Republicans, said the opinion 
piece, had joined them in opposition to the President.66
As argued in Chapters 2 and 4, an assessment of this conspiracy the-
ory does not require an absolute rejection or acceptance. Given the 
disruptive nature of the Trump presidency—putting neoliberal globali-
zation into question, breaking alliances, directly attacking the institutions 
of the national security state, motive exists for the Deep State to want 
Trump removed. He would, after all, be replaced by a vice president that 
has a warm relationship with the Dark Money lords (see Chapter 6) and 
economic elites in general. Motives to undermine Trump exist not only 
among career civil servants in domestic agencies but also for at least a 
significant part of those serving in the military and intelligence bureau-
cracy and the foreign diplomatic corps.
A clue to the levels of concern among foreign policy elites about 
Trump can be found in the comments of Republican Senator Bob 
Corker, chair of the Senate Armed Service Committee. Corker said that 
most Republican senators realized that Trump was a threat to the gen-
eral world order. Referring to Trump’s “volatility,” Corker said, “[They] 

252   D. C. HELLINGER
understand the volatility that we’re dealing with and the tremendous 
amount of work that it takes by people around him to keep him in 
the middle of the road,” adding, “As long as there are people like that 
around him who are able to talk him down when he gets spun up, you 
know, calm him down and continue to work with him before a decision 
gets made, I think we’ll be fine.”67 Breitbart News interpreted Corker’s 
remarks as indicating that “that most Republican senators realized that 
Trump was a threat to the general world order.”68 The New York Times 
report on Corker’s concern did not refer to a “general world order,” but 
did say that Corker, who had announced his retirement from the Senate, 
felt most of his colleagues agree with his words. According to the Times, 
“Mr. Corker, speaking carefully and purposefully, seemed to almost find 
cathartic satisfaction by portraying Mr. Trump in terms that most senior 
Republicans use only in private.”69
Many liberals and Democrats seem to have accepted, if not welcomed, 
the advance of military influence into key roles within the White House, 
especially the role assumed by John Kelly, the White House Chief of Staff 
who took control of access to Oval Office. The alternative, were Kelly 
to leave, would be greater influence by the radical, alt-right in Trump’s 
inner circle, especially that of presidential counsel Stephen Miller. Miller 
along with Bannon once boasted that Breitbart.com was a platform of 
the alt-right. Miller is largely responsible for formulating Trump’s 
anti-immigration policies, including separation of children of detained 
families from their parents, defending the policies in thinly veiled white 
nationalist rhetoric.
Polarized politics and decay of constitutional norms generate legiti-
mate moral issues for conscientious military officers. Air Force General 
John Hyten, commander of the US Strategic Command, has said 
that he would disobey an illegal presidential order to launch a nuclear 
strike.70 Remaining unanswered is, just who determines what is “ille-
gal”? Do we think that military officers, or for that matter thoughtful 
enlisted soldiers, have not considered these issues? Recall that in during 
the Watergate scandal, Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger notified 
key commanders only to obey orders given within the chain of command 
because he anticipated that President Richard Nixon, constitutionally 
commander-in-chief, might give a direct order to deploy troops to pre-
vent his removal from the White House. The liberal Daily Beast recalled 
Schlesinger’s precautions, calling it “the most patriotic act of treason in 
American history.”71

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   253
So far, we have concentrated on ways that Trumpism conflicts with 
the interests of Deep State actors, but there are sectors of the Deep State 
whose interests are in alignment with the administration. Particularly 
well-placed vis-vis Trump are corporations that have benefitted from pri-
vatization of certain aspects of military operations and the criminal jus-
tice system. The “security” functions of the state have increasingly been 
hived off to the private sector in the era of neoliberalism. This privat-
ization has added an additional reason to heed Eisenhower’s warning 
about in his farewell speech about military–industrial complex, which 
largely referred to arms manufacturers.72 Now private capitalism is 
investing in actually engaging in combat and intelligence activities, using 
Washington’s infamous “revolving door” between the bureaucracy and 
corporations extends to advance this objective. The latter has close ties 
with members of Trump’s cabinet who are strong advocates of deregula-
tion and privatization in general.
According to investigative journalists Matthew Cole and Jeremy Scahill, 
Erik Prince, a former Navy Seal who co-founded the Blackwater USA pri-
vate security corporation, and John Macguire, with assistance from Oliver 
North (of Iran-Contra fame), in December 2017 proposed to Trump 
campaign officials setting up a “global, private spy network that would cir-
cumvent official U.S. intelligence agencies.” These agencies would coun-
ter what Prince and Macguire see as “Deep State” enemies engaged in 
undermining the new administration.73 Blackwater’s mercenary forces 
and other activities perfectly fit the concepts of paramilitary and parapoli-
tics. Blackwater attained notoriety in September 2007 after a reported 20 
Iraqi civilians died in a shootout involving company guards escorting State 
Department employees.74 In August 2017, Prince had already proposed 
that American troops, excepting a few Special Forces personnel, be replaced 
by a private army of 5500 private contractors, backed by a 90 aircraft.75 
Prince’s sister, Betsy DeVos, is Secretary of Education and a strong 
proponent of privatizing public education. Prince donated $250,000 
to the Trump campaign through a Dark Money conduit headed by 
Rebekah Mercer. He is an ally of Steve Bannon, who, though banished 
from the White House, should not be given his political funeral prema-
turely given the mercurial nature of Trump’s personality. Jared Kushner, 
Trump’s son-in-law, has developed an alliance with Prince in promot-
ing contracting out military functions. A Washington Post story on the 
Prince-Trump campaign connection highlights the role played by the 
United Arab Emirates in attempting to facilitate Prince’s access to the 

254   D. C. HELLINGER
Trump White House, including meetings taking place in New York and 
in the Seychelles Islands.76
Prince’s relationship with Jared Kushner, Trump’s son-in-law, has 
attracted critical attention in the mainstream media, but it is not all that 
new. According to Steven Simon, who was a National Security Council 
senior director for the Middle East and North Africa in the Obama 
administration, “The idea of using business cutouts, or individuals per-
ceived to be close to political leaders, as a tool of diplomacy is as old as 
the hills. These unofficial channels are desirable precisely because they 
are deniable; ideas can be tested without the risk of failure.” Were this 
meeting simply about the back-channel attempt to foster better relations 
between two nuclear powers, they could be considered, as Simon indi-
cates, a justifiable, confidential effort at diplomacy. But in this case, the 
coordination has more to do with the efforts by Prince’s Blackwater and 
other large companies that offer private military forces (PMFs) to expand 
their role (and profits) in the private security business.
Prince’s efforts can be considered as a step toward the transnationali-
zation of Deep State politics. If he can succeed, other PMFs, who already 
provide significant military and intelligence services (such as Dyncorps, 
Booz Allen Hamilton, among others), may grow even more rapidly 
than they have since the 1990s, when they first began to take over sup-
port services previously handled within the military. PMFs recruit heav-
ily from Special Forces services around the globe. Their emergence was 
facilitated by the widespread availability of second generation but none-
theless highly lethal military equipment and ordnance after the collapse 
of the Soviet Bloc states and the apartheid regime in South Africa.77
The departure of Bannon from Trump’s favor in early 2018 may have 
slowed the transfer of military functions to private paramilitary organiza-
tions. Also, the generals serving in Trump’s inner circle seem intent on 
resisting the expansion of PMFs in combat roles. But PMF’s are likely 
to become more, not less attractive to American politicians worried 
about eventually being held accountable by voters for an endless “War 
on Terrorism”, much of it in remote corners of the globe. Consider the 
powerful rational Prince laid out his proposals in a New York Times op-ed 
piece, one that offers a truly Faustian bargain to politicians keen on 
avoiding taxation and unpopular casualties in Afghanistan.
My proposal is for a sustainable footprint of 2000 American Special 
Operations and support personnel, as well as a contractor force of less than 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   255
6000 (far less than the 26,000 in country now). This team would provide 
a support structure for the Afghans, allowing the United States’ conven-
tional forces to return home…
Prince claimed his company would save American taxpayers $40 billion. 
He concluded,
Just as no one criticizes Elon Musk because his company SpaceX helps sup-
ply American astronauts, no one should criticize a private company—mine 
or anyone else’s—for helping us end this ugly multigenerational war.78
Some obvious moral hazards should come to mind. The profitability of 
PMFs ultimately hinges on the continued prosecution of such a war, not 
necessarily winning it. As some degree of sovereignty will remain in the 
hands of nation-states, these companies’ continued presence will nec-
essarily engage them in deep diplomacy over their continued presence. 
And as international alliances shift, will PMFs find themselves at some 
time fighting one another? Will their clients want to deploy these trans-
national private armies against US troops in some future conflict? The 
transnational PMFs ultimately could bring the mercenary warfare of 
Renaissance Machiavelli’s Italy, an era rife with conspiratorial politics, on 
the global stage that hosts warfare in the twenty-first century.
While many in the military high command may resist privatization of 
warfare, meeting the personnel and bugetary demands of global warfare 
may ultimately sway them. General Raymond A. Thomas, commander of 
the US Special Operations Command, testified in May 2017 at a House 
Armed Services subcommittee meeting that the pace of deployment of 
his forces around the globe was “unsustainable.” He testified that 8000 
Special Ops troops are deployed in 80 different countries.79 Altogether, 
the total number of Special Forces troops ranges between 70,000 and 
100,000, though there are support personnel and less elite (in terms of 
combat training) included. These trends threaten to further undermine 
the constitutional principle of presidential responsibility and accountabil-
ity for authorization of war-making and rules of engagement.80
Military and intelligence functions are being increasingly integrated 
with one another. Under CIA Director Mike Pompeo, the CIA signifi-
cantly boosted its involvement in counterterrorist operations, especially 
in Pakistan, where its clandestine status means that it can undertake mis-
sions that would be politically awkward for regular military troops.81 
Pompeo’s move to Secretary of Defense puts him in a position to 

256   D. C. HELLINGER
counter the unease of the armed forces with this merging of functions. 
The tendency to more deeply involve the agency directly in operations 
rather than only intelligence assistance to military forces is not entirely 
without precedent. A most notorious prior example was Operation 
Phoenix, involving the forcible resettlement of Vietnamese peasants into 
strategic hamlets in order to “drain the water” to kill the fish (National 
Liberation Front insurgents), in which both the CIA and special opera-
tions forces participated. The program included interrogations, torture, 
and assassinations. Estimates of deaths ranged from 21,000 to 40,000 
people, including many civilians caught up in the same net with NLF 
forces.82
In addition to deployments of Special Ops teams and intelligence com-
bat units to Africa, the Middle East, and Central Asia, these elite forces 
have been deployed in the so-called “anti-drug wars” in various geo-
graphical theaters. I say “so-called” because these operations often take 
place in countries where the United States has geopolitical or economic 
interests, what Dawn Paley calls “Drug War Capitalism.”83 In Mexico and 
Central America, the United States has trained thousands of agents and 
assisted in wiretapping, interrogation, and cultivating informants, with-
out much success in reducing trafficking, and with mounting violence in 
which government forces are complicit. Drug Enforcement Agents have 
been implicated in serious human rights violations, including the massacre 
of civilians in Honduras. In Colombia, forces trained for anti-drug oper-
ations were also involved in anti-insurgency operations with forces that 
operated as death squads. The US Department of Justice has suppressed 
efforts to bring some of those responsible for mass murders to justice.84
Repeatedly, from the earliest days of cooperation with the Italian 
Mafia and of operations to ease the immigration of tainted German 
scientists, continuing through the Vietnam War period with cooper-
ation with drug runners in South East Asia, through the Reagan years 
with funding and arming the Contras and other unsavory allies in Latin 
America, and today with reliance on warlords in Central Asia, American 
law enforcement, intelligence, and special operation forces have engaged 
in relationships with allies complicit in trafficking and gross human rights 
violations. These alliances are made as part of “low intensity conflicts” 
that take their toll in lives abroad, but they also reinforce an “ends jus-
tify the means” mentality that can blowback into domestic opera-
tions and encourage the militarization of domestic law enforcement. 
Paramilitary and parapolitical operations are often protected by secrecy 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   257
and subterfuge, but just as often they are hidden in plain sight. Melley’s 
work on the depiction of the covert sphere elucidates how this happens.
Conspiracy Fiction, Conspiracy Reality
Given that part of the mandate of the CIA is to carry out covert oper-
ations, we should hardly be surprised that the ways its employees and 
high-level officials operate in a conspiratorial culture are very well 
depicted in the novels of former spies, such as John le Carre and Ben 
Macintyre. Referring to le Carre, critic Sarah Lyall recently commented,
Early in his writing, le Carré introduced the subversive hypothesis that the 
spies of East and West were two sides of the same tarnished coin, each as 
bad as the other. It was a stunning idea, espionage painted not in black and 
white but in shades of gray…His later books are angrier, more polemical, 
their worldview darker, reflecting the chaotic morality of the post-Soviet 
era and often presenting the United States — with its exceptionalism, its 
flouting of international norms, as he sees it — as the villain in the post-
Cold War era.85
Regarding Trump’s dismissal of the dossier put together by former 
British spy Christopher Steele alleging that Vladimir Putin has black-
mail information on Trump (see Chapter 2), Macintyre, a former British 
operative, commented, “I can tell you what the veterans of the S.I.S. 
[the British Secret Intelligence Service, or MI6] think, which is yes, kom-
promat was done on him. Of course, kompromat is done on everyone. 
So they end up, the theory goes, with this compromising bit of mate-
rial and then they begin to release parts of it. They set up an ex-MI6 
guy, Chris Steele, who is a patsy, effectively, and they feed him some stuff 
that’s true, and some stuff that isn’t true, and some stuff that is demon-
strably wrong. Which means that Trump can then stand up and deny it, 
while knowing that the essence of it is true. And then he has a stone in 
his shoe for the rest of his administration.”86
Playing with truth is endemic in the Deep State, especially when it 
comes to maintaining the fiction that there nothing imperialistic in US 
covert operations. Melley maintains that “the ideological disavowal of 
imperialism was dramatically assisted by the segregation of state policy 
into overt and covert sectors.”87 The institutionalization of deniability 
for government actors encourages a culture where “I don’t know, and 

258   D. C. HELLINGER
don’t really want to know” prevails. “Geographical melodrama” in pop-
ular fiction helps promote this bifurcation of the overt and the covert. It 
serves the function of portraying, often with considerable accuracy, the 
dirty nature of warfare but ultimately justifies this bending of rules or 
worse, including thuggish threats and torture, as a necessary adaptation 
to a threatening international environment, rarely examining underlying 
roots of terrorism. “The dirty work of empire disappears,” says Melley, 
and American exceptionalism persists as a widespread civic belief. Covert 
war, not so different from the Cold War, defends “freedom”, and our 
warriors abroad are the heroes who risk their lives for our “way of life,” 
the envy of all other nations under the umbrella of the Pax Americana.
Popular fiction does not so much make the “Deep State” invisible as 
wipe popular memory clean of the stain of scandal, extra-constitutional 
parapolitics and the seamy side of American foreign intervention. Melley 
highlights popular films and TV programs as having set the trend for 
adapting the covert sphere of politics to the post-Cold War era. Sum of 
All Fears (2002), The Siege (1998), and Enemy of the State (1998) are typ-
ical of the genre in which an act of terrorism or threat of such an attack 
brings a response from the state that is also personally threatening to an 
American hero who, at least at the start, fights a typically lonely fight 
against the enemy. Only later does the hero see that corrupt forces in 
the state bureaucracy or an out-of-control national security official have 
actually been the ones to provoke the terrorist plot in the first place. In 
the Jason Bourne series (films starring Matt Damon, based on Robert 
Ludlum’s novels), our hero, an assassin who has had his memory cleansed 
by the CIA, must battle the bad guys and the Agency, defeating both.
In The Bourne Identity, the first in the series, Bourne finds he was sent 
to kill an African dictator, a very bad man to be sure, but he does not 
complete the act because the man’s wife and children would have also 
been killed—an allegory to the myth that Americans do all possible to 
avoid collateral damage in warfare. What has to be done is done, but 
the basic goodness of the American soul prevails. The myth of American 
exceptionalism—our country retains its liberal values—is reinforced, and 
at the same time the threats of an evil world are real and justify responses 
inconsistent with those values.
Zero Dark 30, released in 2012, one year after Navy Seal Team 6 assas-
sinated Osama Bin Laden, features Jessica Chastain as a CIA analyst on 
the trail of Bin Laden. Her character, Maya, based on an actual female 
operative who identified Bin Laden’s presence at the location where the 
raid took place, is portrayed as reticent to employ torture. The brutality 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   259
of the war on terror teaches her the importance of doing what needs to 
be done, including enhanced interrogation, i.e., torture, to succeed in 
locating the man who publicly professed to have organized the 9/11 
attacks. The film concludes with Navy Seal Team 6 carrying out its oper-
ation to kill Bin Laden. The Team kills only in self-defense in the raid, 
and the film ends with Maya softly crying as she leaves. Is it for the loss 
of innocence? Her own and America’s?
Much of the film is based on fact, including realistic scenes of tor-
ture and battles. The main character’s actual career is misrepresented, 
however. Jane Mayer (the author of Dark Money) among others found 
that the real CIA operative involved was not new to her work, as por-
trayed in film; she participated in intelligence blunders that contributed 
to failures to anticipate the 9/11 attacks. She “gleefully” participated in 
torture sessions and misled Congress about the use of torture in inter-
rogations.88 And is not at all clear that the Seal Team’s killing was only 
done in self-defense. The filmmakers certainly did not sanitize torture, 
but they certainly reinforced the humanity of the film’s protagonists who 
engaged in torture and extreme violence, especially with the final scene. 
Both the CIA and Defense Department cooperated with the filmmakers.
The two most influential, long-running television series of this type 
are Homeland and 24. Homeland began in 2011 and entered its sev-
enth season in 2018; 24, starred Jack Sutherland as Jack Bauer, leader 
of a counterterrorism unit. Both programs feature the “ticking bomb” 
plot device, the race against time to prevent a terrorist attack. Both por-
tray national security agencies in a far less than flattering light, but as 
with Zero-Dark 30, the protagonists’ and agencies flaws’ are set against a 
do-what-is necessary background. Amnesty International has harshly crit-
icized both programs for justifying torture.89 Something similar is por-
trayed in the screenplay for Red Sparrow, a 2018 film starring Jennifer 
Lawrence, which reprised the early years of the Cold War and was writ-
ten by a retired CIA agent with more than three decades of service. 
Brutality is evident on both sides, but that’s the point. It’s a dirty world 
and it has to be fought with the dirty means. The Cold War theme that 
fighting dirty wars to stop the Communist “menace” resonates similarly 
in fictional depictions of way the “war on terrorism” is conducted.
That terrorism may at least in part have emerged from the kind of 
world built by Western imperialism and presided over by the United 
States since World War II is hardly explored at all in these fictional plots. 
The impact of drone attacks, past interventions abroad, Tomahawk 
missiles, “enhanced interrogations,” rarely appears, and usually only as 

260   D. C. HELLINGER
background, except in a few instances (e.g., Three Kings, 1999, set in the 
Iraq War comes to mind). Films, such as the oeuvre of Costa Gavras (Z, 
State of Siege, Missing, others), that explore more troubling themes usu-
ally are relegated to the Art House circuit.
In places where the US footprint has been heavy, we ought not to 
be surprised that conspiracy theories about the United States tend to 
proliferate. Examining Pakistani conspiracy theories about Blackwater, 
Humeira Iqtidar, a lecturer in politics at King’s College, London, notes 
that the US response to these theories usually attributes their rise to 
ignorance of the locals and their failure to appreciate their own responsi-
bility to deal with terrorist cells on their own territory. American officials, 
including Hillary Clinton when she was Secretary of State, called on 
Pakistanis to cease blaming their problems on the United States, for their 
own good. Coupled with an admission of US lapses in protecting civilian 
in some cases serves to signal to the audience, says Iqtidar, “a maturity 
on the part of the U.S. that Pakistan has yet to achieve.”90
Taking note of two stories that ran on consecutive day in May 2010 
in the New York Times, the first claiming, “Conspiracy is a national sport 
in Pakistan,” and the second reporting that General Petraeus, military 
commander at the time, had ordered a “broad expansion” of secret oper-
ations throughout the Middle East, Central Asia, and the Horn of Africa 
against al-Qa’eda, Iqtodar commented, “The sense of humor that allows 
such reporting on consecutive days is surely one that is developed in a 
space free of daily threats, actual occurrences of bombings and American-
sponsored ‘disappearances’ of young men.”91 A similar ironic critique 
might be made of reports highlighting conspiracy theories that circulate 
in Iran. Many of these beliefs are outright anti-Semitic, but not all of them 
are. Either way, they are nurtured by the very real history of intervention 
and unsavory activities of the United States and Israel. For example, the 
Israeli Mossad has been linked to the murders of five Iranian scientists 
working on the country’s nuclear program, an operation all but confirmed 
by Israel’s own Defense Minister.92 Similar themes characterize American 
views of drug trafficking and violence in Mexico. Plot lines in several 
recent films and TV shows feature violent conflicts in Mexico. While they 
often include corrupt American’s in league with trafficking, they contrib-
ute to Trump’s stereotyping of Mexicans as rapists and criminals.
In 2017, three new TV programs featuring themes forgiving of 
moral hazzards facing American warriors debuted with plots and char-
acters drawn from Special Forces. NBC touted The Brave as a “fresh, 
heart-pounding journey into the complex world of America’s elite 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   261
undercover military heroes” as each week another “ticking bomb plot” 
plays out. The casting carefully includes two actresses with South Asian 
surnames, and plots include operations being aided by “the world’s most 
advanced surveillance technology from headquarters in D.C.”93 Valor, 
produced by CBS and Warner Brothers and aired on the CW Network, 
is based on the real-life 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment 
(Airborne)—once again an opportunity to elide fiction and reality. Both 
these shows struggled for renewal, but not so the third program, Seal 
Team, produced by CBS.
Seal Team, as CBS touts it, “follows the professional and personal lives 
of the most elite unit of Navy SEALs as they train, plan, and execute the 
most dangerous, high stakes missions our country can ask of them. Jason 
Hayes is the respected, intense leader of the Tier One team whose home life 
has suffered as a result of his extensive warrior’s existence.”94 This tension 
felt by military families is portrayed realistically, though, as Melley would 
point out, ultimately such plot devices serve to reinforce the domesticity of 
the home front, stressing the need for Americans to show appreciation for 
“heroes” and their families, who are protecting us all at enormous costs. 
Valor does this especially well by including a character who has had to 
overcome opioid addiction because of wounds. As in other films and TV 
program just discussed, Seal Team depicts intelligence operatives working 
closely with the highly trained combat units. The combat is depicted very 
realistically, not to horrify but to reassure the audience that it is unavoidable.
Despite the brutality and even cynicism of some programs, none of 
the TV programs about Special Forces depict other troubling parts of the 
record of special ops, such as unpunished involvement in unjustified vio-
lence and collateral damage to civilians, including the troubling record 
of Seal Team 6 itself, i.e., the unit that carried out the Bin Laden raid. 
The Team’s “quiet killings and blurred lines” were revealed in an exten-
sive, in-depth investigation by a team of New York Times reporters, who 
concluded that special operations force “has been converted into a global 
manhunting machine with limited outside oversight.”95 The Times 
reporters documented lack of civilian oversight; failures to adequately 
investigate reports of civilian casualties, even when reported by European 
allies; front companies set up to arm proxy forces. US officials justify the 
use of Seals and other such operatives because they can be deployed into 
undeclared war zones, about which a retired admiral admitted, “you cer-
tainly don’t want that out in public.”
A surge in use of Special Forces was ordered by Obama in 2006, and 
their daily raids resulted in 10 to 25 deaths per night. One Seal Team 

262   D. C. HELLINGER
6 former officer commented, “These killing fests had become routine.” 
Although team members are supposed to maintain a code of silence, and 
many closely adhere to it, others have told stories, including providing 
accounts of the bin Laden raid. “The Team 6 members routinely per-
formed their missions at night, making life-or-death decisions in dark 
rooms with few witnesses and beyond the view of a camera. Operators 
would use weapons with suppressors to quietly kill enemies as the slept,” 
according to the Times report. Not surprisingly local populations often 
give different accounts of civilian casualties in such conflicts.
The films and TV programs we have reviewed all began their runs 
or production before Donald Trump assumed the presidency. But their 
depiction of Muslims as the enemy, lack of context, and adaption of Cold 
War memes to the war on terrorism helped prepare the turf of Trump’s 
anti-Muslim policies, his stereotyping of Muslim and other Third 
World nations, and the militarist attitudes evident at his rallies. And 
these memes are also now common in movies and television programs 
that depict domestic crime and police pursuit of criminals, often tied to 
the “ticking clock” plot device. Television programs are rife with such 
tropes, especially police procedurals, such as the various NCIS (which 
stands for Naval Crime Investigation Service) shows. They often depict 
anti-trafficking efforts or involve these specialized anti-crime forces in 
efforts to protect Third World officials visiting or living in the United 
States and threatened by nefarious forces from their home government. 
Sometimes the plots depict bureaucratic or corrupt politicians throwing 
obstacles in the path of the cops, justifying their bending of rules.
NCIS is one of the few shows that sometimes beats professional foot-
ball in ratings. The plots are driven by the primal need to attract an audi-
ence that can be sold to advertisers, but this comes at the expense of 
distorting the reality of law and order in America. A summary of research 
on crime procedurals and reality finds that (among other distortions) 
these programs magnify the crime rate in urban areas; they exaggerate 
the percentage of suspects of crimes that are people of color and also 
the reliability of forensic proof; and they underplay civil rights viola-
tions.96 This distorted image of urban America and the nature of crime, 
we should note, closely resembles the distorted picture of crime and its 
threat to white Americans that Trump traded-on in his campaign.
The long-running NCIS began as a procedural based in Washington 
D.C. The show and its various spinoffs rapidly became more violent and 
more focused on plot lines emphasizing big city corruption. This meme is 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   263
especially strong in CSI NCIS New Orleans. For example, Episode 24 in 
Season 2 featured a plotline where the “NCIS team uncovers a mole in the 
ranks while working with the Department of Homeland Security to locate 
900 missing pounds of explosives that pose an imminent threat to New 
Orleans.”97 The teams’ work is made more difficult by corruption in the city 
administration, up to the mayor himself. In the end, the “ticking bomb” 
plot shows that our heroes are working against bureaucratic obstructionism, 
in the form of too much concern about the team violating rules.
One way that the nature of the war on terrorism blows back into 
American civil society is through the employment of returning military 
officers in police occupations. For the individuals involved, this transi-
tion requires a transition from a “warrior culture” to a “guardian” role.98 
At the same time, police forces have become significantly militarized in 
respect to the kinds of equipment they utilize, including the war-grade 
vehicles and artillery, and to the common use of paramilitary SWAT 
teams, especially in difficult urban situations and in confrontations with 
right-wing paramilitary situations. No fully reliable data on how many 
veterans hold police jobs exists, but a recent study jointly conducted by 
the Marshall Project (a nonpartisan, nonprofit collective of news organi-
zations that researches law enforcement issues) and USA Today estimated 
approximately one in five police today are recruited from the ranks of 
military veterans. That study claims that while many police benefit from 
military experience and adapt well to their new challenge.
The Marshall study concludes that “…data from two major-city law 
enforcement agencies, and considerable anecdotal evidence, tentatively con-
cluded (pending more research) that veterans are more likely to get physical, 
and some police executives agree.” The study also raises another caution very 
salient to the theory of a Deep State and to parapolitics. It warns that “…any 
large-scale comparison of the use of force by vets and non-vets is hampered 
by a chronic lack of reliable official record-keeping on issues of police vio-
lence.” The alarming question here is, why is there so little record-keeping 
on police violence, whether that of former soldiers or other police?
Despite limitations, the Marshall study felt that three findings more 
clearly emerged: (1) Veterans in police forces are “more vulnerable 
to self-destructive behavior — alcohol abuse, drugs and, like William 
Thomas, attempted suicide.” (2) “Little or no mental health screen-
ing” or treatment opportunities exist for veterans returning from mili-
tary employment, something the study attributes, among other factors, 
to “a culture of machismo and a number of legal restraints.” (3) White 

264   D. C. HELLINGER
veterans tend to benefit more from hiring preferences, contributing to 
forces less likely to reflect the demographic profile of their communities.
As with media depictions of special ops teams, the militarization of 
police has become a theme in much the same way. Some relatively new 
TV programs depict America’s urban landscape not so differently than 
Trump did in his campaign, as free fire zones of death and destruction. 
S.W.A.T is a carnage filled drama in which cops fight crime and race againt 
the clock in “ticking time bomb” plots, dressed in military gear that might 
make you think Los Angeles, where it is set, is actually Baghdad. Training 
Day (CBS) and A.P.B. (Fox) feature rogue cops who will resort to torture, 
teaching younger, more naïve partners that the times and circumstances 
require breaking rules. Bureaucrats and corrupt officials need to get out 
of the way of guardians of order.99 In real life, some urban police forces 
have engaged in much worse military-style practices that these programs 
never depict. For example, in 2015 (during the Obama administration, 
we should note) reporters in Chicago discovered that over 7000 inmates, 
6000 of whom were black, were detained, mostly on suspicion of narcot-
ics, and interrogated virtually incommunicado, without access to lawyers 
in a warehouse complex in Homan Square. The Chicago police justified 
the center, which drew comparisons to Guantanamo, as a necessary meas-
ure to protect the identity of undercover officers.100
Reviewing a book that detailed the many bungled operations car-
ried out by the CIA since its inception, Evans Thomas, an editor at 
Newsweek, concluded, “Is an open democracy capable of building and 
sustaining an effective secret intelligence service? Maybe not. But with 
Islamic terrorists vowing to set off a nuclear device in an American city, 
there isn’t much choice but to keep on trying.” No better quote sum-
marizes how conspiracy fiction serves the interest of a state-sanctioned 
manufacturer of conspiracies.
Parapolitics and Blowback
The ascendancy of Trump to the presidency came at a time when surveil-
lance, cybersecurity, use of new technologies (such as drones), reliance on 
special forces, use of torture under the euphemism “enhanced interroga-
tion”, cybersecurity, police violence all were converging together as seri-
ous issues. Each of them involves actors and issues that play out as much 
in the grey parapolitical sphere as in the public sphere of politics. On the 
one hand, Trump, who had endorsed waterboarding on the campaign 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   265
trail, chose James Mathis, an opponent of “enhanced interrogation,” as 
his Secretary of Defense. However, Trump also appointed several offi-
cials who were connected directly or indirectly to the Bush administra-
tion’s employment of rendition and “enhanced interrogation.” Gina 
Haspel appointed as deputy director of the CIA, ran a “black site” prison 
in Thailand where waterboarding was employed destroyed film evidence 
of the practice.101 In May 2018 Haspel rose to the position of Director 
of the Agency. Steven Engel, appointed to lead the Justice Department’s 
Office of Legal Counsel, was among those who reviewed the Bush 
administration 2007 memo framed to legalize waterboarding.102
Edward Snowden’s release in 2013 of a massive cache of classified 
files from the National Security Agency’s program of gathering commu-
nications between American citizens and foreigners brought into public 
scrutiny one way that parapolitics is infecting the domestic political game. 
It is notable that the actual work of surveillance was largely done by 
Snowden’s employer, Booz Allen Hamilton, a large contractor for defense 
and intelligence.103 The debate over the propriety of Snowden’s actions 
and the NSA’s role in monitoring US citizens has distracted us from the 
way that this program obscured further the line between public and pri-
vate government, just as it has been by the deployment of private merce-
naries for military purposes. Furthermore, the surveillance program was 
not a national operation but a transnational one. It was begun with agree-
ments among the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand 
to create a global system, code named ECHELON, aimed mainly at the 
Communist bloc during the Cold War but took on a role of conducting 
economic espionage in the 1990s, during the period between the collapse 
of the Soviet bloc and the start of the “war on terrorism” in 2001.104
Surveillance issues are prominent in the sprawling Russiagate scandal, 
centered on allegations of Russian interference into the electoral pro-
cess, including allegations that the Democratic National Committee was 
hacked and that Russian operatives passed to Wikileaks emails revealing 
prejudicial actions favorable to Clinton and harmful to her chief com-
petitor, Bernie Sanders. Wider hacks into corporate and financial insti-
tution files have been attributed to a group called the Shadow Brokers, 
likely Russian. It turns out that Shadow Brokers had somehow obtained 
the codes used by the National Security Agency to hack and some-
times to sabotage computer information systems in other countries.105 
The United States itself had been carrying out hacks in other countries 
for industrial espionage and political reasons for years before using the 

266   D. C. HELLINGER
technology stolen by the Shadow Brokers. In 2009 and 2010, secu-
rity experts believe that the United States with Israel deployed a cyber 
weapon, Stuxnet, designed to destroy Iranian nuclear centrifuges.106
Dueling conspiracy theories about Deep State politics continued to 
dominate headlines as Donald Trump neared the end of the end of the 
second year of his presidency. Opponents of Trump, inclusively among 
political elites, celebrities, and public, subscribe to the conspiracy theory 
that his campaign colluded with Russian operatives closely connected to 
the government of Vladimir Putin, to which in response Trump and his 
supporters allege a conspiracy among mainstream news organization, 
Deep State institutions, and political opponents to undermine his pres-
idency. Significant corollary conspiracy theories grow out of these prin-
cipal theories. On the anti-Trump side, conspiracy theorists argue that 
Russian President Vladimir Putin influenced American elections, seeking 
to ease economic sanctions by placing the more sympathetic Trump in 
office and to undermine confidence in American electoral institutions. A 
second anti-Trump corollary theory argues that the president, even if not 
directly involved in collusion, engaged in obstruction of justice to cover 
up collusion involving close associates, including his son and son-in-law.
Trump’s “disruptive” rhetoric and the anti-patriotic aura around 
Russiagate both threaten the narrative of what Melley calls the “geo-
graphical melodrama” (discussed above). Trump’s excoriating denounce-
ments of the Deep State are disruptive of heroic image of the CIA, 
the FBI, National Security Agency—contradicting the depiction of the 
police, soldiers and spies in popular fiction as “heroes” and self-less “first 
responders.” At the same time there are ways that Trump’s policies and 
discourse may be appealing in certain corners of the Deep State. His 
hypernationalist rhetoric and promotion of increased military spending 
are two examples. These conflicting aspects of Trumpism is consistent 
may provoke riffs in the Deep State between elements who find Trump’s 
“Make America Great Again” and “America First” philosophy appealing 
and those who find his attacks on the FBI, CIA, and National Security 
Agency personally offensive, institutionally threatening, or simply 
obstructing fulfillment of their missions. That hypothesis is highly spec-
ulative, but leaks and public statements by employees retiring from the 
security sector suggest that political polarization exists within the security 
establishment. These evident divisions should caution us about depic-
tions of the Deep State as a monolythic conspiracy and argue for my con-
ception of it as a sphere of politics prone to generating conspiracies.

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   267
In January and February 2017 skirmishing broke out between 
Democrats and Republicans over the release of a memo prepared by 
the David Nunes (R-CA) Chair of the House Intelligence Committee, 
which purported to show abuse of FBI surveillance of a Trump cam-
paign official, part of an effort to undermine the credibility of Muller, 
the Special Counsel. Democrats prepared a memo in response defend-
ing the integrity of the FBI. As numerous commentators have suggested, 
the dispute put on display a remarkable turnout—liberals defending an 
agency they often have criticized for abuse of power, conservatives said 
to be undermining the rule of law. Trump in his first year also launched 
attacks direct attacks on the CIA, prompting Democrats and centrist 
Republicans to defend the agency.
The Nunes memo focused in part on the FBI’s citing a report pre-
pared by the retired British spy, Christopher Steele, which alleged collusion 
between Trump campaign officials, and was paid for by opponents (first 
within the GOP, later Clinton supporters) of Trump. In fact, much more 
was involved in the FBI obtaining the warrant from the Court. But here 
again, we might note that the entire affair should remind us of the new 
element of conspiratorial activity that may be routine in our politics. The 
very fact that the American electoral process now seems to include as rou-
tine campaign strategy hiring former intelligence officials to do opposition 
research is a sign of how transnational the invisible campaign has become, 
and how dirty. Besides Dark Money, American candidates for office now 
tap into the sphere of international Deep State politics to advance their 
cause.
We should take note that Deep State operatives have had roles in other 
elections as well. Besides using the Plumbers to break into Democratic 
headquarters at the Watergate, Richard Nixon and H. R. Halderman, his 
campaign chief of staff, attempted to sabotage Johnson’s plans in October 
1968 to advance peace talks, using Anna Chennault, a GOP fundraiser 
who had a back channel to the South Vietnamese government. William 
Casey, a campaign official for Ronald Reagan, who would become his 
CIA Director, allegedly supervised an attempted deal with Iran to prevent 
any release of hostages before the 1980 election, thwarting an “October 
Surprise.”107 What is of interest here is that in both cases, the political 
class eventually came together to end to further damage from explosive 
revelations. In contrast, President Trump publicly accused Democratic 
members of Congress of “treason” simply for failing to stand and applaud 
any part of the January 2018 State of the Union Address. Republicans, 

268   D. C. HELLINGER
at least through early March 2018, were not especially keen to work with 
Democrats to bring an ending where the pundits and politicians could 
claim, as they did after Watergate, “The system worked.”
Notes
	
1.  Mike Lofgren, The Party’s Over: How Republicans Went Crazy, 
Democrats Became Useless, and the Middle Class Got Shafted (New 
York: Penguin, 2013); Mike Lofgren. The Deep State: The Fall of the 
Constitution and the Rise of a Shadow Government (New York: Penguin, 
2016); and Marc Armbinder (Pseudonym) and D. B. Grady, The Deep 
State: The Fall of the Constitution and the Rise of the Shadow Government 
(New York and Hoboken, NJ: Wiley).
	
2.  Armbinder and Grady (Pseudonym), Deep State: Inside the Government 
Secrecy Industry.
	
3.  “National: Public Troubled by ‘Deep State’,” Monmouth University Poll, 
March 18, 2018, available at https://www.monmouth.edu/polling-in-
stitute/documents/monmouthpoll_us_031918.pdf (accessed June 27, 
2018).
	
4.  Steve Herman, “Trump Backers Fear ‘Deep State’ Aims to Undermine 
Administration,” VOA News, March 9, 2017.
	
5.  Samuel Huntington, American Politics: The Promise of Disharmony 
(Harvard University Press): 75. Quoted in Peter Dale Scott, The 
American Deep State: Wallstreet, Big Oil, and the Attack on U.S. 
Democracy (Lanham, MA: Rowman & Littlefield, 2015): 6 and also 
by Noam Chomsky, a critic of the idea of the Deep State. See his 
essay, “Security and State Power,” available at https://chomsky.
info/20140303 (accessed June 28, 2018).
	
6.  Lofgren, The Party’s Over.
	
7.  Sonam Sheth,” Right-Wing Media Blames Reports That Trump Leaked 
Classified Information to Russia on the ‘Deep State’—Here’s Where 
That Idea Came From,” Business Insider, available at www.businessin-
sider.com/trump-deep-state-bannon-cia-fbi-breitbart-fox-news-2017-5 
(accessed January 11, 2018).
	
8.  Jane Mayer, The Dark Side: The Inside Story of How the War on Terror 
Turned Into a War on American Ideals (New York: Random House, 2008).
	
9.  To cite only a few, see Chalmers Johnson, Blowback, The Costs and 
Consequences of American Empire (New York: Henry Holt and 
Company, 2004); The Sorrows of Empire: Militarism, Secrecy, and the 
End of the Republic (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 2004); 
Christopher Simpson, Blowback: The First Full Account of Americas 

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   269
Recruitment of Nazis, and Its Disastrous Effect on Our Domestic and 
Foreign Policy (New York: Weidenfeld & Nicholson, 1988); and Andrew 
Bacevich, Washington Rules: America’s Path to Permanent War (New 
York: Henry Holt and Company, 2010).
	
10.  “September 11th: Ten Years, with Jane Mayer,” The New Yorker, August 
31, 2011.
	
11.  Dwight W. Eisenhower, Farewell Radio and Television Address to the 
American People, January 17, 1961, available at www.eisenhower.
archives.gov (accessed February 25, 2018).
	
12.  David Remnick, “There Is No Deep State,” The New Yorker, March 20, 
2017.
	
13.  Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon, “Why Steve Bannon Wants You 
to Believe in the Deep State: What Better Way to Decimate the 
Bureaucracy Than to Convince Americans It’s Treacherous?” Politico, 
March 21, 2017.
	
14.  Alex Tunzelmann, “Oliver Stone’s JFK: A Basket Case for Conspiracy 
Theory,” The Guardian, April 11, 2003, drawing substantial on Jack 
Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: Political Rationality and Popular Culture.
	
15.  “Conspiracy panic” refers to dismissal of certain theories as examples of 
the paranoid style; “regime of truth” is a concept of Foucault referring 
to social discipline of acceptable thought. Chapter 2 examines both in 
some depth, drawing substantially upon by Jack Bratich, Conspiracy 
Panics: Political Rationality and Popular Culture (Albany, NY: State 
University of New York Press, 2008): 5–25.
	
16.  Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: 11.
	
17.  Greg Grandin, “What Is the Deep State,” The Nation, February 17, 
2017.
	
18.  Frederic Jameson, “Cognitive Mapping,” pp. 347–360, in Marxism 
and the Interpretation of Culture, ed. C. Nelson and L. Grossberg 
(Champaign–Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1960): 9.
	
19.  Kathryn S. Olmsted, Real Enemies: Conspiracy Theories and American 
Democracy, World War I to 9/11 (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2009).
	
20.  Timothy Melley, The Covert Sphere: Secrecy Fiction and the National 
Security State (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2012).
	
21.  Peter Knight, Conspiracy Culture from Kennedy to the X-Files (New York: 
Routledge, 2001): 3.
	
22.  See Matthew Dentith, The Philosophy of Conspiracy Theories (London: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2014): 41.
	
23.  Peter Dale Scott, The War Conspiracy: JFK, 9/11, and the Politics of War 
(New York: Mary Ferrell Foundation Press, 2008): 238.
	
24.  Scott, The American Deep State: 3.

270   D. C. HELLINGER
	
25.  The most influential pluralist thinker, whose idea of “polyarchy” has 
become a synonym for democracy in mainstream political science, is 
Robert Dahl. See Polyarchy: Participation and Opposition (New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1971).
	
26.  C. Wright Mills, The Power Elite (New York: Oxford University Press, 
1960): 274, 277.
	
27.  Transcript available at http://www.kenrahn.com/JFK/The_critics/
Scott/Debate_Scott_Posner.html (accessed May 10, 2017).
	
28.  Max Holland, “Paranoia Unbound,” The Wilson Quarterly 18/1 (Winter 
1994): 87.
	
29.  Peter Dale Scott, Drugs, Oil, and War: The United States in Afghanistan, 
Colombia, and Indochina (Lanham, PA: Rowman & Littlefield, 2003): 
vii.
	
30.  Steve Mufson and Jim McGee, “BCCI Scandal: Behind the Bank of 
Crooks and Criminals,” Washington Post, July 28, 1991.
	
31.  Steve Lohr, “World-Class Fraud: How B.C.C.I. Pulled It Off—A Special 
Report: At the End of a Twisted Trail, Piggy Bank for a Favored Few,” 
New York Times, August 11, 1991.
	
32.  See The BCCI Affair. A Report to the Committee on Foreign Relations, 
United States Senate, by Senator John Kerry and Senator Hank Brown, 
December 1992, available at https://fas.org/irp/congress/1992_rpt/
bcci (accessed January 31, 2018). This version is the penultimate draft 
published at by Federation of American Scientists. The final report 
included redactions request by Henry Kissinger.
	
33.  The BCCI Affair, section entitle “BCCI and Kissinger Associates.”
	
34.  Agencies and employee figures from Jeffrey T. Richelson, The US 
Intelligence Community (Bolder, CO: Westview Press, 7th ed., 2017): 
12–13. Richelson’s carefully researched and documented overview is a 
highly reliable guide to the history and present status of the intelligence 
community.
	
35.  Tim Weiner, Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA (New York: Anchor 
Books, 2008): 390.
	
36.  Quotation 
from 
Jefferson 
Morley, 
“Wilderness 
of 
Mirrors,” 
The 
Intercept, 
January 
1, 
2018, 
available 
at 
theintercept.
com/2018/01/01/the-complex-legacy-of-cia-counterintelli-
gence-chief-james-angleton (accessed January 22, 2018). Also, Jefferson 
Morley, The Ghost: The Secret Life of CIA Spymaster James Jesus Angleton 
(New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2017).
	
37.  Gerald Posner, Case Closed. Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of 
JFK (New York: Random House, 1993).
	
38.  Council on Foreign Relations. 1940–1943. Studies of American Interests 
in the War and the Peace. Archived at the CFR in New York.

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   271
	
39.  Quoted in Laurence Shoup, “Shaping the Post-War World: The Council 
of Foreign Relations and the United States War Aims During World 
War II,” The Insurgent Sociologist 5, no. 3 (Spring 1975): 18–20. For 
a fuller account see Shoup and William Minter, Imperial Brain Trust: 
The Council on Foreign Relations and United States Foreign Policy 
(New York: Monthly Review Press, 1977); G. William Domhoff, “The 
Council on Foreign Relations and the Grand Area: Case Studies on the 
Origins of the IMF and the Vietnam War,” Class, Race and Power 2, no. 
1 (2014).
	
40.  Available at http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=19364 (accessed 
February 27, 2018).
	
41.  Richelson, The US Intelligence Community: 19.
	
42.  “Doping Report Details ‘Institutional Conspiracy’ in Russia Involving 
More Than 1000 Athletes,” Associated Press, December 9, 2016.
	
43.  Melley, The Covert Sphere: 61 (Quotation), 68–75.
	
44.  Melley, The Covert Sphere: 79.
	
45.  Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect 
to Intelligence Activities (Washington, DC: US Government Printing 
House, 1976).
	
46.  Reed Brody, Contra Terror in Nicaragua: Report of a Fact-Finding 
Mission: September 1984–January 1985 (Boston: South End Press, 
1999).
	
47.  Eric Alterman, “An Actual American War Criminal May Become Our 
Second-Ranking Diplomat,” The Nation, February 2, 2017. “Elliot 
Abrams Appointed to NSC,” Central American and Mexico Report 3 
(2001, No Longer Available). On Casey, see Abrams’ Interview with 
Bill Kristol, available at http://conversationswithbillkristol.org/video/
elliott-abrams/?start=1392&end=1890 (accessed January 22, 2018).
	
48.  See his interview of February 2017, Identity, Values and the Conduct of 
US Foreign Policy with Elliot Abrams-Conversations with History, on 
YouTube, available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LqSyHhks-
JzQ (accessed February 23, 2018).
	
49.  Sinclair Lewis, It Can’t Happen Here (New York: Signet Classics 
Edition, 2014).
	
50.  Garrett M. Graff, Raven Rock: The Story of the U.S. Government’s Secret 
Plan to Save Itself—While the Rest of Us Die (New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 2017).
	
51.  “North Worked on Plan for Martial Law,” Knight-Ridder Newspapers, 
July 5, 1987.
	
52.  Video of the exchange between Inouye and Brooks can easily be found 
by searching on “Iran-contra” on YouTube.com.
	
53.  Graff, Raven Rock: 304.

272   D. C. HELLINGER
	
54.  Both orders can be found at www.presidency.ucsb.edu/executive_orders.
php?year=1988&Submit=DISPLAY (accessed February 27, 2018).
	
55.  James Mann, “The Armageddon Plan,” The Atlantic, March 2004.
	
56.  “Dick Cheney, John Yoo, and COG on 9/11.”
	
57.  Adam Gabbat, “Anti-Protest Bills Would ‘Attack Right to Speak Out’ 
Under Donald Trump,” The Guardian, May 8, 2017.
	
58.  Devlin Barrett, Ellen Nakashima, and Carol Leonnig, “FBI’s Top 
Lawyer Said to Be Reassigned,” Washington Post, December 21, 2017.
	
59.  Seymour Hersh, “Huge CIA Operation Reported in U.S. Against Anti-
War Activist, Other Dissidents in the Nixon Era,” New York Times, 
December 22, 1974, available at www.nytimes.com/1974/12/22/
archives/huge-cia-operation-reported-in-u-s-against-antiwar-forces-
other.html (accessed January 11, 2018).
	
60.  Josh Campbell, “Why I Am Leaving the FBI,” New York Times, 
February 2, 2018.
	
61.  Alfred Stepan, The Military in Politics: Changing Patterns in Brazil 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1971).
	
62.  Scott, The American Deep State. His best-known work is Deep Politics 
and the Death of JFK (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 
1995).
	
63.  Peter Dale Scott, “Dick Cheney, John Yoo, and COG on 9/11” 
(Letter), Journal of 9/11 Studies (September 2016), available at http://
www.journalof911studies.com/dick-cheney-john-yoo-and-cog-on-911 
(accessed February 25, 2018).
	
64.  Peter Dale Scott, The Road to 9/11: Wealth, Empire, and the Future of 
America (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007): 134.
	
65.  Quoted from The Hill, available at http://thehill.com/homenews/
news/341074-donald-trump-jr-shares-tweet-he-says-is-confirmation-
deep-state-is-real (July 7, 2017).
	
66.  Breitbart News, December 12, 2017.
	
67.  Jonathan Martin and Mark Lander, “Bob Corker Says Trump’s Recklessness 
Threatens ‘World War III’,” New York Times, October 8, 2017.
	
68.  Breitbart News, October 9, 2017.
	
69.  Jonatan Martin and Mark Lander, “Bob Corker Says….”
	
70.  Marjorie Cohn, “The Duty to Disobey a Nuclear Launch Order,” 
Truthout.org, November 25, 2017.
	
71.  Gil Troy, “The Most Patriotic Act of Treason in American History,” The 
Daily Beast, February 11, 2017.
	
72.  November 21, 2017, available at https://www.eisenhower.archives.gov/
all_about_ike/speeches/farewell_address.pdf.
	
73.  Matthew Cole and Jeremy Scahill, “Trump White House Weighing 
Plans for Private Spies to Counter ‘Deep State’ Enemies,” The Intercept, 
December 4, 2017.

7  THE DEEP STATE, HEGEMONY, AND DEMOCRACY   273
	
74.  Peter Singer, “The Dark Truth About Blackwater,” October 2, 2007 
(accessed February 2, 2018).
	
75.  Chris Lefkow, “Blackwater Founder Resurfaces Selling Plan for 
Afghanistan,” Military.com, August 13, 2017 (accessed February 2, 
2018).
	
76.  Adam Entous, Greg Miller, Kevin Sieff, and Karen DeYoung, 
“Blackwater Founder Held Secret Seychelles Meeting to Establish 
Trump-Putin Back Channel,” Washington Post, April 3, 2017.
	
77.  Peter W. Singer, Corporate Warriors: The Rise of the Privatized Military 
Industry (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, Updated ed., 2007).
	
78.  Erik Prince, “Mercenaries and Private Military Contractors,” New York 
Times, August 30, 2017.
	
79.  Available at https://www.military.com/daily-news/2017/05/05/spe-
cial-ops-general-rate-of-deployment-unsustainable.html, May 5, 2017 
(accessed February 4, 2018).
	
80.  See Jon D. Michaels, Constitutional Coup: Privatization’s Threat to the 
American Republic (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2017).
	
81.  Thomas Gibbons-Neff, Eric Schmitt, and Adam Goldman, “A Newly 
Assertive C.I.A. Expands Its Taliban Hunt in Afghanistan,” New York 
Times, October 22, 2017.
	
82.  Douglas Valentine, The Phoenix Program (Open Road Distribution, 
2016) is mostly valuable for the wealthy of primary source mate-
rial, including interviews. Dale Andrade’s less emotional Ashes to Ashes 
(Issues in Low-Intensity Conflict Series; Lanham, MA: Lexington 
Books, 1990) is more convincingly dispassionate, but is no less 
disturbing.
	
83.  Dawn Paley, Drug War Capitalism (Oakland, CA: AK Press, 2014).
	
84.  Deborah Sontagg, “The Secret History of Colombia’s Paramilitaries and 
the U.S. War on Drugs,” New York Times, September 10, 2016.
	
85.  Sarah Lyall, “Spies Like Us: A Conversation With John le Carré and Ben 
Macintyre,” New York Times, August 25, 2017.
	
86.  Lyall, “Spies Like Us.”
	
87.  Melley, The Covert Sphere.
	
88.  “Revealed: The True Story of ‘Maya’, the CIA Analyst Who Hunted 
Down Osama bin Laden,” The Daily Telegraph, London, December 20, 
2014.
	
89.  “Homeland, Spooks and 24 Have Led More Britons Than Russians To 
Support Torture, Amnesty International Says,” Huffington Post, May 
13, 2014 (accessed February 6, 2018).
	
90.  Humeira Iqtidar, “Conspiracy Theory as Political Imaginary: Blackwater 
in Pakistan,” Political Studies 64, no. 1 (2014): 201.
	
91.  Iqtidar, “Conspiracy Theory”: 205–205.

274   D. C. HELLINGER
	
92.  Dan Raviv, “U.S. Pushing Israel to Stop Assassinating Iranian Nuclear 
Scientists,” CBS News, March 1, 2014; “Isreal Behind Assassinations of 
Iran Nuclear Scientists,” Jerusalem Post, August 7, 2015.
	
93.  Available at https://www.nbc.com/the-brave.
	
94.  Available at http://www.cbs.com/shows/seal-team/.
	
95.  Mark Mazzetti, Nicholas Kulish, Christopher Drew, Serge F. Kovaleski, 
Sean D. Naylor, and John Ismay, “Seal Team 6: A Secret History of 
Quite Killings and Blurred Lines,” New York Times, June 6, 2015.
	
96.  Hannah K. Gold, “5 Ways Crimes Shows Mess with Your Head,” 
Alternet.org, November 12, 2014 (accessed February 27, 2018).
	
97.  Available 
at 
http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5585896/?ref_=tt_eps_
rhs_0 (accessed February 7, 2018).
	
98.  See Steve Weichselbaum and Beth Schwartzapfel, When Warriors Put On 
the Badge, The Marshall Project and USA Today, March 30, 2017, avail-
able at https://www.themarshallproject.org/2017/03/30/when-war-
riors-put-on-the-badge (accessed February 5, 2018).
	
99.  See James Poniewozik, “‘Training Day’ and ‘A.P.B.,’ Where the Rogue 
Cop Rules,” New York Times, February 1, 2017.
	
100.  “Homan Square Revealed: How Chicago Police ‘Disappeared’ 7000 
People,” The Guardian, October 19, 2015.
	
101.  Medea Benjamin, “The Torture-Friendly Trump Administration,” 
Huffington Post, July 20, 2017.
	
102.  Seung Min Kim, “McCain Opposes Trump Nominee Over Torture 
Memos,” Politico, November 8, 2017.
	
103.  Many sources tell the Snowden saga. Bryan Burrough, Sarah Ellison, 
and Suzanna Andrews, “The Snowden Saga: A Shadowland of Secrets 
and Light,” Vanity Fair, April 23, 2014. See also Wikipedia entry avail-
able at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Snowden (accessed 
February 2, 2018).
	
104.  Gerhard Schmidt, Report on the Existence of a Global System for the 
Interception of Private and Commercial Communications (ECHELON 
Interception System) (Brussels: European Parliament: Temporary 
Committee on the ECHELON Interception System, 2001).
	
105.  Natalie Reneau and Mark Scheffler, “Who Are The Shadow Brokers?” 
New York Times, November 13, 2017; “Security Breach and Spilled 
Secrets Have Shaken the N.S.A. to Its Core,” New York Times, 
November 12, 2017.
	
106.  Ken Dilanian, William M. Arkin and Cynthia McFadden, and Robert 
Windrem, “U.S. Govt. Hackers Ready to Hit Back If Russia Tries to 
Disrupt Election,” NBC News, November 4, 2016.
	
107.  Gary Sick, October Surprise: America’s Hostages in Iran and the Election 
of Ronald Reagan (New York: Crown, 1991).

275
This book has sought to fulfill two goals simultaneously. One is to con-
tribute to the ongoing process of rethinking the meaning and uses of 
“conspiracy theory.” The second, to apply some of these insights to 
understanding the political shock that Americans and the world received 
when Donald Trump, a celebrity real estate tycoon who traded exten-
sively in unwarranted conspiracy theories, rose to the presidency of the 
most powerful state in the world system. Is the Trump phenomenon 
yet another instance of what Hofstadter1 called the paranoid style in 
American politics? Are conspiratorial beliefs the province only of Trump 
and his supporters, or is it more widespread in the political environment? 
Are claims of Russian manipulation of the 2016 election and of Trump 
campaign collusion with such efforts also “conspiracy theories”?
As I write this conclusion, an independent prosecutor has indicted 
former aids and Trump campaign officials for covering up or actually 
engaging in collusion with Russian operatives, feeding calls to impeach 
the president, Trump protests that the “deep state” is out to destroy 
him. Significant numbers of people across the political spectrum see 
political processes as rigged. Retired spies are now recruited by political 
parties and candidates to dig up dirt on opponents. The most popular 
late-night comedian says Russian President Vladimir Putin has material 
to blackmail the president. The National Rifle Association portrays every 
effort at gun control as an attack on the Constitution and, like climate 
change deniers, suspects a socialist plot behind every effort. A Supreme 
Court resignation will probably allow Trump to make his second lifetime 
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion: Conspiracy Theories 
and Political Decay
© The Author(s) 2019 
D. C. Hellinger, Conspiracies and Conspiracy Theories in the Age  
of Trump, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98158-1_8

276   D. C. HELLINGER
appointment of a second radical libertarian judge to the bench. And 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement service is rounding up immi-
grants and denying due process is a way that resembles what Oliver 
North, of Iran-Contra fame, in the Reagan presidency hoped to do with 
protesters of American wars abroad.
The ultra-rich meet in biannual conclaves closed to the public to plan 
deployment of their wealth, hidden behind the mantle of philanthropy, 
to weaken democratic regulation of capitalism. Major “trade treaties” 
that impact global financial flows and systems of production are nego-
tiated in secret with corporate influence but without allowing labor 
and environmentalist organizations at the same table. Officials in cabi-
net-level positions and in Congress believe that scientific expertise on cli-
mate change is in cahoots with proponents of world government. Social 
media provocateurs, foreign and domestic, and automated bots that can 
impersonate real citizens spread conspiracy claims that are often fabri-
cated but so too do partisans post or re-tweet more plausible news.
The financial shock of 2008–2009 shook faith in both the financial 
system and the government’s willingness to hold anyone responsible. 
In recent years, several major corporations have been caught conspir-
ing to break laws that threaten public safety. Wells Fargo was caught in 
2016 and 2017 creating fake insurance and 3.5 million phony savings 
accounts. Volkswagen was forced to buy back all of its diesel engine 
automobiles because it rigged its engines to fool emissions tests. Over 
143 million consumers had their personal financial information stolen by 
hackers in Equifax. It has become clear that the tools that hackers are 
using to steal information from major private and public institutions, as 
well as from the hard drives of personal computers, were developed first 
by the National Security Agency not for defense but to unleash viruses 
and eavesdrop abroad in other sovereign countries.
Is that message on your computer screen warning you that your hard 
drive has been hacked and demanding that you call the number given 
the screen a real threat? Did you click on a link in an email before you 
realized it might be suspicious? Are cryptocurrencies, such a Bitcoin, 
real alternatives to traditional forms of money, or are they just pyramid 
schemes? Has that cop pulling me over profiled me racially? Has that fel-
low in the hoody in this neighborhood got a gun?
Trump may or may not complete his term, but today’s social climate 
of economic uncertainty, mistrust, and polarization ensures that conspir-
acy theories will be a prominent feature of American politics for many 

8  CONCLUSION: CONSPIRACY THEORIES AND POLITICAL DECAY   277
years to come. Conspiracy theories are not just symptomatic of the 
changing social and political climate; they are in some important ways 
relevant theories for explaining how politics in America operate. Dark 
money circulates freely not only through the electoral system but also 
through culture. Wealthy people and corporations hide their income 
from tax authorities in offshore havens. Politicians hire detectives and 
spies to gather dirt on opponents. American forces fight terrorist cells, 
but not with those with whom the United States has made an alliance of 
convenience. National and state legislatures are gerrymandered to block 
progressive adaptation to changing times and political reform. Levels of 
trust in political institutions, from approximately 80% in the early 1960s 
to 20% in 2018. Is this because too many people believe conspiracy 
theories?
Almost in a panic, mainstream academics and media pundits have 
embraced the perception of populism as a threat to democracy, without 
any differentiation of the different movements that are challenging elite 
rule and concentrated wealth. This point of view is nicely summed up on 
the title of a once popular political science text: The “irony of democ-
racy” is that democracy depends more on elites than the people.2 This 
sentiment appears in mainstream views of how democracy succeeds 
and fails. After a wave of coups ended a period of democracy in Latin 
America, a series of studies examined the breakdown of elite consensus 
as the key to why this happened. A similar series, that included some of 
the same authors, saw restoration of democracy as due to interaction 
among elites.3 At best the people appear in these analyses as a kind of 
Greek chorus or as a kind of mob threatening to obstruct the consensus 
building process among elites. Yet, without a progressive populist move-
ment to demand accountability of government, how else can democracy 
become more inclusive, economically as well as politically? Elites collude 
with one another to deploy stealth funding both to block left populism 
and majority rule. The danger today is not tyranny of the majority but 
tyranny of the minority.
Hofstadter’s conception of conspiracism as paranoid and his link-
ing it to populism have in recent years tainted populist movements as 
uniformly antidemocratic. A good example is a recent book by Steven 
Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt, How Democracies Die,4 which warns of 
the dangers of the Trump presidency and argues that the “guardrails” 
are coming off the American democracy, i.e. constitutional checks and 
balances are not functioning. There is much to admire in this book, 

278   D. C. HELLINGER
especially in its final chapter’s emphasis on the need for progressive social 
justice to restore democracies health. Beginning in 1992, Republicans 
have not won the popular vote in a presidential election with one excep-
tion, 2004. The House of Representatives has been gerrymandered to 
reinforce a systematic advantage rural and white suburban conservatism. 
The Supreme Court, with Trump poised to make his second ultra-con-
servative appointment thanks to Republican refusal to consider Obama’s 
nominee. But, have the guardrails come off because of excessive pop-
ulism, or because of the kind of populism we are experiencing? If Trump 
followers are particularly susceptible to manipulation by “conspiracy 
theorists” (which cannot be taken for granted), this should motivate 
political scientists to research not only what “disposes” them toward 
conspiracism but also what motivates a large sector of American elites 
with money and power to create, amplify, and disseminate conspiracy 
theories. For that reason, much of this book argues that conspiratorial 
manipulation of the rules of the political game is an important way that 
conservative elites and wealthy oligarchs are imposing minority rule.
Needed: A Regime of Truth of Truthfulness
The first few chapters of this book take up the argument of Jack Bratich 
that the term “conspiracy theory” is used mainly to reinforce a “regime 
of truth” that attaches a stigma to theories and beliefs that push at the 
boundaries of acceptable thought.5 This does not mean that the proper 
response to this discipline is to treat all theories as equal. In Chapter 2, 
I argue for differentiating conspiracy theories by their level of impact, if 
true, and by their plausibility, evaluating them on a scale ranging from 
unwarranted to warranted. Few if any grand, or world theories will qual-
ify for serious consideration, and petty theories, though cumulatively 
they many impact politics (e.g., through pervasive corruption), are not 
singly important enough to be taken seriously as explanations for large-
scale socioeconomic and political change. Operational theories are mid-
range theories that should be taken more seriously, complementing 
historical and structural explanations, but also in place of the “things-
just-happen” and “no-one’s-really responsible” explanations offered by 
so much of conventional social science.
No longer should the academic approach to the subject be solely and 
completely defined by Hofstadter’s meme, the “paranoid style”, i.e., by 
the idea that all conspiracy theories by their nature violate the principles 

8  CONCLUSION: CONSPIRACY THEORIES AND POLITICAL DECAY   279
of social science as defined by Karl Popper and by the notion that mass 
embrace of a conspiracy necessarily leads to mass pathological behavior. 
Yet studies of conspiracy theory in political psychology more or less con-
tinue to operate with the paradigm established by Hofstadter. The point 
is not to discard Hofstadter’s highlighting of an historical record that 
reveals populism’s serious faults, in particular, its relationship with nativ-
ism and racism in past appearances as a force in American politics. There 
is some very bad conspiracy theorizing going on, and even worse there 
are conspiracy theories that embrace scapegoating and ethnic hatred. 
Dangerous or implausible theories deserve our disapproval because of 
what they propose, because they are circular or not open to reasona-
ble attempts to refute them with evidence, or because they stir hatred 
toward a class of people.
The rise of Donald Trump to the American presidency has in a 
number of ways lent new urgency to the re-examination of conspir-
acy and conspiracy theory. Not all the post-Hofstadter works on con-
spiracy theory are in agreement. Tim Melley, a cultural theorist, still 
rejects conspiracy theory but his work on conspiracism in various forms 
of fiction suggests that conspiracism in popular culture is revealing of 
how national security and military agencies operate in the real “covert 
sphere”, and how these agencies support popular films, games, and TV 
programs that cleanse historical memory of the cost to democracy of 
past abuses.6 Kathryn Olmsted believes ultimately conspiracy theories 
are more harmful than helpful, but her research on conspiracy theories 
in the twentieth shows that contrary to most critics’ view, conspiracy 
theories sometimes empower ordinary people, expose wrongdoing that 
would otherwise remain covert, and force elites to pay mind to demands 
they would rather ignore.7 Bratich, Mark Fenster, and Matthew Dentith 
go further and advance arguments for treating conspiracy theories, at 
least in some cases, as worthy of social science theorizing.8
This book acknowledges that conspiracy beliefs are fostered by ine-
quality and a sense that the economy is no longer fair, but I argue that 
the way American politics is influenced by elite conspiracies is just as 
important as a generator of popular suspicion, contributing to a gath-
ering crisis of representation and mistrust of political institutions. For 
example, neoliberal globalization agreements are negotiated without 
impactful input from social global movements that have as much at stake 
as transnational capitalists, and the latter gather behind closed doors 
to keep it that way. Not only does money influence politics, it is now 

280   D. C. HELLINGER
deployed systematically by elites who regularly gather to discuss how to 
deploy their resources covertly. Special Forces and paramilitary organiza-
tions fight secret and not-so-secret wars, under cover of national emer-
gency by executive order and bills that have never been actually read by 
Congress before votes are passed. Most academics and journalists con-
tinue to reject that a Deep State exists in the United States, a rejection 
based more on a state of denial and caricature than on serious consid-
eration of how far some elites in that sphere of politics have advanced 
preparations to infringe on civil liberties and the Constitution.
What We Can Learn from Conspiracism Abroad
A way that we can assess the significance of conspiracism in America is 
by looking at the conditions that have given rise to this phenomenon 
abroad. Given that Trumpism has risen on a wave of right-wing pop-
ulism occurring in various regions of the world, it seems that this is a 
propitious moment to see how strong the hypothesized link is, going 
back to Hofstadter, between populism and conspiracism. The topic has 
understandably attracted recent attention in Europe, but for various rea-
sons explored in this book, much of the research thus far has uncriti-
cally incorporated the idea that conspiracy theory is always a pathological 
form of discourse. Despite Hofstadter’s insistence is that pathological 
thought is articulated by ‘normal’ people, some of the research persists 
in searching for the underlying personality traits that lend themselves to 
conspiracy thinking (See Chapter 5).
In his fine book, Conspiracy Theories in the Arab World, Matthew 
Gray provides one of the very few studies of conspiracism that has seri-
ously examined this phenomenon in the Middle East (or anywhere in 
the Global South, for that matter) by a scholar with care to due avoid 
cultural stereotypes (Orientalism in this case), oversimplification, 
and a singular focus on anti-Semitism. Gray combines a symptomatic 
approach (conspiracy theories as signs of deeper social ills and injus-
tices) with the understanding that in the Middle East peoples have in  
fact been victimized by conspiracies to establish and maintain colonial-
ism and Western hegemony in the post-colonial period. In the Preface, 
the author, based in Australia, comments that he was surprised about 
“how many similarities there were in political sources of conspiracism in 
the US and Arab world.”9

8  CONCLUSION: CONSPIRACY THEORIES AND POLITICAL DECAY   281
Gray argues that in the Arab World conspiracism is rooted in “his-
torical impacts, state-society relations, and political culture.”10 Despite 
the vast cultural and economic chasm between the Global North and 
South, most of the factors that Gray identifies as symptoms of state 
weaknesses that apply in both spheres. The principle difference has to do 
with historical impact, a variable which plays out in much of the Global 
South as a sense of loss of greatness in the past and resentment toward 
intervention by colonial powers and more recently by the United States. 
With the important exception of some Indigenous people, most Latin 
Americans do not share with the Middle East cultures this same sense 
of lost civilizational greatness, but their political culture too is character-
ized by a sense of failures that achieving autonomy in choosing a devel-
opmental model, a reason they are attracted to neoliberal dependency 
theory.
Gray maintains, “A feature that distinguishes Middle Eastern con-
spiracism from some other countries, such as the US…is the role 
played by the state in promoting conspiracist explanations and engag-
ing in the narration of conspiracy theories.”11 But I would say that 
the difference in “role” is just a matter of degree, especially given the 
degree to which the American state must rely upon the private media 
to promoted messages. This it does effectively in a variety of ways, 
not the least in the influence exercise through money and cooperation 
between producers of popular fiction and the military and intelligence 
agencies (see Chapter 7). Certainly, no one can underestimate the 
uses to which anti-communism was put in the Cold War, especially 
by the enablers of Senator Joseph McCarthy. So too we have seen the 
ability of the American state to manipulate the press coverage and 
“wag the dog,” most recently in the way that the Bush administration 
provided pretexts in the form of supposed weapons of mass destruc-
tion for the first Gulf War. Fear of terrorism has been manipulated 
to justify surveillance and to roll back an admirable (despite episodic 
nativism) heritage of respect and admiration for immigrants. The dif-
ference is also rooted, Gray acknowledges, in the historical reality of 
Western colonialism and intervention, and the quite uncritical sup-
port of the West for Zionism.12 These historical realities feed con-
spiracy theories that have some warrant because they are rooted in 
historical fact, but, it must be said, also feeds ones that are extremely 
anti-Semitic.

282   D. C. HELLINGER
Without going into more details about Gray’s nuanced analysis of 
the “sources and politics” of conspiracism, his framework seems to 
me to applicable in many ways these are highlighted by politics in the 
Trump era. This leads to hypotheses that ought to be part of theorizing 
conspiracy.
•	 Elite interaction—among themselves, with the state, and with soci-
ety. Conspiracy theories are not necessarily the poor man’s social 
scientific theory, they are fabricated or simply advanced when elite 
find it difficult to maintain consensus among each other and break 
into factions. Then too, as polarization and distrust increase, elites 
may turn more on one another. The history of the United States 
Congress in the decades leading to the Civil War is illustrative, as 
political polarization manifested itself not only in social violence 
but also in incivility and worse in Congress. Today we see extreme 
polarization in declining congressional decorum, extreme mistrust 
of executive authority.
•	 The state–society relationship. Doing politics in a conspiratorial 
way has become more routine in the United States, which is both a 
reflection of the widening gap between the political class and society 
and also between elites and the mass public. Olmsted argues that 
conspiracy theories in the twentieth century differ from those of the 
nineteenth century in that with the growth of the federal govern-
ment’s size and reach, the state has replaced foreign enemies as the 
main source of popular suspicion. Political discourse on the right 
feeds on this deeply rooted perception, and the political opposition 
makes little defense of the need for government, certainly nothing 
in the way that was common in the New Deal.
•	 History. Here, of course, there are a major ways we must differ-
entiate the U.S. case from the Mideast. As the global hegemon, 
the idea that the United States is subject to external intervention 
might seem ludicrous, but during the Cold War the perception 
was encouraged by what was presented as a Manichean strug-
gle between Communism and the “free world.” Today, this Cold 
War logic is being applied to the War on Terrorism. And certainly 
Trump’s infamous catch-phrase, “Make America Great Again,” 
suggests some comminality between the national sense of lost civ-
ilizational greatness in the Arab World and the sense of declining 
hegemonic power in the U.S.

8  CONCLUSION: CONSPIRACY THEORIES AND POLITICAL DECAY   283
An Agenda for Research
Once we dispose of the idea that the only use of the term “conspiracy 
theory” is to warn the public that theories not endorsed by mainstream 
academics and journalists are irrational and possibly dangerous, we can 
look to applying the tools of political science and investigative report-
ing to separating the plausible conspiracy theories from the completely 
unwarranted, the dangerous from the amusing but not threatening, the 
ones that point us toward understanding the course of events from the 
ones likely to distract us from broader social and economic causes, or 
worse, mobilize pograms against certain sectors in our community.
A few suggestions for a research agenda on conspiracy are:
•	 Comparative historical studies, perhaps even counterfactual ones, to 
examine the degree of freedom for conspiracies to shape outcomes 
at major historical watersheds. For example, we should examine and 
contextualize the role of conspiratorial behavior in revolutions and 
subversive movements. Stepan’s work on coup-making in Brazil, 
though not intended as a study in conspiracism, is an exemplary 
case study of how agency (coup plotting) interacts with larger social 
and economic forces in a society.13
•	 More cross-cultural and comparative research along the lines rec-
ommended by Gray in his study of the conspiracy theories in the 
Middle East.
•	 Empirical studies using creative databases to test assumptions about 
the prevalence of conspiracism. Uscinski and Parent provide an 
important example of how this can be done with their research on 
letters to the editor.14
•	 More public opinion and attitudinal research on whether there 
are indeed “predispositions” toward conspiracism. Studies of this 
nature should not presume that all belief in conspiracies is patho-
logical. At the same time, it is useful to study predispositions that 
might lead toward scapegoating, ethnic purification, or genocide, 
which often involved paranoid conspiracism at it worse.
•	 The need for continued work in political theory on the ontolog-
ical status of conspiracy theory. In the United States, we have 
seen in recent years major studies focused on elites engaged in a 
“stealth plan,”15 i.e., their concious and secretive deployment of 
“dark money” to move promote a libertarian economic agenda.16 

284   D. C. HELLINGER
hidden plans to suspend constitutional rights in a time of national 
security crisis (See Chapter 7).17 Studies and investigations of this 
phenomenon have often to some degree or another been attacked 
as “conspiracy theories”—even when their authors explicitly reject 
the notion. This points to the need for normative political theorists, 
not just empirical researchers, to take up conspiracy theory, much as 
Dentith, Bratich, Fenster, and others have done.
Last Words: No Time to Panic
I have laid out suggestions for an agenda for research and development 
of conspiracy theory as social science theory, not pathology. I suggest 
that identification and understanding of the role actual conspiracies are 
playing in our politics might, if not sound alarm bells, at least help us 
recognize the signs of political decay. A closer examination of political 
planning and elite collusion in the deep and dark recesses of the Internet 
gated estates of the wealthy, and in the covert sphere of the National 
Security state might prevent democracy from falling to more conven-
tional measures of the past.
Trumpism is more than Donald Trump. It is rooted in factors that 
point to continuing decay in American politics. We can expect politicians 
to “trump-up” fears, appeal to fear and exploit agency panic, appealing to 
white privilege and defence of patriarchy as political levers to hold back 
use of government by democratic majorities to address injustices. Further 
political decay is not inevitable, but that is the general direction of 
American politics today. I expect that we not only will see more conspir-
acism of the paranoid variety, but also more actual conspiratorial behav-
ior by elites threatened by progressive social movements. Neither coups 
nor revolutions are made without conspiracies. It would be alarmist to 
predict that either is imminent, but at the same time several mainstream 
political scientists have analyzed the rise of Trumpism in terms that 
would have been characterized as paranoia not long ago. Levitsky and 
Ziblatt point to the gradual deterioration of the constitutional state into 
an illiberal democracy. They point out that today democracies do not 
usually disappear through a coup, declaration of martial law; no alarm 
bells sound when the line is crossed. “Those who denounce government 
abuse may be dismissed as exaggerating or crying wolf. Democracy’s ero-
sion is, for many, almost imperceptible.”18 Conspiracy theory, appropri-
ately developed, can make erosion more perceptiple and stop the erosion.

8  CONCLUSION: CONSPIRACY THEORIES AND POLITICAL DECAY   285
Notes
	
1.  Richard Hofstadter, The Paranoid Style in American Politics (New York: 
Vintage Reprints, 1968).
	
2.  Thomas Dye, Harmon Ziegler, and Louis Schubert, The Irony of 
Democracy (Boston: Cengage Learning, 15th ed., 2011).
	
3.  Juan Linz and Alfred Stepan, eds. The Breakdown of Democratic Regimes 
(Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1978); Guillermo, 
O’Donnell, Philippe Schmitter, and Laurence Whitehead, ed., Transitions 
from Authoritarian Rule: Comparative Perspectives (Baltimore, MD: 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986).
	
4.  Steven Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt, How Democracies Die (New York: 
Crown, 2018).
	
5.  Jack Bratich, Conspiracy Panics: Political Rationality and Popular Culture 
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 2008).
	
6.  Timothy Melley, The Covert Sphere: Secrecy, Fiction, and the National 
Security State (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2012).
	
7.  Kathryn Olmsted, Real Enemies: Conspiracy Theory and American 
Democracy, World War I to 9/11 (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009).
	
8.  Jack Gratich, Conspiracy Panics; Matthew Dentith, Suspicious Minds: Why 
We Believe in Conspiracy Theories (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014); 
Mark Fenster. Conspiracy Theories: Secrecy and Power in American Culture 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1999, second ed. 2012).
	
9.  Matthew Gray, Conspiracy Theories in the Arab World: Sources and Politics 
(London: Routledge, 2010), xii.
	
10.  Gray, Conspiracy Theories in the Arab World: 8.
	
11.  Gray, Conspiracy Theories in the Arab World: 119.
	
12.  Gray, Conspiracy Theories in the Arab World: 49–87.
	
13.  Alfred Stepan, The Military in Politics: Changing Patterns in Brazil 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1971).
	
14.  Joseph Uscinski and Joseph M. Parent, American Conspiracy Theories 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2014).
	
15.  Nancy MacClean, Democracy in Chains: The Deep History of the Radical 
Right’s Stealth Plan for America (New York: Viking, 2017).
	
16.  Jane Mayer, Dark Money: The Hidden History of the Billionaires Behind the 
Rise of the Radical Right (New York: Doubleday, 2016).
	
17.  Peter Dale Scott, The American Deep State: Wallstreet, Big Oil, and the 
Attack on U.S. Democracy (Lanham, MA: Rowman & Littlefield, 2015); 
Mike Lofgren. The Deep State: The Fall of the Constitution and the Rise of 
a Shadow Government (New York: Penguin, 2016).
	
18.  Steven Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt, How Democracies Die (New York: 
Crown Press, 2018): 6.

287
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2019 
D. C. Hellinger, Conspiracies and Conspiracy Theories in the Age  
of Trump, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98158-1
References
American Press Institute. 2018. Americans and the News Media: What They 
Do—And Don’t—Understand About Each Other. The Media Insight Project 
(June), available for download from mediainsight.org, accessed June 15, 
2018.
Anderson, Benedict. 1991. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and 
Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso.
Armbinder, Marc, and D.B. Grady (pseudonym). 2013. Deep State: Inside the 
Government Secrecy Industry. New York and Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and 
Sons.
Autor, David, David Dorny, Gordon Hanson, and Kaveh Majlesi. 2017. “A Note 
on the Effect of Rising Trade Exposure on the 2016 Presidential Election.” 
Revised Version of March 2017, available at https://economics.mit.edu/
files/12418, accessed February 24, 2018.
Bacevich, Andrew 2010. Washington Rules: America’s Path to Permanent War. 
New York: Henry Holt and Company.
Bachrach, Peter. 1967. The Theory of Democratic Elitism. Boston: Little, Brown 
Publishers.
Bailyn, Bernard. 1967. The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Baram, Marcus. 2017. “Eavesdropping on Roy Cohn and Donald Trump.” The 
New Yorker, April 14.
Barber, Benjamin. 1996. Jihad vs. McWorld: Terrorism’s Challenge to Democracy. 
New York: Ballantine Books, 1996.
Barkin, Michael. 2003. A Culture of Conspiracy: Apocalyptic Visions in 
Contemporary America. Berkeley, CA: University of California.

288   References
Basham, Lee. 2006. “Living with the Conspiracy.” In David Coad (ed.), 
Conspiracy Theories: The Philosophical Debate, 61–117. Burlington, VT: 
Ashgate.
Beard, Charles, and George H.E. Smith. 1977, original 1934. The Idea of 
National Interest: Analytical Study in American Foreign Policy. New York: 
Greenwood Press, Reprint.
Benjamin, Daniel and Steven Simon, “Why Steve Bannon Wants You to Believe 
in the Deep State: What Better Way to Decimate the Bureaucracy than to 
Convince Americans It’s Treacherous?” Politico, March 21, 2017.
Bennett, Lance L. 1996 (3rd ed.). News: The Politics of Illusion. White Plains, 
NY: Longman Publishers.
Berezin, Mabel. 2009. Illiberal Politics in Neoliberal Times: Culture, Security and 
Populism in the New Europe. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Berlet, Chip. n.d. circa 1993. “Rightist Influences on the Christic Institute 
Theories.” Available at http://www.publiceye.org/rightwoo/rwooz9-13.
html, accessed December 8, 2017.
Berlet, Chip. 1993. “Big Lies, Spooky Sources.” Columbia Journalism Review 
(May/June), 67–71.
Berlet, Chip. 2009a. “Clinton, Conspiracism and Civil Society.” Political 
Research Associates, available at http://www.uni-muenster.de/PeaCon/con-
spiracy/networks-01.htm, accessed December 31, 2017.
Berlet, Chip. 2009b. Toxic to Democracy: Conspiracy Theories, Demonization, & 
Scapegoating. Political Research Associates. 2009 (updated): 3, available at 
http://www.publiceye.org/conspire/toxic2democracy/Toxic-2D-all-rev-04.
pdf. Accessed August 17, 2017.
Bilewicz, Michal, Aleksandra Cichocka, and Wiktor Soral, eds. 2015. The 
Psychology of Conspiracy. New York: Routledge.
Bratich, Jack. 2008. Conspiracy Panics: Political Rationality and Popular 
Culture. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Brecht, Bertolt. 2015. The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui, translated by Alistair 
Beaton and George Tabori. London: Methuen Drama.
Brody, Reed. 1999. Contra Terror in Nicaragua: Report of a Fact-Finding 
Mission: September 1984–January 1985. Boston: Southend Press, 1999.
Brotherton, Rob. 2018. Suspicious Minds: Why We Believe Conspiracy Theories. 
New York: Bloomsbury-Signet.
Brotherton, Rob, Christopher French, and Allan Pickering. 2013. “Measuring 
Belief in Conspiracy Theories: The Generic Conspiracist Beliefs Scale. Frontiers 
in Personality Science and Individual Differences.” Frontiers in Psychology. Vol. 
4, available at https://www.frontiersin.org. Accessed February 23, 2018.
Caute, David. 1978. The Great Fear. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Coady, David, ed. 2006. Conspiracy Theories: The Philosophical Debate. 
Burlington, VT: Ashgate.

References   289
Cohen, Marty, David Karol, Hans Noel, and John Zoller. 2008. The Party 
Decides, Presidential Nominations Before and After Reform. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Corr, Anders. 2016. “Liberal Democracy Against a World of Nationalist 
Happenstance.” Forbes Magazine, November 21.
Council on Foreign Relations. 1940–1943. Studies of American Interests in the 
War and the Peace. Archived at CFR in New York.
Dahl, Robert. 1971. Polyarchy: Participation and Opposition. New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1971.
Dean, Jodi. 1998. Aliens in America: Conspiracy Cultures from Outerspace to 
Cyberspace. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Dentith, Matthew. 2014. The Philosophy of Conspiracy Theories. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Domhoff, G. William. 2014. “The Council on Foreign Relations and the Grand 
Area: Case Studies on the Origins of the IMF and the Vietnam War.” Class, 
Race and Power 2, no. 1 (2014):1–41.
Dunst, Alexander. 2015. “The Politics of Conspiracy Theories: American 
Histories, and Global Narratives.” In Conspiracy Theories in the United States 
and the Middle East: A Comparative Approach, eds. Michael Butter and 
Maurus Reinkowski, 294–310. Boston: De Gruyter.
Dye, Thomas, Harmon Ziegler, and Louis Schubert. 2011. The Irony of 
Democracy. Boston: Cengage Learning, 15th ed.
Fenster, Mark. 1999. 2012 (2nd ed.). Conspiracy Theories: Secrecy and Power in 
American Culture. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Fenster, Mark. 2017. The Transparency Fix: Secrets, Leaks, and Uncontrollable 
Government Information. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Ferrel, Henry, and Steven Teles. 2017. “Even the Intellectual Left Is Drawn to 
Conspiracy Theories About the Right. Resist them.” Vox.com (Updated ver-
sion). Accessed October 9, 2017.
Foucault, Michel. 1980. “Truth and Power.” In Michel Foucault: Power/
Knowledge, ed. Colin Gordon, 109–133. New York: Vintage Press.
Friedan, Betty. 1964. The Feminist Mystique. New York: Dell.
Friedman, Thomas. 2012. The Lexus and the Olive Tree. London: Picador Books, 
2012.
Gessen, Masha. 2017. “Russia: The Conspiracy Trap.” New York Review of Books, 
March 6.
Gill, Stephen. 1991. American Hegemony and the Trilateral Commission. 
Cambridge. Cambridge University Press.
Graff, Garrett M. 2017. Raven Rock: the Story of the U.S. Government’s Secret 
Plan to Save Itself—While the Rest of Us Die. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Grandin, Greg. 2017. “What Is the Deep State?” The Nation, February 17.

290   References
Gray, Matthew. 2010. Conspiracy Theories in the Arab World: Sources and Politics: 
Sources and Politics. New York: Routledge.
Griffin, David Ray. 2008. The New Pearl Harbor Revisited: 9/11, the Cover-Up, 
and the Exposé. Northampton, MA: Olive Branch Press.
Griffin, John, and Amin Shams. 2018. Is Bit-Coin Really Untethered. Social 
Science Research Network (SSRN), available at https://papers.ssrn.com/
sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3195066. Accessed June 16, 2018.
Hawley, George. 2017. Making Sense of the Alt-Right. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Hellinger, Daniel. 2003. “Paranoia, Conspiracy, and Hegemony in American 
Politics.” In Transparency and Conpsiracy: Ethnographies of Suspicion in the 
New World Order, ed. Harry G. West and Todd Sanders. Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press.
Hellinger, Daniel, and Dennis Judd. 1991, 1994. The Democratic Façade, 1st 
ed., Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks Cole and 2nd ed., Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Hertzgaard, Mark. 1989. On Bended Knee: The Press and the Reagan Presidency. 
New York: Schocken Press.
Hetherington, Mark J. 2006. Why Trust Matters: Declining Political Trust and 
the Demise of American Liberalism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hofstadter, Richard. 1955. The Age of Reform: From Bryan to F.D.R. New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf.
Hofstadter Richard. 1968. The Paranoid Style in American Politics. New York: 
Vintage Reprints.
Holland, Max. 1994. “Paranoia Unbound.” The Wilson Quarterly 18, no. 1 
(Winter).
Iqtidar, Humeira. 2014. “Conspiracy Theory as Political Imaginary: Blackwater 
in Pakistan.” Political Studies 64, no. 1.
Jameson, Frederic. 1960. “Cognitive Mapping.” In Marxism and the 
Interpretation of Culture, ed. C. Nelson and L. Grossberg, 347–360. 
Champaign–Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Johnson, Chalmers. 2004a. Blowback, The Costs and Consequences of American 
Empire. New York: Henry Holt and Company.
Johnson, Chalmers. 2004b. The Sorrows of Empire: Militarism, Secrecy, and the 
End of the Republic. New York: Henry Holt and Company.
Kazin, Michael. 2006. A Godly Hero: The Life of William Jennings Bryan. New 
York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Kelly, Michael. 1995. “The Road to Paranoia.” The New Yorker, June 19, 60–70.
Khatiwada, Ishwar, and Andrew M. Sum. 2018. “The Widening Socio-Economic 
Divergence in the U.S. Labor Market.” In The Dynamics of Opportunity in 
America, ed. I. Kirsch, H. Braun. Cham: Springer, available at https://link.
springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-25991-8_7. Accessed June 19, 
2018.

References   291
Knight, Peter. 2000. Conspiracy Culture: From the Kennedy Assassination to the 
X-FILES. London: Routledge.
Kornhauser, William. 1959. The Politics of Mass Society. Glencoe, IL: The Free 
Press.
Koulish, Jeremy. 2013. “There Are a Lot of 501(c)(4) Nonprofit Organizations. 
Most Are Not Political.” The Urban Institute, www.urban.org. Accessed 
December 1, 2017.
Kuhn, Thomas. 1970. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press, 2nd ed.
Lasswell, Harold. 1927. Propaganda Technique in the World War. New York: 
Knopf.
Lasswell, Harold. 1930. Psychopathology and Politics. New York: Viking Press.
Lasswell, Harold. 1948. Power and Personality. New York: Viking Press.
Lawrence, Regina D., and Melody Rose. 2009. Hillary Clinton’s Race for the 
White House: Gender Politics and Media on the Campaign Trail. Boulder, CO: 
Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Levitsky, Steven, and Daniel Ziblatt. 2018. How Democracies Die, 6. New York: 
Crown Press.
Linz, Juan, and Alfred Stepan, ed. 1978. The Breakdown of Democratic Regimes. 
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lipset, Seymour Martin. 1960. “Fascism—Let, Right and Center.” In Political 
Man. Garden City, NY: Anchor Books.
Lofgren, Mike. 2013. The Party’s Over: How Republicans Went Crazy, Democrats 
Became Useless, and the Middle Class Got Shafted. New York: Penguin Books.
Lofgren, Mike. 2016. The Deep State: The Fall of the Constitution and the Rise of 
a Shadow Government. New York: Penguin Books.
Lynch, Conor. 2017. “Paranoid Politics: Donald Trump’s Style Perfectly 
Embodies the Theories of Renowned Historian.” Salon, July 7, available at 
http://www.salon.com. Accessed September 18, 2017.
MacLean, Nancy. 2017. Democracy in Chains: The Deep History of the Radical 
Right’s Stealth Plan for America. New York: Viking.
Mann, Jame. 2004. “The Armageddon Plan.” The Atlantic, March.
Mansbridge, Jane J. 1986. Why We Lost the ERA. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Marx, Karl. 1852. The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, available at www.
marxists.org/archive/marx/works/download/pdf/18th-Brumaire.pdf. 
Accessed September 19, 2019.
Mauer, Peter. 2017. “What Kind of Populism, A Comparison of Marine Le Pen’s 
and Donald Trump’s Tweets in the French and US Election Campaigns of 
2016/2017.” Paper Presented at the 113th Meeting of the American Political 
Science Association, San Francisco, CA, August.

292   References
Mayer, Jane. 2010. “Covert Operations: The Billionaire Brothers Who Are 
Waging a War Against Obama.” The New Yorker, August 30.
Mayer, Jane. 2016. Dark Money: The Hidden History of the Billionaires Behind the 
Rise of the Radical Right. New York: Doubleday.
Melley, Timothy. 2012. The Covert Sphere: Secrecy, Fiction, and the National 
Security State. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Michaels, Jon D. 2017. Constitutional Coup: Privatization’s Threat to the 
American Republic. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Miller, Joanne M., Kyle L. Saunders, and Christina E. Farhart. 2016. 
“Conspiracy Endorsement as Motivated Reasoning: The Moderating Roles of 
Political Knowledge and Trust.” American Journal of Political Science 60, no. 
4 (October): 824–844.
Miller, Joanne M., Kyle L. Saunders, and Christina E. Farhart. 2017. “The 
Relationship Between Perceptions or Lower Status and Conspiracy Theory 
Endorsement.” Paper Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American 
Political Science Association, San Francisco, CA, August 31–September 3.
Mills, C. Wright. 1960 (original 1956). The Power Elite. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Morley, Jefferson Morley. 2017. The Ghost: The Secret Life of CIA Spymaster 
James Jesus Angleton. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Moyn, Samuel, and David Priestland. 2017. “Trump Isn’t a Threat to Our 
Democracy. Hysteria Is.” New York Times, August 11.
Muro, Mark. 2017. “Manufacturing Jobs Aren’t Coming Back.” MIT Technology 
Review, https://www.technologyreview.com/s/602869/manufacturing-jobs- 
arent-coming-back. Accessed June 11, 2017.
National Security Archive. 1996. The Contras, Cocaine, and Covert Operations, 
National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book No. 2, available at nsar-
chive2.gwu.edu. Accessed December 8, 2017.
Nivens, David, Jr. 2016. “Why Black People Need Conspiracy Theories.” 
Complex.com, October 16. Accessed February 23, 2018.
Norris, Pippa, and Ronald Inglehart. 2017. “Cultural Backlash: Values and 
Voting for Populist Authoritarian Parties in Europe.” Paper Presented at the 
Panel, “The Roots of the New Populism,” Annual Meeting of the American 
Political Science Association, San Francisco, August 30–September 2, 2017.
O’Donnell, Guillermo, Philippe Schmitter, and Laurence Whitehead, ed. 1986. 
Transitions from Authoritarian Rule: Comparative Perspectives. Baltimore, 
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Office of the Inspector General, U.S. Department of Justice. 2018. A Review 
of Various Actions by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and Department of 
Justice in Advance of the 2016 Election. Washington, DC. June, available 
for 
download 
at 
https://int.nyt.com/data/documenthelper/39-justice- 

References   293
department-report-fbi-clinton-comey/5e54a6bfd23e7b94fbad/optimized/
full.pdf#page=1. Accessed June 15, 2018.
Olmsted, Kathryn S. 2009. Real Enemies: Conspiracy Theory and American 
Democracy, World War I to 9/11. New York: Oxford University Press.
Paley, Dawn Paley. 2014. Drug War Capitalism. Oakland, CA: AK Press.
Pasley, Jeffrey L. 2000. “Conspiracy Theory and American Exceptionalism 
from the Revolution to Roswell. Paper Presented at Sometimes and Art: A 
Symposium Celebration of Bernard Bailyn’s Fifty Years of Teaching and 
Beyond.” Harvard University, May 13, available at http://pasleybrothers.
com/conspiracy/CT_and_American_Exceptionalism_web_version.htm. 
Accessed August 25, 2017.
Patterson, Thomas. 2016. “Pre-Primary News Coverage of the 2016 Presidential 
Race,” Harvard Kennedy School, Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics 
and Public Policy (June 13), available at shorensteincenter.org. Accessed 
December 27, 2017.
Pew Research Center. 2015. “Beyond Distrust: How Americans View Their 
Government,” available at www.people-press.org/2015/11/23/beyond-dis-
trust-how-americans-view-their-government. Accessed December 27, 2017.
Pipes, Daniel. 1997. Conspiracy: How the Paranoid Style Flourishes and Where It 
Comes From. New York: The Free Press.
Popper, Karl. 2006 (original 1945). “The Conspiracy Theory of Society.” In 
Conspiracy Theories: The Philosophical Debate, ed. David Coady, 17–44. 
Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Posner, Gerald. 1993. Case Closed: Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of 
JFK. New York: Random House.
Reeves, Richard. 1981. President Nixon: Alone in the White House. New York: 
Simon & Schuster.
Reich, Robert. Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few. New York: 
Vintage, 2016.
Robinson, Bill. 2017. “What Is Behind the Renegotiation of NAFTA? Trumpism 
and the New Global Economy.” Truthout.org, July 24, available at http://
www.truth-out.org/news/item/41365-what-is-behind-the-renegotiation-of-
nafta-trumpism-and-the-new-global-economy. Accessed July 27, 2018.
Robinson, Nathan J. 2017. “Lessons from Chomsky.” Current Affairs, July 30, 
available at https://www.currentaffairs.org/2017/07/lessons-from-chomsky. 
Accessed October 30, 2017.
Robinson, William I. (Bill). 2004. A Theory of Global Capitalism: Production, 
Class, and State in a Transnational World. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press.
Robinson, William I. (Bill). 2017. “Trumpism, 21st-Century Fascism, and the 
Dictatorship of the Transnational Capitalist Class.” Social Justice Journal, 
January 20, available at http://www.socialjusticejournal.org/trumpism-21st- 

294   References
century-fascism-and-the-dictatorship-of-the-transnational-capitalist-class. 
Accessed March 1, 2018.
Schaffner, Brian, and John A. Clark. 2018. Making Sense of the 2016 Elections. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: CQ Press.
Schlafly, Phyllis. 2014 (reissue). Who Killed the American Family. Medford, OR: 
WND Books.
Schmidt, Gerhard. 2001. Report on the Existence of a Global System for the 
Interception of Private and Commercial Communications (ECHELON 
Interception System). Brussels: European Parliament, Temporary Committee 
on the ECHELON Interception System.
Schumpeter, Joseph. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (London: 
Routledge, 1994 Reprint).
Scott, Peter Dale. 1996. Deep Politics and the Death of JFK. Berkeley: University 
of California Press.
Scott, Peter Dale. 2003. Drugs, Oil, and War: The United States in Afghanistan, 
Colombia, and Indochina. Lanham, PA: Rowman & Littlefield.
Scott, Peter Dale. 2015. The American Deep State: Wallstreet, Big Oil, and the 
Attack on U.S. Democracy. Lanham, MA: Rowman & Littlefield.
Scott, Peter Dale. 2016. “Dick Cheney, John Yoo, and COG on 9/11” (letter). 
Journal of 9/11 Studies (September), available at http://www.journalof911stud-
ies.com/dick-cheney-john-yoo-and-cog-on-911. Accessed February 25, 2018.
Shoup, Laurence. 1975. “Shaping the Post-War World: The Council of Foreign 
Relations and the United States War Aims During World War II.” The 
Insurgent Sociologist 5, no. 3 (Spring): 18–20.
Shoup, Laurence, and William Minter. Imperial Brain Trust: The Council on 
Foreign Relations and United States Foreign Policy. New York: Monthly 
Review Press, 1977.
Sick, Gary. 1991. October Surprise: America’s Hostages in Iran and the Election of 
Ronald Reagan. New York: Crown.
Simpson, Christopher. 1988. Blowback: The First Full Account of Americas 
Recruitment of Nazis, and Its Disastrous Effect on our Domestic and Foreign 
Policy. New York: Weidenfeld & Nicholson.
Singer, Peter W. 2007. Corporate Warriors: The Rise of the Privatized Military 
Industry. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, Updated Edition.
Sklair, Leslie. 2000. The Transnational Capitalist Class. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Skocpol, Theda. 2016. “Who Owns the GOP.” Dissent Magazine, February 3, 
available at www.dissentmagazine.org/online_articles/jan-mayer-dark-money-
review-koch-brothers-gop. Accessed December 5, 2017.
Staff Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations. 1979. “George De 
Mohrenschildt.” U.S. House of Representatives, Ninety-fifth Congress 
Second Session.

References   295
Steger, Manfred. 2005. “Ideologies of Globalization,” Journal of Political 
Ideologies 10.1 (February): 11–30.
Stepan, Alfred C. 1971. The Military in Politics: Changing Patterns in Brazil. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Stroop, Christopher. 2018. Russian Social-Conservatism, the U.S.-Based WCF 
and the Global Culture Wars in Historical Perspective, Political Research 
Associated, available at https://www.politicalresearch.org, February 16. 
Accessed June 23, 2018.
Sunstein, Cass R. 2014. Conspiracy Theories and Other Dangerous Ideas. New 
York: Simon & Schuster.
Teachout, Zephyr. 2014. Corruption in America: From Benjamin Franklin’s 
Snuff Box to Citizens United. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Union of Concerned Scientists. 2017. “Who’s Backing Scott Pruitt to Head the 
EPA? The Koch Brothers,” Got Science? February, available at https://www.
ucsusa.org/publications/got-science. Accessed June 25, 2018.
United States House of Representatives. 1979. “George De Mohrenschildt.” 
Staff Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations, 1979. U.S. House of 
Representatives, Ninety-fifth Congress Second Session (March).
United States Senate. 1993. The BCCI Affair. A Report to the Committee on 
Foreign Relations, United States Senate, by Senator John Kerry and Senator 
Hank Brown. Penultimate Draft, 1992.
Uscinski, Joseph E., and Joseph M. Parent. 2014. American Conspiracy Theories. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Ward, Geoffrey. 1993. “The Most Durable Assassination Theory: Oswald Did It 
Alone.” New York Times Book Review, November 21.
Weatherbe, Leif. 2017. “Politics Is Downstream from Culture, Part 1: Right 
Turn to Narrative.” The Hedgehog Review, blog, The Infernal Machine, 
February 22, 2017, available at http://iasc-culture.org/THR/channels/
Infernal_Machine. Accessed December 5, 2017.
Weiner, Tim. 2008. Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA. New York: Anchor 
Books.
West, Harry G., and Todd Sanders, ed. 2003. Transparency and Conspiracy: 
Ethnographies of Suspicion in the New World Order. Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press.

297
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2019 
D. C. Hellinger, Conspiracies and Conspiracy Theories in the Age  
of Trump, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98158-1
A
Agency panic, 6, 131, 161, 175, 228, 
284
Alt-right, 2, 9, 42, 43, 82, 91, 93–96, 
103, 153, 155, 166, 200, 246, 252
American exceptionalism, 8, 21, 50, 
67, 76, 97, 98, 111, 227, 258
Angleton, James, 70, 234, 235
B
Bannon, Steve, 29, 82, 153–155, 199, 
200, 251–254
Berlet, Chip, 2, 33, 47, 74, 92, 102, 
103, 218
Birther theory, 16, 24, 26, 44, 67, 
110, 112, 135, 154
Blowback, 229, 256, 264, 268
Bratich, Jack, 9, 10, 34, 35, 50, 51, 
53, 63, 75, 103, 149, 181, 217, 
204, 210, 217, 218, 227, 269, 
278, 279, 284, 285
Breitbart, Andrew, 82, 153–155, 181, 
200, 210, 225
Breitbart.com, 82, 88, 91, 252
Brexit, 31, 95, 132, 141, 143, 156, 
172, 183, 200
C
Cambridge Analytica, 91, 117
Cambridge Associates, 199
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 
12, 13, 16, 29, 42, 44, 49, 52, 
55, 69, 70, 93, 113, 191, 223, 
227, 229, 231–236, 238–242, 
246–251, 255–259, 264–267
Citizens United, 35, 189, 191, 192, 
194, 195, 207, 218
compromat, 8, 22, 90
Conspiracism, 2–5, 9–14, 16, 18, 19, 
23, 25, 32, 33, 40, 41, 43–47, 
51, 54, 56, 58, 59, 67, 72, 
81, 82, 91–93, 99–103, 105, 
109, 110, 120–122, 124, 135, 
141–143, 148, 151, 164, 205, 
209, 218, 224, 228, 229, 231, 
277, 279–284
Conspiracy panic, 10, 39, 47, 51, 53, 
93, 159, 204, 213, 215, 224, 
227, 269
Index

298   Index
Conspiracy theory, 1–4, 8–11, 13, 16, 
18–22, 25, 26, 30–33, 35, 39–51, 
53–56, 59, 62, 63, 66, 68, 70, 
72, 73, 76, 80, 88–92, 94, 
96–99, 101, 103, 111, 113–115, 
128, 134, 135, 138, 144, 149, 
164, 179, 186, 194, 200, 204, 
210, 215, 221, 227–230, 238, 
239, 246, 247, 250, 251, 269, 
273, 275, 278–280, 283–285
Continuity of Government (COG), 
243, 272
Coups, 57, 67, 277, 284
Covert sphere, 228, 229, 239, 240, 
257, 258, 269, 271, 273, 279, 
284, 285
D
Dark Money, 10, 22, 32, 53, 54, 94, 
117, 171, 185–187, 189–191, 
194, 198–201, 203, 204, 206, 
209–211, 213, 214, 216–219, 
224, 225, 251, 253, 259, 267, 
277, 283, 285
Deep State, 10, 20, 22, 29, 30, 32, 
36, 41, 54, 67, 82, 88, 90, 114, 
185, 191, 200, 221–231, 233, 
240, 241, 243, 244, 246–251, 
253, 254, 258, 263, 266–269, 
272, 275, 285
Distressed communities, 132, 139
E
Electoral College, 20, 29, 31, 98, 116, 
118, 122, 132, 134, 174, 251
F
Fake News, 7, 23, 29, 31, 79–84, 87, 
88, 90, 101, 110, 111, 113, 115–
117, 135, 137, 138, 153, 217
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 
22, 28–30, 36, 42, 43, 52, 70, 
82, 88, 90, 114, 118, 191, 205, 
208, 222, 229, 230, 235, 243, 
246–249, 266, 267
Federal Emergency Management 
Administration (FEMA), 61, 
241–243, 245
Fenster, Mark, 23, 25, 35, 36, 50, 52, 
53, 63, 72, 75, 93, 103, 149, 
181, 279, 284, 285
Fox News, 29, 36, 41, 80, 82–84, 88, 
90, 98, 102, 112, 115, 155, 250, 
251
Free trade, 4, 109, 121, 141, 144–
147, 157, 158, 167, 171, 172, 
179
Fusion, 91–93, 96, 151, 167, 210
G
Grand (or) world conspiracy, 54, 58, 
111, 186, 237, 278
Grant conspiracy, 278
Gray, Matthew, 33, 58, 76, 100, 103, 
142, 180, 280, 285
Greitens, Eric, 200, 201
H
Hannity, Sean, 29, 82, 88, 90, 250
Hofstadter, Richard, 3, 4, 8, 9, 11, 13, 
24, 33, 34, 39, 43–46, 50, 53, 
73, 74, 83, 96, 101, 105, 110, 
121, 136, 143, 148, 163, 164, 
172, 180, 182, 183, 228, 275, 
277–280, 285
I
Identity politics, 95, 120, 174
Immigration, Immigrants, 44, 95, 
120, 121, 125, 148, 156, 165, 

Index   299
167, 173, 174, 190, 223, 256, 
276
Infowars.com, 29, 82, 86, 112, 143, 
155, 166
Institutionalized conspiracy, 238, 239
IranContra, 90, 232, 233, 240, 
242–245, 249, 253, 271, 276
K
Kennedy assassination, 14, 18–20, 56, 
65, 68, 75, 77, 92, 108, 249
Koch brothers, 87, 179, 185, 186, 190, 
192, 197, 200, 204, 213, 216
Koch, Charles, 154, 185, 190, 195, 
196, 199, 204, 206, 211, 214, 219
Krugman, Paul, 41–44, 47, 55, 72, 74
Kushner, Jared, 199, 253, 254
L
Lofgren, Mike, 221, 224, 268, 285
M
Mayer, Jane, 191–194, 201, 204–206, 
211, 213–219, 225, 226, 259, 
268, 269, 285
McCarthyism, 50, 54, 164, 230, 249
Mexicans, 110, 156, 260
Miller, Stephen, 252
Mistrust, 1, 5, 20, 72, 81, 105, 117, 
120, 122, 178, 190, 276, 279, 
282
Mueller, Robert, 30, 88–90, 96, 97, 
114, 118, 155, 208, 217, 222, 
247
N
National Front, 31, 132, 171–173
Nativism, 7, 24, 99, 110, 148, 151, 
154, 161, 172, 279, 281
O
Olmsted, Elizabeth, 49, 51, 54, 72, 
149, 282
Operational conspiracy, 58, 59, 66, 
94, 186, 206, 233, 238
P
Paranoid style, 3, 4, 8, 11, 13, 24, 
31, 33, 34, 39, 44–46, 48–50, 
56, 72–74, 83, 88, 92, 96, 99, 
101, 103, 105, 109–112, 115, 
120, 121, 136, 143, 148, 149, 
162–164, 172, 180, 183, 185, 
210, 224, 228, 269, 275, 278, 
285
Parapolitics, 224–226, 229, 231, 248, 
258, 263–265
Petty conspiracy, 96
Pipes, Daniel, 2, 33, 43, 45, 50, 58, 
74, 96, 103
PizzaGate, 8
Plausibility, 16, 30, 40, 56, 57, 59, 
62–64, 135, 278
Populism, 4, 9, 24, 31, 45, 46, 80, 
81, 96, 109, 119, 130, 134, 139, 
141, 143, 144, 146, 148, 150, 
154, 155, 158, 161, 163, 164, 
168, 171–173, 175, 177, 180, 
183, 184, 248, 277–280
Prince, Erik, 253, 273
Private Military Forces (PMFs), 254, 
255
R
Regime of truth, 10, 31, 32, 39–41, 
50, 51, 53, 56–59, 62, 63, 66, 
67, 82, 83, 97, 98, 101, 118, 
155, 206, 227, 250, 269, 278
Rigged elections, 57, 108
Russiagate, 22, 30, 41, 44, 45, 97, 
179, 249, 265, 266

300   Index
S
Sanders, Bernie, 4, 23, 31, 89, 98, 
106, 132, 143, 146, 151, 155, 
157, 180, 187, 188, 265
Spygate, 30, 249
Surveillance, 8, 53, 80, 191, 222, 225, 
231, 234, 236, 243–247, 261, 
264, 265, 267, 281
T
Teachout, Zephyr, 23, 35, 206–208, 
218
Transnational, 4, 141, 142, 145, 
146, 148, 158, 164, 165, 167, 
171–173, 179, 180, 182, 183, 
255, 265, 267, 279
Transparency, 7, 23, 25, 35–37, 41, 
52, 53, 72, 75, 99, 100, 103, 
180, 185, 189, 201, 203–205, 
209, 217, 249
Trump, Donald, 1, 3, 4, 6, 14, 23, 
36, 67, 82, 89, 90, 98, 101–103, 
105, 115, 135–137, 142, 143, 
159, 163, 179–181, 185, 203, 
206, 213, 221, 227, 246, 250, 
251, 262, 266, 272, 275, 279, 
284
Truther, 40, 43, 44, 66, 67, 123, 244, 
248
U
Unwarranted, 8, 21, 31, 56, 62–65, 
72, 111, 143, 147, 226, 230, 
275, 278, 283
W
Warranted, 21, 31, 40, 56, 62–64, 72, 
89, 236, 244, 248, 278
Watergate, 25, 26, 29, 83, 87, 90, 
108, 189, 191, 208, 223, 230, 
240, 244, 247–249, 252, 267, 
268
White identity, white supremacy, 46, 
82, 94, 95, 162, 166, 211
World conspiracy. See Grant conspiracy

