FIELDS ET AL, CONTROL FLOW IN ACTIVE INFERENCE SYSTEMS, PART II
1
Control ﬂow in active inference systems
Part II:
Tensor networks as general models of control
ﬂow
Chris Fields, Filippo Fabrocini, Karl Friston, James F. Glazebrook, Hananel Hazan, Michael Levin and
Antonino Marcian`o
Abstract—Living systems face both environmental complexity
and limited access to free-energy resources. Survival under these
conditions requires a control system that can activate, or deploy,
available perception and action resources in a context speciﬁc
way. In Part I, we introduced the free-energy principle (FEP)
and the idea of active inference as Bayesian prediction-error
minimization, and show how the control problem arises in
active inference systems. We then review classical and quantum
formulations of the FEP, with the former being the classical limit
of the latter. In this accompanying Part II, we show that when
systems are described as executing active inference driven by
the FEP, their control ﬂow systems can always be represented
as tensor networks (TNs). We show how TNs as control systems
can be implemented within the general framework of quantum
topological neural networks, and discuss the implications of these
results for modeling biological systems at multiple scales.
Index Terms—Bayesian mechanics, Dynamic attractor, Free-
energy principle, Quantum reference frame, Scale-free model,
Topological quantum ﬁeld theory.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE framework of active inference provides a completely
general, scale-free formal framework for describing in-
teractions between physical systems in cognitive terms. In
Part I of this paper, we reviewed how active inference –
a combination of learning with active exploration of the
environment – emerges in systems compliant with the Free En-
ergy Principle (FEP), a general least-action principle initially
Chris Fields and Hananel Hazan are with the Allen Discovery Cen-
ter, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA; emails: ﬁeldsres@gmail.com,
Hananel.Hazan@tufts.edu
Filippo Fabrocini is with the College of Design and Innovation, Tongji
University, Shanghai, CHINA, and the Institute for Computing Applications
“Mario Picone”, Italy National Research Council, Rome, ITALY; email:
ﬁlippo.fabrocini@gmail.com
Karl Friston is with the Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging,
University College London, London, UK, and VERSES Research Lab, Los
Angeles, CA, USA; email: k.friston@ucl.ac.uk
James F. Glazebrook is with the Department of Mathematics and Computer
Science, Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, IL, USA and is Adjunct
Faculty at the Department of Mathematics, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA; email: jfglazebrook@eiu.edu
Michael Levin is with the Allen Discovery Center, Tufts University, Med-
ford, MA, USA, and the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering
at Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA; email: michael.levin@tufts.edu
Antonino Marcian`o is with the Center for Field Theory and Particle Physics
& Department of Physics, Fudan University, Shanghai, CHINA, and the
Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati INFN, Frascati (Rome), ITALY, and the INFN
sezione Roma “Tor Vergata”, Rome, ITALY; email: marciano@fudan.edu.cn
Manuscript received XXXXX; revised XXXXX.
developed in neuroscience [1]–[7]. We then showed how the
control ﬂow problem arises in active inference systems, and
reviewed classical and quantum formulations of the problem.
Control ﬂow can be represented as switching between classical
dynamical attractors, between deployed quantum reference
frames (QRFs) [8], [9], and between computational processes
represented by TQFTs [10], [11]. Implementing control ﬂow
has a free-energy cost; hence any control-ﬂow system must
trade off its own processing costs against the expected beneﬁts
of switching between input/ouput modes. The time and mem-
ory dependence of control ﬂow generically leads to context
effects on both perception and action.
In this Part II, we develop a fully-general tensor repre-
sentation of control ﬂow in §II, and prove that this tensor
can be factored into a TN if, and only if, the separability
(or conditional statistical independence) conditions needed to
identify distinct features of, or objects in, the environment
are met. We show how TN architectures allows classiﬁcation
of control ﬂows, and give two illustrative examples. We then
discuss several established relationships between TNs and
artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) architectures in §III, and
show how these generalize to topological quantum neural
networks [11], [12], of which standard deep-learning (DL)
architectures are a classical limit [13]. Having developed these
formal results, we turn to implications of these results for
biology in §IV, and discuss how TN architecture correlates
with the observational capabilities of the system being mod-
eled, particularly as regards abilities to detect spatial locality
and mereology. We consider how to classify known control
pathways in terms of TN architecture and how to employ the
TN representation of control ﬂow in experimental design. We
conclude by looking forward to how these FEP-based tools
can further integrate the physical and life sciences.
II. TENSOR NETWORK REPRESENTATION OF CONTROL
FLOW
A. Tensor networks and holographic duality
Entanglement and quantum error correction, two concepts
developed in quantum information theory, have been proved to
have a fundamental role in unveiling quantum gravity [14]. At
the origin of this consideration is the discovery by Bekenstein
and Hawking [15]–[18] that the second law of thermodynamics
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Molecular, Biological, and Multi-Scale Communications . This is the author's version which has not been fully edited a
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TMBMC.2023.3272158
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on June 12,2023 at 15:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

FIELDS ET AL, CONTROL FLOW IN ACTIVE INFERENCE SYSTEMS, PART II
2
can be preserved in the gravitational ﬁeld of a black hole,
if this latter has an entropy proportional to the area of its
horizon, by the inverse of the Newton gravitational constant
G. This entropy is maximal, as implied by the second law
itself, providing an upper bound for possible conﬁgurations of
matter within a region of the same size [19], [20].
Nonetheless, the scaling of the local degrees of freedom
counted by the entropy does not increase as the volume,
hinging toward the formulation of the holographic conjecture
[21], suggesting a division between the information that can
only be retrieved on the boundary world, and a merely appar-
ent bulk world. AdS/CFT realized the holographic conjecture,
postulating a duality between gravity in asymptotically AdS
space and quantum ﬁeld theory on the spatial inﬁnity of the
AdS space [22]. Giving literal meaning to the duality, Ryu
and Takayanagi (RT, [23]) proposed that entanglement of a
boundary region fulﬁls the same law as for the black hole
entropy, replacing the area of the black hole horizon with
an extremal surface area that bounds the bulk region under
scrutiny.
While on the boundaries the theory can be individuated
by assigning a speciﬁc conformal ﬁeld theory (CFT), in the
bulk the geometry can be associated to speciﬁc entanglement
structures of the quantum systems. This is, for instance, what
happens to the ground states of a CFT associated to an
AdS space: the RT surface area increases less fast than the
volume of the boundary. When the boundary is at equilibrium,
in a thermal state of ﬁnite temperature, the bulk geometry
corresponds to that of a black hole, its horizon being parallel to
the boundary and its size increasing with the temperature. The
RT surface is then conﬁned between the boundary and the back
hole horizon, approaching the boundary at higher temperature
and increasing its entropy. These considerations suggest the
existence of a subtle link interconnecting the structure of
spacetime and quantum entanglement, and hence that a theory
of quantum gravity must be fundamentally holographic, where
its states satisfy the RT formula for some bulk geometry.
The existence of an exact correspondence between bulk
gravity and quantum theory at the boundary may hinge toward
possible inconsistencies with locality. This has been discussed
in the literature, in terms of local reconstruction theory [24]–
[26]: variables in the bulk (e.g. bulk spins) can be controlled
instantaneously from the boundary, but this requires simul-
taneous access to a large portion of the boundary: locality
and an upper speed of light do not hold exactly in this
theory. Nonetheless, local observers conﬁned in small regions
at the boundary still fulﬁll locality and the existence of
an upper limit of the speed of information exchange, in a
way that is reminiscent of quantum error correction codes
(QECCs) in quantum information theory: information is stored
redundantly, in such a way that when part of it is corrupted,
a reconstruction of information is still possible. Locality in
the bulk is therefore a QECC property of the encoding map
that realizes the duality between bulk and boundary. On the
other hand, these properties are strictly connected to RT, which
provides the necessary resource of entanglement for QEEC to
emerge.
The RT formula and QECC are properties fulﬁlled by
different classes of models, among which TNs [28]. These
have been ﬁrst introduced in condensed matter physics as
variational wave-functions of strongly correlated systems [29],
[30]. TNs are many-body wavefunctions that can be derived by
composing few-body quantum states, which are indeed tensors.
A prototype TN is, e.g., a collection of Einstein-Podolsky-
Rosen (EPR) entangled pairs of qubits: in a nonentangled
basis, the measured qubits are in some entangled pure state,
and can be composed with additional qubits to create states
with increasing complexity. Indeed, complicated quantum en-
tanglement can be derived by entangling only a few qubits
[31].
Particularly relevant for its implications on the reconstruc-
tion of spacetime structure is the multi-scale entanglement
renormalization ansatz (MERA) [32]. TNs can be naturally
related to holography duality by considering that their entan-
glement entropy can be controlled by their graph geometry.
Some versions of TNs that are characterized by RT entangle-
ment entropy and QEEC have been constructed resorting to
stabilizer codes [33], [34] and random tensors with large bond
dimensions [35]. TNs with random tensors at each node can
be regarded as random states restricted by the topology of the
network. Exactly as random states are almost maximally en-
tangled, random TNs show, through the RT formula, an almost
maximal entanglement, providing a large family of states with
interesting properties to explore holographic duality. Further-
more, for random TNs, the RT formula holds in generic spaces
with not necessarily hyperbolic geometry, hinging toward an
extension of holographic duality beyond AdS, to more general
conﬁgurations in quantum gravity. Nonetheless, at least in
three dimensions, random tensor networks have been related
to the gravitational action, by means of the Regge calculus
[36].
On the other hand, since geometry emerges as a speciﬁca-
tion of the entanglement structure, one may consider that the
Einstein equations should be connected as well to the dynam-
ics of entanglement. For small perturbations around the ground
state of a CFT on a boundary, linearized Einstein equations
have been derived from the RT formula [37], [38]. Indeed,
the conformal symmetry enables a relationship between the
energy-momentum and the entanglement entropy, and conse-
quently the area of the extremal surface can be connected to
the energy-momentum distribution at the boundary – the result
is equivalent to the linearized Einstein equations.
The dynamics on the boundary, on the other hand, shows
a chaotic behaviour, with scrambling of the single-particle
operators, which evolve into multi-particle operators [39].
Maximal chaotic behavior recovered in the growth of the
commutator between ladder operators, as encoded in the out-
of-time-ordered correlation (OTOC) functions, is characterized
by exponential growth in time and temperature. A model
endowed with this property is, e.g., the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev
model, developed to describe certain systems in condensed
matter physics, such as Gapless spin-ﬂuids [40]–[42]. On the
other hand, operator scrambling is also related to QEEC: the
chaotic dynamics at the boundary instantiates QECC preserv-
ing quantum information, which is efﬁciently hidden (and
protected) behind the horizon. Nevertheless, this has led to
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Molecular, Biological, and Multi-Scale Communications . This is the author's version which has not been fully edited a
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TMBMC.2023.3272158
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on June 12,2023 at 15:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

FIELDS ET AL, CONTROL FLOW IN ACTIVE INFERENCE SYSTEMS, PART II
3
many questions concerning the information behind the horizon
being eventually accessible from the boundary though non-
local measurements, the fate of the local degrees of freedom
hitting the singularity, and the relation between the causal
structure of the bulk and the smooth geometry across the
horizon.
B. General results
We can now move to prove a general result:
Theorem 1. A system A exhibits non-trivial control ﬂow if,
and only if, its control ﬂow can be represented by a TN.
and examine some of its corollaries. We begin by deﬁning:
Deﬁnition 1. Control ﬂow is trivial if a system deploys only
one QRF.
As any collection of mutually-commuting QRFs can be rep-
resented as a single QRF [11], [79], any system that deploys
only mutually-commuting QRFs exhibits trivial control ﬂow.
Systems that deploy only a single QRF “do the same thing”
regardless of context, and so do not qualify as “interesting” in
the sense used here. As noted above, no ﬁnite physical system
can measure the entire state of its boundary with a single QRF,
so no such system can simultaneously measure and act on its
entire context. Any system A that deploys multiple QRFs Qi
in sequence cannot, as noted in Part I, avoid contextuality
due to unobservable effects, mediated by the action of HB,
of the action of Qi on the state later measured by Qj. Every
action taken by an “interesting” system, in other words, at
least transiently increases the VFE at its boundary.
Consider, then, a system A that deploys multiple, distinct
QRFs Q1, Q2, . . . Qn, acting on its environment B, where
n ≪N = dim(HAB). Classical control ﬂow in A can then
be represented by a matrix CF = [Pij], where Pij is the
probability of the control transition Qi →Qj. As noted in
Part I, any such transition has an energetic cost, which must
be paid with free energy sourced from the thermodynamic
sector F of the A-B boundary B.
The matrix CF is a 2-tensor. Theorem 1 states that this
tensor can be decomposed into a TN. We prove it as follows:
Proof (Thm. 1). Suppose ﬁrst that control ﬂow in a system
A can be represented by a TN. A TN is, by deﬁnition, a
factorization of a tensor operator into a network of tensor
operators. This network can be either hierarchical or ﬂat; if
it is hierarchical, each layer can be considered a ﬂat TN.
Hence no generality is lost in considering just the case of a ﬂat
TN, which is an operator contraction T = . . . TijTjkTkl . . . ,
where summation on shared indices is left implicit. In general,
Tjk ̸= T T
jk = Tkj, hence these expressions do not commute.
They therefore represent non-trivial control ﬂow. Conversely,
any non-trivial control ﬂow can be written, at any ﬁxed scale
or level of abstraction, as a linear sequence of (in general
probabilistic) operators. The ﬁxed order of operators in the
sequence can be encoded formally by adding “spatial” indices
as needed to allow contraction over shared indices. Hence any
non-trivial control ﬂow at a ﬁxed scale can be written as a ﬂat
TN. This construction can be repeated at each larger scale to
produce a hierarchical TN over a collection of “lowest-scale”
TNs.
We can now examine two corollaries of this result:
Corollary 1. Decoherent reference sectors exist on a bound-
ary B if and only if control ﬂow can be implemented by a
TN.
Proof. Decoherence between sectors requires independently-
deployable, non-commuting QRFs. This requires a control
structure that factors, hence by Theorem 1, it requires a
TN. Conversely, a TN factors the control structure, making
QRFs independently deployable, which renders their sectors
decoherent.
Equivalently, the generative model (GM) implemented by
a system [4] factors if, and only if, control ﬂow can be
implemented by a TN.
Corollary 2. The TN of any system compliant with the FEP
is a decomposition of the Identity.
Proof. The FEP applies to systems with a NESS, and drives
such systems to return to (the vicinity of) the NESS after
any perturbation. Hence at a sufﬁciently large scale, the TN
of any such system is a cycle, i.e., a decomposition of the
Identity.
Many standard TN models, e.g., MERAs, assume bound-
ary conditions asymptotically far, in numbers of lowest-scale
operators, from the region of the network that is of interest.
Identifying such asymptotic boundary conditions yields a
cyclic system.
Theorem 1, together with its corollaries, provides a natural,
formal means of classifying systems by their control architec-
tures. At a high level, two characteristics distinguish systems
with different architectures:
• Hierarchical depth, which indicates the number of “virtual
machine” layers [43] the architecture supports. The in-
terfaces between these layers implement coarse-graining,
removing from the higher-level representation all dimen-
sions, and hence all information, which is contracted out
of the lower-level operators.
• Number and location of contractions that yield unitary op-
erators, and hence build in entanglement between lower-
level operators. The natural limit is a MERA, in which
every pair of lower-level operators is entangled at every
hierarchical level [44].
The control-ﬂow architecture, in turn, speciﬁes the structure
of the “layout” of distinguishable sectors on B and hence
of detectable features/objects in the environment. Locality
on B requires a hierarchical TN; detectable entanglement
requires a MERA-like TN. Locality is required for detectable
features/objects to appear to have components with nested
decompositions. Any QRF for geometric space, and hence for
spacetime, must be hierarchical, and must be a MERA if en-
tanglement in space is to be detected. A MERA is required, in
particular, if the use of coherence between spatially-separated
systems as a computational or communication resource is
detectable.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Molecular, Biological, and Multi-Scale Communications . This is the author's version which has not been fully edited a
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TMBMC.2023.3272158
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on June 12,2023 at 15:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

FIELDS ET AL, CONTROL FLOW IN ACTIVE INFERENCE SYSTEMS, PART II
4
Fig. 1. Example state transition from Dataset 1.
To illustrate the classiﬁcation of systems by hierarchical
level, consider the ten-step cyclic TN shown in Diagram (1):
. . .
A
B
J
(1)
and its extension to a hierarchy as shown in Diagram (2):
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
(2)
where red, blue, and green colors indicate distinct hierarchical
“layers” of tensor contractions. We have trained artiﬁcial
neural networks (ANNs) to execute these TNs as the sequences
of state transitions shown in Table 1. The ﬁrst sequence
(Dataset 1) is a ten-step cycle as shown Diagram (1); the
second sequence (Dataset 2) layers the coarse-grained state
transitions of Diagram (2) onto this ten-step cycle. In Dataset
2, a two-bit tag is used to differentiate the “low-level” from
the coarse-grained “high-level” cycles. An example state state
transition from a randomly-generated initial state is shown in
Fig. 1; the red-on-green bit pattern effectively moves “up” one
step on each state-transition cycle.
Table 1: Datasets used in ANN simulations. Dataset 1 speciﬁes
a ten-step cycle A →B →. . . →J →A. Dataset 2 speciﬁes
this same cycle, with three coarse-grained cycles layered on
top. The tags (0,0), (0,1), (1,0), and (1,1) distinguish the data
for the low- and high-level cycles.
Fig. 2.
Feed-forward network archtecture used to learn the control cycles
speciﬁed in Table 1. Each node is connected to every node of the next layer,
as shown here for the ﬁrst and last nodes only. The labels ‘T’ and ‘T+1’
indicate time steps in the executed control ﬂow.
We trained two ANNs, one to execute each of the control
cycles shown in Table 1. The networks are each composed
of three layers, as illustrated in Fig. 2, with network sizes
of [10, 50, 10] and [10, 200, 10], respectively, for the input,
hidden, and output layers. The units in the hidden layer use
the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) nonlinear activation function
and the neurons in the output layer use the hyperbolic tangent
activation function. The network is connected in a feedforward
way where a neuron in one layer connects to every neuron
in the next layer. Since the ANN serves as a switch state
controller, we use a training scheme, similar to one-class
classiﬁcation [45], where the training data are the only data
that the network learns to produce. In so doing, the network
learns to overﬁt the training data, and any input outside of
the designated state-encoding is discarded. The network is,
therefore, not expected to deviate from the learned pattern.
The network learns both control regimes with 100% accuracy
after training with 3,000 randomly-generated 10-bit inputs.
In the more realistic case of noisy input data, where binary
states can be ﬂipped, the Bidirectional Associative Memory
(BAM), a minimal two-layer nonlinear feedback network [46],
is a viable alternative to a shallow feed-forward ANN. The
architecure is shown in Fig. 3. This BAM network learns to
associate between the two initial and ﬁnal states in Table 1,
with similar performance to that of the feed-forward network.
III. IMPLEMENTING CONTROL FLOW WITH TQNNS
Tensor Networks can be naturally associated to the ma-
trix elements of physical scalar products among topological
quantum neural networks (TQNNs). Physical scalar products
encode indeed the dynamics of TQFTs, since they fulﬁll their
constraints of imposing ﬂatness of the curvature and gauge
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Molecular, Biological, and Multi-Scale Communications . This is the author's version which has not been fully edited a
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TMBMC.2023.3272158
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on June 12,2023 at 15:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

FIELDS ET AL, CONTROL FLOW IN ACTIVE INFERENCE SYSTEMS, PART II
5
Fig. 3. Architecture of the Bidirectional Associative Memory (BAM) network
employed here. As in Fig. 2, only the connections of the ﬁrst and last nodes
are shown explicitly.
invariance. Thus, the matrix elements associated to scalar
products can be seen as evolution matrix elements for the spin-
network states that span the Hilbert spaces of TQNNs.
A. Tensor networks as classiﬁers for TQNNs
A notable example is provided by BF theories [47], a
class of TQFTs particularly well studied in the literature of
mathematical physics that enables expressing effective theories
of particle physics, gravity and condensed matter, and provides
as well a general framework for implementations of models
of quantum information and quantum computation, machine
learning (ML), and neuroscience. These are deﬁned on the
principal bundle M of a connection A for some internal gauge
group G, with algebra g, according to the action on a d-
dimensional manifold Md:
S =
Z
Md
Tr[B ∧F] ,
(3)
where B is an ad(g)-valued d-2-form, F denotes the ﬁeld-
strength of A, which is a 2-form, and the trace Tr is over the
internal indices of g, ensuring gauge invariance of the density
Lagrangian L = Tr[B ∧F] of the BF theory.
Variation with respect to the conjugated variables, the
connection A and the B frame-ﬁeld, closing a canonical
symplectic structure, provide the equations of motion of the
theory [47]:
F = 0 ,
dAB = 0 ,
(4)
which are, respectively, the curvature constraint, imposing the
ﬂatness of the connection, and the Gauß constraint, imposing
invariance under gauge transformations, having denoted with
dA the covariant derivative with respect to the connection A.
At the quantum level, the states of the kinematical Hilbert
space of the theory, fulﬁlling by construction the Gauß con-
straint, can be represented in terms of cylindrical functionals
Cyl, supported on graphs Γ that are unions of segments γi, the
end points of which meet in nodes n, and with holonomies
– elements of the group G – Hγi[A] of the connection A
assigned to γi and intertwiner operators – invariant tensor
products of representations – vn assigned to the nodes n.
For G = SU(2), spin-networks |Γ, jγ, ιn⟩, supported on Γ
and labelled by the spin jγ of the irreducible representations
of the group elements assigned to γ and by the quantum
intertwiner numbers ιn associated to vn, represent a basis of
the kinematical Hilbert space of the theory. In terms of func-
tionals of Cyl, one can provide the holonomy representation,
which is related to the “spin and intertwiner” representation of
|Γ, jγ, ιn⟩by means of the Peter-Weyl transform. This allows
us to decompose the spin-network cylindric functional as [48]:
Ψjγij ,ιni(hγij) =
 O
n
ιn
!
·

O
γij
D(jγij )(hγij)

,
(5)
with D(j) are Wigner matrices providing representation ma-
trices of the SU(2) group elements.
The functorial evolution among spin-networks is ensured by
the projector operator [11], which implements the curvature
constraint in the physical scalar product among states, i.e.
⟨in|P |out⟩,
with
P =
Z
D[N] exp(ı
Z
Tr[NF]) .
(6)
We may then regard |in⟩as elements of the Hilbert space, and
without loss of generality pick up those ones resulting from
composing tensorially in Cyl k-representations of holonomies.
We may further denote them as |j1 . . . jk⟩, with some ordering
prescription to associate the topological structure of Γ to
the sequence of spin labels. Physically evolving states P|in⟩
are distinguished from the former ones by labelling them as
| ^
j1 · · · jk⟩. Similarly, we introduce |out⟩as the tensor product
of (n-k)-representations of holonomies, and denote these states
as |i1 . . . in−k⟩. Then the matrix elements of ⟨in|P |out⟩
naturally give rise [27] to an n-tensor, i.e.
⟨i1 . . . in−k| ^
j1 · · · jk⟩= Ti1...in−kj1...jk .
(7)
B. Geometric RG ﬂow for TQNNs and TNs
The mathematical structures of TQNNs we summarized in
Sec. III-A are picturing systems “at equilibrium”, for which
TQFTs characterize a topological stability that percolates into
the related transition amplitudes. Nonetheless, it is worth
considering as well how stochastic noise might interfere with
the topological order ensured by TQFTs, and study the role of
“out-of-equilibrium” physics in the analysis of the evolution
of the systems under scrutiny.
Out-of-equilibrium dynamics is instantiated considering a
heat-ﬂow evolution of the fundamental ﬁelds of the theory,
with respect to a thermal time τ. Typical Langevin equations,
complemented with stochastic noise, provide through their
convergence toward the equations of motion of the theory the
relaxation toward equilibrium of the ﬁeld conﬁgurations rep-
resenting speciﬁc systems [49]. In general, given some ﬁelds
φσ, with a classical equation of motion derived, according
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Molecular, Biological, and Multi-Scale Communications . This is the author's version which has not been fully edited a
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TMBMC.2023.3272158
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on June 12,2023 at 15:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

FIELDS ET AL, CONTROL FLOW IN ACTIVE INFERENCE SYSTEMS, PART II
6
to the variational principle δS/δφσ, from an action S over
a Euclidean manifold M, the associated Langevin equations
read:
∂
∂τ φσ = −δS
δφσ
+ ησ ,
(8)
with ησ a stochastic noise term. The theory at equilibrium is
characterized by the symmetries of the equations of motion
δS/δφσ = 0 that are broken in the transient phase [50];
these symmetries are consistent with – and in the case of BF
theories, actually generated by – the theories at equilibrium.
A prototype of geometric heat-ﬂow was introduced by
Hamilton, and then used by Perelman to prove the Poincar´e
conjecture, which goes under the name of Ricci ﬂow. Here the
gravitational ﬁeld gµν is the basic conﬁgurational space ﬁeld,
while the drift terms are the Einstein equations of motion in
the vacuum, which indeed are expressed by requiring that the
components of the Ricci tensor vanish, i.e. Rµν = 0. The
Ricci ﬂow then reads
ı ∂
∂τ gµν = −2Rµν ,
(9)
having considered now a Lorentzian manifold M. The Ricci
ﬂow equations can be further complemented introducing the
Ricci target RT
µν = κ2(Tµν −1/2gµνT), expressed in terms of
the Newton constant G = κ2/(8π) and the energy-momentum
tensor of matter Tµν, so as to obtain at equilibrium the Einstein
equations:
Rµν−1
2gµνR = κ2Tµν ,
or equivalently
Rµν = RT
µν .
(10)
The stochastic version of the Ricci ﬂow, with heat equation
turning into a Langevin equation, has been introduced and
deepened in [50] for a generic gravitational system in the
presence of matter ﬁelds, describing an action S for gravity
and matter. Moving then from:
ı ∂
∂τ gµν = −1
κ2
δS
δgµν + η gµν ,
(11)
in which a multiplicative noise ηµν = η gµν appears, the
Hamiltonian analysis of the stochastic Ricci ﬂow (SRF) in the
Adomian decomposition method (ADM) variables has been
derived [50].
An essential by-product of the discussion, from the Ricci
ﬂow perspective, is that the equilibration trajectories corre-
spond to those of a renormalization group (RG) ﬂow. The
thermal time τ plays the role of scale parameter that individ-
uates a dimension in the bulk, which is out-of-equilibrium.
The boundaries are recovered asymptotically in τ, in the
infrared regime, and are by deﬁnition at equilibrium and thus
symmetric.
For a particular class of TQFTs, the BF theories we have
introduced in Sec. III-A for implementing TQNNs and TNs,
the geometric RG ﬂow acquire a speciﬁc expression as the
TQFT equivalent of the gravitational Ricci ﬂow [51].
C. TNs as a generalization of the main model architectures in
ML
The use of TNs is an emerging topic in the ML community.
The integration between the two appears quite immediate. A
Fig. 4. Representation of the decision function (see [53]).
Fig. 5. Matrix product decomposition (again see [53]).
TN structure can be viewed as a ML model in which the
parameters are properly adjusted to learn the classiﬁcation of a
data set. Yet, as Ref. [52] mentions, machine learning can aid,
in turn, in determining a factorization of a TN approximating
a data set. Moreover, TNs are also used to compress the layers
of ANN architectures, besides a variety of other uses. Tensor
networks are becoming more and more popular to the extent
that they are a powerful tool for representing and manipulating
high-dimensional data, as in the case of image and video
classiﬁcation tasks in which the data are represented as a high-
dimensional tensor. High efﬁciency, ﬂexibility, and ease of use
are making them a dominant choice for many AI applications.
Furthermore, besides being used to represent data, TNs can
be used to process data by exploiting a number of operators.
This feature makes them an effective technique for processing
data in ML applications.
As is well known, TNs are particularly well suited for rep-
resenting quantum many-body states in which the dimension
of the Hilbert space is exponentially large in the number of
particles. The corresponding ML approach consists in:
• Lifting data to exponentially higher spaces;
• Applying any linear classiﬁer f(x) = W ⋆Φ(X) to a non-
linear space;
• Compressing the weights by using TNs.
The output of the model is a separation of classes that would
not be linearly separable in a linear space. In particular, the
decision function is the overlap of the weight tensor W with
the feature map tensor Φ as in Fig. 4. The weight tensor W
can be approximated by the decomposition in Fig. 5.
Regularization and optimization are built as a constructive
product of low-order tensors while weight compression is
performed by using the Matrix Product States (MPS) decom-
position. If we look at Deep Neural Networks as a piecewise
composition of linear discriminators (logistic regression func-
tions), then the TN framework appears as a generalization of
the main model architectures found in the ML literature, e.g.
Support Vector Machines, Kernel models, and Deep Neural
Networks.
The literature concerning the use of tensor theory in tra-
ditional ML is becoming large. A short review starts with
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Molecular, Biological, and Multi-Scale Communications . This is the author's version which has not been fully edited a
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TMBMC.2023.3272158
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on June 12,2023 at 15:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

FIELDS ET AL, CONTROL FLOW IN ACTIVE INFERENCE SYSTEMS, PART II
7
a seminal paper by Stoudenmire and Schwab [54], which
demonstrated how algorithms for optimizing TNs can be
adapted to supervised learning tasks by using MPS (ten-
sor trains) to parametrize non-linear kernel learning models.
Novikov, Troﬁmov, and Oseledets [55] have shown how an
exponentially large tensor of parameters can be represented
in a factorized format called Tensor Train (TT), with the
consequence of obtaining a regularization of the model. van
Glasser, Pancotti, and Cirac [56] explored the connection be-
tween TNs and probabilistic graphical models by introducing
the concept of a “generalized tensor network architecture”
for ML. Ref. [57] then designed a generative model, i.e. a
traditional machine learning model that learns joint probability
distributions from data and generates samples according to
it, by using MPS. Ref. [58] made use of autoregressive
MPSs for building an unsupervised learning model that goes
beyond proof-of-concept by showing performance comparable
to standard traditional models. Finally, Ref. [59] analyzes
the contribution of polynomials of different degrees to the
supervised learning performance of different architectures.
IV. IMPLICATIONS FOR BIOLOGICAL CONTROL SYSTEMS
Scale-free biology requires a smooth transition from
quantum-like to classical-like behavior. Typical representations
of metabolic, signal-transduction, and gene-regulatory path-
ways are entirely classical, even though many of their steps in-
volve electron-transfer or other mechanisms that are acknowl-
edged to require a quantum-theoretic description [60], [61]. As
noted earlier, free-energy budget considerations suggest that
both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells employ quantum coher-
ence as a computational resource [62]. Emerging empirical
evidence for longer-range entanglement in mammalian brains
suggests that large-scale networks may also be using quantum
coherence as a resource [63]. Control ﬂow models must,
therefore, support the possibility of quantum computation
in biological systems. Hierarchical TNs that include unitary
components, e.g., MERA-type models, provide this capability.
In prokaryotes, the primary tasks of control ﬂow are
adapting metabolism to available resources via metabolite-
driven gene regulation [64] and initiating DNA replication
and cell division when conditions are favorable. We can,
therefore, expect shallow hierarchies of effectively classical
control transitions in these organisms. Eukaryotes, however,
are characterized by both intracellular compartmentalization
and morphological degrees of freedom at the whole-cell scale.
We have shown previously that the FEP will induce “neu-
romorphic” morphologies – i.e. morphologies that segregate
inputs from outputs and enable a fan-in/fan-out computational
architecture – in any systems with morphological degrees of
freedom [65]. Such systems can be expected to have deep con-
trol hierarchies at the cellular level, with hierarchical structure
correlating with morphological structure in morphologically-
complex cells such as neurons [66], and in multicellular
assemblages at all scales. These distinctions correlate with the
orders-of-magnitude increase in classical computational power
(estimated from total metabolic energy budget) as a function
of cell-surface area in eukaryotes as compared to prokaryotes
[62], as illustrated in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6. Power-law relation between maximum classical computation rate (ver-
tical axis) and cell-surface area (horizontal axis) derived in [62]. Information
processing in eukaryotes is implemented by complex , overlapping signaling
pathways that require hierarchical control, which information processing in
prokaryotes is implemented by comparatively simple, two or three component
pathways that require only shallow control systems. Adapted with permission
from [62] Fig. 3.
As well as managing metabolism and replication, most
eukaryotes implement active exploration of the environment,
communication with other systems, and – crucially for cog-
nition – the writing and reading of stigmergic memories.
Thus we can expect such systems to implement QRFs for
spacetime and for speciﬁc kinds of objects, e.g., conspeciﬁcs
and suitable substrates for recording stigmergic memories.
Such QRFs rely on symmetries, and hence on redundancy
of encoded (or encodable) information; they depend, in other
words, on the availability of error-correcting codes [67], [68].
The implementation of spacetime as a QECC by TNs has
been extensively studied by physicists as noted above; see [69]
for review and [27] for a detailed analysis using the present
formalism. The use of spacetime as an error-correcting code
by organisms – e.g., the implementation of translational and
rotational invariance of objects by dorsal visual processing in
mammals [70], [71] – is well-understood phenomenologically,
but the details of neural implementation remain to be eluci-
dated.
Both the context-sensitivity of, and the occurence of context
effects due to non-commutativity of QRFs in, control net-
works can be expected to increase with their complexity and
hierarchical depth. “Bowtie” networks with high fan-in/fan-
out to/from multi-use proteins or second messengers such
as Ca2+ are increasingly recognized as ubiquitous in higher
eukaryotic cells [72]. Such networks have the general form
of the CCCD depicted in Part I, Diagram 3. Frequently, such
networks evolve via compression of information (e.g. toward
share second messengers, as in [Ca2+]-based interactions [73],
[74]) as an efﬁciency-increasing mechanism. Bowties intro-
duce semantic ambiguities that must be resolved by context.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Molecular, Biological, and Multi-Scale Communications . This is the author's version which has not been fully edited a
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TMBMC.2023.3272158
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on June 12,2023 at 15:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

FIELDS ET AL, CONTROL FLOW IN ACTIVE INFERENCE SYSTEMS, PART II
8
Each incoming signal has its own governing semantics, but
the relevant context can depend on boundary conditions which
can be exceedingly difﬁcult (if not impossible) to predetermine
(see e.g., [75], [76] for general discussions of the history and
semantic depth of this problem). As pointed out in [77], a
context change x 7→y is semantically problematic if for
a ﬁxed set {oi} of observations, the conditional probability
distributions P(oi|x) and P(oi|y) are well deﬁned, but the joint
distribution P(oi|x ∨y) is not [78]. This occurs whenever the
QRFs for x and y do not commute [79, Th 7.1]. As suggested
by Part I, Diagram 3, this context-switching problem affects
deep learning using VAEs [80]; see e.g., the application to
antimicrobial peptides in [81]. In general, the structure of
Part I, Diagram 3 can serve as a convenient benchmark for
distinguishing signal transduction networks that incorporate
co-deployable versus non-co-deployable QRFs [79].
“Quantum” context effects due to non-commutativity have,
interestingly, been reported even at the scale of human lan-
guage use. The “Snow Queen” experiment [82] challenged
subjects with distinct, mutually-inconsistent meanings of terms
such as ‘kind’, ‘evil’, or ‘beautiful’ in different contexts, and
detected statistically-signiﬁcant context effects using the CbD
formalism [83], [84]. Such effects cannot be explained by
linguistic ambiguity, misreading, etc. Such language-driven
contextuality is taken up in the setting of psycholinguistics
and distributional semantics in [85], which combines CbD and
the sheaf theoretic [86], [87] methods to systematically study
semantic ambiguity as creating meaning/sense discrepancies
in statements like “It was about time”, “She had time on her
hands to win the heat”, “West led with a queen”, etc.
While the notion of “languages” has thus far been ap-
plied to cells, tissues, and even non-vertebrates in a mostly
metaphorical way, we can speculate that linguistic approaches
to understanding the interplay between context dependence
and semantic ambiguity may be useful to biology in general.
Immune cells (e.g., T cells) are, for example, “programmed” or
“trained” by their progenitor cells to respond to local cellular
signals and ambient conditions in particular ways. Unexpected
context changes may induce dysfunctional (at the organism
scale) responses, including chronic disorders [88]; these can be
considered consequenes of discrepancies between the “actual”
semantics of incoming signals and the semantics expected by
the immune system’s “language.” This suggestion of possi-
ble “linguistic” contextuality seems in consonance with the
hypothesis of [89] that the immune system is a cognitive
(living) system implementing its exclusive system of language-
grammar, which may be prone to analogous disorders of com-
munication as those discussed in [85]. Similar context effects
have been observed in microbiological systems [90]; here
discrepancies in experimentally derived classical probabilities
arising from lactose-glucose interference signaling in E. Coli
can only be explained in terms of non-classical probabilities.
We note that the expression ‘quantum-like’ [91] is often used
for such effects; however, their formal structure is exactly that
given by quantum theory.
We expect that further research into quantum biology will
unfold signiﬁcant perspectives on human/mammalian physiol-
ogy and cognitive capabilities along the lines suggested in the
present article. For example, allostatic maintenance, as brieﬂy
alluded to in Part I, can be seen as a process regulating a
body’s physiological conditions relative to costs and beneﬁts
while dynamically allocating resources for the purpose of
overall adaptability of an organism within its internal envi-
ronment. Implementing the allostatic and anticipatory mech-
anisms are the visceromotor cortical regions generating auto-
nomic, hormonal, and immunological predictions leading to
interoceptive inference [92]–[94], [96]–[99], [102]. This pro-
cess of inference in humans and mammals putatively utilizes
predictive coding for the processes of homeostasis-allostasis
through a hierarchy of cellular to organ-level systems, in turn
connecting interoception to the processes of extercoception
and proprioception [92], [99]–[102]. The basic principles
follow from how allostasis provides protection against po-
tential surprise by utilizing a framework somewhat beyond
the error signaling necessary for homeostatic maintenance (it
is essentially through minimizing the free energy of internal
state trajectories towards combatting surprise, as discussed in
Part I). The net effect of the process is consonant with the
Good Regulator theorem of [95], showing how regulation of
a given system requires an internal model of that system. A
further perspective is to emphasize the predictive nature of
an integrated, complex, allostatic-interoceptive cortical system
capable of supporting a spectrum of psychological phenomena
including memory and emotions [99] (cf. [102]). Accordingly,
cognitive conditions such as depression and autism have been
described as abnormalities of allostatic-interoceptive inference,
so impairing predictive coding mechanisms due to aberrant
assimilation and mistuning of prediction errors (putatively a
connectivity issue), conceivably leading to a root cause of
many known cognitive conditions [92], [100], [102].
We anticipate that this fully general, context sensitive
model of control ﬂow will be important for understanding
morphogenesis, which is not simply a feed-forward emergent
system, but rather a highly context-sensitive error-minimizing
process [103]. Speciﬁcally, the collective intelligence of cells
during embryonic development, organ regeneration, and meta-
morphosis can create and repair speciﬁc complex structures
despite a wide range of perturbations [104]. Changes in the
genome, the number of cells, or the starting conﬁguration can
often be overcome: bisected embryos result in normal twins,
amputated salamander limbs re-grow back to normal, and
planarian fragments result in perfect little worms [105]. The
competency of cellular collectives to reach the correct target
morphology despite even drastic interventions requires an
understanding of how they navigate, via context-sensitive con-
trol ﬂow, problem spaces including anatomical morphospace
[106], physiological, and transcriptional spaces [68], [107].
Understanding the navigation policies used by unconventional
collective intelligences can help not only understand creative
problem-solving on rapid timescales (such as the ability to
regulate genes to accommodate an entirely novel stressor [108]
without evolutionary adaptation), but may also have implica-
tions for predicting and managing the goals and behavioral
repertoires of synthetic beings [109].
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Molecular, Biological, and Multi-Scale Communications . This is the author's version which has not been fully edited a
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TMBMC.2023.3272158
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on June 12,2023 at 15:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

FIELDS ET AL, CONTROL FLOW IN ACTIVE INFERENCE SYSTEMS, PART II
9
V. CONCLUSION
We have shown here how the problem of deﬁning control
ﬂow arises in active inference systems, and provided three
formal representations of the problem. We have proved that
control ﬂow in such systems can always be represented by
a tensor network, provided illustrative examples, and shown
how the general formalism of topological quantum neural
networks can be used to implement a general model of control
ﬂow. These results provide a general formalism with which to
characterize context dependence in active inference systems
at any scale, from that of macromolecular pathways to that of
multi-organism communities. They suggest that the concept
of communication by language is not just metaphorical when
applied to biological systems in general, but rather an appro-
priate and productive description of interactional dynamics.
We view these results as a further step toward fully
integrating the formal models, concepts, and languages of
physics, biology, and cognitive science. This integration is not
reductive. It rather allows us to classify systems using natural
measures of organizational and computational complexity, and
to understand how interactions between simpler systems can
implement the more complex behavior of the larger systems
that they compose.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
K.F. is supported by funding for the Wellcome Centre for
Human Neuroimaging (Ref: 205103/Z/16/Z), a Canada-UK
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Initiative (Ref: ES/T01279X/1) and the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for
Research and Innovation under the Speciﬁc Grant Agreement
No. 945539 (Human Brain Project SGA3). M.L. gratefully
acknowledges funding from the Guy Foundation and the
John Templeton Foundation, Grant 62230. A.M. wishes to
acknowledge support by the Shanghai Municipality, through
the grant No. KBH1512299, by Fudan University, through
the grant No. JJH1512105, the Natural Science Foundation
of China, through the grant No. 11875113, and by the Depart-
ment of Physics at Fudan University, through the grant No.
IDH1512092/001.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no competing, ﬁnancial, or commercial
interests in this research.
REFERENCES
[1] K. J. Friston, “The free-energy principle: A uniﬁed brain theory?” Nature
Rev. Neurosci., vol. 11, pp. 127–138, 2010.
[2] K. J. Friston, “Life as we know it,” J. R. Soc. Interface, vol. 10, art.
20130475, 2013.
[3] K. J. Friston, T. FitzGerald, F. Rigoli, P. Schwartenbeck, and G. Pezzulo,
“Active inference: A process theory,” Neural Comput., vol. 29, pp. 1–49,
2017.
[4] K. J. Friston, “A free energy principle for a particular physics,” Preprint
arxiv:1906.10184 [q-bio.NC], 2019.
[5] M. J. Ramstead, D. A. R. Sakthivadivel, C. Heins, M. Koudahl, B.
Millidge, L. Da Costa, B. Klein, and K. J. Friston, “On Bayesian
mechanics: A physics of and by beliefs,” Interface Focus 13, 2022.0029.
[6] C. Fields, K. Friston, J. F. Glazebrook, and M. Levin, “A free energy
principle for generic quantum systems,” Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. vol.
173, pp. 36–59, 2022.
[7] K. Friston, L. Da Costa, D. A. R. Sakthivadivel, C. Heins, G. A. Pavliotis,
M. J. Ramstead, and T. Parr, “Path integrals, particular kinds, and strange
things,” Preprint arxiv:2210.12761 [cond-mat.stat-mech], 2022.
[8] Y. Aharonov and T. Kaufherr, “Quantum frames of reference,” Phys. Rev.
D, vol. 30, pp. 368–385, 1984.
[9] S. D. Bartlett, T. Rudolph, and R. W. Spekkens, “Reference frames, super-
selection rules, and quantum information,” Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 79, 555–
609, 2007.
[10] M. Atiyah, “Topological quantum ﬁeld theory,” Pub. Math. IH `ES, vol.
68, pp. 175–186, 1988.
[11] C. Fields and J. F. Glazebrook, and A. Marcian`o, “Sequential measure-
ments, topological quantum ﬁeld theories, and topological quantum neural
networks,” Fortschr. Phys., vol. 70, art. 2200104, 2022.
[12] A. Marcian`o, D. Chen, F. Fabrocini, C. Fields, E. Greco, N. Gresnigt, K.
Jinklub, M. Lulli, K. Terzidis, and E. Zappala, “Quantum neural networks
and topological quantum ﬁeld theories,” Neural Networks, vol. 153, pp.
164–178, 2022.
[13] A. Marcian`o, D. Chen, F. Fabrocini, C. Fields, M. Lulli,and E. Zap-
pala, “Deep neural networks as the semi-classical Limit of topologi-
cal quantum neural networks: The problem of generalisation,” Preprint
arXiv:2210.13741, 2022.
[14] X.-L. Qi, “Does gravity come from quantum information?” Nature Phys.,
vol. 14, pp. 984–987, 2018.
[15] J. D. Bekenstein, “Black holes and the second law,” Lett. Nuovo Cim.,
vol. 4, pp. 737–740, 1972.
[16] J. D. Bekenstein, “Black holes and entropy,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 7, pp.
2333–2346, 1973.
[17] S. W. Hawking, “Gravitational radiation from colliding black holes,”
Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 26, pp. 1344–1346, 1971.
[18] S. W. Hawking, “Black hole explosions?” Nature, vol. 248, pp. 30–31,
1974.
[19] L. Susskind, “The world as a hologram,” J. Math. Phys., vol. 36, pp.
6377–6396, 1995.
[20] R. Bousso, “The holographic principle,” Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 74, pp.
825–874, 2002.
[21] G, ’t Hooft, “Dimensional reduction in quantum gravity,” Preprint
arxiv.org:9310026[gr-qc], 1993.
[22] J. Maldacena, “The large-N limit of superconformal ﬁeld theories and
supergravity,” Int. J. Theor. Phys., vol. 38, pp. 1113–1133, 1999.
[23] S. Ryu and T. Takayanagi, “Holographic derivation of entanglement
entropy from AdS/CFT,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 96, art. 181602, 2006.
[24] A. Almheiri, X. Dong, and D. Harlow, “Bulk locality and quantum error
correction in AdS/CFT,” J. High Energy Phys., vol. 2015, art. 163, 2015.
[25] V. E. Hubeny and M. Rangamani, “Causal holographic information,” J.
High Energy Phys., vol. 2012, art. 114, 2012.
[26] M. Headrick, V. E. Hubeny, A. Lawrence, and M. Rangamani, “Causality
and holographic entanglement entropy,” J. High Energy Phys., vol. 2014,
art. 162, 2014.
[27] C. Fields, J. F. Glazebrook, and A. Marcian`o, “Communication protocols
and quantum error-correcting codes from the perspective of topological
quantum ﬁeld theory.” Preprint arxiv:2303.16461 [hep-th].
[28] B. Swingle, “Entanglement renormalization and holography,” Phys. Rev.
D, vol. 86, art. 065007, 2012.
[29] S. R. White, “Density matrix formulation for quantum renormalization
groups,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 69, pp. 2863–2866, 1992.
[30] F. Verstraete, V. Murg, and J. I. Cirac, “Matrix product states, projected
entangled pair states, and variational renormalization group methods for
quantum spin systems,” Adv. Phys., vol. 57, pp. 143–224, 2008.
[31] D. P. DiVincenzo, et al., “Entanglement of assistance,” in Quantum
Computing and Quantum Communications. Berlin, Springer, pp. 247–
257, 1999.
[32] G. Vidal, “Class of quantum many-body states that can be efﬁciently
simulated,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 101, art. 110501, 2008.
[33] F. Pastawski, B. Yoshida, D. Harlow, and J. Preskill, “Holographic
quantum error-correcting codes: Toy models for the bulk/boundary cor-
respondence,” J. High Energy Phys., vol. 2015, art. 149, 2015.
[34] Z. Yang, P. Hayden, and X.-L Qi, “Bidirectional holographic codes and
sub-AdS locality,” J. High Energy Phys., vol. 2016, art. 175, 2016.
[35] P. Hayden, et al., “Holographic duality from random tensor networks,”
J. High Energy Phys., vol. 2016, art. 9, 2016.
[36] M. Han and S. Huang, “Discrete gravity on random tensor network and
holographic R´enyi entropy,” J. High Energy Phys., vol. 2017, art. 148,
2017.
[37] N. Lashkari, M. B. McDermott, and M. Van Raamsdonk, “Gravitational
dynamics from entanglement ‘thermodynamics,”’ J. High Energy Phys.,
vol. 2014, art. 195, 2014.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Molecular, Biological, and Multi-Scale Communications . This is the author's version which has not been fully edited a
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TMBMC.2023.3272158
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on June 12,2023 at 15:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

FIELDS ET AL, CONTROL FLOW IN ACTIVE INFERENCE SYSTEMS, PART II
10
[38] B. Swingle and M. Van Raamsdonk, “Universality of gravity from
entanglement,” Preprint arxiv:1405.2933, 2014.
[39] S. H. Shenker and D. Stanford, “Black holes and the butterﬂy effect,”
J. High Energy Phys., vol. 2014, art. 67, 2014.
[40] S. Sachdev and J. Ye, “Gapless spin-ﬂuid ground state in a random
quantum Heisenberg magnet,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 70, pp 3339–3342,
1993.
[41] A.
Kitaev,
“A
simple
model
of
quantum
holography,”
Tech.
Rep.
at
http://online.kitp.
ucsb.edu/online/entangled15/kitaev/;
http://online.kitp.ucsb.edu/online/ entangled15/kitaev2/, 2015.
[42] J. Maldacena and D. Stanford, “Remarks on the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev
model,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 94, art. 106002, 2016.
[43] J. E. Smith and R. Nair, “The architecture of virtual machines,” IEEE
Computer, vol. 38, no.5, pp. 32–38, 2005.
[44] R. Or´us, “Tensor networks for complex quantum systems,” Nat. Rev.
Phys., vol. 1, pp. 538–550, 2019.
[45] L. M. Manevitz and M. Yousef, “One-class SVMs for document classi-
ﬁcation,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 2, pp. 139–154, 2002.
[46] B. Kosko, “Bidirectional associative memories,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man
Cybern., vol. 18, pp. 49–60, 1988.
[47] J. Baez, “Four-dimensional BF theory as a topological quantum ﬁeld
theory,” Lett. Math. Phys., vol. 38, pp. 129–143, 1996.
[48] C. Rovelli, Quantum Gravity. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University
Press, 2004.
[49] G. Parisi and Y.-S. Wu, “Perturbation theory without gauge ﬁxing,”
Scientia Sinica, vol. 24, pp. 483–496, 1981.
[50] M. Lulli, A. Marcian`o, and X. Shan, “Stochastic quantization of General
Relativity `a la Ricci ﬂow,” Preprint arXiv:2112.01490[gr-qc], 2021.
[51] A. Marcian`o, in preparation, 2023.
[52] R. Sengupta, S. Adhikary, I. Oseledets, and J. Biamonte, “Tensor
networks in machine learning,” Preprint arxiv:2207.02851, 2022.
[53] E. M. Stoudenmire, Talk at the International Center for Theoretical
Physics Trieste, August, 2018.
[54] E. M. Stoudenmire and D. J. Schwab, “Supervised learning with
quantum-inspired tensor networks,” Preprint arxiv:1605.05775, 2016.
[55] A. Novikof, M. Troﬁmov, and I. Oseledets, “Exponential machines,”
Preprint arxiv:1605.03795, 2017.
[56] I. Glasser, N. Pancotti, and J. I. Cirac, “From probabilistic graphical
models to generalized tensor networks for supervised learning,” Preprint
arxiv:1806.05964, 2018.
[57] Z. H. Han, J. Wang, H. Fan, L. Wang, and P. Zhang, “Unsupervised
generative omdeling using matrix product states,” Physical Review X,
vol. 8, art. 031012, 2018.
[58] J. Liu, S.-J.. Li, J. Zhang, and P. Zhang, “Tensor networks for unsuper-
vised machine learning,” Preprint arxiv:2106.12974, 2021.
[59] I. Convy and K. B. Whaley, “Interaction decompositions for tensor
network regression,” Preprint arxiv:2208.06029, 2022.
[60] M. C. Zweir and L. T. Chong, “Reaching biological timescales with
all-atom molecular dynamics simulations,” Curr. Opin. Pharmacol., vol.
10, pp. 745–752, 2010.
[61] G. Groenhof, “Introduction to QM/MM simulations,” Methods Mol.
Biol., vol. 924, pp. 43–66, 2013.
[62] C. Fields and M. Levin, “Metabolic limits on classical information
processing by biological cells,” BioSystems, vol. 209, art. 104513, 2021.
[63] C. M. Kerskens and D. L. P´erez, “Experimental indications of non-
classical brain functions,” J. Phys. Commun., vol. 6, art. 105001, 2022.
[64] D. Ledezma-Tejeida, E. Schastnaya, and U. Sauer, “Metabolism as a
signal generator in bacteria,” Curr. Opin. Syst. Biol., vol. 28, art. 100404,
2021.
[65] C. Fields, K. Friston, J. F. Glazebrook, M. Levin, and A. Marcian`o, “The
free energy principle induces neuromorphic development,” Neuromorph.
Comp. Engin., vol. 2, art. 042002, 2022.
[66] C. Fields, J. F. Glazebrook, and M. Levin, “Neurons as hierarchies of
quantum reference frames,” Biosystems, vol. 219, art. 104714, 2022.
[67] C. Fields and M. Levin, “Multiscale memory and bioelectric error
correction in the cytoplasm-cytoskeleton-membrane system ,” WIRES
Syst. Biol. Med., vol. 10, art. e1410, 2017.
[68] C. Fields and M. Levin, “Competency in navigating arbitrary spaces as
an invariant for analyzing cognition in diverse embodiments,” Entropy,
vol. 24, art. 819, 2022.
[69] J. Bain, “Spacetime as a quantum error-correcting code?” Stud. Hist.
Phil. Mod. Phys., vol. 71, pp. 26–36, 2020.
[70] J. I. Flombaum, B. J. Scholl, and L. R. Santos, “Spatiotemporal priority
as a fundamental principle of object persistence,” in The Origins of Object
Knowledge. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press, pp. 135–164, 2008.
[71] C. Fields, “Trajectory recognition as the basis for object individuation: A
functional model of object ﬁle instantiation and object-token encoding,”
Front. Psychol., vol. 2, art. 49, 2011.
[72] K. Niss, C. Gomez-Casado, J. X. Hjaltelin, T. Joeris, W. W. Agace, K.
G. Belling, and S. Brunak, “Complete topological mapping of a cellular
protein interactome reveals bow-tie motifs as ubiquitous connectors of
protein complexes,” Cell Rep., vol. 31, art. 107763, 2020.
[73] E. Carafoli and J. Krebs, “Why calcium? How clacium became the best
communicator,” J. Biol Chem, vol. 40, pp. 20849–20857, 2016.
[74] N. Polouliakh, R. Nock, F. Nielsen, and H. Kitano, “G-protein coupled
receptor siganling architecture of mammalian immune cells,” PLoS ONE,
vol. 4, art. e4189, 2009.
[75] T. Friedlander, A. E. Mayo, T. Tlusty, and U. Alon, “Evolution of bow-
tie architectures in biology,” PLOS Computational Biology, vol. 11, art.
e1004055, 2015.
[76] G. Boniolo. M. D’Agostino, M. PIazza, and G. Pulcini, “Molecular
biology meets logic: Context-senstivity in focus,” Found. Science, in
press, 2021, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10699-021-09789-y
[77] C. Fields, J. F. Glazebrook, and M. Levin, “Minimal physicalism as a
scale-free substrate for cognition and consciousness,” Neurosci. Cons.,
vol. 7, art. niab013, 2021.
[78] S. Kochen and E. P. Specker, “ The problem of hidden variables in
quantum mechanics,” J. Math. Mech., vol. 17, pp. 59–87, 1967.
[79] C. Fields and J. F. Glazebrook, “Information ﬂow in context-dependent
hierarchical Bayesian inference,” J. Expt. Theor. Artif. Intell., vol. 34, pp.
111–142, 2022.
[80] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “An introduction to variational autoen-
coders,” Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 307–392, 2019.
[81] S. N. Dean and S. A. Walper, “Variational autoenecoder for generation
of antimicrobial peptides,” ACS Omega, vol.5, pp. 20746–20754, 2020.
[82] V. H. Cervantes and E. N. Dzhafarov, “Snow Queen is evil and beautiful:
Experimental evidence for probabilistic contextuality in human choices,”
Decision, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 193–204, 2018.
[83] E. N. Dzhafarov and J. V. Kujala, “Contextuality-by-Default 2.0: Sys-
tems with binary random variables,” in Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 10106. Berlin, Springer, pp. 16–32, 2017.
[84] E. N. Dzharfarov and M. Kon, “On universality of classical probability
with contextually labeled random varaibles,” J. Math. Psychol., vol. 85,
pp. 17–24, 2018.
[85] D. Wang, M. Sadrzadeh, S. Abramsky, and V. H. Cervantes, “On the
quantum-like contextuality of ambiguous phrases,” in Proceedings of the
2021 Workshop on Semantic Spaces at the Intersection of NLP, Physics
and Cognitive Science, Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
42–52, 2021.
[86] S. Abramsky and A. Brandenburger, “The sheaf-theoretic structure of
non-locality and contextuality,” New J. Phys., vol. 13, art. 113036, 2011.
[87] S. Abramsky, R. S. Barbosa, and S. Mansﬁeld, “Contextual fraction as
a measure of contextuality,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 119, art. 050504, 2017.
[88] Editorial Focus, “A matter of context,” Nature Immunol., vol. 20, p. 769,
2019.
[89] H. Atlan and I. R. Cohen, “Immune information, self-organiztion and
meaning,” Int. Immunology, vol. 10, pp. 711–717, 1998.
[90] I. Basieva, A. Khrennikov, M. Ohya, and O. Yamato, “Quantum-
like interference effect in gene expression: Glucose-lactose destructive
interference,” Syst. Synth. Biol., vol. 5, pp. 59–68, 2011.
[91] A. Khrennikov, “Quantum-like modeling of cognition,” Front. Phys., vol.
3, art. 77, 2015.
[92] L. F. Barrett and W. K. Simmons, “Interoceptive predictions in the
brain,” Nat. Rev. Neurosci., vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 419–429, 2015.
[93] L. F. Barrett, K. S. Quigley, and P. Hamilton, “An active inference theory
of allostasis and interoception in depression,” Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond.
B, vol. 371, no. 1708, art. 20160011, 2016.
[94] L. F. Barrett, “The theory of constructed emotion: An active inference
account of interoception and categorization ,”Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci.,
vol. 12, pp. 1–23, 2017.
[95] R. C. Conant and W. R. Ashby, “Every good regulator of a system must
be a model of that system,” Int. J. Syst. Sci., vol. 1, pp. 89–97, 1970.
[96] A. W. Corcoran, G. Pezzulo, and J. Hohwy, “From allostatic agents to
counterfactual cognisers: Active inference, biological regulation, and the
origins of cognition,” Biol. Philos., vol. 35, no. 3, art. 32, 2020.
[97] J. Hohwy, The Predictive Mind. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press,
2013.
[98] J. Hohwy, “The self-evidencing brain,” Noˆus, vol. 50, no. 2, 259–285,
2016.
[99] I. R. Kleckner, et al., “Evidence for a large-scale brain system supporting
allostasis and interoception in humans,” Nature Human Behav., vol. 11,
art. 0069, 2017.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Molecular, Biological, and Multi-Scale Communications . This is the author's version which has not been fully edited a
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TMBMC.2023.3272158
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on June 12,2023 at 15:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

FIELDS ET AL, CONTROL FLOW IN ACTIVE INFERENCE SYSTEMS, PART II
11
[100] A. K. Seth, K. Suzuki, and H. D. Critchley, “An interoceptive predictive
coding model of conscious presence,” Front. Psychol., vol. 2, art. 395,
2012.
[101] A. K. Seth, “Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self,”
Trends Cogn. Sci., vol. 17, pp. 565–573, 2013.
[102] A. K. Seth and K. J. Friston, “Active interoceptive inference and the
emotional brain,” Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B, vol. 371, art. 20160007, 2016.
[103] M.
Levin,
“Technological
approach
to
mind
everywhere:
An
experimentally-grounded framework for understanding diverse bodies and
minds,” Front. Syst. Neurosci., vol. 16, art. 768201, 2022.
[104] G. Pezzulo and M. Levin, “Top-down models in biology: explanation
and control of complex living systems above the molecular level,” J. R.
Soc. Interface, vol. 13, art. 20160555, 2016.
[105] K. D. Birnbaum and A, S´anchez Alvarado, “Slicing across kingdoms:
Regeneration in plants and animals,” Cell, vol. 132, pp. 697–710, 2008.
[106] M. Levin, “Collective intelligence of morphogenesis as a teleonomic
process,” Preprint PsyArXiv hqc9b, 2022.
[107] S. Biswas, W. Clawson, and M. Levin, “Learning in transcriptional
network models: Computational discovery of pathway-level memory and
effective interventions,” Int. J. Molec. Sci., vol. 24, art. 285, 2023.
[108] M. Emmons-Bell, F. Durant, A. Tung, et al., “Regenerative adaptation
to electrochemical perturbation in planaria: A molecular analysis of
physiological plasticity,” iScience, vol. 22, pp. 147–165, 2019.
[109] W. Clawson and M. Levin, “Endless forms most beautiful 2.0: Teleon-
omy and the bioengineering of chimaeric and synthetic organisms,” Biol.
J. Linnean Soc., vol. 2022, art. blac073, 2022.
VI. BIOGRAPHY SECTION
Chris Fields (ﬁeldsres@gmail.com) is an information theorist. He has worked
in AI applications, neuromorphic computing, and the bioinformatics. He
currently focuses on the interface between quantum information, computing,
and the life sciences.
Filippo Fabrocini is Professor in the College of Design & Innovation at
Tongji University, Director of the Tongji Sustainable AI Lab, and among the
founders of the Tongji AI Art Lab. Filippo Fabrocini is also afﬁliated with
the Italy National Research Council (Institute for Computing Applications).
His main areas of interest are Machine Learning, Quantum Neural Networks,
Ethical AI, and AI Art.
Karl Friston (k.friston@ucl.ac.uk) is a theoretical neuroscientist and authority
on brain imaging. He invented statistical parametric mapping, voxel-based
morphometry, and dynamic causal modelling. He is the architect of the free
energy principle and active inference. He was elected a fellow of the Royal
Society in 2006 and received the Weldon Memorial Prize and Medal in 2013.
James F. Glazebrook (jfglazebrook@eiu.edu) is Professor Emeritus of
Eastern Illinois University, and member of the Adjunct Faculty (Mathematics)
of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA. Current research
interests include mathematical methods in the cognitive sciences involving
scale-free architectures, information theory from the categorical perspective
as applied to contextuality and active inference. Pastimes include music,
literature, theatre, and travelling.
Hananel Hazan (Hananel.Hazan@tufts.edu) is a research scientist at the
Allen Discovery Center at Tufts University, where he focuses on biologically-
inspired computing and neurocomputation. With a strong background in
machine learning and an interdisciplinary approach to his research, Dr. Hazan
explores the computational properties of both neuronal and non-neuronal
systems to advance our understanding of biological systems and improve ma-
chine learning algorithms. His research interests include biologically-inspired
computing, neuronal and non-neuronal computation, emergent behavior from
complex systems, and noisy reinforcement learning.
Michael Levin (michael.levin@tufts.edu) is Distinguished Professor and
Vannevar Bush Chair at the Department of Biology at Tufts University,
director of the Allen Discovery Center at Tufts, and an Associate Faculty
at the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard. His
lab works at the intersection of developmental biology, computer science, and
behavioral science to understand cognition in diverse evolved, designed, and
hybrid complex systems.
Antonino Marcian`o is currently tenured professor of physics at Fudan
University and member of the Italian Institute of Nuclear Physics (INFN). He
currently focuses on a variety of topics in theoretical physics, ranging mainly
from quantum ﬁeld theories and theories of gravity, to their neighboring
research areas as well as analogous applications to solid state physics, artiﬁcial
intelligence and quantum computation.
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Molecular, Biological, and Multi-Scale Communications . This is the author's version which has not been fully edited a
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TMBMC.2023.3272158
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on June 12,2023 at 15:18:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

