Uncorrected author proof---not final version!
The Localization Hypothesis
and Machines
Dominique Chu*
Computing Laboratory
University of Kent
Canterbury CT2 7NF
United Kingdom
D.F.Chu@kent.ac.uk
Weng Kin Ho
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
Birmingham B15 2TT
United Kingdom
W.K.Ho@cs.bham.ac.uk
Keywords
(M,R) systems, Robert Rosen, simulability,
analytic models, synthetic models
Abstract
In a recent article in Artificial Life, Chu and Ho suggested
that Rosen’s central result about the simulability of living systems
might be flawed. This argument was later declared ‘‘null and void’’ by
Louie. In this article the validity of Louie’s objections are examined.
1
Introduction
The field of artificial life is very diverse, with contributions ranging from systems biology to theo-
retical research into the origin of life to robotics. Yet although artificial life research predominantly
uses methodologies from computer science and mathematics, there is also a strong philosophical
component in the artificial life research agenda.
This philosophical aspect of the field has been very much connected to the attempt to create
living systems in silico. Such an attempt leads to a fundamental question: Given a specific com-
putational system, how do we decide whether or not it is alive? Or alternatively, how do we dis-
tinguish between systems that behave like living systems (‘‘lifelike systems’’) and systems that are
truly alive?
As it turned out, this question is not an easy one to answer. Despite many attempts, nobody
has yet been able to identify a single set of criteria to demarcate living systems from nonliving
systems.
The attempt to create life in silico has so far not been a great success. No examples of com-
putational systems that would, at least at an intuitive level, satisfy even a significant minority of
researchers as an example of life have been found. This might be taken as an indication that there is
something about life that cannot be captured in computational models. Hence there are two big
questions that drive the philosophical quest of artificial life.
 What is life?
 Is artificial life (in the sense of a computational system being alive) possible?
n 2007 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Artificial Life 13: 1–4 (2007)
* Corresponding author.

Uncorrected author proof---not final version!
2
If Living Systems Must Have Uncomputable Models, Then Artificial Life
is Impossible
The work of one scientist claims to give definite answers to both of those questions. In his book Life
Itself [3] Robert Rosen gives a ‘‘comprehensive inquiry into the nature, origin and fabrication of life.’’
The central results of this book are (i) a demarcation criterion for living systems and (ii) a proof that
whatever qualifies as a living system must have models that are not ‘‘simulable.’’ (Note that
‘‘simulable’’ sensu Rosen might not directly map to everybody’s intuitive understanding of the word,
yet it is certainly true that according to Rosen, all computer programs are simulable and have
simulable models.) Therefore a central result of Rosen’s work is that artificial life, in the above sense,
is impossible.
Louie [2] criticized a similar statement we made in [1]:
Let me reiterate the fact that Rosen did not say that artificial life is impossible, only that life
is noncomputable. [2, Section 5]
Whether or not Louie is correct depends on what one thinks encompasses artificial life. Rosen’s
results are relevant for computational artificial life, but probably not for wet artificial life. Given that the
field of artificial life is predominantly (if not exclusively) concerned with computational artificial life
and given the context of our statement in [1], we wrongly assumed that it was clear that we only
referred to computational artificial life.
We would now like to respond to Louie’s more substantial objections against the core contributions
of [1], namely our argument that Rosen’s central results might in fact not be relevant at all.
3
Is Rosen Correct?
In order to arrive at his central result, Rosen constructed a minimal relational model of a cell; this
model is usually referred to as the (M,R) system (for metabolism-repair system). ‘‘Relational’’ essentially
means that the model consists of blocks and arrows connecting the blocks. The justification for
assuming that the model is indeed a model of a cell is that it has a certain closure property (‘‘closed
with respect to efficient causation’’). Rosen’s central argument consists then in showing that systems
that have this closure property cannot be fully captured by computational models.
The task we undertook in [1] was both to clarify Rosen’s central proof and to evaluate its validity;
more specifically, we indicated in what sense analytic and synthetic models form categories, and
secondly we reconstructed and assessed Rosen’s proof while avoiding jargon. This critical assessment
uncovered a potential flaw of Rosen’s argument but was later declared ‘‘null and void’’ by Louie [2].
We will not repeat the details of our argument from [1] here, but only summarize its overall
structure; for details the reader is referred to [1, Section 5].
1. Assumption: Figure 1 (which is the same as Figure 6 in [1] and Figure 9D.1 in [3]) is a machine.
Figure 1. A relational model of a machine. See also Figure 6 in [1].
Q1
Artificial Life Volume 13, Number 3
2
The Localization Hypothesis and Machines
D. Chu and W. K. Ho

Uncorrected author proof---not final version!
2. Assumption: In machines a function (which would correspond to the dotted arrow in Figure 1)
is located in an identifiable part of the machine (the localization hypothesis; see [3, Section 8G]).
3. All machines are mechanisms, and for all mechanisms it is the case that all models are simulable.
4. All models simulable implies analytic models = synthetic models:
5. If analytic models = synthetic models, then the system is state-space based [1, Section
2.4.1].
6. If Figure 1 represents a state-space based system, then it is not compatible with the localization
hypothesis.
7. Conclusion: Machines cannot both imply the localization hypothesis and be state-space based.
The conclusion was later declared ‘‘null and void’’ by Louie [2] on the following grounds:
1. The argument in [1] constructs an example of a system that contradicts Rosen’s conclusion. Yet
Rosen’s conclusion was mathematically proven; hence the whole argument is ‘‘null and void.’’
2. The definition of mechanisms in [1] (mechanisms as the class of systems where analytic
models = synthetic models) is wrong; hence any conclusions drawn from this definition
must be ‘‘null and void.’’
3. The discussion by Chu and Ho was based on an incorrect representation of closed systems (i.e.,
Figure 7 in [1] is wrong).
Let us start with the third point. First of all, even if Figure 7 in [1] were indeed incorrectly
reproduced, it would not make any difference to the discussion or conclusion in [1], because the
specifics of the figure are never used. Secondly, Louie’s criticism is in fact incorrect. The reader can
easily convince herself that Figure 7 in [1] is formally identical to Figure 9F.3 in [3].
As to the first point raised by Louie: We think that it represents a misunderstanding of the
argument. First of all, we disagree with the strong statement that there cannot be any counter-
examples to mathematical proven facts. A counterexample to a mathematical theorem (if correct) is
just the same as a proof that the theorem is incorrect. Hence, if a theorem is believed to be proven,
but a counterexample exists, then the proof must be wrong. Hence there is no reason to dismiss
constructions out of hand on the ground that they contradict a known theorem.
In any case, alleging the use of counterexamples to disprove Rosen’s central theorem amounts to
a misunderstanding of our argument in [1]. Instead of constructing a counterexample to Rosen’s
central result, we used one of Rosen’s own examples of a machine (in fact, the simplest relational
model of a machine) and investigated its properties. Admittedly, our argument is not to be
considered a formal mathematical proof, but it is certainly not affected by Louie’s first objection.
As to the second objection: While Louie might be correct in pointing out that the definition of
a mechanisms in [1] was inaccurate, that inaccuracy would be inconsequential for the argument
we made. Let us explain why: Louie complained that we defined a mechanism as equivalent
to analytic models = synthetic models, while in fact only the implication mechanism Z
analytic models = synthetic models is true. Let us, for the sake of the argument, assume he
is correct in this criticism. While pointing out the alleged inaccuracy, Louie also grants us the same
privilege as Humpty Dumpty claims for himself, namely, that we can choose a word to mean
whatever we like, ‘‘neither more nor less.’’ We accept this privilege but, in order not to confuse the
reader, we will distinguish between R mechanisms (mechanisms defined according to Rosen, i.e.,
only the implication holds) and CH mechanisms (equivalence holds).
In order to understand the difference between R mechanisms and CH mechanisms in relation
to the argument in question in [1], it is useful to review once again the basic chain of implications
Artificial Life Volume 13, Number 3
3
The Localization Hypothesis

Uncorrected author proof---not final version!
on which our objection to Rosen relies. This chain is as follows: machine Z mechanism Z
synthetic = analytic Z state  space based Z Ilocalization hypothesis. Another im-
plication is used, namely: machine Z localization hypothesis.
The reader will immediately see that at no point in the above chain does the implication
analytic = synthetic Z mechanism appear. Hence if the above argument is correct for CH
mechanisms, it is so for R mechanisms. Thus, by invoking the Humpty Dumpty privilege, we
conclude that Louie’s objection is immaterial for our argument in [1].
4
Conclusion
We do not believe that Louie’s objections per se force an alteration of our conclusions in [1]. This—
of course—does not mean that [1] is beyond all doubt. To the contrary, our claim in [1] has never
been to provide a definite argument about Rosen’s work, but rather to attempt to present it free from
jargon, increase its accessibility, and provide a critical assessment of the central theorem.
We still believe that Rosen’s work is of high potential significance for our understanding of life
and specifically the relation between life and algorithmic systems. Yet, in order to have any real
impact on the way we think about life, Rosen’s arguments need to be reevaluated and most of all
restated in a language that avoids confusing and unjustified misnomers (such as metabolism and
repair for what really are just arrows). Our contribution in [1] was meant as a first step in this
direction. Future work will need to address among other things the following questions:
 Which biological systems are clear realizations of (M,R) systems in biology?
 Which aspects of those systems cannot be captured by computational simulation?
 What exactly leads to a failure of the localization hypothesis in organisms?
 How do familiar concepts, such as emergence, relate to Rosen’s observations?
References
1. Chu, D., & Ho, W. (2006). A category theoretical argument against the possibility of artificial life.
Artificial Life, 12(4), 117–135.
2. Louie, A. (2006). A living system must have noncomputable models. Artificial Life, this issue.
3. Rosen, R. (1991). Life itself. New York: Columbia University Press.
Artificial Life Volume 13, Number 3
4
The Localization Hypothesis and Machines
D. Chu and W. K. Ho

Uncorrected author proof---not final version!
AUTHOR QUERY
AUTHOR PLEASE ANSWER QUERY
During the preparation of your manuscript, the question listed below arose.
Kindly supply the necessary information.
1. Please check if the proposed running head is okay.
END OF QUERY

