 
1 
 
Cosmic Resonance Theory 
 
 
The concept of ganying (literally "stimulus-response," and hereafter referred 
to as "cosmic resonance"), is an ancient and unique element of Chinese cosmology 
and natural philosophy.  In its barest essence cosmic resonance is a theory of 
simultaneous, non-linear causality.  It posits that events taking place at the same 
time, but separated in space, may exert a subtle effect on one another.  For 
example, a chess game going on in a house and a softball game being played at 
the same time in the street just outside might be portrayed as influencing one 
another's outcome (e.g. the team in black uniforms scoring a run whenever a white 
piece was taken), even though none of the respective participants had any 
knowledge of or contact with one another.  It would not matter if we put our chess 
players in a sound proof, windowless room or removed the baseball game to the 
next county, state, or continent, since such contingencies have no effect on the 
operation of cosmic resonance.  To a believer, there is nothing mysterious about 
these effects, although they occur invisibly; cosmic resonance explains them as 
fundamental workings of the universe.  
 
 
Basic Cosmic Resonance Theory 
 
 
A theory of cosmic resonance was first explicitly articulated in a work of 
Chinese philosophy in the third century B.C.  The earliest example we have of 
such a work is the Lüshi chunqiu, an encyclopedic text commissioned by the prime 
minister of the state of Qin (the kingdom that would eventually unify China in 221 
B.C. and found a dynasty of the same name) and published in 240 B.C.  Following 
a century after the Lüshi chunqiu and closely related to it in content is the 
Huainanzi. Both texts have been fully translated into English.1 The Huainanzi was 
another encyclopedic work commissioned by the imperial prince Liu An (179-122 
                                                
1 For the Lüshi chunqiu see: John Knoblock and Jeffrey Riegel, trs. The Annals of Lü Buwei. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 2000. For the Huainanzi see: John Major, Sarah Queen, Andrew Meyer, and 
Harold Roth, trs. The Huainanzi: A Guide to the Theory and Practice of Government in Early Han China. 
New York: Columbia University Press, 2010. 

 
2 
B.C.) and presented to the court of the Han Emperor Wudi (r. 141-87 B.C.) in 139 
B.C.  One significant historical development in the time elapsed between the 
compilation of the two texts is that the concept of cosmic resonance had grown in 
status from a novel but intriguing idea to become the central and distinctive 
hallmark of Han dynasty (206 B.C.--220 A.D.) thought.  By the time of the writing 
of the Huainanzi, the validity of cosmic resonance theory had been accepted by 
most major intellectuals of the day and was featured centrally in the works of writers 
across the philosophical and political spectrum.  No challenge to the universal 
acceptance of cosmic resonance would be registered until the writings of the 
philosopher Wang Chong (A.D. 27-97), and even his work was not well received 
until more than a ce ntury after his death.  I will quote from the Lüshi chunqiu and 
Huainanzi interchangeably, as both share a single approach to the concept of 
cosmic resonance and together provide a full picture of the theory as it was first 
articulated. 
 
A succinct description of the manifestations of cosmic resonance is 
contained in Chapter Nine of the Lüshi chunqiu: 
 
When the magnet seeks iron, something pulls it, when trees planted close 
together [lean] apart, something pushes them.  When the sage faces south 
and stands with a mind bent on loving and benefiting the people, and before 
his orders have been issued, the [people of the world] all crane their necks 
and stand on tip-toe; it is because he has communicated with the people via 
the Vital Essence.  If a criminal is about to harm a person, that person will 
also be this way.  If now an attacker sharpens his weapons, wears lewd 
clothes, and eats fine food, in anticipation of the day [he will attack], those he 
will attack will feel uneasy.  It is not that someone has told them; the "Spirit" 
has reported to them in advance.  If a person is in Qin, and someone he 
loves dies in Qi, his feelings will be upset, there has been a coming and 
going of Vital Essence.2 
                                                
2 Lüshi chunqiu 9.5/46/19-24. (ICS Concordance Series, D.C. Lau and Chen Fong Ching, eds. Hong Kong: 
Commercial Press, 1994).  

 
3 
 
 
This passage lays out the most basic principles of cosmic resonance.  The 
examples presented are on a par with the hypothetical chess game-baseball game 
interaction described above.  Events and things separated in space, with no 
observable linear causal connection to one another, are assumed to have an 
invisible, instantaneous influence on one another.  We have since developed 
scientific explanations for the first two examples (the magnetism of the iron and the 
tendency of plants to grow towards sunlight) that do not contradict the principle of 
linear causality.  Yet one can appreciate how, in the absence of modern science, 
these phenomena would be seized upon as examples of cosmic resonance.  The 
fact that both of these processes are readily observable in nature demonstrates an 
aspect of cosmic resonance theory as it was understood by its advocates: it was 
not conceived of as a magical or supernatural force, but as a mundane aspect of 
the natural movements of the universe. 
 
 
The basic mechanics of cosmic resonance are outlined at the conclusion of 
the passage.  Speaking of the examples of what we would call ESP, the author 
qualifies that "it is not that someone has told them, the 'Spirit' has reported to them 
in advance," and "there has been a coming and going of Vital Essence."  The 
meaning of these statements is at first glance opaque.  What does the author 
intend by contrasting being "told" by someone with receiving an advance report 
from "the Spirit?"  Though seemingly obscure, these phrases are essential to 
understanding the mechanism at the heart of cosmic resonance theory. 
 
 
"Vital Essence," mentioned twice above, is a translation of the Chinese term 
jing 精.  Vital Essence is the most highly refined form of qi 氣, the primordial 
substance (literally "breath" or "air") which constitutes all phenomena in the 
universe.  In various states of coarseness or refinement, qi composes all objects in 
the world and fills all the spaces between them.  Everything was assumed to be qi 
in some form, from eminently tangible objects like rocks and logs to more rarefied 
phenomena like light and heat.  In its coarser forms, qi coalesces to form our flesh, 

 
4 
blood, and bones.  As Vital Essence, it is the vitalizing energy that suffuses and 
animates our bodies (thus separating us from corpses and inanimate objects).3 
 
 
The term "Vital Essence" is intimately related to another term appearing in 
the above passage:  "Spirit."  Spirit is the English equivalent of shen 神, a 
Chinese word with a long history and broad range of meaning.  In some contexts, 
Spirit does literally refer to a spirit, god, or ghost.  With reference to the individual 
human mind and physiology, however, Spirit denotes the entity within the body that 
is responsible for consciousness.  According to the understanding of the ancient 
Chinese, this entity was (like the body that it animated) also made of qi, yet in its 
most highly refined form--the Vital Essence.  The key to understanding cosmic 
resonance was its correlation with both Vital Essence and consciousness. 
 
 
Our thoughts, feelings, and sense-perceptions are conceived of as 
movements of the Vital Essence, which constitutes the Spirit, in response to events 
we encounter in the world.  The infinitely sensitive responsiveness and seemingly 
instantaneous activation of our thoughts and feelings are attributed to the native 
properties of the Vital Essence.  Cosmic resonance, like consciousness, is an 
emergent phenomenon resulting from the dynamic properties of qi. 
 
 
The resonance which transpires between objects across space is a 
movement of qi analogous to that which takes place within our mind: it is "a coming 
and going of Vital Essence."  The qi or Vital Essence which fills all space conducts 
sympathetic vibrations between objects.  The aptness of this image of 
"sympathetic vibrations" is illustrated by an experimentally verifiable example that 
cosmic resonance theorists advanced in support of their ideas:   
 
                                                
3 Vital Essence is not limited to humanity.  Human vitality and consciousness are merely two of the more 
important consequences of its activities.  Vital Essence, the most rarefied and quintessential form of qi, 
was thought to pervade the universe, occasionally coalescing within objects and giving rise to marvelous 
properties.  The vitality of animals was also attributed to Vital Essence, as was the growth of plants and 
trees and the luster of jade.  See Lüshi chunqiu 3.2/13/3-5。. 

 
5 
Now when a person who tunes a se 
 
Plays [the note] gong, [another] gong string responds; 
 
When he plucks a jue [string], [another] jue responds.4 
 
Musical resonance of this type was cited time and again as the prototypical 
example of cosmic resonance, and this image of two lute strings attuned to one 
another, vibrating in sympathy, is central to all models of cosmic resonance theory.  
The speed of the interaction between strings (the speed of sound--too fast for the 
human ear to notice a significant time-lapse) confirmed ancient theorists' 
assumptions about cosmic resonance.  Because its medium was the Vital 
Essence, the same quintessential qi which constituted our Spirit and thoughts, 
cosmic resonance was assumed to transpire at the speed of thought (in other 
words, to require no time whatsoever). 
 
 
The word "Spirit" (shen) was often used adjectivally to describe just this 
aspect of cosmic resonance:  "Spirit-like," it could transverse any expanse of 
space in the time it took a thought to arise in the mind.  This explains the 
seemingly puzzling contrast noted above, between being "told" by someone and 
reported to by the Spirit.  The author intends us to understand the "report" of the 
Spirit to be an instance of cosmic resonance.  The Spirit, being itself made of 
quintessential qi, receives and responds to vibrations arising from other objects or 
people and carried by the Vital Essence.  It is important to note that within this 
model the human mind (denoted by the Spirit) is not conceived of as transcending 
the physical world, but rather is composed of the same "psycho-physical stuff" (that 
is, qi) as the rest of the universe.  Human consciousness is thus implicit in and 
susceptible to the same processes of cosmic resonance that affect trees, iron, 
magnets, and lute strings.  This is exemplified by the wordless communication that 
passes between a thief and his intended victim and a sage ruler and his grateful 
subjects. 
                                                
4 Major, et. al., page 220. Huainanzi 6/51/18 (ICS Concordance Series, D.C. Lau and Chen Fong Ching, 
eds. Hong Kong: Commercial Press, 1992). 

 
6 
 
 
Yin-yang and Five Phases Cosmology:  The Rules of the Dance 
 
 
We have noted the most essential aspects of cosmic resonance theory as it 
was articulated by its earliest advocates in the second and third centuries B.C.E.  
In order to develop practical applications for the theory, early Chinese philosophers 
articulated a larger systematic context in which the forces of cosmic resonance 
operated.  The Huainanzi describes the first building-block of this larger context: 
 
That things in their [various] categories are mutually responsive is 
[something] dark, mysterious, deep and subtle. 
 
Knowledge is not capable of assessing it; 
 
argument is not capable of explaining it. 
Thus,  
 
when the east wind arrives, win turns clear and overflows [its 
vessels]; 
 
when silkworms secrete fragmented silk, the shang string [of 
a stringed instrument] snaps. 
Something has stimulated them. 
 
When a picture is traced out with the ashes of reeds, the 
moon’shalo has a [corresponding] gap. 
 
When the leviathan dies, comets appear. 
Something has moved them. 
  Thus, when a sage occupies the throne, he embraces the Way 
and does not speak, and his nurturance reaches the myriad people. 
But when ruler and ministers [harbor] distrustin their hearts, back-
to-back arcs appear in the sky. The mutual responsesof qi are 
subtle indeed! 
Thus, 
  
mountain clouds are like grassy hummocks; 
 
river clouds are like fish scales; 
 
dryland clouds are like smoky fire; 
 
cataract clouds are like billowing water. 

 
7 
All resemble their forms and evoke responses according to their 
classes.5 
 
   
It is difficult to discern whether the ironic tone of this passage is intentional or 
not.  The authors begin by declaring that cosmic resonance is beyond the capacity 
of either knowledge or language, and then proceed to articulate a general principle 
whereby it can be understood.  This principle comes at the end, after the long list 
of examples:  "All resemble their forms and evoke responses according to their 
classes."  The operations of cosmic resonance are not random, they are 
rule-based.  They occur in accord with certain distinctive affinities that exist 
between objects, and there are criteria ("shapes" and "categories") according to 
which these affinities can be observed and identified. 
 
 
We have already seen this principle at work in the most general sense, 
among the examples of cosmic resonance provided in the passages quoted thus 
far.  Human relationships are the most obvious form of affinity between "objects" 
consistently acknowledged as significant by cosmic resonance theorists.  It is for 
this reason that the death of a loved one far away produces cosmic resonance, as 
does the concern of a virtuous ruler for his subjects.  "Shape" is another type of 
obvious affinity guiding cosmic resonance, as in the case of the moon traced in 
ashes and the image of the moon in the sky.  The notion of "category," however, 
suggests a more systematic method of determining sympathetic links between 
objects that would not be otherwise obvious.  The Lüshi chunqiu and Huainanzi 
do, in fact, describe just such a system of categories--those of yin and yang and the 
five phases of qi. 
 
 
Yin and yang are two concepts with which English-language readers have 
become generally familiar.  In general, they refer to the two opposed and 
complementary forces that pervade the cosmos and that give rise to the myriad 
bipolar oppositions in the world:  soft and hard, dark and bright, male and female, 
                                                
5 Major, et. al., pages 216-217; Huainanzi 6/50/14-17. 

 
8 
etc.  In the technical vocabulary of cosmic resonance theory, yin and yang 
represent two states or polarities of qi, one passive and yielding, the other active 
and dynamic.  Qi was conceived of as constantly in dynamic flux between these 
polar extremes.  Any body of qi normally consisted of some in the yin-state and 
some in the yang-state.  Ideally the amounts of qi in both states should be 
balanced.  Usually one state predominated over the other.  Only very rarely and 
for brief duration would anything consist of either pure yin or pure yang. 
 
 
Beyond yin and yang, qi can be classed into five "phases" (wu xing) or 
modes into which it coalesces to form the building blocks of everyday matter.  The 
five phases are fire, water, earth, metal, and wood.  They were thought to be 
locked into a dynamic cycle analogous to the fluctuation between the poles of yin 
and yang.  This was called the "succession cycle of the five phases", within which 
each prevailing phase emerged from the decay and destruction of the phase 
preceding it.  Fire succeeded to Wood, Earth succeeded to Fire, Metal succeeded 
to Earth, and Water succeeded to Metal.  These seven--yin, yang, fire, water, 
earth, metal, and wood--are thus the basic categories into which all the phenomena 
in the universe may be classified.  Two things that share the same category (for 
example: two items which are composed primarily of metal qi) are considered to be 
sympathetically linked within the field of cosmic resonance. 
 
 
The phenomenon to which these various categories were most often 
correlated was time.  Any block of time could be analyzed into segments 
corresponding either to yin and yang or the five phases of qi.  The easiest 
illustrative example is the calendar year.  With respect to yin and yang, the year is 
divided into segments marked by the solstices and equinoxes.  The winter solstice 
is the point of fullest yin, when yang has just been reborn in the frozen land.  From 
this point onward, yin begins to decline and yang to increase.  At the spring 
equinox, yin and yang are in perfect balance.  The process continues until the 
summer solstice, when yang is at its highest point and yin at its nadir.  Thereafter 

 
9 
yang declines and yin increases, continuing until the winter solstice when the cycle 
begins again. 
 
 
A similar cycle transpires over the calendar year with respect to the five 
phases.  In the first month of the year (which usually begins some time in the solar 
month of February), the power of Wood is prevalent.  This continues until the 
fourth month, when Fire succeeds Wood.  The sixth month is ruled by Earth.  The 
seventh, eighth, and ninth months are ruled by Metal.  The tenth, eleventh, and 
twelfth months are ruled by Water. 
 
 
Not only periods of time but all other phenomena--sense perceptions, colors, 
musical notes, heavenly bodies, human artifacts--were susceptible to categorization 
within the system of yin and yang and the five phases of qi.  One hallmark shared 
by both the Lüshi chunqiu and the Huainanzi (which also found its way into the 
Confucian classical text, the Book of Rites) is a treatise analyzing the calendar year 
into its five-phase periods and prescribing which items, tasks, colors and modes of 
dress, and ritual observance were categorically appropriate to each. 
 
 
In describing the rules appropriate to the first month of the calendar year, the 
Huainanzi informs us: 
 
The fullness of Potency is in Wood.  Its beasts are [those of the] scaly 
[class].  Its [pentatonic] note is jue.  The pitch pipe [of the first month] is 
Great Budding.  The number [of spring] is eight.  Its flavor is sour.  Its 
smell is rank.  Its sacrifices are made to the door-god.  From the body of 
the sacrificial victim, the spleen is offered first.   
 
The east wind dispels the cold.  Hibernating creatures begin to stir 
and revive.  Fish rise and [rub their] backs [against] the ice.  Otters 
sacrifice fish.  Look for the geese [to return] north.  The Son of Heaven 
wears blue-green clothing.  He mounts [a carriage drawn by] azure 

 
10 
dragon [horses].  He wears azure jade [pendants] and flies a blue-green 
banner.6 
 
 
 
The prime category established at the beginning of the passage is the power 
of Wood (the prevailing phase of qi), from which all of the succeeding categories 
and rules follow.  For example:  the anatomy was analyzed into five "orbs" or 
systems, each one centered on a specific organ that was in turn associated with 
one of the five phases of qi.  The spleen was the focal organ of the orb correlated 
with Wood, thus in the first month the spleen is the first organ offered from a 
sacrificial victim.  In like fashion, because blue-green is the one of the five colors 
associated with Wood, the emperor wears blue-green clothing and uses blue-green 
equipment. 
 
 
The justification and operative principle of this entire complex of correlations 
and categorizations is the theory of cosmic resonance.  By following the rules of 
resonant affinity between objects, the ruler as pictured in the "Treatise on Seasonal 
Rules" brings about harmony within his kingdom by sending positive resonant 
vibrations out into the cosmos.  This point is made explicitly within the text of the 
Treatise itself, although it is made in negative, alarmist terms.  At the end of the list 
of rules and regulations for each month, the Huainanzi includes a warning of what 
will transpire if the rules are broken: 
 
If during the first month of spring the ordinances of summer were carried 
out, then there would be unseasonable winds and rain; plants and trees 
would wither early, and there would be fear in the state.  If the ordinances 
of autumn were carried out, the people would suffer epidemics; violent 
winds and torrential rains would arrive at the same time; and thorns, 
weeds, briars and overgrowth would spring up together.  If the 
ordinances of winter were carried out, floods would create ruin; and there 
                                                
6 Major, et. al, pages 182-183; Huainanzi 5/39/3-5. 

 
11 
would be rain frost and great hailstones. The first-sown seeds would not 
sprout.7  
 
 
These negative consequences, like the positive benefits that accrue from 
following the rules, are the result of cosmic resonance.  Within the universe 
described in these early texts, all things, people, and events are interconnected by 
a web of resonant affinities.  Every action has consequences surpassing its visible, 
linear effects in the here and now.  No one thing may remain isolated--everything 
constantly exchanges resonant influences with the situation unfolding around it. 
 
 
The finer details of the elaborate system articulated in the Lüshi chunqiu and 
the Huainanzi declined in influence over time.  Few rulers after the Han attempted 
to model their court observances entirely upon the "Treatise on the Seasonal 
Rules."  However, aspects of yin-yang and five phases cosmology continued to be 
influential and remain so to this day.  Most importantly, the basic idea of a 
resonant cosmos never ceased to be persuasive and compelling to Chinese 
intellectuals, and its associated practices continue to be important in popular 
activity. 
 
 
 
Andrew Meyer 
ameyer@brooklyn.cuny.edu 
                                                
7 Major, et. al., page 183; Huainanzi 5/39/13-14. 

