Bassham  I  Irwin  I  Nardone  I  Wallace
Critical Thinking
A student's Introduction
fourth EDItION

 CRITICAL THINKING 
 A STUDENT’S INTRODUCTION 
 FOURTH EDITION 
 Gregory  Bassham 
 William  Irwin 
 Henry  Nardone 
 James  M.  Wallace 
 King’s College  
TM

 Published by McGraw-Hill, an imprint of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., 1221 Avenue of the Americas, 
New York, NY 10020. Copyright © 2011, 2008, 2005, 2002. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior 
written consent of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., including, but not limited to, in any network or other elec-
tronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning. 
 This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOC/DOC 0 
 ISBN: 978-0-07-340743-2 
 MHID: 0-07-340743-7  
 Vice President, Editorial:  Michael  Ryan 
 Director, Editorial:  Beth  Mejia 
 Sponsoring Editor:  Mark  Georgiev 
 Marketing Manager:  Pam  Cooper 
 Managing Editor:  Nicole  Bridge 
Developmental Editor:  Phil  Butcher 
 Project Manager:  Lindsay  Burt 
 Manuscript Editor:  Maura  P. Brown 
 Design Manager:  Margarite  Reynolds 
 Cover Designer:  Laurie  Entringer 
 Production Supervisor:  Louis  Swaim 
 Composition:  11/12.5 Bembo by MPS Limited, A Macmillan Company 
 Printing:  45# New Era Matte, R. R. Donnelley & Sons 
 Cover Image:  © Brand X/JupiterImages 
 Credits: The credits section for this book begins on page C-1 and is considered an extension of the copyright page.  
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Critical thinking : a student’s introduction / Gregory Bassham . . . [et al.].—4th ed. 
 p. cm. 
  Includes bibliographical references and index. 
  ISBN 978-0-07-340743-2 (alk. paper) 
 1. Critical thinking—Textbooks. I. Bassham, Gregory, 1959– 
 B809.2.C745 2010 
 160—dc22
 
2009034761 
 The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a Web site does 
not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill, and McGraw-Hill does not guarantee the accuracy of 
the information presented at these sites. 
 www.mhhe.com 
TM

 For Enrico, Eric, Nicole, Dylan, 
 Catherine, Daniel, and Kate 


 
v
 A Word to Students  xi
Preface  xiii
CHAPTER 1  Introduction to Critical Thinking  1
What Is Critical Thinking?  1
Critical Thinking Standards  2
Clarity  2
Precision  2
Accuracy  3
Relevance  3
Consistency  4
Logical Correctness  5
Completeness  6
Fairness  6
The Benefits of Critical Thinking  7
Critical Thinking in the Classroom  7
Critical Thinking in the Workplace  9
Critical Thinking in Life  9
Barriers to Critical Thinking  10
Egocentrism  11
Sociocentrism  13
Unwarranted Assumptions and Stereotypes  16
Relativistic Thinking  19
Wishful Thinking  24
Characteristics of a Critical Thinker  25
 CONTENTS

CHAPTER 2  Recognizing Arguments  29
What Is an Argument?  29
Identifying Premises and Conclusions  33
What Is Not an Argument?  40
Reports  40
Unsupported Assertions  41
Conditional Statements  41
Illustrations  43
Explanations  43
CHAPTER 3  Basic Logical Concepts  53
Deduction and Induction  53
How Can We Tell Whether an Argument Is Deductive or 
Inductive?  56
The Indicator Word Test  57
The Strict Necessity Test  58
The Common Pattern Test  58
The Principle of Charity Test  59
Exceptions to the Strict Necessity Test  61
Common Patterns of Deductive Reasoning  62
Hypothetical Syllogism  62
Categorical Syllogism  65
Argument by Elimination  66
Argument Based on Mathematics  66
Argument from Deﬁ nition  67
Common Patterns of Inductive Reasoning  67
Inductive Generalization  68
Predictive Argument  68
Argument from Authority  69
Causal Argument  69
Statistical Argument  70
Argument from Analogy  70
Deductive Validity  73
Inductive Strength  77
CHAPTER 4  Language  86
Finding the Right Words: The Need for Precision  86
Vagueness  87
Overgenerality  88
Ambiguity  89
vi 
Contents

The Importance of Precise Definitions  93
Types of Deﬁ nitions  95
Strategies for Deﬁ ning  97
Rules for Constructing Good Lexical Deﬁ nitions  100
Emotive Language: Slanting the Truth  107
The Emotive Power of Words  108
Euphemisms and Political Correctness  114
CHAPTER 5  Logical Fallacies—I  119
The Concept of Relevance  119
Fallacies of Relevance  121
Personal Attack (Ad Hominem)  122
Attacking the Motive  123
Look Who’s Talking ( Tu Quoque)  124
Two Wrongs Make a Right  125
Scare Tactics  127
Appeal to Pity  128
Bandwagon Argument  128
Straw Man  129
Red Herring  130
Equivocation  131
Begging the Question  132
CHAPTER 6  Logical Fallacies—II  140
Fallacies of Insufficient Evidence  140
Inappropriate Appeal to Authority  140
Appeal to Ignorance  144
False Alternatives  145
Loaded Question  146
Questionable Cause  147
Hasty Generalization  149
Slippery Slope  150
Weak Analogy  151
Inconsistency  154
CHAPTER 7  Analyzing Arguments  164
Diagramming Short Arguments  164
Tips on Diagramming Arguments  169
Summarizing Longer Arguments  175
Paraphrasing  176
 
Contents 
vii

Finding Missing Premises and Conclusions  180
Summarizing Extended Arguments  182
Common Mistakes to Avoid in Standardizing Arguments  187
CHAPTER 8  Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims  195
When Is an Argument a Good One?  195
What “Good Argument” Does Not Mean  195
What “Good Argument” Does Mean  196
When Is It Reasonable to Accept a Premise?  198
Refuting Arguments  203
Appendix: Sample Critical Essay  219
CHAPTER 9  A Little Categorical Logic  225
Categorical Statements  225
Translating into Standard Categorical Form  230
Categorical Syllogisms  237
CHAPTER 10  A Little Propositional Logic  252
Conjunction  253
Conjunction and Validity  256
Negation  261
Deeper Analysis of Negation and Conjunction  265
Disjunction  271
Conditional Statements  276
CHAPTER 11  Inductive Reasoning  285
Introduction to Induction  285
Inductive Generalizations  286
Evaluating Inductive Generalizations  288
Opinion Polls and Inductive Generalizations  292
Statistical Arguments  296
Reference Class  300
Induction and Analogy  303
What Is an Analogy?  303
How Can We Argue by Analogy?  303
viii 
Contents

Evaluating Arguments from Analogy  305
Arguing by Analogy  312
Induction and Causal Arguments  313
Correlation and Cause  317
A Few Words about Probability  320
A Closer Look at a Priori Probability  322
CHAPTER 12   Finding, Evaluating, and Using 
Sources  330
Finding Sources  333
Reﬁ ning Your Search: Questions and Keywords  334
Directional Information  336
Informational Sources  338
Evaluating Sources  341
Content: Facts and Everything Else  342
The Author and the Publisher  347
The Audience  352
Evaluating Internet Sources  353
Taking Notes  361
Bibliographical Information  361
Content Notes: Quotes, Summaries, and Paraphrases  362
Using Sources  372
Acknowledging Sources  372
Incorporating Sources  376
CHAPTER 13  Writing Argumentative  Essays  382
Writing a Successful Argument  384
Before You Write  385
Know Yourself  385
Know Your Audience  386
Choose and Narrow Your Topic  390
Write a Sentence That Expresses Your Claim  393
Gather Ideas: Brainstorm and Research  394
Organize Your Ideas  400
Organize by Methods of Development  403
Writing the First Draft  406
Provide an Interesting Opening  407
Include a Thesis Statement  408
Develop Your Body Paragraphs  409
Provide a Satisfying Conclusion  410
 
Contents 
ix

After the First Draft  412
Read What You Have Written and Revise  412
Consider What You Have Not Written and Revise  412
Show Your Work  413
Edit Your Work  413
Hand It In  413
Sample Argumentative Essay  414
CHAPTER 14  Thinking Critically about the Media  425
The Mass Media  425
The News Media  426
The Importance of Context  426
Getting Us to Pay Attention: What Really Drives the Media  430
Keeping Our Interest: The News as Entertainment  432
How the Media Entertain Us  433
Slanting the News  441
Media Literacy  445
Advertising  447
What Ads Do  448
Defenses of Advertising  450
Criticisms of Advertising  450
Common Advertising Ploys  452
CHAPTER 15  Science and Pseudoscience  461
The Basic Pattern of Scientific Reasoning  461
The Limitations of Science  468
How to Distinguish Science from Pseudoscience  470
A Case Study in Pseudoscientific Thinking: Astrology  482
Appendix: Essays for Critical Analysis  A-1
Notes  N-1
Answers to Selected Exercises  ANS-1
Credits  C-1
Index  I-1 
x 
Contents

 
xi
 Let’s be honest. Very few of your college textbooks will change your life. 
But this one truly can. 
 This book will make you a better thinker. It will sharpen your mind, 
clarify your thoughts, and help you make smarter decisions. 
 We’ll teach you—step by step—how to analyze issues, reason logically, 
and argue effectively.  With effort on your part, this book will hone the think-
ing and reasoning skills you need to succeed in college, in your career, and in 
life. 
 Critical thinking is what college is all about. College is not about cram-
ming students’ heads with facts. It’s about teaching students to think. And 
that’s precisely what this book is designed to do. It will help you develop 
the skills and dispositions you need to become an independent, self-directed 
thinker and learner. 
 Collectively, the four authors of this textbook have been teaching criti-
cal thinking for over 60 years. Teaching critical thinking is what we do. It’s 
our passion. We’ve seen how critical thinking can change lives. 
 But you’ll only get out of this course what you put into it. Becoming a 
critical thinker is hard work. Sometimes working through this book will feel 
a little like boot camp. There’s a reason for this: No pain, no gain. Becoming 
a master thinker means toning up your mental muscles and acquiring habits 
of careful, disciplined thinking. This requires effort, and  practice . 
 That’s why the heart of this textbook is the exercises. There are lots of 
these, and all have been carefully selected and class-tested. You need to do the 
exercises. As many as you can. (Or at least all that your instructor assigns.) Do 
the exercises, then check the answers at the back of the book. Practice. Make 
mistakes. Get feedback. And watch yourself improve. That’s how you’ll work 
the mental flab off and develop lasting habits of clear, rigorous thinking. 
 Critical thinking is an adventure. Becoming mentally fit is hard work. 
And thinking independently can be a little scary at times. But in the end 
you’ll be a smarter, stronger, more confident thinker.  
 A WORD TO STUDENTS 


 
xiii
 PREFACE 
 Nothing is more powerful than reason. 
 
 —Saint Augustine  
 The first edition of  Critical Thinking: A Student’s Introduction grew out of 
our conviction that a critical thinking text that works—that produces real, 
measurable improvement in students’ critical reasoning skills—must have 
two essential features:
•  It must be a text that our increasingly gadget-oriented students 
 actually  read. 
•  It must provide abundant, class-tested exercises that give students 
the practice they need to develop as maturing critical thinkers.  
 In revising  Critical Thinking: A Student’s Introduction for this edition, 
we’ve tried to remain faithful to this original vision. Many passages have 
been rewritten to make the book clearer and (we hope) more engaging and 
accessible. In addition, dozens of new exercises have been added to give stu-
dents even more opportunities to hone their critical reasoning skills. 
 OVERVIEW OF THE TEXT 
 Critical Thinking: A Student’s Introduction  is designed to provide a versatile and 
comprehensive introduction to critical thinking. The book is divided into 
seven major parts:
1.  The Fundamentals: Chapters 1–3 introduce students to the basics 
of critical thinking in clear, reader-friendly language.  
2.  Language: Chapter 4 discusses the uses and pitfalls of language, 
emphasizing the ways in which language is used to hinder clear, 
effective thinking.  

3.  Fallacies: Chapters 5 and 6 teach students how to recognize and 
avoid twenty of the most common logical fallacies.  
4.  Argument Analysis and Evaluation:  Chapters 7 and 8 offer a clear, 
step-by-step introduction to the complex but essential skills of 
 argument analysis and evaluation.  
5.  Traditional Topics in Informal Logic: Chapters 9–11 offer a clear, sim-
plified introduction to three traditional topics in informal logic: 
categorical logic, propositional logic, and inductive reasoning.  
6.   Researching and Writing Argumentative Essays: Chapters 12 and 13 
provide students with specific, detailed guidance in producing 
well-researched, properly documented, and well-written argumen-
tative essays. 
7.   Practical Applications:  Chapters 14 and 15 invite students to 
apply what they have learned by reflecting critically on two 
areas in which  un critical thinking is particularly common: the 
media (Chapter 14) and pseudoscience and the paranormal 
(Chapter 15).  
 The text can be taught in a variety of ways. For instructors who stress 
argument analysis and evaluation, we suggest Chapters 1–8. For instructors 
who emphasize informal logic, we recommend Chapters 1–6 and 9–11. For 
instructors who focus on writing, we suggest Chapters 1–6 and 12 and 13. 
And for instructors who stress practical applications of critical thinking, we 
recommend Chapters 1–6 and 14 and 15.  
 STRENGTHS AND DISTINCTIVE FEATURES OF THE TEXT 
 There are a number of features that set this book apart from other critical 
thinking texts:
•  A versatile, student-centered approach that covers all the basics of 
critical thinking—and more—in reader-friendly language  
•  An abundance of interesting (and often humorous or thought-
 provoking) classroom-tested exercises  
•  An emphasis on active, collaborative learning  
•  A strong focus on writing, with complete chapters on using and 
evaluating sources (Chapter 12) and writing argumentative essays 
(Chapter 13)  
•  An emphasis on real-world applications of critical thinking, with 
many examples taken from popular culture, and complete chapters 
on the media and pseudoscientific thinking  
xiv 
Preface

 
Preface 
xv
•  An extensive treatment of critical thinking standards, hindrances, 
and dispositions 
•  A clear and detailed discussion of the distinction between deductive 
and inductive reasoning  
•  An abundance of thought-provoking marginal quotes, as well as 
“Critical Thinking Lapses”—outrageous errors in reasoning and 
thinking  
•  An Online Learning Center that includes detailed chapter summa-
ries, tutorials, and quizzes on the Web at  www.mhhe.com/bassham4e 
•  For the instructor, a password-protected, user-friendly Instructor’s 
Manual that includes complete answer keys, teaching tips, sample 
tests and quizzes, and PowerPoint lecture notes  
 WHAT’S NEW TO THE FOURTH EDITION 
 In preparing this edition, we have benefited tremendously from suggestions 
from users and reviewers of previous editions. The major changes in this 
edition are these:
•  A new Appendix has been added, featuring seven new essays for 
critical analysis.  
•  A new chapter on critical reading is available to course adopters on 
the Instructor’s part of the book’s Web site.  
•  Chapter 12 features an expanded and reorganized discussion of 
evaluating Internet sources.  
•  A new sample critical essay has been added, and the sample argu-
mentative essay has been substantially revised.  
•  New readings have been added to Chapters 7 and 8.  
•  Many new marginal quotes and boxed passages have been added.  
•  Several chapters have been streamlined.  
•  New and updated exercises and examples have been added 
throughout the book.  
•  Both the Instructor’s Manual and student online support resources 
have been updated and expanded.  
•  A module on the counterexample method of proving invalidity has 
been added to the Instructor’s Manual.  

xvi 
Preface
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 For valuable feedback leading to this fourth edition we wish to thank Chris 
Blakey (College of the Canyons), David Campbell (Humboldt State Univer-
sity), Arthur Hadley (Lincoln College of Technology), Brian Barnes (Uni-
versity of Louisville), Cecilia Mun (College of Southern Nevada), Dorcas 
Chung (California State University–Sacramento), Janet Dumond (King’s 
College), and Robert Sessions (Kirkwood Community College). Our con-
tinued thanks to reviewers of the previous editions: Dan Barwick, David 
Bowen, James Brooks, Barbara Carlson, B. Steve Csaki, Rory Conces, David 
Detmer, Andrew Dzida, Thomson Faller, Barbara Forrest, Mary Elizabeth 
Gleason, Claude Gratton, Perry Hardison, Jann James, Leemon McHenry, 
Tom MacMillan, Marty Most, Nikolas Pappas, Christopher H. Pearson, Ted 
Schick, and Corin Sutherland. 
 It is a pleasure to pay tribute to the skilled and courteous people at 
McGraw-Hill who guided us through the production process, especially 
Phil Butcher, Lindsay Burt, Nicole Bridge, and David Blatty. 
 Finally, thanks to our families for generously giving us the time to 
write. Without their love and support, this new edition could never have 
been completed.  

1
CHAPTER 1 
 INTRODUCTION TO 
CRITICAL THINKING  
 This book is about the power of disciplined thinking. It’s about learning to 
think for yourself and being your own person. It’s about the personal empow-
erment and enrichment that result from learning to use your mind to its fullest 
potential. In short, it’s about critical thinking. 
 Critical thinking is what a college education is all about. In many high 
schools, the emphasis tends to be on “lower-order thinking.” Students are simply 
expected to passively absorb information and then repeat it back on tests. In col-
lege, by contrast, the emphasis is on fostering “higher-order thinking”: the active, 
intelligent evaluation of ideas and information. This doesn’t mean that factual 
information and rote learning are ignored in college. But it is not the main goal 
of a college education to teach students  what to think.  The main goal is to teach 
students  how to think —that is, how to become independent, self-directed think-
ers and learners. 
 WHAT IS CRITICAL THINKING? 
 Often when we use the word  critical we mean “negative and fault-ﬁ nding.” 
This is the sense we have in mind, for example, when we complain about a 
parent or a friend who we think is unfairly critical of what we do or say. But 
 critical also means “involving or exercising skilled judgment or observation.” 
In this sense critical thinking means thinking clearly and intelligently. More 
precisely,  critical thinking  is the general term given to a wide range of cogni-
tive skills and intellectual dispositions needed to effectively identify, analyze, 
and evaluate arguments and truth claims; to discover and overcome personal 
preconceptions and biases; to formulate and present convincing reasons in sup-
port of conclusions; and to make reasonable, intelligent decisions about what 
to believe and what to do. 
 Put somewhat differently, critical thinking is disciplined thinking governed 
by clear intellectual standards. Among the most important of these  intellectual 
 The function of 
education is to 
teach one to think 
intensively and to 
think critically. 
 —Martin Luther 
King Jr. 
 The purpose 
which runs 
through all other 
educational 
purposes—the 
common thread 
of education—is 
the development 
of the ability to 
think. 
 —Educational 
Policies 
Commission 

2 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Critical Thinking
standards are  clarity, precision, accuracy, relevance, consistency, logical cor-
rectness, completeness,  and  fairness. 1 Let’s begin our introduction to critical 
thinking by looking brieﬂ y at each of these important critical thinking standards. 
 CRITICAL THINKING STANDARDS 
 Clarity 
 Before we can effectively evaluate a person’s argument or claim, we need to 
understand clearly what he or she is saying. Unfortunately, that can be difﬁ cult 
because people often fail to express themselves clearly. Sometimes this lack of 
clarity is due to laziness, carelessness, or a lack of skill. At other times it results 
from a misguided effort to appear clever, learned, or profound. Consider the 
following passage from philosopher Martin Heidegger’s inﬂ uential but notori-
ously obscure book  Being and Time: 
 Temporality makes possible the unity of existence, facticity, and falling, and in 
this way constitutes primordially the totality of the structure of care. The items 
of care have not been pieced together cumulatively any more than temporality 
itself has been put together “in the course of time” [“mit der Zeit”] out of the 
future, the having been, and the Present. Temporality “is” not an  entity  at all. It is 
not, but it  temporalizes itself. . . . Temporality temporalizes, and indeed it tempo-
ralizes possible ways of itself. These make possible the multiplicity of Dasein’s 
modes of Being, and especially the basic possibility of authentic or inauthentic 
existence. 2 
 That may be profound, or it may be nonsense, or it may be both. Whatever 
exactly it is, it is quite needlessly obscure. 
 As William Strunk Jr. and E. B. White remark in their classic  The Elements 
of Style,  “[M]uddiness is not merely a disturber of prose, it is also a destroyer 
of life, of hope: death on the highway caused by a badly worded road sign, 
heartbreak among lovers caused by a misplaced phrase in a well-intentioned 
letter. . . .” 3 Only by paying careful attention to language can we avoid such 
needless miscommunications and disappointments. 
 Critical thinkers not only strive for clarity of language but also seek max-
imum clarity of thought. As self-help books constantly remind us, to achieve 
our personal goals in life we need a clear conception of our goals and priori-
ties, a realistic grasp of our abilities, and a clear understanding of the problems 
and opportunities we face. Such self-understanding can be achieved only if we 
value and pursue clarity of thought. 
 Precision 
 Detective stories contain some of the most interesting examples of critical 
thinking in ﬁ ction. The most famous ﬁ ctional sleuth is, of course, Sherlock 
Holmes, the immortal creation of British writer Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. In 
Doyle’s stories Holmes is often able to solve complex mysteries when the 
 Everything that 
can be said can be 
said clearly. 
 —Ludwig 
Wittgenstein 
 Confusion has its 
costs. 
 —Crosby, Stills, 
and Nash 
 Clarity is not 
a mere embel-
lishment of the 
intellect; it is the 
very heart of intel-
lectual virtue. 
 —Charles Larmore 

 
Critical Thinking Standards 
3
bungling detectives from Scotland Yard haven’t so much as a clue. What is the 
secret of his success? An extraordinary commitment to  precision.  First, by care-
ful and highly trained observation, Holmes is able to discover clues that others 
have overlooked. Then, by a process of precise logical inference, he is able to 
reason from those clues to discover the solution to the mystery. 
 Everyone recognizes the importance of precision in specialized ﬁ elds 
such as medicine, mathematics, architecture, and engineering. Critical thinkers 
also understand the importance of precise thinking in daily life. They under-
stand that to cut through the confusions and uncertainties that surround many 
everyday problems and issues, it is often necessary to insist on precise answers 
to precise questions: What exactly is the problem we’re facing? What exactly 
are the alternatives? What exactly are the advantages and disadvantages of each 
alternative? Only when we habitually seek such precision are we truly critical 
thinkers. 
 Accuracy 
 There is a well-known saying about computers: “Garbage in, garbage out.” 
Simply put, this means that if you put bad information into a computer, bad 
information is exactly what you will get out of it. Much the same is true of 
human thinking. No matter how brilliant you may be, you’re almost guaran-
teed to make bad decisions if your decisions are based on false information. 
 A good example of this is provided by America’s long and costly involve-
ment in Vietnam. The policymakers who embroiled us in that conﬂ ict were 
not stupid. On the contrary, they were, in journalist David  Halberstam’s oft-
quoted phrase, “the best and the brightest” of their generation. Of course, the 
reasons for their repeated failures of judgment are complex and controversial; 
but much of the blame, historians agree, must be placed on false and inad-
equate information: ignorance of  Vietnamese history and culture, an exagger-
ated estimate of the strategic importance of  Vietnam and Southeast Asia, false 
assumptions about the degree of popular support in South Vietnam, unduly 
optimistic assessments of the “progress” of the war, and so on. Had American 
policymakers taken greater pains to learn the truth about such matters, it is 
likely they would not have made the poor decisions they did. 
 Critical thinkers don’t merely value the truth; they have a  passion  for 
accurate, timely information. As consumers, citizens, workers, and parents, 
they strive to make decisions that are as informed as possible. In the spirit of 
 Socrates’ famous statement that the unexamined life is not worth living, they 
never stop learning, growing, and inquiring. 
 Relevance 
 Anyone who has ever sat through a boring school assembly or watched a 
mud-slinging political debate can appreciate the importance of staying 
 focused on relevant ideas and information. A favorite debaters’ trick is to 
try to distract an audience’s attention by raising an irrelevant issue. Even 
 Really valuable 
ideas can only be 
had at the price of 
close attention. 
 —Charles S. Peirce 
 No one can navi-
gate well through 
life without an 
accurate map by 
which to steer. 
Knowledge is the 
possession of such 
a map, and truth 
is what the map 
gives us, linking us 
to reality. 
 —Tom Morris 

4 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Critical Thinking
Abraham Lincoln wasn’t above such tricks, as the following story told by his 
law partner  illustrates: 
 In a case where Judge [Stephen T.] Logan—always earnest and grave—opposed 
him, Lincoln created no little merriment by his reference to Logan’s style of 
dress. He carried the surprise in store for the latter, till he reached his turn before 
the jury.  Addressing them, he said: “Gentlemen, you must be careful and not 
permit yourselves to be overcome by the eloquence of counsel for the defense. 
Judge Logan, I know, is an effective lawyer. I have met him too often to doubt 
that; but shrewd and careful though he be, still he is sometimes wrong. Since this 
trial has begun I have discovered that, with all his caution and fastidiousness, he 
hasn’t knowledge enough to put his shirt on right.” Logan turned red as crim-
son, but sure enough, Lincoln was correct, for the former had donned a new 
shirt, and by mistake had drawn it over his head with the pleated bosom behind. 
The general laugh which followed destroyed the effect of Logan’s eloquence 
over the jury—the very point at which Lincoln aimed. 4 
 Lincoln’s ploy was entertaining and succeeded in distracting the attention of 
the jury. Had the jurors been thinking critically, however, they would have real-
ized that carelessness about one’s attire has no logical relevance to the strength 
of one’s arguments. 
 Consistency 
 It is easy to see why consistency is essential to critical thinking. Logic tells us that 
if a person holds inconsistent beliefs, at least one of those beliefs must be false. 
Critical thinkers prize truth and so are constantly on the lookout for inconsisten-
cies, both in their own thinking and in the arguments and assertions of others. 
 There are two kinds of inconsistency that we should avoid. One is  logical 
inconsistency, which involves saying or believing inconsistent things (i.e., things 
that cannot both or all be true) about a particular matter. The other is  practical 
inconsistency, which involves saying one thing and doing another. 
 Sometimes people are fully aware that their words conﬂ ict with their 
deeds. The politician who cynically breaks her campaign promises once she 
takes ofﬁ ce, the TV evangelist caught in an extramarital affair, the drug coun-
selor arrested for peddling drugs—such people are hypocrites pure and simple. 
From a critical thinking point of view, such examples are not especially inter-
esting. As a rule, they involve failures of character to a greater degree than they 
do failures of critical reasoning. 
 More interesting from a critical thinking standpoint are cases in which 
people are not fully aware that their words conﬂ ict with their deeds. Such cases 
highlight an important lesson of critical thinking: that human beings often 
display a remarkable capacity for self-deception. Author Harold Kushner cites 
an all-too-typical example: 
 Ask the average person which is more important to him, making money or 
being devoted to his family, and virtually everyone will answer  family without 
hesitation. But watch how the average person actually lives out his life. See 
 No tedious and 
irrelevant dis-
cussion can be 
allowed; what is 
said should be 
pertinent. 
 —Plato 
 The guiding prin-
ciple of rational 
behavior is consis-
tency. 
 —Deborah J. 
Bennett 

 
Critical Thinking Standards 
5
where he really invests his time and energy, and he will give away the fact that he 
really does not live by what he says he believes. He has let himself be persuaded 
that if he leaves for work earlier in the morning and comes home more tired 
at night, he is proving how devoted he is to his family by expending himself to 
provide them with all the things they have seen advertised. 6 
 Critical thinking helps us become aware of such unconscious practical incon-
sistencies, allowing us to deal with them on a conscious and rational basis.    
 It is also common, of course, for people to unknowingly hold inconsis-
tent beliefs about a particular subject. In fact, as Socrates pointed out long ago, 
such unconscious logical inconsistency is far more common than most people 
suspect. As we shall see, for example, many today claim that “morality is rela-
tive,” while holding a variety of views that imply that it is not relative. Critical 
thinking helps us recognize such logical inconsistencies or, still better, avoid 
them altogether. 
 Logical Correctness 
 To think logically is to reason correctly—that is, to draw well-founded conclu-
sions from the beliefs we hold. To think critically we need accurate and well-
supported beliefs. But, just as important, we need to be able to reason from those 
 There is a dif-
ference between 
knowing the path 
and walking the 
path. 
 —Morpheus, in 
The Matrix 
 Intelligence means 
a person who can 
see implications 
and arrive at con-
clusions. 
 —Talmud 
 Speaking of Inconsistency . . .  
 Philosophy professor Kenneth R. Merrill 
offers the following tongue-in-cheek ad-
vice for writers. What kind of inconsistency 
does Merrill commit? 
1.    Watch your spelling. Writters who mis-
pele a lott of words are propperly re-
guarded as iliterate. 
2.  Don’t forget the apostrophe where its 
needed, but don’t stick it in where 
theres no need for it. A writers reputa-
tion hangs on such trif le’s. 
3.  Don’t exaggerate. Overstatement always 
causes inﬁ nite harm.  
4.    Beware of the dangling participle. For-
getting this admonition, infelicitous 
phrases creep into our writing. 
5.    Clichés should be avoided like the 
plague. However, hackneyed language 
is not likely to be a problem for the 
writer who, since he was knee-high to a 
grasshopper, has built a better mouse-
trap and has kept his shoulder to the 
wheel. 
6.    Keep your language simple. Eschew ses-
quipedalian locutions and fustian rhet-
oric. Stay clear of the crepuscular—nay, 
tenebriﬁ c and fuliginous—regions of 
orotund sonorities. 
7.    Avoid vogue words. Hopefully, the writer 
will remember that her words basically 
impact the reader at the dynamic inter-
face of creative thought and action. To 
be viable, the writer’s parameters must 
enable her to engage the knowledgeable 
reader in a meaningful  dialogue—
especially at this point in time, when 
people tend to prioritize their priorities 
optimally.  
8.    Avoid profane or abusive language. It is 
a damned outrage how many knuckle-
dragging slobs vilify people they dis-
agree with. 5 

6 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Critical Thinking
beliefs to conclusions that logically follow from them. Unfortunately, illogical 
thinking is all too common in human affairs. Bertrand Russell, in his classic 
essay “An Outline of Intellectual Rubbish,” provides an amusing example: 
 I am sometimes shocked by the blasphemies of those who think themselves 
pious—for instance, the nuns who never take a bath without wearing a bathrobe 
all the time. When asked why, since no man can see them, they reply: “Oh, but 
you forget the good God.” Apparently they conceive of the deity as a Peeping 
Tom, whose omnipotence enables Him to see through bathroom walls, but who 
is foiled by bathrobes. This view strikes me as curious. 8 
 As Russell observes, from the proposition 
 1. God sees everything. 
 the pious nuns correctly drew the conclusion 
 2. God sees through bathroom walls. 
 However, they failed to draw the equally obvious conclusion that 
 3. God sees through bathrobes. 
 Such illogic is, indeed, curious—but not, alas, uncommon. 
 Completeness 
 In most contexts, we rightly prefer deep and complete thinking to shallow and 
superﬁ cial thinking. Thus, we justly condemn slipshod criminal investigations, 
hasty jury deliberations, superﬁ cial news stories, sketchy driving directions, 
and snap medical diagnoses. Of course, there are times when it is impossible or 
inappropriate to discuss an issue in depth; no one would expect, for example, a 
thorough and wide-ranging discussion of the ethics of human genetic research 
in a short newspaper editorial. Generally speaking, however, thinking is better 
when it is deep rather than shallow, thorough rather than superﬁ cial.  
 Fairness 
 Finally, critical thinking demands that our thinking be fair—that is, open-
minded, impartial, and free of distorting biases and preconceptions. That can be 
very difﬁ cult to achieve. Even the most superﬁ cial acquaintance with history 
and the social sciences tells us that people are often strongly disposed to resist 
 It is only when 
there is complete-
ness and exhaus-
tiveness that there 
is scholarship. 
 —Hsün Tzu 
 It is not much 
good thinking of 
a thing unless you 
think it out. 
 —H. G. Wells 
 The human race are masters of the ridiculous. There was actually a story 
in our newspaper of a man who was bitten on the tongue while kissing a 
rattlesnake. He decided to try a nonscientiﬁ c remedy he heard about to 
counteract a snakebite. So he wired his mouth to a pickup truck battery 
and tried to jump-start his tongue. It knocked him out and he ended up 
in the hospital, where he lost part of his tongue and one lip. 7  
 Critical Thinking Lapse 
 Man is the Rea-
soning Animal. 
Such is the claim. 
I think it is open 
to dispute. Indeed, 
my experiments 
have proven to me 
that he is the Un-
reasoning Animal. 
Note his history. 
. . . His record is 
the fantastic re-
cord of a maniac.  
 —Mark Twain 

 
The Beneﬁ ts of Critical Thinking 
7
unfamiliar ideas, to prejudge issues, to stereotype outsiders, and to identify 
truth with their own self-interest or the interests of their nation or group. It 
is probably unrealistic to suppose that our thinking could ever be completely 
free of biases and preconceptions; to some extent we all perceive reality in 
ways that are powerfully shaped by our individual life experiences and cultural 
backgrounds. But as difﬁ cult as it may be to achieve, basic fair-mindedness is 
clearly an essential attribute of a critical thinker. 
 EXERCISE 1.1 
    I. Break into groups of four or ﬁ ve. Choose one member of your group to 
take notes and be the group reporter. Discuss your education up to this point. 
To what extent has your education prepared you to think clearly, precisely, ac-
curately, logically, and so forth? Have you ever known a person (e.g., a teacher or 
a parent) who strongly modeled the critical thinking standards discussed in this 
section? If so, how did he or she do that? 
 II. Have you ever been guilty of either practical inconsistency (saying one thing 
and doing another) or logical inconsistency (believing inconsistent things about 
a particular topic or issue)? In small groups think of examples either from your 
own experience or from that of someone you know. Be prepared to share your 
examples with the class as a whole. 
 THE BENEFITS OF CRITICAL THINKING 
 Having looked at some of the key intellectual standards governing critical 
reasoning (clarity, precision, and so forth), let’s now consider more speciﬁ cally 
what you can expect to gain from a course in critical thinking. 
 Critical Thinking in the Classroom 
 When they ﬁ rst enter college, students are sometimes surprised to discover 
that their professors seem less interested in how they got their beliefs than 
they are in whether those beliefs can withstand critical scrutiny. In college the 
focus is on higher-order thinking: the active, intelligent evaluation of ideas and 
information. For this reason critical thinking plays a vital role throughout the 
college curriculum. 
 In a critical thinking course, students learn a variety of skills that can 
greatly improve their classroom performance. These skills include 
•   understanding the arguments and beliefs of others 
•   critically evaluating those arguments and beliefs 
•   developing and defending one’s own well-supported arguments and 
beliefs 
 Let’s look brieﬂ y at each of these three skills. 
 Closed- mindedness 
means premature 
intellectual old 
age.  
 —John Dewey 
 The main aim of 
education is prac-
tical and reﬂ ective 
judgment, a mind 
trained to be 
critical everywhere 
in the use of evi-
dence. 
 —Brand Blanchard 

8 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Critical Thinking
 To succeed in college, you must, of course, be able to  understand  the ma-
terial you are studying. A course in critical thinking cannot make inherently 
difﬁ cult material easy to grasp, but critical thinking does teach a variety of 
skills that, with practice, can signiﬁ cantly improve your ability to understand 
the arguments and issues discussed in your college textbooks and classes. 
 Doonesbury © G. B. Trudeau. Reprinted with permission of Universal Press Syndicate. All rights reserved. 

 
The Beneﬁ ts of Critical Thinking 
9
 In addition, critical thinking can help you  critically evaluate  what you are 
learning in class. During your college career, your instructors will often ask 
you to discuss “critically” some argument or idea introduced in class. Critical 
thinking teaches a wide range of strategies and skills that can greatly improve 
your ability to engage in such critical evaluations. 
 You will also be asked to  develop your own arguments  on particular topics 
or issues. In an American Government class, for example, you might be asked 
to write a paper addressing the issue of whether Congress has gone too far 
in restricting presidential war powers. To write such a paper successfully, you 
must do more than simply ﬁ nd and assess relevant arguments and information. 
You must also be able to marshal arguments and evidence in a way that con-
vincingly supports your view. The systematic training provided in a course in 
critical thinking can greatly improve that skill as well. 
 Critical Thinking in the Workplace 
 Surveys indicate that fewer than half of today’s college graduates can expect 
to be working in their major ﬁ eld of study within ﬁ ve years of graduation. 
This statistic speaks volumes about changing workplace realities. Increasingly, 
employers are looking not for employees with highly specialized career skills, 
since such skills can usually best be learned on the job, but for employees with 
good thinking and communication skills—quick learners who can solve prob-
lems, think creatively, gather and analyze information, draw appropriate con-
clusions from data, and communicate their ideas clearly and effectively. These 
are exactly the kinds of generalized thinking and problem-solving skills that a 
course in critical thinking aims to improve. 
 Critical Thinking in Life 
 Critical thinking is valuable in many contexts outside the classroom and the 
workplace. Let’s look brieﬂ y at three ways in which this is the case. 
 First, critical thinking can help us avoid making foolish personal decisions. 
All of us have at one time or another made decisions about consumer purchases, 
relationships, personal behavior, and the like that we later realized were seriously 
misguided or irrational. Critical thinking can help us avoid such mistakes by teach-
ing us to think about important life decisions more carefully, clearly, and logically. 
 Second, critical thinking plays a vital role in promoting democratic pro-
cesses. Despite what cynics might say, in a democracy it really is “we the people” 
who have the ultimate say over who governs and for what purposes. It is vital, 
therefore, that citizens’ decisions be as informed and as deliberate as possible. 
Many of today’s most serious societal problems—environmental destruction, 
nuclear proliferation, religious and ethnic intolerance, decaying inner cities, 
failing schools, spiraling health-care costs, to mention just a few—have largely 
been caused by poor critical thinking. And as Albert Einstein once remarked, 
“The signiﬁ cant problems we face cannot be solved at the level of thinking we 
were at when we created them.” 
 We don’t want 
you to axiom-
atically accept 
the conventional 
wisdom on a 
particular subject. 
Indeed, your ﬁ rst 
instinct should be 
to question it. 
 —John J. 
Mearsheimer 
 There is nothing 
more  practical 
than sound 
thinking. 
 —Foundation for 
Critical Thinking 

10 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Critical Thinking
 Third, critical thinking is worth studying for its own sake, simply for the 
personal enrichment it can bring to our lives. One of the most basic truths of 
the human condition is that most people, most of the time, believe what they 
are told. Throughout most of recorded history, people accepted without ques-
tion that the earth was the center of the universe, that demons cause disease, 
that slavery was just, and that women are inferior to men. Critical thinking, 
honestly and courageously pursued, can help free us from the unexamined 
assumptions and biases of our upbringing and our society. It lets us step back 
from the prevailing customs and ideologies of our culture and ask, “This is 
what I’ve been taught, but is it  true ? In short, critical thinking allows us to lead 
self-directed, “examined” lives. Such personal liberation is, as the word itself 
implies, the ultimate goal of a  liberal  arts education. Whatever other beneﬁ ts it 
brings, a liberal education can have no greater reward. 
 BARRIERS TO CRITICAL THINKING 
 The preceding section raises an obvious question: If critical thinking is so 
important, why is it that  un critical thinking is so common? Why is it that so 
many people—including many highly educated and intelligent people—ﬁ nd 
critical thinking so difﬁ cult? 
 The reasons, as you might expect, are quite complex. Here is a list of 
some of the most common barriers to critical thinking: 
•   lack of relevant background information 
•   poor reading skills 
•   bias 
•   prejudice 
•   superstition 
•   egocentrism (self-centered thinking) 
•   sociocentrism (group-centered thinking) 
•   peer pressure 
•   conformism 
•   provincialism 
•   narrow-mindedness 
•   closed-mindedness 
•   distrust in reason 
•   relativistic thinking 
•   stereotyping 
•   unwarranted assumptions 
•   scapegoating 
•   rationalization  
 Citizens who 
think for them-
selves, rather than 
uncritically ingest-
ing what their 
leaders tell them, 
are the absolutely 
necessary ingredi-
ent of a society 
that is to remain 
truly free. 
 —Howard Kahane 

 
Barriers to Critical Thinking 
11
•   denial 
•   wishful thinking 
•   short-term thinking 
•   selective perception 
•   selective memory 
•   overpowering emotions 
•   self-deception 
•   face-saving 
•   fear of change 
 Let’s examine in detail ﬁ ve of these impediments—egocentrism, sociocen-
trism, unwarranted assumptions, relativistic thinking, and wishful thinking—
that play an especially powerful role in hindering critical thinking. 
 Egocentrism 
 Egocentrism  is the tendency to see reality as centered on oneself. Egocentrics 
are selﬁ sh, self-absorbed people who view their interests, ideas, and values as 
superior to everyone else’s. All of us are affected to some degree by egocentric 
biases. 
 Egocentrism can manifest itself in a variety of ways. Two common forms 
are self-interested thinking and self-serving bias. 
 Self-interested thinking  is the tendency to accept and defend beliefs that 
harmonize with one’s self-interest. Almost no one is immune to self-interested 
thinking. Most doctors support legislation making it more difﬁ cult for them 
to be sued for malpractice; most lawyers do not. Most state university profes-
sors strongly support tenure, paid sabbaticals, low teaching loads, and a strong 
faculty voice in university governance; many state taxpayers and university 
administrators do not. Most factory workers support laws requiring advance 
notice of plant closings; most factory owners do not. Most American voters 
favor campaign ﬁ nance reform; most elected politicians do not. Of course, 
some of these beliefs may be supported by good reasons. From a psychologi-
cal standpoint, however, it is likely that self-interest plays at least some role in 
shaping the respective attitudes and beliefs. 
 Self-interested thinking, however understandable it may seem, is a major 
obstacle to critical thinking. Everyone ﬁ nds it tempting at times to reason 
that “this beneﬁ ts me, therefore it must be good”; but from a critical thinking 
standpoint, such “reasoning” is a sham. Implicit in such thinking is the assump-
tion that “What is most important is what  I want and need.” But why should 
I, or anyone else, accept such an arbitrary and obviously self-serving assump-
tion? What makes  your wants and needs more important than everyone else’s? 
Critical thinking condemns such special pleading. It demands that we weigh 
evidence and arguments objectively and impartially. Ultimately, it demands 
that we revere truth—even when it hurts. 
 How quick come 
the reasons for 
approving what 
we like! 
 —Jane Austen 
 Admit your 
faults. I would if 
I had any.  
 —Milton Berle 

12 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Critical Thinking
 Self-serving bias  is the tendency to overrate oneself—to see oneself as 
better in some respect than one actually is. We have all known braggarts or 
know-it-alls who claim to be more talented or knowledgeable than they really 
are. If you are like most people, you probably think of yourself as being an un-
usually self-aware person who is largely immune from any such self-deception. 
If so, then you too are probably suffering from self-serving bias. 
 Studies show that self-serving bias is an extremely common trait. In one sur-
vey one million high school seniors were asked to rate themselves on their “ability 
to get along with others.”  Not a single respondent rated himself below average in such 
ability. 9 Other surveys have shown that 90 percent of business managers and more 
than 90 percent of college professors rate their performance as better than average. 
It is easy, of course, to understand why people tend to overrate themselves. We all 
like to feel good about ourselves. Nobody likes to think of himself or herself as 
being “below average” in some important respect. At the same time, however, it 
is important to be able to look honestly at our personal strengths and weaknesses. 
We want to set high personal goals, but not goals that are wildly unrealistic. Self-
conﬁ dence grounded in genuine accomplishment is an important element of suc-
cess. Overconﬁ dence is an obstacle to genuine personal and intellectual growth. 
 EXERCISE 1.2 
 Are you overconﬁ dent in your beliefs? Here’s a simple test to determine if you are. 
For each of the following ten items, provide a low and a high guess such that you 
are 90 percent sure the correct answer falls between the two. Your challenge is to 
be neither too narrow (i.e., overconﬁ dent) nor too wide (i.e., underconﬁ dent). If 
you successfully meet the challenge, you should have 10 percent misses—that is, 
exactly one miss. 10 
 The one thing 
that unites all 
human beings, 
regardless of age, 
gender, religion, 
economic status, 
or ethnic back-
ground, is that, 
deep down inside, 
we all believe that 
we are above-
average drivers. 
 —Dave Barry 
 CALVIN AND HOBBES © Watterson. Reprinted with permission of Universal Press Syndicate. 
All rights reserved. 

 
Barriers to Critical Thinking 
13
 
90% Conﬁdence Range
 
LOW 
HIGH
 1. Martin Luther King’s age at death 
__________ __________
 2. Length of Nile River (in miles) 
__________ __________
 3. Percentage of African Americans in the 
United States 
__________ __________
 4. Number of books in the Old Testament 
__________ __________
 5. Diameter of the moon (in miles) 
__________ __________
 6. Weight of an empty Boeing 747 
(in pounds) 
__________ __________
 7. Current population of California 
__________ __________
 8. Year in which Wolfgang Amadeus 
Mozart was born 
__________ __________
 9. Air distance from London to Tokyo 
(in miles) 
__________ __________
 10. Deepest known point in the ocean 
(in feet) 
__________ __________11  
 Sociocentrism 
 Sociocentrism  is group-centered thinking. Just as egocentrism can hinder ra-
tional thinking by focusing excessively on the self, so sociocentrism can hinder 
rational thinking by focusing excessively on the group. 
 Sociocentrism can distort critical thinking in many ways. Two of the 
most important are group bias and conformism. 
 Group bias  is the tendency to see one’s own group (nation, tribe, sect, 
peer group, and the like) as being inherently better than others. Social scientists 
tell us that such thinking is extremely common throughout human history and 
across cultures. Just as we seem naturally inclined to hold inﬂ ated views of our-
selves, so we ﬁ nd it easy to hold inﬂ ated views of our family, our community, 
or our nation. Conversely, we ﬁ nd it easy to look with suspicion or disfavor on 
those we regard as “outsiders.” 
 Most people absorb group bias unconsciously, usually from early child-
hood. It is common, for example, for people to grow up thinking that their 
society’s beliefs, institutions, and values are better than those of other societ-
ies. Consider this exchange between eight-year-old Maurice D. and the well-
known Swiss scientist and philosopher Jean Piaget: 
 Maurice D.  (8 years, 3 months old): If you didn’t have any nationality and you 
were given a free choice of nationality, which would you choose ? Swiss nationality. 
Why?  Because I was born in Switzerland.  Now look, do you think the French and 
 He who knows 
most, knows 
best how little he 
knows. 
 —Thomas 
Jefferson 
 Custom and 
example have 
a much more 
persuasive power 
than any certitude 
obtained by way 
of inquiry. 
 —René Descartes 

14 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Critical Thinking
the Swiss are equally nice, or the one nicer or less nice than the other?  The Swiss 
are nicer.  Why?  The French are always nasty.  Who is more intelligent, the Swiss or the 
French, or do you think they’re just the same?  The Swiss are more intelligent.  Why? 
 Because they learn French quickly.  If I asked a French boy to choose any nationality 
he liked, what country do you think he’d choose?  He’d choose France.  Why?  Because 
he was born in France.  And what would he say about who’s nicer? Would he think 
the Swiss and the French equally nice or one better than the other?  He’d say the 
French are nicer.  Why?  Because he was born in France.  And who would he think more 
intelligent?  The French.  Why?  He’d say that the French want to learn quicker than the 
Swiss.  Now you and the French boy don’t really give the same answer. Who do 
you think answered best?  I did. Why?  Because Switzerland is always better. 14  
 Although most people outgrow such childish nationalistic biases to some 
extent, few of us manage to outgrow them completely. Clearly, this kind of 
“mine-is-better” thinking lies at the root of a great deal of human conﬂ ict, 
intolerance, and oppression. 
 Conformism  refers to our tendency to follow the crowd—that is, to 
conform (often unthinkingly) to authority or to group standards of conduct 
 To those who 
would investigate 
the cause of exist-
ing opinions, the 
study of predis-
positions is much 
more important 
than the study of 
argument. 
 —W. E. H. Lecky 
 Poker and Critical Thinking 
 Poker players fall victim to critical thinking barriers like wishful think-
ing and self-serving bias just like anybody else. 12  One barrier that can 
be particularly costly to poker players is overconﬁ dence. Overconﬁ -
dent players think that they’re better, or luckier, than they actually 
are. This often leads them to play with far superior opponents, to 
stay in too many hands, and to bet recklessly. The result: Players who 
overrate their abilities quickly become ATMs for their tablemates. 
  
Poker legend Doyle Brunson tells a cautionary tale about the dan-
gers of overconﬁ dence. A cocky New Yorker calling himself “Roches-
ter Ricky” and ﬂ ashing a big bankroll walked into a Fort Worth poker 
parlor. Around the table sat Amarillo Slim, Puggy Pearson, Johnny 
Moss, Sailor Roberts, Brunson himself, and a couple of Texas busi-
nessmen. Two things quickly became apparent. Though he knew his 
game, Rochester hadn’t played much no-limit poker, and he hadn’t a 
clue he was playing against some of the best no-limit Hold’em poker 
talent in the world. 
  
Rochester didn’t realize that strategies that work well in limit 
games (for example, calling frequently and blufﬁ ng cautiously) often 
backﬁ re in no-limit games. His parting words as he gathered up the 
paltry remnants of his $10,000 bankroll were “If you guys are ever in 
Rochester, don’t bother to look me up. You won’t see me playing 
Hold’em against Texans as long as I live.” 13 
 
 As the great American philosopher Clint Eastwood said, “A man’s 
got to know his limitations.” 
  Pop Culture Connection 

 
Barriers to Critical Thinking 
15
and belief. The desire to belong, to be part of the in-group, can be among the 
most powerful of human motivations. As two classic experiments demonstrate, 
this desire to conform can seriously cripple our powers of critical reasoning 
and decision making. 
 In the ﬁ rst experiment, conducted in the 1950s by Solomon Asch, groups 
of eight college students were asked to match a standard line like the following 
  
 
 with three comparison lines such as these: 
 A  
 
 B  
 
 C  
 
 In each group, only one of the eight participants was unaware of the true na-
ture of the experiment; the other seven were confederates working in league 
with the experimenter. In each case the single true subject was seated at the 
end of the table and asked to answer last. In some trials the seven confederates 
unanimously gave the correct answer (B); in others they unanimously gave 
an incorrect answer. The results: When no pressure to conform was present, 
subjects gave the correct answer more than 99 percent of the time. When 
faced with the united opposition of their peers, however, almost one-third 
(32 percent) of the subjects refused to believe their own eyes and gave answers 
that were obviously incorrect! 
 Another famous experiment was conducted by Stanley Milgram in the 
1960s. 15 In Milgram’s experiment, subjects were asked to administer a series of 
increasingly severe electrical shocks to people whom the subjects could hear 
but couldn’t see. (In fact, no actual shocks were given; the shock “victims” were 
actually confederates who merely pretended to be in pain.) Subjects were told 
that they were participating in a study of the effects of punishment on learn-
ing. Their task was to act as “teachers” who inﬂ icted progressively more painful 
shocks on “learners” whenever the latter failed to answer a question correctly. 
The severity of the shocks was controlled by a series of thirty switches, which 
ranged in 15-volt intervals from 15 volts (“Slight Shock”) to 450 volts (“XX 
Danger: Severe Shock”). The purpose of the study was to determine how far 
ordinary people would go in inﬂ icting pain on total strangers, simply because 
they were asked to do so by someone perceived to be “an authority.” 
 The results were, well, shocking. More than 85 percent of the subjects 
continued to administer shocks beyond the 300-volt mark, long after the point 
at which they could hear the victims crying out or pounding on the walls in 
pain. After the 330-volt mark, the screaming stopped, and for all the subjects 
knew, the victims were either unconscious or dead. Despite that, nearly two-
thirds (65 percent) of the subjects continued to administer shocks, as they were 
instructed, until they had administered the maximum 450 volts. 
 The lesson of these studies is clear: “Authority moves us. We are im-
pressed, inﬂ uenced, and intimidated by authority, so much so that, under the 
right conditions, we abandon our own values, beliefs, and judgments, even 
doubt our own immediate sensory experience.” 16 As critical thinkers, we need 
 When ﬁ fty million 
people say a fool-
ish thing it is still 
a foolish thing. 
 —Anatole France 
 When all think 
alike, then no one 
is thinking. 
 —Walter 
Lippmann 
 Man is born to 
think for himself. 
 —Denis Diderot 

16 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Critical Thinking
to be aware of the seductive power of peer pressure and reliance on authority 
and develop habits of independent thinking to combat them. 
 Unwarranted Assumptions and Stereotypes 
 An  assumption  is something we take for granted, something we believe to be 
true without any proof or conclusive evidence. Almost everything we think 
and do is based on assumptions. If the weather report calls for rain, we take 
an umbrella because we assume that the meteorologist is not lying, that the 
report is based on a scientiﬁ c analysis of weather patterns, that the instruments 
are accurate, and so forth. There may be no proof that any of this is true, but 
we realize that it is wiser to take the umbrella than to insist that the weather 
bureau provide exhaustive evidence to justify its prediction. 
 Although we often hear the injunction “Don’t assume,” it would be im-
possible to get through a day without making assumptions; in fact, many of 
our daily actions are based on assumptions we have drawn from the patterns in 
our experience. You go to class at the scheduled time because you assume that 
class is being held at its normal hour and in its same place. You don’t call the 
professor each day to ask if class is being held; you just assume that it is. Such 
assumptions are  warranted, which means that we have good reason to hold 
them. When you see a driver coming toward you with the turn signal on, you 
have good reason to believe that the driver intends to turn. You may be incor-
rect, and it might be safer to withhold action until you are certain, but your 
assumption is not unreasonable. 
 Unwarranted assumptions, however, are unreasonable. An  unwarranted  as-
sumption is something taken for granted without good reason. Such assump-
tions often prevent our seeing things clearly. For example, our attraction for 
someone might cause us to assume that he or she feels the same way and thus 
to interpret that person’s actions incorrectly. 
 One of the most common types of unwarranted assumptions is a  stereo-
type. The word  stereotype comes from the printing press era, when plates, or 
stereotypes, were used to produce identical copies of one page. Similarly, when 
we stereotype, as the word is now used, we assume that individual people have 
all been stamped from one plate, so all politicians are alike, or Muslims, or Afri-
can Americans, professors, women, and so forth. When we form an opinion of 
someone that is based not on his or her individual qualities but, rather, on his 
or her membership in a particular group, we are assuming that all or virtually 
all members of that group are alike. Because people are not identical, no matter 
what race or other similarities they share, stereotypical conceptions will often 
be false or misleading. 
 Typically, stereotypes are arrived at through a process known as  hasty 
generalization,  in which one draws a conclusion about a large class of things 
(in this case, people) from a small sample. If we meet one South Bergian who 
is rude, we might jump to the conclusion that all South Bergians are rude. 
Or we might generalize from what we have heard from a few friends or read 

 
Barriers to Critical Thinking 
17
in a single news story. Often the media—advertisements, the news, movies, 
and so forth—encourage stereotyping by the way they portray groups of 
people. 
 The assumptions we need to become most conscious of are not the ones 
that lead to our routine behaviors, such as carrying an umbrella or going to 
class, but the ones on which we base our more important attitudes, actions, 
and decisions. If we are conscious of our tendency to stereotype, we can take 
measures to end it. 
 EXERCISE 1.3 
   I. Read this story and answer the questions that follow. 
 When it happened, a disturbing mix of feelings bubbled inside you. It sickened 
you to watch the boat slip beneath the waves and disappear forever; so much 
work had gone into maintaining it and keeping it aﬂ oat, but at least everyone 
was safe in the tiny lifeboat you’d had just enough time to launch. You secretly 
congratulated yourself for having had the foresight to stock the lifeboat with a 
few emergency items, such as a small amount of food and water, but you knew 
that a boat built to hold three, maybe four people wasn’t going to survive too 
long with such an overload of passengers. 
 
You looked around at your companions: the brilliant Dr. Brown, whose 
cleverness and quick wit had impressed you on many occasions; Marie Brown, 
pregnant and clearly exhausted from the climb into the lifeboat; Lieutenant 
Ashley Morganstern, a twenty-year veteran who’d seen the most brutal sorts of 
combat; the lieutenant’s secretary and traveling companion, whose shirt you 
noticed for the ﬁ rst time bore the monogram  LB, but whom everyone called, 
simply, “Letty”; and Eagle-Eye Sam, the trusted friend who’d been at your side 
for many years as you sailed the oceans in your precious, now-vanished boat 
and whose nickname came from his ability to spot the smallest objects seem-
ingly miles away at sea. 
 
Seeing the fear on your passengers’ faces, you tried to comfort them: “Don’t 
worry; we’ll be ﬁ ne. They’ll be looking for us right away. I’m sure of it.” But 
you weren’t so sure. In fact, you knew it wasn’t true. It might be days before 
you were found, since you’d had no time to radio for help. Rescuers probably 
wouldn’t be dispatched until Friday, ﬁ ve days from now, when your failure to 
show up in port would ﬁ nally arouse concern. 
 
On the third day, your passengers showed increasing signs of frustration, 
anger, and fear. “Where are they?” Marie cried. “We can’t go on like this!” 
 
You knew she was right.  We can’t, you thought,  not all of us anyway. 
 
On the fourth day, the food was completely gone, and just enough water 
remained to keep perhaps three people alive for another day, maybe two. Sud-
denly, things got worse. “Is that water?!” Marie screamed, pointing a shaking 
ﬁ nger at the bottom of the lifeboat. Horriﬁ ed, you looked down to see a slight 
trickle of water seeping in at the very center of the boat. Dr. Brown grabbed 
a T-shirt that was lying in the bottom of the boat and used it like a sponge to 
absorb the water, wringing it out over the side and plunging it into the invad-
ing water again and again. But it was no use; the water began to seep in faster 
than Brown could work. 
 General notions 
are generally 
wrong. 
— Mary Worthley 
Montague 

18 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Critical Thinking
 
“We’re too heavy,” the lieutenant insisted without emotion. “We’ve got to 
lighten the load. Someone has to get out and swim.” 
 
“Swim?!” Marie gasped in disbelief. “Are you insane?! There are sharks in 
these waters!” 
 
“Who’s it going to be, Captain?” the lieutenant asked almost coldly, staring 
you square in the eye. “Which one of us swims?” 
 
“Me. I’ll go,” you say, swinging your leg out over the side of the boat. 
 
“No,” Letty insisted. “You’re the only one who knows how to navigate. If you 
go, we’ll all die. You must choose one of us to sacriﬁ ce.” 
 
And so you did. 
A.   Answer the following questions individually.
1.   Which one did you choose? Why? Why didn’t you choose the others? 
2.   As you read, you probably imagined what the characters looked like. From 
the image you had of them, describe the following characters in a few 
 sentences:
 The Captain 
 Dr. Brown 
 Marie Brown 
 Lieutenant Ashley Morganstern  
 Letty 
 Eagle-Eye Sam 
3.   Do you think Dr. Brown is related to Marie Brown? If so, how? 
 B. Now form groups of three and complete the following tasks:
1.   Compare your responses to question 1 in part A. Discuss the reasons for 
your decisions. Is there any consensus in the group? 
2.   Do you all agree on the relationship between Dr. Brown and Marie 
Brown? 
3.   What evidence is there in the story to support your answer for 
question 3 in part A? Is it possible that they are related in another way 
or not at all? 
4.   Look at your portraits of Dr. Brown. How many assumptions did you and 
your group members make about the doctor’s gender, age, appearance, and 
profession? What evidence in the story supports your image of the doctor? 
If your images are similar, what do you think accounts for that similarity? 
Are your mental images similar to ones we normally see in the media, for 
example? 
5.   Look at your portraits of the other characters. First, what similarities do 
you ﬁ nd among your group’s members? Second, what evidence is there 
in the story to support your assumptions? Are other assumptions possible? 
 Finally, where do you think your mental images came from? 
 II. In groups of three or four, name and explain a stereotypical conception 
people may have had about you over the years. Note how that stereotypical con-
ception keeps others from coming to know you more accurately. Turn your page 
over and exchange papers with other members of your group. See if the other 
members can determine which stereotype description goes with what member 
of your group. 

 
Barriers to Critical Thinking 
19
 Relativistic Thinking 
 Virtually every college professor has had at least one conversation like the 
 following: 
 Janie:   Professor X, I don’t understand why you gave me a D on this paper. 
 Prof. X:  Well, as I noted in my written comments, you state your 
 opinions, but you don’t offer any reasons to back them up. 
 Janie:  Do you mean you gave me a low grade because you disagree 
with my opinions? 
 Prof. X:  No, not at all, Janie. You received a low grade because you 
didn’t give any reasons to support your opinions. 
 Janie:   But isn’t everyone entitled to his or her own opinion? And can 
anyone ever really prove that his or her opinion is right and everyone 
else’s is wrong? Why, then, do I have to give reasons for my opinions when 
I’m entitled to hold them and no one can prove that they’re wrong?  
 Janie, here, has fallen into the trap of  relativistic thinking.  It is crucial to under-
stand why this is a trap, because once one has fallen into it, it is very difﬁ cult 
to see any point in studying critical thinking at all. 
 Relativism  is the view that truth is a matter of opinion. There are two 
popular forms of relativism: subjectivism and cultural relativism.  Subjectivism 
is the view that truth is a matter of individual opinion. This is the view Janie 
apparently holds. According to subjectivism, whatever an individual believes 
is true,  is true for that person, and there is no such thing as “objective” or 
 “absolute” truth, i.e., truth that exists independent of what anyone believes. 
For example, suppose Bobby believes that abortion is wrong and Alice believes 
that abortion is not always wrong. According to subjectivism, abortion is always 
wrong for Bobby and not always wrong for Alice. Both beliefs are true— for 
them. And truth  for one individual or another is the only kind of truth there is. 
 The other common form of relativism is  cultural relativism.  This is the 
view that truth is a matter of social or cultural opinion. In other words, cultural 
relativism is the view that what is true for person A is what person A’s culture 
or society believes is true. Drinking wine, for example, is widely considered to 
be wrong in Iran but is not generally considered to be wrong in France. Ac-
cording to cultural relativism, therefore, drinking wine is immoral in Iran but 
is morally permissible in France. Thus, for the cultural relativist, just as for the 
subjectivist, there is no objective or absolute standard of truth. What is true is 
whatever most people in a society or culture believe to be true. 
 Relatively few people endorse subjectivism or cultural relativism in the 
pure, unqualiﬁ ed forms in which we have stated them. Almost everybody would 
admit, for example, that 1  1  2 is true, no matter who might be ignorant 
or deluded enough to deny it. What relativists usually claim, therefore, is not 
that all truth is relative, but that truth is relative in some important domain(s). 
By far the most common form of relativism is  moral   relativism . Like relativism 
generally, moral relativism comes in two major forms: moral  subjectivism and 

20 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Critical Thinking
cultural moral relativism.  Moral subjectivism  is the view that what is morally 
right and good for an individual, A, is whatever A believes is morally right and 
good. Thus, if Andy believes that premarital sex is always wrong, and Jennifer 
believes that it is not always wrong, according to moral subjectivism premarital 
sex is always wrong for Andy and is not always wrong for Jennifer. 
 The other major form of moral relativism is  cultural moral relativism, 
the view that what is morally right and good for an individual, A, is whatever 
A’s society or culture believes is morally right and good. Thus, according to 
cultural moral relativism, if culture A believes that polygamy is wrong, and cul-
ture B believes that polygamy is right, then polygamy is wrong for culture A 
and right for culture B. 
 Cultural moral relativism is a very popular view today, especially among 
the young. There are two major reasons people seem to ﬁ nd it so attractive. 
One has to do with the nature of moral disagreement, and the other concerns 
the value of tolerance. 
 Ethics, obviously, is very different from math or science. In math and sci-
ence, there are arguments and disagreements, but not nearly to the extent there 
are in ethics. In ethics there is widespread disagreement, the disagreements 
often go very deep, and there seems to be no rational way to resolve many 
of them. What this shows, some people conclude, is that there is no objective 
truth in ethics; morality is just a matter of individual or societal opinion. 
 Another reason people ﬁ nd cultural moral relativism attractive is that it seems 
to support the value of tolerance. Throughout history, terrible wars, persecutions, 
and acts of religious and cultural imperialism have been perpetrated by people 
who ﬁ rmly believed in the absolute righteousness of their moral beliefs and prac-
tices. Cultural moral relativism seems to imply that we must be tolerant of other 
cultures’ moral beliefs and values. If culture A believes that polygamy is wrong, and 
culture B believes that it is right, then culture A must agree that polygamy is right 
for culture B, no matter how offensive the practice may be to culture A. 
 Despite these apparent attractions, however, there are deep problems with 
cultural moral relativism, as the following exercise (adapted from a set of role-
playing scenarios developed by Professor Grant H. Cornwell 17 ) will illustrate. 
 EXERCISE 1.4 
 In groups of four or ﬁ ve, choose a group reporter to take notes and be the group 
spokesperson. Read and discuss one of the following case studies as assigned by 
your instructor. 
 Case 1 
 Deﬁ nition: A cultural moral relativist is one who maintains the following thesis: 
 Whatever members of a culture believe is morally right and good is morally right and good 
for them. 
 
 You are a member of culture C studying cultures A and B. You are a 
 committed cultural moral relativist, i.e., you maintain wholeheartedly the 
relativist thesis. 

 
Barriers to Critical Thinking 
21
 
 Culture A is a paciﬁ st culture and believes that it is always morally wrong 
to commit a violent act against another human being for any reason. 
 
 Culture B is a militaristic and slaveholding culture. Its members believe that 
it is morally good and right to invade, subjugate, and enslave other cultures. 
 
 While you are observing them, culture B invades culture A. 
 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
1.   What can you consistently believe with regard to the morality of culture A? 
The morality of culture B? Speciﬁ cally, as a consistent moral relativist, can you 
criticize or condemn the morality of culture A? Of culture B? 
2.   What can you consistently do with regard to culture B’s invasion and at-
tempted subjugation of culture A? 
 Case 2 
 Deﬁ nition: A cultural moral relativist is one who maintains the following thesis: 
 Whatever members of a culture believe is morally right and good is morally right and good 
for them. 
 
  You are a member of culture B and a committed cultural moral relativist, 
i.e., you maintain wholeheartedly the relativist thesis. 
 
 Culture B is a militaristic and slaveholding culture. A majority of its mem-
bers believe that it is morally right and good to invade, subjugate, and en-
slave other cultures. 
 
 Culture A is a paciﬁ st culture. A majority of its members believe that it is 
always wrong to commit any act of violence against another human being 
for any reason. 
 
 Culture B believes that it is morally wrong for culture A to practice paciﬁ sm. 
 
 Culture B invades culture A. Its aim is to subjugate and enslave members 
of culture A and force some of them to participate in gladiatorial bouts for 
the amusement of members of culture B. 
 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
 1. Is there any logical inconsistency in being a cultural moral relativist and also 
belonging to culture B? ( Hint:  Consider not only what culture B believes is right 
and good for its own members to do but also what it believes is right and good 
for other cultures to do.) If so, which beliefs, precisely, are inconsistent? 
 2. What can you consistently believe with regard to the morality of culture A? 
The morality of culture B? Speciﬁ cally, as a consistent moral relativist, can you 
criticize or condemn the morality of culture A? Of culture B? 
 3. What can you consistently do with regard to culture B’s invasion and 
 attempted conquest of culture A? 
 Case 3 
 Deﬁ nition: A cultural moral relativist is one who maintains the following thesis: 
 Whatever members of a culture believe is morally right and good is morally right and good 
for them. 

22 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Critical Thinking
 
 Culture B consists of two subcultures: the Alphas and the Betas. The 
Alphas are a ruling majority group. They believe that it is morally right 
to randomly select a young child for sacriﬁ ce at the beginning of each 
year. The Betas are an oppressed minority group with its own distinctive 
 cultural, moral, and religious practices. Betas believe strongly that child 
 sacriﬁ ce is morally wrong. 
 
 You are a member of culture B and a Beta. You are also a committed  cultural 
moral relativist, i.e., you maintain wholeheartedly the relativist thesis. 
 
 Culture A is a paciﬁ st culture. Members of this culture believe that it is 
always wrong to commit any act of violence against another human being 
for any reason. 
 
 The Alphas believe that it is morally right to impose their beliefs and 
 values on culture A. They believe that it is a moral atrocity that culture A 
does not sacriﬁ ce children, and they believe that they have a moral duty to 
use whatever means are necessary to change the beliefs of culture A and 
have its members comply with this practice. 
 
 Culture B invades culture A and begins its program of subjugation and 
 indoctrination. 
 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
 1. Is it possible for an individual to belong to more than one culture at the same 
time? If so, does this pose any logical difﬁ culty for the cultural moral relativist? 
 2. Is there any logical difﬁ culty in being a moral relativist and belonging to 
 culture B? ( Hint: Consider not only what culture B believes is right and good 
for its own members to do but also what it believes is right and good for other 
cultures to do.) 
 3. What can you consistently believe with regard to the morality of culture A? 
The morality of culture B? Speciﬁ cally, as a consistent moral relativist, can you 
criticize or condemn the morality of culture A? Of culture B? 
 4. What can you consistently do with regard to culture B’s invasion and 
 attempted subjugation of culture A? 
 5. Suppose that sometime in the future the Betas become the majority subcul-
ture in culture B, and a majority of culture B comes to believe that child sacri-
ﬁ ce is wrong. Can this be described as “moral progress” from the standpoint of 
cultural moral relativism? Why or why not? 
 These cases highlight several serious problems with cultural moral relativism. 
1.   Relativism makes it impossible for us to criticize other cultures’ customs 
and values, even those that intuitively seem to us to be terribly wrong.  We 
can no longer say, for example, that a particular culture is wrong to 
practice slavery or child sacriﬁ ce, as long as that culture believes that 
those practices are morally right. 

 
Barriers to Critical Thinking 
23
2.   Relativism makes it impossible for us to criticize our own societies’ customs and 
values.  Suppose you personally oppose racial segregation, but a majority 
of your society supports it. According to relativism, you must change 
your mind and agree that racial segregation is right in your  society. In 
fact, if relativism is true, anyone who criticizes majority  values is  always 
wrong.  Total conformity to majority opinion is required.  
3.   Relativism rules out the idea of moral progress. Moral values can change, 
but if relativism is true, they can never become better or worse, for 
relativism implies that what is right for a society is what that culture 
believes is right  at that time. Thus, a relativist cannot say, for example, 
that the abolition of slavery or laws outlawing gender discrimination 
represented moral progress in the United States. 
4.   Relativism can lead to conﬂ icting moral duties. There are several ways in 
which a relativist might ﬁ nd himself stuck with conﬂ icting moral 
beliefs and duties. Cases 2 and 3 highlight two ways in which this 
can occur: 18 
 
a.   When a relativist is a member of a society that holds beliefs that conﬂ ict 
with moral relativism (cases 2 and 3). If your society believes, for 
example, that child sacriﬁ ce is absolutely and objectively right, 
then you too, as a moral relativist, must believe that child sacriﬁ ce 
is absolutely and objectively right, for whatever moral beliefs your 
society holds, you must hold as well. 
 
b.   When a relativist belongs to two or more cultures and those cultures hold 
mutually inconsistent moral beliefs (case 3). Can a person belong to 
two different cultures at the same time? It is hard to see why not. 
An Amish farmer living in Ohio, for instance, would seem to be 
a member of both an Amish culture and a larger American one. 
If such dual membership is possible, however, conﬂ icts can clearly 
occur between the two cultures’ moral codes. And given relativ-
ism’s claim that what is right for a person is whatever his or her 
culture believes is right, this could lead to conﬂ icting moral duties.  
 Thus, cultural moral relativism has consequences that make it very difﬁ cult to 
accept. In addition, however, it can be shown that the two main reasons people 
are attracted to cultural moral relativism—ethical disagreement and the value 
of tolerance—are not good reasons at all. 
 First, does the fact that there is deep disagreement in ethics show that 
there is no objective moral truth—that ethics is just a matter of opinion? 
Hardly. Think about another area in which there is deep, pervasive, and seem-
ingly irresolvable disagreement: religion. People disagree vehemently over 
whether God exists, whether there is an afterlife, and so forth; yet we don’t 
conclude from this that there is no objective truth about these matters. It may 
be difﬁ cult to  know  whether God exists. But  whether  he exists is not simply a 
matter of opinion. Thus, deep disagreement about an issue does not show that 
there is no objective truth about that issue. 

24 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Critical Thinking
 Second, as the cases in Exercise 1.4 make clear, cultural moral relativism 
does not necessarily support the value of tolerance. Relativism tells us that we 
should accept the customs and values of our society. Thus, if you live in an 
 intolerant society, relativism implies that you too should be intolerant. 
 Does this mean that cultural moral relativism has nothing at all to teach 
us? No. The fact that people disagree so much about ethics does not show 
that moral truth is simply a matter of opinion, but it should make us cautious 
and open-minded regarding our own ethical beliefs. If millions of obviously 
decent, intelligent people disagree with you, how can you be sure that your 
values are the correct ones? In this way relativism can teach us an important 
lesson about the value of intellectual humility. But we don’t need relativism—
which is a false and confused theory—to teach us this lesson. We can learn it 
just by opening our hearts and minds and thinking critically about the chal-
lenges of living an ethical life. 
 Wishful Thinking 
 Once, as a Little Leaguer, one of the authors was thrown out at the plate in a 
foolish attempt to stretch a triple into a home run, possibly costing the team 
the game. Angry and disappointed, he refused to believe that he had really 
been thrown out. “I was safe by a mile,” he said plaintively to his disbelieving 
coaches and teammates. It was only years later, when he was an adult, that he 
could admit to himself that he really had been out—out, in fact, by a mile. 
 Have you ever been guilty of wishful thinking—believing something not 
because you had good evidence for it but simply because you wished it were 
true? If so, you’re not alone. Throughout human history, reason has done battle 
with wishful thinking and has usually come out the loser. 
 People fear the unknown and invent comforting myths to render the 
universe less hostile and more predictable. They fear death and listen credu-
lously to stories of healing crystals, quack cures, and communication with the 
dead. They fantasize about possessing extraordinary personal powers and accept 
uncritically accounts of psychic prediction, levitation, and ESP. They delight 
in tales of the marvelous and the uncanny, and they buy mass-market tabloids 
that feature headlines such as “Spiritual Sex Channeler: Medium Helps Griev-
ing Widows Make Love to their Dead Husbands.” 19 They kid themselves into 
thinking, “It can’t happen to me,” and then ﬁ nd themselves dealing with the 
consequences of unwanted pregnancies, drunk-driving convictions, drug ad-
diction, or AIDS. 
 EXERCISE 1.5 
  I. Have you ever been guilty of self-interested thinking, self-serving bias, group 
bias, conformism, or wishful thinking? Without embarrassing yourself too much, 
discuss these critical thinking lapses in groups of three or four, then share with 
the class whatever examples you’d like to discuss. 
 We all need to be 
a little humble in 
our certainties. 
 —Tom Morris 
 The easiest thing 
of all is to de-
ceive one’s self; 
for what a man 
wishes, he gener-
ally believes to be 
true. 
 —Demosthenes 
 A man hears what 
he wants to hear 
and disregards the 
rest. 
 —Paul Simon 
 The universe is 
what it is, not 
what I choose that 
it should be. 
 —Bertrand Russell 

 
Characteristics of a Critical Thinker 
25
 II. This textbook gives a number of examples of self-interested  thinking, 
self-serving bias, group bias, conformism, and wishful thinking. Jot down 
at least two additional examples of each of these ﬁ ve critical thinking 
 hindrances. Divide into groups of three or four, discuss your examples with 
the group, and share what you think are the best examples with the class as a 
whole.  
 CHARACTERISTICS OF A CRITICAL THINKER 
 So far in this chapter, we have discussed (1) the nature of critical thinking; 
(2) key critical thinking standards such as clarity, precision, accuracy, and fair-
ness; (3) the beneﬁ ts of critical thinking; and (4) some major impediments to 
critical thinking, including egocentrism, sociocentrism, relativistic thinking, 
unwarranted assumptions, and wishful thinking. With this as background, we 
are now in a position to offer a general proﬁ le of a critical thinker. The follow-
ing list contrasts some of the key intellectual traits of critical thinkers with the 
relevant traits of uncritical thinkers. 20 
Critical Thinkers . . .
Uncritical Thinkers . . .
Have a passionate drive for  clarity 
precision, accuracy, and other critical 
thinking standards.
Often think in ways that 
are unclear,  imprecise, and 
inaccurate.
Are sensitive to ways in which 
critical thinking can be skewed by 
egocentrism, sociocentrism, wishful 
thinking, and other  impediments.
Often fall prey to egocentrism, 
 sociocentrism, relativistic 
 thinking,  unwarranted 
assumptions, and  wishful 
thinking
Are skilled at understanding, 
analyzing, and evaluating  arguments 
and viewpoints.
Often misunderstand or 
evaluate  unfairly arguments and 
viewpoints.
Reason logically and draw 
 appropriate conclusions from 
evidence and data.
Think illogically and draw 
unsupported conclusions from 
evidence and data.
Are intellectually honest with 
themselves, acknowledging what they 
don’t know and  recognizing their 
limitations.
Pretend they know more 
than they do and ignore their 
limitations.
Listen open-mindedly to 
 opposing points of view and 
welcome criticisms of beliefs and 
assumptions.
Are closed-minded and 
resist criticisms of beliefs and 
assumptions.
What is the 
 hardest task in 
the world? To 
think.
—Ralph Waldo 
Emerson

26 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Critical Thinking
Base their beliefs on facts and 
evidence rather than on personal 
preference or self-interest.
Often base beliefs on mere 
personal preference or self-
interest.
Are aware of the biases and pre-
conceptions that shape the way they 
perceive the world.
Lack awareness of their own 
biases and preconceptions.
Think independently and are 
not afraid to disagree with group 
opinion.
Tend to engage in “groupthink,” 
uncritically following the beliefs 
and values of the crowd.
Are able to get to the heart of an 
issue or a problem, without being 
distracted by details.
Are easily distracted and lack 
the ability to zero in on the 
essence of an issue or a problem.
Have the intellectual courage to face 
and assess fairly ideas that challenge 
even their most basic beliefs.
Fear and resist ideas that 
challenge their basic beliefs.
Pursue truth and are curious about a 
wide range of issues.
Are often relatively indifferent 
to truth and lack curiosity.
Have the intellectual perseverance 
to pursue insights or truths despite 
obstacles or difﬁ culties
Tend not to persevere when 
they encounter intellectual 
obstacles or difﬁ culties.
 A course in critical thinking is like most other things in life: You get 
out of it what you put into it. If you approach critical thinking as a chore—a 
pointless general education requirement you need to get out of the way be-
fore you can turn to more “relevant” courses in your major—a chore it will 
be. On the other hand, if you approach critical thinking as an opportunity to 
learn habits of disciplined thinking that are vital to success in school, in your 
career, and in your life as a liberally educated person, critical thinking can be a 
rewarding and even transformative experience.  
 EXERCISE 1.6 
  I. Review the list of critical thinking traits on pages 25–26, then write a 250-word 
essay in which you address the following questions: Which of the traits listed do you 
think is your strongest critical thinking trait? Why? Which is your weakest? Why? 
What could you do to improve in this latter regard? Be speciﬁ c and realistic. 
  II. In groups of three or four, deﬁ ne the following critical thinking traits: intel-
lectual honesty, open-mindedness, fair-mindedness, intellectual courage, and in-
tellectual perseverance. (See the list of critical thinking traits on pages 25–26 for 
some broad hints.) Give an example of each. 
 III. In groups of three or four, think of examples, either from your experience or 
from your knowledge of current events or history, of individuals who possess, or 
did possess, the quality of intellectual courage to an unusual degree. What about 
 To become a criti-
cal thinker is not, 
in the end, to be 
the same person 
you are now, 
only with better 
abilities; it is, 
in an important 
sense, to become 
a  different person.  
 —Gerald Nosich 
Character is 
 destiny.
—Heraclitus

 
Summary 
27
them leads you to think of them as being especially intellectually courageous? Do 
the same for the qualities of open-mindedness, intellectual honesty, and intellec-
tual perseverance. Be prepared to share your group’s best examples with the class.  
 SUMMARY 
1.   Critical thinking  is the general term given to a wide range of cognitive skills 
and intellectual dispositions needed to effectively identify, analyze, and 
evaluate arguments and truth claims; to discover and overcome personal 
preconceptions and biases; to formulate and present convincing reasons in 
support of conclusions; and to make reasonable, intelligent decisions about 
what to believe and what to do. It is disciplined thinking governed by 
clear intellectual standards that have proven their value over the course of 
human history. Among the most important of these intellectual standards 
are clarity, precision, accuracy, relevance, consistency, logical correctness, 
completeness, and fairness. 
2.   Critical thinking is beneﬁ cial for many reasons. It can help students do 
better in school by improving their ability to understand, construct, and 
criticize arguments. It can help people succeed in their careers by improv-
ing their ability to solve problems, think creatively, and communicate their 
ideas clearly and effectively. It can also reduce the likelihood of making 
serious mistakes in important personal decisions, promote democratic pro-
cesses by improving the quality of public decision making, and liberate and 
empower individuals by freeing them from the unexamined assumptions, 
dogmas, and prejudices of their upbringing, their society, and their age.  
3.   Major barriers to critical thinking include egocentrism, sociocentrism, 
 unwarranted assumptions, relativistic thinking, and wishful thinking.
 Egocentrism is the tendency to see reality as centered on oneself. Two 
 common forms of egocentrism are self-interested thinking (the 
 tendency to accept and defend beliefs that accord with one’s own 
 self-interest) and self-serving bias (the tendency to overrate oneself). 
 Sociocentrism is group-centered thinking. Two common varieties of 
 sociocentrism are group bias (the tendency to see one’s culture or 
group as being better than others) and conformism (the tendency to 
conform, often unthinkingly, to authority or to group standards of 
 conduct and  belief). 
 Unwarranted assumptions  are things we take for granted without good 
 reason. Often, unwarranted assumptions take the form of stereo-
types.   Stereotypes  are generalizations about a group of people in which 
 identical characteristics are assigned to all or virtually all members of the 
group, often without regard to whether such attributions are  accurate.  
 To learn is to face 
transformation. 
 —Parker J. Palmer 

28 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Critical Thinking
 Relativistic thinking is thinking that is based on the idea that there is no 
“objective” or “absolute” truth because truth is simply a matter of 
 opinion. The most popular form of relativism is  moral relativism, which 
holds that what is morally right and good varies from individual to 
individual ( moral subjectivism ) or from culture to culture ( cultural moral 
relativism ). 
 Wishful thinking is believing something because it makes one feel good, 
not because there is good reason for thinking that it is true. 
4.   Critical thinkers exhibit a number of traits that distinguish them from un-
critical thinkers.  Among the most important of these traits are a passionate 
drive for clarity, precision, accuracy, and other intellectual standards that 
characterize careful, disciplined thinking; a sensitivity to the ways in which 
critical thinking can be skewed by egocentrism, wishful thinking, and 
other psychological obstacles to rational belief; honesty and intellectual 
humility; open-mindedness; intellectual courage; love of truth; and intel-
lectual perseverance.  

29
 CHAPTER 2
 RECOGNIZING ARGUMENTS  
 As we saw in the previous chapter, critical thinking is centrally concerned 
with  reasons:  identifying reasons, evaluating reasons, and giving reasons. In 
critical thinking, passages that present reasons for a claim are called  arguments. 
In this chapter we explore the concept of an argument and explain how to 
distinguish arguments from nonarguments. 
 WHAT IS AN ARGUMENT? 
 When people hear the word  argument, they usually think of some kind of 
quarrel or shouting match. In critical thinking, however, an argument is simply 
a claim defended with reasons. 
 Arguments are composed of one or more premises and a conclusion. 
 Premises  are statements in an argument offered as evidence or reasons why we 
should accept another statement, the conclusion. The  conclusion  is the state-
ment in an argument that the premises are intended to prove or support. An 
 argument, accordingly, is a group of statements, one or more of which (called 
the premises) are intended to prove or support another statement (called the 
conclusion). 
 A  statement  is a sentence that can be viewed as either true or false.1 Here 
are some examples of statements: 
 Red is a color. 
 Canada is in South America. 
 God does not exist. 
 Abortion is morally wrong. 
 Some of these statements are clearly true, some are clearly false, and some 
are controversial. Each of them is a statement, however, because each can be 
prefaced with the phrase “It is true that” or “It is false that.” 

30 
CHAPTER 2 Recognizing Arguments
 Four things should be noted about statements. First, a sentence may 
be used to express more than one statement. For example, the grammatical 
 sentence 
 Roses are red and violets are blue 
expresses two distinct statements (“roses are red” and “violets are blue”). Each 
of these is a statement because each is capable of standing alone as a declarative 
sentence. 
 Second, a statement can sometimes be expressed as a phrase or an in-
complete clause, rather than as a complete declarative sentence. Consider the 
sentence 
 With mortgage interest rates at thirty-year lows, you owe it to yourself to 
consider reﬁ nancing your home. (radio ad) 
Grammatically, this is a single declarative sentence. The speaker’s intent, how-
ever, is clearly to defend one assertion (“You owe it to yourself to consider 
reﬁ nancing your home”) on the basis of another (“Mortgage interest rates are 
at thirty-year lows”). The fact that we have to rephrase the sentence slightly to 
make this explicit should not obscure the fact that two statements are being 
offered rather than one. 
 Third, not all sentences are statements, that is, sentences that either assert 
or deny that something is the case. Here are some examples of sentences that 
are not statements: 
 What time is it? (question) 
 Hi, Dad! (greeting) 
 Close the window! (command) 
 Please send me your current catalog. (request) 
 Let’s go to Paris for our anniversary. (proposal) 
 Insert tab A into slot B. (instruction) 
 Oh, my goodness! (exclamation) 
None of these is a statement because none of them asserts or denies that 
anything is the case. None says, in effect, “This is a fact. Accept this; it is true.” 
Consequently, sentences like these are not parts of arguments. 
 Finally, statements can be about subjective matters of personal 
experience as well as objectively veriﬁ able matters of fact. If I say, for 
example, 
 I feel a slight twinge in my left knee 
this is a statement because it is either true or false (I might be lying, after all), 
even though other people may have no way of verifying whether I am telling 
the truth. 

 
What Is an Argument? 
31
 Not all sentences, however, are as they appear. Some sentences that look 
like nonstatements are actually statements and can be used in arguments. Here 
are two examples: 
 Alyssa, you should quit smoking. Don’t you realize how bad that is for your 
health? 
 Commencement address: Do not read beauty magazines. They will only make 
you feel ugly. (Mary Schmich)  
 The ﬁ rst example contains a rhetorical question. A  rhetorical question  
is a sentence that has the grammatical form of a question but is meant to be 
understood as a statement. In our example, the person asking the question isn’t 
really looking for information. She’s making an assertion: that smoking is very 
bad for one’s health. This assertion is offered as a reason (premise) to support 
the conclusion that Alyssa should quit smoking. 
 The second example includes an  ought imperative,  that is, a sentence that 
has the form of an imperative or command but is intended to assert a value or 
ought judgment about what is good or bad or right or wrong. Grammatically, 
“Do not read beauty magazines” looks like a command or suggestion. In this 
context, however, the speaker is clearly making an assertion: that you  shouldn’t 
read beauty magazines. Her statement that reading such magazines will only 
make you feel ugly is offered as a reason to support this value judgment. 
 How can we tell when a sentence that looks like a command or sug-
gestion is really an ought imperative? The key question to ask is this: Can we 
accurately rephrase the sentence so that it refers to what someone should or 
ought to do? If we can, the sentence should be regarded as a statement. 
 Consider two further examples. Suppose a drill sergeant says to a new 
recruit, 
 Close that window, soldier! It’s freezing in here! 
 In this context it is clear that the sergeant is issuing an order rather than ex-
pressing an ought judgment (“You  ought  to close that window, soldier!”). On 
the other hand, if one roommate were to say to another, 
 Don’t blow-dry your hair in the tub, Bert! You could electrocute yourself! 
it is likely that the roommate is expressing an ought judgment (“You  shouldn’t 
blow-dry your hair in the tub!”), rather than issuing an order or making a mere 
suggestion. 
 As these examples make clear, it is always important to consider the con-
text in which an expression is used. A sentence such as “Eat your vegetables” 
might be a command (nonstatement) in one context and an ought imperative 
(statement) in another. 
 To recap: Imperative sentences are not statements if they are intended as 
orders, suggestions, proposals, or exhortations. They are statements if they are 
intended as pieces of advice or value judgments about what someone ought 
or ought not to do. 

32 
CHAPTER 2 Recognizing Arguments
 EXERCISE 2.1 
  I. Determine whether, in typical contexts, the following sentences are or are 
not statements. Exercises marked with the icon ( ) are answered in the back of 
the book. 
 1.  Capital punishment is wrong. 
 2.  Can vegetarians eat animal crackers? (George Carlin) 
 3.  Ted Williams is the greatest hitter in baseball history. 
 4.  What do you say we stop at the next rest stop? 
 5.  Abraham Lincoln was the ﬁ rst president of the United States.  
 6.  Let’s party! 
 7.  Great! 
 8.  Keep off the grass. (sign) 
 9.  If Sally calls, tell her I’m at the library. 
10.  I hope Peter likes his new job. 
11.  Can’t you see that pornography demeans women? 
12.  Holy cow! 
13.  Please print your name legibly. 
14.  What will it proﬁ t a man, if he gains the whole world and forfeits his life? 
(Matt. 16:26) 
15.   You want mayo on that, right? 
16.  What a crock! 
17.  Give me a call if you have trouble downloading the ﬁ le.  
18.  Blondes are more attractive than brunettes. 
19.  I’ll have a cheeseburger and fries, please. (said to a fast-food restaurant 
 employee) 
20.  Give us this day our daily bread. (said in prayer) 
21.  Smoke ’em if you’ve got ’em. 
22.  Mi casa es su casa. 
23.  Don’t you realize how silly that hat looks? 
24.  What’s love but a secondhand emotion? (Tina Turner) 
25.   Yikes! 
  II. Determine whether the following passages do or do not contain ought 
 imperatives. 
 1.  Be nice to your kids. They’ll choose your nursing home. (bumper sticker) 
  A nineteen-year-old man was hospitalized in Salt Lake City after un-
dertaking a personal investigation into the eternal question of whether 
it is possible to ﬁ re a .22-caliber bullet by placing it inside a straw and 
striking it with a hammer.  Answer: Sometimes (including this time); it 
went off and hit him in the stomach. 2 
 Critical Thinking Lapse 

 
Identifying Premises and Conclusions 
33
 2.  Toby, never throw a pen at your sister! You could put an eye out! (said by 
Toby’s mother) 
 3.   Never raise your hands to your kids. It leaves your groin unprotected. 
(George Carlin) 
 4.   If you consume three or more alcoholic drinks every day, ask your doctor 
whether you should take ibuprofen or other pain relievers/fever reducers. 
Ibuprofen may cause stomach bleeding. (label) 
 5.  Why don’t we eat at El Grande Burrito tonight. I feel like Mexican. 
 6.   If you do not get your ﬁ rst meal service choice, please do not be distressed, 
as all our entrées taste very much the same. (ﬂ ight attendant) 
 7.  Turn off your engine when waiting to pick up the kids. Idling longer than 
ten seconds in park uses more gas than restarting the car. (Al Gore) 
 8.   In batting practice you must make a point of leaving the bad pitches alone. 
You don’t want your reﬂ exes to get into bad habits. (Mickey Mantle) 
 9.   Don’t bother buying premium gas if your car speciﬁ es regular. It won’t make 
your car go faster or operate more efﬁ ciently—and it’s about 14 percent 
more expensive. ( Consumer Reports advertising brochure) 
10.    Up, sluggard, and waste not life; in the grave will be sleeping enough. 
 (Benjamin Franklin) 
11.    I never use a whistle in practice. I want the players to get used to reacting to 
my voice—just like in a real game. (basketball coach Mike Krzyzewski) 
12.   Associate not with evil men, lest you increase their number. (George 
Herbert) 
13.    If you play [poker] enough, accept that from time to time you are going to 
go bust, because from time to time, everyone, even the best of the best, does. 
(Doc Holliday) 
14.    O Lord, won’t you buy me a Mercedes Benz? My friends all drive Porsches; 
I must make amends. ( Janis Joplin) 
15.    Borrow money from pessimists—they don’t expect it back. (Steven Wright) 
 IDENTIFYING PREMISES AND CONCLUSIONS 
 In identifying premises and conclusions, we are often helped by indicator 
words.  Indicator words  are words or phrases that provide clues that premises 
or conclusions are being put forward.  Premise indicators  indicate that prem-
ises are being offered, and  conclusion indicators  indicate that conclusions are 
being  offered. Here are some common premise indicators: 
 since  
 because 
 for 
  given that 
 seeing that  
 considering that 
 inasmuch as  
  as 

34 
CHAPTER 2 Recognizing Arguments
 in view of the fact that 
  as indicated by 
 judging from 
 on account of 
 The following examples illustrate the use of premise indicators: 
 Having fun can be the spice of life but not its main course,  because when it 
is over, nothing of lasting value remains. (Harold Kushner) 
 Since effective reasoning requires reliable information, it’s important to be 
able to distinguish good sources and trustworthy experts from less useful 
ones. (Drew E. Hinderer) 
 Women are not by any means to blame when they reject the rules of life, 
which have been introduced into the world,  seeing that it is men who have 
made them without their consent. (Michel de Montaigne) 
 I think that,  as life is action and passion, it is required of a man that he 
should share the passion and action of his time, at peril of being judged 
not to have lived. (Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.) 
 And here are some common conclusion indicators: 
 therefore  
  thus 
 hence 
  consequently 
 so  
  accordingly 
 it follows that  
  for this reason 
 that is why  
  which shows that 
 wherefore  
  this implies that 
 as a result 
  this suggests that 
 this being so  
  we may infer that 
 These examples illustrate the use of conclusion indicators: 
 There’s probably no God,  so stop worrying and enjoy your life. (ad on 
 London bus) 
 Rapid economic improvements represent a life-or-death imperative 
throughout the Third World. Its people will not be denied that hope, no 
matter the environmental costs.  As a result, that choice must not be forced 
upon them. (Al Gore) 
 Your life is what your thoughts make it.  That is why it is important for all of 
us to guard our minds from unhealthy habits of thinking, habits that hold 
us back from what we could be accomplishing. (Tom Morris) 
 As our birth brought us the birth of all things, so will our death bring us 
the death of all things.  Wherefore it is as foolish to weep because a hundred 
years from now we shall not be alive, as to weep because we were not living 
a hundred years ago. (Michel de Montaigne) 

 
Identifying Premises and Conclusions 
35
 Understanding arguments would be easier if the expressions just listed 
were used only to signal premises or conclusions. That is not the case, however, 
as the following examples illustrate: 
 I haven’t seen you  since high school. 
 You’ve had that jacket  for as long as I’ve known you. 
 Thus far everything has been great. 
 It was  so cold that even the ski resorts shut down. 
 I wouldn’t mind  seeing that movie again. 
 There is water on the ﬂ oor  because the sink overﬂ owed. 
 In none of these examples does the italicized term function as an indicator 
word. This shows once again why it’s so important to consider the context 
when determining the meaning of an expression. 
 Many arguments contain no indicator words at all. Here are two  examples: 
 Cats are smarter than dogs. You can’t get eight cats to pull a sled through 
snow. ( Jeff Valdez) 
 I can’t be completely responsible for my life. After all, there are many factors 
outside my control, people and forces that create obstacles and undermine my 
efforts. And we are subject to pressures and inﬂ uences from within ourselves: 
feelings of greed, fear of death, altruistic impulses, sexual compulsions, need 
for social acceptance, and so on. ( John Chaffee, emphasis omitted)  
 In these passages, there are no indicator words to help us identify the premises 
and conclusions. Reading carefully, however, we can see that the point of the 
ﬁ rst passage is to support the claim, “Cats are smarter than dogs,” and the point 
of the second passage is to support the claim, “I can’t be completely responsible 
for my life.” 
 How can we ﬁ nd the conclusion of an argument when the argument 
contains no indicator words? The following list provides some helpful hints. 
 Tips on Finding the Conclusion of an Argument 
•   Find the main issue and ask yourself what position the writer or 
speaker is taking on that issue. 
•   Look at the beginning or end of the passage; the conclusion is often 
(but not always) found in one of those places. 
•   Ask yourself, “What is the writer or speaker trying to prove?” That 
will be the conclusion. 
•   Try putting the word  therefore before one of the statements. If it ﬁ ts, 
that statement is probably the conclusion. 
•   Try the “because” trick. That is, try to ﬁ nd the most appropriate way 
to ﬁ ll in the blanks in the following statement: The writer or speaker 

36 
CHAPTER 2 Recognizing Arguments
believes 
 (conclusion) because 
 (premise). The 
conclusion will naturally come before the word  because. 3 
 EXERCISE 2.2  
 I.  The following exercises will give you practice in identifying premises and 
conclusions. 
 1.   Since light takes time to reach our eyes, all that we see really existed in the 
past. (Louis Pojman,  The Theory of Knowledge ) 
 2.   Life changes when you least expect it to. The future is uncertain. So seize 
this day, seize this moment, and make the most of it.( Jim Valvano, quoted in 
Mike Krzyzewski,  Leading with the Heart ) 
 3.   Take care of a good name: for this shall continue with thee, more than a 
thousand treasures precious and great. (Ecclesiasticus 41:15) 
 4.   I think faith is a vice, because faith means believing a proposition when 
there is no good reason for believing it. (Bertrand Russell, “The Existence 
and Nature of God”) 
 5.   You want to be very careful about lying; otherwise you are nearly sure to get 
caught. (Mark Twain, “Advice to Youth”) 
 6.   There is no deﬁ nitive way to prove any one set of religious beliefs to the 
exclusion of all others. For that reason religious freedom is a human right. 
(Richard Paul and Linda Elder,  The Miniature Guide to Understanding the 
Foundations of Ethical Reasoning ) 
 7.   Science is based on experiment, on a willingness to challenge old dogma, on 
an openness to see the universe as it really is. Accordingly, science sometimes 
requires courage—at the very least the courage to question the conventional 
wisdom. (Carl Sagan,  Broca’s Brain: Reﬂ ections on the Romance of Science ) 
 8.   Do not play your sound system loudly as you may not be able to hear warn-
ing sirens from emergency vehicles. In addition, hearing damage from loud 
noise is almost undetectable until it’s too late. (car owner’s manual) 
 9.   The invention or discovery of symbols is doubtless by far the single great-
est event in the history of man. Without them, no intellectual advance is 
possible; with them, there is no limit set to intellectual development except 
inherent stupidity. ( John Dewey,  The Quest for Certainty ) 
 10.   You know how I know animals have souls? Because on average, the lowest 
animal is a lot nicer and kinder than most of the human beings that inhabit 
this Earth. (newspaper call-in column) 
 11.   Democracy has at least one merit, namely, that a member of Parliament can-
not be stupider than his constituents, for the more stupid he is, the more 
stupid they were to elect him. (Bertrand Russell,  Autobiography ) 
 12.   Don’t worry about senility. When it hits you, you won’t know it. (Bill Cosby, 
 Time Flies ) 
 13.   There is nothing wrong with burning crude [oil] like crazy—oil isn’t 
helping anyone when it sits in the ground—so long as there’s a plan for 
What we have 
to learn to do we 
learn by doing. 
 —Aristotle 
 We cannot get 
anywhere without 
practice. 
 —Thich Thien-An 

 
Identifying Premises and Conclusions 
37
energy alternatives when the cheap oil runs out. (Gregg Easterbrook, 
“Opportunity Costs”) 
 14.    There is no doubt that certain events recorded at seances are genuine. Who 
does not recall the famous incident at Sybil Seretsky’s when her goldﬁ sh 
sang “I Got Rhythm” —a favorite tune of her recently deceased nephew? 
(Woody Allen,  Without Feathers ) 
 15.    So far the states are spending more than 90 percent of the tobacco-
settlement money on programs unrelated to smoking, such as building 
highways. This is good, because we need quality highways to handle the 
sharp increase in the number of Mercedes automobiles purchased by lawyers 
enriched by the tobacco settlement. (Dave Barry, “War on Smoking Always 
Has Room for Another Lawyer”) 
 16.    It’s part of human nature to be angry at God when bad things happen, but 
what’s the point? If we encourage each other to blame God for  injustices, 
then aren’t we giving the evil or dark side a victory by keeping God’s 
 precious children—that’s all of us—away from His loving arms? (letter to 
the editor) 
 17.    In great contests each party claims to act in accordance with the will of 
God. Both may be, and one must be, wrong. God cannot be for and against 
the same thing at the same time. (Abraham Lincoln, “Meditation on the 
Divine Will”)  
 18.   There seems to be a tacit assumption that if grizzlies survive in Canada and 
Alaska, that is good enough. It is not good enough for me. The Alaska bears 
are a distinct species. Relegating grizzlies to Alaska is about like relegating 
happiness to heaven; one may never get there. (Aldo Leopold,  A Sand 
County Almanac ) 
 19.    Has it ever occurred to you how lucky you are to be alive? More than 
99% of all creatures that have ever lived have died without progeny, but 
not a single one of your ancestors falls into this group! (Daniel C. Dennett, 
 Darwin’s Dangerous Idea ) 
 20.    Men love the suit so much, we’ve actually styled our pajamas to look like a 
tiny suit. Our pajamas have little lapels, little cuffs, simulated breast pockets. 
Do you need a breast pocket on your pajamas? You put a pen in there, 
you roll over in the middle of the night, you kill yourself. ( Jerry Seinfeld, 
 SeinLanguage ) 
  II. Identify the premises and conclusions in the following arguments. 
 1.   When the universe has crushed him man will still be nobler than that which 
kills him, because he knows that he is dying, and of its victory the universe 
knows nothing. (Blaise Pascal,  Pensées ) 
 2.   Rights are either God-given or evolve out of the democratic process. Most 
rights are based on the ability of people to agree on a social contract, the 
ability to make and keep agreements. Animals cannot possibly reach such 
an agreement with other creatures. They cannot respect anyone else’s rights. 
Therefore they cannot be said to have rights. (Rush Limbaugh,  The Way 
Things Ought to Be ) 

38 
CHAPTER 2 Recognizing Arguments
 3.   You’d better shape up, ’cuz I need a man, and my heart is set on you. (Olivia 
Newton-John,  Grease ) 
 4.   Since moral responsibility presupposes free-will, since this freedom is not 
compatible with universal causal determinism, and since universal causal 
determinism appears to be the case, it seems evident that—contrary to what 
most people believe—human beings are not morally responsible. (stated but 
not endorsed in William H. Halverson,  A Concise Introduction to Philosophy, 
4th ed. [adapted]) 
 5.   Our faith comes in moments; our vice is habitual. Yet there is a depth in 
those brief moments which constrains us to ascribe more reality to them 
than to all other experiences. For this reason the argument which is always 
forthcoming to silence those who conceive extraordinary hopes of man, 
namely the appeal to experience, is forever invalid and vain. (Ralph Waldo 
Emerson, “The Over-Soul”)  
 6.   The travel rule I will stress here is: Never trust anything you read in travel 
articles. Travel articles appear in publications that sell large, expensive 
advertisements to tourism-related industries, and these industries do not 
wish to see articles with headlines like: “ URUGUAY: DON’T BOTHER ”. So no 
matter what kind of leech-infested, plumbing-free destination travel writers 
are writing about, they always stress the positive. (Dave Barry,  Dave Barry’s 
Greatest Hits; emphasis omitted) 
 7.   How can anyone in his right mind criticize the state police for the speed 
traps? If you’re not speeding, you don’t have to worry about them. It could 
save your life if some other speeder is stopped. (newspaper call-in column) 
 8.   Philosophy is dangerous whenever it is taken seriously. But so is life. Safety 
is not an option. Our choices, then, are not between risk and security, but 
between a life lived consciously, fully, humanly in the most complete sense 
and a life that just happens. (Douglas J. Soccio,  Archetypes of Wisdom, 3rd ed.) 
 9.   Our nation protests, encourages, and even intervenes in the affairs of 
other nations on the basis of its relations to corporations. But if this is the 
case, how can we dissociate ourselves from the plight of people in these 
 countries? (Louis P. Pojman,  Global Environmental Ethics ) 
 10.   If a man say, “I love God,” and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that 
loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he 
hath not seen? (I John 4:20) 
 11.   Each of us has an intellectual dimension to his experience. We need ideas 
as much as we need food, air, or water. Ideas nourish the mind as the latter 
provide for the body. In light of this, it’s clear that we need good ideas as 
much as we need good food, good air, and good water. (Tom Morris,  If 
Aristotle Ran General Motors ) 
 12.   What is right in one place may be wrong in another, because the only 
criterion for distinguishing right from wrong—and so the only ethical 
standard for judging an action—is the moral system of the society in which 
the act occurs. (stated but not endorsed in William H. Shaw,  Business Ethics, 
4th ed.) 
 13.   Whether you like it or not, you’d better accept reality the way it occurs: as 
highly imperfect and ﬁ lled with most fallible human beings. Your alternative? 

 
Identifying Premises and Conclusions 
39
Continual anxiety and desperate disappointments. (Albert Ellis and Robert A. 
Harper,  A New Guide to Rational Living ) 
 14.   We should be emotionally reconciled to the fact of death, rather than fearing 
it, once we understand that death is necessary for two important, and very 
positive, things. First, it’s necessary for our appreciation of life. The more vivid 
our sense of the approach of death, the more we relish the small things in life. 
And secondly, death is necessary for the continued march of evolutionary 
improvement, an ongoing progress leading to more valuable states of good, to 
take place on earth. (Tom Morris,  Philosophy for Dummies ) 
 15.   It is a scientiﬁ c fact that 1974 was the worst year in world history for rock 
music. And I am NOT saying this because among the top musical acts to 
emerge that year were Abba AND Barry Manilow. I am saying it because the 
hit songs included “Kung Fu Fighting,” “Seasons in the Sun,” “Billy Don’t Be 
a Hero,” “The Night Chicago Died” and “(You’re) Having My Baby.” (Dave 
Barry,  Dave Barry Turns 50  ) 
 16.   Getting in your run early certainly has its advantages. Those who develop 
the ﬁ rst-thing-in-the-morning routine tend to be more consistent in their 
training. . . . Morning runs also avoid the heat and peak air pollution. You can 
enjoy your run without carrying along all the stress that builds up during 
the day. Early-morning runs . . . save time too by combining your morning 
and postrun shower. (Bob Glover and Shelly-lynn Florence Glover,  The 
Competitive Runner’s Handbook ) 
 17.    Guys accuse me of constantly singing the praises of Duke [University’s men’s 
basketball program]. Well, what is there not to like? You go there and it has 
everything you dream about in college basketball. Guys play hard. They go to 
class. They do things the right way. They have discipline. They go out and 
win. The crowd is behind them. (Dick Vitale,  Campus Chaos ) 
 18.   I wish that someone would give a course in how to live. It can’t be taught in 
the colleges: that’s perfectly obvious, for college professors don’t know any 
better than the rest of us. (A. Edward Newton,  The Book-Collecting Game ) 
 19.   Shop at the farmer’s market. You’ll begin to eat food in season, when they 
are at the peak of their nutritional value and ﬂ avor, and you’ll cook, because 
you won’t ﬁ nd anything processed or microwavable. You’ll also be supporting 
farmers in your community, helping defend the countryside from sprawl, 
saving oil by eating food produced nearby, and teaching your children that 
a carrot is a root, not a machine-lathed orange bullet that comes in a plastic 
bag. (Michael Pollan, “Six Reasons for Eating Wisely”) 
 20.    The next time you ﬁ nd yourself in an argument, rather than defend your 
position, see if you can see the other point of view ﬁ rst. .  . . When you 
understand other positions and points of view, several wonderful things 
begin to happen. First, you often learn something new . . . [and] expand your 
horizons. Second, when the person you are talking to feels listened to, he 
or she will appreciate and respect you far more than when you habitually 
jump in with your own position. . . . A side beneﬁ t is that the person you are 
speaking to may even listen to your point of view. (Richard Carlson,  Don’t 
Sweat the Small Stuff . . . And It’s All Small Stuff    )  

40 
CHAPTER 2 Recognizing Arguments
 WHAT IS NOT AN ARGUMENT?  
 We encounter arguments everywhere in daily life—at school, at work, in magazine 
ads, in newspaper editorials, in political discussions, in television documentaries, 
and on radio talk shows. Of course, people don’t use language only to offer argu-
ments: they also use it to tell jokes, sing songs, recite poetry, express feelings, report 
events, ask questions, offer explanations, say prayers, give orders, and exchange 
wedding vows. How, then, can we distinguish arguments from nonarguments? 
 The basic test is quite simple. Something counts as an argument when 
(1) it is a group of two or more statements and (2) one of those statements 
(the conclusion) is claimed or intended to be supported by the others (the 
premises). By applying this simple test, we can usually tell whether a given pas-
sage is or is not an argument. Now let’s look at ﬁ ve types of nonargumentative 
discourse that are sometimes confused with arguments: 
•   reports 
•   unsupported assertions 
•   conditional statements 
•   illustrations 
•   explanations 
 Reports 
 The purpose of a  report is simply to convey information about a subject. Here 
is an example of a report:
 Sweeping changes occurred in demographics, economics, culture, and soci-
ety during the last quarter of the 20th century. The nation aged, and more 
  Larry Walters, a thirty-three-year-old truck driver from North 
 Hollywood, California, had always dreamed about ﬂ ying. So, on 
July 2, 1982, Walters tied forty-two Army surplus weather balloons to 
an aluminum lawn chair, strapped himself in, and cut himself loose. 
 
 Walters expected to ﬂ oat lazily over the housetops. Instead, he shot 
up to 16,000 feet. 
 
 Soon Walters found himself drifting into the main approach corridor 
of Los Angeles International Airport. Shivering with cold, he managed to 
get himself down by shooting out some balloons with a pellet gun. 
 
 Eventually, Walters crashed into some power lines, brieﬂ y blacking 
out a small area in Long Beach. 
 
 When asked why he had done it, Walters simply replied, “A man 
can’t just sit around.” 4 
 Critical Thinking Lapse 

 
What Is Not an Argument? 
41
of its people gravitated to the Sunbelt. Sprawling “urban corridors” and 
“edge cities” challenged older central cities as sites for commercial, as well 
as residential, development. Rapid technological change fueled the growth 
of globalized industries, restructuring the labor force to ﬁ t a “postindustrial” 
economy. 5  
 In this passage, the authors are simply reporting a series of events; their aim is 
to narrate and inform, not to offer reasons why one statement should be ac-
cepted on the basis of others. 
 Caution is needed, however, with reports  about  arguments. Here is an 
example of such a passage:
 Government is legitimate, according to Hobbes, because living under a gov-
ernment is better than living in a state of nature. The advantages of govern-
ment are so great that it is worth sacriﬁ cing some of our freedom in order to 
bring about these advantages. For this reason, rational people would consent 
to sign a social contract and subject themselves to the laws and powers of a 
government. 6  
 This is not an argument because the author is merely reporting another 
person’s argument, not endorsing it or putting it forward as his own. 
 Unsupported Assertions 
 Unsupported assertions  are statements about what a speaker or writer hap-
pens to believe. Such statements can be true or false, rational or irrational, but 
they are parts of arguments only if the speaker or writer claims that they follow 
from, or support, other claims. Here is an example of a series of unsupported 
assertions:
 I believe that it is not dying that people are afraid of. Something else, something 
more unsettling and more tragic than dying frightens us. We are afraid of never 
having lived, of coming to the end of our days with the sense that we were never 
really alive, that we never ﬁ gured out what life was for. 7  
 Because there is no claim that any of these statements follow from, or imply, 
any other statements, this is not an argument. 
 Conditional Statements 
 A conditional statement is an  if-then statement. Here are several examples: 
 If it rains, then the picnic will be canceled. 
 You must speak French if you grew up in Quebec. 
 If at ﬁ rst you don’t succeed, don’t try skydiving. 
 Conditional statements are made up of two basic parts. The ﬁ rst part, the 
statement(s) following the word  if, is called the  antecedent.  The second part, 
the statement(s) following the word  then, is called the  consequent.  
 Few may think, yet 
all have opinions.  
 —George Berkeley 

42 
CHAPTER 2 Recognizing Arguments
 Conditional statements need not be explicitly in  if-then form; in fact, in 
modern usage,  then  is usually dropped. For example, the following statements 
are conditional statements: 
 Should it rain, the picnic will be canceled. 
 In the event of rain, the picnic will be canceled. 
 Pete will graduate, provided he passes Critical Thinking. 
 Conditional statements are not arguments, because there is no claim that 
any statement  follows from any part of a conditional statement. Thus, if I say, “If 
it rains, the picnic will be canceled,” I’m not asserting either that it will rain or 
that the picnic will be canceled. I’m only asserting that  if  the ﬁ rst statement is 
true, the second statement will also be true. Because there is no claim that any 
statement follows from, or supports, this conditional statement, no argument 
has been given. 
 Although conditional statements are not arguments, some conditional 
statements do involve a process of reasoning. Thus, if I say, for example, 
 If Rhode Island were larger than Ohio, and Ohio were larger than Texas, 
then Rhode Island would be larger than Texas 
 it may appear that I have reasoned to a conclusion, and thus offered an argu-
ment. In fact, however, no argument has been given. All I have asserted is that 
 if the ﬁ rst two statements are true, then the third statement must also be true. 
I have not claimed that any of these statements  are true. Thus, I have not put 
forward any premises or reasoned to any conclusion. In fact, I have asserted 
only a single claim: that one statement is true  on the condition  that two other 
statements are true. Certainly, this claim was arrived at by a process of reason-
ing, but that does not mean that it is an argument. As we have seen, no single 
claim by itself is ever an argument. 
 Conditional statements, accordingly, are not arguments. They can, how-
ever, be  parts of arguments. For example: 
 If Sturdley fails Critical Thinking, he’ll be placed on academic probation. 
 Sturdley will fail Critical Thinking. 
 So, Sturdley will be placed on academic probation. 
 In fact, arguments can be composed entirely of conditional statements: 
 If Tech scores on this play, I’ll eat my hat. 
 If I eat my hat, I’ll have a bad case of indigestion. 
 So, if Tech scores on this play, I’ll have a bad case of indigestion. 
 Such arguments are sometimes called  chain arguments  because the an-
tecedent (the  if part) of the ﬁ rst statement is linked to the consequent 
(the  then part) of the last statement by a chain of intervening conditional 
statements.  

 
What Is Not an Argument? 
43
 Illustrations 
 Illustrations  are intended to provide  examples of a claim, rather than prove or 
support the claim. Here is an example: 
 Many wildﬂ owers are edible. For example, daisies and day lilies are deli-
cious in salads. 
 Even though the second statement does provide some evidence for the ﬁ rst, 
this passage is an illustration rather than an argument. Its purpose is not to pro-
vide convincing evidence for a conclusion but merely to provide a few notable 
or representative examples of a claim. 
 Distinguishing arguments from illustrations can be tricky for two reasons. 
First, phrases like  for example  and  for instance  sometimes occur in arguments 
rather than in illustrations. For example: 
 Purists sometimes insist that we should say  between when two and only two 
objects are present,  among if there are more than two. This, however, is an 
oversimpliﬁ cation. For example, no one would object to  between in “ The 
main stumbling block in the present delicate exchanges between Paris, Athens, London 
and Ankara. . . .” 8 
 Second, there is sometimes a ﬁ ne line between illustrating a claim and 
providing sufﬁ cient evidence for the claim. Consider the following: 
 Many of the world’s greatest philosophers were bachelors. For instance, 
Descartes, Locke, Hume, and Kant were all unmarried. 
 This is a borderline case between an argument and an illustration. Without 
more information, we cannot tell whether the author’s purpose was to provide 
convincing evidence for a claim or merely to illustrate the claim. Such cases 
are fairly commonplace and rarely pose any serious difﬁ culty. The general rule 
here, as with other borderline cases, is simple. Critical thinkers call it the  prin-
ciple of charity (see box on page 44). 
 Applying this simple principle can resolve many otherwise troublesome 
cases quickly and easily. In the previous example, for instance, it is doubtful 
whether the four philosophers cited provide sufﬁ cient evidence for the claim 
that “many” of the world’s greatest philosophers have been bachelors. It is bet-
ter, therefore, to treat these as illustrations of the claim rather than as evidence 
intended to prove the claim. 
 Explanations 
 Consider the following two statements: 
  Titanic sank because it struck an iceberg. 
 Capital punishment should be abolished because innocent people may be 
mistakenly executed. 
 On the surface, these two statements look very much alike. Both give rea-
sons, and both use the indicator word  because.  There is, however, an important 
 “For example” is 
no proof. 
 —Yiddish proverb 
 Read not to 
contradict and 
confute, nor 
to believe and 
take for granted 
. . . but to weigh 
and consider. 
 —Francis Bacon 

44 
CHAPTER 2 Recognizing Arguments
difference between the two: The ﬁ rst statement is an explanation, and the 
second is an argument. 
 An  explanation  tries to show  why something is the case, not to prove 
 that it is the case. In the ﬁ rst example, for instance, it is clear that the speaker 
isn’t trying to argue  that Titanic  sank—everybody already knows that it sank. 
Instead, he is trying to explain  why it sank. Of course, you can argue about 
whether a given explanation is or is not correct. Consider this example: 
 Dinosaurs became extinct because of the impact of a large asteroid. 
 Scientists argue vigorously about whether this is the correct explanation of the 
apparently sudden extinction of the dinosaurs sixty-ﬁ ve million years ago. But 
the fact that this explanation is controversial (i.e., can be argued about) doesn’t 
mean that it is an argument. The purpose of the passage is not to argue  that 
dinosaurs became extinct but to explain  why they became extinct. 
 Explanations have two parts. The statement that is explained is the 
 explanandum.  The statement that does the explaining is the  explanans.  Thus, 
in the explanation 
 I fell down because I tripped 
 the statement “I fell down” is the explanandum, and the statement “I tripped” 
is the explanans. 
 In everyday speech, we often use “argument” and “explanation” almost 
interchangeably. Thus, we might say, for example, that the second speaker above 
is “explaining” why capital punishment should be abolished. This loose way of 
speaking no doubt contributes greatly to the confusion many students feel in 
distinguishing arguments from explanations. 
 Nevertheless, it is important to be able to distinguish arguments from 
explanations because the standards for evaluating them are quite different. The 
fact that Schlomo likes mystery stories may be a more or less satisfactory ex-
planation of  why  he is now reading Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s  The Hound of 
the Baskervilles, but plainly it is not a good reason for thinking  that  he is now 
reading that particular book. 
 How then does one distinguish arguments from explanations? There are 
four basic tests. 
 When interpreting an unclear passage, always give the speaker or 
writer the beneﬁ t of the doubt. Never attribute to an arguer a weaker 
argument when the evidence reasonably permits us to attribute to 
him or her a stronger one. And never interpret a passage as a bad argu-
ment when the evidence reasonably permits us to interpret it as  not an 
 argument at all. 
 The Principle of Charity 

 
What Is Not an Argument? 
45
 The Common-Knowledge Test   First, is the statement that the passage 
seeks to prove or explain a matter of common knowledge? If it is, the pas-
sage is probably an explanation rather than an argument. (There’s usually little 
point in trying to prove something that is already a well-known fact.) Thus, 
the passage 
 The North won the American Civil War because it had a larger population 
and a greater industrial base 
 is clearly an explanation rather than an argument because it is common knowl-
edge that the North won the Civil War. 
 The Past-Event Test   Second, is the statement that the passage is seeking to 
prove or explain an event that occurred in the past? If so, the passage is prob-
ably an explanation rather than an argument because it is much more common 
to try to explain  why  past events have occurred rather than to prove  that  they 
occurred. Thus, the passage 
 Mel ﬂ unked out because he never went to class 
 is best viewed as an explanation because the speaker is referring to a past event, 
and we usually try to explain such events rather than provide convincing evi-
dence that they have happened. 
 The Author’s Intent Test   Third, is it the speaker’s or writer’s intent to 
prove or establish  that something is the case—that is,  to provide reasons or evidence 
for accepting a claim as true ? Or is it his intent to explain  why something is the 
case—that is,  to offer an account of why some event has occurred or why something is 
the way it is ? If the former, the passage is an argument; if the latter, the passage 
is an explanation. Consider this example: 
 Kevin is majoring in political science because he wants to go to law school. 
 Here it is unlikely that the speaker is trying to prove that Kevin is majoring 
in political science, for the “evidence” offered (the fact that Kevin wants to go 
to law school) would clearly be insufﬁ cient to establish that conclusion. It is 
therefore more likely that the speaker is offering an explanation rather than 
an argument. 
 The Principle of Charity Test   Fourth, the principle of charity, as we 
have seen, requires that we always interpret unclear passages generously 
and, in particular, that we never interpret a passage as a bad argument when 
the evidence reasonably permits us to interpret it as not an argument at all. 
This test often proves helpful when the other tests yield no clear answer. 
For example: 
 Jeremy won’t come to the frat party tonight because he has an important 
exam tomorrow. 

46 
CHAPTER 2 Recognizing Arguments
 This claim about Jeremy is not common knowledge, nor does it refer to a past 
event. Thus, neither the common-knowledge test nor the past-event test is 
applicable to this example. The third test—the author’s intent test—also yields 
no clear answer; the speaker might reasonably be interpreted as offering either 
an argument or an explanation. If we interpret the passage as an argument, 
however, the reasoning is bound to strike us as somewhat weak. Our choice 
therefore (assuming that a choice must be made) is to interpret the passage 
either as a weak argument or as an apparently satisfactory explanation. In these 
circumstances the principle of charity dictates that we interpret the passage as 
an explanation. 
 It should be noted that none of these four tests is foolproof. Consider 
this example: 
 All men are mortal, and Socrates is a man. Therefore, Socrates is mortal. 
 Here the concluding statement (“Socrates is mortal”) is a matter of common 
knowledge. Generally, as we have noted, we don’t argue for conclusions that 
are well-known matters of fact; yet, clearly, the passage is an argument. 
 The past-event test also has exceptions, as this example illustrates: 
 No single shooter could have shot as quickly and as accurately as Lee 
Harvey Oswald is alleged to have done in the Kennedy assassination. 
Therefore, Oswald was not the lone assassin. 
 The statement this passage seeks to prove or explain is about an event that oc-
curred in the past, yet clearly the passage is an argument. 
 Sometimes none of the four tests yields a clear answer. In real life, of 
course, passages don’t come neatly labeled as “argument” or “explanation.” And 
the truth is that sometimes we just can’t tell whether a passage is meant to be 
an argument or an explanation. Consider this quote from former ACLU presi-
dent Nadine Strossen: 
 Because civil libertarians have learned that free speech is an indispensable 
instrument for the promotion of other rights and freedoms—including 
racial equality—we fear that the movement to regulate campus expression 
will undermine equality, as well as free speech. 9 
 What is the author’s intent here? Is she trying to  explain  why civil libertarians 
fear that campus speech codes may undermine both freedom and equality? Or 
is she offering a  reason  why everyone should be concerned about such possible 
consequences? Or is she perhaps doing both? It is very difﬁ cult to say, and 
none of our four tests yields a clear answer. 
 Some students ﬁ nd it frustrating that critical thinking doesn’t always pro-
vide deﬁ nite, clear-cut answers. In this respect, however, critical thinking simply 
reﬂ ects life. Life is complex and messy, and critical thinking, because it helps us 
think intelligently about life, naturally reﬂ ects this complexity and messiness. 
Sometimes despite our best efforts we can’t be sure whether a passage is an 
argument or an explanation. When that happens, we shouldn’t  pretend that 

 
What Is Not an Argument? 
47
a passage is clear. Instead, we should look at the various possibilities and say, 
“Well, it’s unclear whether this is an argument or an explanation. However,  if 
it’s an argument, it is a good [bad] argument because _______. And  if  it’s an 
explanation, it is a good [bad] explanation because _______.” It is often pos-
sible to evaluate a passage in this way, even if we can’t be sure how the passage 
should be understood. 
 EXERCISE 2.3 
 Arrange the chairs in the class into a circle. The instructor will give each student 
a 3 × 5 index card. On one side of the card, write a very brief example of either 
an argument or an explanation. On the other side of the card, write “argument” 
or “explanation,” whichever is appropriate to your example. When everyone has 
ﬁ nished writing, pass your card to the student sitting to your right. Read the card 
you have received and decide whether it is an argument or an explanation, then 
check your answer with the answer indicated on the back. Continue passing the 
cards until each card has been read. The instructor will then collect the cards and 
discuss the examples with the class. 
 EXERCISE 2.4 
  I. Determine which of the following passages contain arguments and which 
do not. 
 1.   I ate because I was hungry. 
 2.   He must be home. His car’s in the driveway. 
 3.   I’m trading in my Ford Explorer for a Toyota Corolla because they’re more 
reliable and get better gas mileage. 
 4.   If Christmas is on a Friday, the day after Christmas must be a Saturday. 
 5.   Dinosaurs became extinct sixty-ﬁ ve million years ago, probably as a result of 
dramatic global cooling that resulted from the impact of a large asteroid. 
 6.   Dogs make better pets than cats because they’re more intelligent and 
obedient. 
 7.   According to baseball statistician Bill James, Stan Musial was a better all-
around baseball player than Ted Williams because Musial was, in addition to 
being a great hitter, a better ﬁ elder and base-runner than Williams was.  
 8.   The rich and famous tend not to be happy, well-adjusted personalities. Look 
at Britney Spears. 
 9.   I stayed home from school because I was sick. 
 10.   The Cascades mountain range contains many majestic peaks. Mt. Rainier 
and Mt. Hood, for instance, are both more than ten thousand feet. 
 11.   The death penalty  costs too much. Allowing our government to kill citizens 
compromises the deepest moral values upon which this country was 
conceived: the inviolable dignity of human persons. (Helen Prejean, CSJ, 
 Dead Man Walking ) 

48 
CHAPTER 2 Recognizing Arguments
 12.   If there were no maldistribution, if everyone shared equally, and if no grain 
were fed to animals, all of humanity could be adequately nourished today. 
(Paul Ehrlich and Anne Ehrlich,  Betrayal of Science and Reason ) 
 13.   The British statesman William Gladstone thought that we would all be 
healthier if we chewed each bite of food precisely 32 times. Why else, he 
argued, did nature endow us with exactly 32 teeth? (Thomas Gilovich,  How 
We Know What Isn’t So ) 
 14.   Guys are extremely reluctant to make commitments, or even to take any 
steps that might  lead to commitments. That is why, when a guy goes out 
on a date with a woman and ﬁ nds himself really liking her, he often will 
demonstrate his affection by avoiding her for the rest of his life. (Dave Barry, 
 Dave Barry’s Complete Guide to Guys ) 
 15.   You can fool all of the people some of the time, and some of the people all 
the time, but you cannot fool all the people all the time. (Abraham Lincoln) 
 16.   A new study published in the journal  Pediatrics found that removing a 
child’s tonsils and adenoids can lead to better grades, presumably because the 
surgery allows for a better night’s sleep. (Stacey Burling, “Tonsillectomy Can 
Hike Grades, New Study Says”) 
 17.   Productivity and serving the public and taking care of one’s own employees 
are neither mere means nor an afterthought of business but rather its very 
essence. Then, as every smart entrepreneur knows well enough, the proﬁ ts 
will come as a consequence. (Robert C. Solomon,  Ethics and Excellence: 
Cooperation and Integrity in Business ) 
 18.   It is clear that there never was a time when nothing existed; otherwise 
nothing would exist now. (C. S. Lewis,  Miracles ) 
 19.   Children should be taught not to steal because it is wrong. They should not 
be taught not to steal because there is a rule against stealing. ( J. F. Covaleski, 
“Discipline and Morality: Beyond Rules and Consequences”) 
 20.   The wind blows where it wills, and you hear the sound of it, but you do not 
know whence it comes or whither it goes; so it is with every one who is 
born of the Spirit. ( John 3:8) 
 21.   However “civilized,” however much brought up in an artiﬁ cially contrived 
environment, we all seem to have an innate longing for primitive simplicity, 
close to the natural state of living. Hence the city people’s pleasure in the 
summer camping in the woods or traveling in the desert or opening up an 
unbeaten track. (D. T. Suzuki,  Zen and Japanese Culture ) 
 22.   More than any other time in history, mankind faces a crossroads. One path 
leads to despair and utter hopelessness, the other, to total extinction. Let 
us pray that we have the wisdom to choose correctly. (Woody Allen,  Side 
Effects ) 
 23.   What’s right in the corporation is not what is right in a man’s home or in 
his church. What is right in the corporation is what the guy above you wants 
from you. That’s what morality is in the corporation. (Robert Jackal,  Moral 
Mazes ) 
 24.   Never hit your child. Today health professionals agree that hitting children 
harms them emotionally as well as physically, fosters rage and self-hate, and 

 
What Is Not an Argument? 
49
often does lasting damage to their self-esteem and sense of worth. (Dr. C. 
Everett Koop,  Dr. Koop’s Self-Help Advisor ) 
 25.   Tradition and folklore contain a large number of fallacious beliefs. For 
example, many widespread and popular beliefs such as “Don’t swim for an 
hour after eating,” “You should rub snow on frost bite,” “Reading in the 
dark will ruin your eyes,” “You can catch cold from being chilled,” and “The 
more you cut your hair, the faster it will grow” are not true. (I. W. Kelly et 
al., “The Moon Was Full and Nothing Happened: A Review of Studies on 
the Moon and Human Behavior and Human Belief”) 
 26.   If you don’t listen to radio talk shows, you really should, because it gives you 
a chance to reassure yourself that a great many people out there are much 
stupider than you are. (Dave Barry,  Dave Barry’s Bad Habits ) 
 27.   If a bridge collapses, if a dam breaks, if a wing falls off an airplane and people 
die, I cannot see that as God’s doing. I cannot believe that God wanted 
all those people to die at that moment, or that He wanted some of them 
to die and had no choice but to condemn the others along with them. I 
believe that these calamities are all acts of nature, and that there is no moral 
reason for those particular victims to be singled out for punishment. (Harold 
Kushner,  When Bad Things Happen to Good People ) 
 28.   When what is just or unjust is thought to be determined solely by whoever 
has the power to lay down the law of the land, it unavoidably follows that 
the law of the land cannot be judged either just or unjust. (Mortimer J. 
Adler,  Six Great Ideas ) 
 29.   The cause of the Millenium Bug dates back to the 1960s, when computer 
programmers decided to represent certain types of data in shorthand. Thus 
1967 became just “67”; Missouri became just “Mo.”; a broiled chicken 
sandwich with fries and a medium soft drink became just “The No. 4 
Combo”; and Charles A. Frecklewanger Jr. became just “Chuck.” The 
programmers did this because, in the 1960s, computer memory was very 
expensive. Also, back then everybody except Bill Clinton was on drugs. 
Many of these programmers didn’t know what century it was. (Dave Barry, 
“Come the Millenium, Please Use the Stairs”) 
 30.   Your manuscript is both good and original; but the part that is good is not 
original, and the part that is original is not good. (Samuel Johnson) 
  II. Determine whether the following passages are best understood as arguments 
or explanations. 
 1.   Neptune is blue because its atmosphere contains methane. ( John Fix, 
 Astronomy: Journey to the Cosmic Frontier, 2nd ed.) 
 2.   A good schoolmaster is a far more useful citizen than the average bank 
president, politician, or general, if only because what he transmits is what 
gives meaning to the life of the banker, the politician, the general. (Clifton 
Fadiman,  The Lifetime Reading Plan ) 
 3.   My mother, who graduated from high school at sixteen, had no hope of 
affording college, so she went to work in the local post ofﬁ ce for a dollar a 
day. (Tom Brokaw,  The Greatest Generation ) 

50 
CHAPTER 2 Recognizing Arguments
 4.   Since rights claimed against the government should (at least within a 
democracy) be held equally by all citizens, and since not every citizen could 
be employed by the government, citizens cannot claim a right to a job from 
the government. ( Joseph DesJardins,  An Introduction to Business Ethics ) 
 5.   Why are there laws of gravity? Because, Einstein revealed, large masses 
distort space-time, causing objects to move along geodesic paths. (Martin 
Gardner, “Science and the Unknowable”) 
 6.   The Great Lakes area has a concentration of industry because of the 
availability of water for manufacturing processes, and because water 
transportation is an efﬁ cient way to move raw materials and products. (Eldon 
E. Enger and Bradley F. Smith,  Environmental Science, 6th ed.) 
 7.   True success always starts with an inner vision, however incomplete it might 
be. That’s why most of the books on success by famous coaches, business 
stars, motivational consultants, and psychologists begin with chapters on goal 
setting. (Tom Morris,  Philosophy for Dummies ) 
 8.   It is a fact of life on our beleaguered little planet that widespread torture, 
famine, and governmental criminal irresponsibility are much more likely to 
be found in tyrannous than in democratic governments. Why? Because the 
rulers of the former are much less likely to be thrown out of ofﬁ ce for their 
misdeeds than the rulers of the latter. (Carl Sagan,  The Demon-Haunted World: 
Science as a Candle in the Dark ) 
 9.   Men seem to ﬂ y around the television more than women. Men get that 
remote control in their hands, they don’t even know what the hell they’re 
not watching. . . . Women don’t do this. Women will stop and go, “Well 
let me see what the show is, before I change the channel. Maybe we can 
nurture it, work with it, help it grow into something.” Men don’t do that. 
Because women nest and men hunt. That’s why we watch TV differently. 
( Jerry Seinfeld,  SeinLanguage ) 
 10.   A bullet has no conscience; neither does a malignant tumor or an 
automobile gone out of control. This is why good people get sick and get 
hurt as much as anyone. (Harold Kushner,  When Bad Things Happen to Good 
People ) 
 11.   We are bound to run into trouble if we seek rational justiﬁ cations of every 
principle we use, for one cannot provide a rational argument for rational 
argument itself without assuming what we are arguing for. (A. F. Chalmers, 
 What Is This Thing Called Science? 3rd ed.) 
 12.   Most of us ﬁ nd the ideal of promoting human happiness and well-being 
an attractive one and, as a result, admire greatly people like Mother Teresa 
(1910–1997), who devoted her life to working with the poor. (William H. 
Shaw,  Business Ethics, 4th ed.) 
 13.   Good hitters have good work habits. They know that practice and lots of it 
is the surest way to eliminate slumps. And they know that practice is essential 
to maintaining their edge. Consequently, good hitters are usually always 
working on something. (Charley Lau,  The Art of Hitting .300  ) 
 14.   I always turn to the sports section ﬁ rst. The sports page records people’s 
accomplishments; the front page has nothing but man’s failures. (Earl Warren, 
quoted in Steve Rushin, “The Season of High Heat”) 

 
Summary 
51
 15.   Men may live more truly and fully in reading Plato and Shakespeare than 
at any other time, because then they are participating in essential being and 
are forgetting their accidental lives. (Allan Bloom,  The Closing of the American 
Mind ) 
 16.   Because height is inherited, short people bear shorter children than tall 
people on average. ( Wendy Northcutt,  The Darwin Awards ) 
 17.   Many people are concerned that the chemical and biological weapons that 
Saddam Hussein is supposed to be making could be devastating and deadly. 
I’m not denying they are, but I don’t think whatever he manufactures could 
have much of an effect on the United States, being that we’re already tearing 
ourselves apart and destroying the very ﬁ ber that founded this country. 
(newspaper call-in column) 
 18.   I wear glasses primarily so I can look for the things that I keep losing. (Bill 
Cosby,  Time Flies ) 
 19.   [NBA] superstars with dramatic, eye-catching moves are paid vast sums of 
money, while players who contribute to the team effort in less ﬂ amboyant 
ways often make close to the minimum salary. As a result, few players come 
to the NBA dreaming of becoming good team players. (Phil Jackson and 
Hugh Delehanty,  Sacred Hoops: Spiritual Lessons of a Hardwood Warrior ) 
 20.   I come from the Lower East Side of New York City and from very rough 
circumstances. As a matter of fact, I came from a family of fourteen children. 
Fourteen children. It’s true. It happened because my mother was hard of 
hearing. I’ll explain this to you. You see, every night when it was time to 
retire, my father would turn to my mother and say, “Would you like to go to 
sleep or what?” My mother, who couldn’t hear very well would say, “What?” 
And that’s how it happened. ( Jackie Mason,  Jackie Mason’s America ) 
 SUMMARY 
1.   Because critical thinking is concerned primarily with understanding, 
constructing, and critically evaluating arguments, one of the most basic 
critical thinking skills is that of recognizing arguments. 
2.   An  argument, as that term is used in critical thinking, is a claim defended 
with reasons. Arguments are composed of one or more premises and a 
conclusion.  Premises are statements in an argument offered as evidence 
or reasons in support of another statement. A  statement is a sentence that 
can be viewed as either true or false. A  conclusion is the statement in an 
argument that the premises are intended to support or prove. 
3.   Indicator words provide clues that premises or conclusions are being offered. 
Common indicator words include  therefore, consequently, thus, because, 
and  since. Premise indicators provide clues that premises are being offered, 
and  conclusion indicators provide clues that conclusions are being offered. 
Indicator words, however, should be approached with caution because not 

52 
CHAPTER 2 Recognizing Arguments
all arguments contain indicator words, and sometimes indicator words are 
used in passages that are not arguments. 
4.   It is important to distinguish arguments from various kinds of nonargu-
mentative discourse, such as reports, unsupported assertions, conditional 
statements, illustrations, and explanations.  Reports are statements that 
are intended simply to convey information about a subject.  Unsupported 
assertions are statements that indicate what a person believes but don’t offer 
evidence for that belief.  Conditional statements are  if-then statements. They 
claim only that one statement is true  if another statement is true.  Illustra-
tions are statements intended to provide examples of a claim, rather than 
evidence or proof for the claim.  Explanations are statements intended to 
explain  why something is the case, rather than to prove  that it is the case. 
None of these types of passages is an argument because none is intended 
to prove a claim. 

53
CHAPTER 3
 BASIC LOGICAL CONCEPTS 
  In the previous chapter, we talked about what arguments are and how we can 
distinguish them from nonarguments. In this chapter we introduce some basic 
logical concepts needed to distinguish good arguments from bad ones. 
 In evaluating any argument, one should always ask two key questions: 
(1) Are the premises true? and (2) Do the premises provide good reasons to 
accept the conclusion? 
 The ﬁ rst question—how to decide whether an argument’s premises are 
true—is discussed in Chapter 8. In this chapter we focus on the second ques-
tion. What does it mean to say that an argument’s premises provide “good 
reasons” for its conclusion, and how can we know when such reasons are 
being offered? 
 DEDUCTION AND INDUCTION 
 Before we can effectively evaluate an argument, we need to understand what 
kind of argument is being offered. Traditionally, arguments have been divided 
into two types: deductive arguments and inductive arguments. Because the 
standards for evaluating deductive and inductive arguments are quite differ-
ent, it is important to understand the difference between these two types of 
arguments. 
 All arguments claim to provide support—that is, evidence or reasons—
for their conclusions. But arguments differ greatly in the amount of support 
they claim to provide. Deductive arguments try to  prove  their conclusions 
with rigorous, inescapable logic. Inductive arguments try to show that their 
conclusions are  plausible or  likely given the premise(s). 
 Here are two examples of deductive arguments:
 All humans are mortal. 
 Socrates is human. 
 Logic is the great 
disperser of hazy 
and confused 
thinking: it clears 
up the fogs which 
hide from us our 
own ignorance, 
and make us be-
lieve that we un-
derstand a subject 
when we do not. 
 —John Stuart Mill 

54 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
 Therefore, Socrates is mortal. 
 If the president lives in the White House, then he lives in Washington, D.C. 
 The president does live in the White House. 
 So, the president lives in Washington, D.C. 
Notice how the conclusions of these arguments ﬂ ow from the premises with 
a kind of inescapable logic. Each argument’s conclusion follows necessar-
ily from the premises. Arguments are deductive when their premises are in-
tended to provide this kind of rigorous, airtight logical support for their 
conclusions. 
 EXERCISE 3.1  
I.  Deductive reasoning isn’t some technical and specialized form of reasoning 
engaged in only by logicians or mathematicians. It is something we all do easily 
and naturally. See if you can solve the following mini-mysteries on your own, 
using your own native reasoning abilities. Then discuss your solutions with a 
partner. 1 
1.   Either Moriarty was the murderer, or Stapleton was the murderer. 
 
 If Stapleton was the murderer, then traces of phosphorus should have been 
found on the body. 
 
 No traces of phosphorus were found on the body. 
 
  Whodunnit? 
2.   The murder did not occur in the library. 
 
 If Adler was the murderer, then the weapon was a revolver. 
 
 Either Hope was the murderer, or Adler was the murderer. 
 
 If Hope was the murderer, then the murder took place in the library. 
 
  Whodunnit? With what weapon? 
 3. The murder was not committed on the moor.
 
If Windibank was the murderer, then the weapon was a rope. 
 
 Either Windibank was the murderer, or Calhoun was the murderer. 
 
 If the weapon was a rope, then the murder was committed on the downs. 
 
 If Calhoun was the murderer, then the weapon was a crowbar. 
 
 If the weapon was a crowbar, then the murder was committed on the moor. 
 
  Whodunnit? With what weapon? Where was the murder committed? 
II.  The following logic problems are slightly more difﬁ cult than the ones in the 
previous exercise. See if you can solve the problems on your own, then discuss 
your solutions with a partner. 
1.   At a picnic, Mike went for soft drinks for Amy, Brian, Lisa, and Bill, as well 
as for himself. He brought back iced tea, grape juice, Diet Coke, Pepsi, and 
7-Up. 
 
 Mike doesn’t like carbonated drinks. 
 
 Amy would drink either 7-Up or Pepsi. 
 
 Brian likes only sodas. 
 We think in 
logic, as we talk 
in prose, without 
aiming at doing so.  
 —John Henry 
Newman 
 The study of logic 
appeals to no cri-
terion not already 
present in the 
learner’s mind. 
 —C. I. Lewis 

 
Deduction and Induction 
55
 
 Lisa prefers the drink she would put lemon and sugar into. 
 
 Bill likes only clear drinks. 
 
  What drinks did Mike bring for each person? 2 
2.   Seth, Maria, Antoine, and JoBeth are college friends in the United States who 
plan to spend a semester abroad. They can study in China, Germany, Australia, 
Japan, England, or Canada. Seth is willing to go anywhere except Asia. Maria 
prefers not to go to a country south of the Equator. Antoine wants to study 
in either Europe or Australia. JoBeth doesn’t care where they go, as long as 
it’s not England. 
 
  Which is the one country that satisﬁ es all of these various preferences? 
3.   Five college students, Buck, Jennifer, Li, Ursula, and Tyler, are talking about 
what they should bring to Patrick’s party. Buck says he’ll bring chips or 
mixed nuts unless somebody else wants to bring a salty snack, in which 
case he’ll bring some soda. Jennifer says she’s allergic to nuts but would be 
happy to bring some pretzels if Buck wants to pick up some soda. Li says 
he’ll bring cookies unless somebody else brings a dessert, in which case he’ll 
bring some homemade dip. Ursula says if Li brings a dip, she’ll bring chips if 
 nobody else does. Tyler says he’ll bring soda if nobody else does; otherwise, 
he’ll bring ice cream. 
 
  If each of these students does what he or she says, what will each bring to the party? 
 Deductive arguments claim to provide logically conclusive grounds for 
their conclusions. That is, they attempt to show that their conclusions  must  be 
true given the premises asserted. Inductive arguments, on the other hand, sim-
ply claim that their conclusions are  likely  or  probable given the premises offered. 
Here are some examples of inductive arguments:
 Polls show that 75 percent of Republicans favor a school prayer amendment. 
 Joe is a Republican. 
 Therefore, Joe likely favors a school prayer amendment. 
 Every ruby so far discovered has been red. 
 So, probably all rubies are red. 
 The bank safe was robbed last night. 
 Whoever robbed the safe knew the safe’s combination. 
 Only two people know the safe’s combination: Lefty and Bugsy. 
 Bugsy needed money to pay his gambling debts. 
 Bugsy was seen sneaking around outside the bank last night. 
 It is reasonable to conclude, therefore, that Bugsy robbed the safe. 
 It is often said that the difference between deduction and induction is 
that deduction moves from general premises to particular conclusions, whereas 
induction moves from particular premises to general conclusions. 3 That, how-
ever, is a misconception. 
 Much that is 
taught in college 
classes grows 
soon out of date, 
but the skills of 
correct reason-
ing never become 
 obsolete. 
 —Irving M. Copi 
and Carl Cohen 

56 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
 Here, for example, is a deductive argument that moves not from general 
premises to a particular conclusion but from particular premises to a general 
conclusion:
 Lincoln was president from 1861 to 1865. (particular premise) 
 So, all persons born during Lincoln’s presidency were born in the nineteenth 
century. (general conclusion) 
 Here is an example of an inductive argument that moves from general 
premises to a particular conclusion:
 All of Stephen King’s previous novels have been good. (general premise) 
 Therefore, Stephen King’s next novel will probably be good. (particular 
 conclusion) 
 In fact, it is possible to ﬁ nd examples of  any possible combination of gen-
eral or particular premises or conclusions in deductive or inductive arguments. 
Thus, it is a mistake to regard any particular pattern of general or particular 
statements as a deﬁ ning characteristic of deductive or inductive reasoning. 
 What makes an argument deductive or inductive is not the pattern of 
particularity or generality in the premises and conclusion. Rather, it is the 
 type of support  the premises are claimed to provide for the conclusion. The fol-
lowing list summarizes the key differences between deductive and inductive 
reasoning. 
 Key Differences between Deductive and Inductive Arguments
Deductive arguments claim that . . .
Inductive arguments claim that . . .
If the premises are true, then the 
 conclusion must be true.
If the premises are true, then 
the conclusion is probably true.
The conclusion follows necessarily 
from the premises.
The conclusion follows prob-
ably from the premises.
It is impossible for all the premises to 
be true and the conclusion false.
It is unlikely for the premises to 
be true and the conclusion false.
It is logically inconsistent to assert the  
premises and deny the conclusion; 
if you accept the premises, you must 
 accept the conclusion.
Although it is logically consis-
tent to assert the premises and 
deny the conclusion, the 
conclusion is probably true if 
the premises are true.
 HOW CAN WE TELL WHETHER AN ARGUMENT 
IS DEDUCTIVE OR INDUCTIVE? 
 We have seen that an argument is deductive if its premises are intended to 
provide conclusive grounds for the truth of its conclusion, and inductive if its 
premises are intended to provide merely probable grounds for the truth of its 

 
How Can We Tell Whether an Argument Is Deductive or Inductive?  
57
conclusion. But it is not always easy to know what a given speaker or writer 
intends. For that reason it is sometimes difﬁ cult to tell whether a particular 
argument is deductive or inductive. 
 Fortunately, there are four tests that greatly simplify the task of determin-
ing whether an argument should be regarded as deductive or inductive: 
 • the indicator word test 
 • the strict necessity test 
 • the common pattern test 
 • the principle of charity test  
 The Indicator Word Test 
 Just as we use indicator words to signal the assertion of premises or conclu-
sions, we use indicator words to signal when our arguments are deductive or 
inductive. For example, a phrase like “it necessarily follows that” almost always 
indicates that an argument is deductive. Here are some other common  deduc-
tion indicator words :
certainly 
it logically follows that
deﬁ nitely 
it is logical to conclude that
absolutely 
this logically implies that
conclusively 
this entails that
These are some common induction indicator words:
probably 
one would expect that
likely 
it is a good bet that
it is plausible to suppose that 
chances are that
it is reasonable to assume that 
odds are that 
 The indicator word test is often extremely helpful. Nevertheless, two 
limitations of the test should be noted. 
 First, many arguments contain no deduction or induction indicator 
words. Here are two examples:
 If you call a dog’s tail a leg, how many legs does it have? Answer: Four. Calling 
a tail a leg doesn’t make it a leg. (Attributed to Abe Lincoln) 
 Pleasure is not the same thing as happiness. The occasional self-destructive 
behavior of the rich and famous conﬁ rms this far too vividly. (Tom Morris) 
Neither of these arguments contains any indicator words that would help us 
decide whether it is deductive or inductive. For arguments such as these, we 
must rely on one or more of the other tests discussed in this section. 
 Second, arguers often use indicator words loosely or improperly. For 
example, it is common to hear speakers use strong phrases like “it must be the 
case that” and “it is logical to assume that” when the context makes clear that 

58 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
the argument is not intended to be strictly deductive. For these reasons the 
indicator word test must be used with caution. 
 The Strict Necessity Test 
 All deductive arguments claim, explicitly or implicitly, that their conclusions 
follow necessarily from their premises. Moreover, we know from experience that 
most arguers don’t offer obviously bad deductive arguments and that most arguers 
don’t offer logically conclusive arguments unless they mean to offer logically 
conclusive arguments. From these simple facts, we can usually determine whether 
an argument is meant to be deductive or inductive. 
 The strict necessity test can be stated as follows: 
 An argument’s conclusion either follows with strict logical necessity 
from its premises or it does not. 
 If the argument’s conclusion  does follow with strict logical necessity 
from its premises, the argument should always be treated as deductive. 4 
 If the argument’s conclusion does  not follow with strict logical necessity 
from its premises, the argument should normally be treated as inductive. 
(The few exceptions to this rule are discussed later in this section.) 
 Now let’s apply this test to a couple of examples. Consider the following 
arguments:
 Alan is a father. Therefore, Alan is a male. 
 Jill is a six-year-old girl. Therefore, Jill cannot run a mile in one minute ﬂ at.  
Does the conclusion of the ﬁ rst argument (“Alan is a male”) follow with strict 
necessity from the premise (“Alan is a father”)? Could it possibly be true that 
Alan is a father yet false that he is a male? Clearly not, for by deﬁ nition all 
fathers are male. According to the strict necessity test, therefore, the ﬁ rst argu-
ment is clearly deductive. 
 What about the second argument? Could it be true that Jill is a six-year-
old girl yet false that she cannot run a mile in one minute ﬂ at? Yes. Of course, 
it’s not  physically possible  for a six-year-old girl to run a mile in one minute ﬂ at. 
Six-year-old girls (and human beings in general) just lack the physical equip-
ment to be able to do that. But there is no  logical contradiction  in thinking that 
there  could  be a six-year-old girl who could run that fast. It is logically possible, 
therefore, that the premise is true and the conclusion is false. Thus, the con-
clusion does not follow with strict logical necessity from the premises. So, the 
argument should be treated as inductive.  
 The Common Pattern Test 
 Because deductive and inductive arguments often occur in characteristic, 
 telltale patterns of reasoning, we can apply the common pattern test to de-
termine which kind of reasoning we are dealing with. 
 So logical! 
 —Supertramp 

 
How Can We Tell Whether an Argument Is Deductive or Inductive?  
59
 Consider this argument:
 If we’re in Paris, then we are in France. 
 We are in Paris. 
 Therefore, we are in France. 
This argument has a particular pattern or form that occurs frequently in de-
ductive reasoning. The general pattern of the argument is this:
 If [ the ﬁ rst statement ] is true, then [ the second statement ] is true. 
 [ The ﬁ rst statement ] is true. 
 Therefore, [ the second statement ] is true. 
 Because it is awkward and wordy to talk about “the ﬁ rst statement,” “the 
second statement,” and so on, logicians generally use  letters  to stand for the var-
ious parts of an argument. Suppose we let the letter  A stand for the statement 
“We are in Paris” and the letter  B stand for the statement “We are in France.” 
We can then state the general pattern of the argument as follows:
 If A then B. 
 A. 
 Therefore, B. 
This is an argument pattern that logicians call modus ponens, a Latin expres-
sion that means “afﬁ rmative mode.” Because it is obvious that this is a logically 
reliable pattern of reasoning, arguments of this pattern should always be treated 
as deductive. 
 Modus ponens  is one very common pattern of deductive reasoning. Later in 
this chapter, we discuss several other common patterns of deductive and induc-
tive reasoning. Once you have learned to recognize such patterns, you will ﬁ nd 
it easy to identify everyday examples of deductive and inductive  reasoning.   
 The Principle of Charity Test 
 Suppose you have tried each of the three tests we have discussed and you are 
still not sure whether a particular argument should be treated as deductive 
or inductive. In that case, it is time to fall back on the important principle 
discussed at the end of Chapter 2: the  principle of charity.  Recall what that 
principle says: When interpreting an unclear argument or passage, always give 
the speaker or writer the beneﬁ t of the doubt. Never attribute to an arguer a 
weaker argument when the evidence reasonably permits us to attribute to him 
or her a stronger one. And never interpret a passage as a bad argument when 
the evidence reasonably permits us to interpret it as not an argument at all. 
 The principle of charity serves two important goals in critical thinking. 
First, it fosters goodwill and mutual understanding in argument by demanding 
that we treat the arguments of others with the same generous and respect-
ful spirit that we would like others to treat our own arguments. Even more 

60 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
 important, it promotes the discovery of truth by insisting that we confront 
arguments that we ourselves admit to be the strongest and most plausible ver-
sions of those arguments. 
 Let’s apply the principle of charity test to an actual example. Consider 
the following:
 Andy told me that he ate at Maxine’s Restaurant yesterday. But Maxine’s was 
completely destroyed by ﬁ re less than a month ago. It is certain, therefore, that 
Andy is either lying or mistaken. 
Should this argument be regarded as deductive or inductive? Let’s apply our 
various tests. 
 First, are there any deduction or induction indicator words? Yes. We have 
seen that the phrase “it is certain that” is often used as a deduction indica-
tor. But we have also seen that people often use indicator words—especially 
deduction indicator words—loosely or improperly. So this ﬁ rst test, though 
it clearly suggests that the argument is meant to be deductive, shouldn’t be 
treated as conclusive. 
 Second, does the conclusion follow with strict necessity from the  premises? 
No. Although it seems quite unlikely, it is certainly conceivable that the restau-
rant has been quickly rebuilt and has reopened for business. This suggests that 
the argument should be regarded as inductive. 
 Third, does the argument have a pattern of reasoning that is either typi-
cally deductive or typically inductive? Not really, as we shall see. Thus, the third 
test doesn’t apply in this case. 
 In short, the ﬁ rst test suggests that the argument is deductive, the second 
test suggests that the argument is inductive, and the third test doesn’t apply. So 
where does that leave us? Up the proverbial creek without a paddle? 
 No, because this is where the principle of charity comes to the rescue. 
 According to that principle, we should always interpret a doubtful argument in 
the way most favorable to the arguer. In this case, we are in doubt as to whether 
the argument should be treated as deductive or inductive. But consider: If 
we treat the argument as deductive, it is clearly a bad deductive argument 
because the conclusion plainly does not follow necessarily from the premises. 
On the other hand, if we treat the argument as inductive, the argument is a 
good inductive argument because the premises, if true, do make the conclusion 
likely. Thus, the most charitable way to interpret the argument is to interpret it 
as inductive. This is what the principle of charity requires that we do. 
 A word of caution, however:  The principle of charity should never be used to 
reinterpret bad arguments as good ones.  The principle of charity is a principle of 
interpretation, not a principle of argument repair. Its basic purpose, like that 
of the other three tests, is to help us decide what arguments are actually being 
offered, not to replace bad arguments with ones we think are better. Thus, the 
principle should be used only when there is genuine uncertainty about how 
an argument should be interpreted. It should not be used when it is clear what 
argument has actually been put forward.  

 
How Can We Tell Whether an Argument Is Deductive or Inductive?  
61
 Exceptions to the Strict Necessity Test 
 We saw earlier that an argument should generally be treated as inductive if its 
conclusion does not follow necessarily from its premises. There are, however, 
exceptions to this general rule. Two broad exceptions should be noted. 
 An argument in which the conclusion does not follow necessarily from 
the premises should nonetheless be treated as deductive if either 
1.   the  language or context makes clear that the arguer  intended to offer 
a logically conclusive argument, but the argument, in fact, is not 
 logically conclusive; 
or 
2.   the argument has a  pattern of reasoning that is characteristically deduc-
tive, and nothing else about the argument indicates clearly that the 
argument is meant to be inductive. 
 Here is an example of the ﬁ rst exception:
 Magellan’s ships sailed around the world. It necessarily follows, therefore, that 
the earth is a sphere. 
Here the phrase “it necessarily follows that” indicates that the argument is 
meant to be deductive. In this case, however, it is clear that the conclusion does 
not follow necessarily from the premise, because it would still be possible for 
a ship to sail around the world if the earth were, say, egg-shaped or cylindrical 
rather than spherical. 
 Here is an example of the second exception:
 If I’m Bill Gates, then I’m mortal. 
 I’m not Bill Gates. 
 Therefore, I’m not mortal. 
This is a terrible argument. The premises provide no support whatsoever 
for the conclusion, much less logically conclusive support. Nevertheless, the 
 argument is rightly regarded as deductive because, as we shall see, it employs a 
pattern of reasoning that is almost invariably deductive. 
 This has been a rather complex discussion. The following list is the sim-
plest and clearest way we know to sum up the basic guidelines for distinguish-
ing deductive from inductive arguments. 
 How to Distinguish Deductive from Inductive Arguments 
1.   If the conclusion follows necessarily from the premises, the 
argument should always be treated as deductive. 
2.   If the conclusion does not follow necessarily from the premises, the 
argument should be treated as inductive unless (a) the language or 
context of the argument makes clear that the argument is deductive 
or (b) the argument has a pattern of reasoning that is characteristically 
deductive.  

62 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
3.   If the argument has a pattern of reasoning that is characteristically 
deductive, the argument should be treated as deductive unless 
there is clear evidence that the argument is intended to be 
inductive. 
4.   If the argument has a pattern of reasoning that is characteristically 
inductive, the argument should be treated as inductive unless there is 
clear evidence that the argument is intended to be deductive. 
5.   Arguments often contain indicator words—words like  probably, 
 necessarily, and  certainly —that provide clues in determining whether 
an argument is deductive or inductive. Keep in mind, however, that 
 indicator words are often used loosely or improperly. 
6.   If there is signiﬁ cant doubt about whether an argument is deductive 
or inductive, always interpret the argument in the way most favor-
able to the arguer. 
 COMMON PATTERNS OF DEDUCTIVE REASONING  
 Often, the quickest way to determine whether an argument is deductive or 
inductive is to note whether it has a pattern of reasoning that is characteristi-
cally deductive or inductive. In this section we discuss ﬁ ve common patterns 
of deductive reasoning: 
 • hypothetical syllogism  
 • categorical syllogism  
 • argument by elimination 
 • argument based on mathematics 
 • argument from deﬁ nition   
 Hypothetical Syllogism 
 A  syllogism  is a three-line argument, that is, an argument that consists of exactly 
two premises and a conclusion. A hypothetical syllogism is a syllogism that 
contains at least one hypothetical or conditional (i.e.,  if-then ) premise. 6 
 Here are two examples of hypothetical syllogisms:
 If the Tigers beat the Yankees, then the Tigers will make the playoffs. 
 The Tigers will beat the Yankees. 
 So, the Tigers will make the playoffs. 
 If I want to keep my ﬁ nancial aid, I’d better study hard. 
 I do want to keep my ﬁ nancial aid. 
 Therefore, I’d better study hard. 

 
Common Patterns of Deductive Reasoning 
63
 Notice that these two arguments each have the same logical pattern or form:
 If A then B. 
 A. 
 Therefore, B. 
 This pattern, as we have seen, is called  modus ponens.  Arguments with this 
pattern consist of one conditional premise, a second premise that asserts as true 
the antecedent (the  if part) of the conditional, and a conclusion that asserts as 
true the consequent (the  then  part) of the conditional. Other common variet-
ies of hypothetical syllogisms include 
 • chain argument  
 • modus tollens (denying the consequent) 
 • denying the antecedent 
 • afﬁ rming the consequent  
 Chain arguments  consist of three conditional statements that link to-
gether in the following way:
 If A then B. 
 If B then C. 
 Therefore, if A then C. 
Here is an example of a chain argument:
 If we don’t stop for gas soon, then we’ll run out of gas. 
 If we run out of gas, then we’ll be late for the wedding. 
 Therefore, if we don’t stop for gas soon, we’ll be late for the wedding. 
 Modus tollens 7 arguments have the following pattern:
 If A then B. 
 Not B. 
 Therefore, not A. 
Arguments of this pattern are sometimes called “denying the consequent” 
 because they consist of one conditional premise, a second premise that denies 
(i.e., asserts to be false) the consequent of the conditional, and a conclusion 
that denies the antecedent of the conditional. Here is an example:
 If we’re in Sacramento, then we’re in California. 
 We’re not in California. 
 Therefore, we’re not in Sacramento. 
 Modus ponens,  chain argument, and  modus tollens  are all logically reliable 
patterns of deductive reasoning. That is, any argument that has one of these 
patterns is absolutely guaranteed to have a true conclusion if the premises are 
also true. But not all patterns of deductive reasoning are completely reliable in 

64 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
this way.  Two patterns that are  not  logically reliable are denying the antecedent 
and afﬁ rming the consequent. 
 Denying the antecedent arguments have the following pattern:
 If A then B. 
 Not A. 
 Therefore, not B. 
Here is an example:
 If Shakespeare wrote  War and Peace, then he’s a great writer. 
 Shakespeare didn’t write  War and Peace. 
 Therefore, Shakespeare is not a great writer. 
Notice in this example that the premises are true and the conclusion is false. 
This shows straightaway that the pattern of reasoning of this argument is not 
logically reliable. 
 Another faulty pattern of deductive reasoning is  afﬁ rming the conse-
quent . Its pattern is as follows:
 If A then B. 
 B. 
 Therefore, A. 
Here is an example:
 If we’re on Neptune, then we’re in the solar system. 
 We are in the solar system. 
 Therefore, we’re on Neptune. 
Given that this argument has true premises and a false conclusion, it is clear 
that afﬁ rming the consequent is not a logically reliable pattern of reasoning. 
 O most lame 
and impotent 
 conclusion! 
 —Shakespeare 
  A Poltergeist’s Logic  
 In J. K. Rowling’s  Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone , the following ex-
change takes place between Peeves, the mischievous resident polter-
geist of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, and Filch, the 
school’s caretaker: 
 Peeves: Shan’t say nothing if you don’t say please. 
 Filch: All right—please. 
 Peeves:  NOTHING! Ha Haaa! Told you I wouldn’t say nothing if you 
didn’t say please! 
 Is Peeves’s argument a logically reliable form of if- then reasoning? 
 Pop Culture Connection 

 
Common Patterns of Deductive Reasoning 
65
 Because  modus ponens, modus tollens,  and chain argument are logically reli-
able patterns of reasoning, they should always be treated as deductive. Denying 
the antecedent and afﬁ rming the consequent are not logically reliable patterns 
of reasoning; nevertheless, they should generally be treated as deductive be-
cause they have a pattern of reasoning that is characteristically deductive. 
 EXERCISE 3.2 
 For each of the following, indicate which type of hypothetical syllogism it is: 
 modus ponens, modus tollens,  chain argument, denying the antecedent, or afﬁ rming 
the consequent. In some cases, the argument may need to be rephrased slightly to 
make the logical pattern explicit.  
 1.   If we’re in London, then we’re in England. We are not in England. So, we are 
not in London. 
 2.   If we’re in Los Angeles, then we are in the United States. We are in the 
United States. So, we are in Los Angeles. 
 3.   If we’re in the United States, then we are on Earth. We are in the United 
States. So, we are on Earth. 
 4.   If we’re in Paris, then we are in France. If we’re in France, then we are in 
Europe. So, if we are in Paris, then we are in Europe. 
 5.   If we’re in Houston, then we are in the United States. We are not in 
 Houston. So, we are not in the United States. 
 6.   If we’re in Shanghai, then we are in China. So, we are in China, because we 
are in Shanghai. 
 7.  We are not in Mexico, because if we are in Mexico City, we are in Mexico, 
and we are not in Mexico City. 
 8.   Since we’re in India, we are in Calcutta, since we are in India if we are in 
Calcutta. 
 9.   If we’re in Toronto, then we are in Canada. So, because if we are in  Canada, 
we are in North America, if we are in Toronto, then we are in North  America.  
10.   We’re in Berlin, given that if we are in Berlin, then we are in Germany, and 
we are in Germany.  
 Categorical Syllogism 
 Another common pattern of deductive reasoning is categorical syllogism. For 
present purposes, a categorical syllogism may be deﬁ ned as a three-line argu-
ment in which each statement begins with the word  all, some,  or  no. 8 Here are 
two examples:
 All oaks are trees. 
 All trees are plants. 
 So, all oaks are plants. 

66 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
 Some Democrats are elected ofﬁ cials. 
 All elected ofﬁ cials are politicians. 
 Therefore, some Democrats are politicians. 
 Because categorical reasoning like this is such a familiar form of rig-
orous logical reasoning, such arguments should nearly always be treated as 
deductive.  
 Argument by Elimination 
 An  argument by elimination  seeks to logically rule out various possibilities 
until only a single possibility remains. Here are two examples:
 Either Joe walked to the library or he drove. 
 But Joe didn’t drive to the library. 
 Therefore, Joe walked to the library. 9 
 Either Dutch committed the murder, or Jack committed the murder, or Celia 
committed the murder. 
 If Dutch or Jack committed the murder, then the weapon was a rope. 
 The weapon was not a rope. 
 So, neither Dutch nor Jack committed the murder. 
 Therefore, Celia committed the murder. 
 Because the aim of such arguments is to logically exclude every possible 
outcome except one, such arguments are always deductive.  
 Argument Based on Mathematics 
 Mathematics is a model of logical, step-by-step reasoning. Mathematicians 
don’t claim that their conclusions are merely likely or probable. They claim 
to prove their conclusions on the basis of precise mathematical concepts and 
reasoning. In an  argument based on mathematics,  the conclusion is claimed 
to depend largely or entirely on some mathematical calculation or measure-
ment (perhaps in conjunction with one or more nonmathematical premises). 10 
Here are two examples:
 Eight is greater than four. 
 Four is greater than two. 
 Therefore, eight is greater than two. 
 Light travels at a rate of 186,000 miles per second. 
 The sun is more than 93 million miles distant from the earth. 
 Therefore, it takes more than eight minutes for the sun’s light to reach the earth.  
 Because mathematical arguments are generally models of precise log-
ical reasoning, arguments based on mathematics are usually best treated as 

 
Common Patterns of Inductive Reasoning 
67
 deductive. Arguments based on mathematics  can be inductive, however, as this 
example shows:
 My blind uncle told me that there were 8 men, 6 women, and 12 kids at the 
party. 
 By simple addition, therefore, it follows that there were 26 people at the party. 
 Here, the conclusion clearly does  not  follow from the premise because it is 
possible for the premise to be true and the conclusion false. (Maybe my blind 
uncle miscounted, for example.) For that reason, the argument is best treated 
as inductive.  
 Argument from Defi nition 
 In an  argument from deﬁ nition , the conclusion is presented as being “true 
by deﬁ nition,” that is, as following simply by deﬁ nition from some key word 
or phrase used in the argument. Here are two examples:
 Janelle is a cardiologist. Therefore, Janelle is a doctor. 
 Bertha is an aunt. It follows that she is a woman. 
 Because a statement that follows by deﬁ nition is necessarily true if the 
relevant deﬁ nition is true, arguments from deﬁ nition are always deductive. 
 Our discussion of common patterns of deductive reasoning can be 
 summarized as follows: 
 Arguments by elimination and arguments from deﬁ nition should always 
be treated as deductive. 
 Logically reliable hypothetical syllogisms, categorical syllogisms, and 
 arguments based on mathematics should always be treated as 
deductive. 
 Logically unreliable hypothetical syllogisms, categorical syllogisms, and 
arguments based on mathematics should be treated as deductive unless 
there is clear evidence that they are intended to be inductive. 
 COMMON PATTERNS OF INDUCTIVE REASONING 
 In this section we look at six common patterns of inductive reasoning: 
 • inductive generalization  
 • predictive argument  
 • argument from authority 
 • causal argument  
 • statistical argument  
 • argument from analogy  

68 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
 Inductive Generalization 
 A generalization, as that term is used in critical thinking, is a statement that 
attributes some characteristic to  all  or  most  members of a given class. Here are 
some examples of generalizations:
 All wild grizzly bears in the United States live west of the Mississippi River. 
 Most college students work at least part-time. 
 Men are so unromantic! 
 An inductive generalization is an argument in which a generalization is 
claimed to be probably true based on information about some members of a 
particular class. Here are two examples:
 All dinosaur bones so far discovered have been more than sixty-ﬁ ve million 
years old. 
 Therefore, probably all dinosaur bones are more than sixty-ﬁ ve million years 
old. 
 Six montshs ago I met a farmer from Iowa, and he was friendly. 
 Four months ago I met an insurance salesman from Iowa, and he was friendly. 
 Two months ago I met a dentist from Iowa, and she was friendly. 
 I guess most people from Iowa are friendly. 
 Because all inductive generalizations claim that their conclusions are 
probable rather than certain, such arguments are always inductive.  
 Predictive Argument 
 A prediction is a statement about what may or will happen in the future. In a 
predictive argument, a prediction is defended with reasons. Predictive argu-
ments are among the most common patterns of inductive reasoning. Here are 
two examples:
 It has rained in Vancouver every February since weather records have been kept. 
 Therefore, it will probably rain in Vancouver next February. 
 Most U.S. presidents have been tall. 
 Therefore, probably the next U.S. president will be tall. 
 Because nothing in the future (including death and taxes) is absolutely 
certain, arguments containing predictions are usually inductive. It should be 
noted, however, that predictions can be argued for deductively. For  example:
 If Amy comes to the party, Ted will come to the party. 
 Amy will come to the party. 
 Therefore, Ted will come to the party. 
Even though this argument contains a prediction, it is clearly deductive be-
cause the conclusion must be true if the premises are true. 
 Life is the art of 
drawing  sufﬁ cient 
conclusions 
from insufﬁ cient 
 premises. 
 —Samuel Butler 

 
Common Patterns of Inductive Reasoning 
69
 Argument from Authority 
 An argument from authority asserts a claim and then supports that claim by 
citing some presumed authority or witness who has said that the claim is true. 
Here are three examples:
 More Americans die of skin cancer each year than die in car accidents. How do 
I know? My doctor told me. 
 The  Encyclopaedia Britannica says that parts of Virginia are farther west than  Detroit. 
In general, the  Encyclopaedia Britannica  is a highly reliable source of information. 
Therefore, it’s probably true that parts of Virginia are farther west than Detroit. 
 There are bears in these woods. My neighbor Frank said he saw one last week. 
 Because we can never be absolutely certain that a presumed authority 
or witness is accurate or reliable, arguments from authority should normally 
be treated as inductive. Arguments from authority are sometimes deductive, 
however. For example:
 Whatever the Bible teaches is true. 
 The Bible teaches that we should love our neighbors. 
 Therefore, we should love our neighbors. 
 Because the conclusion of this argument follows necessarily from the premises, 
the argument is deductive. 
 Causal Argument 
 A  causal argument  asserts or denies that something is the cause of something 
else. Here are three examples:
 I can’t log on. The network must be down. 
 Rashid isn’t allergic to peanuts. I saw him eat a bag of peanuts on the ﬂ ight 
from Dallas. 
 Medical care is the number-one cause of sudden rapid aging among middle-
aged people. Ask yourself how many times you have heard somebody tell you 
a story like this: “Ralph was feeling ﬁ ne, no problems at all, and then he went 
in for a routine physical checkup, and the next thing we heard he was in critical 
condition with the majority of his internal organs sitting in a freezer in an 
 entirely different building.” 11 
 As we shall see in Chapter 11, we can rarely, if ever, be 100 percent cer-
tain that one thing causes, or does not cause, something else. For that reason 
causal arguments are usually best treated as inductive. 
 It cannot be assumed, however, that causal arguments are  always  induc-
tive. The following causal argument, for example, is clearly deductive:
 Whenever iron is exposed to oxygen, it rusts. 
 This iron pipe has been exposed to oxygen. 
 Therefore, it will rust. 

70 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
 Statistical Argument 
 A  statistical argument  rests on statistical evidence—that is, evidence that some 
percentage of some group or class has some particular characteristic. Here are 
two examples:
 Eighty-three percent of St. Stephen’s students are Episcopalian. 
 Beatrice is a St. Stephen’s student. 
 So, Beatrice is probably Episcopalian. 
 Doctor to patient: Studies show that condoms have an annual failure rate of 
2 to 3 percent, even if they are used consistently and correctly. So, you should 
not assume that condoms will provide complete protection from the risk of 
pregnancy or sexually transmitted diseases. 
 Because statistical evidence is generally used to support claims that are 
presented as probable rather than certain, statistical arguments are usually in-
ductive. It should be noted, however, that statistical evidence can be used in 
deductive reasoning. For example:
 If 65 percent of likely voters polled support Senator Beltway, then Senator 
 Beltway will win in a landslide. 
 Sixty-ﬁ ve percent of likely voters polled do support Senator Beltway. 
 Therefore, Senator Beltway will win in a landslide. 
 Argument from Analogy 
 An analogy is a comparison of two or more things that are claimed to be alike 
in some relevant respect. Here are two examples of analogies:
 Habits are like a cable. We weave a strand of it every day and soon it cannot be 
broken. (Horace Mann) 
 As man casts off worn-out garments and puts on others that are new, similarly 
the embodied soul, casting off worn-out bodies, enters into others, which are 
new. (Bhagavad-Gita) 
 In an argument from analogy, the conclusion is claimed to depend on 
an analogy (i.e., a comparison or similarity) between two or more things. 
 Here are two examples:
 Hershey Park has a thrilling roller-coaster ride. 
 Dorney Park, like Hershey Park, is a great amusement park. 
 Therefore, probably Dorney Park also has a thrilling roller-coaster ride. 
 Bill is a graduate of Central University, and he is bright, energetic, and 
 dependable. 
 Mary is a graduate of Central University, and she is bright, energetic, and 
dependable. 
 Paula is a graduate of Central University. 
 Therefore, most likely, Paula is bright, energetic, and dependable, too. 

 
Common Patterns of Inductive Reasoning 
71
 Note the basic logical pattern of these arguments:
 These things are similar in such-and-such ways. 
 Therefore, they’re probably similar in some further way. 
 Because the conclusions of arguments of this pattern are claimed to fol-
low only probably from the premises, such arguments are clearly inductive. 
 Not all analogical arguments are inductive, however. For example: 
1.  Automobiles cause thousands of deaths each year and produce noxious and 
offensive fumes. 
2.  Smoking causes thousands of deaths each year and produces noxious and 
offensive fumes. 
3.  Thus, if smoking is heavily regulated, automobiles should also be heavily 
regulated. 
4.  But automobiles shouldn’t be heavily regulated. 
5.  Therefore, smoking shouldn’t be heavily regulated, either. 
This is an analogical argument because the main conclusion, statement 5, is 
claimed to depend on an analogy between automobiles and smoking. Never-
theless, the argument is deductive because it would be logically inconsistent to 
assert all the premises and deny the conclusion. 
 Our discussion of common patterns of inductive reasoning can be sum-
marized as follows: 
 Inductive generalizations, by deﬁ nition, are always inductive.  
 Predictive arguments, arguments from authority, causal arguments, sta-
tistical arguments, and arguments from analogy are generally, but not 
always, inductive. 
 It takes practice to be able to recognize the patterns of deductive and 
inductive reasoning that we have discussed, but it is important to be able to do 
so because such patterns often provide the best clue available as to whether an 
argument is deductive or inductive.  
 EXERCISE 3.3  
 Determine whether the following arguments are deductive or inductive. For each 
argument, state which test(s) you used in reaching your decision (i.e., the indicator 
word test, the strict necessity test, the common pattern test, and/or the principle of 
charity test). If the common pattern test is used, indicate which speciﬁ c pattern the 
argument exempliﬁ es (e.g., causal argument, argument from authority, and so on). 
 1.  Because  x  3 and  y  5, then  x   y  8. 
 2.  According to the  New York Public Library Desk Reference, the pop-up toaster 
was invented by Charles Strite in 1927. The  New York Public Library Desk 
 Reference is a highly reliable reference work. Therefore, it’s reasonable to 
 believe that Charles Strite did invent the pop-up toaster in 1927. 

72 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
 3.  Seventy-three percent of Ft. Gibson residents enjoy ﬁ shing. Lonnie is a Ft. 
Gibson resident. So, it’s likely that Lonnie enjoys ﬁ shing.  
 4.  Either Elmo will win the election or Schlomo will win the election. But 
Elmo won’t win the election. Therefore, Schlomo will win the election. 
 5.  The burglar is tall and thin. Duncan is short and fat. Obviously, therefore, 
Duncan isn’t the burglar. 
 6.  There are no visible signs of forced entry. It seems certain, therefore, that the 
burglar had a key. 
 7.  The sign says it is seven miles to Lake Lily. Therefore, it is approximately 
seven miles to Lake Lily. 
 8.  Joan is an extrovert. It follows that she is outgoing. 
 9.  All inductive generalizations are inductive. Some inductive generalizations 
are unreliable. Therefore, some inductive arguments are unreliable. 
10.  If it rains, the game will be postponed until next Saturday. According to the 
National Weather Service, there’s a 90 percent chance of rain. Therefore, 
probably the game will be postponed until next Saturday. 
11.  If the batter bunts in this situation, he’ll move the runner over to second 
base. But the batter won’t bunt in this situation. Therefore, the runner will 
never be moved over to second base. 
12.  Hughie is the father of Louie. It follows that Hughie is the grandfather of 
Dewey because Louie is the father of Dewey. 
13.  Mandatory school uniforms are a good idea because they keep students’ 
minds focused on their schoolwork rather than on what the kid sitting next 
to them is wearing.  
14.  Klaus ingested a large dose of rat poison just before he died. Therefore, the 
rat poison must have caused Klaus’s death. 
15.   All previously observed polar bears have weighed less than 1,500 pounds. 
Therefore, all polar bears probably weigh less than 1,500 pounds. 
16.  Kevin says he can lift 1,000 pounds over his head. A full-grown cow weighs 
less than 1,000 pounds. So, Kevin can lift a full-grown cow over his head. 
17.   If my car is out of gas, it won’t start. My car won’t start. Therefore, it is out of gas.  
18.    Yale is an Ivy League school, and it has a good library. Harvard is an Ivy 
League school, and it has a good library. Therefore, because Brown is an Ivy 
League school, it must have a good library, too. 
19.  I wouldn’t swim in that water if I were you. It might be polluted. 
20.  This tree is deciduous. It must be the case, therefore, that it periodically sheds 
its leaves. 
21.  Whatever my church teaches as infallible doctrine is true. My church teaches 
as infallible doctrine that God is eternal. Therefore, God is eternal. 
22.  Every argument is either deductive or inductive. Because this argument isn’t 
deductive, it must be inductive. 
23.  Five alleged eyewitnesses have testiﬁ ed that they saw Frank Lane stab Melissa 
Jenkins. So, Frank Lane did stab Melissa Jenkins. 
24.  Tiger Woods is one of the best golfers in the world. Melvin Rumsley has 
never played golf in his life. It is certain, therefore, that Melvin Rumsley 
could never beat Tiger Woods in a round of golf. 

 
Deductive Validity 
73
25.    If Steve is 48 years old and Pam is exactly 19 years younger than Steve, it 
necessarily follows that Pam is 29 years old. 
 DEDUCTIVE VALIDITY 
 In this section we introduce the most important concept in deductive logic: 
the concept of deductive validity. 
 We have seen that all deductive arguments  claim,  implicitly or explic-
itly, that their conclusions follow necessarily from their premises. A logically 
reliable deductive argument is one in which the conclusion  really does  follow 
necessarily from the premises. In logic, a logically reliable deductive argument 
is called a  valid deductive argument. 
 More formally, a valid deductive argument is an argument in which it is 
impossible for all the premises to be true and the conclusion false. Put another 
way, a valid deductive argument (or  valid argument  for short) is an argument in 
which these conditions apply: 
 If the premises are true, the conclusion  must be true. 
 The conclusion follows  necessarily from the premises. 
 The premises provide logically  conclusive grounds for the truth of the 
conclusion. 
 It is logically  inconsistent to assert all the premises as true and deny the 
conclusion. 
 In everyday language,  valid often means “good” or “true.” We say, for in-
stance, that a person makes a “valid point” or offers a “valid suggestion.” In 
logic, however,  valid never means simply “good” or “true.” It is always used in 
the precise technical sense indicated above.  
 EXERCISE 3.4 
 Working individually, see if you can determine which statement follows validly 
from the statements provided. When you are ﬁ nished, discuss your answers with a 
partner. 
 1.  If alpha, then beta. 
 
 Alpha. 
 
 Therefore,  
 .  
 2.  Either alpha or beta. 
 
 Not beta. 
 
 Therefore,  
 .  
 3.  All alphas are betas. 
 
 Delta is an alpha. 
 
 Therefore,  
 .  

74 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
 4.  If Delta is an alpha, then Delta is a beta. 
 
 Delta is not a beta. 
 
 Therefore,  
 .  
 5.  No alphas are betas. 
 
 Delta is an alpha. 
 
 Therefore,  
 .  
 6.  All alphas are betas. 
 
 Delta is not a beta. 
 
 Therefore,  
 .  
 7.  If Delta is an alpha, then Delta is a beta. 
 
 If Delta is a beta, then Delta is a theta. 
 
 Therefore,  
 .  
 8.  If Delta is an alpha, then Delta is a beta. 
 
 If Delta is a theta, then Delta is a beta. 
 
 Either Delta is an alpha or Delta is a theta. 
 
 Therefore,  
 .  
 9.  Either Delta is an alpha or Delta is a beta. 
 
 If Delta is an alpha, then Delta is a theta. 
 
 If Delta is a beta, then Delta is a sigma. 
 
 Therefore,  
 .  
10.   Some alphas are betas. 
 
 All betas are thetas. 
 
 Therefore,  
 .  
 As the preceding exercises make clear, it is not necessary to know whether 
an argument’s premises or conclusion are true to know whether the argument 
is valid. In fact, some valid arguments have obviously  false premises and a  false 
conclusion. For example:
 All squares are circles. 
 All circles are triangles. 
 Therefore, all squares are triangles. 
 Some valid arguments have  false premises and a  true conclusion.  For example:
 All fruits are vegetables. 
 Spinach is a fruit. 
 Therefore, spinach is a vegetable. 
 And some valid arguments have  true premises  and a  true conclusion.  For 
example:
 If you’re reading this, you are alive. 
 You are reading this. 
 Therefore, you are alive. 

 
Deductive Validity 
75
 There is, however, one combination of truth or falsity that no valid argu-
ment can have.  No valid argument can have all true premises and a false conclusion. 
This important truth follows from the very deﬁ nition of a valid argument. 
Because a valid argument, by deﬁ nition, is an argument in which the conclu-
sion  must  be true if the premises are true, no valid argument can have all true 
premises and a false conclusion. 
 A deductive argument in which the conclusion does  not  follow necessar-
ily from the premises is said to be an invalid deductive argument. Here are 
four examples:
 All dogs are animals. 
 Lassie is an animal. 
 Therefore, Lassie is a dog. 
 If I’m a monkey’s uncle, then I’m a primate. 
 I’m not a monkey’s uncle. 
 So, I’m not a primate. 
 All pears are vegetables. 
 All fruits are vegetables. 
 Therefore, all pears are fruits. 
 All dogs are cats. 
 All cats are whales. 
 Therefore, all whales are dogs. 
Each of these arguments is invalid. The ﬁ rst argument has true premises and 
a true conclusion. The second argument has true premises and a false conclu-
sion. The third argument has false premises and a true conclusion. And the 
fourth argument has false premises and a false conclusion. 
 To recap: An invalid argument can have any combination of truth or 
falsity in the premises or conclusion. A valid argument can have any com-
bination except one: No valid argument can have true premises and a false 
conclusion. 
 Because an argument’s conclusion either does or does not follow neces-
sarily from its premises, it follows that all deductive arguments are either valid 
or invalid. For the same reason, all deductive arguments are either 100 percent 
valid or 100 percent invalid. Either a deductive argument provides logically 
conclusive grounds for its conclusion or it does not. If it does, the argument 
is valid. If it does not, the argument is invalid. Thus, no deductive argument 
can be “mostly valid” or “almost valid.” Deductive validity doesn’t come in 
degrees. 
 Probably the most common mistake students make when they are ﬁ rst 
introduced to the concept of deductive validity is to think that  valid  means 
“true.” Remember: Valid  does  not mean “true.”  Valid  means that the argument 
is well reasoned, that the pattern of reasoning is a logically reliable pattern of 
 Valid deductive 
arguments are 
like steel traps. 
Once a person 
walks into the 
trap by accept-
ing the premises, 
there is no escape; 
the conclusion fol-
lows necessarily. 
 —Kathleen Dean 
Moore 

76 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
reasoning, that the conclusion follows necessarily from the premises. Thus, the 
basic test of deductive validity is not whether the premises are actually true. 
Instead, the key question is this:  If the argument’s premises were true, would the 
conclusion also have to be true?  If the answer is yes, the argument is valid. If the 
answer is no, the argument is invalid. 
 Now let’s apply this test of validity to a few examples. Here’s one:
 The Eiffel Tower is in Paris. 
 Paris is in France. 
 Therefore, the Eiffel Tower is in France. 
 If the premises of this argument were true (as they are, of course), would the 
conclusion also have to be true? Yes, it would be contradictory to assert that 
the Eiffel Tower is in Paris and that Paris is in France and yet deny that the 
Eiffel Tower is in France. Thus, the argument is valid. 
 Here is a second example:
 All pigs are sheep. 
 All sheep are goats. 
 Therefore, all pigs are goats. 
 Here both the premises and the conclusion are false. Does this mean that the 
argument is invalid? No, because if the premises were true, the conclusion 
would also have to be true. Thus, the argument is valid. 
 Here is a third example:
 Some people like spinach. 
 Some people like anchovies. 
 Therefore, some people who like spinach also like anchovies. 
 Here the premises and the conclusion are all true. Does the conclusion fol-
low necessarily from the premises? No, it is logically possible that the class of 
people who like spinach doesn’t overlap at all with the class of people who like 
anchovies. Thus, there is no contradiction in asserting the premises and deny-
ing the conclusion. Hence, the argument is invalid. 
 Consider a ﬁ nal example:
 No dogs are cats. 
 Some dogs are not housebroken. 
 Therefore, some things that are housebroken are not cats. 
 Is this argument valid? Does the conclusion follow necessarily from the prem-
ises? In this case, the logic of the argument is complex, so it is not easy to say. 
In fact, the argument is  invalid,  but most of us have trouble seeing that using 
just our seat-of-the-pants logical intuitions. Fortunately, logicians have discov-
ered several nifty ways of testing whether arguments are valid or invalid. We 
study two of these techniques (the Venn diagram method and the truth table 
method) later in this book. 

 
Inductive Strength 
77
 Why is the concept of validity so important? Because validity is the 
basis of all exact, rigorous reasoning directed at the discovery of truth. Much 
as a leakproof pipe perfectly preserves whatever ﬂ uids ﬂ ow through it, a valid 
argument perfectly preserves whatever truth is contained in the argument’s 
premises. In short, validity is important because  validity preserves truth.  Only by 
reasoning validly can we reason rigorously from truth to truth. 
 Important as the concept of validity is, however, we shouldn’t presume 
that every valid argument is a  good argument. Consider the following:
 All heavenly bodies are made of green cheese. 
 The moon is a heavenly body. 
 Therefore, the moon is made of green cheese. 
This is a valid argument. It is also clearly a  bad argument. What examples like 
this show is that we don’t merely want our deductive arguments to be valid; we 
also want them to have  true premises.  Deductive arguments that combine both 
of these desirable features—that is, deductive arguments that are both valid and 
have all true premises—are called sound deductive arguments. Deductive 
arguments that either are invalid or have at least one false premise, or both, are 
called unsound deductive arguments. 
 INDUCTIVE STRENGTH 
 Inductive arguments, like deductive arguments, can be well reasoned or poorly 
reasoned. A well-reasoned inductive argument is called a  strong  inductive argu-
ment. More precisely, in a strong inductive argument, the conclusion follows 
probably from the premises. Put otherwise, a strong inductive argument is an 
argument in which the following conditions apply: 
 If the premises are true, the conclusion is probably true. 
 The premises provide probable, but not logically conclusive, grounds for 
the truth of the conclusion. 
 The premises, if true, make the conclusion likely. 
  A small-town emergency squad was summoned to a house where 
smoke was pouring from an upstairs window. The crew broke in and 
found a man in a smoldering bed. After the man was rescued and 
the mattress doused, the obvious question was asked: “How did this 
happen?” 
 
 “I don’t know,” the man replied. “It was on ﬁ re when I lay down 
on it.” 12 
 Critical Thinking Lapse 

78 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
Here are two examples of strong inductive arguments:
 Most college students own MP3 players. 
 Andy is a college student. 
 So, Andy probably owns an MP3 player. 
 All recent U.S. presidents have been college graduates. 
 Thus, it is likely that the next U.S. president will be a college graduate. 
 An inductive argument that is not strong is said to be  weak. In a  weak 
inductive argument , the conclusion does  not  follow probably from the prem-
ises. In other words, a weak argument is an inductive argument in which the 
premises, even if they are assumed to be true, do not make the conclusion 
probable. Here are two examples of inductively weak arguments:
 All previous popes have been men. 
 Therefore, probably the next pope will be a woman. 
 Fifty-ﬁ ve percent of students at East Laredo State University are Hispanic. 
 Li Fang Wang, owner of Wang’s Chinese Restaurant, is a student at East 
Laredo State University. 
 Therefore, Li Fang Wang is probably Hispanic. 
 Because the conclusions of these arguments are not probably true even if we 
assume that the premises are true, the arguments are weak. 
 Like deductively valid arguments, inductively strong arguments can 
have various combinations of truth or falsity in the premises and conclusion. 
Some strong arguments have  false premises  and a  probably false conclusion.  For 
 example:
 All previous U.S. vice presidents have been women. 
 Therefore, it is likely that the next U.S. vice president will be a woman. 
 Some inductively strong arguments have  false premises  and a  probably true 
conclusion. For example:
 Every previous U.S. president has been clean-shaven. 
 So, the next U.S. president probably will be clean-shaven. 
 And some inductively strong arguments have  true premises  and a  probably 
true conclusion. For example:
 No previous U.S. president has been a native Alaskan. 
 So, the next U.S. president probably will not be a native Alaskan. 
 As with valid deductive arguments, however, there is one combination of 
truth or falsity no strong inductive argument can ever have. Because, by deﬁ -
nition, a strong inductive argument is an argument in which the conclusion 
follows probably from the premises,  no strong inductive argument can have true 
premises and a probably false conclusion. 

 
Inductive Strength 
79
 Weak inductive arguments, on the other hand, like invalid deductive ar-
guments, can have any combination of truth or falsity in the premises and 
conclusion. Here are some examples:
 Most U.S. presidents have been married. 
 Therefore, probably the next U.S. president will be a man. 
 Most U.S. presidents have been over ﬁ fty years old. 
 Therefore, probably the next U.S. president will be single. 
 Most U.S. presidents have been women. 
 Therefore, probably the next U.S. president will be married. 
 Most U.S. presidents have been less than 5 feet tall. 
 Therefore, probably the next U.S. president will be single. 
 Each of these inductive arguments is weak. That is, each has a conclusion that 
does not follow probably from the premise, even if we assume that the premise 
is true. The ﬁ rst argument has a true premise and a probably true conclusion. 
The second argument has a true premise and a probably false conclusion. The 
third argument has a false premise and a probably true conclusion. The fourth 
argument has a false premise and a probably false conclusion. 
 As these examples make clear, whether an inductive argument is strong or 
weak generally does not depend on the actual truth or falsity of the premises and 
the conclusion. Rather, it depends on whether the conclusion  would probably   be true 
if the premises  were  true. Thus, the key question we ask about inductive strength 
is this:  If the argument’s premises were true, would the conclusion probably be true?  If the 
answer is yes, the argument is strong. If the answer is no, the argument is weak. 
 The concept of inductive strength is similar in many ways to the concept 
of deductive validity, but there is one important difference: Inductive strength, 
unlike deductive validity, does come in degrees. Deductive arguments, as we have 
seen, are either 100 percent valid or 100 percent invalid. Inductive arguments, in 
contrast, can be more or less strong or weak. Consider the following examples:
 According to the National Weather Service, there is a 60 percent chance of rain 
today. 
 Therefore, probably it will rain today. 
 According to the National Weather Service, there is a 90 percent chance of rain 
today. 
 Therefore, probably it will rain today. 
 According to the National Weather Service, there is a 40 percent chance of rain 
today. 
 Therefore, probably it will rain today. 
 According to the National Weather Service, there is a 10 percent chance of rain 
today. 
 Therefore, probably it will rain today. 

80 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
 The ﬁ rst and second arguments are both strong inductive arguments be-
cause the conclusions are probably true if the premises are true. The second ar-
gument, however, is stronger than the ﬁ rst because its premise provides greater 
support for its conclusion than the premise of the ﬁ rst argument provides for 
its conclusion. Similarly, the third and fourth arguments are both weak in-
ductive arguments because the conclusions do not follow probably from the 
premises. The fourth argument, however, is weaker than the third because its 
premise provides less support for its conclusion than the premise of the third 
argument provides for its conclusion. 
 Finally, keep in mind that an inductive argument can be strong and yet 
still be a bad argument. For example:
 All previous U.S. presidents have worn togas. 
 Therefore, probably the next U.S. president will wear a toga. 
 Although this argument is inductively strong, it is a poor argument because 
the premise is obviously false. A good inductive argument must both be strong 
(i.e., inductively well reasoned) and have all true premises. If an argument 
both is inductively strong and has all true premises, it is said to be a cogent 
argument. 13 If an inductive argument either is weak or has at least one false 
premise, it is an uncogent argument. Consider these examples:
 No U.S. president has been a U.S. skateboarding champ. 
 Therefore, probably the next U.S. president will not be a U.S. skateboarding 
champ. 
 All previous U.S. presidents have been Democrats. 
 Therefore, probably the next U.S. president will be a Democrat. 
 All previous U.S. presidents have been professional football players. 
 Therefore, probably the next U.S. president will be an astronaut. 
 The ﬁ rst argument is cogent because it meets both conditions of a cogent ar-
gument: Its premise is true and the argument is strong. The second argument 
is uncogent because it fails one of the conditions of a cogent argument: Its 
premise is false. The third argument is uncogent because it fails both conditions 
of a cogent argument: Its premise is false and the argument is weak. 
 In light of the preceding deﬁ nitions, arguments may be diagrammed as 
follows:  
Deductive arguments
Valid
Invalid
(all are
unsound)
Sound
Unsound
  
Inductive arguments
Strong
Weak
(all are
uncogent)
Cogent
Uncogent

 
Inductive Strength 
81
 EXERCISE 3.5  
 I.   The following arguments are deductive. Determine whether the arguments 
are valid or invalid. Explain your answer in each case. 
 1.   If Flipper is a dolphin, then Flipper is a mammal. Flipper is a dolphin. So, 
Flipper is a mammal. 
 2.   If anything is a trout, then it’s a ﬁ sh. A dolphin is not a ﬁ sh. Therefore, a dol-
phin is not a trout. 
 3.   If we’re at the North Pole, then we’re on Earth. We are on Earth. Therefore, 
we’re at the North Pole. 
 4.   If Bigfoot is human, then Bigfoot has a heart. Bigfoot is not human. So, Big-
foot doesn’t have a heart. 
 5.   Some people like ice cream. Some people like cake. So, some people who 
like ice cream must also like cake. 
 6.   Simba is a lion. Necessarily, therefore, Simba must have four legs. 
 7.   Your mother can’t be a professional race car driver. Only men are profes-
sional race car drivers, and your mother, obviously, is not a man. 
 Argument: A set of statements in which 
a claim (called the  conclusion ) is defended 
with reasons (called the  premises ). 
 Deductive argument: An argument in which 
the conclusion is claimed or intended to 
follow necessarily from the premises. 
 Inductive argument: An argument in which 
the conclusion is claimed or intended to 
follow probably from the premises. 
 Valid argument: A deductive argument in 
which the conclusion follows necessarily 
from the premises—that is, a deductive argu-
ment in which it is impossible for the prem-
ises to be true and the conclusion false. 
 Invalid argument: A deductive argument in 
which the conclusion does not follow nec-
essarily from the premises—that is, a de-
ductive argument in which it is possible for 
the premises to be true and the conclusion 
false. 
 Sound argument: A deductive argument that 
both is valid and has all true premises. 
 Unsound argument: A deductive argument 
that either is invalid or has at least one 
false premise, or both. 
 Strong argument: An inductive argument 
in which the conclusion follows probably 
from the premises—that is, an inductive ar-
gument in which it is unlikely that its con-
clusion is false if its premises are true. 
 Weak argument: An inductive argument in 
which the conclusion does not follow prob-
ably from the premises—that is, an inductive 
argument in which it is unlikely that if its 
premises are true, its conclusion is also true. 
 Cogent argument: An inductive argument that 
both is strong and has all true premises. 
 Uncogent argument: An inductive argument 
that either is weak or has at least one false 
premise, or both. 
 Recap of Key Defi nitions 

82 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
 8.  Science student: Science is often deﬁ ned as the organized arrangement of 
known facts. But that cannot be the correct deﬁ nition because a phone 
book is an organized arrangement of facts, and a phone book is not science. 
 9.  Bill: I guess some of the seniors were late to practice this morning. 
 
  Diane: How do you know? 
 
  Bill: Because the coach said that anyone late to practice this morning would 
have to do wind sprints, and I just saw some of the seniors doing wind 
sprints. That’ll teach them. 
10.   Frank: I’m going to bring my cell phone with me when I take the logic test 
tomorrow. Whenever I don’t know the answer, I’ll just call my roommate, 
Ted. He aced Logic last semester. 
 
  Maria: Are you crazy? Professor Hardy will never allow you to cheat like that! 
 
  Frank: Sure he will. I distinctly heard him say, “No notes or books are 
 allowed during the test,” and phone calls, my friend, qualify as neither. It’s 
simple logic: No notes or books may be used during the test; phone calls 
aren’t notes or books; so, they are allowed. 
 
  Maria: Clearly, you’re going to need all the help you can get. 
 II.   The following arguments are deductive. Determine whether the arguments 
are sound or unsound. Explain your answer in each case. 
 1.  All mosquitoes are insects. All insects are animals. So, all mosquitoes are  animals.  
 2.  Either dogs are cats, or dogs are ﬁ sh. Dogs are not ﬁ sh. So, dogs are cats.  
 3.  If Rome is in Italy, then Rome is in Europe. Rome is in Italy. So, Rome is 
in Europe. 
 4.  If Bill Gates is a billionaire, then he’s rich. Bill Gates is rich. So, he’s a 
 billionaire. 
 5.  No cars are trucks. A Mazda Miata is a car. So, a Mazda Miata is not a truck. 
 6.  California has a larger population than Ohio. Ohio has a larger population 
than Vermont. So, California has a larger population than Vermont. 
 7.  If the pope plays for the New York Yankees, then he is a professional baseball 
player. The pope does not play for the New York Yankees. So, the pope is not 
a professional baseball player. 
 8.  Some apples are red. Some apples are delicious. So, some apples are red and 
delicious. 
 9.  Los Angeles is west of Chicago. Hence, Atlanta is east of Chicago because 
Atlanta is east of Los Angeles. 
10.   Halloween is always on a Friday. Therefore, the day after Halloween is always 
a Saturday. 
 III.   The following arguments are inductive. Determine whether the arguments 
are cogent or uncogent. Explain your answer in each case. 
 1.  It tends to be cold in Alaska in January. So, probably it will be cold in Alaska 
next January. 
 2.  Cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. Therefore, if you have been a heavy 
cigarette smoker for many years, you will probably die of lung cancer. 
 3.  The vast majority of popes have been Americans. Therefore, the next pope 
will probably be an American. 

 
Inductive Strength 
83
 4.   In poker it’s OK to lie and deceive. Business is like poker. Therefore, in 
business it’s OK to lie and deceive. 
 5.   Billions of men around the world shave daily. Therefore, somewhere in the 
world, someone must be shaving right now. 
 6.   Shakespeare was English, and he was a great poet. Milton was English, and 
he was a great poet. Wordsworth was English, and he was a great poet. I 
guess most great poets were English. 
 7.   Harvard University has been a leading American university for many years. 
Therefore, probably Harvard University will be a leading American univer-
sity ten years from now. 
 8.   Ninety percent of Americans jog daily. Tom Cruise is an American. So, Tom 
Cruise probably jogs daily. 
 9.   Very few people in this country are named Obadiah. Therefore, the next 
person I meet is unlikely to be named Obadiah. 
10.   John F. Kennedy was a Democratic president, and he cheated on his wife. 
Bill Clinton was a Democratic president, and he cheated on his wife. I sup-
pose all Democratic presidents have cheated on their wives. 
 IV.   Determine whether the following arguments are deductive or inductive. If the 
argument is deductive, determine whether it is valid or invalid. If the argument is 
inductive, determine whether it is strong or weak. Explain your answer in each case.  
 1.   If Boston loses, Cleveland will make the play-offs. If Cleveland makes the 
play-offs, the ﬁ rst play-off game will be played in Seattle. Therefore, if Bos-
ton loses, the ﬁ rst play-off game will be played in Seattle.  
 2.   All birds can ﬂ y. Penguins are birds. So, penguins can ﬂ y.  
 3.   Most college students sleep late on Sunday mornings. Wes is a college stu-
dent. So, Wes probably sleeps late on Sunday mornings. 
 4.   Exercise is good for the vast majority of people. Therefore, it would be good 
for my ninety-ﬁ ve-year-old grandfather to run in next year’s Boston Marathon.  
 5.   John’s home address is 47 Riverside Drive. It follows that he must live near a 
river.  
 6.   It is totally dark in here, but I know that the only things in the drawer are 
socks, ten black, ten white. I had better take out eleven socks to be sure I get 
a matched pair. 14 
 7.   According to the  Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, philosopher William 
James was born in New York City in 1842. So, William James was born in 
New York City in 1842. 
 8.   If it rained, then the streets are wet. The streets are wet. So, it rained. 
 9.   This bathwater is tepid. It follows that it is neither extremely hot nor 
 extremely cold. 
10.   States were justiﬁ ed in suing tobacco companies to recover the health-care 
costs associated with smoking. Similarly, states would be justiﬁ ed in suing 
McDonald’s and Burger King to recover the health-care costs associated 
with eating fatty foods. 
11.   There are more than ﬁ fty students in this class. It must be the case, therefore, 
that at least one of them is a Capricorn. 

84 
CHAPTER 3 Basic Logical Concepts
12.   In a recent Gallup poll, 72 percent of Americans said they favored the death 
penalty. Therefore, approximately 72 percent of Americans do favor the 
death penalty. 
13.   On Monday I drank ten rum-and-Cokes, and the next morning I woke up 
with a headache. On Wednesday I drank eight gin-and-Cokes, and the next 
morning I woke up with a headache. On Friday I drank nine bourbon-and-
Cokes, and the next morning I woke up with a headache. Obviously, to 
prevent further headaches, I must give up Coke. 15 
14.   Smedley ran 5 miles in 38 minutes. It follows that he must have run at least 
1 mile in less than 8 minutes. 
15.   Some Native Americans are Democrats. Some Democrats are Supreme 
Court justices. So, some Supreme Court justices must be Native Americans.  
16.   Nearly all U.S. presidents were born before 1925. It stands to reason, 
therefore, that the next U.S. president will have been born before 1925. 
17.   The Empire State Building is taller than the Sears Tower.  Therefore, because 
the Eiffel Tower is shorter than the Empire State Building, it follows that the 
Sears Tower is taller than the Eiffel Tower. 
18.   Do most Americans like rap music? Apparently not. In a random survey 
of ten thousand nursing home patients around the country, fewer than 
5 percent said they enjoyed listening to rap. 
19.   Richard Dawkins, the famous scientist, has said that the heavy elements like 
iron and zinc that compose human bodies were created billions of years ago 
in the interiors of long-extinct stars. Moreover, virtually all scientists agree 
with Dawkins on this point. Therefore, it is probably true that the heavy 
elements like iron and zinc that compose human bodies were created billions 
of years ago in the interiors of long-extinct stars.  
20.   Jerry was born on Easter Sunday. It necessarily follows, therefore, that his 
birthday always falls on a Sunday.  
 SUMMARY 
1.   All arguments are either deductive or inductive. In a  deductive argument, the 
conclusion is claimed to follow necessarily from the premises. In an  induc-
tive argument, the conclusion is claimed to follow only probably from the 
premises. 
2.   In deciding whether an argument is deductive or inductive, one should 
apply four simple tests. The  indicator word test asks, Are there any indicator 
words—words such as  probably, necessarily, and  likely —that signal whether 
the argument is intended to be deductive or inductive? The  strict neces-
sity test asks, Does the conclusion follow with strict necessity from the 
 premises? The  common pattern test asks, Does the argument have a pattern 
that is characteristically deductive or inductive? The  principle of charity test 

 
Summary 
85
urges us to treat doubtful arguments in whatever way is most favorable to 
the arguer. 
3.   We looked at ﬁ ve common patterns of deductive reasoning. A  hypotheti- 
cal syllogism is a three-line argument that contains at least one conditional 
( if-then ) statement. A  categorical syllogism is a three-line deductive argument 
in which each line in the argument begins with  all, some, or  no. An 
 argument by elimination seeks to logically rule out various possibilities until 
only a single possibility remains. In an  argument based on mathematics, the 
conclusion is claimed to depend largely or entirely on some  mathematical 
calculation or measurement (perhaps in conjunction with one or more 
nonmathematical premises). In an  argument from deﬁ nition, the conclusion is 
presented as being true by deﬁ nition.  
4.   We studied six common patterns of inductive reasoning. An  inductive gen-
eralization is an argument in which a generalization is claimed to be likely 
on the basis of information about some members of a particular class. In a 
 predictive argument, a prediction is defended with reasons. An  argument from 
authority asserts that a claim is true and then supports that claim by 
alleging that some presumed authority or witness has said that the claim 
is true. A  causal argument asserts or denies that something is the cause of 
something else. A  statistical argument rests on statistical evidence—that is, 
evidence that some percentage of some group has some particular charac-
teristic. In an  argument from analogy,  the conclusion is claimed to depend on 
an analogy (i.e., a comparison or similarity) between two or more things. 
5.   Deductive arguments are either valid or invalid. In a  valid deductive argu-
ment, the conclusion follows necessarily from the premises. In other words, 
it is an argument in which it is impossible for all the premises to be true 
and the conclusion false. In an  invalid deductive argument, the conclusion 
does not follow necessarily from the premises. 
6.   A  sound deductive argument both is valid and has all true premises. An 
 unsound deductive argument either is invalid or has at least one false premise, 
or both. 
7.   Inductive arguments are either strong or weak. In a  strong inductive argu-
ment, the conclusion follows probably from the premises. In other words, 
it is an inductive argument in which, if the premises are (or were) true, 
the conclusion would probably be true. In a  weak inductive argument, the 
conclusion does not follow probably from the premises. 
8.   A  cogent argument is an inductive argument that both is strong and has all 
true premises. An  uncogent argument is an inductive argument that either is 
weak or has at least one false premise, or both. 

86
CHAPTER 4
 LANGUAGE 
 We take our language for granted. Seldom do we think about how much 
we depend on the ability to use words and put them together in phrases and 
sentences. With language we plan the day’s events, curse the television, ex-
claim our surprise or frustration (“Damn!”), express pain (“Ouch!”), scribble 
reminders on scraps of paper, record our thoughts and feelings in diaries and 
journals, recall past conversations and events, talk to ourselves in anxious mo-
ments, pray, wonder, and worry. We could, perhaps, think in other ways—with 
images, for example—but that would be very limiting. 
 Thought and language create our world, and so to think critically about 
the world we must pay careful attention to words—the words we choose and 
the words others use. In this chapter we focus on the skills of choosing the 
right word, deﬁ ning words, and identifying the emotive and slanted messages 
some words carry. 
 FINDING THE RIGHT WORDS: THE NEED FOR PRECISION 
 Failure to be precise in communicating can result in confusion and misunder-
standing. What makes perfectly good sense to one person might be confusing 
to someone else. “My father is a painter,” you tell a friend, but does your father 
paint houses or canvases? A professor writes “vague” in the margins of what 
you consider your best paper. Whose fault is it that your professor didn’t “get 
it”? ( Hint: not your professor’s.) To communicate clearly, to defend our claims 
without confusing or misleading anyone, and to assess the truth of premises 
presented to us in the arguments of others, we must insist that language in the 
context of argumentation be clear and precise. 
 Say, for example, that as support for the claim that college bookstores 
should stop selling clothes manufactured in foreign sweatshops, the following 
were offered as premises:
 Only where there 
is language is 
there world. 
 —Adrienne Rich 
 The slovenliness 
of our language 
makes it easier 
to have foolish 
thoughts. 
 —George Orwell 

 
Finding the Right Words: The Need for Precision 
87
 Sweatshop laborers earn minimal pay working in suffocating conditions in 
factories owned by American corporations. They claim that economic realities 
force them to participate in this practice. 
To the writer this may be clear, but the reader will question what is meant by 
“sweatshop” and “minimal pay” and may wonder if “suffocating” is a literal 
description of the factory (limited fresh air to breathe) or a metaphorical 
description of the oppressive working conditions. The reader might also wonder 
if “they” in the second sentence refers to the corporations or to the laborers, 
both of which could conceivably feel “forced” into such practices. Thinking 
critically and arguing effectively often depend on recognizing imprecise 
language—that is, language that is vague, overgeneral, or ambiguous. 
 Vagueness 
 One kind of imprecision in language is vagueness. A word (or group of words) 
is  vague when its meaning is fuzzy and inexact. The phrase  minimal pay  in our 
example is vague because it does not indicate precisely how much money is 
paid to laborers. Or consider the word  rich. It is clear that Bill Gates is rich. It is 
equally clear that most welfare recipients are not rich. But what about an NBA 
benchwarmer who earns $400,000 a year? Or a plastic surgeon who earns 
$1 million a year but has large gambling debts? Are such people rich? It is hard 
to say because the word  rich isn’t precise enough to provide a clear answer. The 
term  middle-aged  is also vague. Everyone would agree that President Obama is 
middle-aged. Everyone would also agree that Lindsay Lohan and former presi-
dent Carter are not middle-aged. But what about Stefﬁ  Graf or Mick Jagger? 
No deﬁ nite answer can be given because the word  middle-aged  has no clear and 
distinct meaning. 
 As these examples suggest, a vague word divides things into three 
classes: those things to which the word clearly applies, those things to which 
it clearly does not apply, and those things to which it may or may not apply. 
In such borderline cases, it is hard to say whether the word refers to those 
things or not. 
 Nearly all words are vague to some degree. Some words, such as  indecent 
and  obscene, are extremely vague: They create lots of difﬁ cult borderline cases. 
Other words, like  vehicle, are moderately vague. Ordinary cars and trucks are 
clearly vehicles, but what about roller skates, baby carriages, snow sleds, and 
motorized wheelchairs? Still other words, such as  triangle and  prime number, 
have very precise meanings, with little or no vagueness. 
 Vague language is useful and appropriate in many contexts. It lets us 
speak with suitable caution when we lack precise information. (“I think I 
did pretty well on the exam.”) It frequently adds richness, subtlety, and com-
plexity to poetry and other literary forms (“a slumber did my spirit seal”). In 
diplomacy a certain deliberate vagueness may be needed to avoid disclosing 
important information. (“If you invade, there will be severe consequences.”) 
And vague language is useful—indeed probably indispensable—in formulating 
 I like sharp out-
lines. I hate misty 
vagueness. 
 —Bertrand Russell 

88 
CHAPTER 4 Language
suitably broad legal standards (“freedom of speech”) in contexts in which it 
would be unwise to attempt to enact a detailed code of laws. 
 Generally speaking, however, vagueness should be avoided because it 
frustrates clear thinking and communication. Imagine, for example, living in a 
police state in which the following laws were enacted:
 Anyone behaving  immorally will be severely punished. 
 Anyone speaking  disloyally will be shot. 
Would you have any clear idea what kinds of conduct were prohibited by such 
vague laws? 
 Overgenerality 
 Vagueness is often confused with overgenerality. There is, however, an impor-
tant distinction between the two. Words are vague if they have fuzzy or inexact 
boundaries and hence give rise to unclear borderline cases. In contrast, words 
are  overgeneral if the information they provide is too broad and unspeciﬁ c 
in a given context. 
 Consider the following brief dialogues:
 Teacher:  Johnny, what is seven plus ﬁ ve?  
 Johnny: More than two. 
 Dean of students: What were you drinking at this keg party? 
 Freshman: A beverage.  
 Mother: Where are you going? 
 Teenager:  Out. 
 Mother: When will you be back? 
 Teenager:  Later. 
None of these replies is particularly vague in the sense of having blurry bound-
aries. The phrase “More than two,” for example, gives rise to no troublesome 
borderline cases. The problem with these answers is not vagueness but over-
generality. The answers are not speciﬁ c enough to count as satisfactory answers 
in the context indicated. 
 Whether an expression is overly general usually depends on the context. 
“He’s human” may be a perfectly adequate response to the question “Is your 
chess opponent human or a computer?” But it is a poor response to the ques-
tion “What’s your new boyfriend like?” 
 Sometimes, of course, words may be both vague and overgeneral. Thus, 
if I describe my lost luggage simply as “a large black bag,” my description is 
too vague (“large,” “black,” and “bag” all have fuzzy, inexact meanings) and too 
general (the phrase “large black bag” isn’t speciﬁ c enough to distinguish my 
bag from many others). 

 
Finding the Right Words: The Need for Precision 
89
 Ambiguity 
 Ambiguity refers to a doubtful sense of a word or phrase. Many words have 
more than one meaning. The word  star,  for example, can mean, among other 
things, a Hollywood celebrity or a twinkling celestial object. A word or ex-
pression is  ambiguous  if it has two or more distinct meanings and the context 
does not make clear which meaning is intended. Ambiguity is what makes 
puns and many jokes funny, but used unintentionally it can destroy the effec-
tiveness of an argument. 
 Ambiguity, like overgenerality, is often confused with vagueness. The basic 
difference between ambiguity and vagueness is this: A vague word is imprecise 
because it has blurry boundaries and unclear borderline applications. An am-
biguous word is imprecise because it is unclear which of two or more  distinct 
meanings (each of which may be quite precise) is the one intended by the 
author. A handy way to remember the distinction is to keep in mind that  ambi 
means “both,” as in  ambidextrous:  “able to use both hands with equal skill.” 
 Some expressions are ambiguous because it is not clear to what a single 
word or phrase in the expression refers:
 Joe went to the bank. [“Bank” in the sense of a ﬁ nancial institution or “bank” 
in the sense of a slope bordering on a river? Or could it be a sperm bank?]  
 John called. [John Smith or John Brown?] 
 Margie sold out. [Did Margie sell her inventory or did she surrender her 
ideals?] 
 Ambiguities that result from uncertainty about the meaning of an indi-
vidual word or phrase are called  semantic ambiguities. 
 Other expressions are ambiguous because of a faulty sentence structure:
 As a young girl, her grandfather often told her stories about the Wild West. 
[Her grandfather was never a young girl.]2 
 One morning he shot an elephant in his pajamas. (Groucho Marx) [Those 
must have been big pajamas!] 
 On Monday, Professor Kraus will give a lecture on safer-sex in the college 
auditorium. [Students are having sex in the auditorium?!] 
 If a man is capable 
of thinking 
anything at all, he 
is also always able 
to express it in 
clear, intelligible, 
unambiguous 
terms.  
 —Arthur 
Schopenhauer 
 Sometimes 
words have two 
meanings. 
 —Led Zeppelin 
 Words have a 
meaning, whether 
we mean that 
meaning or not. 
 —John Henry 
Newman 
 He wasn’t nude but the mayor of North Platte, Neb., did keep his 
promise to walk naked down the street. 
 
 Mayor Jim Whitaker said he’d “walk naked” if the Paws-itive Part-
ners Humane Society raised $5,000. When the scheme drew national 
attention—and angry calls—Whitaker revealed that he actually planned 
to walk a dog named Naked instead of walking in the buff himself.1 
 Walking Naked—As Promised 

90 
CHAPTER 4 Language
 Newspaper ad: Dog for sale. Eats anything and is especially fond of children. 
 Newspaper headline: Prostitutes Appeal to Pope. 
 Headline:  Two Sisters Reunited after 18 Years in Checkout Line. 
 Sign in Laundromat: Customers are required to remove their clothes when 
the machine stops. 3 
 Ambiguities that result from faulty grammar or word order are called 
 syntactical ambiguities. 
 Some phrases that on their own may be ambiguous are clariﬁ ed in the 
context of an argument. For instance, “Joe went to the bank” creates no confu-
sion in the sentence “Joe went to the bank to complain to the manager about 
the increase in ATM fees.” 
 But miscommunication can result when a word has more than one 
meaning and the intended meaning is not clariﬁ ed by deﬁ nition or by context. 
In some cases, this failure results in what is known as a  verbal dispute,  which 
occurs when people appear to disagree on an issue but in actuality have simply 
not resolved the ambiguity of a key term. Suppose two people were asked the 
same question: “Is the suspect arrested last night  guilty of the crime?” The ﬁ rst 
 When you say 
something, make 
sure you have said 
it. The chances of 
your having said it 
are only fair. 
 —William Strunk 
Jr. and E. B. White 
 Recent legal changes have eroded the traditional conﬁ dentiality of 
letters of recommendation. As a result, it is not uncommon for letter 
writters to be sued by disgruntled job candidates. To avoid such law-
suits, letter writers might wish to consider some strategically ambigu-
ous expressions:
   To describe a candidate who is extremely lazy: “In my opinion, you will 
be very fortunate to get this person to work for you.” 
 To describe a job applicant who is totally inept: “I most enthusiasti-
cally recommend this candidate with no qualiﬁ cations whatsoever.”  
  To describe an ex-colleague who is difﬁ cult to get along with: “I am 
pleased to say that this candidate is a former colleague of mine.” 
  To describe a job applicant who is not worth further consideration: 
“I would urge you to waste no time in making this candidate an offer 
of employment.” 
  To describe a person with lackluster credentials: “All in all, I cannot 
say enough good things about this candidate or recommend him too 
highly.” 
 A little Internet humor. 
 Zen and the Art of Writing Litigation-Proof 
Letters of Recommendations 

 
Finding the Right Words: The Need for Precision 
91
person answers, “No, a person is innocent until proven guilty.” The second per-
son disagrees: “I say he is guilty; he confessed when he was picked up.” There 
is really no disagreement here on whether the suspect  committed  the crime; the 
ﬁ rst person is deﬁ ning  guilt  in a legal sense (the suspect hasn’t been convicted 
yet), and the second is deﬁ ning it to mean that the suspect did the crime of 
which he or she is accused. 
 A  factual dispute,  on the other hand, occurs when opponents disagree 
not over the meanings of words but over the relevant facts. Person A might 
say, “That man did not commit the crime; he has an alibi.” Person B might 
respond, “He did commit the crime; I saw him do it.” 
 In other cases, though, assessing the truth of a claim that hinges on an 
ambiguous term can be nearly impossible. If someone claims, without further 
elaboration, that on average “men are more powerful than women,” we would 
have no way of assessing the claim because  powerful has several meanings; and 
whereas one of those meanings (physical strength) may be defensible, the oth-
ers may not be. 
 EXERCISE 4.1 
 I.   For each of the following, say whether the italicized expression is vague, 
overgeneral, or both. Remember that a word or phrase is  vague if it gives rise to 
debatable borderline cases, and it is  overgeneral if the information it provides is too 
broad and unspeciﬁ c in a given context.
 1.   School principal:  Any student wearing  inappropriate  clothing will receive 
 detention.  
 2.   Professor: Erik, did you read today’s assignment? 
 Erik: Some of it. 
 3.   Advertisement: Save up to 70% on select items throughout the store. 
 4.   Teacher: Billy, do you know where Norway is? 
 
   Billy: In the Northern hemisphere. 
 5.   Airline regulation: Overweight passengers must pay a 20% surcharge. 
 6.   Tessa: I promised my boyfriend I would go to the shore with him this 
weekend, but my dog is sick, and I may need to take her to the vet. What 
should I do? 
 
  Crystal: Do what’s ethical. 
 7.   Pablo: Who won the long jump at the track meet? 
 
   Ollie: The guy who jumped the farthest. 
 8.   Beri: What’s the speed limit on this highway? 
 
   Sally: There is no speed limit. But you can be ﬁ ned or arrested if you drive 
at a  dangerous or unreasonable speed. 
 9.    Rick: I’m really looking forward to seeing you in New York City on Saturday. 
Where do you want to meet? 
 
   Ted: I’ll meet you in Central Park.  
 10.    Comedian George Carlin: Weather forecast for tonight:  Dark. Continued dark 
overnight, with widely scattered light by morning. 
 How many a dis-
pute could have 
been deﬂ ated into 
a single paragraph 
if the disputants 
had dared to de-
ﬁ ne their terms. 
 —Aristotle 

92 
CHAPTER 4 Language
 II.   Identify problems of vagueness, overgenerality, and ambiguity in the follow-
ing passages. You’ll notice that many of the examples are comical, whether or not 
the writer intended them to be so. See if you can determine which of the comi-
cal passages contain some clever and deliberate use of imprecision and which are 
unintentionally funny.
 1.   College harassment policy: Harassment “includes language to physical acts 
which degrades, insult s , taunt s , or challenges another person by any means of 
communication, verbal, so as to provoke a violent response, communication 
of threat, defamation of character, use of profanity, verbal assaults, derogatory 
comments or remarks, sexist remarks, racists remarks or any behavior that 
places another member of the University community in a state of fear or 
anxiety.” (From a student handbook (quote is verbatim)) 
 2.   As a member of Parliament, Anglo-Irish playwright Richard Brinsley 
Sheridan (1751–1816) had been asked to apologize for insulting a fellow 
member of Parliament. “Mr. Speaker,” replied Sheridan, “I said the honorable 
member was a liar it is true and I am sorry for it. The honorable member 
may place the punctuation where he pleases.” 4 
 3.   Headline: Need Plain Clothes Security: Must Have Shoplifting Experience. 5  
 4.   Weather forecast: Cloudy with a chance of rain. 
 5.   Headline: Advice to Teachers and Parents on Drugs. 
 6.   He ate his cheesecake with relish. 
 7.   With her enormous bottom exposed to the sky, Ellen watched  Titanic  slowly sink.  
 8.   On returning from church one day, President Coolidge was asked on what 
topic the minister had preached. After a moment’s thought, he replied, “Sin.” 
“And what did he say about the sin?” his interlocutor asked. “He was against 
it,” Coolidge replied. 6 
 9.   Sign: Dogs must be carried on escalator. 
 10.   Bob told Devlin he was hot. 
 11.   Headline: Safety experts say school bus passengers should be belted. 
 12.   3 + 5 × 3 = ? 
 13.   St. Louis Cardinals pitcher Dizzy Dean was famous for his strong arm and 
weak mind. In the 1934 World Series, Dean was pegged in the head while 
sliding into second base. A headline the next day read: “X-rays of Dean’s 
Head Show Nothing.” 
 14.   She cannot bear children. 
 15.   Headline: Doctor testiﬁ es in horse suit.  
 16.   British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli had a standard acknowledgment 
for people who sent him unsolicited manuscripts for his opinion: “Thank 
you for the manuscript; I shall lose no time in reading it.” 7 
 17.   Lost: Small brown dog with black collar. Generous reward for return. 
 18.   Headline: Teacher Strikes Idle Kids. 
 19.   Jana told her sister she was envious. 
 20.   Headline: Panda Mating Fails; Veterinarian Takes Over. 
 III.   Determine whether the following disputes are verbal or factual.
 1.   Tracy: Sue is really religious. She reads her Bible and prays every day. 
 
   Mark: Sue isn’t religious. She never goes to church. 

 
The Importance of Precise Deﬁ nitions 
93
 2.   Paul: This is a maple tree. I know because it’s just like the maple tree in my 
backyard. 
 
   Amy: Maple tree, my foot! Maple trees don’t have acorns! 
 3.   Mitch: Professor Tomkins is a great professor. She tells funny stories, gives 
easy exams, and never assigns any homework. 
 
   David: On the contrary, a good professor challenges his or her students and 
motivates them to do their best. 
 4.   Mike: We better leave now. Coach said the game starts at 1:00. 
 
   Lindo: We have plenty of time. He said it starts at 4:00. 
 5.   Hal: Let’s take Highway 6. It’s shorter. We can save at least 10 miles. 
 
   Yavonna: It’s not shorter. Highway 6 is always backed up this time of day. It 
will take us at least 10 minutes longer. 
 6.   Prosecutor:  The defendant was neither legally insane nor coerced when he 
shot Frank Smith, mistaking him for a porcupine. Thus, the defendant acted 
freely. 
 
    Defense attorney: Your honor, my client shot Frank Smith accidentally, not 
intentionally. So, my client did not act freely. 
 7.    Belinda: Ty Cobb has the highest single-season batting average—.420. 
 
   Ned: Wrong as usual, sports fan. Rogers Hornsby hit .424 one year. 
 8.    Professor: John, it’s clear you didn’t study hard for this test. This was a very 
straightforward exam, and you failed every section. 
 
   John: But I did study hard! I spent over an hour last night studying for this 
exam!  
 THE IMPORTANCE OF PRECISE DEFINITIONS 
 A convincing argument often depends on the clear and accurate deﬁ nition of 
language. The failure to deﬁ ne terms carefully can result in a messy battle, with 
some partxicipants struggling to ﬁ nd the truth and others ﬁ ghting to avoid it. 
Former president Clinton’s entire political career nearly came to a crashing 
halt because he and investigators looking into an alleged affair disagreed on the 
deﬁ nition of the term  sexual relations.  Prosecutors provided a legal deﬁ nition 
of the phrase, a deﬁ nition Clinton believed excluded the speciﬁ c behavior he 
had engaged in. He denied the affair on the grounds that the term was inac-
curate. While many observers might argue that Clinton, knowing full well 
the meaning of  sexual relations,  played games with the meaning of the phrase, 
others might claim that, like any good lawyer, Clinton held the prosecutor’s 
language to the highest standard: It wasn’t as precise as it should have been. 
In some respects Clinton’s looking for an escape hatch is understandable. You 
would be very aware of the need for clarity if, for example, you were arrested 
and charged with an offense. Our radar for undeﬁ ned terms seems to kick 
in quickest when we are on the defensive: “What, exactly,” you might ask, “is 
‘reckless driving’?” 
 The difference be-
tween the almost 
right word and 
the right word is 
really a large 
matter—’tis 
the difference 
between the light-
ning bug and the 
lightning. 
 —Mark Twain 
 Deﬁ nitions are 
the foundation of 
reason. You can’t 
reason without 
them. 
 —Robert M. Pirsig 
 That depends on 
what the meaning 
of the word “is” is.  
 —Bill Clinton 

94 
CHAPTER 4 Language
 In many discussions, terms may need to be deﬁ ned before a position can 
be advanced. Take, for example, the issue of whether Congress should approve 
an amendment outlawing desecration of the American ﬂ ag. The attempt to 
adopt a ﬂ ag desecration amendment, in June 2006, failed in the Senate by only 
one vote. Such an amendment would make it a crime to deliberately deface 
or destroy the ﬂ ag in certain circumstances. Of course, if such an amendment 
passes, individual cases of “desecration” will be decided on the basis of courts’ 
deﬁ nition of the term. Clearly,  desecration  would require deﬁ ning: Would tying 
the ﬂ ag to your bumper and dragging it through the streets be considered des-
ecration? How about sewing an old ﬂ ag into a T-shirt or a bathing suit? Using 
it as a tablecloth? Flying it upside down? But the word  ﬂ ag would also need 
deﬁ ning. What is a “ﬂ ag”? Is it only the cloth banner that ﬂ ies or hangs from a 
pole? What if, after a law against desecration has been passed, someone using a 
slide projector projects the image of a ﬂ ag onto a white wall, throws paint or 
blood against the wall, and shouts obscenities at the “ﬂ ag”? What if the same 
person projected the image, not against a white wall, but against a wall with 
anti-government slogans spray-painted on it? 
   Clearly, the interpretation of such documents as the Constitution can 
depend heavily on our deﬁ nitions of key terms; and whereas an amendment 
might be deliberately left vague, it is up to the courts to decide on a case-by-
case basis whether individual actions fall under the amendment. 
 In almost any argument, the deﬁ nition of words can be at the heart of the 
debate. In fact, whereas some arguments take place over the truth or falseness 
 If you wish to 
converse with me, 
deﬁ ne your terms. 
 —Voltaire 
Language Games in The Simpsons
Imprecise language, especially ambiguity, is the foundation of much 
of the humor in movie and sitcom dialogue. Consider these examples 
from The Simpsons:
1.  In a National Park Service building, Bart encounters a Smokey the 
Bear robot equipped with an electronic quiz:
 
Smokey: Only who can prevent forest ﬁ res?
 
Bart examines the two choices, “you” and “me.” He selects “you.”
 
 Smokey: You pressed “you,” referring to me. That is incorrect. The 
correct answer is “you.” (“Mountain of Madness”)
2.  According to urban legend in Springﬁ eld, Troy McClure, the movie 
star, has a strange sexual proclivity involving ﬁ sh. One day, Troy 
walks into the Department of Motor Vehicles, creating a stir:
 
 Dr. Hibbert: Troy McClure? I thought he disappeared after that 
scandal at the aquarium.
 
Louie: Hey, I thought you said Troy McClure was dead.
 
 Tony: No, what I said was, “He sleeps with the ﬁ shes.” (“A Fish 
Called Selma”)
Pop Culture Connection

 
The Importance of Precise Deﬁ nitions 
95
of a claim (“The death penalty should be abolished”), other arguments center 
on the meaning of the words used to express the claim. Suppose that your for-
mer high school proposes to begin testing students for drug use. Even if you 
agree that this is a good idea, you need to know what school ofﬁ cials mean 
by “drug.” What speciﬁ c drugs do they intend to test for? Or suppose that a 
local PTA petitions the school board to ban violent movies from classrooms. 
Because many of us disagree on the deﬁ nition of  violence, those parents making 
the suggestion must clearly deﬁ ne what they mean by “violent movie.” If the 
PTA’s proposition were accepted without a clear deﬁ nition, teachers would 
never know whether a ﬁ lm they intended to show ﬁ t the category “violent 
movie.” Driver-education teachers could be charged with violating the rule 
if, in an effort to encourage safer driving, they were to show driving students 
ﬁ lms depicting the aftermath of trafﬁ c accidents. 
 Types of Defi nitions 
 To use language correctly in an argument, it is important to remain aware that 
not everyone reading or listening to your claims has the same background, 
experience, and values that you do. Your audience, therefore, might not under-
stand completely what you mean by certain terms. In fact, your audience may 
have very different deﬁ nitions of the terms you are using. Therefore, you need 
to present deﬁ nitions of words that might be misunderstood. There are several 
types of deﬁ nitions you can use. 
 Stipulative Deﬁ nitions   If you’ve ever created a new word or used an old 
word in an entirely new way, you have provided a  stipulative de ﬁ nition; that 
is, you tell your readers or listeners what it is  you mean by the term. Here are 
two examples:
 “Buddy-dumped” means dropped from a person’s Internet Buddy List. 
 “Lottoholic” means someone who is obsessed with playing the lottery. 
 A stipulative deﬁ nition is among the most subjective of deﬁ nitions be-
cause the deﬁ nition is one you have determined. In other words, a stipulative 
deﬁ nition cannot be true or false, though it can, of course, be more or less 
ﬁ tting or appropriate. Writers frequently stipulate deﬁ nitions when they give 
labels to cultural trends, political movements, schools of thought, and so forth. 
Similarly, scientists and technologists often stipulate deﬁ nitions when they 
make new discoveries or invent new products. Stipulative deﬁ nitions rarely 
create problems unless a writer fails to explain clearly that he or she is coining 
a new word or using an old word with a new meaning. 
 Persuasive Deﬁ nitions   Another kind of subjective deﬁ nition is a  persuasive 
deﬁ nition,  in which an arguer deﬁ nes a term in an effort to persuade a reader 
or listener to agree with the arguer’s point of view regarding the thing being 
deﬁ ned. Persuasive deﬁ nitions usually contain emotional appeals and slanted 
 He who deﬁ nes 
the terms wins the 
argument. 
 —Chinese proverb 
 “When I use a 
word,” Humpty 
Dumpty said in 
a rather scornful 
tone, “it means 
just what I choose 
it to mean—
neither more nor 
less.” 
 —Lewis Carroll 

96 
CHAPTER 4 Language
terms and are often given in arguments over highly charged political and social 
topics on which people have ﬁ rm views. Here are two examples:
 Capital punishment means the state-sanctioned, vengeful murder of helpless 
prisoners. 
 Capital punishment means the inﬂ iction of appropriate punishment on 
vicious cowards who have no regard for life. 
Each of these is a slanted, “loaded” deﬁ nition, whose point is not to provide an 
objective, neutral deﬁ nition of  capital punishment  but to persuade the audience 
to adopt the speaker’s particular attitude toward the death penalty. 
 Although persuasive deﬁ nitions are often presented as objective and au-
thentic, they are convincing only if they are very well defended. For example, 
someone claiming that capital punishment is “vengeful murder” would have to 
provide strong support for that statement. 
 Lexical Deﬁ nitions   Less personal deﬁ nitions include lexical deﬁ nitions 
and precising deﬁ nitions. In a  lexical deﬁ nition,  a word is deﬁ ned in the way 
it is standardly used in the language. In other words, the purpose of a  lexical 
deﬁ nition  is to state the conventional, dictionary meaning of a word. Here are 
two examples:
 Pastel means a color having a soft, subdued shade. 
 Rug means a heavy fabric used to cover a ﬂ oor.  
The second deﬁ nition accurately states how most people in the United States 
deﬁ ne  rug. In England, however,  rug  can also mean a type of blanket used to 
cover the legs while a passenger sits in a car or train. Notice that the deﬁ nition 
of  rug reﬂ ects its general usage, not one person’s use of the word. 
 Precising Deﬁ nitions   A  precising deﬁ nition  is intended to make a vague 
word more precise so that the word’s meaning is not left to the interpretation 
of the reader or listener. Here are two examples:
 From a class syllabus:  “Class participation” means attending class, listening 
attentively, answering and asking questions, and participating in class 
discussions. 
 A “heavy smoker,” for purposes of this clinical trial, is anyone who smokes 
more than twenty-four cigarettes per day. 
In general usage, terms like  class participation  and  heavy smoker  are vague. In these 
examples, they are given comparatively precise meanings to permit clearer un-
derstanding and more accurate assessment. 
 In giving a precising deﬁ nition, we should be careful to avoid attach-
ing fanciful, biased, or purely personal qualities to the deﬁ nition. A professor 
could not, for example, claim that bringing gifts is part of “class participation.” 
Moreover, a precising deﬁ nition must be appropriate for the particular context. 

 
The Importance of Precise Deﬁ nitions 
97
Whereas belting out a rowsing rendition of “YMCA” might be appropriate 
participation in a talent show, it would not ﬁ t the deﬁ nition of participation 
in a classroom. 
 Strategies for Defi ning 
 Writers rely on a number of strategies that, though not strictly deﬁ nitions, may 
be helpful in clarifying the meanings of certain words. Each of these strategies, 
while useful in particular contexts, has limitations of which we should be aware. 
 Ostensive Deﬁ nitions   Sometimes the simplest way to explain the meaning 
of a word is to give an  ostensive deﬁ nition,  which consists in simply pointing 
to, or demonstrating, the thing being deﬁ ned. Here are two examples:
 Door means  this.  (as you point to one for the beneﬁ t of a foreign visitor) 
 Popping means this! (as you demonstrate your latest dance moves) 
 Ostensive deﬁ nitions are often useful (indeed indispensable) in various 
contexts, but they have obvious limitations. For instance, your foreign visitor 
might conclude that a door must be made of wood or that anything with 
hinges is a door (lids can have hinges). You could take your visitor on a tour 
and point to every type of door you come across (elevator doors, sliding glass 
doors, car doors, and so forth) to provide a more complete ostensive deﬁ nition, 
but such an exercise would obviously be time-consuming, and in the end the 
visitor still might conclude that  door  means “anything pointed at by my kind 
and somewhat obsessive host.” 
 Enumerative Deﬁ nitions   Another simple way to clarify what you mean 
by a word is to use an  enumerative deﬁ nition,  that is, to provide speciﬁ c 
examples of what the word refers to. For example, to help someone understand 
the meaning of  baseball player,  you might list some famous baseball players: Babe 
Ruth, Joe DiMaggio, and Mickey Mantle. To deﬁ ne  river you could mention the 
Nile, the Mississippi, the Thames, and so forth. Here are additional examples:
 Actor means Tom Cruise, Jack Nicholson, Nicholas Cage, and so on. 
 Bible-belt state means Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Tennessee, and the like. 
 The trouble with enumerative deﬁ nitions is that they tend to be incom-
plete, and hence may give rise to misunderstandings or convey only a very 
limited understanding of what the word means. For example, your list of base-
ball players might give the impression that  baseball player  is synonymous with 
 Yankee. Sometimes it is possible to provide a complete list of a word’s referents 
( Low Countries  means Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands), but even 
these may not be very useful if the reader or listener is unfamiliar with the 
things being enumerated ( Diencephalon means thalamus, hypothalamus, epi-
thalamus, and ventral thalamus). 

98 
CHAPTER 4 Language
 Deﬁ nitions by Subclass   A  deﬁ nition by subclass  assigns a meaning to a word 
by listing subclasses of the general class to which the word refers. Two examples:
 Mammal means gorilla, horse, lion, whale, and so forth. 
 Poem  means sonnet, limerick, haiku, epic, ode, and the like. 
 Deﬁ nitions by subclass are similar to deﬁ nitions by enumeration in that 
both attempt to clarify the meaning of a word by illustrating what the word 
refers to; however, whereas deﬁ nitions by enumeration list  individual things  sig-
niﬁ ed by a word, deﬁ nitions by subclass list entire  classes or categories . 
 Although often helpful, deﬁ nitions by subclass suffer from the same 
shortcomings as deﬁ nitions by enumeration. They can give rise to misunder-
standings (our list of mammals might lead someone to think all mammals are 
large), and they are helpful only if one is broadly familiar with the classes that 
are named.  
 Etymological Deﬁ nitions   A good dictionary tells what part of speech a 
word is, how it is commonly pronounced, and whence it came—its ancestry, 
or  etymology.  Automobile,  for example , comes from the Greek  autos,  mean-
ing “self,” and the French  mobile (from the Latin  mobilis ), meaning “move.” An 
automobile is self-moving or self-propelled. 
 Because the meaning of words can change over time, knowing a word’s 
etymology is not always useful, but it will often help us deﬁ ne the word cor-
rectly and use it properly. For example, some people say “ambivalent” when 
they really mean to say “apathetic” (unconcerned).  Ambivalent  comes from the 
Latin word for “both” ( ambi -) and “vigor” ( valentia ); so, to be ambivalent is to 
feel strongly both ways.  Apathy  comes from the Latin preﬁ x  a, meaning “not,” 
and from the Greek  pathos,  meaning “suffering” or, more common, “feeling.” 
So, to be apathetic is to lack feeling. You might feel ambivalent about abortion, 
but you are probably not apathetic about it. 
 Besides pronunciation and etymology, dictionaries also, obviously, pro-
vide deﬁ nitions. But because they are written in a particular time and place, 
dictionaries cannot contain all of the meanings for each word in our lan-
guage. Meanings change over time, and new words are added as they become 
popular.  Gay,  for example, means something different from what it meant 
ﬁ fty years ago, and  MP3 player is difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd in even the most recent 
dictionaries, including those published for access on a computer. Dictionar-
ies are best considered history books that describe the way words were used 
when the dictionary was written, rather than prescribe how we should de-
ﬁ ne a word. Furthermore, because dictionaries are written by people, they 
can show the bias of a particular person or group. A dictionary can also be 
incomplete, limited in the number of deﬁ nitions it gives for a word, or just 
plain incorrect. Considered the best dictionary in English, the  Oxford English 
Dictionary (OED)  overcomes many of the deﬁ ciencies inherent in dictionaries 
by providing extensive deﬁ nitions, etymologies, and examples of a word’s use 
throughout history.  

 
The Importance of Precise Deﬁ nitions 
99
 Synonymous Deﬁ nitions   A  synonymous deﬁ nition  assigns a meaning to a 
word by offering a synonym—that is, another word that has the same meaning 
as the word being deﬁ ned. Two examples:
 Loquacious means talkative. 
 Deleterious means harmful. 
 Synonymous deﬁ nitions can be helpful in many contexts. The confusion 
caused by technical jargon, for example, can be lessened if the jargon is accom-
panied by a synonymous deﬁ nition. An apprentice carpenter might be puzzled 
to hear about a chisel’s “bezel” until he or she discovers that the bezel is more 
commonly known as the “bevel” or even more commonly as the “edge,” or 
imprecisely as the “point.” Speaking among themselves, teachers might use 
words like “assessment” or “inventory.” When speaking to parents, teachers 
might refer instead to “tests.” It should be noted, however, that there are few 
true synonyms in the English language, and the subtle differences between 
words like  rob  and  steal or  excuse and  justiﬁ cation  prevent us from substituting 
one for the other without regard to our real intentions. Robbers threaten or 
use violence to get what they want; someone could steal from you without 
your knowing it. And while poverty might be an excuse for robbing someone, 
it is certainly no justiﬁ cation.  
 Deﬁ nition by Genus and Difference   One of the most useful strategies 
for deﬁ ning terms is to deﬁ ne by genus and difference, a method that lexi-
cographers (dictionary writers) often use to create deﬁ nitions. A  deﬁ nition by 
genus and difference  assigns a meaning to a word by identifying a general 
class (genus) to which things named by the word belong and then specifying a 
differentiating quality (difference) that distinguishes those things from all other 
things in the class. Two examples:
 Buck  means male deer. 
 Calf means young cow. 
In the ﬁ rst example,  deer  names the general class (genus) to which bucks be-
long, and  male names the differentiating characteristic that distinguishes bucks 
from all other deer. 
 The ﬁ rst step in deﬁ ning by genus and difference is to place the term 
into an appropriate general class or genus. For example,  automobile  belongs not 
in the classes of furniture, clothes, or trees, but in the class of vehicles. Now we 
are left with the much tougher task of listing characteristics—the differences—
that distinguish an automobile from other objects in the class of vehicles—
trucks, golf carts, motorcycles, and so forth. To distinguish an automobile from 
a truck, you might say that an automobile is intended for the transportation 
of passengers. Unlike a motorcycle, an automobile usually has four wheels. An 
internal-combustion engine separates an automobile from a golf cart. Your 
deﬁ nition now looks like this:  An automobile is a passenger vehicle that usually has 
four wheels and an internal-combustion engine. 

100 
CHAPTER 4 Language
 Next, ask if your deﬁ nition could apply to anything that is not an au-
tomobile. In other words, is there anything that  is a passenger vehicle with 
four wheels and an internal-combustion engine but is  not  an automobile? You 
might argue that a gas-powered, four-wheeled car used to transport coal min-
ers (passengers) satisﬁ es the deﬁ nition, but it is certainly not an automobile. 
To separate automobiles from coal cars, you could add a distinguishing char-
acteristic to your deﬁ nition:  An automobile is a passenger vehicle that usually has 
four wheels and an internal-combustion engine and is used for transportation on streets, 
roads, and highways. 
 It should be noted that one limitation of the genus and difference method 
is that it can be used to deﬁ ne a word without capturing the true essence of the 
thing that is deﬁ ned. One famous example involves Plato’s deﬁ nition of a human 
being: a human being is an  animal  (excludes all inanimate objects and plants) that 
 walks on two legs  (excludes all four-legged animals, but birds, such as chickens, 
walk on two legs) and that  has no feathers.  That deﬁ nition is a good deﬁ nition by 
genus and difference: a human being is in fact the only featherless animal that 
walks on two legs. But the deﬁ nition isn’t fully adequate because it doesn’t re-
ally capture the essence of being human—as an ancient wiseacre once proved by 
plucking a chicken and throwing it over the wall of Plato’s school with a sign that 
read “Plato’s man.” Besides our upright stature and lack of feathers, what essential 
attributes separate us from all other animals? The capacity for language? The abil-
ity to laugh? Critical thinking skills? How would you deﬁ ne  human being ?  
 Rules for Constructing Good Lexical Defi nitions 
 Some readers may have noticed how difﬁ cult it is come up with good, accu-
rate deﬁ nitions. Every method has its pitfalls. While you may have occasion to 
stipulate a deﬁ nition or to indicate precisely what is meant by a vague term 
such as  participation or  heavy smoker,  most critical thinking contexts call for 
lexical deﬁ nitions. Here are a few simple rules that will help you to construct 
sound deﬁ nitions and evaluate those of others. 
•   Don’t make the de ﬁ nition too broad or too narrow. A deﬁ -
nition is too broad if it includes too much and is too narrow if it 
includes too little. A good deﬁ nition applies to  all and only the things 
being deﬁ ned. A deﬁ nition of  automobile as “a vehicle with four 
wheels” would be too broad because it would include golf carts 
and lawn mowers. A deﬁ nition of  sibling as “brother” would be too 
narrow because it fails to include sisters. 
•   Convey the essential meaning of the word being deﬁ ned.  A 
good deﬁ nition should do more than just pick out some uniquely 
identifying properties of the thing being deﬁ ned. Deﬁ ning  horse, for 
example, as “the animal ridden by Napoleon during the battle of 
Waterloo” is clearly a poor deﬁ nition, even though the deﬁ ning 
 expression does apply uniquely to horses. The problem with the 
 The true deﬁ ni-
tion of each thing 
involves and 
expresses nothing 
beyond the nature 
of the thing de-
ﬁ ned.  
 —Baruch Spinoza 

 
The Importance of Precise Deﬁ nitions 
101
deﬁ nition is that it fails to capture the really important and  necessary 
properties that make horses  horses, rather than, say, cows or sheep. 
Expressing the essential meaning of a word can be very difﬁ cult and 
often requires specialized knowledge.
•   Provide a context for ambiguous words.  Many words are 
ambiguous; that is, they have two or more distinct meanings. For 
example, a “walk” in baseball is different from a “walk” in the park. 
To prevent confusion, therefore, a good deﬁ nition should indicate 
the context in which an ambiguous word is being used. Thus, we 
might say, “‘Walk’ means (in baseball) an award of ﬁ rst base to a 
batter who receives four pitched balls that are outside the strike 
zone and are not swung at by the batter.”  
•  Avoid slanted deﬁ nitions.  Don’t let personal preferences or atti-
tudes interfere with your deﬁ nition. Avoid slanted deﬁ nitions—that is, 
biased or emotionally charged deﬁ nitions that improperly play on the 
emotions or attitudes of an audience. Slanted deﬁ nitions may be OK 
for a laugh, as in Woodrow Wilson’s famous deﬁ nition of a conservative 
as “a man who sits and thinks, mostly sits.” But don’t try to win a de-
bate by a deﬁ nition that can rightly be won only by an argument.
•   Avoid ﬁ gurative deﬁ nitions. A good deﬁ nition should express 
clearly the conventional meaning of a word, not be couched in ﬁ gu-
rative or metaphorical language. Consider these examples:
 Slot machine means one-armed bandit. 
 Advertising means legalized lying. 
 Religion means the ﬂ ight of the alone to the Alone. 
 “Deﬁ nitions” such as these may have their place (they may be hu-
morous or clever, for example); but if a straightforward deﬁ nition is 
in order, such ﬁ gurative language should be avoided.  
•   Avoid needlessly obscure deﬁ nitions.  A good deﬁ nition should 
clarify the meaning of a word for someone who may be unfamiliar 
with the term. Thus, a deﬁ nition should not include a lot of big words 
or technical jargon that readers aren’t likely to understand. For example:
 Mouse means a quadrupedal mammalian of any of the more diminu-
tive species of the genus  Mus of the order  Rodentia. 
 For people not trained in biology, this deﬁ nition is likely to be more 
confusing than helpful.
•   Avoid circular deﬁ nitions. A deﬁ nition is circular if a person 
would need to know what the deﬁ ned word means in order to un-
derstand the word or words used to deﬁ ne it:
 Entomologist means someone who engages in the science of entomology. 
 Gambler means someone who gambles. 
 We had better not 
follow Humpty 
Dumpty in mak-
ing words mean 
what we please. 
 —C. S. Lewis 
 You explain 
English by Greek. 
 —Benjamin 
Franklin 

102 
CHAPTER 4 Language
 Such deﬁ nitions are likely to be unhelpful because the deﬁ ning 
phrases are just slight variants of the words being deﬁ ned.  
   EXERCISE 4.2 
 I.   In groups deﬁ ne eight words from the list below, using any of the methods 
we have discussed—or a combination of them. The class will compare deﬁ ni-
tions. What do your deﬁ nitions have in common? What makes them unique? 
Could you come to some agreement on a deﬁ nition for each of the terms? 
How important is it that you agree as a group on the deﬁ nition of some of 
these terms?
chair
sports star
blues
sofa
fan (sports)
horror novel
pencil
fanatic
drunk
coat
poet
democracy
jacket
rock and roll
advertising
actor
grunge
racism
patriotism
knowledge
justice
 II.   As a group read and respond to each situation given below. Your answer will 
depend on how you deﬁ ne the key word in the question. Group members might 
debate the deﬁ nitions and the application of the deﬁ nition to the given situation. 
Use any strategy for deﬁ ning terms, or use a combination of strategies. You may 
have to consult outside sources in deciding on your deﬁ nitions, and you may 
want to agree on some contextual details that are not provided in the question. 
Some students, for example, might argue that the ﬁ rst question depends on how 
long the couple has been dating.
 1.   You just caught your boyfriend or girlfriend carrying on a sexually explicit 
dialogue with someone in an electronic chat room. Has your mate “cheated” 
on you? 
 2.   As a “computer genius,” you can access the college’s computer ﬁ les anytime 
you like. You can review your transcript, check your medical records, read 
what your high school guidance counselor said about you, and so forth. All 
of this information would be provided to you if you asked, but you don’t. 
Can you be accused of “stealing”? 
 3.   A sign posted outside the auditorium reads, “No food or drink in the audi-
torium.” During a lecture your neighbor is loudly sucking on a lollipop. You 
remind him that food is not allowed. He tells you he doesn’t have “food.” 
Who is right? 
 4.   Jack knows that the college to which he is applying gives preference to 
minorities. He argues in his application letter that his being a second-
generation Irish immigrant distinguishes him from other people applying to 
the college. Is he a “minority”? 

 
The Importance of Precise Deﬁ nitions 
103
 5.   Nancy has a paper due tomorrow morning. She has written a very rough, 
undeveloped draft. Last semester Nancy’s roommate, Sharon, wrote a paper 
on the very same topic. Sharon gives Nancy the paper and tells her to “take 
as much of it as you want.” With Sharon’s permission and help, Nancy 
copies passages from Sharon’s paper. Is Nancy guilty of “plagiarizing”? 
 6.   An acquaintance of yours was just seen leaving your room with one of your 
favorite CDs, which you did not give him permission to take. Can he be 
charged with “robbery”? With “larceny”?  
 7.   Your professor thinks women are far superior to men in every way—intel-
lectually, morally, emotionally, and so forth. Is your professor a “feminist”? 
 8.   The cheerleaders at your school have petitioned to have cheerleading listed 
as one of the school’s sports teams. Is cheerleading a “sport”? 
 9.   One day, out of frustration, your roommate throws a full plate of mashed 
potatoes against the wall of the room, where, amazingly, it sticks. You get up 
TYPES
Stipulative: A deﬁ nition that a writer or 
speaker has assigned to a term or that has 
been assigned to a term for the ﬁ rst time. 
Example: “The Wild Bunch” means our in-
tramural football team. I call my little sister 
“the gnat.”
Persuasive: A deﬁ nition given to a term in 
an effort to persuade the reader or listener 
to agree with the writer’s or speaker’s point 
of view. Example: Advertising is the means 
by which companies convince unsuspect-
ing consumers to buy defective or unneces-
sary products.
Lexical: A deﬁ nition in which terms are de-
ﬁ ned in the way they are generally used in 
the language. Example: Blue jeans are pants 
made of blue denim.
Precising: A deﬁ nition in which the writer 
or speaker assigns a precise meaning to a 
vague term so that the word’s meaning is 
not left to the interpretation of the reader 
or listener. Example: The newly elected gov-
ernor wants to raise taxes on the rich, which 
he deﬁ nes as anyone making more than 
$100,000 a year in take-home pay.
STRATEGIES
Ostensive Deﬁ nition: Provide a concrete ex-
ample of the term. Example: The capital let-
ter a looks like this: A.
Enumerative Deﬁ nition: List members of the 
class to which the term refers. Example: The 
term country refers to France, England, Iraq, 
Mexico, and so on.
Deﬁ nition by Subclass: Indicate what sub-
classes the word contains. Example: Fiction 
includes short stories, novellas, and novels.
Etymological Deﬁ nition: Show the history of 
the term. Example: A playwright is not one 
who writes plays, but one who makes a 
play the way a wheelwright makes a wheel. 
The term wright comes from an Old English 
word, wrytha, meaning “work.”
Synonymous Deﬁ nition: Use a word that has 
the same meaning or nearly the same mean-
ing as the term being deﬁ ned. Example: A 
playwright is a dramatist.
Deﬁ nition by Genus and Difference: Place the 
term in a class that helps narrow its meaning 
and then provide characteristics that distin-
guish the term from other terms in the same 
class. Example: A fawn is a young deer.
Types of Defi nitions and Strategies for Defi ning

104 
CHAPTER 4 Language
to remove the plate and potatoes from the wall. “Leave it,” your roommate 
insists. “It says something. It’s art.” “It’s garbage,” you reply. Who is right? 
 10.   One day Professor Smith tells the class a joke he heard on a popular late-
night talk show. The joke involves a sexual situation, and the punch line is 
quite offensive. Several students in the room, including a number of women, 
are clearly shocked by the joke. Could Smith be accused of “sexual harass-
ment”? Does it make a difference if Smith is male or female? 
 11.   Recently, a third-grader (age eight) told several off-color jokes to a female 
classmate. Is this an example of “sexual harassment”? 
 12.   A high school football coach in Florida, upset at the behavior of one of his 
black players, warned the student not to “act like a street nigger.” Many of 
the coaches, players, parents, and community members have accepted the 
coach’s apology and pointed out that the incident is not typical of the coach, 
but others insist that the coach’s remark indicates that he is “racist.” What do 
you think? Does it make a difference if the coach is white or black? 
 13.   After meeting Brad at a party, Sarah accompanies him to his apartment. After 
several minutes of kissing on his bed, Brad asks Sarah if she’d like to have 
sex. She says no, but as they continue to kiss and touch, Brad is persistent in 
his efforts to persuade Sarah, and she ﬁ nally consents, even though she is not 
entirely sure she is doing the right thing. Has a “rape” occurred? 
 14.   You are standing in a line of about one hundred people of varying ages, 
waiting to buy movie tickets at a multiscreen cinema. Your attention is 
drawn to a woman who is speaking very loudly to a child of about six who 
is pleading with the woman to take him to the bathroom. She tells him to 
“quiet down” several times before slapping him ﬁ rmly once on the cheek. 
The force of the slap is equivalent to what you would use to swat a mos-
quito on your own skin. Has this child been “abused”? 
 15.   In the last three seconds of a professional hockey game, team A is losing by 
two goals. A member of team A skates up behind a player from team B and 
swings his stick at the player, hitting him on the side of the head and knock-
ing him unconscious. The player is removed from the rink on a stretcher and 
taken to the hospital, where doctors ﬁ nd that he has sustained a concussion. 
His wound requires twenty stitches to close. He is hospitalized for several 
days. Should the player from team A be charged with “assault”? (You may 
wish to consult a dictionary of legal terms.) 
 III.   Determine whether the following are stipulative deﬁ nitions, persuasive deﬁ -
nitions, lexical deﬁ nitions, or precising deﬁ nitions.
 1.   Funky two-step means the funny dance Peppermint Patty does in the Charlie 
Brown Christmas special. 
 2.   Oar means a stout pole, widened and ﬂ attened at one end into a blade, used 
as a lever to propel a boat. 
 3.   Philosopher means a deluded dreamer who spends his or her life attempting 
to answer questions that can’t be answered. 
 4.   Beyond a reasonable doubt means, for purposes of determining a defendant’s 
guilt or innocence in a court of law, a degree of certainty of 95 percent or 
higher. 

 
The Importance of Precise Deﬁ nitions 
105
 5.   Litter-butt means a person who throws lighted cigarette butts out car 
 windows. 
 6.   Afﬂ uent means, for purposes of this sociological study, having an annual 
family income of $250,000 or greater. 
 7.   Labyrinth means an intricate structure of intercommunicating passages, 
through which it is difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd one’s way without a clue.  
 8.   Circler means someone who spends an inordinate amount of time circling 
parking lots, looking for the closest possible parking place. 
 9.   Chronically tardy means being late to class ﬁ ve or more times in any quarter 
or three or more times in any two-week period. 
 10.    Faith means an illogical belief in occurrence of the improbable. (H. L. 
Mencken) 
 11.    Tic-tac-toe means a mindless game for bored children that almost invariably 
ends in a tie. 
 12.    Intoxicated, for purposes of driving a car in this state, means having a blood 
alcohol ratio of 0.08 or higher. 
 13.    Garden means a plot of ground, usually near a house, where ﬂ owers, veg-
etables, or herbs are cultivated. 
 14.    Chathead means a person who stays glued day and night to Internet chat 
rooms. 
 15.    Republican Party means a political organization of patriotic, civic-minded 
citizens dedicated to preserving the cherished freedoms of all Americans. 
 16.    Kite means a toy consisting of a light frame, with paper or other thin mate-
rial stretched over it, to be ﬂ own in a strong wind by means of a string 
attached and a tail to balance it.  
17.    By  full employment economists mean an unemployment rate of 5 percent or 
lower.  
18.    Democracy means rule by the ignorant masses. 
 19.    Indolent means having or showing a disposition to avoid exertion; lazy; slothful.  
 20.   Normal speech volume, according to audio engineers, is approximately 70 to 
73 decibels in a quiet environment with the talker and listener 6 feet apart. 
 IV.   Determine whether the following are ostensive deﬁ nitions, enumerative 
deﬁ nitions, deﬁ nitions by subclass, etymological deﬁ nitions, synonymous deﬁ ni-
tions, or deﬁ nitions by genus and difference.
 1.   Poet means a person such as John Keats, Walt Whitman, or Emily Dickinson. 
 2.   Halitosis means bad breath. 
 3.   Psychic is a word that derives from the Greek word  psyche, which means 
“mind” or “soul.” 
 4.    Bird means cardinal, sparrow, robin, starling, and the like. 
 5.    Bull means a male cow. 
 6.    Industrious means hardworking. 
 7.    Red means this, and this, and this (as you point successively to a red ﬁ re 
truck, a red apple, and a red crayon). 
 8.    Metropolis means a place like New York City, London, or Paris. 
 9.    Sagacious means wise. 
 10.    Gander means a male goose. 

106 
CHAPTER 4 Language
 11.   Optometrist originates from the Greek word  optos, meaning “seen” or “visible.”  
 12.   Moon means  that (as you point to it). 
 13.   Beverage means drinkable liquid. 
 14.   Clement means merciful or lenient. 
 15.   Sport means baseball, basketball, football, hockey, soccer, and the like. 
 16.   Faith derives from the Latin verb  ﬁ dere, meaning “to trust.” 
 17.   Yucky means  that (as you point to the sticky, congealed residue at the bottom 
of a trash can). 
 18.   Question mark means this 
? 
 19.   Purloin means steal.  
 20.   Amateur, from the Latin  amator, or “lover,” means a person who plays for the 
love of the game rather than for compensation. 
 V.   Each of the following deﬁ nitions is defective in some way. Determine 
whether the deﬁ nition is too broad, too narrow, lacking in context, ﬁ gurative, 
slanted, obscure, or circular. If the deﬁ nition suffers from none of these defects, 
determine whether it is nevertheless defective because it fails to capture the 
essential meaning of the word.
 1.   Rectangle means a geometrical ﬁ gure.  
 2.   Epistemology means the systematic study of epistemological issues. 
 3.   Lawyer means a scum-sucking scavenger licensed to practice law. 
 4.   Spade means a black ﬁ gure shaped like an inverted heart with a short stem at 
the cusp opposite the point. 
 5.   Poem means a rhymed composition in verse. 
 6.   Human means the animal that does crossword puzzles. 
 7.   By  knowledge we mean information that has been objectively veriﬁ ed and is 
consistent with existing knowledge. 
 8.   Deodorant means any preparation for masking or retarding the malodorous 
secretions of the apocrine sudoriferous glands. 
 9.   Conservative means a person who is enamored of existing evils, as distin-
guished from a liberal, who wishes to replace them with others. (adapted 
from Ambrose Bierce)  
 10.   King means the chief piece of each color, moved one square at a time in any 
direction. 
 11.   Hockey means a game played on ice between two teams of vicious thugs 
wearing skates, the object being to beat up the other team and to score goals 
by shooting a puck into the opponents’ net, using a stick with a blade. 
 12.   Prestidigitator means a person who practices the art of prestidigitation. 
 13.   Spouse means wife. 
 14.   Architecture means frozen music. 
 15.   New York City means the city in which the Statue of Liberty is located. 
 16.   Pope means the infallible vicar of Christ and head of the Roman Catholic 
Church. 
 17.   Guard means either of the two players stationed in the backcourt. 
 18.   Cello means a stringed musical instrument. 
 19.   Evolution means an integration of matter and concomitant dissipation of 
motion, during which the matter passes from an indeﬁ nite, incoherent 

 
Emotive Language: Slanting the Truth 
107
homogeneity to a deﬁ nite, coherent heterogeneity, and during which the 
retained motion undergoes parallel transformation. (Herbert Spencer) 
 20.  And what, then, is  belief     ? It is the demi-cadence which closes a musical 
phrase in the symphony of our intellectual life. (Charles S. Peirce, emphasis 
added) 
 EMOTIVE LANGUAGE: SLANTING THE TRUTH 
 So far in this chapter, we have seen how language is used to convey informa-
tion and defend claims in an argument. We have seen that clarity, precision, 
objectivity, and clear deﬁ nitions will go a long way toward making our ideas 
comprehensible and our claims more convincing. But although we may be 
careful to avoid vague and ambiguous words and to deﬁ ne our terms, we 
aren’t always as cautious as we should be when claims are presented to us, and 
we sometimes ﬁ nd ourselves falling under the sway of those whose masterful 
use of language we ﬁ nd hard to resist. Consider the way college brochures 
are written. What follows is a ﬁ ctional illustration assembled from the bro-
chures of several colleges and universities; you might recognize some of the 
language:
 Most people, when visiting our campus, say Wexford feels like a college should 
feel: warm and welcoming—a community atmosphere. Wexford’s faculty and 
staff form the kind of close relationships with students that challenge them to 
their full potential. Students appreciate the personal attention in the classroom, 
the relatively small classes, and the dedicated faculty. Our residence halls provide 
a sense of family from your ﬁ rst days here. You will ﬁ nd activities to suit your 
personal style, from the performing arts and competitive sports to volunteer 
service and student-run organizations. 
 
 Students are involved and enjoy being at Wexford. Nearly nine of every ten 
freshmen return for their sophomore year—well above the national average. 
Parents and students comment frequently on how friendly and professional the 
people are at Wexford. 
 
 From our innovative freshman orientation program to the ongoing support 
for planning a career, you will ﬁ nd your four years at Wexford marked by a sin-
cere interest in both your personal and your academic growth. 
 “Close relationships,” “relatively small classes,” a “dedicated faculty,” a 
“sense of family,” “well above the national average,” “innovative”—all these 
words and phrases were carefully chosen for their intended impact on the 
reader beyond their literal meaning. The words are selected not so much for 
the information they convey as for their  emotive force —the appeal they 
make to readers’ feelings, desires, and needs. Emotive language more overtly 
reveals a writer’s attitude and feelings toward the subject than precise, neutral, 
and more objective language does; and it is intended to create in the reader the 

108 
CHAPTER 4 Language
same  attitude and feelings  toward the subject, rather than increase the reader’s 
 knowledge  about it.  Emotive is the adjective form of  emotion,  which comes from 
the same Latin word,  movere,  from which we get  motion  and  move.  You have no 
doubt heard the expressions “moved to tears” or “moved by your kind words.” 
Emotive language in an argument is intended to rile, to  move  readers by agitat-
ing, disturbing, angering, or exciting them. 
 Look again at the college brochure. The phrase “relatively small classes,” 
for example, suggests that such small classes are a desirable thing. Instead of tell-
ing us precisely how many students are in an average class, the writer assures us 
that the classes are “relatively small,” which in this case gives us no information 
whatsoever. Relative to what? The Los Angeles Coliseum? The writer doesn’t 
exactly lie about the college, but merely slants the truth to a degree that makes 
the college more attractive. The writer could easily have said that “the faculty 
do the jobs they are paid for” or that “the orientation program was created 
by the staff,” but “dedicated” and “innovative” sound so much better and are 
almost guaranteed to create a warm feeling in the receptive reader. The danger 
is that we might believe that information has been conveyed, when in truth we 
have learned nothing factual. 
 The Emotive Power of Words 
 The emotive power of a word can come from the word’s  denotation,  or 
literal meaning. If someone tells you that a child was “punched,” you might 
ﬁ nd yourself moved to disgust or even action at hearing a word that means 
“hit forcefully with the closed ﬁ st.” But emotive meaning also comes from 
the word’s   connotation —the images and feelings that are associated with the 
word. The word  waterfall,  for example,  denotes  (or means literally) the steep 
descent of water from a high point, but it also  connotes  (or suggests) power, 
strength, the beauty of nature, island paradises, and so forth. Connotations 
of words come from many sources, including people’s experiences, the use 
of the word in the culture (in poems, for instance, or in advertisements), the 
way the word is used as a symbol or metaphor in various religions, and even 
from the word’s sound. 
 To see just how language can generate feelings and reactions by connota-
tion and sound, consider the names of any number of motor vehicles currently 
or recently on the market: Aurora, Blazer, Bravado, Breeze, Camaro, Catera, 
Concorde, Crown Victoria, Expedition, Explorer, Integra, Intrigue, Mustang, 
Ranger, Regency, Sebring, Sierra, Sonoma, Taurus, Voyager, Windstar. Several of 
those names were chosen for what they might suggest. The names Ranger or 
Explorer or Blazer, for example, let the prospective buyer know what the ve-
hicle can best be used for and suggest a feeling of strength and adventure. Other 
names suggest wealth and status (Crown Victoria and Regency), speed and priv-
ilege (Concorde), wild independence (Mustang), or youthful freedom (Breeze). 
Other names, though, are chosen entirely for their sound. Because there is no 
conventional meaning for Sebring or Catera, consumers are simply expected to 
 The tongue of 
man is a twisty 
thing. 
 —Homer 

 
Emotive Language: Slanting the Truth 
109
associate those words with something positive.  Sebring has a luxurious sound and 
so might suggest elegance and reﬁ nement. What does  Catera suggest? 
 EXERCISE 4.3 
I.  In groups of three, come up with names for several new cars—a massive 
luxury sedan, an SUV for the family, an off-road vehicle for the sports-minded, 
an affordable four-door, and a sleek, sporty coupe. Then choose one of your new 
cars and write an ad to sell it. 
II.   You have probably noticed that the builders of shopping malls and hous-
ing developments often use emotive language when naming their facilities. It is 
not uncommon to see such things as Meadowbrook Farms Shopping Plaza and 
Sunnydale Apartments in the most unlikely places. Even cemeteries get in on 
the emotive act (Riverview Memorial Gardens). Discuss as a group some of the 
names you have seen on housing complexes, shopping malls, and cemeteries in 
your hometown or college area. You might want to discuss the reason for these 
names and perhaps even the irony involved in their creation—how, for example, 
a deer hasn’t been seen alive in Deer Run Community Acres for more than 
twenty years. 
 Let’s look now at more-sophisticated examples of the use of words to 
slant the truth and evoke predictable responses from a reader. Whereas adver-
tisers use words deliberately to get us to buy their products or services, not 
everyone is so aggressively manipulative. It is up to critical readers to keep their 
eyes and minds open to the use of connotative language (language that evokes 
certain images or emotions) in all forums, including supposedly neutral sources 
such as newspapers, magazines, and encyclopedias. Read the following passages 
from  Time magazine and the  Philadelphia Inquirer,  each of which describes the 
launch of a space shuttle. 
 Time describes the launch of  Discovery,  the ﬁ rst shuttle to be launched 
after the  Challenger  disaster in January 1986. The  Inquirer describes the launch 
of the former Soviet Union’s ﬁ rst shuttle launch. 
 From  Time 
 As the countdown clock ﬂ ashed out the number of seconds until lift-off, the 
eyes of an entire nation focused on Launch Pad 39-B and the gleaming white 
shuttle  Discovery,  ﬂ anked by its two solid rocket boosters and clinging to the side 
of a giant, rust-colored external fuel tank. . . . 
 
 Finally, spectators joined in for the last 15 seconds of countdown, the engines 
ignited and the shuttle rose majestically from the pad, carrying its crew of ﬁ ve 
veteran astronauts. Over the space center’s loud-speakers came the triumphant 
announcement: “Americans return to space, as Discovery clears the tower.” But 

110 
CHAPTER 4 Language
the cheers were muted as the crowd—many with clenched ﬁ sts, gritted teeth 
and teary eyes—nervously watched the spacecraft rise—on its pillar of ﬂ ame, 
then begin its roll out over the Atlantic. 8 
 From the  Philadelphia Inquirer 
 For the 6 a.m. launch, Buran could be seen piggy-backed on the white Energia 
rocket, towering against the pre-dawn sky at the Baikonur Cosmodrome in the 
central Asian republic of Kazakhstan. As the countdown neared zero, the rocket 
was enveloped ﬁ rst in smoke and then in a giant ball of ﬂ ame as it lumbered off 
the launch pad and into the dark blue sky. 
 
 Three and half hours and two orbits later, the gleaming white Buran with its 
black underbelly came back into the television camera’s view. Buran glided on 
automatic pilot until it bumped onto the specially built runway stretching across 
the vast, ﬂ at steppes a few miles from Baikonur. 9 
 The difference in the language used in these two accounts is obvious. 
Whereas the American shuttle rises “majestically” on a “pillar of ﬂ ame,” the 
Soviet shuttle “lumber[s] off the launch pad” in “a giant ball of ﬂ ame.” The 
American shuttle, “gleaming white,” “cling[s]” to its fuel tank; the Soviet shut-
tle “can be seen piggy-backed” on its white rocket, and we are reminded of the 
“black underbelly” when it lands. The difference in these two descriptions is 
truly amazing because the Soviet space shuttle, aside from the national mark-
ings it carried and the fact that it was imperceptibly smaller, looked precisely 
the same as the American space shuttle and lifted off in an identical manner. 
In other words, if the two shuttles had had no ﬂ ags and such to indicate their 
countries of origin, an observer would have seen no difference between them. 
Why, then, does NASA’s shuttle “rise majestically” whereas the Soviets’ “lum-
bers”? Because both of these launches took place during the Cold War, and 
because  Discovery  marked a return to space after a national tragedy, the shuttle 
lifting off from Cape Canaveral appeared to an American writer much more 
thrilling than the liftoff of the shuttle from the Baikonur Cosmodrome. 
 The test for emotive language is not whether a reader or listener is emo-
tionally moved by the words in an argument. Some words have inescapable 
connotations, and an audience’s reactions are often individual and unpredict-
able. The word  mother, for example, which means, simply and precisely, a female 
parent, will stir up positive images and feelings in many people and may evoke 
negative reactions in others. But even though these associations are inescap-
able, a writer who uses the word  mother  in an argument may have no intention 
of evoking the reader’s emotions and may simply mean a female parent—
nothing more or less: “Single mothers returning to work have difﬁ culty ﬁ nd-
ing affordable day care.” 
 The test for emotive words is, instead, whether the writer or speaker 
 appears to be using the word unfairly to generate predictable feelings in an 
audience or to manipulate the audience into either agreeing with the argument 
or overlooking its ﬂ aws. Much depends, of course, on the context and the tone 
of the argument. For example, a young man who says to his girlfriend, “Don’t 
mother me,” intends the word in a negative sense and appears to be claiming that 

 
Emotive Language: Slanting the Truth 
111
his girlfriend’s attention diminishes his independence. One way to distinguish 
between the fair and unfair use of emotive words is to ask whether the use 
of the word needs to be defended. No one would challenge the use of  mother 
in the ﬁ rst example because a woman (whether single or married) with a child 
is, in fact, a mother. On the other hand, the girlfriend in the second example 
might say, “How do I ‘mother’ you?” or “What do you mean by ‘mother’?” 
 The best way to determine whether words are unduly emotive is to ask 
whether the words could be replaced with neutral words and phrases with no 
damage to whatever information is being conveyed. Good examples often come 
from the sports world. A writer will claim that one team “slaughtered”—or 
“annihilated,” “destroyed,” “crushed,” “embarrassed,” and so forth—another team 
that in a more neutral sentence simply “lost” or was “beaten.” A writer who chooses 
“slaughtered” for “beat” is slanting the statement to evoke the reader’s emotions. 
 When determining whether language is unduly emotive, it is helpful to 
ask the following questions:
1.   Is the term—even though it may have emotive power—actually an 
accurate and precise way to describe an event, an idea, a person, and 
so forth?  Slaughter is not always manipulative if it is used correctly—
to describe events in warfare, for example. 
2.   Does the writer appear to be manipulating the reader’s reactions 
or attempting to move the reader toward feelings of rage, fear, joy, 
desire, and so forth? What other evidence in the context of the argu-
ment supports the conclusion that the writer’s language is unfairly 
emotive? Be sure to separate your personal reactions to certain 
words from reactions that the writer appears to be targeting. 
3.   Should the writer be expected to defend the term? A political candi-
date who calls his opponent a “fascist” would have to deﬁ ne the term 
and show how the opponent’s words and actions ﬁ t that deﬁ nition.  
4.   Is there a more neutral way to make the same point? 
5.   How important to the argument, information, or explanation is the 
suspected emotive language? We don’t usually quibble over the emo-
tive naming of cars or complain about a coach’s emotional pep talk. 
Nor should we deny a writer some leeway in an argument for the 
expression of feelings and attitudes. 
 EXERCISE 4.4 
 I.   Look at the italicized words in the sentences below and think of three or 
four words you could use to describe the action. Then discuss what differences 
are suggested by the words you have listed. The ﬁ rst is done as an example.
 1.   Bill used a blunt instrument to  make contact with Bob. (hit, strike, bash, blud-
geon)  Hit and  strike suggest less force and aggression;  bash and  bludgeon con-
note a greater impact. 
 Language exerts 
hidden power, like 
the moon and the 
tides. 
 —Rita Mae Brown 

112 
CHAPTER 4 Language
 2.   She  said , “I don’t love you.” 
 3.   “I want ice cream,” the child  said .  
 4.   “Do this, please,” she  asked .  
 5.   “Did you  look at that woman?” 
 6.   Out of anger, he  damaged the CD player. 
 7.   He  held on to her arm. 
 8.   You were  not rational to do that. 
 9.   I am a  ﬁ rm believer in that cause. 
 10.   He is a man  without feeling .  
 11.   She is a woman of  inaction .  
 12.   He became  angry .  
 13.   The boss  approved of her work. 
 14.   You’re  thinking only of yourself .  
 15.   His actions were  inappropriate .  
 II.   Identify the emotive language in the following passages. Indicate which 
emotive terms you feel are manipulative and which you feel are appropriate.
 1.   From an ad for a home: Charming, cozy three-bedroom Cape Cod in an older 
neighborhood, wall-to-wall carpeting throughout, lower-level recreation 
room opening onto large deck, modern kitchen, new roof, garage, needs 
some tender loving care. 
 2.   From a personal ad: DWF, mature, petite, attractive, spiritual, intelligent busi-
ness professional, occasional drinker, enjoys quiet evenings, serious movies, 
and long novels. 
 3.   Leave it to the People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) to try 
and spoil the party for all of us ﬁ shing families. 
 
   
 The animal rights group traipsed across the country last week in an at-
tempt to disrupt National Fishing Week activities and indoctrinate school-
children. Circumventing parents and teachers, PETA members stood outside 
schoolyards and distributed “Look, Don’t Hook” toy binoculars to kids. A 
6-foot-tall, anti-ﬁ shing mascot, “Gill the Fish,” hovered nearby while activists 
spread the animal rights’ gospel. . . . 
 
   
 Kids, take note: This kind of self-indulgent terrorism by animal rights 
activists is truly “cruel—not cool.” (Michelle Malkin, “PETA, Go Jump in 
the Lake,”  Philadelphia Daily News ) 
 4.   Women, unless they were quite wealthy, have always worked: in the house 
and out of the house, on the farm, in factories, sometimes caring for other 
people’s kids, often leaving their own with the family herd under grandma’s 
practiced eye. I’ve read that early in this century, when desperate families 
ﬂ ooded into cities seeking work, leaving their rural support systems behind, 
female factory workers had to bundle their toddlers up on boards and hang 
them on hooks on the walls. At break time they’d unswaddle the kids and 
feed them. I like to mention this to anyone who suggests that modern day 
care is degrading the species. (Barbara Kingsolver, “The Household Zen,” 
 High Tide in Tucson: Essays from Now or Never ) 
 5.   Five years after a world war has been won, men’s hearts should anticipate 
a long peace, and men’s minds should be free from the heavy weight that 

 
Emotive Language: Slanting the Truth 
113
comes with war. But this is not such a period—for this is not a period of 
peace. This is a time of the “cold war.” This is a time when all the world is 
split into two vast, increasingly hostile armed camps—a time of a great ar-
maments race. . . . 
 
   
 The reason why we ﬁ nd ourselves in a position of impotency is not 
because our only powerful potential enemy has sent men to invade our 
shores, but rather because of the traitorous actions of those who have been 
treated so well by this Nation. It has not been the less fortunate or members 
of minority groups who have been selling this Nation out, but rather those 
who have had all the beneﬁ ts that the wealthiest nation on earth has had to 
offer—the ﬁ nest homes, the ﬁ nest college education, and the ﬁ nest jobs in 
Government we can give. 
 
   
 This is glaringly true in the State Department. There the bright young 
men who are born with silver spoons in their mouths are the ones who have 
been the worst. . . . In my opinion the State Department, which is one of the 
most important government departments, is thoroughly infested with Com-
munists. 
 
   
 I have in my hand 57 cases of individuals who would appear to be either 
card carrying members or certainly loyal to the Communist Party, but who 
nevertheless are still helping to shape our foreign policy. . . . 
 
   
 I know that you are saying to yourself, “Well, why doesn’t the Congress 
do something about it?” Actually, ladies and gentlemen, one of the important 
reasons for the graft, the corruption, the dishonesty, the disloyalty, the treason 
in high Government positions—one of the most important reasons why this 
continues is a lack of moral uprising on the part of the 140,000,000 Ameri-
can people. In the light of history, however, this is not hard to explain. 
 
   
 It is the result of an emotional hang-over and a temporary moral lapse 
which follows every war. It is the apathy to evil which people who have 
been subjected to the tremendous evils of war feel. As the people of the 
world see mass murder, the destruction of defenseless and innocent people, 
and all of the crime and lack of morals which go with war, they become 
numb and apathetic. It has always been thus after war. 
 
   
 However, the morals of our people have not been destroyed. They still 
exist. This cloak of numbness and apathy has only needed a spark to rekindle 
them. Happily, this spark has ﬁ nally been supplied. . . . 
 
   
 [This] moral uprising . . . will end only when the whole sorry mess of 
twisted, warped thinkers are swept from the national scene so that we may 
have a new birth of national honesty and decency in government. (Senator 
Joseph McCarthy, Remarks,  Congressional Record; originally “Speech Deliv-
ered to the Women’s Club of Wheeling, West Virginia”) 
 6.   Shortly before 3:00 a.m. on the morning of January 1, 1991, an American 
F-117 Nighthawk soared across the skies of the brightly lit city of Baghdad. 
The stealth aircraft ﬂ ew too high for Iraqis on the ground to see, and it 
was undetected by the probing pulses of Iraqi radar. In air defense centers 
throughout the country, tired technicians peered through clouds of cigarette 
smoke at empty radar screens. They heard nothing overhead—just the steady 

114 
CHAPTER 4 Language
background hum of air conditioners. Yet they knew that twenty minutes 
earlier American helicopters had attacked two radar sites on the border with 
Saudi Arabia. Both had ceased transmitting. And twelve minutes after that, at 
2:51, the Nukhayb Intercept Operations Center controlling air defense over 
western Iraq had also ceased activity. Surely the anticipated Coalition attack 
on Iraq had begun. Yet nothing appeared on their screens. 
 
   
 Then, at exactly 3:00, all hell broke loose over Baghdad. A violent ex-
plosion rocked the city’s main communications center, housed in a structure 
the Americans called the AT&T building. Instantly Iraq’s communications 
with the outside world went down. When CNN’s live television feed from 
Baghdad died, a huge cheer went up from American planners in Riyadh: 
The end of the CNN feed was a sure sign that bombs from the F-117 had 
hit their target. (Williamson Murray and Robert H. Scales Jr.,  The Iraq War ) 
 III.   Divide into groups of four. Each group is to select a name from the following 
list, and each member of the group is to look up the name in an encyclopedia, 
making sure that no two members of a single group use the same encyclopedia. 
After the group members have done their research, the group reassembles and 
compares notes on how the various encyclopedias portrayed their subject. Com-
pare, especially, the language used by the writers of the encyclopedia entries. 
Some writers may focus on different aspects of the person’s life, but does the 
language reveal anything about the attitude of the writer toward the subject?
 
   John F. Kennedy 
 
   John Brown 
 
   Malcolm X 
 
   Benedict Arnold  
 
   Elizabeth Cady Stanton 
 
   Martin Luther King Jr. 
Now do the same with newspapers. Choose a contemporary issue and read 
about it in four different newspapers. What differences in language can you 
ﬁ nd? Many daily papers can be found on the Internet. You can ﬁ nd them by 
starting at  newslink.org,  an index of thousands of newspapers and magazines on 
the Internet.  
 EUPHEMISMS AND POLITICAL CORRECTNESS 
 Very often in our communications with one another, we avoid language that 
we feel might offend, upset, or insult our listeners or readers. For example, 
when consoling a friend who has suffered a death in the family, we might 
refer to that death as a “passing away” or “passing on”: “I’m sorry your uncle 
has passed on,” we say, because saying “I’m sorry your uncle died” seems too 
blunt or because “died” seems so ﬁ nal, whereas “passing” connotes moving 
to another place. Whatever our reasons, when we choose a more gentle and 
less negative word over those we feel would be offensive or too direct, we are 

 
Euphemisms and Political Correctness 
115
speaking in  euphemisms:  mild, comforting, or evasive words that take the 
place of harsh, blunt, or taboo words. 
 Many euphemisms exist to describe actions and places associated with 
bodily functions.  Bodily function  is itself a euphemism, and so are words and 
phrases such as  the facilities, restroom, ladies’ room, powder room,  and so forth. It is 
no surprise that many everyday euphemisms are used to cover up our most 
private actions; perhaps we believe we lend some measure of dignity to our 
lives if we talk about our instincts, drives, and needs in more reﬁ ned and civi-
lized language. 
 There is nothing wrong with using euphemisms to make us more com-
fortable in “polite society,” but a critical thinker should be aware that pleasant 
or vague language is often used to hide reality or avoid facing the truth. For 
example, knowing that the word  downsizing —itself a euphemism for  ﬁ ring —can 
evoke fear and anger from workers or citizens, corporations and the U.S. gov-
ernment often substitute language that, because it is confusing or overly techni-
cal, does not immediately generate negative responses. Sometimes the word is a 
clear synonym for  downsizing.  For example,  rightsizing has been used by execu-
tives in a number of ﬁ rms to suggest that the number of employees had grown 
to an excessive number and that trimming that number would return the work-
force to its “right size.” So although these companies were, in fact, downsiz-
ing, they avoided, at least momentarily, the negative results of using that word. 
Other companies have used even more creative euphemisms. General Motors 
instituted a “career transition program”; Wal-Mart began a “normal payroll ad-
justment”; National Semiconductor called its efforts at downsizing “reshaping”; 
Tandem Computers called it “reducing duplication”; and Procter & Gamble, in 
perhaps the most pleasant-sounding euphemism, called it “strengthening global 
effectiveness.”11 In all of these cases, the companies were scaling back their 
workforces. They were downsizing. They were ﬁ ring people. 
 Government employees and politicians are especially notorious for using 
euphemisms. The military of the United States, for example, has referred to 
civilian casualties as “collateral damage” and has labeled soldiers “expendable 
 One of the dis-
coveries of the 
twentieth century 
is the enormous 
variety of ways 
of compelling 
language to lie. 
 —Jules Henry 
 Always use the 
proper names for 
things. 
 —Albus 
Dumbledore, in 
J.K. Rowling’s Harry 
Potter and the 
Sorcerer’s Stone 
Comedian George Carlin, who “passed on” in 2008, often joked 
about euphemisms and the language police. One of his most famous 
routines dealt with euphemisms for the word “die”:
 I’m getting old. And it’s OK. Because thanks to our fear of death in 
this country I won’t have to die—I’ll “pass away.” Or I’ll “expire,” like 
a magazine subscription. If it happens in the hospital they’ll call it a 
“terminal episode.” The insurance company will refer to it as a “nega-
tive patient care outcome.” And if it’s the result of malpractice they’ll 
say it was a “therapeutic misadventure.” 10 
George’s Carlin’s Terminal Episode

116 
CHAPTER 4 Language
resources.” Enemy troops are sometimes called “soft targets.” Soldiers who 
die by “friendly ﬁ re” have been accidentally killed by their own forces. The 
word  retreat would never be uttered among the military elite, but  strategic 
redeployment  would be. In some cases the media has helped promote the use 
of euphemisms. In 2004, a vice president at Fox News asked his reporters 
to refer to U.S. Marines pictured in Fallujah, Iraq, as “sharpshooters” rather 
than “snipers,” a word with negative connotations. Not every euphemism is 
used in an effort to bamboozle audiences or hide the truth, and some writers 
simply use synonyms to avoid repetition. But when euphemisms are used in a 
deliberate effort to confuse the audience or evade the truth, a critical thinker 
can call the lie what it is. 
 Over the past several years, euphemisms for various people and groups 
have proliferated. It is not unusual to hear that the school has hired several 
“custodial engineers” or that the local market is looking to hire “meat cutters.” 
It seems that no one wants to be a janitor or a butcher any longer. In many 
cases, this use of euphemisms has been an attempt to ﬁ nd language more 
precise than the words commonly used. For example, although someone using 
a wheelchair may face some difﬁ culty getting around, the terms  crippled and 
 disabled strike many people as inaccurate in describing wheelchair users, who 
are often very resourceful in overcoming common obstacles and who can lead 
lives as productive as anyone else’s provided their needs are considered in the 
design of buildings and transportation. In other words, “disability” is the result of 
obstacles placed in the way, not a quality inherent in the person. For some people, 
then, the word  challenged  or even differently abled more accurately describes the 
condition of a wheelchair user. Because we often begin to perceive people by 
the words we use to describe them, calling someone “challenged” rather than 
“disabled” can have the positive result of changing our perceptions. 
 Other attempts have been made to use more-precise language in de-
scribing human beings;  ﬁ reﬁ ghter,  for example, is more precise than  ﬁ reman  if 
that ﬁ reﬁ ghting human being’s name is Barbara. There is little danger in using 
words such as ﬁ reﬁ ghter and businessperson, and, in fact, doing so only improves 
our way of communicating and may even help keep the peace. 
 But perhaps we have gone too far in some regards. What was once an 
effort at accuracy has in some aspects become excessive. The term  political cor-
rectness  was coined to indicate the almost ridiculous extremes to which some 
people have gone to avoid using language that might offend or insult. In this 
case, politically correct language can be euphemistic. Take, for example, the 
term  urban,  which is used by some contemporary writers in place of  black or 
 African American.  Reviews now often refer to “urban” ﬁ lms or “urban” themes 
rather than say that the ﬁ lm portrays an African American cast of characters 
confronting racial issues. The use of the term  urban betrays an effort on the 
writer’s part to remain politically correct. Similarly, writers often refer to the 
“economically disadvantaged” rather than the “poor,” or say that someone is 
“chemically dependent” rather than a “drug addict.” Such use of euphemisms 
may hide the real tragedy of poverty or addiction. Critical thinkers should 
 Thanks to words, 
we have been 
able to rise above 
the brutes, and 
thanks to words, 
we have often 
sunk to the level 
of demons. 
 —Aldous Huxley 

 
Summary 
117
strive to remain aware of euphemisms that conceal reality and should make 
every effort in their own writing to use words that are accurate and precise. 
 EXERCISE 4.5 
 In groups of three or more, discuss which word from each of the pairs below you 
think is more accurate. Which word in the pair would you prefer to use? Which 
would you prefer to see used by writers and speakers? How would the context of 
the word inﬂ uence your answers to the previous questions? How would the con-
text inﬂ uence your judgment? The words in the right column might be consid-
ered euphemisms or politically correct terms. 
retarded
mentally challenged
old, elderly
senior citizen
used car
pre-owned car
stewardess
ﬂ ight attendant
fat
full-ﬁ gured
deaf
hearing impaired
ghetto
culturally deprived area
divorced
newly single
primitive
preliterate
doorman
access controller
pimples
blemishes
pornography
adult entertainment
blockaded
quarantined
bombed
paciﬁ ed
torture
enhanced interrogation techniques
freshman
ﬁ rst-year student
gambling
gaming
 SUMMARY 
1.   Failing to be precise can lead to miscommunication.  Vague words have 
meanings that are fuzzy and inexact and thus have debatable, borderline 
applications.  Overgenerality occurs when language is too broad and unspe-
ciﬁ c.  Ambiguous words have two or more distinct meanings in a particular 
context, making it difﬁ cult if not impossible for the reader or listener 
to decide which is intended. Ambiguity can also occur because of faulty 
sentence structure.  
2.   Very often, good arguments will depend on the precise deﬁ nition of 
words and phrases that opponents in an argument might deﬁ ne differently.  

118 
CHAPTER 4 Language
3.   Deﬁ nitions can be  stipulative (a word’s meaning is determined by the 
writer),  persuasive (the writer reveals bias or a point of view in the deﬁ -
nition),  lexical (the word is deﬁ ned in the way it is generally used), or 
 precising (a vague word is given a clear, precise meaning). A writer might 
provide concrete examples of what is meant by a word by pointing to the 
object being deﬁ ned ( ostensive deﬁ nition ), by listing members of the class 
( enumerative deﬁ nition ), or by indicating what subclasses the word contains 
( deﬁ nition by subclass ).  Etymological deﬁ nitions give a word’s history, whereas 
 synonymous deﬁ nitions provide more-familiar equivalent terms. A  deﬁ nition 
by genus and difference records the characteristics that distinguish one thing 
from the other things in its class. 
4.   A good deﬁ nition should be neither too broad nor too narrow, convey the 
essential meaning of a word, provide a context where needed, and not be 
slanted, ﬁ gurative, obscure, or circular.  
5.   Good critical thinkers are careful to avoid vague language and to deﬁ ne 
terms, but they are also aware of the manipulations of language, especially 
language intended to evoke emotional responses that trick us out of atten-
tion and skepticism. Even sources we expect to be objective may contain 
language that subtly edges us toward a particular, predictable feeling or 
attitude. 
6.   Euphemisms are mild or evasive words that take the place of harsh, nega-
tive words. Some euphemisms are perfectly acceptable. Euphemisms are 
unacceptable when they are used in an effort to hide the truth. The effort 
to label people and groups more precisely led to creations such as  Native 
American in place of  Indian. Although this is seen by some people as an 
example of “political correctness,” that term is better applied to efforts 
to dress up reality with euphemistic language.   

119
CHAPTER 5
 LOGICAL FALLACIES—I 
 We encounter arguments all over the place: in books, advertisements, TV 
talk shows, political speeches, newspaper editorials, class discussions, and late-
night bull sessions with our friends. Some of those arguments are sound and 
convincing, but many are fallacious. An argument is fallacious when it contains 
one or more logical fallacies. A  logical fallacy —or fallacy, for short—is an ar-
gument that contains a mistake in reasoning. 1 In this chapter and the next, we 
discuss many of the most common logical fallacies. 2 In general, these are falla-
cies that are both frequently committed and often psychologically persuasive. 
 There are many common logical fallacies, and they can be classiﬁ ed in 
various ways. The simplest way—and the one we adopt in this text—is to 
divide such fallacies into two broad groups: fallacies of relevance and fallacies 
of insufﬁ cient evidence.  Fallacies of relevance  are mistakes in reasoning that 
occur because the premises are  logically irrelevant  to the conclusion.  Fallacies of 
insuf ﬁ cient evidence are mistakes in reasoning that occur because the prem-
ises, though logically relevant to the conclusion,  fail to provide suf ﬁ cient evidence 
to support the conclusion. Fallacies of relevance are discussed in this chapter. 
Fallacies of insufﬁ cient evidence are discussed in Chapter 6. 
 THE CONCEPT OF RELEVANCE 
 Before we consider the fallacies of relevance, we must ﬁ rst clarify the concept 
of relevance itself. 
 To say that one statement is  relevant to another is to say that  it counts either 
for or against that other statement.  In other words, a statement is relevant to an-
other statement if it provides at least some reason for thinking that the second 
statement is true or false. 
 There are three ways in which a statement can be relevant or irrelevant 
to another. A statement can be positively relevant, negatively relevant, or logi-
cally irrelevant to another statement. 3 
 Arguments, like 
people, are often 
pretenders.  
 —Plato 
 Education that 
has merely taught 
people to follow a 
syllogism without 
enabling them to 
detect a fallacy 
has left them in 
constant peril.  
 —Stanley Baldwin 

120 
CHAPTER 5 Logical Fallacies—I
 A statement is  positively relevant  to another statement if it counts in favor 
of that statement. Here are several examples of  positive relevance: 
 First argument:  Dogs are cats. Cats are felines. So dogs are felines. 
 Second argument:  All dogs have ﬁ ve legs. Rover is a dog. So Rover has ﬁ ve legs. 
 Third argument:  Most Wexford College students live off-campus. Annie is a 
Wexford College student. So, probably, Annie lives off-campus. 
 Fourth argument: Chris is a woman. Therefore, Chris enjoys knitting. 
Each of these premises is positively relevant to its conclusion. That is, each pro-
vides at least some reason for thinking that the conclusion is true. In the ﬁ rst 
and second arguments, the premises provide logically conclusive reasons for 
accepting the conclusion. In the third argument, the premises provide prob-
able reasons for accepting the conclusion. 4 In the fourth argument, the premise 
(“Chris is a woman”) provides neither probable nor conclusive reasons for ac-
cepting the conclusion (“Chris enjoys knitting”). The premise does, however, 
make the conclusion slightly more probable than it would be if the conclusion 
were considered independent of that premise. Thus, the premise does provide 
some evidence for the conclusion, and hence is positively relevant to it. 
 These examples highlight two important lessons about the concept of 
  relevance: First, a statement can be relevant to another statement even if the 
ﬁ rst statement is completely false. Thus, in the ﬁ rst example, the statement “Dogs 
are cats” is clearly false. Nevertheless, it is relevant to the statement “Dogs are fe-
lines” because if it  were true, the latter statement would have to be true as well. 
 Second, whether a statement is relevant to another usually depends on the 
 context  in which the statements are made. Thus, in the second example, the state-
ment “All dogs have ﬁ ve legs” is positively relevant to the statement “Rover has 
ﬁ ve legs” only because it is conjoined with the statement “Rover is a dog.” 
 Statements that count  against other statements are said to be  negatively 
relevant to those statements. Here are two examples of  negative relevance: 
 Marty is a high-school senior. So, Marty likely has a Ph.D. 
 Althea is two years old. So, Althea probably goes to college. 
   In both of these examples, the premises are negatively relevant to the conclu-
sion. Each premise, if true, provides at least some reason for thinking that the 
conclusion is false. 
 Finally, statements can be logically irrelevant to other statements. A state-
ment is  logically irrelevant  to another statement if it counts neither for nor against 
that statement. Here are two examples of  logical irrelevance: 
 The earth revolves around the sun. Therefore, marijuana should be legalized. 
 Last night I dreamed that the Yankees will win the pennant. Therefore, the 
Yankees will win the pennant. 
Neither of these two premises provides the slightest reason for thinking that 
its conclusion is either true or false. Thus, they are logically irrelevant to those 
conclusions. 
 My motto is: TO 
THE POINT. 
 —Voltaire 
 History is a cata-
log of incidents in 
which a poor ar-
gument convinced 
hordes of people 
to act badly, or 
even brutally.  
 —S. Morris Engel 

 
Fallacies of Relevance 
121
 EXERCISE 5.1 
 Determine whether the premises in the following arguments are positively rel-
evant, negatively relevant, or logically irrelevant to the conclusion. 
 1.   Carlos recently gave Amy an engagement ring. Therefore, Carlos loves Amy. 
 2.   Marcos lives in Costa Rica. So, Marcos probably speaks German. 
 3.   The sky is blue. Hence, the next president will be a Democrat. 
 4.   Thousands of tobacco farm workers will lose their jobs if cigarette taxes are 
doubled. Therefore, smoking does not cause cancer. 
 5.   Thousands of tobacco farm workers will lose their jobs if cigarette taxes are 
doubled. Therefore, cigarette taxes should not be doubled. 
 6.   Emily is CEO of a Fortune 500 company. Thus, it’s likely that Emily earns 
more than $50,000 a year. 
 7.   Mel lives in Pittsburgh. Hence, Mel lives in Ohio. 
 8.   Sue lives in Ohio. So, Sue probably lives in Cleveland. 
 9.   The last three coin tosses have been heads. So, the next coin toss will probably 
be tails. 
 10.   You should believe in God. You have everything to gain if God does exist, and 
little to lose if He doesn’t. 
 11.   Peter and his wife are both over 6 feet tall. Therefore, their daughter is likely 
to be over 6 feet tall, too. 
 12.   Hmm, the wiper blades were turned on when I started the engine of this 
rental car. It must have been raining when the last person returned the car. 
 13.   Martina partied all night last night. However, Martina was valedictorian of her 
high school class. Therefore, she will do well on her critical thinking test this 
morning. 
 14.   Xu is a ﬁ ve-year-old child living in China. Therefore, Xu is probably a boy.  
 15.   Most Americans believe that abortion should be legal. Therefore, abortion 
should be legal. 
 FALLACIES OF RELEVANCE 
  A fallacy of relevance occurs when an arguer offers reasons that are logically 
irrelevant to his or her conclusion. Fallacies of relevance often seem to be good 
arguments but aren’t. In this chapter we look at eleven fallacies of relevance. 
 Kodak introduced a single-use camera called The Weekender. Cus-
tomers have called the support line to ask if it’s OK to use it during 
the week. 5 
 Critical Thinking Lapse 

122 
CHAPTER 5 Logical Fallacies—I
 Personal Attack ( Ad Hominem ) 
 We commit the  fallacy of personal attack  7 when we reject someone’s argu-
ment or claim by attacking the person rather than the person’s argument or 
claim. Here is an example:
   Hugh Hefner, founder of  Playboy magazine, has argued against censorship 
of pornography. But Hefner is an immature, self-indulgent millionaire who 
never outgrew the adolescent fantasies of his youth. His argument, there-
fore, is worthless.  
Notice what is going on here. The arguer makes no attempt to show why 
Hefner’s arguments against the censorship of pornography are ﬂ awed. Instead, 
he simply attacks Hefner’s character. In effect, he argues this way:
  1.  Hugh Hefner is a bad person. 
 2.  Therefore, Hugh Hefner’s argument must be bad. 
But the pattern of reasoning is clearly fallacious. Even if it is true that Hefner is 
a bad person, that doesn’t mean he is incapable of offering good arguments on 
the topic of censorship. The attack on Hefner’s character is simply irrelevant to 
the point at issue, which is the strength of Hefner’s case against the censorship 
of pornography. 
 It is important to bear in mind, however, that not every personal attack 
is a fallacy. The fallacy of personal attack occurs only if (1) an arguer rejects 
another person’s argument or claim and (2) the arguer attacks the person who 
offers the argument or claim, rather than considering the merits of that argu-
ment or claim. 
 Consider some examples of personal attacks that  aren’t  fallacies but might 
easily be mistaken as fallacies. Here is one example:
  Millions of innocent people died in Stalin’s ruthless ideological purges. 
Clearly, Stalin was one of the most brutal dictators of the twentieth century. 
 It would be a very 
good thing if every 
trick could receive 
some short and 
obviously appro-
priate name, so 
that when a man 
used this or that 
particular trick, 
he could at once 
be reproved for it. 
 —Arthur 
Schopenhauer 
 In one of his famous debates with Abraham Lincoln, Stephen Douglas 
spoke disparagingly of Lincoln’s humble origins and in particular of 
Lincoln’s brief career as a storekeeper. Lincoln responded: “Many 
a time I have been on one side of the counter and sold whiskey to 
Mr. Douglas on the other side. But now there’s a difference between 
us: I’ve left my side of the counter, but he sticks to his as tenaciously 
as ever.” 6   
One Good  Ad Hominem Deserves Another 

 
Fallacies of Relevance 
123
This personal attack is not a fallacy, because no  argument  offered by Stalin is 
rejected on irrelevant personal grounds. There is no fallacious claim that any 
particular argument of Stalin’s must be bad because Stalin himself was a bad 
person. The argument, in fact, is a good one. 
 Here is another example:
 Becky Fibber has testiﬁ ed that she saw my client rob the First National 
Bank. But Ms. Fibber has twice been convicted of perjury. In addition, 
you’ve heard Ms. Fibber’s own mother testify that she is a pathological liar. 
Therefore, you should not believe Ms. Fibber’s testimony against my client. 
Here the issue is whether Ms. Fibber is or is not a believable witness. Because 
the arguer’s personal attack is relevant to this issue, no fallacy is committed. 
 Attacking the Motive 
 Closely related to the fallacy of personal attack is the fallacy of attacking the 
motive.  Attacking the motive 8 is the error of criticizing a person’s motivation 
for offering a particular argument or claim, rather than examining the worth 
of the argument or claim itself. Here are two examples:
 Professor Michaelson has argued in favor of academic tenure. But why 
should we even listen to Professor Michaelson? As a tenured professor, of 
course he supports tenure. 
 Barbara Simmons, president of the American Trial Lawyers Association, 
has argued that punitive damage awards resulting from tobacco litigation 
should not be limited. But this is exactly what you would expect her to say. 
Trial lawyers stand to lose billions if such punitive damage awards are lim-
ited. Therefore, we should ignore Ms. Simmons’s argument. 
Note that these examples share a common pattern:
 1.  X is biased or has questionable motives. 
 2.  Therefore, X’s argument or claim should be rejected. 
The pattern of reasoning is fallacious because people with biases or question-
able motives do sometimes offer good arguments. You cannot simply assume 
that because a person has a vested interest in an issue, any position he or she 
takes on the issue must be false or weakly supported. 
 It is important to realize, however, that not all attacks on an arguer’s motives 
are fallacious. Here are two examples:
 Burton Wexler, spokesperson for the American Tobacco Growers Associa-
tion, has argued that there is no credible scientiﬁ c evidence that cigarette 
smoking causes cancer. Given Wexler’s obvious bias in the matter, his argu-
ments should be taken with a grain of salt. 
 “Crusher” Castellano has testiﬁ ed that maﬁ a hit man Sam Milano was at 
the opera at the time mob informer Piero Roselli was gunned down. But 
Castellano was paid $30,000 by the mob for his testimony. Therefore, 
Castellano’s testimony should not be believed. 
 It is a matter 
of perfect indif-
ference where a 
thing originated. 
The only question 
is: “Is it true in 
and for itself  ?” 
 —G. W. F. Hegel 

124 
CHAPTER 5 Logical Fallacies—I
Both of these arguments include attacks on an arguer’s motives; neither, how-
ever, is fallacious. Both simply reﬂ ect the commonsense assumption that argu-
ments put forward by arguers with obvious biases or motivations to lie need 
to be scrutinized with particular care. Thus, the fallacy of attacking the motive 
does not consist of simply criticizing another arguer’s motives. Instead, it con-
sists of criticizing an arguer’s motives rather than offering a rational critique of 
the argument itself. 
 Look Who’s Talking ( Tu Quoque ) 
 The fallacy of  look who’s talking  9 is committed when an arguer rejects an-
other person’s argument or claim because that person fails to practice what he 
preaches. Here are several examples:
 Doctor:  You should quit smoking. 
 Patient: Look who’s talking! I’ll quit when you do, Dr. Smokestack! 
 Parent:  Honey, I don’t want you to skip school on senior skip day.  You 
don’t want to jeopardize your chances of being class valedictorian, do you?  
 Daughter: But Mom, you told me you skipped out on senior skip day! 
Why do you always get to have all the fun? 
 Presidential candidate Bill Bradley:  When Al [Gore] accuses me of nega-
tive campaigning, that reminds me of the story about Richard Nixon, 
 Some people will 
take every other 
kind of trouble 
in the world, if 
they are saved 
the trouble of 
thinking. 
 —G. K. Chesterton 
 Monty Python’s Argument Clinic 
 What’s the difference between “argument” and “abuse”? Monty 
Python, the zany British comedy team, offered a classic take on that 
eternal question in  Monty Python’s Flying Circus  (Episode 29, “The 
Money Programme”). A customer, hoping to hone his argumentative 
skills, enters an “Argument Clinic,” where he ﬁ nds Mr. Barnard: 
 Mr. Barnard:  What do you want? 
 Customer:   Well, I was just . . . 
 Mr. Barnard:  Don’t give me that, you snotty-faced heap of parrot 
droppings! 
 Customer:   What? 
 Mr. Barnard:   Shut your festering gob, you tit! Your type really make 
me puke, you vacuous, toffee-nosed, malodorous pervert! 
 Customer:   Look, I came here for an  argument , I’m not going to just 
stand . . . ! 
 Mr. Barnard:  OH! Oh, I’m sorry, but this is Abuse. 
 By mistake, the customer had walked into the Argument Clinic’s 
“Abuse Room.” 
Pop Culture Connection

 
Fallacies of Relevance 
125
the kind of politician who would chop down a tree, then stand on the 
stump and give a speech about conservation. 10 
The logical pattern of these arguments is this:
 1. X fails to follow his or her own advice. 
 2. Therefore, X’s claim or argument should be rejected. 
But this reasoning is clearly fallacious. Arguments are good or bad not because 
of who offers them but because of their own intrinsic strengths or weaknesses. 
You cannot refute a person’s argument simply by pointing out that he or she 
fails to practice what he or she preaches. 
 It should be noted, however, that there is nothing fallacious as such in 
criticizing a person’s hypocritical behavior. For example:
    Jim:  Our neighbor Joe gave me a hard time again yesterday about 
washing our car during this drought emergency. 
 Patty: Well, he’s right. But I wish that hypocrite would live up to his 
own advice. Just last week I saw him watering his lawn in the middle of 
the afternoon. 
Here, Patty is simply pointing out, justiﬁ ably, that their neighbor is a hypocrite. 
Because she does not reject any argument or claim offered by the neighbor, 
however, no fallacy is committed. 
 Two Wrongs Make a Right 
 Closely related to the fallacy of look who’s talking is the  fallacy of two wrongs 
make a right,  which occurs when an arguer attempts to justify a wrongful 
act by claiming that some other act is just as bad or worse. Here are some 
examples:
 I don’t feel guilty about cheating on Dr. Boyer’s test. Half the class cheats 
on his tests. 
 Why pick on me, ofﬁ cer? Nobody comes to a complete stop at that stop 
sign.
 Marge: Bart, quit hitting your sister. 
 Bart:  Well, she pinched me. 
We have all offered our share of such excuses. But however tempting such ex-
cuses may be, we know that they can never truly justify our misdeeds. 
 Of course, there are times when an act that would  otherwise  be wrong 
can be justiﬁ ed by citing the wrongful actions of others. Here are two 
examples:
 Police ofﬁ cer:  Why did you spray this man with pepper spray? 
 You: Because he attacked me with a knife. I did it in self-defense. 
 Father: Why did you go swimming when the pool was closed? 
 Altho’ thy teacher 
act not as he 
preaches, yet 
ne’er the less, if 
good, do what he 
teaches. 
 —Benjamin 
Franklin 

126 
CHAPTER 5 Logical Fallacies—I
 Son:  Because my friend Joe jumped in and was drowning. I did it to 
save his life. 
These are clear cases where the justiﬁ cations offered do, in fact, serve to justify 
what would otherwise be wrongful behavior. Not all cases, however, are so 
clear. Here are two cases that are not: 
 Jedediah Smith murdered three people in cold blood. Therefore, Jedediah 
Smith should be put to death.
 Umpire: Why did you throw at the opposing pitcher? 
 Pitcher: Because he threw at three of our players. I have an obligation 
to protect my teammates if you guys won’t. 
 Do these arguments commit the fallacy of two wrongs make a right? They 
do only if the justiﬁ cations offered are insufﬁ cient to justify the apparently 
wrongful behavior. Whether they do or not is, of course, debatable. 
 The fallacy of two wrongs make a right is often confused with the fal-
lacy of look who’s talking. This is understandable, because it is easy to think of 
examples of arguments that commit  both fallacies. For example:
 Mother: Honey, it’s wrong to steal. How would you feel if someone 
stole your favorite doll? 
 Child:  But you told me you stole your friend’s teddy bear when you 
were a little girl. So stealing isn’t  really wrong. 
This argument commits the fallacy of two wrongs make a right because it at-
tempts to justify a wrongful act by citing another wrongful act. It also commits 
the fallacy of look who’s talking because it dismisses an argument based on the 
arguer’s failure to practice what she preaches. 
How to Distinguish the Look Who’s Talking Fallacy 
from the Two Wrongs Make a Right Fallacy
The look who’s talking fallacy always 
involves a charge of hypocrisy or failing to 
practice what one preaches; the two wrongs 
make a right fallacy often does not.
 
 Here is an example of an argument that 
commits the fallacy of look who’s talking 
but does not commit the fallacy of two 
wrongs make a right:
  I can’t believe our pastor told us that wives 
should stay home and not work! What a 
crock! I happen to know that his own wife 
worked to put him through college.  
 The two wrongs make a right fallacy always 
involves an attempt to justify an apparently 
wrongful act; the look who’s talking fallacy 
often does not. 
 
 Here is an example of an argument that 
commits the two wrongs make a right fal-
lacy but does not commit the fallacy of 
look who’s talking:
 I don’t feel any obligation to report all 
of my waitressing tips to the IRS. I don’t 
know a single waitress who does. 

 
Fallacies of Relevance 
127
 The fallacy of two wrongs make a right is, in fact, distinct from the fallacy 
of look who’s talking. The key differences between the two are summarized in 
the box on page 126. 
 Scare Tactics 
 Fear is a powerful motivator—so powerful that it often causes us to think and 
behave irrationally. The  fallacy of scare tactics 12 is committed when an arguer 
threatens harm to a reader or listener if he or she does not accept the arguer’s 
conclusion and this threat is irrelevant to the truth of the arguer’s conclusion. 
Here are two examples:
 Diplomat to diplomat: I’m sure you’ll agree that we are the rightful rul-
ers of the San Marcos Islands. It would be regrettable if we had to send 
armed forces to demonstrate the validity of our claim. 
 Gun lobbyist to politician:  This gun-control bill is wrong for America, 
and any politician who supports it will discover how wrong they were 
at the next election. 
In both of these examples, the scare tactics employed provide no relevant evi-
dence that supports the stated conclusion. As the second example makes clear, 
the fallacy of scare tactics need not involve a threat of  physical force. Any kind 
of threat can be involved, and the threat may be veiled. 
 Of course, not all threats involve fallacies. Consider these two examples:
 Parent to teen:  If you come home late one more time, your allowance 
will be cut. 
 President John Kennedy to Soviet Premier Nikita Krushchev:  If you don’t 
remove your nuclear missiles from Cuba, we will have no choice but 
to remove them by force. If we use force to remove the missiles, that 
may provoke an all-out nuclear war. Neither of us wants a nuclear war. 
Therefore, you should remove your missiles from Cuba. (paraphrased) 
The ﬁ rst example is not a fallacy because it is simply a statement, not an argu-
ment. The second example is not a fallacy because the premises are logically 
relevant to the conclusion. 
 The fear of man 
brings a snare.  
 —Proverbs 29:25 
 No passion so 
effectively robs 
the mind of all its 
power of acting 
and reasoning 
as fear. 
 —Edmund Burke 
Once while giving a speech, Catholic historian Hilaire Belloc was re-
peatedly heckled by a member of the audience. Belloc, who was built 
like a boxer, bore these interruptions patiently for some time. Finally, 
however, he could endure no more. Fixing the heckler with a glare, he 
said, “I should prefer, sir, to settle this question by physical encounter, 
but since the rules of this club do not permit that method, I am com-
pelled to attempt the task of teaching you how to think.”11
Force or Reason?

128 
CHAPTER 5 Logical Fallacies—I
 Appeal to Pity 
 The  fallacy of appeal to pity 13 occurs when an arguer inappropriately attempts 
to evoke feelings of pity or compassion from his listeners or readers. Here are 
two examples:
   Student to professor:  I know I missed half your classes and failed all my 
exams, but I had a really tough semester. First my pet boa constrictor 
died. Then my girlfriend told me she wants a sex-change operation. With 
all I went through this semester, I don’t think I really deserved an F. Any 
chance you might cut me some slack and change my grade to a C or a D?  
 Parent to high school football coach:  I admit my son Billy can’t run, pass, 
kick, catch, block, or tackle, but he deserves to make the football team. 
If he doesn’t make the team, he’s going to be an emotional wreck, and 
he may even drop out of school. 
 These arguments may or may not be effective in arousing our sympathies. 
Logically, however, the arguments are clearly fallacious because the premises 
provide no relevant reasons to accept the conclusions. 
 Are all arguments that contain emotional appeals fallacious? No, as the 
following examples illustrate:
 Mother to daughter:  Nana was asking about you the other day. She’s so 
lonely and depressed since Grandpa passed away, and her Alzheimer’s 
seems to get worse every day. She’s done so much for you over the 
years. Don’t you think you should pay her a visit?14 
 High school softball coach:  Girls, this state championship is the biggest 
game of your lives. This is what you’ve been working for all year. Your 
parents are counting on you, your school is counting on you, and 
your community is counting on you. Make them proud! Play like the 
champions you are! 
 In these examples the appeals to emotion are both appropriate and relevant to 
the arguers’ legitimate purposes. Too often, however, people use emotional ap-
peals to hinder or obscure rational thinking. When emotional appeals are used 
in this way, the appeals are fallacious. 
 Bandwagon Argument 
 We all like to feel loved, admired, appreciated, and accepted by others. A  band-
wagon argument  is one that plays on a person’s desire to be popular, accepted, 
or valued, rather than appealing to logically relevant reasons or evidence. Here 
are three examples:
 All the really cool kids at East Jefferson High School smoke cigarettes. 
Therefore, you should, too. 
 I can’t believe you’re going to the library on a Friday night! You don’t want 
people to think you’re a nerd, do you? 
 Our feelings or 
emotions about a 
particular claim 
have no bearing 
on the truth or 
falsity of that 
claim. 
 —T. Edward 
Damer 
 The few may be 
right and the 
many wrong. 
 —John Henry 
Newman 

 
Fallacies of Relevance 
129
 There must be something to astrology. Millions of Americans can’t be 
wrong. 
 The basic pattern of these arguments is this:
 1. Everybody (or a select group of people) believes or does X. 
 2. Therefore, you should believe or do X, too. 
This pattern is fallacious because the fact that a belief or practice is popular 
usually provides little or no evidence that the belief is true or that the practice 
is good. 
 Not all appeals to popular beliefs or practices are fallacious, however, as 
these examples illustrate:
 All the villagers I’ve talked to say that the water is safe to drink. Therefore, 
the water probably is safe to drink. 
 Lots of my friends recommend the Back Street Deli, so it’s probably a good 
place to eat. 
These bandwagon appeals are not fallacious because the premises are relevant 
to the conclusions. 
 Straw Man 
 The  straw man fallacy  is committed when an arguer distorts an opponent’s 
argument or claim to make it easier to attack. For example:
 Pete has argued that the New York Yankees are a better baseball 
team than the Atlanta Braves. But the Braves aren’t a bad team. 
They have a great pitching staff, and they consistently ﬁ nish at or 
near the top of their division. Obviously, Pete doesn’t know what he’s 
talking about. 
This argument misrepresents Pete’s view. Pete hasn’t claimed that the Braves 
are a  bad team, merely that the Yankees are a  better  team than the Braves. By 
mischaracterizing Pete’s view—making it seem weaker or less plausible than it 
really is—the arguer has committed the straw man fallacy. 
 Straw man fallacies are extremely common in politics. For example:
 Senator Biddle has argued that we should outlaw violent pornography. 
Obviously, the senator favors complete governmental censorship of 
books, magazines, and ﬁ lms. Frankly, I’m shocked that such a view 
should be expressed on the ﬂ oor of the U.S. Senate. It runs counter to 
everything this great nation stands for. No senator should listen seriously 
to such a proposal.  
This argument distorts the senator’s view. His claim is that  violent pornography 
should be outlawed, not that there should be complete governmental censorship 
of books, magazines, and ﬁ lms. By misrepresenting the senator’s position and 
then attacking the misrepresentation rather than the senator’s actual position, 
the arguer commits the straw man fallacy. 
 Popularity is 
vanity. 
 —John Donne 
 Our ways of 
thinking are as 
much arrived at 
by imitation of 
those we admire 
as by reasoned 
reﬂ ection.  
 —Alvin Plantinga 
 Neither believe 
nor reject any-
thing, because 
any other person, 
or description 
of persons, have 
rejected or be-
lieved it. Your own 
reason is the only 
oracle given you 
by heaven, and 
you are answer-
able, not for the 
rightness, but the 
uprightness of the 
decision. 
 —Thomas 
Jefferson 

130 
CHAPTER 5 Logical Fallacies—I
 The logical pattern of straw man arguments is this:
 1.  X’s view is false or unjustiﬁ ed [but where X’s view has been unfairly 
characterized or misrepresented]. 
 2. Therefore, X’s view should be rejected. 
Clearly, arguments of this pattern provide no logically relevant support for 
their conclusions. 
 Red Herring 
 The  red herring fallacy  is committed when an arguer tries to sidetrack his 
audience by raising an irrelevant issue and then claims that the original issue 
has effectively been settled by the irrelevant diversion. The fallacy apparently 
gets its name from a technique used to train English foxhounds. 15 A sack of 
red (i.e., smoked) herrings was dragged across the trail of a fox to train the 
foxhounds to follow the fox’s scent rather than the powerful distracting smell 
of the ﬁ sh. In a similar way, an arguer commits the red herring fallacy when 
he seeks to distract his audience by raising an irrelevant issue and then claims 
or implies that the irrelevant diversion has settled the original point at issue. 
Here is an example:
 Many people criticize Thomas Jefferson for being an owner of slaves. But 
Jefferson was one of our greatest presidents, and his Declaration of Inde-
pendence is one of the most eloquent pleas for freedom and democracy 
ever written. Clearly, these criticisms are unwarranted. 
The issue here is whether Jefferson can rightly be criticized for owning slaves, 
not whether he was one of America’s greatest presidents or whether he de-
serves credit for writing the Declaration of Independence. By diverting the 
reader’s attention from the original argument and then claiming that the origi-
nal argument has been refuted by the irrelevant diversion, the arguer commits 
the red herring fallacy. 
 Red herring fallacies are also extremely common in politics. For 
example:
 Critics have accused my administration of doing too little to save the fam-
ily farm. These critics forget that I grew up on a farm. I know what it’s like 
to get up at the crack of dawn to milk the cows. I know what it’s like to 
work in the ﬁ eld all day in the blazing sun. Family farms are what made this 
country great, and those who criticize my farm policies simply don’t know 
what they’re talking about. 
  The issue here is whether the speaker’s administration is doing enough to 
save the family farm. The fact that the speaker grew up on a farm is simply a 
smokescreen used to distract attention from this issue. 
 Intellectual  debate 
is impoverished 
when one attacks 
caricatures; soft 
targets generally 
only suit weapons 
of corresponding 
low ﬁ repower.  
 —William T. 
Twining 
 Fear not those 
who argue but 
those who dodge. 
 —Marie von 
Ebner-Eschenbach 

 
Fallacies of Relevance 
131
 It should be noted, however, that it is  not  a fallacy simply to change the 
subject or evade an issue. For example:
 Political opponent:  Congressman Crookley, now that you have been con-
victed of bribery, extortion, and grand theft auto, isn’t it high time that 
you resigned from ofﬁ ce?  
 Representative Crookley:  How’ bout those Yankees? A ten-game lead at 
the All-Star break!  
Here the speaker doesn’t deny the charge or pretend it is refuted by discussing 
irrelevant issues; rather, he simply evades the issue. Because there is no mistake 
in reasoning in the argument, no fallacy is committed. 
 Equivocation 
 We saw in Chapter 4 that words often have more than one meaning. The  fal-
lacy of equivocation  is committed when a key word is used in two or more 
senses in the same argument and the apparent success of the argument depends 
on the shift in meaning. Here are several examples:
 It is a crime to smoke grass. Kentucky bluegrass is a grass. Therefore, it is a 
crime to smoke Kentucky bluegrass. 
 I distinctly heard Mo say, “Hit me,” as he was playing cards in Las Vegas. 
To hit someone is to slug them. So, Mo must enjoy being slugged. 
How to Distinguish the Straw Man Fallacy
from the Red Herring Fallacy
The straw man fallacy always involves mis-
representing another person’s argument or 
claim; the red herring fallacy often does not.
 
Here’s an example of an argument that 
commits the straw man fallacy but does 
not commit the red herring fallacy:
I overheard my friend Hal say that 
democracy isn’t always the best form of 
government. Funny, I never ﬁ gured Hal 
for a communist.
The red herring fallacy always involves 
changing or evading the issue; the straw 
man fallacy often does not.
Here’s an example of an argument that 
commits the red herring fallacy but does 
not commit the straw man fallacy:
Jessica Wu has argued that immediate 
steps should be taken to reduce global 
warming. The most serious environ-
mental problem, however, isn’t global 
warming—it’s overpopulation. Unless 
something is done to reduce population 
growth in the third world, mass starva-
tion and irreversible environmental dam-
age will result. Frankly, I think Jessica’s 
view is ridiculous.

132 
CHAPTER 5 Logical Fallacies—I
 Any law can be repealed by the proper legal authority. The law of gravity 
is a law. Therefore, the law of gravity can be repealed by the proper legal 
authority. 16 
In each of these arguments, a key word is used ambiguously or  equivocally —that is, 
with two or more distinct senses. The ﬁ rst argument equivocates on the word  grass. 
In the ﬁ rst premise, it means marijuana; in the second, it means ordinary lawn grass. 
The second argument equivocates on the word  hit . In the ﬁ rst premise, it means 
dealing a card; in the second, it means being punched or struck. The third argu-
ment equivocates on the word  law.  In the ﬁ rst premise, it refers to a law regulating 
human conduct; in the second, it refers to an observed uniformity of nature. 
 Fallacies of equivocation can be difﬁ cult to spot because they often  ap-
pear valid, but they aren’t. The third example above appears to have the follow-
ing logical pattern:
 1.  All A’s are B’s. [All laws are things that can be repealed by the proper 
legal authority.] 
 2. C is an A. [The law of gravity is a law.] 
 3.  Therefore, C is a B. [Therefore, the law of gravity is a thing that can be 
repealed by the proper legal authority.] 
Such a pattern is, of course, valid. Moreover, the premises appear to be true. 
Nevertheless, the argument is clearly fallacious. Why? 
 The argument is fallacious because it only  appears  to have a valid argu-
ment form. This becomes clear if we make explicit the two different senses in 
which the word  law is used in the argument.
 1.  All A’s are B’s. [All laws regulating human conduct are things that can 
be repealed by proper legal authority.] 
 2. C is a D. [The law of gravity is an observed uniformity of nature.] 
 3.  Therefore, C is a B. [Therefore, the law of gravity is a thing that can be 
repealed by the proper legal authority.] 
When the two senses of the word  law  are distinguished in this way, it is clear 
that the premises provide no relevant support for the conclusion. 
 Begging the Question 
 The  fallacy of begging the question is committed when an arguer states or 
assumes as a premise the very thing he or she is trying to prove as a conclusion. 
There are two common ways to commit this fallacy. 
 The most obvious way is to simply  restate  the conclusion in slightly dif-
ferent words. Here are two examples:
 Bungee-jumping is dangerous because it’s unsafe. 
 Capital punishment is morally wrong because it is ethically impermissible 
to inﬂ ict death as punishment for a crime. 
In the ﬁ rst example, the premise basically repeats the conclusion: saying that 
bungee-jumping is “unsafe” is another way of saying that it is “dangerous.” In 

 
Fallacies of Relevance 
133
the second example, the conclusion is begged because saying that it is “ ethically 
impermissible” to inﬂ ict death as punishment for a crime is equivalent to say-
ing that capital punishment is “morally wrong.” 
 The second common form of begging the question involves “circular 
reasoning” or “arguing in a circle.” This occurs when an arguer offers a chain 
of reasons for a conclusion, where the conclusion of the argument is stated or 
assumed as one of the premises. For example:
 Kylie:  God wrote the Bible. 
 Ned: How do you know? 
 Kylie:  Because it says so in the Bible, and what the Bible says is true. 
 Ned: How do you know what the Bible says is true? 
 Kylie:  Because God wrote the Bible. 
Note the tight circle of reasoning here: A because B, B because A. In more-
complex arguments, the circular reasoning may be more difﬁ cult to spot, as in 
this example:
 Wexford College is a better college than Aggie Tech. Wexford is a better 
college because it has better students. It has better students because it has 
better faculty. It has better faculty because it pays higher faculty salaries. 
It pays higher faculty salaries because it has a larger endowment. It has a 
larger endowment because it has more generous and loyal alumni. It has 
more generous and loyal alumni because it is a better college. 
Here the chain of reasoning is so lengthy that it is easy to overlook the fact that 
the statement “Wexford College is a better college than Aggie Tech” appears 
both as a premise and as a conclusion in the argument. 
Recap of Fallacies of Relevance
Personal attack: Arguer attacks the charac-
ter of another arguer.
Attacking the motive: Arguer attacks the 
motive of another arguer.
Look who’s talking: Arguer attacks the hy-
pocrisy of another arguer.
Two wrongs make a right: Arguer tries to jus-
tify a wrong by citing another wrong.
Scare tactics: Arguer threatens a reader or 
listener.
Appeal to pity: Arguer tries to evoke pity 
from a reader or listener.
Bandwagon argument: Arguer appeals to a 
reader’s or listener’s desire to be accepted 
or valued.
Straw man: Arguer misrepresents an oppo-
nent’s position.
Red herring: Arguer tries to distract the at-
tention of the audience by raising an irrel-
evant issue.
Equivocation: Arguer uses a key word in two 
or more different senses.
Begging the question: Arguer assumes the 
point to be proven.

134 
CHAPTER 5 Logical Fallacies—I
 EXERCISE 5.2 
  I.   Identify the fallacies of relevance committed by the following arguments. 
There may be more than one. If no fallacy is committed, write “no fallacy.” 
 1.   The new Volkswagon Beetle is the coolest car around. It’s selling like 
 hotcakes. You should ask your parents to buy you one. 
 2.   Jason: Did you hear Andrew’s class presentation on senior-class rights and 
privileges? 
 
   Kyle: Yeah, but I don’t buy any of his arguments. He’s just a rich snob who 
likes to hear himself talk. 
 3.   Bill Baxter deserves to be promoted to vice president. He has three small 
children, and just last week his wife was diagnosed with breast cancer. 
 4.   School superintendent Kate Duncan has argued that children in public schools 
should be allowed to participate in a voluntary moment of silence at the begin-
ning of each school day. But it’s wrong to allow teachers to indoctrinate children 
with their own religious views. Duncan’s argument must be ﬁ rmly rejected.  
 5.   My driving instructor, Mr. Peterson, told me that it’s dangerous to drive 
without a seat belt. But why should I listen to him? Last week I saw  him 
driving without a seat belt. 
 6.   Jeff and Maribeth slept together on prom night. Sleep is a state of uncon-
scious or semiconscious rest or repose. It follows that Jeff and Maribeth must 
have spent a very restful night together. 
 7.   Paper is combustible because it burns. 
 8.   Jesse Jackson has argued that last week’s police shooting was racially motivated. 
But this is exactly what you would expect Jackson to say. After all, he’s black.  
 9.   Child to playmate: Admit it! Admit that  Scooby-Doo is a better cartoon show 
than  Pokémon ! If you don’t, my big brother is going to beat you up! 
 10.   Al: I can’t believe it! My bank made a mistake on my account balance. 
There’s an extra $3,000 in my checking account. 
 
   Joe: Are you going to report the mistake? 
 
   Al:  Why should I? They’ve been ripping me off for years with their high 
ATM fees.  
 11.   Opponents of capital punishment have argued that the death penalty is 
unfair and discriminatory. But it’s ridiculous to suggest that cold-blooded 
murderers should not have to pay for their crimes. How is that fair to the 
victims or their families? 
 12.   Malcolm Cox isn’t qualiﬁ ed to be a kindergarten teacher. He’s lazy and 
 incompetent and has twice been convicted of child abuse. 
 13.   Only man has an immortal soul. No woman is a man. Therefore, no woman 
has an immortal soul. 
 14.   Surveys show that more than 70 percent of high school seniors believe that 
 novel means “book.” Therefore,  novel does mean “book.” 
 15.   I almost lost it when I heard the Maharishi condemn Western materialism and 
consumerism. What a crock! Did you see the Rolls Royce he drove up in?  
 16.   Dean of students to student:  Mr. Boosely, you’ve twice been cited for violating 
the college’s alcoholic beverage policy. If you commit a third violation, I’ll 
have no choice but to suspend you from school. 

 
Fallacies of Relevance 
135
 17.   You often hear people say that the French are rude, especially to people who 
don’t speak their language. But France is a wonderful country! The wine, the 
food, the museums! There’s no country in Europe I’d rather visit. 
 18.   I wish I could take my four basset hounds with me when I move, but I 
just can’t. I know you have only a small apartment, but won’t you consider 
adopting them? I hate to think of them starving in the street or winding up 
in the dog pound. 
 19.   Recently, a scientiﬁ c study found that eating large amounts of chocolate 
ice cream is actually good for you. We shouldn’t be too quick to accept 
this conclusion, however, because the study was funded entirely by Baskin-
 Robbins and other leading ice-cream makers. 
 20.   Dear Mr. Ferguson, I’m sure you’ll agree that after three years working as 
head of company security I’m long overdue for a raise. By the way, may I re-
spectfully suggest that you make sure the surveillance cameras are turned off 
next time you and your secretary need to “catch up on some paperwork”? 
 21.   Convicted murderer Johnny Palko has argued that he did not receive a fair 
trial. But Palko is a vicious thug who’s spent most of his adult life behind 
bars. Why should we even listen to such a parasite? 
 22.   Rachel Peters has argued that assault weapons should be outlawed. 
 Apparently, Rachel believes that no one has the right to own ﬁ rearms for 
purposes of self-protection. But such a view is completely indefensible. It 
would leave law-abiding citizens defenseless against predatory criminals. 
 23.    Baseball owners have argued that baseball should continue to be exempt 
from antitrust laws. But the owners stand to lose millions if baseball’s anti-
trust exemption is revoked. No sensible person should be taken in by the 
owners’ obviously self-serving arguments. 
 24.    I see nothing unethical in paying bribes to foreign ofﬁ cials to obtain 
 business favors. That’s the way business is done in many parts of the world. 
Like they say, “When in Rome, do as the Romans do.” 
 25.    Karen has argued that the secretaries at Acme Steel will get more respect 
if they change their title from “secretary” to “ofﬁ ce assistant.” But every-
one knows that Acme Steel has a bottom-line mentality. They’ll let you call 
yourself anything you want, but they won’t raise your salary a nickel. 
 26.    Hi, Mrs. Bowman, this is Debbie at Little Tykes Day Care. Sorry to bother 
you at work. I know you asked us not to give Petey any more candy or 
 desserts at day care, but there’s a birthday party today and all the kids are 
having chocolate cupcakes. Petey feels so left out. He’s the only one without 
a cupcake, and he’s just bawling his little eyes out. Wouldn’t it be OK if I 
gave him a dessert just this once? 
 27.    You’re home alone. You’ve just heard on the radio that a homicidal maniac 
has escaped from the state pen. Suddenly, you hear the sound of breaking 
glass. What do you do? What  do you do? Don’t let this happen to you! Give 
your family the peace of mind they deserve. Call Allied Security today! 
 28.   At the global-warming conference in Kyoto, many developing nations argued 
against setting strict emissions standards, claiming that this would put them 
at a competitive disadvantage against rich industrialized nations that have 
already beneﬁ ted from lax environmental standards. But these developing 

136 
CHAPTER 5 Logical Fallacies—I
nations are just jealous of the high standard of living industrialized nations 
have achieved. Sour grapes, that’s all their arguments amount to.  
 29.   Sigrid is an illegal alien. An alien is a creature from outer space. Therefore, 
Sigrid is a creature from outer space. 
 30.   Wellington’s is a classier bar than Jake’s. It’s a classier bar because it has a 
more upscale clientele. It has a more upscale clientele because it has a nicer 
décor. It has a nicer décor because it’s a classier bar. 
 31.   Flag-burning is illegal. Just ask anybody. 
 32.   My doctor told me I need to eat right and lose weight. What a laugh! You 
know where that tub o’ lard was when he gave me this great advice? He was 
a contestant in the banana-split-eating contest at the county fair. 
 33.   I can’t believe that these convicted murderers have the gall to claim that 
their rights have been violated by prison ofﬁ cials. They didn’t respect the 
rights of their victims. Why should we respect theirs? 
 34.   Of course you should have your nose pierced. “Body modiﬁ cation” is all the 
rage these days. 
 35.   Mr. Martin claims that boys tend to be better at math than girls. What a 
 ridiculous overgeneralization! My friend Alice is the best math student in 
her class. So, it’s clear that boys are not always better at math than girls. 
 36.   Penicillin is a miracle of modern medicine. A miracle is a divinely produced 
violation of a law of nature. Therefore, penicillin is a divinely produced vio-
lation of a law of nature. 
 37.   Dr. Christina Sparks has argued that the morning-after pill is an effective 
contraceptive. But the morning-after pill simply encourages sexual pro-
miscuity. Sexual promiscuity is the reason why we have such high rates of 
abortion and out-of-wedlock births in this country. Obviously, Dr. Sparks’s 
argument is ﬂ awed.  
 38.   Mrs. Devlin, your right rear tire is practically bald. I recommend that you 
replace it. I know you do a lot of driving at night on backcountry roads, and 
I’m sure you wouldn’t want to get stranded. 
 39.   Professor Douglas has argued that marijuana should be legalized. But 
 Douglas is a radical ex-hippie whose brains were fried at Woodstock. No 
sensible person should listen to such a fruitcake. 
 40.   Al: Doc Miller told me I’ve been working too hard. He said I need a vacation.  
 
   Deb: He’s a ﬁ ne one to talk! I bet Doc hasn’t taken a vacation in forty years. 
But you know he’s probably right. You have been working awfully hard 
lately. 
 II.   Write an original example of each of the fallacies of relevance discussed in 
this chapter. Be prepared to share your examples with the class. 
 III.   Find examples of the fallacies discussed in this chapter from everyday life 
(newspapers, magazines, TV, radio, class discussions, and so on). Collect your 
 examples in a notebook or portfolio. For each example, indicate where you 
found the fallacy and give a brief explanation why you think it commits the 
 fallacy you claim. Be prepared to share your examples with the class. 

 
Summary 
137
 SUMMARY 
1.   A logical fallacy is an argument that contains a mistake in reasoning. 
Fallacies can be divided into two general types: fallacies of relevance 
and fallacies of insufﬁ cient evidence. Fallacies of relevance are arguments 
in which the premises are logically irrelevant to the conclusion. Fallacies 
of insufﬁ cient evidence are arguments in which the premises, though logi-
cally relevant to the conclusion, fail to provide sufﬁ cient evidence for the 
conclusion. We discussed fallacies of relevance in this chapter. Fallacies of 
insufﬁ cient evidence are discussed in Chapter 6.  
2.   A statement is  relevant to another statement if it provides at least some 
reason for thinking that the second statement is true or false. There are 
three ways in which a statement can be relevant or irrelevant to another: 
A statement is  positively relevant to another statement if it provides at least 
some reason for thinking that the second statement is true. A statement is 
 negatively relevant  to another statement if it provides at least some reason for 
thinking that the second statement is false. A statement is  logically irrelevant 
to another statement if it provides no reason for thinking that the second 
statement is either true or false.  
3.   This chapter discussed eleven common fallacies of relevance:
 a.   Personal attack (ad hominem): An arguer rejects a person’s argument or 
claim by attacking the person’s character rather than the person’s argument 
or claim. 
 Example
 Professor Snodblatt has argued against the theory of evolution. But Snodblatt 
is a pompous, egotistical windbag and a card-carrying member of the Nazi 
Bikers Association. I absolutely refuse to listen to him. 
b.   Attacking the motive: An arguer criticizes a person’s motivation for of-
fering a particular argument or claim, rather than examining the worth of 
the argument or claim itself. 
Example
 Jim Gibson has argued that we need to build a new middle school. But Gibson 
is the owner of Gibson’s Construction Company. He’ll make a fortune if his 
company is picked to build the new school. Obviously, Gibson’s argument is a 
lot of self-serving baloney. 
c.   Look who’s talking (tu quoque): An arguer rejects another person’s argu-
ment or claim because that person is a hypocrite. 
 Example 
 My opponent, Bill Peters, has accused me of running a negative political cam-
paign. But Peters has run a much more negative campaign than I have. Just 
last week he ran television ads falsely accusing me of embezzlement and cruelty 
to animals. Clearly, Peters’s charge that I’m guilty of mudslinging is untrue.  

138 
CHAPTER 5 Logical Fallacies—I
d.  Two wrongs make a right: An arguer attempts to justify a wrongful act by 
claiming that some other act is just as bad or worse. 
 Example 
 I admit we plied Olympic ofﬁ cials with booze, prostitutes, free ski vacations, 
and millions of dollars in outright bribes to be selected as the site of the next 
Winter Olympics. But everybody does it. That’s the way the process works. 
Therefore, paying those bribes wasn’t really wrong. 
e.   Scare tactics: An arguer threatens harm to a reader or listener and this 
threat is irrelevant to the truth of the arguer’s conclusion. 
 Example 
 You’ve argued that Coach Bubba should be ﬁ red because he’s twice been ar-
rested for starting barroom brawls. But Coach Bubba is the winningest football 
coach we’ve ever had at Culmbank High. He doesn’t deserve to be ﬁ red. And 
if you can’t understand that, maybe these boys with baseball bats can change 
your mind. 
f.   Appeal to pity: An arguer attempts to evoke feelings of pity or compas-
sion, where such feelings, however understandable, are not relevant to the 
truth of the arguer’s conclusion. 
 Example 
 Ofﬁ cer, I know I was going 80 miles per hour in a 15-mile-an-hour school zone, 
but I don’t deserve a speeding ticket. I’ve had a really tough week. Yesterday I got 
ﬁ red from my job, and last Monday my Chihuahua got eaten by a Great Dane.  
g.  Bandwagon argument: An arguer appeals to a person’s desire to be popular, 
accepted, or valued, rather than to logically relevant reasons or evidence.
 Example 
 All the popular, cool kids at Westmont Middle School wear Mohawk haircuts. 
Therefore, you should, too. 
h.  Straw man: An arguer misrepresents another person’s position to make it 
easier to attack. 
 Example 
 Professor Davis has argued that the Bible should not be read literally. Obvi-
ously, Davis believes that any reading of the Bible is as good as any other. But 
this would mean that there is no difference between a true interpretation of 
Scripture and a false interpretation. Such a view is absurd. 
i.  Red herring: An arguer tries to sidetrack her audience by raising an ir-
relevant issue, and then claims that the original issue has been effectively 
settled by the irrelevant diversion. 
 Example 
 Frank has argued that Volvos are safer cars than Ford Mustang convertibles. 
But Volvos are clunky, boxlike cars, whereas Mustang convertibles are sleek, 
powerful, and sexy. Clearly, Frank doesn’t know what he’s talking about. 
Appeal to numbers 
has no logical 
force.  
 —William James 

 
Summary 
139
j.  Equivocation: An arguer uses a key word in an argument in two (or 
more) different senses. 
 Example 
 Hanes is advertising “tanks for all occasions.” It’s illegal for anyone but the 
military to sell tanks. So, Hanes is breaking the law. 
k.   Begging the question: An arguer states or assumes as a premise the very 
thing he is seeking to prove as a conclusion. 
 Example 
  I am entitled to say whatever I choose because I have a right to say whatever I 
please. 

140
 CHAPTER 6
 LOGICAL FALLACIES—II 
 FALLACIES OF INSUFFICIENT EVIDENCE  
 In Chapter 5, we looked at fallacies of relevance, mistakes in reasoning that 
occur when the premises are logically irrelevant to the truth of the conclu-
sion. In this chapter we discuss  fallacies of insufﬁ cient evidence —mistakes 
in reasoning in which the premises, though relevant to the conclusion, fail to 
provide sufﬁ cient evidence for the conclusion. We discuss nine such fallacies.  
 Inappropriate Appeal to Authority 
 All of us depend on things that other people tell us. Children rely on their par-
ents and teachers for basic guidance and instruction. Scientists rely on other sci-
entists to report their ﬁ ndings accurately. Historians depend on primary sources 
and other historians for reliable information about the past. Indeed, it is hard 
to see how any stable and cohesive society could exist without a great deal of 
shared trust in its members’ basic honesty and reliability. For that reason, trust in 
authority has aptly been described as “the very foundation of civilization.” 1  
 Too often, however, people rely  uncritically on the authority of others. 
Throughout history blind faith in authority has bred superstition, intolerance, 
and dogmatism. Consequently, it is of great importance to be able to distin-
guish legitimate appeals to authority from those that are fallacious. 
 The fallacy of  inappropriate appeal to authority  is committed when 
an arguer cites a witness or authority who, there is good reason to believe, is 
unreliable. But when, in general, is it reasonable to believe that a witness or an 
authority is unreliable? Here are some relevant circumstances: 
 • when the source is not a genuine authority on the subject at issue 
 • when the source is biased or has some other reason to lie or mislead 
 • when the accuracy of the source’s observations is questionable 
 • when the source cited (e.g., a media source, a reference work, or an 
Internet source) is known to be generally unreliable 
 It is as the enemy 
of fallacy that 
logic must always 
ﬁ nd its application 
to real life. 
 —Alfred Sidgwick 
 Do not be scared 
by the word  
authority. . . . 
 Ninety-nine 
percent of the 
things you believe 
are believed on 
authority. 
 —C. S. Lewis 

 
Fallacies of Insufﬁ cient Evidence 
141
 • when the source has not been cited correctly or the cited claim has 
been taken out of context 
 • when the source’s claim conﬂ icts with expert opinion 
 • when the issue is not one that can be settled by expert opinion 
 • when the claim is highly improbable on its face 
Let’s look brieﬂ y at each of these reasons for questioning the reliability of a 
source. 
 Is the Source Not an Authority on the Subject at Issue?   An  authority 
is a person who possesses special knowledge, competence, or expertise in a 
particular ﬁ eld. The most obvious way to commit the fallacy of inappropriate 
appeal to authority is to appeal to a person who is not a genuine authority on 
the subject at issue. For example: 
 My barber told me that Einstein’s general theory of relativity is a lot of 
hogwash. I guess Einstein wasn’t as smart as everybody thinks he was. 
Because the arguer’s barber presumably is not an authority on Einstein’s gen-
eral theory of relativity, this argument commits the fallacy of inappropriate 
appeal to authority. 
 Fallacies of this sort are particularly common in advertising. Consider 
this example: 
 Hi, I’m heavyweight boxing champ Buster Brawler. After a tough night in the 
ring, my face needs some tender loving care. Lather-X Sensitive Skin Shaving 
Gel. You can’t get a smoother, closer shave. 
The arguer may be an expert on knocking out opponents in the boxing ring, 
but because he is no expert on the comparative virtues of shaving products, 
the argument is fallacious. 
 Is the Source Biased?   Common sense tells us that we should be cautious 
about accepting a claim when the person making the claim is biased or has 
some other obvious motive to lie or mislead. Here are two examples: 
 Ned Bumpley has been paid $100,000 by the  Sensational Enquirer tabloid for his 
story that he is Bill Gates’s illegitimate son. Given Mr. Bumpley’s reputation 
for honesty, I think we should believe him, even though he has produced no 
corroborating evidence and DNA tests fail to support his claim. 
 Mrs. Cox has testiﬁ ed that her son Willie was home with her at the time when 
Willie is alleged to have shot Steve Wilson. Even though Willie’s ﬁ ngerprints 
were found on the murder weapon and six witnesses have identiﬁ ed Willie as 
the assailant, I can’t believe that a good woman like Mrs. Cox would lie to 
protect her son. I think Willy is innocent. 
In both of these examples, the testiﬁ er has an obvious motive to lie (ﬁ nancial 
gain in the ﬁ rst example, maternal love in the second). Given these motivations, 
 There is nothing 
so stupid as an 
educated man, 
if you get him off 
the thing he was 
educated in. 
 —Will Rogers 

142 
CHAPTER 6 Logical Fallacies—II
together with other information contained in the examples, these appeals to 
authority are fallacious.2  
 Is the Accuracy of the Source’s Observations Questionable?   A source 
may also be unreliable if we have reason to doubt the accuracy of his or her 
observations or experiences. Here are two examples:
 Jerry [who was listening to heavy metal music on his iPod] claims he heard 
the victim whisper his name from more than 100 feet away. Jerry has always 
struck me as a straight shooter. So, I have to believe that Jerry really did hear 
the victim whisper his name. 
 After taking LSD and drinking seven beers, Jill claims she had a conversation 
with Elvis’s ghost in the alley behind McDearmon’s Bar. I’ve never known Jill to 
lie. So, I think we should believe her. 
In these examples there are obvious reasons for doubting the reliability of the 
witnesses’ observations or experiences. Consequently, these appeals to author-
ity are fallacious. 
 Is the Source Known to Be Generally Unreliable?   Generally speak-
ing, it is reasonable to accept claims made in reputable newspapers, magazines, 
encyclopedias, radio and television news programs, and Internet Web sites. But 
we must be cautious about accepting claims found in sources that we have 
reason to believe are generally unreliable. Here is an example from the  Weekly 
World News, a once-popular supermarket tabloid. 
 Scientists’ Research Reveals . . . It Takes 3 Million Years 
for a Human Soul to Reach Heaven . . . And No One 
from Earth Has Arrived There Yet! 
 Heaven is a mind-boggling 3 billion light-years from earth, space scientists have 
recently determined—a distance so vast that not a single person who’s died in 
all of recorded history has yet reached the Pearly Gates! . . . 
 
 Startling photos taken by the Hubble Space Telescope and the Mars Pathﬁ nder 
have pinpointed a shining white city suspended in the blackness of space, roughly 
3 billion light-years away. 
 
 Those secret NASA photos, leaked by an insider and published in the  Weekly 
World News, are widely believed to depict Heaven itself. 
 
 And the implication of the great distance is staggering. 
 
 “Even a single light-year, the distance light travels in one year, is enormous—
5.8 trillion miles,” said [French astrophysicist Antoine] Letelier. 
 
 “Presumably, the human soul has zero mass, allowing it to travel at the speed 
of light—the fastest any natural object can move. 
 
 “In fact, let’s assume that because of its supernatural nature, a soul can travel 
1,000 times faster than light. 
 
 “Even at that breakneck rate, the earliest cavemen would just now be arriving 
at Heaven’s gates . . . and if you died today, you wouldn’t get there until the year 
2998003 A.D.”3 

 
Fallacies of Insufﬁ cient Evidence 
143
 Given the obvious weaknesses of the reported argument and the fact that tab-
loids like the  Weekly World News  are known to concoct outlandish stories, an 
argument based on an appeal to the authority of the  Weekly World News  would 
be fallacious. 
 Has the Source Been Cited Incorrectly?   The fallacy of inappropriate 
appeal to authority can also be committed if the arguer has not cited a source 
correctly. For example: 
 It states in the Constitution that there must be a “wall of separation” between 
church and state. Publicly funded school vouchers clearly violate this wall of 
separation. Therefore, publicly funded school vouchers are unconstitutional. 
Though many people believe that the phrase “wall of separation” is found in 
the Constitution, it actually appears in a letter Thomas Jefferson wrote to the 
Danbury, Connecticut, Baptist Association in 1802. For that reason this appeal 
to authority is fallacious. 
 Does the Source’s Claim Conﬂ ict with Expert Opinion?   Damon 
Runyon once said, “The race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the 
strong, but that’s the way to bet.”4 Much the same can be said about expert 
opinion. Though experts are often wrong (sometimes spectacularly so), it is 
generally unwise to accept a claim that conﬂ icts with a clear expert consensus. 
For  example: 
 Dr. Duane Gish, a biochemist with a Ph.D. from Berkeley and former senior 
vice president of the Institute for Creation Research, has argued that there is 
no credible evidence supporting the theory of evolution. In view of Dr. Gish’s 
expertise on this subject, we should conclude that evolution is a myth. 
Because an overwhelming majority of scientists disagree with this view, it would 
be fallacious to accept this conclusion simply on the authority of Dr. Gish.  
 Testimony is like 
an arrow shot 
from a long bow; 
the force of it 
depends on the 
strength of the 
hand that draws 
it. Argument is 
like an arrow shot 
from a crossbow, 
which has equal 
force though shot 
by a child. 
 —Samuel Johnson 
Would You Believe . . .?
Here are some more wacky headlines from 
the Weekly World News:
Haunted Toilet Claims Third Plumber in 
Eight Years!
Hitler’s Clone Turns Seven Years Old!
Want Hot Sex with an E.T.? Wear Flowery 
Hat
UFOs Are Piloted by Angels and Demons—
And They’re Planning a Dogﬁ ght That 
Could Destroy Us All!
Your Internet Dream Girl Could Be a 
CHIMP!
Ghost Pours Ice Water on Couple—Every 
Time They Have Sex!
Palin Bags Bigfoot!
3,600-lb. Mystery Sphere Is Hairball from 
Space Alien!
Olympic Broad Jumpers Using Gas Pills to 
Boost Athletic Performance!
Aliens Are Here for Our Krispy Kremes!

144 
CHAPTER 6 Logical Fallacies—II
 Is the Source’s Claim Not One That Can Be Settled by an Appeal to 
Expert Opinion?   Some issues are so inherently controversial that they can-
not be settled by appeals to expert opinion. Here are two examples: 
 Dr. Stanford P. Higginbotham, a leading social philosopher, has argued that 
capital punishment is always morally wrong. Given Dr. Higginbotham’s impres-
sive credentials, we should conclude that capital punishment is always morally 
wrong. 
 Swami Krishnamurti Chakrabarti, spiritual leader of the Worldwide Church of 
Cognitive Enlightenment, has said that the meaning of life lies in achieving mys-
tical unity with the Great I Am. In view of the swami’s deep spiritual insight, it 
is clear that this is indeed the meaning of life. 
Topics such as the morality of capital punishment and the meaning of life are 
issues on which no expert consensus exists or is likely to exist. Consequently, 
debates on these issues cannot be settled by appeals to authority. 
 Is the Claim Highly Improbable on Its Face?   The more improbable a 
claim is in itself, the less willing we should be to accept it merely on the say-so 
of a witness or an authority. If we accept an extraordinary claim on authority 
and it is more likely that the alleged authority is lying or mistaken than it is 
that the claim is true, we commit the fallacy of inappropriate appeal to author-
ity. For example: 
 Old Doc Perkins says he has an eighty-year-old friend who can run a 100-yard 
dash in less than ten seconds. Old Doc is one of the most trusted members of 
this community. So, if Old Doc says he has an eighty-year-old friend who can 
run a 100-yard dash in less than ten seconds, I, for one, believe him. 
This claim, considered independent of Old Doc’s report, is so improbable that 
it should be rejected unless strong additional evidence is provided.  
 Appeal to Ignorance 
 When we lack evidence for or against a claim, it is usually best to suspend 
judgment—to admit that we just don’t know. When an arguer treats a lack 
of evidence as reason to think that a claim is true or false, he or she commits 
the fallacy of appeal to ignorance. More precisely, the fallacy of  appeal to 
ignorance  occurs when an arguer asserts that a claim must be true because no 
one has proven it false or, conversely, that a claim must be false because no one 
has proven it true. Here are several examples: 
 There must be intelligent life on other planets. No one has proven that there isn’t. 
 There isn’t any intelligent life on other planets. No one has proven that there is. 
 No one has proved that humans are responsible for global warming. So, we 
must conclude that humans are not responsible for global warming. 
 No one has proved that humans are not responsible for global warming. So, we 
must conclude that humans are responsible for global warming. 
 To every Ph.D. 
there is an equal 
and opposite 
Ph.D. 
 —B. Duggan 
 The wise are un-
certain and speak 
with contrary 
voices. 
 —J. R. R. Tolkien 
Extraordinary 
claims require 
 extraordinary 
 evidence.
—Carl Sagan
 Absence of 
evidence is not 
evidence of 
absence. 
 —Carl Sagan 

 
Fallacies of Insufﬁ cient Evidence 
145
Each of these examples suffers from the same basic ﬂ aw: It assumes that the lack of 
evidence for (or against) a claim is good reason to believe that the claim is false (or 
true). If such reasoning were allowed, we could “prove” almost any conclusion: 
 No one has proven that three-eyed, four-armed, polka-dotted gremlins don’t 
exist deep in the interior of the moon. Therefore, it’s reasonable to believe that 
such creatures do exist deep in the interior of the moon. 
 There is no evidence that it was cloudy in Rome on September 8, AD 643. 
Therefore, we must conclude that it wasn’t. 
Is it ever legitimate to treat a lack of evidence for a claim as evidence 
that the claim is false? In some cases, yes. Two exceptions, in particular, should 
be noted. 
 First, sometimes the fact that a search  hasn’t  found something is good 
evidence that the thing isn’t there to be found. Here are two examples: 
 We’ve searched this car from top to bottom looking for the stolen jewels, and no 
trace of them has been found. Therefore, probably the jewels aren’t in the car. 
 After years of extensive scientiﬁ c testing, there is no evidence that substance 
XYZ is toxic to rodents. Therefore, it’s reasonable to conclude that substance 
XYZ is not toxic to rodents. 
It is important to keep in mind, however, that this “fruitless search” ex-
ception applies only when (1) a careful search has been conducted and (2) it is 
likely that the search would have found something if there had been anything 
there to be found. 
 The second exception applies to cases in which special rules require that 
a claim be rejected as false unless a certain burden of proof is met. Here is an 
example: 
 In the American legal system, a criminal defendant is legally guilty only if his or 
her guilt is proved beyond a reasonable doubt. My client has not been proven 
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Therefore, my client is not legally guilty. 
In this example, special rules of evidence require that a claim be rejected as 
false unless it is proven to be true by some elevated standard of proof. Because 
these special rules justify the inference “not proven, therefore false,” no fallacy 
is committed.  
 False Alternatives 
 The fallacy of  false alternatives is committed when an arguer poses a false 
either/or choice.5 Here are two examples: 
 Look, the choice is simple. Either you support a pure free-market economy or 
you support a communist police state. Surely you don’t support a communist 
police state. Therefore, you should support a pure free-market economy. 
 Either we elect a Republican as president, or crime rates will skyrocket. Obvi-
ously, we don’t want crime rates to skyrocket. Therefore, we should elect a 
Republican as president. 
 You can claim 
that anything’s 
real if the only 
basis for believ-
ing in it is that 
nobody’s proved 
it doesn’t exist.  
 —J. K. Rowling’s 
Hermione Granger 

146 
CHAPTER 6 Logical Fallacies—II
In these examples, the arguers claim that there are only two relevant choices when, 
in fact, there are more than two. 6  The ﬁ rst arguer poses a false choice by ignoring a 
wide range of political and economic systems that lie somewhere between a pure 
free-market economy on the one hand and a communist police state on the other. 
The second arguer poses a false choice by assuming, implausibly, that the only way 
to avoid rapidly rising crime rates is to elect a Republican as president. 
 Note that the fallacy of false alternatives need not involve just  two false 
choices. For example: 
 There are just three types of base hits in baseball: a single, a double, and a 
triple. Slugger got a base hit but didn’t get a single or a double. Therefore, 
Slugger must have gotten a triple. 
This argument poses a false choice between three alternatives: single, double, 
or triple. This is a false choice because it ignores the possibility that Slugger 
may have hit a home run. 
 Note also that the fallacy of false alternatives need not be explicitly ex-
pressed in  either-or  form. Often, for instance, a false choice is expressed as a 
conditional ( if-then ) statement, as in this example: 
 If we don’t elect a Democrat as president, then the economy will go down the 
tubes. Obviously, we don’t want the economy to go down the tubes. So, we 
should elect a Democrat as president. 
Here the ﬁ rst sentence is equivalent to saying, “ Either  we elect a Democrat as 
president  or the economy will go down the tubes.” 
 Finally, it should be noted that fallacies of false alternatives are often ex-
pressed as incomplete arguments. Here are two examples: 
 Either buy me some candy, Daddy, or I’ll hold my breath until I die. 
 Dad, I know a new BMW is expensive, but you wouldn’t want me riding around 
in this old rust bucket all winter long, would you? 
It is not difﬁ cult to ﬁ ll in the missing parts of these arguments.  
 Loaded Question 
 A loaded question is a question that contains an unfair or questionable assump-
tion. For example, “Do you still steal from your boss?” is a loaded question if it 
presupposes, without justiﬁ cation, that you once did steal from your boss. The 
 loaded question  fallacy occurs when an arguer asks a question that contains an 
unfair or unwarranted presupposition. Here is a particularly blatant example:
 Joe:  Have you stopped cheating on exams? 
 Pete: No! 
 Joe:  Oh, so you admit that you still cheat on exams? 
 Pete:  No, I meant to say yes! 
 Joe:  Oh, so you admit that you used to cheat on exams? 
 Pete:  No! 
 Mankind likes 
to think in terms 
of extreme op-
posites. It is given 
to formulating its 
beliefs in terms of 
Either-Ors. 
 —John Dewey 

 
Fallacies of Insufﬁ cient Evidence 
147
It is easy to spot the trick here. Joe’s question, “Have you stopped cheating 
on exams?” is a loaded question because any direct yes or no answer to it will 
force Pete to admit something that he does not want to admit. Joe’s apparently 
single question is really two questions rolled into one. 
 Question 1: Did you cheat on exams in the past? 
 Question 2: If you did cheat on exams in the past, have you stopped now?  
 By applying Pete’s single “yes” or “no” answers to both questions, Joe commits 
the fallacy of loaded question. 
 Here is a more realistic example:
 Honorable Flora MacDonald (Kingston and the Islands) [speaking in the Canadian House 
of Commons]: Madam Speaker, my question is also directed to the Minister of 
Finance. I would like to say to him that his policies are directly responsible for the 
fact that 1,185 more Canadians are without jobs every single day, 1,185 more 
Canadians with families to feed and mortgages to pay. How long is the Minister 
prepared to condemn 1,200 more Canadians every day to job loss and insecurity 
because he is too stubborn and too uncaring to change his policies? 7  
This question is loaded because it unfairly rolls  three questions into one.
 Question 1: Are the Minister of Finance’s policies directly responsible for the 
fact that 1,185 Canadians lose their jobs every single day? 
 Question 2:  If so, are these policies allowed to continue because the Minister is 
too stubborn and uncaring to change his policies? 
 Question 3:  If the Minister is too stubborn and uncaring to change his policies, 
how much longer will this stubborn and uncaring attitude continue? 
To respond to a loaded question effectively, one must distinguish the different 
questions being asked and respond to each individually. 
 Are all loaded questions fallacies? No. Strictly speaking, a loaded question 
is fallacious only if it is used unfairly in an argumentative context. For purposes 
of this text, however, it can be assumed that all loaded questions are fallacious. 
Thus, for example, the following questions may be regarded as fallacious: 
 When are you going to stop acting so immature? 
 Tell me, how long have you been embezzling money from the ﬁ rm? 
 Where did you hide the body? 
 How long had you planned this bank robbery before you carried it out? 
 Why do you always act like a total jerk when you’re around my ex-boyfriend? 
 Did you write this immoral trash? 
 Questionable Cause 
 We live in a complex and mysterious world. Often it’s hard to know what 
has caused some event to occur. When an arguer claims, without sufﬁ cient 
 evidence, that one thing is the cause of something else, he commits the fallacy 
of  questionable cause. 
 An answer is 
contained in your 
question. 
 —Plato 

148 
CHAPTER 6 Logical Fallacies—II
 There are three common varieties of the questionable cause fallacy: the post 
hoc fallacy, the mere correlation fallacy, and the oversimpliﬁ ed cause fallacy. 
 The  post hoc fallacy  (from the Latin  post hoc ergo propter hoc  [“after this, 
therefore because of this”]) is committed when an arguer assumes, without 
adequate evidence, that because one event, A, occurred before another event, 
B, A is the cause of B. Here are two examples: 
 How do I know that ginseng tea is a cure for the common cold? Last week 
I had a bad case of the snifﬂ es. I drank a cup of ginseng tea, and the next 
morning my snifﬂ es were gone. 
 Medieval villager: Two days after that old hag Jezebel Taylor moved into the 
village, my cow died. That witch must have put a hex on my cow! 
In the ﬁ rst example, the arguer assumes that because her snifﬂ es disappeared 
after she drank ginseng tea, drinking the tea must have caused her snifﬂ es to 
disappear. This is precisely the kind of post hoc reasoning that underlies almost 
all quack cures. It is much more reasonable to suppose that the arguer never 
really had a cold or that the cold simply got better on its own. 8 
 The second example illustrates how superstitions often have their origin 
in post hoc thinking. It is a fallacy to think that because something bad hap-
pened to you after a black cat crossed your path, black cats are bad luck. 
 Another common variety of the false cause fallacy is the  mere correlation 
fallacy,  which is committed when an arguer assumes, without sufﬁ cient evidence, 
that because A and B regularly occur together, A must be the cause of B or vice 
versa. Here are two examples: 
 On Monday I stayed up all night partying, had eggs for breakfast, and failed my 
calculus test. On Wednesday I stayed up all night partying, had eggs for break-
fast, and failed my biology test. On Thursday I stayed up all night partying, had 
eggs for breakfast, and failed my history test. Obviously, to do better on tests, 
I must stop eating eggs for breakfast. 9 
 Aztec high priest: Every spring we sacriﬁ ce a virgin to the sun god, and every 
summer the life-giving rains come. Therefore, sacriﬁ cing a virgin to the sun god 
causes the life-giving rains to come. 
In these examples the arguers have mistakenly assumed that because two events 
are regularly correlated (i.e., occur together), there must be a cause-and-effect 
relationship between them. But correlation does not imply causation. The rooster 
may crow every morning just before Farmer Jones milks the cows, but that doesn’t 
mean that the rooster’s crowing causes Farmer Jones to milk the cows. 
 Perhaps the most common form of the questionable cause fallacy is the 
 oversimpliﬁ ed cause fallacy.  This fallacy is committed when we assume, without 
adequate evidence, that A is the sole cause of B when, in fact, there are several 
causes of B. Here are two examples: 
 Violent crime has declined steadily in recent years. Obviously, tougher impris-
onment policies are working. 
 SAT scores have fallen sharply since the 1960s. Clearly, students are watching 
too much TV. 10 
 Do not let anyone 
deceive you with 
empty arguments. 
 —Ephesians 5:6 
 Happy is he who 
knows the causes 
of things. 
 —Virgil 

 
Fallacies of Insufﬁ cient Evidence 
149
The ﬁ rst argument oversimpliﬁ es the situation by ignoring other causes that have 
likely contributed to falling crimes rates (e.g., new policing strategies, changing 
demographics, reduced use of crack cocaine). In the second argument, the ar-
guer correctly identiﬁ es one likely cause of declining SAT scores: Kids today do 
watch too much TV. He fails to mention, however, other important causes that 
have also contributed to the decline (e.g., the fact that a much larger number of 
average and below-average students now take the SAT than was true in the past). 
For those reasons these arguments commit the fallacy of questionable cause.  
 Hasty Generalization 
 A generalization is a statement that asserts that all or most things of a cer-
tain kind have a certain quality or characteristic. Here are some examples of 
generalizations: 
 All emeralds are green. 
 Most college students receive ﬁ nancial aid. 
 The majority of dogs are not dangerous. 
 Plays are boring! [All plays? Most plays?] 
We commit the fallacy of  hasty generalization  when we draw a general 
conclusion from a sample that is biased or too small. Here are two examples:
 Do most Americans still believe in God? To ﬁ nd out, we asked more than 
ten thousand scientists at colleges and universities throughout America. Less 
than 40 percent said they believed in God. The conclusion is obvious: Most 
Americans no longer believe in God. 
 Small-business owner: I’ve hired three San Pedrans in the past six months, and all 
three were lazy and shiftless. I guess most San Pedrans are lazy and shiftless. 
The ﬁ rst argument is fallacious because it draws a general conclusion from a 
sample that is  biased (i.e., not representative of the target population as a whole). 
Surveys indicate that scientists tend to be far more skeptical of religious beliefs 
than average Americans. 11  
 The second argument illustrates how hasty generalizations can give rise 
to harmful stereotypes and prejudices. In this example a general conclusion is 
drawn from a sample that is too small to support a reliable generalization. It is 
unfair, as well as illogical, to stigmatize an entire class of people on the basis of 
the perceived faults of a few. 
 It should be noted that not every argument that jumps to a conclusion is 
a hasty generalization. For example: 
 That large biker with the swastika tattoo and the brass knuckles looks friendly 
enough. I bet he wouldn’t mind if I introduced myself with a joy buzzer handshake. 
This is certainly a hasty conclusion, but it is not a hasty generalization because 
it is not a generalization at all. The conclusion is a particular statement about 
one particular biker, not a general statement about bikers in general. A hasty 
generalization must have a general statement (i.e., a statement about all or most 
 Those sweeping 
judgments which 
are so common 
are meaningless. 
They are like 
men who salute 
a whole crowd 
of people in the 
mass. Those who 
really know them 
salute and take 
notice of them 
individually and 
by name. 
 —Michel de 
Montaigne 

150 
CHAPTER 6 Logical Fallacies—II
members of a group) as its conclusion. Consequently, this argument does not 
commit the fallacy of hasty generalization. 12 
 Slippery Slope 
 We often hear arguments of this sort: “We can’t allow A, because A will lead to B, 
and B will lead to C, and we sure as heck don’t want C!” Arguments of this sort are 
called slippery-slope arguments. Often, such arguments are fallacious. We commit 
the  slippery-slope fallacy  when we claim, without sufﬁ cient evidence, that a seem-
ingly harmless action, if taken, will lead to a disastrous outcome. Some examples: 
 Senator Walker has argued that we should outlaw terrorist threats on the In-
ternet. This proposal is dangerous and must be strongly resisted. If we allow 
the government to outlaw terrorist threats on the Internet, next it will want to 
ban “hate speech” and other allegedly “harmful” speech on the Internet. Next 
the government will want to censor “harmful” ideas on television, radio, and 
in newspapers. Eventually, everything you see, hear, or read will be totally con-
trolled by the government. 
 Bans on so-called assault weapons must be vigorously opposed. Once the 
gun-grabbing liberals have outlawed assault weapons, next they’ll go after 
handguns. After that, it will be shotguns and semiautomatic hunting riﬂ es. In 
the end, law-abiding citizens will be left totally defenseless against predatory 
criminals and a tyrannical government. 
 In a recent letter to the editor, Stella Davis argued that we should legalize 
same-sex marriage. But allowing same-sex marriage would undermine respect 
for traditional marriage. Traditional marriage is the very foundation of our 
society. If that foundation is destroyed, our whole society will collapse. Thus, if 
we want to prevent the complete disintegration of our society, we must oppose 
the legalization of same-sex marriage. 
Notice that each of these arguments has the same basic pattern: 
1.  The arguer claims that if a certain seemingly harmless action, A, is 
permitted, A will lead to B, B will lead to C, and so on to D. 
2.  The arguer holds that D is a terrible thing and therefore should not be 
permitted. 
3.  In fact, there is no good reason to believe that A will actually lead 
to D. 13 
 It should be noted that many slippery-slope arguments leave out some 
or all of the intermediate steps that an arguer believes will occur. Here are two 
examples: 
 Dr. Perry has proposed that we legalize physician-assisted suicide. No sensible 
person should listen to such a proposal. If we allow physician-assisted suicide, 
eventually there will be no respect for human life. 
 Socialized medicine really frightens me. Once you start down that road, there’s 
no turning back. A complete socialist dictatorship is the inevitable result. 
In general terms it is not difﬁ cult to imagine what sorts of intermediate steps 
these arguers fear will occur. 
 If we accept slip-
pery slope argu-
ments, we may 
have to accept 
other forms of 
fallacious reason-
ing. Eventually, 
we won’t be able 
to reason at all. 
Hence, we should 
avoid slippery 
slope arguments. 
 —Adapted from 
James W. Benham 
and Thomas J. 
Marlowe 

 
Fallacies of Insufﬁ cient Evidence 
151
 It is important to note that not all slippery-slope arguments are fallacious. 
Sometimes there are good reasons for thinking that a very bad outcome may 
result from a seemingly harmless ﬁ rst step. For example: 
 Brad, I know you’ve been shootin’ up heroin. Man, don’t you know what that 
stuff can do to you? First you shoot up “just when you need a high.” After a 
while you become addicted to the stuff. You lose your job, your apartment, 
even rob from your best friend to feed the habit. Eventually, you wind up dead 
in some alley or strung out in some detox center. Listen to me, I’m your best 
friend. Think about what you’re doing. 
In this case, there are perfectly sound reasons for avoiding this all-too-genuine 
slippery slope. 
 Weak Analogy 
 We have all heard the expression “That’s like comparing apples and oranges.” 
This saying points to a mistake called the fallacy of  weak analogy,  which oc-
curs when an arguer compares two (or more) things that aren’t really compa-
rable in relevant respects. Here are two examples: 
 Teachers of false religions are like carriers of a deadly plague. Just as we rightly 
quarantine plague victims to prevent them from infecting others, so we should 
quarantine teachers of false religions to prevent them from spreading their 
spiritual poison. 
 Lettuce is leafy and green and tastes great with a veggie burger. Poison ivy is 
also leafy and green. Therefore, poison ivy probably tastes great with a veggie 
burger, too. 
In these examples there are obvious and important differences, or “disanalo-
gies,” between the things being compared. Because of these differences, the 
premises don’t provide good reasons to accept the conclusion. 
 Although fallacies of weak analogy occur in many different forms, three 
patterns are particularly common. 
 One common pattern is to compare two things that have several identi-
ﬁ ed similarities. For example: 
 Alan is tall, dark, and handsome and has blue eyes. Bill is also tall, dark, and 
handsome. Therefore, Bill probably has blue eyes, too. 
The basic pattern here is 
 1. A has characteristics w, x, y, and z. 
 2. B has characteristics w, x, and y. 
 3. Therefore, B probably has characteristic z too. 
Many arguments with this pattern are perfectly good arguments. For 
example: 
 Alice lives in a mansion, drives a Rolls Royce, wears expensive jewelry, and is 
rich. Beatrice also lives in a mansion, drives a Rolls Royce, and wears expensive 
jewelry. Therefore, Beatrice probably is rich, too. 
 The human mind 
is an inveterate 
analogizer. 
 —Richard Dawkins 
 He who would not 
be found tripping, 
ought to be very 
careful in this 
matter of com-
parisons, for they 
are most slippery 
things. 
 —Plato 

152 
CHAPTER 6 Logical Fallacies—II
This is a good argument from analogy because people who live in a mansion, 
drive a Rolls Royce, and wear expensive jewelry are usually rich. There is no 
relevant connection, however, between being tall, dark, and handsome on the 
one hand and having blue eyes on the other. 
 Another common pattern of reasoning by analogy is a comparison of 
several things that have only one or two identiﬁ ed similarities. For example: 
 Jake is a member of the Wexford College Football Fanatics, and he goes bare-
chested to all the home football games. Kyle is a member of the Wexford 
College Football Fanatics, and he goes bare-chested to all the home football 
games. Brad is a member of the Wexford College Football Fanatics, and he 
goes bare-chested to all the home football games. Jennifer is also a member of 
the Wexford College Football Fanatics. So, she probably goes bare-chested to 
the home football games, too. 
The pattern of this argument is 
 1. A is an x, and A is a y. 
 2. B is an x, and B is a y. 
 3. C is an x, and C is a y. 
 4. D is an x. 
 5. Therefore, D is probably a y too. 
This argument is clearly fallacious because it ignores an obvious difference be-
tween the things being compared (the fact that Jennifer is a woman). Some ar-
guments with this logical pattern, however, are good arguments. For example: 
 Steven Spielberg directed  Jaws, and that was a good movie. Spielberg directed 
 Schindler’s List, and that was a good movie. Spielberg directed  Saving Private 
Ryan, and that was a good movie. In fact, I’ve seen all of Spielberg’s movies, 
and almost all of them have been good. Therefore, Spielberg’s next movie will 
probably also be good. 
This is a good argument from analogy because there is good reason to think 
that the things being compared are, in fact, relevantly similar. 
 A third common pattern of argument by analogy is simply to assert, 
without further elaboration, that two cases are relevantly similar. For example: 
 Why does a family who has no children in a school district have to pay school 
taxes? This is like paying cigarette taxes even though you don’t smoke. 14 
Here the arguer doesn’t bother to spell out why he thinks these two cases are 
analogous. To critically evaluate an argument like this, we need to do three things: 
(1) list all important similarities between the two cases, (2) list all  important 
dissimilarities between the two cases, and (3) decide whether, on balance, the 
similarities are strong enough to support the conclusion. 
 Let’s apply this three-step method to the school taxes argument. 
1.   List important similarities. 
 
 How  making families that have no children in a public school system pay 
school taxes is like  making people who don’t smoke pay cigarette taxes: 

 
Fallacies of Insufﬁ cient Evidence 
153
 
 Both are taxes that you are required to pay regardless of whether you or 
your family derives any immediate beneﬁ t from them.  
2.   List important dissimilarities. 
 
 How  making families that have no children in a public school system pay 
school taxes is not like  making people who don’t smoke pay cigarette taxes: 
 
 Imposing school taxes on all property owners beneﬁ ts society by 
promoting equal educational opportunities and helping create 
an educated and informed citizenry. Imposing cigarette taxes on 
nonsmokers would harm society by subsidizing an activity that is 
harmful and addictive. 
 
 Imposing school taxes on all property owners provides signiﬁ cant 
indirect beneﬁ ts even to families without school-age children because 
the taxes help create a better-educated workforce and citizenry. 
Imposing cigarette taxes on nonsmokers would provide few, if any, 
indirect beneﬁ ts to people who don’t smoke. 
 
 It is fair to require cigarette smokers to pay cigarette taxes because 
smokers impose economic and health costs on the rest of society in 
the form of higher insurance premiums, increased Medicare costs, 
lost workdays, health risks of secondhand smoke, and so on. It would 
 not be fair to require nonsmokers to pay cigarette taxes because this 
would force nonsmokers to pick up the tab for a costly and unhealthy 
activity that doesn’t beneﬁ t them and for which they bear no personal 
responsibility.  
Signs are sometimes a good source of en-
tertaining inconsistencies. Here are a few 
examples:
Sign outside a disco: Smarts is the most exclu-
sive disco in town. Everyone welcome.
Sign in a London department store: Bargain 
basement upstairs
Sign on a repair shop door: We can repair any-
thing. (Please knock hard on the door—the 
bell doesn’t work.)
Sign in the Mammoth Caves in Virginia: Bot-
tomless Pit—175 Feet Deep
Sign at Dicker’s Department Store: 47th Annual 
Once-in-a Lifetime Sale
Sign at Burger King: 10 FREE french fry certiﬁ -
cates for only $1.00
Sign on school grounds: No trespassing with-
out permission
Sign on display of “I Love You Only” Valentine 
cards: Now available in multi-packs
Sign on the wall of a Baltimore estate: Tres-
passers will be prosecuted to the full extent 
of the law—Sisters of Mercy
Sign in a church vestry: Will the last person to 
leave please see that the perpetual light is 
extinguished
Sign in social services building: Illiterate? Write 
for free help today
Sign Language

154 
CHAPTER 6 Logical Fallacies—II
3.   Decide whether the similarities or the dissimilarities are more 
important. 
In this case, the relevant differences between the two cases are too great to 
support the conclusion. For that reason the argument commits the fallacy of 
weak analogy. 15  
 Inconsistency 
 Two statements are inconsistent when they both can’t be true. The fallacy 
of  inconsistency  occurs when an arguer asserts inconsistent or contradictory 
claims. Here are several examples:
 Moral absolutist: I can’t believe that members of the Mabunga tribe still 
practice child sacriﬁ ce. If anything is absolutely and universally wrong, 
it’s child sacriﬁ ce.  
 Moral relativist: Hey, get with the times, man! All value judgments are 
relative. And that’s the absolute truth. 
 Pearson Q. Legacy: Preferential treatment is unfair and discriminatory. It 
has no place in college admissions. 
 Roommate: But didn’t you say a minute ago that you got into this col-
lege only because your father was a rich alumnus? 
 Pearson Q. Legacy: Well, yeah. But what’s wrong with that? 
 Roommate: Just checking, man. 
 Mickey Mantle: Hey, Yogi, what do you say we eat at Toots’ tonight? 
 Yogi Berra: That place is old news. Nobody goes there anymore. It’s too 
crowded. 16 
Inappropriate appeal to authority: Arguer cites 
an unreliable authority or witness.
Appeal to ignorance: Arguer claims that some-
thing is true because no one has proven it 
false or vice versa.
False alternatives: Arguer poses a false either/ 
or choice.
Loaded question: Arguer asks a question 
that contains an unfair or unwarranted 
assumption.
Questionable cause: Arguer claims, without 
adequate evidence, that one thing is the 
cause of something else.
Hasty generalization: Arguer draws a general 
conclusion from a sample that is biased or 
too small.
Slippery slope: Arguer claims, without ade-
quate evidence, that a seemingly harmless 
action will lead to a very bad outcome.
Weak analogy: Arguer compares things that 
aren’t truly comparable.
Inconsistency: Arguer asserts inconsistent 
claims.
Recap of Fallacies of Insuffi cient Evidence

 
Fallacies of Insufﬁ cient Evidence 
155
In the ﬁ rst example, the arguer asserts a claim (“It’s absolutely true that all 
value judgments are relative”) that is self-contradictory; in the second and third 
examples, the arguers assert inconsistent premises. 
 Inconsistency is a logical fault that critical thinkers are careful to avoid. 
We should remember, however, that it is also a mistake to cling stubbornly to 
an old idea when new information suggests that the idea is false. No real learn-
ing takes place without an openness to new ideas. 
 EXERCISE 6.1 
   I.  Identify the fallacies of insufﬁ cient evidence in the following arguments. If 
no fallacy is committed, write “no fallacy.” 
 1.   I’d better eat my Wheaties. Michael Jordan says that it’s the breakfast of 
champions. 
 2.   I can’t believe I failed my chemistry test. I knew I should have worn my 
lucky sweatshirt to take the test. 
 3.  Did you vote for the idiot or the liar in the last presidential election? 
  4.   Podunk State University is a better university than Harvard University. I’ve 
been assured of this by Dr. Bigelow Hype, dean of admissions at Podunk State.  
 5.   Skeptics have tried for centuries to prove that reincarnation is a myth, and 
no one has ever succeeded. Therefore, we must conclude that reincarnation 
is a fact. 
 6.   I’ve long been convinced that nothing exists outside my own mind. Indeed, 
the arguments for this seem so obvious to me that I can’t understand why 
everybody else doesn’t believe it, too. 17 
 7.  Ford cars are lemons. I’ve owned two, and they gave me nothing but trouble. 
 8.   Police detective: Did you get a good look at the bank robber?
 
  Witness: Yes, I saw his face clearly. It was Willie, the night watchman. 
 
  Detective: And were you also able to recognize his voice? 
 
   Witness: No, I couldn’t really hear what he said very well. His voice was 
mufﬂ ed by the full ski mask he wore. 
 9.   Either you support preferential treatment for disadvantaged minorities in 
university admissions, or you’re a racist. But surely you’re not a racist. There-
fore, you support preferential treatment for disadvantaged minorities in 
university admissions. 
 10.   Old Mr. Ferguson (who resides at the Burnside Home for the Blind) claims 
he could read the car’s license plate from more than 150 feet away. I’ve never 
known Mr. Ferguson to be deliberately dishonest. Therefore, we should con-
clude that Mr. Ferguson really did read the car’s license plate from more than 
150 feet away.  
 11.   Students have asked that we extend residence hall visitation hours by one 
hour on Friday and Saturday nights. This request will have to be denied. If 
we give students an extra visitation hour on weekends, next they’ll be asking 
us to allow their boyfriends and girlfriends to stay over all night. Eventually, 
we’ll have students shacking up in every room. 
 The foolish and 
the dead alone 
never change their 
opinion. 
 —James Russell 
Lowell 

156 
CHAPTER 6 Logical Fallacies—II
 12.   There is no information in Private Baker’s service record that indicates that 
he is not a homosexual. Consequently, I can only assume that he is. 
 13.   A Saint Bernard is large, cuddly, furry, and makes a great house pet. A baby 
grizzly bear is also large, cuddly, and furry. Therefore, a baby grizzly bear 
would make a great house pet, too. 
 14.   I’ve searched my car carefully, and I haven’t found my lost car keys there. It’s 
reasonable to conclude, therefore, that my car keys aren’t in the car. 
 15.   You’re not seriously thinking of voting for that bum, are you? Why don’t 
you wake up and smell the coffee? 
 16.   Most immigrants who enter this country wind up in jail or on welfare. 
I know this because I read it on a White Power Web site. 
 17.   It would be a much greater wrong to destroy the last remaining copy of 
Shakespeare’s  Macbeth  than it would be to destroy an individual copy of 
 Macbeth . Similarly, it is a much greater wrong to cause the extinction of an 
entire animal species than it is to destroy an individual member of that species.  
 18.   Don’t ﬁ re that cannon in these snow-packed hills. The cannon could cause 
an avalanche, and the avalanche could destroy the ski lodge and possibly the 
village below. Hundreds of people might die. 
 19.   It says in the  Encyclopaedia Britannica  that the Bermejo River is a western trib-
utary of the Paraguay River in south-central South America. This is probably 
true because the  Encyclopaedia Britannica  is a highly reliable reference source.  
 20.   The volcano erupted shortly after the king abandoned worship of the an-
cient tribal spirits. The tribal spirits must be angry. 
 21.   Strong measures must be taken to halt the ﬂ ood of Mexican immigrants into 
the United States. If we allow this immigration to continue, soon Spanish 
will become the ofﬁ cial language of California and Texas. Eventually, the 
entire United States will be just a cultural offshoot of Mexico. 
 22.   On Tuesday I was passed by a reckless woman driver. On Thursday I was 
passed by a reckless woman driver. On Friday I was passed by a reckless 
woman driver. It’s clear that most reckless drivers today are women. 
 23.   Coach Phil, giving a pep talk to his soccer team in the ﬁ lm Kicking and Scream-
ing: You can win and go on to glory, or you can lose and probably face a 
series of cataclysmic events. 
 24.   Why all the fuss about preserving old-growth redwood forests? Redwood 
trees are like Motel 6’s. Once you’ve seen one, you’ve seen them all. 18 
 25.   My taxicab driver this morning told me he once drove from New York to Los 
Angeles in less than 18 hours at an average speed of 165 miles per hour. I hate 
to think how many speeding tickets he must have gotten along the way!  
 26.   If a large asteroid had struck China in AD 1200, it’s likely that some historical 
records of the disaster would have been preserved. But there is absolutely no 
mention of any such catastrophe in any of the numerous Chinese historical 
records that survive from that period. Therefore, it’s reasonable to conclude 
that a large asteroid did not strike China in AD 1200. 
 27.  Why do you ﬁ nd it so difﬁ cult to be fair and impartial?  
 28.   I’m prejudiced only if I hold irrational biases. But I don’t hold any irrational 
biases. I just think this country’s being overrun by Catholics and Jews. 

 
Fallacies of Insufﬁ cient Evidence 
157
 29.   Since the 1960s promiscuity, divorce, abortion, teen suicide, and out-of-
wedlock births have all risen sharply. Clearly, we need to restore prayer in 
public schools. 
 30.   Dr. Leonard Vesey, chief of Pediatrics at Boston Children’s Hospital, has 
argued that abortion is always immoral. Given Dr. Vesey’s impressive profes-
sional credentials, we must conclude that abortion is always immoral. 
 31.   Everything that exists is animal, or vegetable, or mineral. The number 7 ob-
viously isn’t an animal or a vegetable. Therefore, the number 7 is a mineral. 
 32.   Rich Kowalski is a young, successful CEO of an Internet start-up company, 
and his parents come from Poland. Kelly Yablonski is a young, successful 
CEO of an Internet start-up company, and her parents come from Poland. 
Matt Golembeski is a young, successful CEO of an Internet start-up com-
pany, and his parents come from Poland. Miguel Gonzalez is also a young, 
successful CEO of an Internet start-up company. So, his parents probably 
come from Poland, too. 
 33.   A benevolent, all-powerful Creator may exist. On the other hand, a benevo-
lent, all-powerful Creator may not exist. No one knows for certain which 
of these claims is true. But one thing is certain: one of these claims must 
be true. 
 34.   There’s nothing wrong with segregating restrooms on the basis of race. After 
all, we’ve always had separate restrooms for men and women, and no one 
seems to complain about that. 
 35.   Which sport is more popular: sailing or snow skiing? To ﬁ nd out we asked 
more than ﬁ ve hundred people on the streets of Miami, Florida. The result? 
Americans prefer sailing by a margin of more than 3 to 1. 
 36.   I have no proof that my refrigerator light goes off when I close the refrig-
erator door. Therefore, it’s reasonable to believe that it doesn’t. 
 37.   Most women from California believe in astrology. I know because I’ve dated 
three women from California, and they all believed in astrology. 
 38.   I don’t understand why you have to wear a helmet to play football. Soccer is 
a dangerous sport, and they don’t make soccer players wear helmets. 
 39.   Carl Sagan, the world-famous astronomer, argued that Venus is too hot to 
support life. Moreover, I’ve consulted three astronomy textbooks, and they 
all agree with Dr. Sagan on this point. Therefore, it is reasonable to believe 
that Venus is too hot to support life. 
 40.   If we don’t dramatically increase defense spending, the Chinese will soon 
surpass us as a military power. And, if the Chinese surpass us as a military 
power, it’s only a matter of time before we’ll all be speaking Chinese and 
eating chop suey. 
 II.   Most of the following passages were taken from letters to the editor and 
newspaper call-in columns. Identify any fallacies discussed in Chapters 5 and 6 
that you ﬁ nd. If no fallacy is committed, write “no fallacy.” 
 1.   When will the American people ﬁ nally realize that the Democrats are lead-
ing this country straight into socialism? (newspaper call-in column)  
 2.   Nasrudin was throwing handfuls of crumbs around his house. “What are 
you doing?” someone asked him. “Keeping the tigers away.” “But there are 

158 
CHAPTER 6 Logical Fallacies—II
no tigers in these parts.” “That’s right. Effective, isn’t it.” (Idries Shah,  The 
Exploits of the Incomparable Mulla Nasrudin [slightly adapted]) 
 3.   I’d like to make a comment on the boy who wore the KKK outﬁ t to school. 
I think it was blown way out of proportion. You have other organizations, 
the KKK is an organization, the Knights of Columbus is an organization, 
the Shriners are an organization, the Masons are an organization, they all 
have uniforms. This is a uniform of something that is all over the United 
States, the KKK. Now, I don’t see anything wrong with it. (newspaper call-in 
column) 
 4.   See it or be un-American! (ad for  The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle 
movie) 
 5.   In regard to Thursday’s paper: To have a gay lead a Boy Scout troop. Isn’t 
that like putting the fox in the henhouse? What a travesty of common sense. 
(newspaper call-in column) 
 6.   Television actor and liberal Democratic activist Martin Sheen says that Presi-
dent Bush is a “moron.” . . . Before Sheen makes such a childish assertion 
in the future, maybe he should remember that “it takes one to know one.” 
(  James Whittington, letter to the editor,  USA Today ) 
 7.   Party labels don’t mean anything anymore. You can draw a line right 
down the middle. On the one side are the Americans, on the other are the 
Communists and Socialists. (George Murphy, speech to a Republican 
fund-raiser) 19 
 8.   Could we please have a move on to abolish parole in this state, in fact in the 
country? If you get sentenced for a crime, you should serve the entire time, 
not just a portion of it. Just like when you take out a mortgage or a car loan, 
they don’t say you paid it nice for the ﬁ rst couple of years and we’ll elimi-
nate the next twenty-some years. (newspaper call-in column) 
 9.   The resurrection is a myth because the Bible is myth, and the Bible is a 
myth because it contains obviously mythical stories like the resurrection. 
(discussed but not endorsed in Peter Kreeft and Ronald K. Tacelli,  Handbook 
of Christian Apologetics ) 
 10.   After nine years at Paciﬁ c Bell I learned just about everything there was to 
know about  looking busy without actually being busy. During that time the 
stock price of Paciﬁ c Bell climbed steadily, so I think I can conclude that my 
avoidance of work was in the best interest of the company and something to 
be proud of. (Scott Adams,  The Dilbert Principle ) 
 11.   U.S. Army Captain Laughlin Waters: “Well, you were supposed to have 
1,500 prisoners. Where are they?” 
 
   Polish captain: “They are dead. We shot them. These are all that are left.” 
 
   Captain Waters: “Then why don’t you shoot these too?” A pause, then Waters 
corrected himself: “No, you can’t do that.” 
 
   Polish captain: “Oh, yes we can. They shot my countrymen.” 20 
 12.   This is about the person who is concerned about McDonald Corporation’s 
treatment of pigs and chickens. What about the poor potatoes? They gouge 
out their eyes, they rip off their skin, and they throw them in boiling oil. 
(newspaper call-in column) 

 
Fallacies of Insufﬁ cient Evidence 
159
 13.   Dudley said that whenever anything would go wrong at his last job, his boss 
would always say he was responsible. I guess Dudley must be a very respon-
sible person. I’d better hire him. (adapted from Tom Morris,  True Success ) 
 14.   Miscarriages of justice are rare [in capital sentencing], but they do occur. 
Over a long enough time they lead to the execution of some innocents. 
Does this make irrevocable punishments morally wrong? Hardly. Our 
government employs trucks. They run over innocent bystanders more fre-
quently than courts sentence innocents to death. We do not give up trucks 
because the beneﬁ ts they produce outweigh the harm, including the death 
of innocents. (Ernest Van Den Haag, “The Death Penalty Once More”) 
 15.   To the guy who reads ﬁ ve newspapers and is bashing President Bush. Five 
newspapers a day? Let me guess. You don’t have a job. You’re probably living 
off the government. (newspaper call-in column) 
 16.   In regards to the teachers working on the Dallas [Pennsylvania] curriculum. 
That’s a joke. I had two daughters nine years apart in the Dallas Middle 
School. Both had the same two science teachers, they used the same exact 
questions and lesson plans nine years later. Come on guys, wake up. Science 
changes on a daily basis. Dallas teachers are a joke and an embarrassment. 
(newspaper call-in column) 
 17.   One of your readers suggested we should ban smoking [in public places] like 
California does. I’m from New York and New York State tried to do some-
thing similar, but think about this. You might be concerned with the ﬁ lthy 
smoke that streams over to the nonsmoking section, but realize this: When 
your state starts to control your actions that’s just the beginning, and soon 
everything else will be controlled. You might want to think about that. If 
you don’t like places that allow smoking, try going somewhere that does not 
allow it. (newspaper call-in column) 
 18.   I hope that you understand why it would be wrong to allow a club for ho-
mosexuals in school. It would only encourage a lifestyle that is destructive 
and immoral. If you still believe there should be a gay club, then you should 
insist on there being a club for thieves and robbers and a club for murderers 
including abortionists. (letter to the editor,  Scranton Times ) 
 19.   Life is divided up into the horrible and the miserable. The horrible would 
be like terminal cases, blind people, cripples—I don’t know how they get 
through life. It’s amazing to me. And the miserable is everyone else. So when 
you go through life, you should be thankful that you’re miserable. (Alvy 
Singer, in  Annie Hall  ) 
 20.   In Lane Filler’s opinion, whoever the hell he is, real life resembles a football 
game. If that were true, Mr. Filler, I think I’d slit my wrists right now. What 
an awful thing to say . . . you have a fat head and your picture proves it. 
(from a newspaper call-in column) 
 21.   If a proposed amendment to the Pennsylvania state constitution to grant 
residents of Pennsylvania the right to hunt is passed, the ﬂ oodgate will be 
opened for other groups to follow. What’s next? An amendment allowing 
the right to play golf or go shopping? (letter to the editor,  Wilkes-Barre Times 
Leader [slightly adapted]) 

160 
CHAPTER 6 Logical Fallacies—II
 22.   Judges make the decision to return children to an abusive home once the 
Department of Human Services has investigated a home and have presented 
their ﬁ ndings to the judge. Unfortunately most judges are incompetent to 
make a decision. I have watched three cases in which judges in Pawhuska 
[Oklahoma] have allowed access of their children to abusive parents. (letter 
to the editor,  Tulsa World  )  
 23.   Yeah, this is for the person who called in and said that he likes enjoying cold 
weather football and there are sissy teams in the dome and down in Florida. 
I have one question for this macho man. Was he sitting outside in his yard 
with his TV and cold beer out in the snow? Or was he in his warm, warm 
living room? Who’s the real sissy, pal? (newspaper call-in column) 
 24.   If angels don’t exist, how do you explain the days when you haven’t studied for 
a test, and there is a snow day the next day? Or when you’re mean to someone, 
and the very next day you see someone getting teased and you realize how 
bad it must feel? (  Jack McKenna, age 12, quoted in  Parade  magazine)  
 25.   Methadone, what a crock. Just because you can’t get high off of it doesn’t 
mean it’s not a narcotic. What all these addicts are doing is trading one nar-
cotic for another. It’s like having an alcoholic drink beer instead of whisky. 
(newspaper call-in column) 
 26.   Amid cries that there is too much violence on TV, members of Congress 
are moving to censor network programming. Congress should mind its own 
dang business. . . . 
 
   
 Rep. Edward Markey, D-Mass., wants to require new TV sets to include a 
computer chip that will allow parents to block violent programs. 
 
   
 That’s not as harmless as it seems. What’s next? A computer chip to block 
anti-government programs? (editorial, “On TV Censorship,”  Charleston (West 
Virginia) Daily Mail   ) 
 27.   You know if you [critics of President Bush] attacked the terrorists with 
half the fervor you go after your own president with they wouldn’t stand a 
chance! In the meantime I’ll settle for you all just getting jobs, moving out 
of your parents’ home, and paying taxes—maybe take a shower too. (anony-
mous Internet news story comment) 
 28.   Judge : “You say you’re innocent, yet ﬁ ve people swore they saw you steal the 
watch.” 
 
   Defendant : “Your honor, I can produce 500 people who didn’t see me steal 
it.” (adapted from Richard Lederer,  Anguished English ) 
 29.   Sign in New Jersey parking lot : Free shuttle transportation to and from airport. 
Fuel surcharge of $4 per car. 
 30.   It is a proven scientiﬁ c fact that video games are . . . corrupting Ameri-
can youth. In a recent experiment, scientiﬁ c researchers exposed a group 
of teenaged boys to an arcade game, and found all of them had unclean 
thoughts. Of course, the researchers got the same result when they exposed 
the boys to coleslaw, an alpaca sweater, and “The McNeil-Lehrer News 
Hour” but that is beside the point. The point is that we should all write let-
ters to our elected ofﬁ cials to urge them to ban video games. (Dave Barry, 
 Dave Barry’s Bad Habits, 1985) 

 
Fallacies of Insufﬁ cient Evidence 
161
 III.  Write an offbeat or amusing example of each of the fallacies of insufﬁ cient 
evidence discussed in this chapter. Be prepared to share your examples with the 
class.  
 IV.  Find examples of the fallacies discussed in this chapter from everyday life 
(newspapers, magazines, TV, radio, the Internet, and so on). Collect your ex-
amples in a notebook or portfolio. For each example indicate where you found 
the fallacy and give a brief explanation why you think it commits the fallacy you 
allege. Be prepared to share your examples with the class. 
 V.  Watch the classic 1957 ﬁ lm  12 Angry Men in class and keep in mind the 
following questions for class discussion. 
 1.   What evidence initially points to the guilt of the defendant? How was this 
evidence later undermined or called into question by good critical thinking? 
 2.   What fallacies were committed by individual jurors? ( Hint: There are lots of 
them.) 
 3.  In your opinion, was the ﬁ nal verdict correct or incorrect? Defend your answer.  
Monty Python and the Logic of Witch Detection
In the ﬁ lm Monty Python and the Holy Grail (1975), there’s a classic 
spoof of the kinds of bogus logic that led to the persecution of 
“witches” in the Middle Ages. A mob of peasants plans to burn a 
woman whom they claim is a witch. How do they know she’s a witch? 
She looks like one! On the other hand, since the mob admits they 
dressed her up to look like a witch, this proof is hardly a clincher. The 
dialogue, slightly abridged, proceeds as follows:
 
Sir Bedivere: What do you do with witches?
 
Mob: Burn them!
 
Sir Bedivere: And what do you burn apart from witches?
 
First Peasant: Wood!
 
Sir Bedivere: Wood! So why do witches burn?
 
First Peasant: ’Cause they’re made of wood.
 
Sir Bedivere: Does wood sink in water?
 
Mob: No, it ﬂ oats.
 
Sir Bedivere: What also ﬂ oats in water?
 
King Arthur: A duck.
 
Sir Bedivere: Yes, exactly. So, logically . . . ?
 
Mob: If she weighs the same as a duck . . . she’s made of wood!
 
Sir Bedivere: And therefore . . . ?
 
Mob: A witch! Burn her!
Hmmm, seems a little shaky to us. How many fallacies can you detect 
in this passage?
Pop Culture Connection

162 
CHAPTER 6 Logical Fallacies—II
 4.  What do you see as the basic message of the ﬁ lm?  
 5.  Why aren’t there any women on the jury? 
 6.  Does the ﬁ lm lower your conﬁ dence in the jury system? Why or why not?  
 7.   How does the ﬁ lm underscore the practical value of critical thinking skills 
and dispositions? 
 VI.  This exercise is a game we call  Name That Fallacy! Here’s how the game is 
played: The instructor divides the class into teams of four or ﬁ ve students, then 
reads an example of a fallacy. The ﬁ rst team to raise a hand gets a chance to 
identify the fallacy. Before the instructor reveals the correct answer, the other 
teams are given the opportunity to challenge the ﬁ rst team’s answer. Scoring is as 
follows:
Correct answer:
Incorrect answer:
Correct challenge:
Incorrect challenge:
5 points
−5 points
5 points
−5 points
The ﬁ rst team to reach 40 points wins. 21  
 SUMMARY 
 1.  In this chapter we studied fallacies of insufﬁ cient evidence—arguments in 
which the premises, though logically relevant to the conclusion, fail to 
provide sufﬁ cient evidence to support the conclusion.  
 2.  We looked at nine common fallacies of insufﬁ cient evidence:
 
 a.  Inappropriate appeal to authority: citing a witness or authority that is 
untrustworthy. 
 Example 
 My hairdresser told me that extraterrestrials built the lost city of Atlantis. So, 
it’s reasonable to believe that extraterrestrials did build the lost city of Atlantis. 
 
b.   Appeal to ignorance: claiming that something is true because no one has 
proven it false or vice versa. 
 Example 
 Bigfoot must exist. No one has proved that it doesn’t. 
 
c. False alternatives: posing a false either/or choice. 
 Example 
 The choice in this election is clear: either we elect a staunch conservative as our 
next president, or we watch as our country slides into anarchy and economic 
depression. Clearly, we don’t want our country to slide into anarchy and eco-
nomic depression. Therefore, we should elect a staunch conservative as our 
next president. 
 You can’t convert 
the absence of 
information into a 
conclusion. 
 —Tom Clancy 
 The commonest 
vice of the human 
mind is its disposi-
tion to see every-
thing as yes or no, 
as black or white. 
 —William James 

 
Summary 
163
 
 d.  Loaded question: posing a question that contains an unfair or unwar-
ranted presupposition. 
 Example 
 Al:  Are you still dating that total loser Phil? 
 Mary: Yes. 
 Al: Well, at least you admit he’s a total loser. 
 
 e.  Questionable cause: claiming, without sufﬁ cient evidence, that one thing 
is the cause of something else. 
 Example 
 Two days after I drank lemon tea, my head cold cleared up completely. Try it. 
It works. 
 
 f.  Hasty generalization: drawing a general conclusion from a sample that is 
biased or too small. 
 Example 
 BMWs are a pile of junk. I have two friends who drive BMWs, and both of 
them have had nothing but trouble from those cars. 
 
 g.  Slippery slope: claiming, without sufﬁ cient evidence, that a seemingly 
harmless action, if taken, will lead to a disastrous outcome. 
 Example 
 Immediate steps should be taken to reduce violence in children’s television pro-
gramming. If this violent programming is allowed to continue, this will almost 
certainly lead to ﬁ ghts and acts of bullying on school playgrounds. This in turn 
will lead to an increase in juvenile delinquency and gang violence. Eventually, 
our entire society will become engulfed in an orgy of lawlessness and brutality. 
 
 h.  Weak analogy: comparing things that aren’t really comparable. 
 Example 
 Nobody would buy a car without ﬁ rst taking it for a test drive. Why then 
shouldn’t two mature high school juniors live together before they decide 
whether to get married? 
 
 i.  Inconsistency: asserting inconsistent or contradictory claims. 
 Example 
 Note found in a Forest Service suggestion box:  Park visitors need to know how impor-
tant it is to keep this wilderness area completely pristine and undisturbed. So 
why not put up a few signs to remind people of this fact?  
 Facts have sworn 
eternal enmity to 
generalizations. 
 —Will and Ariel 
Durant 
 I made up my 
mind but I made 
it up both ways. 
 —Casey Stengel 

164
CHAPTER 7
 ANALYZING ARGUMENTS 
  To  analyze an argument means to break it down into its various parts to see 
clearly what conclusion is defended and on what grounds. Analyzing argu-
ments is an important critical reasoning skill because, to paraphrase Bob Dylan, 
we can’t think critically about what we don’t understand. In this chapter we 
discuss two methods for analyzing arguments, one for short arguments and one 
for longer arguments. 
 DIAGRAMMING SHORT ARGUMENTS 
 Diagramming is a quick and easy way to analyze relatively short arguments 
(i.e., arguments that are roughly a paragraph in length or shorter). This section 
explains how the diagramming method works. 
 First, read through the argument and circle any premise or conclusion 
indicators you see. For example:
 The death penalty should be abolished  because  it’s racially discriminatory, 
there’s no evidence that it’s a more effective deterrent than life imprisonment, 
and innocent people may be executed by mistake.  
Second, number the statements consecutively as they appear in the argument:
 ➀ The death penalty should be abolished  because  ➁ it’s racially discrimi-
natory, ➂ there’s no evidence that it’s a more effective deterrent than life 
imprisonment, and ➃ innocent people may be executed by mistake. 
Third, arrange the numbers on a page with premises placed above the conclu-
sions(s) they are claimed to support: 
➁
➂
➀
➃
 
 We must under-
stand before we 
pass judgment.  
 —H. I. Marrou 

 
Diagramming Short Arguments 
165
 Fourth, omit any logically irrelevant statements—that is, statements that don’t 
function as either premises or conclusions in the argument. In this particular 
example, there are no logically irrelevant statements. 
 Finally, using arrows to mean “is offered as evidence for,” create a kind of 
ﬂ owchart that indicates relationships of argumentative support: 
➁
➂
➀
➃
 
 In this argument each of the three premises provides  independent support  for the 
conclusion.  A premise provides independent support for a conclusion when it pro-
vides a separate, freestanding reason for accepting the conclusion. More precisely, 
a premise provides  independent support  for a conclusion when the amount of 
support it provides would  not  be weakened or destroyed by the removal of any 
other premise in the argument. We symbolize this relationship of independent 
support by drawing arrows from each of the three premises to the conclusion. 
 In some arguments the premises work cooperatively, rather than inde-
pendently, to support the argument’s conclusion. For example:
 ➀ Every member of the Applewood Association is more than ﬁ fty years old. 
➁ Bob is a member of the Applewood Association. So, ➂ Bob is more than 
ﬁ fty years old. 
Here the argument’s premises provide  linked support  for the conclusion.  A prem-
ise provides linked support when it works conjointly with another premise to 
support the conclusion. More precisely, a premise provides  linked support  
for a conclusion when the amount of support it provides would be weakened 
or destroyed by the removal of some other premise in the argument.1 We 
symbolize relationships of linked support by underlining the linked premises 
and putting a plus sign (+) between them. Thus, the argument above can be 
diagrammed as follows: 
 
➀

➁
➂
 The basic distinction between linked and independent premises isn’t hard 
to understand. Two premises are  linked if the omission of one of the premises 
would reduce the amount of support provided by the other. For example:
 ➀ No members of the Mill City High School marching band are Yankee 
fans. ➁ Allan is a member of the Mill City High School marching band. So, 
➂ Allan isn’t a Yankee fan. 
In this example neither premise provides any support for the conclusion with-
out the other. Taken together, however, the  linked premises  validly imply the 

166 
CHAPTER 7 Analyzing Arguments
conclusion. The premises are linked because the amount of support provided 
by one of the premises would be reduced if the other premise were omitted. 
 Similarly, two premises are  independent  if neither premise would lose any 
power to support the conclusion if the other premise were removed. Here are 
two examples:
 ➀ Ten witnesses say they saw Blotto rob the bank. ➁ The stolen bank 
money was found in Blotto’s apartment. ➂ Blotto’s ﬁ ngerprints were 
found on the note the robber handed to the bank teller. Therefore, ➃ 
probably Blotto robbed the bank. 
 ➀ Agatha is a mother. ➁ Agatha is an aunt. Therefore, ➂ Agatha is a female. 
In the ﬁ rst example, the premises work independently to build a cumulative 
case to support the conclusion. In the second example, each of the prem-
ises independently provides complete logical support for the conclusion. Both 
are examples of  independent premises  because the amount of support each 
provides individually would not be reduced or destroyed even if every other 
premise in the argument were omitted. 
 Let’s practice this diagramming technique with a few examples:
 If Amy runs marathons, she’s probably very ﬁ t. Amy does run marathons. 
She’s also a B student. So, Amy probably is very ﬁ t.  
First we circle all the premise and conclusion indicators:
 If Amy runs marathons, she’s probably very ﬁ t. Amy does run marathons. 
She’s also a B student.  So , Amy probably is very ﬁ t.  
Next we number the statements in the argument consecutively:
 ➀ If Amy runs marathons, she’s probably very ﬁ t. ➁ Amy does run marathons. 
➂ She’s also a B student.  So , ➃ Amy probably is very ﬁ t.  
How to Decide Whether Premises 
Are Linked or Independent
Two premises are linked when the omis-
sion of one of the premises would cancel 
or reduce the amount of support provided 
by the other.
Example
No student at Wexford College is a 
Rhodes Scholar.
Melissa is a Rhodes Scholar.
So, Melissa is not a student at Wexford 
College.
Two premises are independent when neither 
premise would provide less support for 
the conclusion if the other premise were 
omitted.
Example
Nick doesn’t own a car.
Nick is legally blind.
So, Nick probably won’t drive a car to the 
game.

 
Diagramming Short Arguments 
167
Then we check to see if there are any logically irrelevant statements in the 
argument. In this case, statement ➂ is clearly irrelevant. It is simply an aside 
that provides no support whatsoever for the conclusion. Thus, we will omit it 
from our diagram. 
 Finally, we diagram the argument by arranging the numbers on a page 
with premises placed above the conclusion(s) they are claimed to support. In 
this argument the conclusion indicator  so  indicates that ➃ is the conclusion. 
Because ➀ supports ➃ only if it is conjoined with ➁, ➀ and ➁ provide linked 
support for ➃. Thus, the argument can be diagrammed as follows: 
➀

➁
➃
 
 Here is a second example:
 Jim is a senior citizen. So, Jim probably doesn’t like hip-hop music. So, 
Jim probably won’t be going to the Jay-Z concert this weekend. 
First we circle the indicator words:
 Jim is a senior citizen.  So , Jim probably doesn’t like hip-hop music.  So , Jim 
probably won’t be going to the Jay-Z concert this weekend.  
Next we number the statements in the argument:
 ➀ Jim is a senior citizen.  So , ➁ Jim probably doesn’t like hip-hop music.  So , 
➂ Jim probably won’t be going to the Jay-Z concert this weekend.  
Then we determine whether any of the premises are irrelevant to the argu-
ment. In this case, none is. 
 Finally, we diagram the argument by placing the numbers for the prem-
ises above the conclusion(s) they support and adding arrows to indicate rela-
tionships of support. In this argument we see that the conclusion indicator  so 
is used twice. This tells us that ➀ is offered as a reason for ➁, and ➁ is offered 
as a reason for ➂. Thus, we diagram the argument as follows: 
➀
➁
➂ 
 Here is a third example:
 Most Democrats are liberals, and Senator Dumdiddle is a Democrat. Thus, 
Senator Dumdiddle is probably a liberal. Therefore, Senator Dumdiddle 
probably supports afﬁ rmative action in higher education, because most 
liberals support afﬁ rmative action in higher education. 

168 
CHAPTER 7 Analyzing Arguments
First we circle all premise and conclusion indicators:
  Most Democrats are liberals, and Senator Dumdiddle is a Democrat.  Thus , 
Senator Dumdiddle is probably a liberal.  Therefore , Senator Dumdiddle 
probably supports afﬁ rmative action in higher education,  because most 
liberals support afﬁ rmative action in higher education.  
Next we number the statements consecutively:
  ➀ Most Democrats are liberals, and ➁ Senator Dumdiddle is a Democrat. 
Thus , ➂ Senator Dumdiddle is probably a liberal.  Therefore , ➃ Senator 
Dumdiddle probably supports afﬁ rmative action in higher education, 
because  ➄ most liberals support afﬁ rmative action in higher education. 
Then we check to see whether any of the numbered statements is irrelevant to 
the argument. In this case, none is. 
 Finally, we diagram the argument by arranging the numbers on a page 
with premises placed above the conclusion(s) they allegedly support. ➀ and ➁ 
clearly work conjointly to support ➂.  Thus, they provide linked support for ➂. 
We therefore diagram this part of the argument as follows: 
➀

➁
➂
 
 ➂ and ➄ likewise provide linked support for ➃.  Thus, the entire argument can 
be diagrammed as follows: 
 
➀

➁
➂➂

➄
➃
 Here is a ﬁ nal example: 
   Cheating is wrong for several reasons. First, it will ultimately lower your 
self-respect because you can never be proud of anything you got by cheat-
ing. Second, cheating is a lie because it deceives other people into thinking 
you know more than you do. Third, cheating violates the teacher’s trust 
that you will do your own work. Fourth, cheating is unfair to all the people 
who aren’t cheating. Finally, if you cheat in school now, you’ll ﬁ nd it easier 
to cheat in other situations later in life—perhaps even in your closest per-
sonal relationships.2 
First we circle the premise and conclusion indicators:
  Cheating is wrong for several reasons. First, it will ultimately lower your self-
 respect  because  you can never be proud of anything you got by  cheating. 
Second, cheating is a lie  because  it deceives other people into thinking you 
 We must learn 
to take thinking 
apart. 
 —Richard Paul 
and Linda Elder 

 
Diagramming Short Arguments 
169
know more than you do. Third, cheating violates the teacher’s trust that you will 
do your own work. Fourth, cheating is unfair to all the people who aren’t cheat-
ing. Finally, if you cheat in school now, you’ll ﬁ nd it easier to cheat in other situ-
ations later in life—perhaps even in your closest personal relationships.  
Next we number the statements consecutively, as follows:
 ➀ Cheating is wrong for several reasons. First, ➁ it will ultimately lower 
your self-respect  because  ➂ you can never be proud of anything you 
got by cheating. Second, ➃ cheating is a lie  because  ➄ it deceives other 
people into thinking you know more than you do. Third, ⑥ cheating vio-
lates the teacher’s trust that you will do your own work. Fourth, ⑦ cheat-
ing is unfair to all the people who aren’t cheating. Finally, ⑧ if you cheat 
in school now, you’ll ﬁ nd it easier to cheat in other situations later in life—
perhaps even in your closest personal relationships. 
Then we decide whether any of the numbered statements is logically irrel-
evant to the argument. In this argument, none is. 
 Now we diagram the argument. As the premise indicator  because  indi-
cates, ➂ is offered as support for ➁, and ➄ is offered as support for ➃: 
 
➂
➁
➄
➃
 Finally, we note that ➁, ➃, ⑥, ⑦, and ⑧ all provide independent support 
for the main conclusion ➀. Thus, the complete diagram of the argument is as 
follows:
➂
➁
➄
➃
➅
➀
➆
➇
 Tips on Diagramming Arguments 
 Diagramming arguments is a little like learning to play golf: difﬁ cult at ﬁ rst, but 
challenging and fun once you get the hang of it. This section provides a few 
tips on how to diagram arguments like a pro:3
1.   Find the main conclusion ﬁ rst.  It is easy to get lost if you don’t have a 
clear idea where you are going. For that reason it is often a good idea, 
especially when diagramming complex arguments, to start by locating 
the main conclusion and then working back through the passage to see 
how the argument as a whole works together to support the conclusion. 
 Analysis is a 
skill you need 
everywhere in life. 
Lawyers analyze 
complex claims 
and sort out the 
issues; physicians 
analyze symp-
toms; detectives 
look for patterns 
in the evidence; 
business people 
sort through the 
parts of an intri-
cate deal; parents 
try to untangle 
and get a grip on 
the issues trou-
bling a family. 
 —Tom Morris 

170 
CHAPTER 7 Analyzing Arguments
(For help in locating the main conclusion of an argument, review “Tips 
on Finding the Conclusion of an Argument” on pages 35–36.)  
2.   Pay close attention to premise and conclusion indicators. One common 
mistake students make in diagramming arguments is to overlook 
premise and conclusion indicators such as  since, as, so, and  because.  Pay 
especially close attention to premise indicators like  since and  because 
that precede independent clauses, as in this example:
 All dogs go to heaven. So, Sparky will go to heaven  because Sparky is 
a dog. 
 
In this argument the premise indicator  because signals that, logically 
speaking, there are two statements in the second sentence (a premise 
and a conclusion) rather than one. These two statements must be 
distinguished for purposes of argument analysis. 
3.   Remember that sentences containing the word and  often contain two or more 
separate statements. We have seen that a single sentence frequently ex-
presses two or more distinct statements. Sometimes these statements 
are separated by the word  and. For example:
 Never ﬂ y Cattle Car Airlines. They’re never on time, and the food 
tastes like warmed-over cardboard. 
 
Here the second sentence is a compound sentence that expresses 
two logically distinct premises separated by the word  and. These 
distinct premises should be diagrammed separately. 
4.   Treat conditional statements (if-then  statements )  and disjunctive statements 
(either-or  statements )  as single statements. As we saw in Chapter 2, 
conditional statements should always be treated as a single logical 
unit because they assert a single complete thought. For example, the 
conditional sentence
 If I win the lottery, then I’ll move to Tahiti 
 
doesn’t assert that I’ll win the lottery, nor does it assert that I’ll move 
to Tahiti. Rather, it asserts a single conditional statement: that one 
event will occur (I’ll move to Tahiti)  if another event occurs (I win 
the lottery). Because conditional sentences assert only a single 
 statement, they should always be treated as a single logical unit for 
purposes of argument analysis. 
 
 
 For similar reasons disjunctions ( either-or statements) should also 
be diagrammed as single statements. Notice that if I say
 Either Boston will win the pennant or Cleveland will win the pennant 
 
I am not saying that Boston will win the pennant or that Cleveland 
will win the pennant. Rather, I am asserting a single (disjunctive) state-
ment: that one of two events will occur— either Boston will win the 

 
Diagramming Short Arguments 
171
pennant  or  Cleveland will win the pennant (but not both). Because 
 disjunctive statements, like conditional statements, express a single com-
plete thought, they should always be diagrammed as single statements.  
5.   Don’t number or diagram any sentence that is not a statement.  Arguments, 
by deﬁ nition, consist entirely of statements—that is, sentences that it 
makes sense to regard as either true or false. Consequently, questions, 
suggestions, exclamations, and other nonstatements should be omit-
ted from argument diagrams. 
6.   Don’t diagram irrelevant statements. In real life most lengthy and 
complex arguments contain logically irrelevant statements—that is, 
statements that don’t support the conclusion in any way. Because 
the purpose of an argument diagram is simply to map the logical 
structure of an argument, such statements should be omitted. 
7.   Don’t diagram redundant statements. Many arguments contain 
redundant statements—that is, statements that basically repeat what’s 
already been said. Such statements are often useful for rhetorical 
purposes, but they should be omitted in argument diagrams because 
they merely clutter the argument. 
 EXERCISE 7.1 
  I.   Diagram the following arguments using the method presented in the pre-
ceding section. 
  1.   Bertie probably isn’t home. His car isn’t in the driveway, and there are no 
lights on in his house. 
 2.   No members of the volleyball team like rap music. Andrea is a member of 
the volleyball team. So, Andrea doesn’t like rap music. 
 The essence of 
thinking is to 
analyze—that is, 
to discriminate. 
 —D. T. Suzuki 
How to Diagram an Argument
1.  Read through the argument carefully, 
circling any premise or conclusion indi-
cators you see.
2.  Number the statements consecutively as 
they appear in the argument. Don’t num-
ber any sentences that are not statements.
3.  Arrange the numbers on a page with the 
premises placed above the conclusion(s) 
they support. Omit any irrelevant or re-
dundant statements.
4.  Using arrows to mean “is offered as evi-
dence for,” create a kind of ﬂ owchart 
that shows which premises are intended 
to support which conclusions.
5.  Indicate independent premises by draw-
ing arrows directly from the premises to 
the conclusions they are claimed to sup-
port. Indicate linked premises by placing 
a plus sign between each of the prem-
ises, and drawing an arrow from the un-
derlined premises to the conclusions 
they support.
6.  Put the argument’s main conclusion at 
the bottom of the diagram.

172 
CHAPTER 7 Analyzing Arguments
 3.   Don’t copy off Sturdley’s exam. He’s one of the worst students in class. My 
roommate told me he’s bombed every test this semester. 
 4.   Afﬁ rmative action in higher education is morally justiﬁ able because it com-
pensates for past discrimination, provides valuable role models for women 
and minorities, and promotes multicultural understanding. 
 5.   This is either my car or Sandy’s car. If it is my car, my key should ﬁ t in the 
lock. But my key doesn’t ﬁ t in the lock. So, this is Sandy’s car.  
 6.   Wexford College is a really great college. The students are friendly.  The fac-
ulty really care about the students. The campus is beautiful, and the athletic 
facilities are great. 
 7.   Only three people could have stolen the CD: Danny, Stacy, or Patrick. But 
Stacy couldn’t have stolen the CD because she was out riding her bike. 
Patrick couldn’t have stolen the CD because he was at a friend’s house. 
Therefore, Danny must have stolen the CD. 
 8.   Something is a square only if it is a rectangle. But this isn’t a rectangle. Look, 
it has only three sides, and some of the sides aren’t even straight. So, this can’t 
be a square. 
 9.   Lasse speaks ﬂ uent Finnish. It is likely, then, that Lasse was born in Finland.
Anyone born in Finland is a Finnish citizen. So Lasse is likely a Finnish 
citizen. Finnish citizens are entitled to European Union travel privileges. So 
Lasse is probably entitled to European Union travel privileges. 
 10.   Several states have abolished the insanity defense as a defense against criminal 
responsibility. This may be popular with voters, but it is morally indefensible. 
Insanity removes moral responsibility, and it is wrong to punish someone 
who is not morally responsible for his crime. Moreover, it is pointless to 
punish the insane because punishment has no deterrent effect on a person 
who cannot appreciate the wrongfulness or criminality of his or her actions.  
 11.   Jeremiah is a bullfrog. It follows—since all bullfrogs are amphibians—that 
Jeremiah is an amphibian. All amphibians can drink wine. So Jeremiah can 
help me drink my wine. 
 12.   It’s foolish to smoke cigarettes. Smoking is expensive, unhealthy, and obnox-
ious to many nonsmokers. I wouldn’t date anyone who smokes cigarettes. 
 13.   If today is Saturday, then tomorrow is Sunday. If tomorrow is Sunday, then 
we’ll be having pasta for dinner. If we’ll be having pasta for dinner, then I 
should pick up some red wine today because in this state wine can be pur-
chased only at liquor stores, and the liquor stores are closed on Sundays. 
Today is Saturday. Therefore, I should pick up some red wine today. 
 14.   It makes no sense to ask God for things in prayer. The thing you ask for is 
either good or it is not. If it is good, God will do it anyway. If it is not, he 
won’t. In neither case can your prayer make any difference.4 
 15.   If Amy isn’t dating Sturdley, she’s dating Mel or Steve. Amy isn’t dating 
Sturdley because she doesn’t date anyone who uses drugs, and Sturdley  sniffs 
glue practically every weekend. Thus, Amy is dating Mel or Steve. Amy 
won’t date anyone who isn’t a football player, however, nor will she date 
anyone who isn’t good-looking. Both Mel and Steve are good-looking, but 
Steve isn’t a football player. Consequently, Amy is not dating Steve. We can 
logically deduce, therefore, that Amy is dating Mel. 

 
Diagramming Short Arguments 
173
II.  Diagram the following real-life arguments using the method presented in this 
section. For convenience, the statements have been numbered. 
  1.   Since ➀ our feelings, desires, and preferences can be either beneﬁ cial or 
harmful, noble or ignoble, praiseworthy or damnable, and since ➁ they can 
be either in harmony or in conﬂ ict with other people’s feelings, desires, and 
preferences, ➂ they are obviously not accurate tools for analysis of moral 
 issues or trustworthy guidelines to action. (Vincent Ryan Ruggiero,  The 
Moral Imperative, 2nd ed.) 
 2.    ➀ Suppose you had one sheep which fell into a ditch on the Sabbath; is 
there one of you who would not catch hold of it and lift it out? And ➁ 
surely a man is worth more than a sheep! ➂ It is therefore permitted to do 
good on the Sabbath (Jesus, Matt. 12:11–12) 
 3.    ➀ Wealth is not sought except for the sake of something else, because ➁ of 
itself it brings us no good, but only when we use it, whether for the support 
of the body or some similar purpose. Now ➂ the highest good is sought 
for its own sake, and not for another’s sake. Therefore ➃ wealth is not man’s 
highest good. (St. Thomas Aquinas,  Summa Contra Gentiles ) 
 4.   ➀ School tests should be abolished. ➁ Tests introduce competition where 
it does not belong. ➂ They deny the individuality of students’ talents and 
interests. ➃ They degrade education by encouraging passivity, mindlessness, 
and triviality. Finally, ➄ they send the wrong messages about what is valu-
able in education and in life. (stated but not endorsed in E. D. Hirsch Jr.,  The 
Schools We Need and Why We Don’t Have Them ) 
 5.    ➀ The rule of equal incomes is socially impracticable. ➁ It would deter the 
great majority of the more efﬁ cient from putting forth their best efforts 
and turning out their maximum product. As a consequence, ➂ the total 
volume of product would be so diminished as to render the share of the 
great majority of persons smaller than it would have been under a rational 
plan of unequal distribution. (John A. Ryan,  Distributive Justice,  3rd ed.)  
 6.   ➀ Many that live deserve death. And ➁ some that die deserve life. ➂ Can 
you give it to them? Then ➃ do not be too eager to deal out death in judg-
ment. ➄ For even the wise cannot see all ends. (Gandalf, in J. R. R. Tolkien, 
 The Lord of the Rings ) 
 7.    ➀ Everything eternal is necessary. But ➁ whatever God wills, He wills from 
eternity, for ➂ otherwise His will would be mutable. Therefore, ➃ what-
ever He wills, He wills necessarily. (stated but not endorsed in Saint Thomas 
Aquinas,  Summa Theologica ) 
 8.   ➀ Testing at the national level is indicated; ➁ we are all aware of the abysmal 
education of too many young people, especially in certain areas and certain 
schools. ➂ Such people tend to become narrow-minded, ignorant and hate-
ful, and contribute little to advancing the highest ideals of which we are 
capable. ➃ National testing can help to devote extra attention to such places. 
( John D. Leith, letter to the editor,  The Key Reporter ) 
 9.   ➀ If a body moves, either it must move in the place where it is or in the 
place where it is not. But ➁ it cannot move in the place where it is, and ➂ 
it cannot move in the place where it is not. Therefore, ➃ no body can move. 
(Zeno, “Paradoxes”)  

174 
CHAPTER 7 Analyzing Arguments
 10.   ➀ Education implies teaching. ➁ Teaching implies knowledge. ➂ Knowl-
edge is truth. ➃ The truth is everywhere the same. Hence ➄ education 
should be everywhere the same. (Robert Maynard Hutchins,  The Higher 
Learning in the United States )  
 11.  ➀ All humans have equal positive value. ➁ There is no morally relevant 
difference between humans and some animals (such as mammals). Therefore, 
➂ some animals have equal positive worth with humans. ➃ Moral rights 
derive from the possession of value. Since ➄ humans have rights (to life, 
not to be harmed, and so forth), ➅ animals have those same rights. (Louis P. 
Pojman,  Global Environmental Ethics ) 
 12.  ➀ True/false and multiple-choice tests have well-known limits. ➁ No 
matter how carefully questions are worded, some ambiguities will remain. ➂ 
The format of the questions prohibits in-depth testing of important analytic 
skills. ➃ Students can become so “test savvy” that objective tests measure 
test-taking skill as much as subject-matter content. (Douglas J. Soccio, 
 Instructor’s Manual for Archetypes of Wisdom, 3rd ed.) 
 13.   ➀ Planetary exploration has many virtues. ➁ It permits us to reﬁ ne insights 
derived from such Earth-bound sciences as meteorology, climatology, geology 
and biology, to broaden their powers and improve their practical applications 
here on Earth. ➂ It provides cautionary tales on the alternative fates of worlds. 
➃ It is an aperture to future high technologies important for life here on 
Earth. ➄ It provides an outlet for the traditional human zest for exploration 
and discovery, our passion to ﬁ nd out, which has been to a very large degree 
responsible for our success as a species. And ➅ it permits us, for the ﬁ rst 
time in history, to approach with rigor, with a signiﬁ cant chance of ﬁ nding 
out the true answers, questions on the origins and destinies of worlds, the 
beginnings and ends of life, and the possibilities of other beings who live in 
the skies—questions as basic to the human enterprise as thinking is, as natural 
as breathing. (Carl Sagan,  Broca’s Brain: Ref lections on the Romance of Science )  
 14.  ➀ Creation has no place in a science class because ➁ it is not science. Why 
not? Because ➂ creationism cannot offer a scientiﬁ c hypothesis that is capa-
ble of being shown wrong. ➃ Creationism cannot describe a single possible 
experiment that could elucidate the mechanics of creation. ➄ Creationism 
cannot point to a single prediction that has turned out to be right, and sup-
ports the creationist case. ➅ Creationism cannot offer a single instance of 
research that has followed the normal course of scientiﬁ c inquiry, namely, 
independent testing and veriﬁ cation by skeptical researchers. (Douglas 
J. Futuyma,  Science on Trial: The Case for Evolution ) 
 15.  ➀ Nonhuman animals lack linguistic capacity, and, for this reason, ➁ lack a men-
tal or psychological life. Thus, ➂ animals are not sentient. ➃ If so, of course, they 
cannot be caused pain, appearances to the contrary. Hence, ➄ there can be no 
duty not to cause them pain. (Christine Pierce and Donald VanDeveer, “General 
Introduction,” in Christine Pierce and Donald VanDeveer, eds.,  People, Penguins, 
and Plastic Trees: Basic Issues in Environmental Ethics,  2nd ed. [slightly paraphrased])5  
 16.   ➀ All students should study a foreign language. ➁ It improves mastery of 
English. ➂ It helps to avoid cultural provincialism by expanding the cultural 
experience of students. ➃ It is useful for travel and commerce. ➄ It makes 

 
Summarizing Longer Arguments 
175
it possible to do advanced work in a foreign language, including the study 
of the major literary works in that language. Finally, ➅ the ability to read, 
speak, and think in a second language is a source of pleasure and satisfaction 
even if this language is not used for travel and business and even if it does 
not  become a ﬁ eld of further study. (Geraldine Van Doren and Charles Van 
Doren, “A Foreign Language,” in Mortimer J. Adler, ed.,  The Paideia Program: 
An Educational Syllabus [slightly adapted]) 
 17.  ➀ No belief is justiﬁ ed if it can be fully explained as the result of natural 
causes. ➁ If materialism is true, then all beliefs can be explained as the result 
of irrational causes. Therefore ➂ if materialism is true, then no belief is justi-
ﬁ ed. ➃ If no belief is justiﬁ ed, then the belief “materialism is true” is not 
justiﬁ ed. Therefore ➄ materialism should be rejected. ( Victor Reppert,  C. S. 
Lewis’ Dangerous Idea [slightly adapted]) 
 18.  ➀ A square must have exactly four corners, and ➁ a circle must have exactly zero 
corners. So ➂ a round square must have exactly four corners and simultaneously 
have exactly zero corners. But ➃ this is plainly impossible; hence ➄ there cannot 
be a round square. (Erik J.Wielenberg,  God and the Reach of Reason )  
 19.  ➀ Lefty Grove was the greatest pitcher of all time, period. ➁ The one best 
indicator of a pitcher’s ability is his ERA, and ➂ Lefty Grove led leagues in 
earned run average nine times. ➃ No one else even approaches this record. 
➄ The second-best indicator of a pitcher’s ability is his winning percentage. 
Guess what? ➃ Grove also led the league in that more times than anyone 
else. (Bill James,  The Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract  [slightly adapted])  
 20.   ➀ Here is a gentleman of a medical type, but with the air of a military man. 
➁ Clearly an army doctor, then. ➂ He has just come from the tropics, for 
➃ his face is dark, and ➄ that is not the natural tint of his skin, as ➅ his 
wrists are fair. ➆ He has undergone hardship and sickness, as ⑧ his haggard 
face says clearly. ➈ His left arm has been injured. ➉ He holds it in a stiff 
and unnatural manner. Where in the tropics could an English doctor have 
seen much hardship and get his arm wounded?  Clearly in Afghanistan. 
(Sherlock Holmes, in Sir Arthur Conan Doyle,  A Study in Scarlet ) 
 SUMMARIZING LONGER ARGUMENTS 
 Diagramming works well with relatively short arguments, but with longer ar-
guments it quickly becomes tedious and confusing. Consequently, it is usually 
better to  summarize  lengthy arguments rather than diagram them. In summariz-
ing we don’t try to identify every single step in an argument. Instead, the goal of 
an  argument summary  is to provide a synopsis of the argument that accurately 
restates the main points in the summarizer’s own words. In this section we in-
troduce a method for summarizing longer arguments called  standardization.  
 Summarizing involves two skills of argument analysis that are not gener-
ally used in argument diagramming, namely, paraphrasing and ﬁ nding missing 
premises and conclusions. Let’s look at these two skills before we introduce our 
technique for summarizing arguments. 
 The better off 
you become at 
analyzing complex 
problems, the 
better off you are 
for solving them. 
 —Tom Morris 
 A good arguer or 
clear speaker is 
one who excels in 
analyzing or ex-
pressing a process 
of reasoning. 
 —John Henry 
Newman 

176 
CHAPTER 7 Analyzing Arguments
 Paraphrasing 
 The purpose of an argument summary is to clarify an argument’s structure by 
restating its main points as brieﬂ y, clearly, and accurately as possible. Because 
many arguments are expressed in ways that are needlessly wordy, complex, or 
obscure, it is often necessary to restate them in ways that are simpler and easier 
to understand. A  paraphrase is a detailed restatement of a passage using differ-
ent words and phrases. A good paraphrase is  accurate, clear, concise,  and  charitable. 
Let’s look at each of these four qualities. 
 A Good Paraphrase Is Accurate   The ﬁ rst virtue of a good paraphrase is that 
it is accurate. An accurate paraphrase is faithful to an author’s intended meaning; 
it reproduces that meaning fairly and without bias or distortion. For example:
 Original passage 
 Europe has a set of primary interests, which to us have none, or a very 
 remote relation.—Hence, she must be engaged in frequent controversies, the 
causes of which are essentially foreign to our concerns.—Hence, therefore, it 
must be unwise in us to implicate ourselves, by artiﬁ cial ties in the ordinary 
vicissitudes of her politics, or the ordinary combinations and collisions of 
her friendships or enmities. (George Washington, “Farewell Address,” 1796)  
 Paraphrase 1 
 Europe’s vital interests are totally different from ours. For this reason Euro-
pean nations will often become embroiled in conﬂ icts that don’t concern 
us. Therefore, we shouldn’t become involved in Europe’s political affairs. 
 Paraphrase 2 
 Europe has a set of vital interests that are of little or no concern to us. For this 
reason, European nations will often become embroiled in conﬂ icts for reasons 
that don’t concern us. Therefore, we shouldn’t form artiﬁ cial ties that would 
get us involved in the ordinary ups and downs of European politics.  
The ﬁ rst paraphrase clearly distorts Washington’s argument, making it easier 
to attack. Washington does not say, for example, that Europe’s vital interests 
are  totally different from ours. Nor does he say ﬂ atly that we shouldn’t become 
involved in Europe’s political affairs. The second paraphrase is more faithful to 
Washington’s intent. 
 A Good Paraphrase Is Clear    Arguments are often expressed in language 
that is needlessly wordy or confusing. Because one of the basic aims of an argu-
ment summary is to clarify what an argument is saying, it’s often necessary to 
translate (i.e., paraphrase) complex or confusing language into language that’s 
easier to understand. Here are several examples:
  Original passage 
 The patient exhibited symptoms of an edema in the occipital-parietal
region and an abrasion on the left patella. 
 Clearness is the 
ﬁ rst essential.  
 —Quintilian 

 
Summarizing Longer Arguments 
177
 Paraphrase 
 The patient had a bump on the back of his head and a scrape on his left knee. 
  Original passage 
 ’Twas the nocturnal segment of the diurnal period preceding the annual 
Yuletide celebration and throughout our place of residence, kinetic activity 
was not in evidence among the organic possessors of this potential, includ-
ing the species of diminutive rodent known as  Mus musculus . 6 
 Paraphrase 
 ’Twas the night before Christmas, when all through the house, not a crea-
ture was stirring, not even a mouse. 
 In short, any time you can accurately say something more simply and clearly 
than the author has, by all means do so. 
 A Good Paraphrase Is Concise   A good summary captures the essence 
of an argument. It strips away all the irrelevant or unimportant details and 
puts the key points of the argument in a nutshell. To lay bare the essence of an 
argument, it is often necessary to paraphrase portions that can be stated more 
brieﬂ y than they are by the author. Here are some examples:
  Original passage 
 The ofﬁ ce wasn’t open at that point in time, owing to the fact that there 
was no electrical power in the building. (22 words) 
 Paraphrase 
 The ofﬁ ce was closed then because there was no electricity in the building. 
(13 words) 
  Original passage 
 Look round the world: Contemplate the whole and every part of it: You 
will ﬁ nd it to be nothing but one great machine, subdivided into an inﬁ nite 
number of lesser machines, which again admit of subdivisions, to a degree 
beyond what human senses and faculties can trace and explain. All these 
various machines, and even their most minute parts, are adjusted to each 
other with an accuracy, which ravishes into admiration all men, who have 
ever contemplated them. The curious adapting of means to ends, through-
out all nature, resembles exactly, though it much exceeds, the productions 
of human contrivance; of human design, thought, wisdom, and intelli-
gence. Since therefore the effects resemble each other, we are led to infer, 
by all the rules of analogy, that the causes also resemble; and that the 
Author of Nature is somewhat similar to the mind of man; though possessed 
of much larger faculties, proportioned to the grandeur of the work, which he 
has executed. 7 (160 words)  
 Paraphrase 
 The universe is like a giant machine, made up of an inﬁ nite number of 
smaller machines. These machines are similar to human artifacts, though 
 Beware of and 
eschew pompous 
prolixity. 
 —Charles A. 
Beardsley 
 A fool multiplies 
words. 
 —Ecclesiastes 

178 
CHAPTER 7 Analyzing Arguments
far more complicated and impressive. Since human artifacts are made by 
intelligent beings, the universe is probably also made by an Intelligent Being, 
though one far wiser and more powerful than human beings are. (58 words) 
 As these examples show, a paraphrase can be signiﬁ cantly shorter than the 
original but still remain faithful to the author’s intent. 
 It should be noted, however, that to be accurate some paraphrases must 
be longer than the original passage. Suppose, for instance, you are driving 
down a quiet residential street and see a road sign that says, “Watch Children.” 
What this means is that drivers should watch out for children who may be on 
or near the road—not that they should watch the children in their own cars or 
those who might be playing on their front porches. The point is to make the 
paraphrase as concise as possible,  provided  it remains accurate.  
 A Good Paraphrase Is Charitable     It is often possible to interpret a pas-
sage in more than one way. In such cases, the principle of charity requires that 
we interpret the passage as charitably as the evidence reasonably permits. 8 
Here are two examples:
 Original passage 
 You know as well as I do that you can’t get a good job today unless you have 
a college degree. So, I hope you’ll rethink your decision not to go to college.  
 First paraphrase 
 No one can get a good job today unless they have a college degree, so I 
hope you’ll rethink your decision not to go to college. 
 Second paraphrase 
 It’s very difﬁ cult to get a good job today unless one has a college degree, so 
I hope you’ll rethink your decision not to go to college. 
  Original passage 
 Cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. Therefore, if you continue to smoke, 
you are endangering your health. 
 First paraphrase 
 Cigarette smoking invariably produces lung cancer. Therefore, if you 
continue to smoke, you are endangering your health. 
  Second paraphrase 
 Cigarette smoking is a causal factor that greatly increases the risk of getting 
lung cancer. Therefore, if you continue to smoke, you are endangering your 
health. 
 In these examples, the second paraphrases are better than the ﬁ rst because they 
clarify the arguer’s intent in ways that make the arguments stronger and less 
easy to attack. 
 Genius is the 
ability to reduce 
the complicated to 
the simple. 
 —C. W. Cernan 
 Kindness in 
thinking creates 
profoundness. 
 —Lao-tzu 

 
Summarizing Longer Arguments 
179
 EXERCISE 7.2 
  Paraphrase the following passages. Be prepared to share your answers with the 
class as a whole. ( Note: You’ll probably need a dictionary for this exercise.) 
  1.   Californians are friendly. 
 2.   It’s the squeaky wheel that gets the grease. 
 3.   Thou shalt not kill. (Exodus 20:13) 
 4.   Only man is rational. 
 5.   Past cure is past care. 
 6.   No person except a natural born Citizen . . . shall be eligible to the Ofﬁ ce of 
President. (U.S. Constitution, Article 2) 
 7.   Money can’t buy happiness. 
 8.   If I don’t see you, have a nice holiday. 
 9.   All men are created equal. (Declaration of Independence) 
 10.    A well-regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the 
right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed. (Second 
Amendment) 
 11.   He jests at scars that never felt a wound. (Shakespeare) 
 12.   With reference to yesterday’s electronic-mail communication from you, I 
would urge you to take into consideration that at this point in time there are 
no parking facilities within close proximity to the convention center, due to 
the fact that the Jefferson Street Parking Garage is currently closed for repairs.  
 13.    Prudence, indeed, will dictate that Governments long established should 
not be changed for light and transient causes; and accordingly all experi-
ence hath shown, that mankind are more disposed to suffer, while evils are 
sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they 
are accustomed. But when a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing 
invariably the same Object evinces a design to reduce them under abso-
lute Despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such Govern-
ment and to provide new Guards for their future security. (Declaration of 
 Independence) 
 14.    Not every man should have the knowledge of his duty left to his own judg-
ment; he should have it prescribed to him, and not be allowed to choose at 
his discretion. Otherwise, seeing the imbecility and inﬁ nite variety of our 
reasons and opinions, we should in the end forge for ourselves duties that 
would set us on devouring one another. (Michel de Montaigne) 
 15.    In 1994, Missouri lawmakers passed a law intended, according to a later 
Missouri Supreme Court interpretation, to outlaw nonconsensual sex. The 
law read as follows: “A person commits the crime of sexual misconduct in 
the ﬁ rst degree if he has deviate sexual intercourse with another person of 
the same sex, or he purposely subjects another person to sexual contact or 
engages in conduct which would constitute sexual contact except that the 
touching occurs through the clothing without that person’s consent.” 9 
 
   
 What does this law, read literally, actually prohibit? How would you 
paraphrase it to express more accurately and clearly the lawmakers’ intent? 
 

180 
CHAPTER 7 Analyzing Arguments
 Finding Missing Premises and Conclusions 
 In real life, people often leave parts of their arguments unstated. Sometimes a 
premise is left unstated:
 Store clerk: I’m sorry, I can’t sell you any beer; you’re under twenty-one. 
Implied here is the premise, “I can’t sell beer to anyone under twenty-one.” 
 In other cases, a conclusion is left unstated:
 Advertisement: The bigger the burger, the better the burger. Burgers are 
 bigger at Burger King. 
Implied here is the conclusion, “Burgers are better at Burger King.” 
 There are many reasons why a premise or conclusion might be implied 
rather than stated. Sometimes the missing statement is something so obvious 
and familiar that it would be tedious to state it explicitly. For example:
 Sally can’t drive because she doesn’t have a driver’s license. 
 Understood here is the premise, “No one can drive without a driver’s license.” 
This is something so widely known that in most contexts it can simply be 
assumed. 
 At other times an arguer may leave a premise or conclusion unstated 
because he wishes to conceal a weak or questionable step in his argument. For 
example:
 She’s Cuban, so she’s probably hot-tempered. 
Here the unstated premise is “Most Cubans are hot-tempered.” By leaving this 
questionable premise unstated, the arguer makes the argument appear stronger 
than it actually is. 
 An argument with a missing premise or conclusion is called an  enthymeme. 
There are two basic rules in ﬁ lling in missing steps in enthymemes: 10 
1.   Faithfully interpret the arguer’s intentions.  The most important rule in ﬁ lling 
in missing premises and conclusions is to be as accurate as possible in 
interpreting an arguer’s intent. A missing premise or conclusion is a 
genuine part of an argument only if it was implicitly understood to be 
part of the argument by the arguer himself. Consequently, we should 
always try to ﬁ ll in a missing step in an argument in a way that the 
arguer himself would recognize as expressing his own thought. One 
way to determine this is to ask  what else the arguer must assume—that 
he does not say—to reach his conclusion.  All assumptions you add to the 
argument must be consistent with everything the arguer says.  
2.   Be charitable. Sometimes it is difﬁ cult or impossible to know what 
unstated premise or conclusion an arguer had implicitly in mind. 
In such cases, the principle of charity requires that we interpret the 
argument as generously as possible. In general, this means that we 
should search for a way of completing the argument that (1) is a 
plausible way of interpreting the arguer’s uncertain intent and 
 One of the famil-
iar tricks of the 
orator or propa-
gandist is to leave 
certain things un-
said, things that 
are highly relevant 
to the argument, 
but that might 
be challenged if 
they were made 
explicit. 
 —Mortimer Adler 
and Charles 
Van Doren 

 
Summarizing Longer Arguments 
181
(2) makes the argument as good an argument as it can be. Such 
judgments require practice and skill. But you’ll seldom be far off 
the mark if you remember this simple golden rule:  Be as generous in 
interpreting other people’s incompletely stated arguments as you would like 
them to be in interpreting your own. 
 EXERCISE 7.3 
 I.   Assume that the following arguments are deductive. Identify the missing 
premises or conclusions that are needed to make the arguments deductively valid. 
  1.   Because this is a Mazda Miata, it’s a convertible. 
 2.   All Volkswagens are fuel efﬁ cient, and this Beetle is a Volkswagen.  
 3.   Either Blazers are made by Chevy, or Blazers are made by Ford. Therefore, 
Blazers are made by Chevy. 
 4.   This is a Civic only if it’s a Honda. Therefore, this is not a Civic. 
 5.   If this is a Camaro, then it’s a Chevy. If this is a Firebird, then it’s a Pontiac. 
Therefore, this is either a Chevy or a Pontiac. 
 6.   Ford Windstars are roomy; after all, Windstars are minivans. 
 7.   If this is a Camry or a Corolla, then it’s a Toyota. If this is a Toyota, then it 
gets good gas mileage. This is a Corolla. Therefore, it gets good gas mileage. 
 8.   If this car gets good gas mileage, it’s good for the environment. If this car 
doesn’t get good gas mileage, I don’t want it. This car isn’t good for the 
environment. Therefore, I don’t want it. 
 9.   Either this is a Contour or it’s a Mystique. If this is a Contour, it’s a Ford. If 
this is a Mystique, it’s a Mercury. 
 10.   Some Fords are trucks because all Rangers are trucks. 
II.  Identify the missing premises or conclusions in the following enthymemes. 
Some of the arguments are deductive and some are inductive. 
  1.   Li Fong is from Singapore, so she probably speaks English. 
 2.   Boxing should be banned because it’s dangerous. 
 3.   Angela is blonde, so she’s probably dumb. 
 4.   If it’s snowing, then it’s cold. My car won’t start if it’s cold. My car will start. 
If it’s not snowing, then Uncle Fred will be coming over for dinner. 
 5.   Kevin graduated from Princeton, so he must be smart. Therefore, he should 
be able to solve this logic puzzle in the time allotted. 
 6.   If I’m Bill Gates, I’m rich. Hence, I’m not Bill Gates. Hence, I’m not the 
chairman of Microsoft. 
 7.   If today is Thursday, Zoe is either at work or on the golf course. Therefore, 
Zoe is at work. 
 8.   Everything in this world will come to an end. So, my life will come to an 
end, and all the consequences of my life will come to an end. Thus, my life is 
meaningless, and so is everything else. 11 
 9.   If Sparky committed the robbery, he was working for Curley. If Sparky was 
working for Curley, Bugsy drove the getaway car. But Bugsy became totally 
blind last year. So, I guess we can cross Sparky off our list of suspects. 

182 
CHAPTER 7 Analyzing Arguments
 10.   Most Hampton College students are Republicans. Therefore, Jay is probably 
a Republican. I know he voted the straight Republican ticket in the last 
election. I also know that he regularly attends meetings of the Young 
Republicans. Because Jay is probably a Republican, it’s likely that he favors a 
constitutional amendment banning abortion. 
 
 Summarizing Extended Arguments 
 Now that we have learned how to paraphrase passages and ﬁ ll in missing 
premises and conclusions, it is time to introduce our method for summarizing 
longer arguments. The method is called  standardization because it consists of 
restating an argument in standard logical form. An argument is said to be in 
 standard logical form  when each step in the argument is numbered consecu-
tively, premises are stated above the conclusions they are claimed to support, 
and justiﬁ cations are provided for each conclusion in the argument. 
 The following list shows the steps in argument standardization. 
 How to Standardize an Extended Argument 
1.   Read through the argument carefully and try to identify its main 
conclusion (it may be only implied). Once you have identiﬁ ed the 
main conclusion, go back through the argument to identify major 
premises and subconclusions offered in support of the main conclu-
sion. Paraphrase as needed to clarify meaning. 
2.   Omit any unnecessary or irrelevant material. Focus only on the key 
points in the argument. Omit any statements that provide little or no 
direct support for the main conclusion.
 3.   Number the steps in the argument and stack them in correct logical 
order (i.e., with the premises placed above the conclusions they are 
intended to support). State the main conclusion last. 
4.   Fill in any key missing premises or conclusions. Don’t worry about 
ﬁ lling in all missing steps in the argument. Include only those miss-
ing premises or conclusions that are important in understanding and 
evaluating the central argument. Place brackets around implied state-
ments to indicate that they have been added to the argument. 
5.   Add parenthetical justiﬁ cations for each conclusion in the argument. 
In other words, for each conclusion or subconclusion, indicate in pa-
rentheses from which previous lines in the argument the conclusion 
or subconclusion is claimed to directly follow. 
 Let’s practice this technique for summarizing extended arguments with a 
few examples. First, a very brief example provides a quick illustration of how 
the method works:
 [The] desire for perfect happiness is inborn in all of us, it is a universal 
human longing, it is rooted in human nature. But everything that is in 
human nature has been put there by God. In His Wisdom and Goodness, 
Dispense with 
triﬂ es.
 —Shakespeare 

 
Summarizing Longer Arguments 
183
he could not have implanted a natural longing that was impossible to ful-
ﬁ ll. Therefore, there must exist, somehow, a real perfect happiness which is 
within the capacity of struggling men to attain. 12 
In this argument there are four statements: three premises and a conclusion 
(here stated last and indicated by the word  therefore ). To standardize the argu-
ment, we ﬁ rst number the statements and list them in logical order:
1.  The desire for perfect happiness is a natural longing, inborn in all 
human beings. 
2.  Everything that is in human nature has been put there by God. 
3.  In His Wisdom and Goodness, God could not have implanted a natural 
longing that was impossible to fulﬁ ll.  
4.  Therefore, it must be possible for human beings to achieve perfect 
happiness. 
Next we check to see whether any of the steps in the argument are un-
necessary or irrelevant. In this short argument, none is. 
 Then we check to see whether there are any crucial premises or conclu-
sions missing in the argument. In this case, no statements need to be added 
because the argument is deductively valid as it stands. 
 Finally, we add justiﬁ cations to indicate which premises are intended to 
support which conclusions. In this case, there are three premises that support 
the conclusion. The complete argument summary is as follows:
1.  The desire for perfect happiness is a natural longing, inborn in all 
human beings. 
2.  Everything that is in human nature has been put there by God. 
3.  In His Wisdom and Goodness, God could not have implanted a natural 
longing that was impossible to fulﬁ ll.  
4.  Therefore, it must be possible for human beings to achieve perfect 
happiness. (from 1–3) 
Here’s a slightly more complex example:
 We can see something only after it has happened. Future events, however, 
have not yet happened. So, seeing a future event seems to imply both that 
it has and has not happened, and that’s logically impossible. 13 
Reading this argument carefully, we can see that it contains three stated prem-
ises and one stated subconclusion. First, we number the statements and list 
them in logical order:
1.  We can see something only after it has happened. 
2.  Future events have not yet happened. 
3.    So, seeing a future event seems to imply both that it has and has not 
happened.  
4.  It is logically impossible for an event both to have happened and not to 
have happened. 

184 
CHAPTER 7 Analyzing Arguments
Second, we check to see whether the argument contains any unnecessary or 
irrelevant steps. In this case, none of the statements is unnecessary or irrelevant. 
 Third, we look to see if there are any important premises or conclusions 
missing in the argument. Examining the argument, we see at a glance that 
there is indeed an important step missing: the argument is lacking a main con-
clusion. Reading closely, we see that what follows logically from the argument 
is this conclusion:
 It is logically impossible to see a future event. 
Thus, we add this conclusion to the argument, using brackets to indicate that it 
is implied rather than stated. Finally, we add parenthetical justiﬁ cations to indi-
cate which premises are claimed to support which conclusions. The complete 
argument summary, then, is this:
1.  We can see something only after it has happened. 
2.  Future events have not yet happened. 
3.  So, seeing a future event seems to imply both that it has and has not 
happened. (from 1–2) 
4.  It is logically impossible for an event both to have happened and not to 
have happened. 
5.  [Therefore, it is logically impossible to see a future event.] (from 3–4) 
Here is a more complex example:
 EBR’s Students Need Your Vote 
 Students in East Baton Rouge Parish schools need your help today. Please 
vote to extend, for 10 years, a 4.98-mill property tax that helps operate the 
public school system. 
 
 The School Board has been strapped for funds for several years. State 
aid is stagnant, property tax revenue has grown more slowly than inﬂ ation 
and the board has trimmed considerable fat from its budget. 
 
 Losing the $6.7 million a year generated by the tax would force budget 
cuts that could affect the quality of learning in a school system already 
struggling to improve academic achievement. 
 
 This tax should not be confused with the School Board’s past or potential 
proposals to raise taxes for school improvements. This tax is modest, 
amounting to less than 3 percent of the system’s general revenue. It already 
is on the books; voting “for” won’t raise anyone’s taxes, but just keep 
them from dropping slightly. And the money will keep going to day-to-day 
operations, not new buildings or programs. 
 
 We understand why some people are less than satisﬁ ed with the School 
Board and might be eager to send a message. But a negative vote today will 
not hurt the board; it will hurt the 56,000 students who rely on the public 
schools for an education. 
 
 Voters probably will have a chance to vote for or against another tax-
increase plan this summer. They deﬁ nitely will have a chance to vote on School 
Board members when all the board seats come up for election this fall. 
 
 Today, vote for the students. 14 

 
Summarizing Longer Arguments 
185
 Here is one reader’s standardization of the argument:
1.  The School Board has been short of money for several years because 
state aid has not increased, inﬂ ation has outstripped increases in prop-
erty tax revenue, and the board has cut spending. 
2.  Losing the $6.7 million a year generated by the tax would force budget 
cuts that could harm the quality of learning at a time when schools are 
struggling to improve academic achievement. 
3.  [Voters should not place the quality of learning at risk by depriving the 
school system of money.] 
4.  The tax is not a large one, but amounts to less than 3 percent of the 
school system’s general revenue. 
5.  The tax is already in effect, meaning that taxes will stay as they are now 
rather than go up. 
6.  The money will be used to fund the daily operation of the schools, not 
to build new buildings or add programs. 
7.  Voting against the tax will hurt the 56,000 students who rely on the 
public schools. 
8.  Therefore, voters in East Baton Rouge should vote for the 4.98-mill 
property tax that funds public school operation. (from 1–7) 
This standardization, though somewhat lengthy, is relatively straight- 
forward: little paraphrasing is required, and there are few missing premises or 
conclusions. Not all arguments, however, can be reconstructed so easily. Here 
is an argument that requires more-radical reconstruction:
 Editor: 
 Regarding your editorial (Sept. 7), “Give us better SAT scores,” that’s the 
last thing we need! It is common knowledge that many successful entre-
preneurs and inventors were not high honor students. In fact, many were 
high school and college drop-outs, and many did not get outstanding 
SAT scores. 
 
 Professional speaker Jim Rohn states: “Formal education will earn 
you a living. Self-education will earn you a fortune. You determine how 
much of a fortune you will earn by how much self-education you decide 
to get.” 
 
 So, there must be better predictors of success than grades and stan-
dardized tests. As a business owner, I want to hire people who have excel-
lent people skills and positive attitudes and are committed to doing quality 
work. These skills are a million times more important to me, as well as to 
other employers in the long run, than perfect SAT scores. 
 
 In my opinion, our country is in the shape it’s in because of our illit-
eracy in human relations. Memorization-based education does not teach 
our children how to ﬁ nd answers, solve problems, deal with difﬁ culties in 
their personal or professional lives, take responsibility for their actions, or 
develop their skills and talents. It does encourage people to seek the easy 
way out. And it destroys our children’s ability to use their common sense. 

186 
CHAPTER 7 Analyzing Arguments
The United States has more people in prison, in terms of percentage of 
population, than any other nation. They’re not there because they didn’t 
memorize easily looked-up information. 
 
 The political and power structures of the medical community as well 
as our legal system damage our country with their lack of common sense. 
Throughout history, mainstream organizations have always resisted 
change. The most educated people believed the earth was ﬂ at. It was the 
so-called dumbbell who proved them wrong. 
 
 If we want high scores, let’s get them in kindness. In the words of Theo-
dore Roosevelt, “The most important single ingredient in the formula of 
success is knowing how to get along with people.” 
 
 So tell me about the schools where our kids get great grades in kind-
ness and consideration. You can build a life on those traits. We can build 
bombs and prisons when we focus on the opposite. 15 
 This argument is neither as clear nor as well organized as the previous 
argument we examined. Here is one reader’s attempt to summarize the writer’s 
central argument:
1.  Memorization-based education does not teach our children how to ﬁ nd 
answers, solve problems, deal with difﬁ culties in their personal or pro-
fessional lives, take responsibility for their actions, or develop their skills 
and talents. 
2.  Memorization-based education encourages people to take the easy way 
out and destroys our children’s ability to use their common sense. 
3.  Memorization-based education is largely responsible for the bad 
shape this country is in today, including the high prison population 
and the lack of basic common sense in our medical and legal 
communities. 
4.  [Thus, memorization-based education is a mistake. (from 1–3)] 
5.  [The SAT is mainly a test of memorized information.] 
6.  Many successful entrepreneurs and inventors were high school or 
college drop-outs who did not get outstanding SAT scores. 
7.  Good people skills are a million times more important to employers 
than perfect SAT scores. 
8.  Thus, success in life depends much more on good people skills than it 
does on good grades or high SAT scores. (from 6–7) 
9.  [Therefore, contrary to the September 7 editorial, it is much more 
important for schools to teach good people skills than it is for them 
to teach the kinds of memorized information tested on the SAT. 
(from 4–5, 8)]  
This argument is fairly typical of arguments encountered in letters to 
the editor, radio talk shows, and other popular forums. Key parts of the argu-
ment are left unstated (including the main conclusion), some statements ap-
pear to have little or no relevance to the main conclusion, and a fair amount 
of paraphrasing and reading between the lines is needed to clarify the author’s 

 
Summarizing Longer Arguments 
187
apparent intent. The standardization we have offered is an example of the kind 
of major reconstruction that is sometimes needed to summarize an argument 
brieﬂ y and accurately. 
 Common Mistakes to Avoid in Standardizing Arguments 
 It takes practice to become good at standardizing arguments. Here are some 
common mistakes to watch out for. 
1.   Don’t write in incomplete sentences. 
 Example 1 
1.  Because animals can experience pain and suffering ( incorrect ) 
2.  Therefore, it’s wrong to kill or mistreat animals. (from 1) 
 Line 1 is a sentence fragment, not a complete sentence. Because ar-
guments are composed entirely of statements (i.e., sentences that can 
sensibly be regarded as true or false), only complete sentences should 
be included in argument standardizations. In this argument the stan-
dardization can be repaired simply by deleting the word  because in 
the ﬁ rst line. The correct version is thus 
 Example 2 
1.  Animals can experience pain and suffering. ( correct ) 
2.  Therefore, it’s wrong to kill or mistreat animals. (from 1) 
2.   Don’t include more than one statement per line. 
 Example 3 
 1.  The president should resign, since he no longer enjoys the conﬁ dence 
of the Board of Trustees. ( incorrect ) 
 There are two statements on this line: a premise (“he no longer 
enjoys the conﬁ dence of the Board of Trustees”) and a conclusion 
(“The president should resign”). These two statements should be 
placed on separate lines as follows: 
 Example 4 
1.  The president no longer enjoys the conﬁ dence of the Board of 
Trustees.  
2.  Therefore, he should resign. (from 1) ( correct ) 
3.   Don’t include anything that is not a statement. 
 Example 5 
1.  It’s all the same whether there’s a Democrat or a Republican in the 
White House. 
2.  Therefore, why should I care about presidential politics? (from 1) 
( incorrect ) 

188 
CHAPTER 7 Analyzing Arguments
 Here the second line is phrased as a rhetorical question rather than as 
a statement. Because only statements are included in arguments, for 
the argument to be standardized this question must be rephrased as a 
statement. This can be done as follows: 
 Example 6 
1.  It’s all the same whether there’s a Democrat or a Republican in the 
White House. 
2.  Therefore, I have no reason to care about presidential politics. (from 1) 
( correct ) 
4.   Don’t include anything that is not a premise or a conclusion. 
 Example 7 
1.  Many people today argue that capital punishment is morally wrong. 
( incorrect ) 
2.  But the Good Book says, “an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.” 
3.  What the Good Book says is true. 
4.  Therefore, capital punishment is not morally wrong. (from 2–3) 
 Arguments are composed entirely of premises and conclusions. In 
this argument, the ﬁ rst line is neither a premise nor a conclusion. 
Therefore, it should be omitted. 
 The following exercise will give you practice in standardizing arguments. 
 EXERCISE 7.4 
 Standardize the following arguments using the method presented in the pre-
ceding section. 
 1.   Professor Jack W. Meiland, offering advice to new college students: There is one 
question which you should  not ask, nor feel any temptation to ask, your 
instructor. That question is: “Will this be on the exam?”  This question infu-
riates many instructors, and rightly so. For this question indicates that your 
main interest is in getting through the course with a good grade rather than 
in learning what the instructor has to teach. It is insulting to the teacher 
who has worked hard to put you in a position to appreciate the material—
its intrinsic interest, its subtlety, its complexity. 
 2.   Douglas J. Futuyma on the limits of science: [S]cience seeks to explain only 
objective knowledge, knowledge that can be acquired independently by 
different investigators if they follow a prescribed course of observation or 
experiment. Many human experiences and concerns are not objective and 
so do not fall within the realm of science. As a result, science has nothing to 
say about aesthetics or morality. . . . The functioning of human society, then, 
clearly requires principles that stem from some source other than science. 
 3.   From Chief Justice Earl Warren’s opinion in  Brown v. Board of Education  (1954): 
Today, education is perhaps the most important function of state and local 

 
Summarizing Longer Arguments 
189
governments. Compulsory school attendance laws and the great expenditures 
for education both demonstrate our recognition of the importance of educa-
tion to our democratic society. It is required in the performance of our most 
basic public responsibilities, even service in the armed forces. It is the very 
foundation of good citizenship. Today it is a principal instrument in awaken-
ing the child to cultural values, in preparing him for later professional train-
ing, and in helping him to adjust normally to his environment. In these days, 
it is doubtful that any child may reasonably be expected to succeed in life if 
he is denied the opportunity of an education. Such an opportunity, where 
the state has undertaken to provide it, is a right which must be made available 
to all on equal terms.  
 4.    Professor Vincent Ryan Ruggiero on teaching critical thinking to students of all ability 
levels:  Thinking instruction in elementary and secondary education should 
not be limited to the honors program. Everyone needs thinking skills to meet 
the demands of career and citizenship. More important, everyone needs such 
skills to realize his or her potential as a human being. The highest of Abraham 
Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs, self-actualization, is unachievable with-
out the ability to think productively. Thus to deny meaningful instruction in 
thinking to students below a certain IQ or proﬁ ciency level is to deny them 
an essential part of their humanity. Similarly, the constitutional guarantees 
of freedom to speak, to choose one’s own religion, and so on, lose much of 
their meaning when only some individuals are trained to evaluate and choose 
among competing views.  
 5.    Management Professor James O’Toole on vocational education (slightly adapted):  
Consideration should be given to providing all students in the twelfth grade 
with some kind of work-and-study experience. This would help to overcome 
age segregation by allowing students to observe adults at work and, in doing 
so, to learn what it is like to work all day. It would give students the opportu-
nity to overcome stereotypes about people who perform kinds of jobs differ-
ent from their parents’. The jobs would enhance the meaning of schoolwork, 
because students would see how education actually contributes to workaday 
life. Young people would come to know better what they really like to do and 
what they are good at doing, and thus develop clearer career aspirations. Most 
important, the work experience could be used to make classroom discussions 
of social and economic institutions vivid and individually relevant.  
 6.   From a newspaper call-in column: My opinion regarding the amount of 
homework a child receives is basically threefold. I don’t believe the children 
should receive any homework whatsoever. One, because the teacher has 
seven or eight hours during the course of the school day to instruct children 
and do work assignments with them, to review material for tests. They do 
not need to be sending work home. To me, homework is an excuse for a 
teacher’s lack of ability to do their job properly. Two, there are too many 
children that come home with either no adult there or no adult with the 
ability to help them with their homework. That places too many children 
at a disadvantage compared to other children who have their parents there 
to help them with their homework. Three, an adult spends eight hours at 
work, comes home, and has the rest of the day to enjoy themselves. That is a 

190 
CHAPTER 7 Analyzing Arguments
luxury that a child should deﬁ nitely be afforded. They don’t need to spend 
time after school. Teacher, it is time to wake up. 
 7.   Theologian Thomas Aquinas on the greatest evil in life: It is impossible for any 
sorrow or pain to be man’s greatest evil. For all sorrow or pain is either for 
something that is truly evil, or for something that is apparently evil, but 
good in reality. Now pain or sorrow for that which is truly evil cannot be 
the greatest evil: for there is something worse, namely, either not to reckon 
as evil that which is really evil, or not to reject it. Again, sorrow or pain, for 
that which is apparently evil, but really good, cannot be the greatest evil, for 
it would be worse to be altogether separated from that which is truly good. 
Hence it is impossible for any sorrow or pain to be man’s greatest evil.  
 8.   Educators Ann Flanagan and David Grissmer on improving lower-performing 
public schools:  Besides disproportionately low spending and high num-
bers of disadvantaged students, there are several other reasons that urban, 
southern, and western school districts should receive the focus of policy 
attention. First, students in these areas constitute a growing proportion 
of U.S. students, and future productivity will depend on learning how to 
provide better education for them. Second, recent research suggests that 
the achievement scores of minority and disadvantaged students respond to 
additional well-targeted educational expenditures and that signiﬁ cant score 
gains could occur. Third, research also suggests that additional educational 
investment might be recouped through lower future social expenditures 
and improved economic productivity. Fourth, such policies would reduce 
the achievement gap between racial or ethnic and income groups—a 
source of continuing social and political divisions and economic costs in 
society. Finally, improving the United States’ international standing requires 
lifting the scores of these students.  
 9.   From a  newspaper editorial: The recent use of mail ballots in Oregon’s election 
of a U.S. senator has led some people to hail this as the wave of the future in 
our democratic republic. 
 We do not share that enthusiasm. 
 The primary advantage of the mail ballot is that it requires little time 
and effort on the part of the voter. We think that also is a primary shortcom-
ing of this process. 
 It is worth a little of both our time and our energy to exercise the right 
to vote, and that personal investment should serve to make us a bit more 
conscious of the value of that opportunity. 
 Another negative aspect for the electorate is that a mail election neces-
sarily must take place over a relatively long time frame, rather than a single 
day that is the culmination of an election campaign process. 
 That means voters who cast their ballots near the end of the designated 
voting period might have a larger volume of information, and perhaps more 
accurate information, than those who vote early in the process. 
 We also are seriously concerned about the potential for voter fraud in 
elections conducted by mail. A state with Louisiana’s political history would 
be fertile ground for that. 

 
Summarizing Longer Arguments 
191
 Finally, we take note of one of the more ironic potential shortcomings 
of this procedure, and that is the very fact that this process involves using the 
mail, rather than a voting machine. 
 Many of us, at one time or another, have sent or received mail that, 
through no fault of our own, did not arrive on time or was lost altogether. 
 We would prefer not to risk having that happen to our ballots in any 
local, federal or state election. 
 10.   Carmen F.  Ambrosino on why drugs shouldn’t be legalized: I am hoping that 
you’re as fed up as I am with all this pro-legalization of drugs nonsense. It is 
offensive to those of us who have dedicated our lives to helping the addicted 
and their families. 
 Some people might say I have a self-serving reason for writing this 
article, because I work in the drug treatment and prevention/education ﬁ eld. 
 Well, consider this: If I was selﬁ sh, I’d say legalize drugs because, without 
doubt, all drug treatment professionals would have an abundance of work. 
Rather, we treatment professionals are dedicated to signiﬁ cantly reducing 
and eventually eliminating America’s No. 1 health problem. 
 I would welcome the day when our drug problem will be so 
insigniﬁ cant that there would no longer be a need for professional drug and 
alcohol treatment agencies. 
 With this said, let me set the record straight, because you won’t get the 
full picture from these pro–legalizing drug advocates. 
 Fact 1: Legalization advocates always use the argument that legalizing 
drugs will take the proﬁ t motive away from the street or clandestine 
manufacturers. They never tell you, however, that the economic cost of legal 
drugs is 2
1
2
_ times greater than that of illicit drugs. 
 Additionally, these advocates never use the argument that legalization 
will reduce hospitalizations, crimes, car accidents, addicted babies, industrial 
accidents, family breakups, etc. The reason they don’t is, if the drugs were 
legalized, every one of these problems would worsen signiﬁ cantly. 
 Common sense should tell us when there are fewer controls, there will 
be more incidents. 
 For example, between 1972 and 1978, 11 states decriminalized mari-
juana, and marijuana use escalated to unprecedented levels. 
 Fact 2: Drug use is not a right and should never be. People who 
proclaim, “It’s my body, and I have a right to do with it what I want,” 
need to re-examine this naïve statement. Drug use not only impacts on 
the user, but has serious implications for families, community, consumers 
and others. 
 Legalizing drugs would open the ﬂ oodgates of access to these mood-
altering chemicals and would send a message that drugs are not harmful. 
 Think about ﬂ ying to Disney World and having to depend on a pilot 
or an air-trafﬁ c controller who is high. Or having your child’s surgery being 
performed by a surgeon who has just ingested mood-altering chemicals. 
Or entrusting your children to school bus drivers who ﬁ re up a joint of 
marijuana before their daily run. . . . 

192 
CHAPTER 7 Analyzing Arguments
 Legalizing drugs is not a solution; in fact, it is a ridiculous option. It’s 
like saying our child abuse laws are not effective because abuse of children is 
escalating, therefore we should do away with these child protection laws. 
 Fact 3: If we still don’t believe that legalizing drugs will make the 
problems worse, then I would ask you to examine two of America’s favorite 
legal drugs: alcohol and nicotine. I don’t think much more needs to be said 
about the epidemic use of these two chemicals and the tremendous negative 
impact they have had on the physiological, social, psychological, economic 
and spiritual aspects of our lives. 
 By legalizing illicit drugs that are proven harmful, you’d better be ready 
to hire thousands of police ofﬁ cers, physicians, counselors and other medical 
personnel to respond to the human carnage. 
 Some could argue that I am very emotional when I write or lecture 
about this topic. 
 You bet I am. 
 When legalization proponents have seen 24 years of human misery in 
the form of suicide, homicides, overdoses, psychiatric institutionalizations, 
medical emergencies, etc., then you’ll qualify to be emotional as well. 
 I took a pledge in 1973 to use my God-given energies to help people to 
ﬁ nd the joys that come with living a drug-free life. 
 I am conﬁ dent that our public will reject any effort that might be made 
by a small minority who has, unfortunately, chosen not to get all the facts 
before they talk. 
 If you want the facts, talk with recovering addicts and families who have 
lost their loved ones to a chemical that some want to legalize. 
 11.   Gregory  Bassham on why grades shouldn’t be based on effort: A recent study 
by Professor Ellen Greenberger and fellow researchers at the University 
of  California, Irvine, found that a third of students surveyed said that they 
 expected a B just for attending lectures, and 40 percent said they deserved 
a B for completing the required reading. 
 Jason Greenwood, a senior kinesiology major at the University of 
 Maryland, would go even further. 
 “If you put in all the effort you have and get a C, what is the point?” 
Greenwood said. “If someone goes to every class and reads every chapter in 
the book and does everything the teacher asks of them and more, then they 
should be getting an A like their effort deserves. . . . What else is there really 
than the effort that you put in?” (Quoted in Max Roosevelt, “Student Expec-
tations Seen As Causing Grade Disputes,”  New York Times, Feb. 18, 2009, A15). 
 What else is there other than effort? What about performance? 
 As a college professor, I have no problem basing grades  partly on student 
effort. I regularly reward students who faithfully attend class, participate 
actively, and do all the assigned readings. Sometimes I even give extra credit 
for extra work. 
 I do this because I believe that qualities like hard work, discipline, and 
determination are critical to success in both college and in life, and so de-
serve to be rewarded. Also, effort is the one thing students can completely 
control. Everything else that factors into academic success—IQ, memory, 

 
Summary 
193
college preparedness, health, outside work and family commitments, etc.—is 
at least partly a matter of luck. 
 Nevertheless, most college professors—including myself—base grades 
much more on achievement than we do on effort. There are two good 
reasons for this. 
 First, there is no fair or objective way to measure effort in one’s aca-
demic work. When I hand a student a test, I have no idea if they have stud-
ied one hour for it or ten. If I gave out grades based on  my perception of how 
much effort my students have expended, the grades would be wildly unfair 
and I would have to barricade myself in my ofﬁ ce to ward off all the plead-
ers and complainers. 
 In fact, students who say they should get B’s just for attending class 
aren’t claiming that grades should be based exclusively on effort. They’re 
saying that students who put in a  minimum amount of effort should receive 
at least a  decent grade. But this is a bad idea too. 
 It’s a bad idea because it defeats the two main reasons colleges give 
out grades at all. One is to allow students to assess their own learning—to 
determine if they are, in fact, learning what their professors are paid to teach 
them. The other is to let outside evaluators—notably employers and graduate 
admissions ofﬁ cers—know which graduates are likely to be the top 
performers. 
 This second function is absolutely crucial to our nation’s health and 
prosperity. Engineering ﬁ rms need to know which potential hires will do 
good work, and which might design bridges that fall down. Medical schools 
need to know which student applicants are likely to become good doctors, 
and which might amputate the wrong limb. 
 Performance matters. In engineering. In medicine. In life. And until that 
changes, professors cannot base their grades on student effort. 
 SUMMARY 
 1.   In this chapter we learned how to analyze arguments. To  analyze an 
argument means to break it up into its various parts to see clearly what 
conclusion is being defended and on what grounds. 
2.   To analyze short arguments we use a method called  diagramming, which 
involves six basic steps:
 a.   Read through the argument carefully, circling any premise or conclusion 
indicators you see.  
b.  Number the statements consecutively as they appear in the argument. 
(Don’t number any sentences that are not statements.) 
c.   Arrange the numbers spatially on a page with the premises placed 
above the conclusion(s) they are alleged to support. Omit any irrelevant 
or redundant statements. 

194 
CHAPTER 7 Analyzing Arguments
d.   Using arrows to mean “is evidence for,” create a kind of ﬂ owchart that 
shows which premises are intended to support which conclusions. 
e.   Indicate independent premises by drawing arrows directly from the 
premises to the conclusions they are claimed to support. Indicate linked 
premises by placing a plus sign between each of the linked premises, 
underlining the premises, and drawing an arrow from the underlined 
premises to the conclusions they are claimed to support. (Two premises 
are  independent if neither premise would provide less support for the 
conclusion if the other premise were removed. Two premises are  linked 
if at least one of the premises would provide less support for the con-
clusion if the other premise were removed.) 
f.   Put the argument’s main conclusion last. 
3.   To analyze longer arguments, we use a method called  standardizing.  There 
are ﬁ ve basic steps in standardizing arguments:
a.   Read through the argument carefully. Identify the main conclusion 
(it may be only implied) and any major premises and subconclusions. 
Paraphrase as needed to clarify meaning. (A  paraphrase is a restatement 
of a passage using different words and phrases. A good paraphrase is 
clear, concise, accurate, and charitable.) 
b.   Omit any unnecessary or irrelevant material. 
c.   Number the steps in the argument and list them in correct logical 
order (i.e., with the premises placed above the conclusions they are in-
tended to support). 
d.   Fill in any key missing premises and conclusions. 
e.   Add justiﬁ cations for each conclusion in the argument. In other words, 
for each conclusion or subconclusion, indicate in parentheses from 
which previous lines in the argument the conclusion or subconclusion 
is claimed to directly follow. 

195
 CHAPTER 8
 EVALUATING ARGUMENTS 
AND TRUTH CLAIMS 
 In previous chapters we learned to
 • appreciate the importance of critical thinking standards such as 
 clarity, precision, accuracy, consistency, and fairness 
 • distinguish arguments from nonarguments 
 • identify premises and conclusions 
 • recognize hidden assumptions and implied premises and conclusions 
 • distinguish deductive from inductive arguments 
 • assess the logical validity or strength of arguments 
 • distinguish relevant from irrelevant reasons 
 • identify common logical fallacies 
 • analyze extended arguments to clarify their content and structure 
In this chapter we use this tool kit of skills to tackle the $64,000 question: 
When is an argument a good one? We will also address an issue that is crucial in 
argument evaluation, namely: When is it reasonable to accept a premise as true? 
Finally, we will learn some powerful strategies for refuting bad arguments. 
 WHEN IS AN ARGUMENT A GOOD ONE? 
 Arguments can be good or bad in various ways. To help us understand what a 
good argument is from the standpoint of critical thinking, we begin by spelling 
out a few things that a good argument is  not. 
 What “Good Argument” Does  Not Mean 
 “Good Argument” Does Not Mean “Agrees with My Views”   One 
of the most serious mistakes in critical thinking is to confuse “good argument” 
 The supreme end 
of education is 
expert discernment 
in all things—the 
power to tell the 
good from the bad, 
 the genuine from 
the counterfeit. 
 —Samuel Johnson 
 I realize I can be 
seriously, dread-
fully, fatally 
wrong, and wrong 
about what it 
is enormously 
important to be 
right. That is 
simply the human 
condition. 
 —Alvin Plantinga 

196 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims 
with “argument whose conclusion I agree with.”   To suppose that an argument 
is good only if it agrees with your own preexisting opinions is the epitome 
of close-mindedness. It reﬂ ects the mind-set of someone who thinks, “I have 
a monopoly on the truth. Anyone who disagrees with me must be wrong.” 
Such an attitude makes it impossible to learn from viewpoints that differ from 
one’s own and is completely opposed to the spirit of critical thinking. 
 “Good Argument” Does Not Mean “Persuasive Argument”   A good 
archery shot hits the bull’s-eye. A good putt goes in the hole. A good pair of 
scissors cuts the paper efﬁ ciently. In many contexts a thing is said to be good 
if it does successfully what it was intended to do. 1 Does this hold true of argu-
ments as well? Is a good argument a  persuasive  argument—that is, an argument 
that actually succeeds in convincing an audience to accept a conclusion? Not 
necessarily—for two reasons. 
 First, not all arguments are meant to persuade. Sometimes the arguer is 
just “playing devil’s advocate,” or “preaching to the choir,” or “going through 
the motions,” or “thinking out loud,” or giving examples without any intention 
of persuading anybody. Second, bad arguments often persuade, whereas good 
arguments often fall on deaf ears. In the years leading up to World War II, for 
example, Hitler’s demagogic ravings convinced millions, whereas Churchill’s 
well-founded warnings were largely ignored. Yet no critical thinker would 
suggest that Hitler’s arguments were, therefore, “better” than Churchill’s. 
 “Good Argument” Does Not Mean “Well-Written or Well-Spoken 
Argument”   We sometimes praise arguments for their literary or rhetorical 
merit—their clarity, eloquence, organization, imaginativeness, and the like. Does 
it follow that a good argument is, or must be, a well-written or well-spoken argu-
ment? No, because some obviously bad arguments possess literary merit, whereas 
some obviously good ones do not. A subtly deceptive political speech may be a 
masterpiece of rhetorical skill and still be seriously ﬂ awed from the standpoint of 
critical reasoning. By the same token, an argument in, say, science or mathematics 
may be a perfectly good argument but possess little or no literary merit.  
 What “Good Argument”  Does Mean 
 What, then,  is a good argument from the standpoint of critical thinking? To 
answer this question, we need to review some things we learned in previous 
chapters. 
 In Chapter 3 we learned that a good argument is basically an argument 
in which two conditions are met: All the premises are true, 2 and the premises 
provide good reasons to accept the conclusion. 
 We also learned in Chapter 3 that a set of premises provides good rea-
sons to accept a conclusion when the argument is either deductively valid or 
inductively strong. ( Remember:  An argument is  deductively valid  if the conclusion 
 must  be true if the premises are true. An argument is  inductively strong  if the 
 A man is not reck-
oned wise because 
he speaks skilfully.  
 —Chuang-tzu 
 Demeanor, face, 
voice, attitude, 
and the gown may 
set off a speech, 
which in itself is 
mere twaddle. 
 —Michel de 
Montaigne 

 
When Is an Argument a Good One? 
197
conclusion is  probably true if the premises are true.) Arguments that are both 
deductively valid and have all true premises are said to be deductively  sound. 
Arguments that are both inductively strong and have all true premises are said 
to be inductively  cogent. Thus,  a good argument, fundamentally, is an argument that 
is either deductively sound or inductively cogent. 
 That deﬁ nition, however, is not fully adequate. As we saw in Chapter 1, 
there are certain basic critical thinking standards that all good thinking and 
argumentation must meet. Among the most important of these standards are 
clarity, precision, accuracy, relevance, consistency, logical correctness, com-
pleteness, and fairness. An argument that is deeply obscure, full of irrelevant 
statements, and grossly incomplete in its examination of the relevant evidence 
doesn’t count as a “good” argument, even if it is deductively sound. 
 Imagine, for example, that you’re the dean of students at Wexford Col-
lege, and you write the following letter to the parents of a student, Binger 
Boosely, explaining why their son has been expelled from college:
 Dear Mr. and Mrs. Boosely, 
 This letter is to inform you that your son, Binger Boosely, has been expelled 
from Wexford College. I deemed this action to be necessary for the following 
reasons:
 1. Paris is the capital of France. 
 2. The capital of France is Paris. 
 3. Binger deserved to be expelled. 
 4. Binger earned F’s in all his classes and was continuously drunk from the ﬁ rst 
day of classes to the last day of ﬁ nal exams.  
 5. Any student who earns F’s in all his classes and is continuously drunk from 
the ﬁ rst day of classes to the last day of ﬁ nal exams deserves to be expelled. 
 6. Therefore, Binger deserved to be expelled. 
This, obviously, is an atrocious argument. Premise 1 is completely irrelevant to 
the conclusion. Premise 2 is redundant; it merely repeats premise 1 in slightly 
different words. Premise 3 is simply a restatement of the conclusion, causing 
the argument to commit the fallacy of begging the question. Only premises 4 
and 5 provide any support at all for the conclusion. 
 Despite these obvious defects, however, the argument is deductively 
sound (assuming that the premises are true, which we can stipulate is the case). 
Premises 4 and 5 do validly imply the conclusion; and, because deductively 
valid arguments remain valid no matter what other premises are added to 
them, 3 the argument as a whole is deductively valid, despite the obvious de-
fects of premises 1–3. 
 Hence, it is not enough for an argument to be deductively sound or in-
ductively cogent. It must also satisfy (at least up to a certain threshold) the key 
critical thinking standards discussed in Chapter 1. 
 Now that we have combined these insights from Chapters 1 and 3, we 
are ready to answer the question, “When is an argument a good one?” 
 Validity is not the 
only aspect of an 
argument that 
concerns us. In 
many contexts, 
it is not even our 
chief concern. 
 —Robert J. Fogelin 
and Walter 
Sinnott-Armstrong 

198 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims 
 A good argument, from the standpoint of critical thinking, is an argument 
that  satisﬁ es the relevant critical thinking standards that apply in a particular context. 
The most important of these standards are accuracy (Are all the premises true?) 
and logical correctness (Is the reasoning correct? Is the argument deductively 
valid or inductively strong?). But other critical thinking standards must also be 
taken into account, including clarity, precision, relevance, consistency, 4 com-
pleteness, and fairness. 
 Given this general deﬁ nition of “good argument,” we can offer the fol-
lowing general guidelines on evaluating arguments. 
 Evaluating Arguments: Some General Guidelines 
 • Are the premises true? 
 • Is the reasoning correct? Is the argument deductively valid or induc-
tively strong? 
 • Does the arguer commit any logical fallacies? 
 • Does the arguer express his or her points clearly and precisely? 
 • Are the premises relevant to the conclusion? 
 • Are the arguer’s claims logically consistent? Do any of the arguer’s 
claims contradict other claims made in the argument? 
 • Is the argument complete? Is all relevant evidence taken into account 
(given understandable limitations of time, space, context, and so on)? 
 • Is the argument fair? Is the arguer fair in his or her presentation of 
the evidence and treatment of opposing arguments and views? 5 
 WHEN IS IT REASONABLE TO ACCEPT A PREMISE? 
 All good arguments, as we have seen, have true premises. But when is it  reason-
able to accept a premise as true? This is a complex issue, and only a few general 
suggestions can be offered here. A more detailed discussion of some of these 
issues is presented in later chapters. 
 Let’s suppose that somebody asserts a claim—for example, that  women are 
more superstitious than men  or that  I saw Elvis at a Dunkin’ Donuts in Lubbock. 
For simplicity, let’s suppose that the claim is unsupported (i.e., no argument is 
given for it) and that for some reason it is either impossible or not worthwhile 
to try to verify the claim for ourselves. Under what conditions is it reasonable 
to accept such a claim? 
 The most general principle can be summed up in the following  principle 
of rational acceptance:  generally speaking, it is reasonable to accept a claim if 
(1) the claim does not conﬂ ict with personal experiences that we have no good 
reason to doubt, (2) the claim does not conﬂ ict with background beliefs that we 
have no good reason to doubt, and (3) the claim comes from a credible source. 6 
 Let’s brieﬂ y discuss these three conditions. 
 The possession of 
truth is the ulti-
mate good of the 
human mind. 
 —Mortimer Adler 

 
When Is It Reasonable to Accept a Premise? 
199
 Does the Claim Conﬂ ict with Our Personal Experiences?   Sometimes 
people assert claims that conﬂ ict with our own personal observations and ex-
periences. When this happens it is usually best to trust our own experiences. 
Thus, if your neighbor’s Doberman pinscher is snarling, foaming at the mouth, 
and chewing on the tattered remnants of a mail carrier’s bag, it is probably a 
good idea to trust your own eyes rather than your neighbor’s assurance that his 
dog is “as gentle as a kitten.” 
 The problem is that people often place  too much  trust in their own ob-
servations and experiences. As Brooke Moore and Richard Parker point out, 
we often overestimate the reliability of our observations by failing to take into 
account such factors as poor physical conditions for making observations (e.g., 
bad lighting, excessive noise, frequent distractions); sensory impairment (e.g., 
poor vision or hearing); poor physical condition of the observer (e.g., fatigue, 
stress, intoxication); unreliable measuring instruments; and failures of memory. 8 
Indeed, studies show that even under good observational conditions, people are 
often much less accurate in their observations than they generally assume. 9  
 Critical thinkers also recognize that their beliefs, hopes, fears, expectations, 
and biases can affect their observations. Children, for example, “see” monsters 
in the closet. Sports fans perceive referees as partial to the other team. Coffee 
drinkers who unwittingly drink decaffeinated coffee typically feel more alert. 
Teachers who expect improvement from their students often “perceive” better 
performance even when none exists. And love, as the adage says, is blind. 
 In short, personal experiences are often less reliable than we think. We 
need to be aware that often “believing is seeing” and that things are not always 
as they appear. 
 Does the Claim Conﬂ ict with Our Background Beliefs?   Sometimes 
a claim doesn’t conﬂ ict with any of our personal observations or experiences 
but does conﬂ ict with certain background beliefs we hold. By “background 
beliefs” we mean that vast network of conscious and unconscious convictions 
we use as a framework to assess the credibility of claims that can’t be veriﬁ ed 
 Who you gonna 
believe—me or 
your own eyes?  
 —Chico Marx 
 Our very eyes are 
sometimes, like 
our judgments, 
blind. 
 —Shakespeare 
 Loving eyes can 
never see. 
 —Percy Sledge 
 Fix reason ﬁ rmly 
in her seat and 
call to her tribu-
nal every fact, 
every opinion. 
 —Thomas Jefferson 
 Here’s a quick observation exercise. Reading at normal speed, count 
the number of times the letter  f appears in the following sentence:
 These functional fuses have been developed after years of scientiﬁ c 
investigation of electric phenomena, combined with the fruit of long 
experience on the part of the two investigators who have come for-
ward with them for our meeting today. 
How many  f   ’s did you count? Check endnote 7 to see if your answer 
is correct. 7 
 How Many  F ’s? 

200 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims 
directly. In general, if a claim ﬁ ts well with our background beliefs, it is rea-
sonable for us to accept it. For example, the claim, “It was hot in Las Vegas last 
Fourth of July,” is quite believable given background information most of us 
share about midsummer weather conditions in the Nevada desert. The claim, 
“It snowed in Las Vegas last Fourth of July,” however, would rightly be rejected 
out of hand unless it was accompanied by strong supporting evidence. 
 The problem is that most of us place too much conﬁ dence in the ac-
curacy of our background beliefs. A chain is only as strong as its weakest link. 
Consequently, if our backgrounds beliefs are unreliable, any beliefs based on 
them will also be unreliable. Suppose, for example, I believe that
 Lance Armstrong uses steroids. 
And suppose I believe this based entirely on my background belief that
 All professional cyclists use steroids. 
Clearly, it would be unreasonable for me to believe the ﬁ rst statement if the 
only reason I have for believing the second statement is that I read it in a su-
permarket tabloid. 
 Because critical thinkers know how important it is to have accurate and 
well-grounded background beliefs, they think very carefully about the beliefs 
they accept.  Never to believe without sufﬁ cient evidence  and  Never to believe more 
strongly than the evidence warrants are the watchwords of the wise. 
 EXERCISE 8.1 
 For each of the claims in this exercise, indicate whether you think the claim is
 Completely believable (“I know this is the case.”) 
 Somewhat believable (“I am somewhat conﬁ dent that this is the case.”)  
 Somewhat unbelievable (I am somewhat conﬁ dent that this is not the case.”)  
 Completely unbelievable (“I know this is not the case.”) 
 In doubt a man of 
worth will trust to 
his own wisdom. 
 —Hama, in 
J. R. R. Tolkien’s 
 The Lord of the Rings 
 A healthy garden 
of beliefs requires 
well-nourished 
roots and tireless 
pruning. 
 —W. V. O. Quine 
and J. S. Ullian 
  Tom Morris, author of  Philosophy for Dummies,  tells the following anec-
dote about the demand for evidence: “An old friend of mine, a pro-
fessor of philosophical theology at Yale, once received an unexpected 
phone call from his little son’s Sunday school teacher. The teacher 
said, ‘Professor, every time I say anything new in Sunday school class, 
your little boy blurts out “Prove it!” Could you please have a talk with 
him and explain that no one can prove everything?’” 10 
 
 Critical thinkers, certainly, are sticklers for evidence and proof. But 
not all of our beliefs can be supported by evidence because this would 
lead to an inﬁ nite regress. So when  do  beliefs need to be supported by 
evidence? What do you think? 
 Hyper-Critical Thinking? 

 
When Is It Reasonable to Accept a Premise? 
201
Then, for each claim, list some background beliefs that led you to assign the claim 
the degree of conﬁ dence you did. Be prepared to discuss your responses in small 
groups. 
   1. Your astrological sign determines some of your basic personality. 
 2.   The biblical story of Noah’s Ark is literally true. 
 3.   The Loch Ness monster really exists. 
 4.   After people die, their souls are reincarnated in other human bodies. 
 5.   Extraterrestrials have visited the earth in some form. 11 
 Does the Claim Come from a Credible Source?   Much of what we 
believe about the world is based on testimony or authority. All of us believe, 
for example, that George Washington was the ﬁ rst president of the United 
States, that the earth revolves around the sun, that there is such a place as 
the Sahara Desert, and that it is cold at the North Pole in January. Yet few of 
us have personally veriﬁ ed any of this information for ourselves. Thus, a crucial 
question for critical thinkers is When is it reasonable or justiﬁ able to accept a 
claim based simply on the testimony or authority of another? 
 This complex topic is discussed in Chapter 6 and is examined further in 
Chapter 12. Here we’ll just recap some of the highlights of Chapter 6. 
 Generally speaking, we should accept a claim on authority if it comes 
from a credible source that we have no good reason to doubt. Good reasons to 
doubt the credibility of a source may include the following:
 • The source is not a genuine expert or authority. 
 • The source is speaking outside his or her area of expertise. 
 • The source is biased or has some other motive to lie or mislead. 
 • The accuracy of the source’s personal observations or experiences is 
questionable. 
 • The source is contained in a source (e.g., a supermarket tabloid or 
sensationalistic Web site) that is generally unreliable. 
 • The source has not been cited correctly or has been quoted out of 
context. 
 • The issue is one that cannot be settled by expert opinion. 
 • The claim made by the source is highly improbable on its face. 
 Finally, it is important to remember that the principle of rational ac-
ceptance applies only to claims that are unsupported by arguments and that 
are either impossible or not worthwhile to verify for ourselves. If the claim  is 
supported by reasons, then of course we must consider the strength of those 
reasons in deciding whether we should accept the claim. Speciﬁ cally, we must 
ask, “Are all the premises true?” and “Do the premises provide good reasons to 
accept the conclusion?” 
 To . . . accept 
anything without 
questioning is 
to be somebody 
else’s puppet, 
a second-hand 
person. 
 —Daniel Kolak and 
Raymond Martin 
 Trust in a witness 
in all matters in 
which neither his 
self-interest, his 
passions, his prej-
udices, nor the 
love of the mar-
velous is strongly 
concerned. 
 —Thomas Henry 
Huxley 

202 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims 
 Moreover, if the claim is an important one, and one that we can rea-
sonably investigate for ourselves, we have an intellectual responsibility to do 
so.  Indeed, a willingness to seek out evidence and then to proportion one’s 
belief to that evidence lies at the very heart of what it means to be a critical 
thinker. 
 EXERCISE 8.2 
I.  How good are your powers of observation and recollection? Answer the fol-
lowing questions outside of class, then bring your answers to class and be prepared 
to compare your responses with those of your classmates. 
 
  Remember the last time the class met? Answer the following questions 
about your instructor.
 a.  Was he/she wearing a jacket? 
 
 b.  If so, what color? 
 
 c.  Was he/she wearing slacks? Jeans? A skirt? 
 
 d.  If so, what color? 
 
 e.  Was he/she wearing a tie or scarf? 
 
 f.  If so, what color? 
 
 g.  Was he/she wearing a ring? 
 
 h.  Was he/she wearing a watch? 
 
 i.  Was he/she carrying a briefcase or satchel? 
 If so, describe it. 
 j.  Did the instructor end class early? 
 13  
II.  For each of the following unsupported claims, indicate whether or not it 
would be reasonable to accept the claim. Also state the criteria you use in reach-
ing your decision.
  1.  Tigers live in Africa. 
  2.  There are wolves in Yellowstone National Park. 
  3.  Black cats bring bad luck. 
  4.  Ninety-eight percent of statistics are just made up. 
  5.  Dunleavy Ford:  Nobody sells for less. (heard on the radio) 
 Mere memory 
is a shaping 
instrument. 
 —A. L. Rowse 
  A Houston man learned a succinct lesson in gun safety when he played 
Russian roulette with a .45-caliber semiautomatic pistol. The nineteen-
year-old man was visiting friends when he announced his intention to 
play the deadly game. He apparently did not realize that a semiauto-
matic pistol, unlike a revolver, automatically inserts a cartridge into 
the ﬁ ring chamber when the gun is cocked. His chance of winning a 
round of Russian roulette was zero, as he quickly discovered. 12 
 Critical Thinking Lapse 
 The foundation of 
morality is to . . . 
give up pretending 
to believe that for 
which there is no 
evidence. 
 —Thomas Henry 
Huxley 

 
Refuting Arguments 
203
  6.  The closest star to the earth, other than the sun, is Proxima Centauri. (said by 
your astronomy instructor) 
  7.  I fought in World War II. (said by a man who appears to be about forty-ﬁ ve 
years old) 
  8.  There is no hard scientiﬁ c evidence that smoking is addictive. (said by a 
 tobacco company executive) 
  9.  Parts of Alaska are farther west than Hawaii. (overheard on the bus) 
 10.  Parts of Alaska are farther west than Hawaii. (said by your geography 
 instructor) 
 11.  Analgex brand aspirin: Nothing works stronger or faster on your tough 
headaches. (said by a paid sports celebrity) 
 12.  I read the entire  Encyclopaedia Britannica last summer. (said by a stranger at a 
party) 
 13.  Most hate crimes in this country are not committed against African 
 Americans or Jews. They are committed against evangelical Christians. 
(said by the late TV evangelist Jerry Falwell) 
 14.  Did you know that gun control laws  actually increase the violent crime rate? 
(statement on anti–gun control Web page) 
 15.  A Space Alien Tried to Mate with My Harley! (tabloid headline) 14 
 REFUTING ARGUMENTS 
 To refute an argument isn’t merely to challenge, rebut, or criticize it. It is to 
 defeat  it, to show that the premises do not provide convincing reasons to accept 
the conclusion. Arguments can be criticized in various ways (e.g., as obscure, 
wordy, or repetitious). But there are only two ways in which an argument can 
be refuted:
1.   Show that a premise—or a critical group of premises—is false 
or dubious. 
2.   Show that the conclusion does not follow from the premises. 
Let’s look at these two refutation strategies in turn. 
 Strategy One: Show That a Premise—or a Critical Group of Premises—
Is False or Dubious   Sometimes it is possible to defeat an argument by 
showing that a single premise is false. Consider this example:
 1. All presidents live in the White House. 
 2. Paris Hilton is president. 
 3. So, Paris Hilton lives in the White House. 
Here, simply noting that the second premise is false is enough to refute the 
argument. Because this premise is false, the argument fails to provide good 
reason to accept the conclusion. 

204 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims 
 Some arguments, however, cannot be refuted simply by showing that one 
of their premises is false. Here are two examples:
 1. Children who have unsupervised access to the Internet may be exposed to 
pornographic and violent images. 
 2. Some sexual predators use the Internet to ﬁ nd and communicate with 
 children. 
 3. Children have no ability to use a keyboard or mouse correctly. 
 4. So, children should not be allowed unsupervised access to the Internet. 
 1. All circles are squares. 
 2. All squares are rectangles. 
 3. All rectangles are geometrical ﬁ gures.  
 4. So, all squares are geometrical ﬁ gures. 
In the ﬁ rst example, the third premise is false (many children do know how to 
use a keyboard and mouse correctly). However, showing that the premise is false 
is not sufﬁ cient to refute the argument, for premises 1 and 2 are adequate to 
support the conclusion even without premise 3. In the second example, the ﬁ rst 
premise (“All circles are squares”) is obviously false. As we have seen, however, 
an argument can be valid even if it contains some false or irrelevant premises. 
Since premises 2 and 3 are true and the conclusion follows validly from those 
premises, the premises do provide good reason to accept the conclusion. The 
argument cannot be refuted simply by noting that the ﬁ rst premise is false. 
 However, arguments like this  can be refuted by showing that one or more 
of their  critical premises is false. All well-reasoned arguments have some premise 
or group of premises that are necessary to support the argument’s conclusion. 
These are the argument’s  critical premises,  its essential supports. Consider 
these two examples:
 1. I ran 5 miles on Saturday. 
 2. I ran 10 miles on Sunday. 
 3. So, I ran 15 miles this weekend. 
 1. Bob, who was drunk at the time and doesn’t see very well, claims he saw 
Buster rob the bank. 
 2. Bank surveillance tapes show Buster in the act of robbing the bank. 
 3. So, Buster robbed the bank 
In the ﬁ rst example, both premises are critical to the success of the argument. 
If either was shown to be false, the conclusion would be unsupported. In the 
second example, only the second premise is critical. The argument can’t be 
refuted merely by showing that the ﬁ rst premise is false. But it can be refuted 
by proving that the second premise is false. 
 As these examples suggest, some arguments can be refuted by means of 
 selective  targeting: Pick out those premises that are essential to the argument’s 

 
Refuting Arguments 
205
success, and refute as many as you need to knock out the conclusion’s support. 
Some arguments are built like a house of cards; remove one or two vital cards 
and the entire structure collapses. 
 Here are two examples that will illustrate this notion of selective targeting:
1.  TJ is a bachelor. 
2.  TJ is an uncle. 
3.  So, TJ is a male. 
1.  Bob, who was drunk and doesn’t see very well, claims he saw Buster rob 
the bank. 
2.  Bank surveillance tapes show Buster in the act of robbing the bank. 
3.  DNA tests on the robbery note and stolen loot show that there is a high 
probability that Buster is the robber. 
4.  So, Buster robbed the bank.  
In the ﬁ rst example, neither premise is critical to the conclusion, but each is 
individually sufﬁ cient. (The conclusion follows validly from either premise.) 
To refute the argument, therefore, it is necessary to reject both premises. In the 
second example, none of the premises is individually necessary to support the 
conclusion. In this case, however, it is not necessary to reject  all  the premises 
in order to refute the argument. Since the ﬁ rst premise, even if it is true, fails 
to support the conclusion, it sufﬁ ces to reject premises 2 and 3. These are the 
premises that must be selectively targeted to refute the argument. 
 For simplicity, we have spoken so far only of refuting  false premises. In 
fact, however, arguments can often be defeated simply by showing that one or 
more of their premises are  dubious, that is, open to signiﬁ cant doubt. Consider 
this example:
1.  The last surviving dinosaur was a Triceratops. 
2.  Triceratops had horns. 
3.  So, the last surviving dinosaur had horns. 
The weak point of this argument is clearly the ﬁ rst premise—the claim that 
the last surviving dinosaur was a Triceratops. Even though it would be difﬁ cult 
or impossible to show that the premise is false, that isn’t necessary to refute 
the argument. Nobody has a clue whether the last surviving dinosaur was a 
Triceratops, a T-Rex, or some other species of dinosaur that existed just before 
the Great Extinction. That fact alone is enough to show that the premises do 
not provide good reason to accept the conclusion. 
 There are, of course, a wide variety of ways to demonstrate that a premise 
is false or dubious. You could, for instance:
•   appeal to personal experience (“What do you mean ‘There are no 
bears in New Jersey’? I’ve seen several.”) 
•   appeal to common knowledge (“Everybody knows Germany lost the 
Second World War.”)  

206 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims 
•   appeal to a reputable reference source (“Wrong again, sports fan. 
It says in  The Sports Encyclopedia: Baseball that Mickey Mantle was the 
American League MVP in 1957.”) 
•   note that the premise is self-contradictory or otherwise false or dubi-
ous on its face (“How can Adam Sandler be an aunt?! Only women 
can be aunts!”) 
•   point out that the premise conﬂ icts with some other premise in the 
argument (“You say it’s wrong to eat animals, yet you say it’s OK 
to eat ﬁ sh. But aren’t ﬁ sh animals?”)  
•   show that the premise is based on an unwarranted assumption or ste-
reotype (“How can you say that most illegal immigrants don’t want 
to learn English?”) 
•   personally demonstrate that the claim is false or dubious (“Snow-
cones  can give you a brain freeze. Here, take a big bite of mine.”) 
 In addition to these general refutation strategies, there are two speciﬁ c 
techniques that are often useful in refuting false or dubious premises: reducing 
to the absurd and refutation by counterexample. 
 Reducing to the absurd  ( reductio ad absurdum,  in the traditional Latin) is at-
tempting to show that a statement is false by proving that it logically implies 
something that is clearly false or absurd. Suppose your roommate says that 
“ absolutely all killing is wrong.” You could reduce this claim to the absurd—
and hence refute it—by pointing out that this implies that it is wrong to eat 
any plants or animals (since this usually involves killing) or even to breathe 
or brush your teeth (since these acts kill microorganisms). The claim, taken 
literally, has absurd implications and so is false. 
 Another effective refutation strategy is  refutation by counterexample . A 
 counterexample, in this context, is an example that proves that a general claim 
(i.e., a claim of the form “All A’s are B’s” or “Most A’s are B’s”) is false. Suppose 
you say, “All twentieth-century U.S. presidents have been rich.” I could refute 
your universal claim by means of a single counterexample (“Wait a minute. 
Harry Truman wasn’t rich by any stretch of the word.”). Or suppose I say, 
“Nearly all post–World War II presidents have been Republicans.”  You could 
refute my claim by noting that Truman, Kennedy, Johnson, Carter, Clinton, 
and Obama were all Democrats. 
 To sum up: You can refute an argument by showing that a key premise 
(or critical group of premises) of the argument is false or dubious. And two 
useful strategies in proving that a premise is false are reducing to the absurd and 
refutation by counterexample. 
 Strategy Two: Show That the Conclusion Does Not Follow from the 
Premises   The second way to refute an argument is by showing that the rea-
soning is faulty—that the conclusion does  not follow properly from the prem-
ises.  You can show that an argument is poorly reasoned by showing that it is 

 
Refuting Arguments 
207
either (a)  deductively invalid  (the conclusion does not follow with strict necessity 
from the premises) or (b)  inductively weak  (the conclusion does not follow prob-
ably from the premises). 
 In previous chapters we looked at a variety of methods for determining 
whether arguments are deductively invalid or inductively weak. (Additional 
methods will be explored in later chapters.) As we have seen, the most impor-
tant questions to ask in assessing the logic of an argument are
•   If the argument is deductive, does the conclusion follow  necessarily 
from the premises? (Do the premises, if true, absolutely  guarantee the 
truth of the conclusion? Or could the premises conceivably be true 
and the conclusion false?)  
•   Are the premises  relevant to the conclusion? (Does the argument, for 
example, commit the fallacy of straw man, personal attack, or some 
other fallacy of relevance?) 
•   Are the premises  sufﬁ cient to support the conclusion? (Even if we as-
sume all the premises are true, do they provide enough support to 
justify the conclusion?) 
 In evaluating the sufﬁ ciency of an argument’s supporting premises, it is 
often important to ask a more speciﬁ c question:  Does the argument omit any 
crucial countervailing evidence? 
 In real life, as we’ve seen, it is relatively uncommon for arguments to be 
posed in explicit deductive or inductive form. What  is very common is for 
people to offer a series of reasons for a claim that they believe  on balance  pro-
vide adequate support for the claim. Here are two examples:
 Get high-speed Internet access by satellite. It’s fast, reliable, and won’t tie up 
your phone lines. 
 All mothers should stay home with their young kids. It would promote closer 
family ties, and studies show that children with stay-at-home moms do better 
in school, have higher self-esteem, and are less likely to get involved with drugs 
or commit crimes. 
In evaluating arguments of this sort, the important question to keep in mind 
is: Do the premises provide  enough  evidence for the conclusion? In many cases, 
the answer will be “No,” because the arguer has  omitted important evidence  that 
points to a contrary conclusion. For instance, the ad for high-speed Internet 
access fails to mention any costs associated with purchasing high-speed service 
(a hefty installation fee plus high monthly payments) or the long-term con-
tractual commitments that are typically required. And the second argument 
ignores the facts that many mothers  have to work to make ends meet and that 
the economic and social costs of removing working mothers from the work-
force would be enormous. 
 In sum: Even if you agree that all the premises in an argument are true 
and relevant, you can still refute the argument if you can show that the prem-
ises do not provide adequate support for the conclusion. Often this can be 

208 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims 
done by citing evidence, not mentioned by the arguer, that points to a different 
conclusion. 
 EXERCISE 8.3 
 I.   In small groups, reduce the following claims to absurdity. Be prepared to 
share your answers with the class.
1.   No statements are true. 
2.   All generalizations are false. 
3.   Some brothers are nieces. 
4.   No beliefs are justiﬁ ed; we should be absolute and total skeptics.  
5.   This ball is both red all over and blue all over. 
6.   I was kissed by an angel, a disembodied spirit. 
7.   Lake Wobegon: Where all the children are above average. 
8.   Joseph went back in time and accidentally killed his own grandfather. 
 II.   In small groups, refute the following statements by citing one or more coun-
terexamples. Be prepared to share your answers with the class.
1.   No large mammals live in the Arctic. 
2.   It’s always wrong to break a promise. 
3.   No student should ever have his or her cell phone on in class. 
4.   America has produced no truly great writers. 
5.   The great majority of supermarket fruits are red. 
6.   The United States consistently favors democratic rule and has never sup-
ported corrupt authoritarian regimes. 
7.   Except for Iowa, there are no U.S. states with names that have fewer than ﬁ ve 
letters. 
 III.   In small groups,  refute, if possible, the following arguments by citing omitted 
countervailing evidence. If you think the argument is strong and can’t be refuted, 
cite omitted countervailing evidence that  weakens the argument. Be prepared to 
share your answers with the class.
1.  Why should I go to college? It costs a fortune, it’s boring, and I can get a 
high-paying job in trucking or construction without a college education. 
2.   My buddy keeps telling me I should save for retirement, but I tell him, 
“ Look: I’m overweight. I smoke. Neither of my parents lived past sixty-ﬁ ve. 
Honestly, I’d rather enjoy my money now than save it for a nursing home 
I’ll never need.” 
3.   This whole business about “equal pay” between men and women is a crock. 
Sure, forty years ago there was job discrimination against women, but that’s 
ancient history. Today there’s only one reason men make more money than 
women. It’s called personal choice. A lot of women  choose to work as low-paid 
teachers, librarians, or secretaries or  choose to drop out of the workforce or to 
work only part-time to raise a family. Where’s the “inequity” in that? 
4.   Bans on owning AK-47’s and other assault weapons should be repealed. The 
Constitution guarantees the right to bear arms, and if there’s ever a foreign 

 
Refuting Arguments 
209
invasion or a breakdown of society, I, for one, want to be able to protect my 
family. 
5.   Tanning booths are great. They’re available day or night and at any season of 
the year. You don’t have to worry about getting burned, and you can get a 
great, even tan  quick .  
6.   All able-bodied applicants for U.S. citizenship should be required to join the 
armed forces for three years before being eligible for citizenship. It would 
help them learn English, strengthen our national defense, inculcate patriotic 
values, and serve as a deterrent to potential immigrants who care only about 
what America can do for them and nothing at all about what they can do for 
America. 
7.   Drugs like LSD and cocaine should be legal. Let’s face it, the “war on drugs” 
has failed. Legalizing drugs would drastically reduce drug-related crime, alle-
viate prison overcrowding, unclog the courts, and allow police to concentrate 
on catching robbers and rapists, instead of petty dealers or substance abusers. 
Plus, we could tax these legalized drugs and use the money for more produc-
tive purposes. 
8.   Don’t marry career women. Research shows that women tend to be hap-
pier when their husband is the primary breadwinner. It also shows that career 
women are more likely to cheat, more likely to get divorced, less likely to 
have kids, and more likely to be unhappy if they do have kids. 
9.   Come for the sun, the wide, sandy beaches, the nightlife, the history. Beirut: 
the perfect vacation spot for the entire family. 
 IV.   Writing a Critical Essay  A  critical essay is one in which you analyze and 
critically evaluate another person’s argument. Write an 800- to 1,000-word criti-
cal essay on one of the selections on pages 210–217 or on a topic approved by 
your instructor. Your essay should include the following four elements.
 Introduction: Identify the title, author, and context of the essay you are critically 
evaluating. Summarize very brieﬂ y the writer’s basic position and state in general 
terms your overall evaluation of the argument. 
 Argument summary:  Standardize the writer’s argument using the ﬁ ve-step method 
presented in Chapter 7 (or, if your instructor prefers, summarize the argument in 
paragraph form). 
 Critical evaluation: Evaluate the argument; that is, say whether you think the ar-
gument is a good, convincing argument and give reasons to support your view. 
You may ﬁ nd it helpful to keep in mind the following general guidelines on 
evaluating arguments, discussed earlier in this chapter:
•   Are the premises true? ( Note: You may need to do some research to make an 
informed judgment on this issue.) 
•   Is the reasoning good? Is the argument deductively valid or inductively 
strong? 
•   Does the arguer commit any logical fallacies? 
•   Does the writer express his or her points clearly and precisely? 
•   Are the arguer’s claims logically consistent? 
•   Is the argument complete? Is all relevant evidence taken into account? 

210 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims 
•  Is the argument fair? Is the arguer fair in his or her presentation of the 
evidence and treatment of opposing arguments and views? 
 Conclusion:  Brieﬂ y restate the key points of your critical response to reinforce them 
in the reader’s mind. If possible, end with a strong concluding line (e.g., an apt 
quotation) that nicely sums up your response or puts the issue in a larger context.  
 A sample critical essay is included in an appendix to this chapter.
 Helmet Laws Discriminate against Bikers 
 Stan Daniels 
 Freedom is a most valued and cherished possession. People are willing to ﬁ ght, 
and even die, for it. 
 
 Isn’t it great to live in the United States of America where we can choose to 
live the sort of life we care to live, choose any religion, decide which schools to 
attend, and choose our own livelihood? 
 
 As an avid motorcyclist, I wonder why the governments of some states, in-
cluding Pennsylvania, target me and other riders with discriminatory legislation 
such as mandatory helmet laws. 
 
 There is no discernible difference in motorcycle injuries or fatalities among 
those states where helmet use is voluntary. 
 
 Motorcycles represent just 2 percent of total vehicles in the United States 
and account for less than 1 percent of all vehicle accidents. Trucks and buses 
account for 28 percent of accidents, and pedestrians account for 15 percent 
of total vehicle fatalities. Maybe they, too, should have been required to wear 
helmets, although I believe it wouldn’t have mattered. 
 
 For me, this is an issue of personal freedom. 
 
 Mandatory helmet laws are annoying and unnecessary to an extremely small 
minority of citizens who would prefer to make their own decision on an issue 
which has no effect on anyone else. 
 
 To the average citizen who does not share an affection for motorcycles, this 
may not seem important. But what if the government decided to discriminate 
against your small group? 
 
 Would golfers enjoy a sunny afternoon on the greens sporting helmets to 
protect them from a stray golf ball, or would hunters care to wear bullet-proof 
vests in the woods? 
 
 Recently, a local television station conducted a telephone poll asking if the 
state should repeal its current mandatory helmet law. The results were 82 per-
cent in favor of repealing the existing law. 
 
 I believe that the time has come for the government to allow responsible 
citizens to choose what safety measures best suit their particular needs. 15 
 Don’t Use God’s Law to Beat Up on Gays 
 Leonard Pitts 
 This is for those who hated my recent column about Ellen DeGeneres and Jerry 
Falwell—the lesbian comic and the preacher who ﬁ nds her disgusting. It’s for 
the ones who pointed me to the Bible, speciﬁ cally Leviticus 20:13, which calls 
homosexuality an “abomination” worthy of death. . . . 
 
 Let me begin by saying that I have no answer. 
 
 When it comes to reconciling the words in the ancient book with the conun-
drums of modern life, such is often the case. 

 
Refuting Arguments 
211
 
 The same chapter of Leviticus, for instance, also mandates death for cursing 
your parents (Leviticus 20:9) or committing adultery (Leviticus 20:10). 
 
 Why aren’t those who quote Leviticus as literal law rushing to obey this in-
junction? Why aren’t the streets running red with the blood of sluttish spouses 
and spoiled brats? 
 
 I have no answer. 
 
 It is emphatically not my intention to ridicule God’s Book. However, I do 
mean to challenge those who seem to take their faith as an excuse for spurning 
two of His greatest gifts. Meaning a heart that knows compassion and a mind 
that entertains questions. 
 
 They claim there’s nothing personal in their persecution of gays. They are, 
they say, just following God’s law. 
 
 But we seldom hear of anyone getting this hot and bothered over faithless 
spouses or ill-mannered children, both worthy of capital punishment according 
to the Bible. 
 
 For that matter, you seldom hear rage over men with long hair (I Corin-
thians 11:14) or women who speak out in church (I Corinthians 11:34–35)—
both also scorned by the Bible. And so, if these people are honest with them-
selves, they must admit that their antipathy toward gays has less to do with 
God’s law than with human aversion—the visceral shudder of revulsion many 
feel at the thought of all things homosexual. . . . 
 
 What’s this say about us that so many are willing to interpret the Bible only 
to the limits of their own narrow-mindedness and bigotry? That so many are 
inclined to ignore passages that say men ought not to judge? Or that so many 
seem to disregard what happened when the scribes and Pharisees brought 
before Jesus a woman caught in the act of adultery and demanded that she be 
stoned in accordance with God’s law. Instead, Jesus faced them and said the 
one who was without sin should cast the ﬁ rst stone. 
 
 Why is it so few ever take that literally? 
 
 I have no answer. 
 
 Is homosexuality an abomination? 
 
 No answer for that, either, except that if I was given heart and mind, the 
giver must have wanted me to use them. No answer except that my heart 
and mind ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to justify loathing or impeding people who have done 
me no harm. No answer except to note that God is mercy. And, of course, He 
is love. 
 
 So it doesn’t bother me to have no answers. 
 
 But I fear the man who has no questions. 16 
 We’re Spendthrift “Environmentalists” 
 Constance Hilliard 
 Eight out of 10 Americans regard themselves as environmentalists. Yet while 
we Americans comprise a mere 5% of the world’s population, we consume an 
estimated 30% of its non-replenishable resources. So much of what we call 
“environmentalism” in this country, from recycling soda cans to petitioning 
Congress for wetlands preservation, represents little more than a clamorous 
sideshow to the far more painful issues at hand. 
 
 We may be quick to take sides in political debates over environmental is-
sues, but upon closer inspection we often are all on the same side in the larger 
 ecological debate. Our voracious patterns of consumption engulf gadgetry-
 addicted, fossil-fuel guzzling environmentalists and anti-environmentalists alike. 

212 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims 
 
 The more single-mindedly we grab for that elusive, nirvana-like American 
Dream, the more inexorable the slippage in our quality of life. We suffer more 
stress-related illnesses now than ever before, while neglecting family and inti-
mate relationships in our time-consuming struggles to surpass the Joneses. 
 
 America’s most pressing ecological crisis stems from our societal addiction to 
consumerism. Our patterns of overconsumption reﬂ ect a dependency, a need for 
constantly whispering promises of untold bliss that mere goods simply cannot 
keep. This unbridled consumerism, editor Roger Rosenblatt notes in the book 
 Consuming Desires, is “threatening the ecological balance of our entire globe.” 
 
 In this holiday season of frenzied shop-’til-you-drop spending, those of us 
who call ourselves environmentalists might just wish to take time out to re-
evaluate our personal patterns of consumption. What emotional or spiritual 
wounds do we really think that new item will heal? More to the point, what are 
the unspoken costs to the fragile, unreplenishable resources of this planet of 
our endless material acquisitions? 
 
 And we Americans call ourselves environmentalists. 17 
 Campus Rules Overreach 
 USA Today 
 Our view: Students have a right to express views that offend some others. 
 Following the September 11, 2001, attacks, several students at Shippensburg 
(Pa.) University put up posters in their dorms depicting Osma bin Laden in a 
 riﬂ e’s crosshairs. But school ofﬁ cials ordered the posters removed. The stu-
dents said they were told the signs might offend other dorm residents. 
 
 In response to that bit of political correctness run amok, a group represent-
ing the students sued the university, claiming its code of student conduct limits 
free speech. A federal judge agreed. Last week, the school revised its code, which 
had banned “any unwanted conduct which annoys, demeans or alarms.” 
 
 The case illustrates how colleges’ efforts to promote campus harmony can 
violate constitutional rights to free expression by squelching all but the most 
bland and conformist comments. While some views may be offensive, the best 
way to confront them is by encouraging open dialogue, not giving veto power 
to those most easily offended. 
 
 Yet, many colleges still prohibit provocative speech protected by the First 
Amendment, according to the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education 
(FIRE), which sued Shippensburg and other colleges that attempted to censor 
debate. 
 
 Examples of campus restrictions the group has challenged:
•  Ofﬁ cials at the College of William and Mary in Virginia, University of 
Colorado and the University of California at Irvine prevented some 
students from holding bake sales with discount prices for minority stu-
dents as satirical protests of afﬁ rmative-action policies. They relented 
after FIRE threatened to sue. 
•  Last year, Gonzaga University in Spokane, Wash., took disciplinary ac-
tion against a student group that posted ﬂ iers about a speech by the 
author of the book  Why the Left Hates America . Offended students and 
administrators have complained that the title could be considered a 
form of hate speech. Gonzaga reversed itself after FIRE protested. 
•  A writing instructor at Forsyth Technical Community College 
in  Winston-Salem, N.C., claims she was let go last year after 

 
Refuting Arguments 
213
criticizing the Iraq war during a class. FIRE is working to have her 
 reinstated.    
 
 Some universities argue that speech codes are needed to comply with federal 
rules that ban sexual or racial harassment. But the head of the U.S. Department 
of Education’s Ofﬁ ce of Civil Rights says the regulations don’t “impair the exer-
cise of rights protected under the First Amendment.” The rules are intended to 
protect students from discrimination, not regulate speech, he said. 
 
 Encouraging students to show sensitivity to others is laudable, but it’s better 
achieved through persuasion than coercion of those who express disagreeable 
views. After all, a free exchange of ideas is supposed to be an integral part of 
the college experience. 
 
 Universities can support civility without tearing down posters or limiting 
speech. Free expression will make some uncomfortable, but that’s not sufﬁ cient 
reason to block it within the ivy-covered walls of academia. 18 
 Hate Cannot Be Tolerated 
 Richard Delgado 
 Opposing view: Limits on the most offensive forms of speech are reasonable. 
 Anonymous vandals scrawl hate-ﬁ lled grafﬁ ti outside a Jewish student center. 
Black students at a law school ﬁ nd unsigned ﬂ iers stuffed inside their lockers 
screaming that they do not belong there. At a third campus, a group of toughs 
hurls epithets at a young Latino student walking home late at night. 
 
 In response to a rising tide of such incidents, some colleges have enacted 
hate-speech codes or applied existing rules against individuals whose conduct 
interferes with the educational opportunities of others. Federal courts have 
extended “hostile environment” case law to schools that tolerate a climate of 
hate for women and students of color. 
 
 Despite the alarm these measures sometimes elicit, nothing is wrong with 
them. In each case, the usual and preferred response—“more speech”—is unavail-
able to the victim. With anonymous hate speech such as the ﬂ ier or grafﬁ ti, the 
victim cannot talk back, for the hate speaker delivers his message in a cowardly 
fashion. And talking back to aggressors is rarely an option. Indeed, many hate 
crimes began just this way: The victim talked back—and paid with his life. 
 
 Hate speech is rarely an invitation to a conversation. More like a slap in the 
face, it reviles and silences. College counselors report that campuses where 
highly publicized incidents of hate speech have taken place show a decline in 
minority enrollment as students of color instead choose to attend school where 
the environment is healthier. 
 
 A few federal courts have declared overly broad hate-speech codes uncon-
stitutional, as well they should. Nothing is gained by a rule so broad it could be 
construed as forbidding the discussion of controversial subjects such as evolu-
tion or afﬁ rmative action. 
 
 But this is not what most people mean by hate speech, nor are colleges 
barred from drafting narrow rules that hone in on the conduct they wish to 
control. And when they do, courts are very likely to ﬁ nd in their favor. Recent 
Supreme Court rulings striking down laws that ban sodomy, upholding afﬁ rma-
tive action, and approving punishment for cross-burning show that the court is 
not unaware of current trends. Society is becoming more diverse. Reasonable 
rules aimed at accommodating that diversity and regulating the conduct of 
bullies and bigots are to be applauded—not feared. 19 

214 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims 
 Why Cats Make Better Pets Than Dogs 
 Sean Curtis 
 I love dogs. They are loyal, loving, and always there for you. But let’s face it, 
having a dog is not that different from having a child. Dogs need constant 
feeding, constant walking, and constant attention. If you happen to get a dog 
before you are settled down with a family, you quickly realize how much your 
life changes. No more going out drinking straight after work. No more spur-of-
the-moment road trips. No more sleeping in on Saturday mornings. 
 
 I prefer cats because they can be just as loving as dogs, but much lower 
maintenance. My cat doesn’t hide from people or constantly want to be left 
alone. In fact, when people come over he runs to the front door to see who is 
there, just like a dog would (only without the barking). He snuggles up on the 
couch with my wife and I when we watch a movie. In many ways, he’s just like a 
dog. Here’s my case for why cats make better pets: 
  FEED A CAT ONCE A DAY. Most cats can be fed once a day or once every 
few days. Just ﬁ ll up the cat’s bowl, get some fresh water, and you’re done. 
With dogs, they need to be fed as often as humans. Many times you’ll have 
to rush home “to feed the dog.” You’ll almost never have this problem with 
a cat. If you were to ﬁ ll your dog’s bowl to the top with food and leave him 
for the day, odds are you’ll come home to a sick dog or a pile of vomit. 
 NO SUB-ZERO WALKS AT 6 A.M. I love the idea of getting outside and taking 
the dog for a walk. But I love that idea on a beautiful summer evening. I 
do not love that idea on a sub-zero Chicago morning before the sun has 
even come up. It gives me chills just thinking about it. And forget about 
sleeping in. Your dog will wake you up for a walk while the roosters are still 
asleep. 
 THE POOP IS IN ONE PLACE. If you live in a city with a dog, you should be 
picking up your dog’s poop (you BE T TER be picking it up!). I imagine 
that’s not much fun. With cats, they put their waste in the same place. 
Every few days you just need to scoop it out and you’re done. Easy. 
 NO BARKING. Some dogs bark loud. Very loud. If you live in an apartment 
with a bark-happy dog, odds are you are disturbing your neighbors. Cats 
are nice and quiet. Sure, they meow every now and then, but that’s noth-
ing compared to a Golden Retriever’s bark. 
 WEARY HOUSE GUESTS. There are few things I hate more than showing 
up at someone’s house and being assaulted by their dog. Dogs jump up 
on people and lick them and put their dog smell all over them. I’m sorry, 
but I don’t necessarily want to smell like someone’s dog for the rest of the 
day. If you can teach your dog to stay off the guests, great. If not, people 
are going to secretly hate stopping over for a visit. 
 
 I know it may sound like I’m anti-dog. I’m not. I’d love to have a dog eventu-
ally. But my wife and I decided it doesn’t make sense to get one until we have kids. 
Until then, the ease and freedom we get from our ultra-loving cat is preferable. 20  
 On Campus, a Good Man Is Hard to Find 
 John Tierney 
 When a boy opens his acceptance letter from college, he now has to wonder 
what most impressed the admissions ofﬁ cers. Did they want him for his mind, 
or just his body? 

 
Refuting Arguments 
215
 
 The admissions director at Kenyon College, Jennifer Delahunty Britz, 
 published an Op-Ed article this week revealing an awkward truth about her job: 
afﬁ rmative action for boys. As the share of the boys in the applicant pool keeps 
shrinking—it will soon be down to 40 percent nationally—colleges are admitting 
less-qualiﬁ ed boys in order to keep the gender ratio balanced on campus. 
 
 This week’s revelation did not please Kim Gandy, the president of the 
 National Organization for Women, who told me that she might challenge the 
legality of afﬁ rmative action for male applicants. She and I are not normally 
ideological soulmates, but I have some sympathy with her on this policy. 
 
 It’s not fair to the girls who are rejected despite having higher grades and 
test scores than the boys who get fat envelopes. It’s not fair to the boys, either, 
if they’re not ready to keep up with their classmates. 
 
 After consulting with the federal Education Department, I can conﬁ dently 
report that this discrimination may violate the law—or then again, it may not. 
Either way, I agree with Gandy that public colleges shouldn’t practice it, because 
the government shouldn’t favor one group over another. Gandy’s also wary of 
allowing private schools like Kenyon to discriminate, and she’s skeptical of their 
justiﬁ cation: that they need a fairly even male-female ratio on campus to attract 
the best applicants of either sex. I’m not sure if that’s true, but I trust the col-
leges to know better than me or Gandy or federal lawyers. As long as a school is 
private, let it favor whomever it wants—men, women, alumni children, Latinos, 
African-Americans—without any interference from the Education Department. 
 
 What the department should be doing is ﬁ guring out how to help boys 
reach college. The gender gap has been getting worse for two decades, but the 
Education Department still isn’t focusing on it. Instead, it has an “educational 
equity” program aimed at helping girls and women. 
 
 The department is paying to encourage African and Slavic girls and women 
in Oregon to pursue careers in science. There’s a grant to help women in West 
Virginia overcome “traditional, outdated 19th-century attitudes” by pursuing 
jobs in blue-collar trades. Another grant aims to motivate women at the 
 Medgar Evers College in Brooklyn, N.Y., to study math. 
 
 These are all noble goals. I’d be glad to see the women of Brooklyn take up 
advanced calculus. But the chief “equity” issue at their college is the shortage 
of men, who make up barely a ﬁ fth of the student body. What happened to the 
boys who didn’t make it? 
 
 Boys are, on average, as smart as girls, but they are much less fond of 
school. They consistently receive lower grades, have more discipline problems, 
and are more likely to be held back for a year or placed in special education 
classes. The Harvard economist Brian Jacobs attributes these problems to boys’ 
lack of “noncognitive skills,” like their difﬁ culties with paying attention in class, 
their disorganization, and their reluctance to seek help from others. 
 
 Those are serious handicaps, but they could be mitigated if schools became 
more boy-friendly. A few educators have suggested reforms: more outdoor exercise, 
more male teachers, more experiments with single-sex schools. But those ideas 
have gotten little attention or money. Schools have been too busy trying to close 
the gender gap in the few areas where boys are ahead, like sports and science. 
 
 No matter what changes are made to help boys, they’ll probably still be less 
likely than girls to go on to college, simply because girls’ skills and interests are 
better suited to the types of white-collar jobs that now require college degrees. 
Boys will remain more inclined to skip college in favor of relatively well-paying 
jobs in ﬁ elds like construction and manufacturing. 

216 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims 
 
 There’s no reason to expect a 50-50 ratio on campus—and certainly no rea-
son to mandate it. Boys don’t need that kind of afﬁ rmative action. What they 
could use, long before college, is equal attention. 21 
 Don’t Blame the Burgers 
 USA Today 
 Our view: “Fat” lawsuits won’t ﬁ x the obesity epidemic. Personal responsibility will. 
 People who overeat used to be called gluttons. Now, they’re victims. Two over-
weight Bronx, N.Y., teens who scarfed down McDonald’s burgers and fries sev-
eral times a week blame the company for their health problems. Their attorneys 
assert they are victims of corporate malfeasance because the chain deceives 
customers about its products. 
 
 The “McDonald’s-made-me-fat” lawsuit leaps to mind whenever the subject 
of frivolous litigation comes up. Nine of 10 Americans say it’s wrong to hold 
food companies liable for obesity-related health problems, a 2003 Gallup Poll 
found. A federal judge who dismissed the case that year agreed, noting, 
“Nobody is forced to eat at McDonald’s.” 
 
 A federal appeals court reinstated the lawsuit last week, saying the teens 
should be allowed to collect more evidence before trial. So the case that became a 
meal ticket for comedians and inspired an Oscar-nominated documentary , Super 
Size Me,  about a man who ate nothing but McDonald’s food for 30 days, can 
again clog the arteries of American jurisprudence. Fourteen states have passed 
“cheeseburger” bills to protect chains from lawsuits about their customers’ girth. 
 
 The McDonald’s lawsuit is no joke to the attorneys who see food as their next 
cash cow. The lawyers acknowledge that their goal is to use class-action suits to 
hold food ﬁ rms liable for a lucrative portion of the $117 billion in annual public 
health costs related to obesity. Of at least eight “fat” lawsuits ﬁ led so far, ﬁ ve 
have been partially successful in pushing companies to provide better nutritional 
information. The trial lawyers hope that securing documents from food chains 
will yield the kind of incriminating memos they found with Big Tobacco. 
 
 It’s a stretch to suggest that McNuggets are as addictive or dangerous as 
nicotine. Although two-thirds of Americans are overweight, lawsuits and gov-
ernment edicts are no way to trim the nation’s midsection. Market forces and 
public education work better. 
 
 Food companies are responding to health ﬁ ndings and consumer demand. 
McDonald’s has phased out its Super Size program. Mascot Ronald McDonald 
will visit elementary schools to promote ﬁ tness, not burgers. More nutritional 
information is displayed on the restaurants’ Web sites. 
 
 Most fast-food chains have cut fat content and offer salads and low-carb 
meals. All 1,500 Applebee’s restaurants, for example, offer Weight Watchers 
meals. People who choose Hardee’s 1,418-calorie Monster Thickburger have 
only themselves to blame. 
 
 Advice to avoid such foods is hard to miss. The government’s new dietary 
guidelines, issued earlier this month, counsel people to exercise more, eat more 
fruits, vegetables and whole grains, and cut their intake of trans fats in pro-
cessed foods. The Food and Drug Administration will soon grade food-health 
claims, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is studying the 
effects of food marketing on children’s diets. 
 
 Ultimately, good eating habits are a matter of personal and parental 
responsibility. As the trial judge in the McDonald’s case put it: “If a person 

 
Refuting Arguments 
217
knows or should know that eating copious orders of supersized McDonald’s 
products is unhealthy and may result in weight gain, it is not the place of the 
law to protect them from their own excesses.” 22 
 End the Death Penalty; Use Life without Parole 
 USA Today 
 The evidence is in: the verdict is beyond dispute. The death penalty is a failure 
as a tool of law, justice or public safety. . . . 
 
 You need not be a legal scholar to see the death penalty’s many ﬂ aws. Nor 
do you need to be “soft on crime.” Other punishments are more meaningful 
and just as satisfying. Indeed, the death penalty actually makes our society 
more violent and our persons less secure. 
 
 Capital punishment has a “brutalizing effect” that actually seems to incite 
killers. The phenomenon has been documented as far back as the 1850s, both 
here and in Europe. One famous study found that in New York between 1907 
and 1963, the murder rate increased, on average, by two in every month fol-
lowing a public execution. 
 
 There’s a simpler way to prove the death penalty doesn’t work: Look at the 
crime stats. In 1992, the average murder rate in death-penalty states was 7.8 per 
100,000 people. In states without: 4.9 per 100,000. Where do you want to live? . . . 
 
 Capital punishment satisﬁ es a natural urge for revenge that is complete and 
ﬁ nal. And, certainly, the courts should impose lasting punishments that truly 
punish. 
 
 But the death penalty dooms the innocent along with the guilty. Since 1900, 
as many as 23 people have been put to death for crimes they did not commit. 
Even now, death-row inmates scheduled for execution are regularly reprieved. 
In 1993 alone, ﬁ ve death-row inmates were found to be completely innocent. 
 
 The risk of error has a companion: The taint of racism. 
 
 On the federal level, 75% of those convicted under the Drug Kingpin Act 
have been white, but 90% of those who face capital prosecutions under the 
same statute are minorities. In the states, only one white in 18 years has been 
executed for killing a black. A black murderer is twice as likely to be executed if 
his victim was white than if his victim was a minority. 
 
 Make no mistake. Opposition to capital punishment is not opposition to 
swift and certain punishment. An alternative that meets both standards is 
available: Life in prison with no possibility of parole, now available in at least 
33 states. 
 
 This sentence means what it says. A convict will not get out in seven years, 
or 12 years or 15 years.  There is no parole. 
 
 Many jurors, like most Americans, think there’s no such thing as a life sentence. 
They fear a killer will get out and kill again. But in California, for instance, not 
one person sentenced to life without parole has been freed. This is life in a cage—
forever. 
 
 The only problem is that this sentence isn’t more common. Life without parole:
•  Is easier to win than the death penalty, and cheaper by one-third or 
one-half. . . . 
•  Is indisputably constitutional. 
•  And may actually deter crime, especially for those in communities 
where the prospect of death may be more tolerable than the prospect 
of life in a cage. 

218 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims 
 
 The death penalty offers no certainty of justice. It is arbitrary. It wastes 
money. It makes us less safe. It cannot be reconciled with the Constitution. It 
bogs down the courts. It encourages legalistic manipulation, and it erodes the 
system’s integrity. 
 
 So why bother with it? Life in prison without any possibility of parole will 
put the bad guys where it hurts the most and improve our judicial system at the 
same time. . . . Abolish the death penalty. 24 
 
 SUMMARY 
1.   In critical thinking a  good argument is an argument that satisﬁ es the relevant 
critical thinking standards that apply in a particular context. The most im-
portant critical thinking standards are  accuracy (Are the premises true?) and 
 logical correctness (Do the premises, if true, provide good reasons to accept 
the conclusion?).  There are, however, other critical thinking standards that 
should also be considered in evaluating arguments. Among these are clar-
ity, precision, relevance, consistency, completeness, and fairness. 
2.   In general, it is reasonable to accept an unsupported claim as true when 
(1) the claim does not conﬂ ict with personal experiences that we have no 
good reason to doubt, (2) the claim does not conﬂ ict with background 
beliefs that we have no good reason to doubt, and (3) the claim comes 
from a credible source. 
3.   To refute an argument is to defeat it—to show that the premises do not 
provide good reasons to accept the conclusion. There are two ways to refute 
an argument: (1) show that a premise—or a critical group of  premises—is 
false or dubious, or (2) show that the reasoning is bad—that the premises 
do not provide adequate logical support for the conclusion. Two often-
effective strategies for showing that a premise is false are  reducing to the ab-
surd (reductio ad absurdum)  and  refutation by counterexample. Reducing to the 
absurd seeks to refute a claim by showing that the claim implies something 
that is obviously false or absurd. Refutation by counterexample attempts 
to show that a general claim (i.e., a claim of the form “All A’s are B’s” or 
  Wayne, 38, of Pittston, Pennsylvania, was bitten by a cobra belonging 
to his friend, Roger, after playfully reaching into the tank and picking 
up the snake. Wayne subsequently refused to go to a hospital, telling 
Roger, “I’m a man, I can handle it.” Falser words have seldom been 
spoken. Instead of a hospital, Wayne reported to a bar. He had three 
drinks and enjoyed bragging that he had just been bitten by a cobra. 
Cobra venom is a slow-acting central nervous system toxin. He died 
within a few hours, in Jenkins Township, Pennsylvania. 23 
 Critical Thinking Lapse 

 
Appendix: Sample Critical Essay 
219
“Most A’s are B’s”) is false by producing one or more counterexamples—
that is, examples or exceptions that demonstrate that the claim is false. 
 
 The second way to refute an argument is to show that its reasoning is 
bad—that the premises, even if they are conceded to be true, fail to pro-
vide sufﬁ cient logical support for the conclusion. Many real-life arguments 
can be refuted by showing that the argument  omits crucial countervailing 
evidence —that is, evidence or information not mentioned by the arguer 
that points to a different or contrary conclusion. 
4.   Key questions we should ask in evaluating arguments include the following:
•   Are the premises true? 
•  Is the reasoning correct? Is the argument deductively valid or induc-
tively strong? 
•  Does the arguer commit any logical fallacies? 
•  Does the arguer express his or her points clearly and precisely? 
•   Are the premises relevant to the conclusion? 
•   Are the arguer’s claims logically consistent? Do any of the arguer’s claims 
contradict other claims made in the argument? 
•  Is the argument complete? Is all relevant evidence taken into account 
(given understandable limitations of time, space, context, and so on)? 
•  Is the argument fair? Is the arguer fair in his or her presentation of the 
evidence and treatment of opposing arguments and views? 
 APPENDIX: SAMPLE CRITICAL ESSAY 
 Below is a sample critical essay, written by us ( Jamie Kendall is a pseudonym). 
The essay is a critical analysis of a short piece we wrote on academic cheat-
ing. Portions of the critical essay are adapted from the Preamble to the King’s 
College Academic Integrity Policy, written by our colleague, Regan Lance 
Reitsma. Here is the cheating essay, followed by our critical analysis. 
 In Defense of Cheating By Joe Kribs 
 Most people, if they’re honest, admit that they do sometimes cheat. According 
to the Educational Testing Service Web site, while about 20 percent of college 
students admitted to cheating in high school during the 1940s, today between 
75 and 98 percent of college students report having cheated in high school. 
 Nobody likes cheating. Cheating is never good, but sometimes it is mor-
ally justiﬁ ed. 
 Times have changed a lot since the 1940s. Today, many students are maxed 
out with all the demands of sports, work, after-school activities,  community 
service, and homework. Sometimes there just aren’t enough hours in the day 
to get all one’s schoolwork done. 

220 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims 
 Also, a much higher percentage of high school students go to college today 
than was the case in the 1940s. Good grades are more important now than ever. 
Competition is intense for scholarships, admission to top colleges, and for the 
highest-paying jobs. Given the rampant amount of cheating today, students who 
don’t cheat put themselves at an unfair advantage against those who do. 
 Cheating is not something anyone feels proud about. But a lot of the classes 
students are forced to take, especially in high school, are just pointless. I mean, 
unless you are going to be an American History teacher, why do you need to 
memorize the details of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act? Many students cheat on 
busy work because they feel, rightly, that the effort is not worth their time. And 
some teachers are so incompetent or so ridiculously hard that it’s impossible to get 
a good grade if you don’t cheat. They don’t care, so why should their students? 
 Let’s face it, it’s a dog-eat-dog world out there. Every day we hear about 
some business scandal or some top athlete caught doping. Most adults cheat on 
their taxes, so what’s the big deal if students sometimes cheat on a test? Does 
anybody really get hurt? 
 Of course, it would be dumb to cheat if you knew you were likely to get 
caught. However, that is rarely the case. In a recent poll conducted by  Who’s 
Who Among American High School Students,  95 percent of confessed academic 
cheaters said they had never been caught. And most teachers understand the 
pressures on students to cheat. Rarely are the penalties for getting caught se-
vere. The prevailing attitude of both students and teachers is that cheating is 
not that big a deal. 
 One other thing has changed since the 1940s. We live in a globalized 
and increasingly competitive world. In today’s world, nice guys not only ﬁ n-
ish last—they go broke. So let’s stop kicking ourselves about a lost age of 
academic innocence. Times have changed, and students have changed with 
them. America has always been about success. As long as the American Dream 
remains alive, students will do what it takes to get ahead. 
 Sample Critical Essay 
 Jamie Kendall  
Kendall 1
 Critical Thinking 101 
 Professor Lewis 
 May 5, 2010 
 Why Cheating Is Always Wrong 
 
 Surveys show that cheating is becoming 
increasingly common among American high school and 
college  students. Many students say that cheating 
isn’t that big a deal and may sometimes be

 
Appendix: Sample Critical Essay 
221
 
Kendall 2
necessary or morally acceptable. In an essay titled 
“In Defense of Cheating” that appears in this text, 
Joe Kribs argues that cheating, while it is never 
good or something a student should be proud of, is 
sometimes justiﬁ able. In this essay I will argue 
that Kribs’s argument is unconvincing. 
 
 Kribs’s basic argument can be summarized as 
 follows:
 1.   Many students are too maxed out with work and 
extracurricular activities to do all their 
schoolwork. 
 2.   Academic cheating is rampant today. 
 3.   Thus, students who don’t cheat put themselves at 
an unfair advantage against those who do. (from 2)  
 4.  A much higher percentage of high school students go 
to college today than was the case in the 1940s.  
 5.   Competition is intense for scholarships, admission 
to top colleges, and for the highest-paying jobs.  
 6.   Thus, good grades are more important today than 
ever. (from 4 and 5) 
 7.   Many classes students are forced to take, especially 
in high school, are pointless. 
 8.   Busy work is not worth students’ time. 
 9.   Thus, teachers who assign busy work have no right 
to expect students not to cheat on it. (from 8)  
10.   Many teachers are so incompetent or so 
ridiculously hard that it’s impossible to get a good 
grade in their classes without cheating. 
11.   Incompetent or ridiculously hard teachers don’t 
care about their students’ educations. 
12.   Thus, students of such teachers needn’t care 
about respecting rules against cheating. (from 10 
and 11)  

222 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims 
 
Kendall 3
13.  Most adults cheat on their taxes, and cheating 
is commonplace today in business, sports, etc.  
14.  Surveys show that academic cheaters very rarely 
get caught. 
15. Penalties for cheating are seldom severe. 
16.  Nobody gets hurt when students cheat. 
17.   In today’s globalized and increasingly competitive 
world, nice guys not only ﬁ nish last—they go broke.  
18.  Therefore, academic cheating is sometimes morally 
justiﬁ ed. (from 1, 3, 6, 7, 9, 12, 13–17)  
 
 Kribs’s essay is provocative and clearly argued. 
However, his overall argument is ﬂ awed for several 
reasons. 
 
 First, his claim in (13) that cheating is justiﬁ ed 
because cheating is rampant in society today is an 
example of the bandwagon fallacy. The bandwagon fallacy, 
as you’ll recall, is the mistake of thinking that if a 
belief or act is popular, then it must be true or 
acceptable. Something can be popular but still 
unethical—as was the case with racial segregation or the 
persecution of religious minorities in times past. 
Whether academic cheating is ethical or justiﬁ able 
cannot be determined by surveys or opinion polls. 
 
 Second, Kribs’s arguments in (8–9) and (10–12) that 
cheating is justiﬁ ed in certain cases because some 
teachers assign busy work, or are incompetent or too 
demanding, are examples of the two wrongs make a right 
fallacy. The two wrongs fallacy is committed when an 
arguer attempts to justify a wrongful act by claiming that 
someone else has done something just as bad or worse. As 
we have seen, if an act is truly  wrong,  the fact that 
other people are also acting wrongly cannot justify the 
act. For example, just because others cheat on their taxes

 
Appendix: Sample Critical Essay 
223
 
Kendall 4
doesn’t mean that it’s acceptable for you to do so. And as 
we’ll see, it really is  wrong to cheat in school. 
 
 Third, Kribs’s argument in (3) that cheating is 
justiﬁ able because students who cheat get an unfair 
advantage over those who don’t is also an example of the 
two wrongs fallacy. Those who cheat on their taxes place 
an unfair burden on honest taxpayers—they have to pay 
more to make up for the cheaters. But just because 
others are being dishonest doesn’t mean it’s OK for you 
to be dishonest too. Two wrongs don’t make a right. 
 
 Fourth, Kribs’s claim in (16) that nobody gets hurt 
when students cheat is just not true. Cheating gives the 
cheater unfair advantages. He saves time and energy. The 
cheater’s better grade might give him future scholarship 
or employment advantages over other students. Furthermore, 
the student who cheats puts students who do not in a bad 
situation. When the student who does not cheat recognizes 
that others do, she naturally wonders whether her good 
behavior has serious practical costs: “Are the cheats 
getting better grades than me? Are they going to be 
offered the job I want?” Finally, cheating damages the 
academic reputation of the cheater’s school or college; 
when the cheater, ill-prepared for work or further 
education, does poorly, future students from that 
institution lose out. Cheating is not a victimless crime; 
it has effects upon the entire academic community. 
 
 Kribs offers a number of other arguments in defense of 
cheating. He claims that students lead very busy lives, 
that good grades are more important today than ever, that 
many classes are pointless, that cheaters rarely get 
caught, that penalties tend to be light, and that people 
cannot afford to be honest in today’s globalized economy. 
Even if we grant all of these arguments—and some of them 

224 
CHAPTER 8 Evaluating Arguments and Truth Claims 
 
Kendall 5
are certainly highly questionable—they are not sufﬁ cient to 
justify cheating. Those arguments speak to cheaters’  self-
interest —what they stand to gain from cheating (better 
grades, more scholarship money, better job opportunities, 
etc.). What is missing from Kribs’s essay is any 
appreciation of the strong ethical reasons  not to cheat. 
 
 Academic cheating is wrong for many reasons. Cheating 
is dishonest and violates the teacher’s trust, because to 
cheat is to turn in work that is not yours under the 
pretense that it is. Cheating lowers one’s self-respect 
and undermines the sense of pride one ought to feel in 
one’s academic accomplishments. Cheating subverts the 
whole point of giving grades, which is to assess student 
learning, give helpful feedback, and determine which 
students are most deserving of further educational and 
career opportunities. (Would you want to be operated on by 
a doctor who cheated his way through medical school? Or 
drive across a bridge that was designed by an engineer who 
cheated her way through her engineering program?) Cheating 
erodes character, since students who cheat in school are 
more likely to cheat later on. Finally, as we’ve seen, 
cheating is unfair to students who don’t cheat, because it 
gives the cheater an unfair advantage over them. 
 
 In sum, while Kribs shows that cheating may sometimes 
be personally advantageous, he fails to show that cheating 
is, as he claims, morally justiﬁ ed. Three of Kribs’s 
arguments commit the two wrongs make a right fallacy, and 
one commits the bandwagon fallacy. More signiﬁ cantly, 
Kribs fails to rebut, or even to consider, any of the 
strong ethical arguments against cheating. Contrary to the 
old adage, cheaters may sometimes prosper. But Kribs does 
nothing to show that cheating is morally acceptable.  

225
 CHAPTER 9
 A LITTLE 
CATEGORICAL LOGIC  
 To help us make sense of our experience, humans constantly group things 
into classes or categories. These classiﬁ cations are reﬂ ected in our everyday 
language. For instance, we often encounter statements like these: 
 All donuts are fattening. 
 No minors are permitted in the store. 
 Some mushrooms are poisonous. 
 Some Republicans are not conservatives. 
The ﬁ rst statement says that anything included in the class of donuts is also 
included in the class of things that are fattening.  The second statement says 
that no member of the class of minors is included in the class of persons per-
mitted in the store. The third statement says that some members of the class of 
mushrooms are also members of the class of things that are poisonous. And the 
fourth statement says that some members of the class of Republicans are not 
members of the class of conservatives. 
 These are examples of what logicians call  categorical statements.  In this 
chapter we introduce a simple yet powerful technique for testing the validity 
of simple arguments made up of categorical statements. 
 CATEGORICAL STATEMENTS 
 A  categorical statement  makes a claim about the relationship between two 
or more categories or classes of things. In this chapter we focus on what are 
called  standard-form categorical statements,  which have one of the follow-
ing four forms:
 All  S are  P. ( Example: All Democrats are liberals.) 
 No  S are  P. ( Example: No Democrats are liberals.) 
 Some  S are  P. ( Example: Some Democrats are liberals.) 
 Some  S are not  P. ( Example: Some Democrats are not liberals.) 
 One of the most 
fundamental and 
pervasive of all 
human psycho-
logical activities is 
the propensity to 
categorize. 
 —David A. Levy 

226 
CHAPTER 9 A Little Categorical Logic 
Logicians have discovered a number of techniques to test the validity of 
simple categorical arguments. The easiest method involves drawing a series of 
overlapping circles and associated markings called  Venn diagrams. 1 Let’s start 
with a few simple examples to see how the method works. 
 Suppose we wish to draw a Venn diagram of the statement “All 
Democrats are liberals.” We start by drawing a circle to stand for the class of 
Democrats: 
 
Democrats
 
 Then we draw a circle to stand for the class of liberals: 
 
Liberals
 
 The ﬁ rst circle includes anyone who is a Democrat; the second circle includes 
anyone who is a liberal. 
 Next we need to connect the two circles to indicate that the two classes 
are being related to each other in the statement. We do this by drawing the 
circles so that they partially overlap: 
 Democrats
Liberals
1
2
3
4
 
 Anything in area 1 is a Democrat but not a liberal. Anything in area 2 is both 
a Democrat and a liberal. Anything in area 3 is a liberal but not a Democrat. 
And anything in area 4, the area outside the two circles, is neither a Democrat 
nor a liberal. 2 
 Finally, we need some way to represent the asserted relationship between 
these two classes, namely, that all members of the class of Democrats are also 

 
Categorical Statements 
227
members of the class of liberals. To do this we shade that part of the Democrats 
circle that does not overlap with the Liberals circle: 
 Democrats
Liberals 
 The shading means that that part of the Democrats circle that does not overlap 
with the liberals circle is  empty; that is, it contains no members. 3 The diagram 
thus asserts that there are  no Democrats who are not liberals. This is what we 
mean when we say that all Democrats are liberals. 
 Next let’s diagram the statement “No Democrats are liberals.” Once 
again we start by drawing two overlapping circles, one to represent Democrats 
and the other to represent liberals: 
 Democrats
Liberals 
 To say that no Democrats are liberals is to say that no members of the 
class of Democrats are members of the class of liberals—that is, that there is  no 
overlap  between the two classes. To represent this claim, we shade that portion 
of the two circles that overlaps: 
 Democrats
Liberals 
 The diagram now tells us that anyone who is a Democrat is  not  a liberal—that 
is, that the class of people who are both Democrats and liberals is empty.  And 
that is what it means to say that no Democrats are liberals. 
 Categorical statements that begin with  some  must be treated differently 
from categorical statements that begin with  all or  no.  Some is often ambiguous in 
ordinary usage. Does it mean “a few,” “at least a few,” “at least one but not all,” 

228 
CHAPTER 9 A Little Categorical Logic 
“at least one and maybe all,” “at least a few but not all,” “lots,” “many”? To avoid 
such confusions, logicians always use  some  with the same consistent meaning. In 
logic  some always means “at least one.” For example,
 Some dogs are animals 
means “At least one dog is an animal” (which is true), not “At least one dog is 
an animal, but not all” (which is false). 
 There is another important difference between  some  statements and  all  or 
 no statements. In modern logic,  all  or  no  statements are treated as purely  condi-
tional (“if-then”) statements. Thus, the statement “All Hobbits are mushroom-
lovers” doesn’t say that there  are any Hobbits. Rather, it says that  if  anything 
is a Hobbit,  then  it is a mushroom-lover. In contrast, the statement “Some 
Hobbits are mushroom-lovers”  does  assert that something exists. Speciﬁ cally, it 
asserts that at least one Hobbit exists and that that Hobbit is a mushroom-lover. 
This difference between the two kinds of quantiﬁ ers isn’t very intuitive, but it 
causes few problems as long as the special meanings assigned to these expres-
sions are kept ﬁ rmly in mind. 
 In logic, accordingly, the statement “Some Democrats are liberals” means 
“There exists at least one Democrat and that Democrat is a liberal.”  To dia-
gram this statement, we place an  X in that part of the Democrats circle that 
overlaps with the Liberals circle: 
 Democrats
Liberals
X
 
 The  X here stands for that at-least-one-Democrat who is deﬁ nitely asserted 
to be a liberal. 
 Two Important Things to Remember 
about Some Statements 
1.  In categorical logic,  some  always means 
“at least one.” 
2.  Some  statements are understood to 
assert that something actually exists. 
Thus, “Some mammals are cats” asserts 
that at least one mammal exists and 
that that mammal is a cat. In contrast, 
 all  or  no  statements are not interpreted 
as asserting the existence of anything. 
Instead, they are treated as purely con-
ditional statements. Thus, “All trespass-
ers will be prosecuted” asserts that  if 
anyone is a trespasser, he or she will 
be prosecuted, not that there  are tres-
passers and that all of them will be 
prosecuted. 

 
Categorical Statements 
229
 A similar strategy is used with statements of the form “Some  S are not  P. ” 
In logic the statement “Some Democrats are not liberals” means “At least one 
Democrat is not a liberal.” To diagram this statement, we place an  X in that 
part of the Democrats circle that lies outside the Liberals circle: 
 Democrats
Liberals
X
 
 The diagram now asserts that at least one member of the class of Democrats is 
not a member of the class of liberals. And that is what it means, in logic, to say 
that some Democrats are not liberals. 
 In summary, the four kinds of standard-form categorical statements are 
diagrammed as follows:
 All  S are  P. 
S
P 
 No  S are  P. 
S
P 
 Some  S are  P. 
S
P
X
 

230 
CHAPTER 9 A Little Categorical Logic 
 Some  S are not  P. 
S
P
X
 
 EXERCISE 9.1 
 Draw Venn diagrams of the following statements. In some cases, you may need to 
rephrase the statements slightly to put them in one of the four standard forms (i.e., 
All  S are  P, No  S are  P, Some  S are  P, or Some  S are not  P ). 
 1.  No artichokes are fruits. 
 2.  Some rectangles are squares. 
 3.  All architects are professionals. 
 4.  Some skateboarders are jazz fans. 
 5.  Some tattoo artists are not archbishops. 
 6.  All persons born in the United States are U.S. citizens. 
 7.  No women are persons who have been U.S. presidents or vice presidents. 
 8.  Many dwarves are bachelors. 
 9.  Not a single chess master is a rock star. 
10.  Some of the world’s greatest soccer players are South Americans. 
 TRANSLATING INTO STANDARD CATEGORICAL FORM 
 Although relatively few of our everyday statements are explicitly in standard 
categorical form, a surprisingly large number of those statements can be  trans-
lated  into standard categorical form. That is why Venn diagrams are so useful in 
testing everyday arguments. 
 Before we discuss ways to translate ordinary English sentences into 
 standard-form categorical statements, let’s take a closer look at what such 
statements involve. 
 Standard-form categorical statements have a very simple logical struc-
ture. Here, once again, are the four standard categorical forms:
 All  S are  P. 
 No  S are  P. 
 Some  S are  P. 
 Some  S are not  P. 
 The main practi-
cal value of logic 
to one who wants 
to distinguish 
between straight 
and crooked 
thinking is that it 
introduces him to 
the device of re-
ducing arguments 
to their skeleton 
form as a means 
of judging whether 
or not they give 
sound support to 
their conclusions. 
 –Robert H. Thouless  

 
Translating into Standard Categorical Form 
231
TACOMA, Wash.—Kerry B. had been drinking with several friends when 
one of them said they knew a person who had bungee-jumped from 
the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in the middle of trafﬁ c. The conversation 
grew heated, and at least 10 men trooped along the walkway of the 
bridge at 4:30 A.M. Upon arrival at the midpoint of the bridge, they 
discovered that no one had brought bungee rope. Kerry, who had con-
tinued drinking, volunteered and pointed out that a coil of lineman’s 
cable lay nearby. One end of the cable was secured around Kerry’s leg 
and the other end was tied to the bridge. His fall lasted 40 feet before 
the cable tightened and tore his foot off at the ankle. He miraculously 
survived his fall into the icy river water and was rescued by two nearby 
ﬁ sherman. “All I can say,” said Kerry, “is that God was watching out for 
me on that night. There’s just no other explanation for it.” Kerry’s foot 
was never located.4
Critical Thinking Lapse
Notice that each of these statement forms has four basic parts: 
1.   They all begin with the word  all, no,  or  some.  These words are 
called  quantiﬁ ers  because they are used to express a quantity or a 
number.  
2.   They all have a  subject term —a word or phrase that names a class 
and that serves as the grammatical subject of the sentence. In these 
statement forms, the subject term is represented by  S. 
3.   They all have a  predicate term —a word or phrase that names a class 
and that serves as the subject complement of the sentence. In these 
statement forms, the predicate term is represented by  P. 
4.   They all have a  copula, or linking verb, which is some form of the 
verb  to be. The copula serves to link, or join, the subject term with 
the predicate term. 
 With this helpful terminology in mind, we can now offer the following 
tips on how to translate ordinary English sentences into standard categorical 
form. 
 Tip 1: Rephrase all nonstandard subject and predicate terms so that 
they refer to classes. 
 Many everyday English sentences have adjectives as their grammatical 
predicates. Because adjectives name attributes rather than classes, they must be 
rewritten as nouns, pronouns, or noun phrases that refer to classes. Here are 
two examples:
All actors are vain.
All actors are vain people.
Some roses are white.
Some roses are white flowers.

232 
CHAPTER 9 A Little Categorical Logic 
 Tip 2: Rephrase all nonstandard verbs. 
 For the sake of consistency, only two linking verbs (copulas) are allowed 
in standard-form categorical statements:  are and  are not.  Sentences that contain 
linking verbs other than  are or  are not  must be rewritten in standard form. Here 
are two examples: 
Some students walk to school.
Some students are persons who walk 
to school.
All the northern counties were 
ﬂ ooded.
All the northern counties are places 
that were ﬂ ooded.
 Tip 3: Fill in any unexpressed quantiﬁ ers.  
 Often categorical statements have no stated quantiﬁ er. In such cases, the 
unexpressed quantiﬁ er must be added. Here are two examples:
Koalas are marsupials.
All koalas are marsupials.
Californians are health nuts.
Some Californians are health nuts.
 Sometimes it is hard to know what quantiﬁ er a speaker or writer may 
have had implicitly in mind. In such cases, we should interpret the speaker’s or 
writer’s intent as charitably as possible. Here are two examples:
Bankers are conservatives.
Some bankers are conservatives.
(Not: All bankers are conservatives.)
Texans are friendly.
Some Texans are friendly people.
(Not: All Texans are friendly people.)5
 Tip 4: Translate singular statements as  all or  no statements. 
 A  singular statement  makes a claim about a particular person, place, or 
thing. Often, with a little ingenuity, such statements can be translated into  all 
or  no statements. Here are several examples:
Caesar crossed the Rubicon.
All persons identical with Caesar 
are persons who crossed the 
Rubicon.
Joe wasn’t born in Kansas.
No persons identical with Joe are persons 
who were born in Kansas.
Paris is the capital of France.
All places identical with Paris are 
places that are the capital of 
France.
This ﬂ ower is blooming.
All things identical with this ﬂ ower are 
things that are blooming.
Such translations, however artiﬁ cial, are useful because they greatly increase 
the number of everyday arguments that can be tested by means of Venn 
diagrams.

 
Translating into Standard Categorical Form 
233
 Tip 5: Translate stylistic variants into the appropriate categorical form. 
Each of the four standard categorical forms has numerous  stylistic variants —
that is, different ways of saying essentially the same thing. 6 For instance, the 
statement
 Mary is loved by John 
is a stylistic variant of the statement
 John loves Mary. 
 Following is a list of some of the most common stylistic variants of state-
ments of the form “All  S are  P. ” 
Common Stylistic Variants of “All S are P”
Every S is a P.
Example: Every dog is an animal.
Whoever is an S is a P.
Example: Whoever is a bachelor is a male.
Whatever is an S is a P.
Example: Whatever is a lemon is a fruit.
If anything is an S, 
then it is a P.
Example: If anything is a lizard, then it 
is a reptile.
If something is not a P, 
then it is not an S.
Example: If something is not a bird, then 
it is not a sparrow.
Any S is a P.
Example: Any triangle is a geometrical 
ﬁ gure.
Each S is a P.
Example: Each monkey is a primate.
S are all P.
Example: Senators are all politicians.
S are always P.
Example: Racists are always bigots.
Only P are S.
Example: Only Catholics are popes.
Only if something is a P 
is it an S.
Example: Only if something is a ﬁ sh is it 
a salmon.
The only S are P.
Example: The only seats available are seats 
in the upper deck.
Something is an S 
only if it is a P.
Example: Something is an elm only if it 
is a tree.
 Pay special attention to the phrases containing the word  only in that list. 
 Only  is one of the trickiest words in the English language. Note, in particular, 
that as a rule the subject and predicate terms must be  reversed  if the statement 
begins with the words  only  or  only if.  Thus, “Only citizens are voters” must be 
rewritten as “All voters are citizens,”  not “All citizens are voters.” Similarly, “Only 
if a thing is an insect is it a bee” must be rewritten as “All bees are insects,”  not 
“All insects are bees.” Subject and predicate terms in sentences that contain the 
phrase  the only,  however, generally should  not be reversed. Thus, “The only seats 
available are seats in the upper deck” means “All seats that are available are seats 
in the upper deck,”  not “All seats in the upper deck are available seats.” 

234 
CHAPTER 9 A Little Categorical Logic 
 EXERCISE 9.2 
 Translate the following  only sentences into standard categorical form. 
  1.   Only doctors are psychiatrists. 
 2.   Only fools rush in. (Elvis). 
 3.   Something is a blue jay only if it’s a bird. 
 4.   Only if something is a Ford is it a Mustang. 
 5.   Sign: Employees’ restroom only. 
 6.   The only persons eligible for the honor society are persons with a 3.8 GPA 
or higher. 
 7.   Pitchers and catchers are the only players due to report on Monday. 
 8.   No one is allowed in the hall without a pass. 
 9.   None except senior citizens are eligible for the discount. 
 10.   Teachers alone may use the Teacher’s Lounge. 
 11.   Fire is the devil’s only friend. (Don McClean) 
 12.   Only a lunatic would dance when sober. (Cicero) 
 13.   God loveth none but him that dwelleth in wisdom. (Wisdom 7:28) 
 14.   Man . . . is wholly human only when he plays. (Friedrich von Schiller) 
 15.   I loathe none but executioners. (Albert Camus) 
 Following is a list of some of the most common stylistic variants of state-
ments of the form “No  S are  P. ” 
Common Stylistic Variants of “No S are P” 
No P are S. 
Example: No vegetables are fruits.
S are not P. 
Example: Oaks are not conifers.
Nothing that is an S is a P. 
 Example: Nothing that is a known fact is 
a mere opinion.
No one who is an S is a P. 
 Example: No one who is a Democrat is a 
Republican.
None of the S is a P. 
 Example: None of the students is a 
 registered Independent.
Not a single S is P. 
 Example: Not a single U.S. president is a 
woman.
If anything is an S,   
Example: If anything is a plant, then it is 
then it is not a P. 
not a mineral.
All S are non-P. 
 Example: All robots are nonhumans.
 Following is a list of some common stylistic variants of statements of the 
form “Some  S are  P. ” 

 
Translating into Standard Categorical Form 
235
Common Stylistic Variants of “Some S are P”  
Some P are S. 
Example: Some Democrats are women.
A few S are P. 
Example: A few mathematicians are poets.
There are S that 
Example: There are monkeys that are 
are P.  
carnivores.
Several S are P. 
 Example: Several planets in the solar system 
are gas giants.
Many S are P. 
 Example: Many billionaires are Internet 
tycoons.
Most S are P. 
 Example: Most high school principals are 
men.
Nearly all S are P. 
 Example: Nearly all Hollywood producers 
are liberals.7
 Following is a list of some common stylistic variants of statements of the 
form “Some  S are not  P. ” 
Common Stylistic Variants of “Some S are not P” 
Not all S are P. 
 Example: Not all mammals are quadrupeds.
Not everyone who 
Example: Not everyone who is a used-car
is an S is a P. 
dealer is a crook.
S are not always P. 
 Example: Sailors are not always swimmers.
Some S are non-P. 
 Example: Some theologians are nonbelievers.
There are S that are 
Example: There are bears that are not 
not P.  
carnivores.
A few S are not P. 
 Example: A few logicians are not eccentrics.
Several S are not P. 
 Example: Several of the world’s most 
famous sports celebrities are not good 
role models.
Most S are not P. 
 Example: Most students are not binge 
drinkers.
Nearly all S are not P. 
 Example: Nearly all physicists are not sharp 
dressers.
 It should be emphasized that these translation tips are not intended as 
hard-and-fast rules. Language is far too subtle an instrument ever to be re-
duced to any mechanical set of do’s and don’ts. The best general advice we 
can give is this:  Always try to restate the speaker’s or writer’s intended meaning as 
 accurately as possible.  Don’t assume that because two sentences look alike they 
can be translated alike. In the ﬁ nal analysis, as William Halverson remarks, there 

236 
CHAPTER 9 A Little Categorical Logic 
is no safe route to accurate categorical translation except “through the brain 
of an alert restater.”8 
 EXERCISE 9.3 
I.  Translate the following sentences into standard-form categorical statements. 
 1.   Maples are trees. 
 2.   Roses are red. 
 3.   Some bats are nocturnal. 
 4.   Each insect is an animal. 
 5.   Not all desserts are fattening. 
 6.   If anything is an igloo, then it is made of ice. 
 7.   All that glitters is not gold. 
 8.   Cheaters never prosper. 
 9.   Every cloud has a silver lining. 
 10.   You have to swing the bat to hit the ball. 
 11.   World War II began in 1939. 
 12.   If something is not a vehicle, then it is not a car. 
 13.   There are birds that cannot ﬂ y.  
 14.   Almost all Wexford College students graduate in four years. 
 15.   Not every sheep is white. 
 16.   The grass is always greener on the other side. 
 17.   Some persons are nonhumans. 
 18.   Nothing is a mammal unless it is not a reptile. 
 19.   Polar bears live in Canada. 
 20.   Every man prefers belief to the exercise of judgment. (Seneca) 
 21.   Success has ruined many a man. (Benjamin Franklin) 
 22.   Show me a liar, and I will show thee a thief. (George Herbert) 
 23.   Only the educated are free. (Epictetus) 
 24.   Anybody who goes to see a psychiatrist ought to have his head examined. 
(Samuel Goldwyn)  
 25.   The mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation. (Henry David Thoreau) 
 26.   There is no place more delightful than home. (Cicero) 
 27.   What’s not worth doing is not worth doing well. (Don Hebb) 
 28.   Only the fool perseveres in error. (Cicero) 
 29.   The unexamined life is not worth living. (Socrates) 
 30.   Faithless is he who says farewell when the road darkens. (J. R. R. Tolkien) 
 31.   The only certainty is that nothing is certain. (Pliny the Elder) 
 32.   Whoso would be a man must be a nonconformist. (Ralph Waldo 
Emerson) 
 33.   He who has a why to live can bear with almost any how. (Friedrich 
Nietzsche)  
 34.  There’s ne’er a villain dwelling in all Denmark but he’s an arrant knave. 
(Shakespeare) 
35.   Men are all rogues, pretty nigh. (Anthony Trollope) 

 
Categorical Syllogisms 
237
II.   Arrange the chairs in the class into a circle. Your instructor will give each stu-
dent a 3-by-5-inch index card. On one side of the card, write your own original 
example of a stylistic variant of a standard-form categorical statement. On the 
other side of the card, write the correct standard-form translation of your ex-
ample. (For example, you might write “Only men are uncles” on one side and 
the correct translation—“All uncles are men”—on the other. Check the lists of 
stylistic variants for ideas.) When everyone has ﬁ nished, pass your card to the 
student sitting to your right. Read the card you have received and decide what 
you think is the correct translation. Then check your answer with the answer 
indicated on the back of the card. If your answer was wrong, place a checkmark 
on the back of the card. Continue passing the cards until each card has been read. 
The instructor will then collect the cards and go over the examples that students 
found difﬁ cult.  
 CATEGORICAL SYLLOGISMS 
 A  syllogism  is a three-line deductive argument—that is, a deductive argument 
that consists of two premises and a conclusion. In a  categorical syllogism, 
all the statements in the argument are categorical statements. Here are several 
examples of categorical syllogisms:
 No doctors are professional wrestlers. 
 All cardiologists are doctors. 
 So, no cardiologists are professional wrestlers. 
 All snakes are reptiles. 
 All reptiles are cold-blooded animals. 
 So, all snakes are cold-blooded animals. 
 Some Baptists are coffee-lovers. 
 All Baptists are Protestants. 
 So, some Protestants are coffee-lovers. 
 I consider the 
invention of the 
form of syllogisms 
one of the most 
beautiful, and 
also one of the 
most important, 
made by the 
human mind. 
 —Gottfried Leibniz 
 Paul S., 47, was hospitalized in Andover Township, N.J., and his wife, 
Bonnie, was also injured, when a quarter-stick of dynamite blew 
up in their car. While driving around at 2 A.M., the bored couple lit 
the dynamite and tried to toss it out the window to see what would 
happen, but they apparently failed to notice that the window was 
closed. 9 
Critical Thinking Lapse

238 
CHAPTER 9 A Little Categorical Logic 
 No Democrats are Republicans. 
 Some lifeguards are Republicans. 
 So, some lifeguards are not Democrats. 
 In this section we see how Venn diagrams can be used to test the validity 
of categorical syllogisms. 
 Let’s start with the ﬁ rst preceding example:
 No doctors are professional wrestlers. 
 All cardiologists are doctors. 
 So, no cardiologists are professional wrestlers. 
Because this argument, like all standard-form categorical syllogisms, has three 
category terms (in this case, “cardiologists,” “professional wrestlers,” and “doc-
tors”), we need three interlocking circles rather than two to represent the three 
categories. By convention the two circles for the conclusion are placed at the 
bottom. Thus, the diagram for our example is as follows: 
 
Doctors
Cardiologists
Professional wrestlers
 Fallacious and 
misleading argu-
ments are most 
easily detected if 
set out in correct 
syllogistic form. 
 —Immanuel Kant 
  OSLO—A drunken Norwegian who pulled a pair of underpants over his 
face and robbed a post ofﬁ ce was awakened by police two days later 
to ﬁ nd he had tipped them off about his identity.
 
 The 47-year-old drunk charged into the post ofﬁ ce and handed over 
a note saying “This is a robbery,” the local newspaper  Bergensavisen  
 reported. 
 
 But his wife’s name and personal details were on the demand note, 
the newspaper said. 
 
 The man told a court he did not remember the robbery, but admit-
ted he had a suspicion of having been up to no good when he woke 
up and saw a picture of the beknickered robber in the newspaper and 
found a large wad of money in his living room. 10   
Critical Thinking Lapse

 
Categorical Syllogisms 
239
 The ﬁ rst premise states that no doctors are professional wrestlers. To rep-
resent this claim, we shade that part of the Doctors circle that overlaps with the 
Professional wrestlers circle: 
Doctors
Cardiologists
Professional wrestlers 
 The second premise states that all cardiologists are doctors. To represent 
this claim, we shade that part of the Cardiologists circle that does not overlap 
with the Doctors circle: 
 
Doctors
Cardiologists
Professional wrestlers
 We now have all the information we need to see whether the argument 
is valid. The conclusion tells us that no cardiologists are professional wrestlers. 
This means that the area where the Cardiologists and Professional wrestlers 
circles overlap is shaded, that is, empty. We look at the diagram to see if this area 
is shaded, and we see that it is indeed shaded. That means that the conclusion 
is implicitly “contained in” (i.e., follows logically from) the premises. Thus, the 
argument is shown to be valid. 
 Now, let’s look at the second example:
 All snakes are reptiles. 
 All reptiles are cold-blooded animals. 
 So, all snakes are cold-blooded animals. 

240 
CHAPTER 9 A Little Categorical Logic 
First we draw and label the three circles, placing the circles for the conclusion 
at the bottom: 
 
Reptiles
Snakes
Cold-blooded animals
 Next we diagram the ﬁ rst premise, which states that all snakes are reptiles. 
We represent this information by shading the area of the Snakes circle that 
does not overlap with the Reptiles circle: 
 
Reptiles
Snakes
Cold-blooded animals
 Next we diagram the second premise, which states that all reptiles are 
cold-blooded animals. We represent this claim by shading that part of the Rep-
tiles circle that does not overlap with the Cold-blooded animals circle: 
 
Reptiles
Snakes
Cold-blooded animals

 
Categorical Syllogisms 
241
 Finally, we look to see if the information contained in the conclusion is 
depicted in the diagram. The conclusion tells us that all snakes are cold-blooded 
animals. This means that the part of the Snakes circle that does not overlap with 
the Cold-blooded animals circle should be completely shaded. Inspection of the 
diagram shows that this is indeed the case. So, the argument is valid. 
 Let’s turn to the third example:
 Some Baptists are coffee-lovers. 
 All Baptists are Protestants. 
 So, some Protestants are coffee-lovers. 
 Notice that this example includes two  some  statements. Diagramming 
 some statements is a little trickier than diagramming  all  or  no  statements. As 
we have seen,  some  statements are diagrammed by placing  X  ’s rather than 
by shading. Most mistakes in Venn diagramming involve incorrect placement 
of an  X. 
 To avoid such mistakes, remember these three rules:
 1.   If the argument contains one  all or  no statement, this statement 
should be diagrammed ﬁ rst. In other words,  always do any necessary 
shading before placing an X . If the argument contains two  all or  no 
statements, either statement can be done ﬁ rst.  
2.   When placing an  X in an area, if one part of the area has been 
shaded, place the  X in the unshaded part.  Examples: 
X
X
3.   When placing an  X in an area, if neither part of the area has been 
shaded, place the  X precisely on the line separating the two parts. 
 Examples:  
 
X
X

242 
CHAPTER 9 A Little Categorical Logic 
 The rationales for these rules are explained in the following discussion. 
 Now, let’s return to the third example: 
 Some Baptists are coffee-lovers. 
 All Baptists are Protestants. 
 So, some Protestants are coffee-lovers. 
First we draw and label the three circles: 
 
Baptists
Protestants
Coffee-lovers
 Next we need to decide which premise to diagram ﬁ rst. Should it be 
the  some  premise or the  all premise? Suppose we start with the  some  prem-
ise. Right away we see that we have a problem: Where exactly in the over-
lap between the Baptists and Coffee-lovers circles do we put the  X ? Any 
choice at this point would be a sheer guess (and a guess that might later be 
shown to be wrong by additional information contained in the argument). 
To avoid this problem,  always diagram an  all  or a  no  premise before diagramming 
a some  premise.  
 So we begin by diagramming the second premise. That premise states 
that all Baptists are Protestants. This means that the class of Baptists that are not 
Protestants is empty. To represent this claim, we shade that area of the Baptists 
circle that does not overlap with the Protestants circle: 
Baptists
Protestants
Coffee-lovers 

 
Categorical Syllogisms 
243
 Now we can diagram the ﬁ rst premise, which states that some Baptists are 
coffee-lovers. To represent this claim, we place an  X in the area of the  Baptists 
circle that overlaps with the Coffee-lovers circle. Part of this area, however, is 
shaded. This means that there is nothing in that area. For that  reason we place 
the  X in the unshaded portion of the Baptists circle that overlaps with the 
Coffee-lovers circle: 
Baptists
Protestants
Coffee-lovers
X
 
 Finally, we inspect the completed diagram to see if the information con-
tained in the conclusion is represented in the diagram. The conclusion states 
that some Protestants are coffee-lovers. This means that there should be an  X 
in the area of the Protestants circle that overlaps with the Coffee-lovers circle. 
A glance at the diagram shows that there is an  X in this area. Thus, the argu-
ment is valid. 
 Let’s turn to the fourth example:
 No Democrats are Republicans. 
 Some lifeguards are Republicans. 
 So, some lifeguards are not Democrats. 
First we draw and label the three circles: 
 
Republicans
Lifeguards
Democrats

244 
CHAPTER 9 A Little Categorical Logic 
 Because one premise begins with  no and one begins with  some,  we 
start by diagramming the premise that begins with  no. That premise states 
that no Democrats are Republicans. To represent this information, we 
shade that part of the Democrats circle that overlaps with the Republicans 
circle: 
 
 
Republicans
Lifeguards
Democrats
 The second premise states that some lifeguards are Republicans. To dia-
gram this claim, we place an  X in the area of the Lifeguards circle that overlaps 
with the Republicans circle. Because part of this area is shaded, we place the  X 
in that part of the area that is not shaded: 
 
Republicans
Lifeguards
Democrats
X
 Finally, we look at the completed diagram to see if the claim made in 
the conclusion is represented in the diagram. The conclusion states that some 
lifeguards are not Democrats. This means that there should be an  X in that 
part of the Lifeguards circle that does not intersect with the Democrats circle. 
Inspection of the diagram shows that there is an  X in this area. Thus, the argu-
ment is shown to be valid. 

 
Categorical Syllogisms 
245
 So far, all the categorical syllogisms we have looked at have been valid. 
But  Venn diagrams can also show when a categorical syllogism is invalid. 
Here is one example:
 All painters are artists. 
 Some magicians are artists. 
 So, some magicians are painters. 
First we draw and label the three circles: 
 
Artists
Magicians
Painters
 Because the ﬁ rst premise begins with  all  and the second premise begins 
with  some,  we diagram the ﬁ rst premise ﬁ rst. The ﬁ rst premise states that all 
painters are artists. To depict this claim, we shade that part of the Painters circle 
that does not overlap with the Artists circle: 
 
Artists
Magicians
Painters
 Next we enter the information of the second premise, the claim that 
some magicians are artists. To represent this claim, we place an  X in that por-
tion of the Magicians circle that overlaps with the Artists circle. That area, 
however, is divided into two parts (the areas marked “1” and “2”), and we have 
no information that warrants placing the  X in one of these areas rather than 

246 
CHAPTER 9 A Little Categorical Logic 
the other. In such cases, we place the  X precisely on the line  between the two 
sections: 
 
Artists
Magicians
Painters
1
2
X
 The  X on the line means that we have no way of knowing from the informa-
tion given whether the magician-who-is-an-artist is also a magician-who-is-
a-painter. 
 The conclusion states that some magicians are painters. This means that 
there should be an  X that is deﬁ nitely in the area where the Magicians and 
Painters circles overlap. There is an  X in the Magicians circle, but it dangles 
on the line between the Artists circle and the Painters circle. We don’t know 
whether it is inside or outside the Painters circle. Consequently, the argument 
is invalid. 
 Let’s look at a ﬁ nal example:
 No scientists are toddlers. 
 All physicists are scientists. 
 So, some physicists are not toddlers. 
First, we draw and label the circles: 
 
Scientists
Physicists
Toddlers
 Because both of the premises are  all  or  no  statements, it doesn’t matter 
which premise we diagram ﬁ rst. Let’s start with the ﬁ rst. That premise states 

 
Categorical Syllogisms 
247
that no scientists are toddlers. To diagram this information, we shade that por-
tion of the Scientists circle that intersects with the Toddlers circle: 
Scientists
Physicists
Toddlers 
 Next we diagram the second premise, the claim that all physicists are 
scientists. To represent this claim, we shade that part of the Physicists circle that 
does not overlap with the Scientists circle: 
 
Scientists
Physicists
Toddlers
 Finally, we look at the diagram to see if the information contained in 
the conclusion is represented in the diagram. The conclusion states that some 
physicists are not toddlers. This means that there should be an  X in the part of 
the Physicists circle that does not overlap with the Toddlers circle. Inspection 
of the diagram shows that there are no  X s at all in the diagram. Hence, the 
argument is invalid. 
 The following list summarizes the basic steps to be followed in Venn 
diagramming. 
 Using Venn Diagrams to Test the Validity of Categorical Syllogisms  
 Step 1: Translate all statements in the argument (if necessary) into standard-
form categorical statements. 
 Step 2: Draw and label three overlapping circles, one for each term (class name) 
in the argument, with the two circles for the conclusion at the bottom.  
 A familiarity with 
logical principles 
tends very much 
(as all feel, who 
are really well 
acquainted with 
them) to beget a 
habit of clear and 
sound reasoning. 
 —Richard Whately 

248 
CHAPTER 9 A Little Categorical Logic 
 Step 3: Use shading to represent the information in  all or  no statements. To 
diagram statements of the form “All  S are  P, ” shade that portion of the  S circle 
that does not overlap with the  P circle. To diagram statements of the form “No 
 S are  P, ” shade that portion of the  S circle that overlaps with the  P circle. 
 Use  X ’s to represent the information in  some statements. To diagram state-
ments of the form “Some  S are  P, ” place an  X in that portion of the  S circle 
that overlaps with the  P circle. To diagram statements of the form “Some 
 S are not  P, ” place an  X in that portion of the  S circle that does not overlap 
with the  P circle.  
 Step 4:  Diagram the two premises. (No marks should be entered for the con-
clusion.) If the argument contains one  all or  no premise and one  some premise, 
diagram the  all or  no premise ﬁ rst. Otherwise, diagram either premise ﬁ rst.  
 Step 5:  When placing an  X in a two-part area, if one part of the area has been 
shaded, place the  X in the unshaded part. If neither part of the area has been 
shaded, place the  X precisely on the line separating the two parts. 
 Step 6:  Look to see if the diagram contains all the information presented in the 
conclusion. If it does, the argument is valid. If it doesn’t, the argument is invalid.  
 It takes practice to become skilled at Venn diagramming. Once you get 
the hang of it, however, you’ll ﬁ nd that it is a handy way to check the validity 
of a surprisingly wide range of everyday arguments. 
 EXERCISE 9.4 
I.  Use Venn diagrams to test the validity of the following arguments. 
 1.   No sharks are pets, since no barracuda are pets, and no sharks are barracuda. 
 2.   No farmers are city dwellers. Hence, since all city dwellers are urbanites, no 
urbanites are farmers. 
 3.   All curmudgeons are pessimists. All pessimists are cynics. So, some cynics are 
curmudgeons. 
 4.   Some bankers are vegetarians. No anarchists are bankers. So, some anarchists 
are not vegetarians. 
 5.   No beach bums are workaholics. Some beach bums are rollerbladers. So, 
some rollerbladers are not workaholics. 
 6.   All violinists are musicians. Therefore, since some bookworms are violinists, 
some bookworms are musicians. 
 7.   No poker players are early risers. Some ﬁ reﬁ ghters are early risers. So, some 
ﬁ reﬁ ghters are not poker players.  
 8.   Some dot-com millionaires are philanthropists. All philanthropists are altruists. 
Hence, some altruists are dot-com millionaires.  
 9.   Some telemarketers are Methodists. Some Methodists are Democrats. So, 
some Democrats are telemarketers. 
 10.   No Fords are Pontiacs. All Escorts are Fords. So, some Escorts are not Pontiacs.  
 11.   No mockingbirds are cardinals. Some cardinals are songbirds. So, some 
songbirds are not mockingbirds. 

 
Categorical Syllogisms 
249
 12.   All ecologists are environmentalists. Hence, because all ecologists are 
 wilderness-lovers, all wilderness-lovers are environmentalists. 
 13.   No landlubbers are sailors. Some sailors are not pirates. So, some pirates are 
not landlubbers. 
 14.   All cats are carnivores. All tigers are cats. So, all tigers are carnivores. 
 15.   All sound arguments are valid arguments. Therefore, because some sound 
arguments are mathematical arguments, some mathematical arguments are 
not valid arguments. 
 16.   No ﬁ sh are reptiles. All trout are ﬁ sh. So, some trout are not reptiles.  
 17.   Some dreamers are not romantics, because some idealists are not romantics, 
and all idealists are dreamers. 
 18.   Some stockbrokers are couch potatoes. Hence, because all stockbrokers are 
e-traders, some e-traders are couch potatoes. 
 19.   Some butchers are not bakers. No butchers are candlestick makers. 
Therefore, some candlestick makers are not bakers. 
 20.   All meteorologists are forecasters. Hence, because some forecasters are 
 psychics, some psychics are meteorologists. 
II.  Translate the following into standard categorical form. Then use Venn diagrams 
to test the arguments for validity. 
 1.   No one who is a Nobel Prize winner is a rock star. A number of astrophysi-
cists are Nobel Prize winners. Therefore, a number of astrophysicists are not 
rock stars. 
 2.   Many philosophers are determinists. Anyone who is a fatalist is a determinist. 
So, many fatalists are philosophers. 
 3.   If anything is a maple, then it’s a tree. Hence, because nothing that is a bush 
is a tree, nothing that is a bush is a maple. 
 4.   Everybody who is a liberal is a big spender. Therefore, because Senator 
Crumley is a big spender, Senator Crumley is a liberal. 
 5.   Many tarot-readers are lottery players. Every tarot-reader is a fraud. So, many 
frauds are not lottery players. 
 6.   Only poems are sonnets. No mathematical treatise is a poem. Therefore, no 
mathematical treatise is a sonnet. 
 7.   At least one lawyer is not a golfer. Only persons who have attended law school 
are lawyers. So, at least one person who has attended law school is not a golfer.  
 8.   No one who is a cardsharp is a psychic. Someone is a cardsharp only if he is 
a poker player. Therefore, some poker players are not psychics. 
 9.   Whatever is a ﬁ sh is a nonmammal. Each pickerel is a ﬁ sh. So, no pickerel is 
a mammal. 
 10.    Only social scientists are political scientists. Many political scientists are per-
sons who favor campaign ﬁ nance reform. Accordingly, many persons who 
favor campaign ﬁ nance reform are social scientists.  
 11.   Egoists are not humanitarians. Not a single humanitarian is a sweatshop 
owner. So, not a single sweatshop owner is an egoist. 
 12.   There are e-mail messages that are not spell-checked. There are interofﬁ ce 
memos that are e-mail messages. Therefore, there are interofﬁ ce memos that 
are not spell-checked. 

250 
CHAPTER 9 A Little Categorical Logic 
 13.   Every tax evader is a lawbreaker. Hence, because no one who is a lawbreaker 
is a model citizen, no one who is a model citizen is a tax evader. 
 14.   If anything is a truck, then it is not a car. There are Mazdas that are trucks. It 
follows that there are Mazdas that are not cars. 
 15.   Any dog is furry. Lassie is a dog. So, Lassie is furry. 
 16.   Not every lie is immoral, for no harmless acts are immoral and some lies are 
harmless. 
 17.   Mystics are always religious. At least one religious person is not greedy. 
 Consequently, at least one mystic is not greedy. 
 18.   Every person who drinks and drives is an irresponsible person. Not 
every person who talks on a car phone is an irresponsible person. Hence, 
not every person who talks on a car phone is a person who drinks and 
drives. 
 19.   Anyone who eats pizza every night is at risk for heart disease. Some people 
who are at risk for heart disease are cab drivers. So, some cab drivers are 
people who eat pizza every night. 
 20.   Joey is in kindergarten. Only children in kindergarten ﬁ ngerpaint in school. 
So, Joey ﬁ ngerpaints in school.  
 
 SUMMARY 
 1.   A  categorical statement makes a claim about the relationship between two 
or more classes or categories of things. In this chapter we focused mainly 
on  standard-form categorical statements, which have one of the following four 
forms: All  S are  P, No  S are  P, Some  S are  P, or Some  S are not  P. 
2.   Standard-form categorical statements have four basic parts:
•  They all begin with the word  all, no, or  some. These words are called 
 quantiﬁ ers because they are used to express a quantity or a number. 
•  They all have a  subject term —a word or phrase that names a class and that 
serves as the grammatical subject of the sentence. In the four statement 
forms listed above, the subject term is represented by  S. 
•  They all have a  predicate term —a word or phrase that names a class 
and that serves as the subject complement of the sentence. In the state-
ment forms listed above, the predicate term is represented by  P. 
•  They all have a  copula, or linking verb, which is either  are or  are not.  The 
copula serves to link, or join, the subject term with the predicate term. 
3.   With a little ingenuity, many ordinary English sentences can be translated 
into standard-form categorical statements. When translating into standard 
categorical form, keep in mind the following tips:
 Tip 1: Rephrase all nonstandard subject and predicate terms so that they 
refer to classes. 

 
Summary 
251
 Tip 2: Rephrase all nonstandard verbs so that the statement includes the 
linking verb  are or  are not. 
 Tip 3: Fill in any unexpressed quantiﬁ ers.  
 Tip 4: Translate singular statements as  all or  no statements. 
 Tip 5: Translate stylistic variants into the appropriate categorical form. 
4.   A  categorical syllogism is a three-line deductive argument in which all three 
statements in the argument are categorical statements. A simple way to 
test the validity of categorical syllogisms is to use  Venn diagrams, in which 
overlapping circles represent relationships among classes. The Venn diagram 
technique for checking the validity of categorical syllogisms involves six 
basic steps:
 Step 1:  Translate all statements in the argument (if necessary) into 
 standard-form categorical statements. 
 Step 2:  Draw and label three overlapping circles, one for each term (class 
name) in the argument, with the two circles for the conclusion at the 
bottom. 
 Step 3: Use shading to represent the information in  all or  no statements. 
To diagram statements of the form “All  S are  P, ” shade that portion of 
the  S circle that does not overlap with the  P circle. To diagram state-
ments of the form “No  S are  P, ” shade that portion of the  S circle that 
overlaps with the  P circle. 
 
 Use  X ’s to represent the information in  some  statements. To diagram 
statements of the form “Some  S are  P, ” place an  X in that portion of the  S 
circle that overlaps with the  P circle. To diagram statements of the form “Some 
 S are not  P, ” place an  X in that portion of the  S circle that does not overlap 
with the  P circle. 
 Step 4:  Diagram the two premises. (No marks should be entered for the 
conclusion.) If the argument contains one  all or  no premise and one 
 some premise, diagram the  all or  no premise ﬁ rst. If the argument con-
tains two  some or two  all or  no premises, diagram either premise ﬁ rst.  
 Step 5:  When placing an  X in a two-part area, if one part of the area has 
been shaded, place the  X in the unshaded part. If neither part of the 
area has been shaded, place the  X on the line separating the two parts. 
 Step 6:  Look to see if the completed diagram contains all the information 
presented in the conclusion. If it does, the argument is valid. If it does 
not, the argument is invalid. 

252
 CHAPTER 10
 A LITTLE 
PROPOSITIONAL LOGIC 
 It is often difﬁ cult to determine whether a long and complex argument is 
valid or invalid just by reading it. Consider the following example: 
 If the Democrat loses the Senate race, the Republicans will have a majority in 
the Senate. 
 If the Republicans have a majority in the Senate, the Senate will vote down the 
new bill. 
 It is not the case that the Senate will vote down the new bill or the Democrat 
will lose the Senate race. 
 So, it is not the case that if the Democrat does not lose, the Senate will not 
vote down the new bill. 
Can you tell whether that argument is valid or invalid? Most people can’t. In 
this chapter we learn the basics of  propositional logic,  a way to symbolize 
the parts of arguments so that we can analyze whole arguments for validity. 
By the end of the chapter, difﬁ cult examples, such as the one above, will be 
easy to analyze. 
 The method we present for analyzing arguments for validity involves 
assigning variables to the different parts of the argument, much as we do in 
algebra. For example, if  a  3 and  b  7, then  a   b  10. With the same 
variables, we can solve for an unknown:  a   c   b , so 3   c  7. We know 
that  c must equal 4. We won’t be solving equations or crunching numbers in 
this chapter, but we will be using variables to consider arguments in a more 
abstract and more manageable way. In algebra we start with variables whose 
values we know and solve for variables whose values we don’t know. Similarly, 
in propositional logic we start by assigning variables to the parts of the argu-
ment that are given and “solve for” what we don’t know, namely, whether the 
argument is valid or invalid. 
 Propositional logic is nothing to be afraid of. In fact, some students con-
sider it the most enjoyable and interesting part of their critical thinking course. 
With some practice anyone can become a master of propositional logic. This 
 The object of 
reasoning is to 
ﬁ nd out, from the 
consideration of 
what we already 
know, something 
else which we do 
not know. 
 —Charles S. Peirce 

 
Conjunction 
253
chapter is full of exercises, so you’ll get all the practice you need. We start with 
simple arguments and gradually build up to more-complex arguments. 
 CONJUNCTION 
 As we learned in Chapter 2, arguments are composed of statements. A  state-
ment  is a sentence that can sensibly be regarded as either true or false. A  simple 
statement consists of just one sentence that sensibly can be regarded as either 
true or false—for example, “Tina is tall.” A  compound statement  consists of 
two or more statements, each of which can separately be considered either true 
or false—for example, “Tina is tall, and Sarah is tall.” 
 Sometimes the premise or the conclusion of an argument is a simple 
statement, such as “Tina is tall.” We can easily symbolize a simple statement 
by assigning it a variable. Let’s assign “Tina is tall” the variable  p. If the argu-
ment contains a second simple statement—for example, “Sarah is tall”—we 
can symbolize it by assigning it a different variable. Let’s assign “Sarah is tall” 
the variable  q. 
 Let’s assume that we do not know whether our premises are true or false. 
In that case, each of the variables has two possible  truth values;  that is, each 
variable could be true or it could be false. With that in mind, we can now set 
up a truth table for each variable. A  truth table  is just a list of all possible truth 
values. 
 The truth table for  p is
  p
T
F 
The truth table displays the information that  p is either true or false. 
 We can do the same now for our second variable,  q: 
 q
T
F 
This displays the information that  q is either true or false. 
 Let’s consider the compound statement “Tina is tall, and Sarah is tall.” 
This compound statement consists of two simple statements joined by the 
word  and. In grammar the word  and  is a conjunction; that is, it “conjoins,” or 
joins together, two elements. In propositional logic a  conjunction  is a com-
pound statement. Notice that the conjunction “Tina is tall, and Sarah is tall” 
consists of two simple statements to which we have already assigned variables, 
 p and  q , joined by the word  and. In propositional logic we symbolize the word 
 and with the ampersand,  &. Thus, we symbolize the conjunction “Tina is tall, 
and Sarah is tall” as  p &  q. 

254 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
 Now we are ready to determine the truth values for  p &  q. The com-
pound statement  p &  q is true only when both of its variables stand for true 
simple statements. Put another way, only when  p is true and  q is true is the 
statement  p &  q true. If either  p or  q is false, the statement  p &  q is false. If both 
 p and  q are false, the whole statement  p &  q is false. To set up the truth table 
for  p &  q , we need to account for all four possible combinations of  p &  q. We 
do this as follows:
p
q
p & q
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
In a truth table that includes two variables, the ﬁ rst two columns will follow 
the pattern of the two columns in the truth table shown above. The ﬁ rst 
variable is true in the ﬁ rst and second lines and false in the third and fourth. 
The second variable alternates between true and false. Although all four 
possible combinations of the two variables can be obtained in other ways, this 
is the conventional way of setting up a truth table with two variables and is the 
easiest to remember. 
 We used  p &  q to stand for “Tina is tall, and Sarah is tall,” but  p &  q 
can be used to stand for other compound statements as well. The compound 
statement “Winter is cold, and summer is warm” could also be represented by 
 p &  q , where  p stands for “winter is cold” and  q stands for “summer is warm.” 
In fact,  p &  q is a propositional form that can stand for an inﬁ nite number of 
compound statements: “The train is late, and the bus is on time”; “The sky is 
blue, and the grass is green”; and so on. 
 A word of caution: Not every use of the word  and indicates a compound 
statement that can be represented by  p &  q. That makes sense, given the fact 
that the word  and does not always join two simple statements. Sometimes  and 
joins two things within the same simple statement—for example, “The Knicks 
and the Bulls are playing each other tonight.” This is one simple statement, not 
two, and is properly symbolized by a single variable, say,  p. 
 To determine whether a statement is simple or compound, we must ask 
ourselves what the statement means. Our example does not consist of two sim-
ple statements: “The Knicks are playing each other tonight” and “The Bulls are 
playing each other tonight.” Rather, it is one simple statement: “The Knicks 
and the Bulls are playing each other tonight.” Take another example: “Peanut 
butter and jelly is my favorite lunch.” This too is a single simple statement and 
is properly symbolized by a single variable, say,  q. To see the contrast, consider a 
compound statement: “I like peanut butter, and she likes jelly.” This compound 
statement consists of two simple statements joined by the word  and. Thus, it 
is properly symbolized by the conjunction of two variables, say,  r &  s. If we 
are ever unsure whether a statement is simple or compound, we should ask 
 The art of rea-
soning is nothing 
more than a 
language well 
arranged. 
 —Étienne 
Bonnot de 
Condillac 

 
Conjunction 
255
ourselves, “What does the statement mean?” Does the statement consist of two 
simple statements? If it does, it is compound. If it doesn’t, it is simple. 
 Don’t feel that you always have to use the variables  p ,  q ,  r , and  s. Any 
letters will do. Be careful, however, that you don’t repeat variables when you 
symbolize an argument. Once a variable has been used to represent one state-
ment, it cannot be used again to represent a different statement in the same 
argument. We’ll discuss this more when we get deeper into analyzing argu-
ment forms for validity. 
 Propositional logic has many advantages when it comes to dealing with 
arguments, but it also has one important disadvantage: It does not capture the 
richness of everyday language. For example, there may be a big difference in 
emphasis between “He likes Fords, and she likes Chevys” and “He likes Fords, 
 but she likes Chevys.” The ﬁ rst statement may simply be pointing out the likes 
of two different people, whereas the second may be contrasting their different 
likes. The fact is that each of the two compound statements is true only when 
both of its simple statements are true—that is, when it is true that he likes 
Fords and it is true that she likes Chevys. In every other case, it is false. Because 
in propositional logic there is no difference in logical signiﬁ cance between the 
words  but and  and, they are interchangeable for the purposes of determining 
truth value. So, both of the compound statements ﬁ t the propositional form 
 p &  q , and both can be analyzed by the following truth table:
p
q
p & q
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
 In propositional logic any word that conjoins two simple statements is 
symbolized by the ampersand,  &. For the purposes of propositional logic, then, 
all these words are equivalent and can be symbolized by the ampersand:  and, 
but, yet, while, whereas, although, though,  and  however.  The following compound 
statements are all correctly symbolized as  p &  q: 
 Tony had steak,  and Theresa had chicken. 
 Tony had steak,  but Theresa had chicken. 
 Tony had steak,  yet Theresa had chicken. 
 Tony had steak,  while Theresa had chicken. 
 Tony had steak,  whereas Theresa had chicken. 
 Tony had steak,  although Theresa had chicken. 
 Tony had steak,  though Theresa had chicken. 
 Tony had steak;  however Theresa had chicken. 
Each of these compound statements has a slightly different emphasis, but each 
is true only when it is true that Tony had steak and it is also true that Theresa 
had chicken. 

256 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
 EXERCISE 10.1 
  I.  Put the following statements in symbolic form. 
  1.  Ken hit a home run. 
 2.  Hank went ﬁ shing, and Dirk went hunting.  
 3.  Hank and Dirk went ﬁ shing.  
 4.  Hank went ﬁ shing, but Dirk went hunting.  
 5.  The train was late, and the bus was on time. 
 6.  The train was late, though the bus was on time. 
 7.  France is in Europe, and China is in Asia. 
 8.  France is in Europe, but China is in Asia. 
 9.  France and Germany are in Europe. 
 10.  Sally ate a peanut butter and jelly sandwich, whereas Nancy ate a salad. 
 II.  Let the following variables stand for the following statements:
 
   a  December is cold.  
  x  February is sunny. 
 
   b  June is warm.  
 y  July is cold. 
 
   c  March is windy.  
 z  August is snowy. 
 
  Assume that  a ,  b , and  c are true and  x ,  y , and  z are false. Determine whether 
each of the following is true or false. 
 1.  a &  b 
 2.   b &  z 
 3.   z &  y 
 4.   c &  b 
 5.   x &  z 
 6.   c &  a 
 7.   c &  z 
 8.   x &  y 
 9.   a &  c 
 10.   y &  a 
 III.  Without knowing what they stand for, assume for the sake of this exercise 
that  p ,  q , and  r are true and  w ,  x , and  y are false. Determine whether each of the 
following is true or false. 
 1.   p &  q 
 2.   p &  w 
 3.   x &  y 
 4.   r &  q 
 5.   r &  y 
 6.   y &  w 
 7.   x &  w 
 8.   q &  r 
 9.   p &  y 
 10.   r &  p 
 
 CONJUNCTION AND VALIDITY 
 Now we are ready to symbolize arguments and analyze them for validity. 
We already know enough to deal with some very basic arguments. Consider 
this one:
 Tina is tall. 
 Sarah is tall. 
 So, Tina is tall, and Sarah is tall. 

 
Conjunction and Validity 
257
We can symbolize the argument as follows (in propositional logic the symbol 
 simply indicates that the conclusion follows):
 p 
 q 
   p &  q 
It should be clear to you just by reading it that this argument is valid, but it is a 
handy example for illustrating the truth table method for establishing validity. 
In the previous section, we learned how to set up truth tables for statements; 
now we’ll see how truth tables can be used to determine the validity or inva-
lidity of arguments. 
 First we must set up the truth table:
p
q
p & q
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
The truth table above starts with columns for the basic building blocks, the two 
variables  p and  q , and ends with a column for their conjunction,  p &  q. In this 
case, the three columns represent the two premises of the argument and the 
conclusion. To analyze the truth table for validity or invalidity, we have to recall 
one very important piece of information about validity:  In a valid argument, it is 
impossible for all the premises to be true and the conclusion false. So, in examining the 
truth table, we look for instances in which all the premises are true. If any instance of all 
true premises is followed by a false conclusion—an  F  under the conclusion column—the 
argument is invalid.  It doesn’t matter if there are instances in the truth table in 
which all the premises are true and the conclusion is true, too. If it is even pos-
sible for an argument’s conclusion to be false while all the premises are true, 
the argument is invalid. 
 Let’s reconsider the truth table for the argument form we have been 
examining:
p
q
p & q
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
There is only one case, the ﬁ rst line across, in which both of the premises are 
true. And in this case, the conclusion is true as well. This tells us that the argu-
ment form for “Tina is tall. Sarah is tall. Therefore, Tina is tall, and Sarah is tall” 
is valid. That is, the argument form
 The greatest 
progress men have 
made lies in their 
learning how to 
draw correct 
inferences. 
 —Friedrich 
Nietzsche 

258 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
  p 
 q 
   p &  q 
is valid. Any two arguments that share the same argument form are either both 
valid or both invalid. When we know that an argument form is valid, we know 
that any argument that ﬁ ts that form is valid. 
 Thus, we know, for example, that the argument
 The sky is blue. 
 The grass is green. 
 Therefore, the sky is blue, and the grass is green. 
is valid because it ﬁ ts the valid argument form
 p 
 q 
   p &  q 
Consider another argument:
 Grass is green. 
 So, grass is green, and the sky is blue. 
We hope it is obvious to you that this argument is invalid. Its conclusion may 
be true, but it doesn’t follow from its premise. We can symbolize this argument 
in the following way:
 p 
   p &  q 
 The truth table set up for the argument is familiar to us by now:
p
q
p & q
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
We now must examine the truth table to see if there are any cases in which all 
the premises are true (this argument has only one premise) and the conclusion 
is false. In other words, are there any cases in which we get a  T under the  p 
column and an  F under the  p &  q column? 
 Examining truth tables for validity takes a careful eye. In this book we 
will mark premises with an asterisk, ∗, and conclusions with a capital  C. This 
method isn’t pretty, but it helps us remember with which columns we are 
concerned. Because you don’t have to be a graphic designer to make an aster-
isk or a capital  C , you can do the same in making your own truth tables for 

 
Conjunction and Validity 
259
 homework exercises. (It isn’t  necessary to use the asterisk and capital  C , but it 
may help you to avoid careless mistakes at ﬁ rst.) In our examples the line across 
that ultimately allows us to determine validity or invalidity will be circled. 
Circles are easy to draw and are helpful in focusing attention on lines that are 
crucial for determining validity. 
 Here is our truth table appropriately marked:
p∗
q
p & q C
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
There are two relevant lines across, two cases in which the premise is true. In the 
ﬁ rst line, the premise is true and the conclusion is true as well. But in the second 
line, the premise is true and the conclusion is false. This second line allows us 
to determine that the argument form is invalid. Our examination of the truth 
table has established that the argument “Grass is green. So, grass is green, and the 
sky is blue” is invalid. Even more important, it has established that any argument 
that has the form 
 p 
  p &  q 
is invalid. 
 Consider one more argument: 
 Franklin is short and stout. 
 So, Franklin is short. 
We must recognize that the ﬁ rst statement is a compound statement. It is an 
abbreviated way of saying “Franklin is short, and Franklin is stout.” Clearly, we 
can symbolize the argument as follows: 
 p &  q 
   p 
In setting up the truth table for analyzing this argument form, we start 
with the basics:
p
q
p & q
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
All the information we need to determine the validity or invalidity of the 
argument form is in the truth table as it stands. To make it easier to examine, 
though, we can mark the premise and the conclusion:

260 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
p C
q
p & q∗
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
To make it even easier and to minimize the chances of making a careless mis-
take in looking at the argument, we can treat the ﬁ rst two columns as “guide 
columns” and line up our premises and conclusion from left to right. It isn’t 
necessary to do this, but it is never wrong to repeat information in a truth table, 
especially if it helps you see the columns and analyze for validity.
p
q
p & q∗
p C
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
As the truth table shows, in the only case in which the single premise is true 
the conclusion is true as well. So, the argument form is valid. 
 EXERCISE 10.2  
I.  Determine the validity of the following argument forms using truth tables. 
 1.   p 
 
 q 
 
  p &  q 
2.   p &  q 
 
  q 
3.   r 
 
  r &  s 
4.   r 
 
  s 
5.   r &  s 
 
  r 
II.  Put the following arguments in symbolic form and then test them for validity 
using a truth table. 
1.   The train was on time. The bus was late. So, the train was on time, and the 
bus was late. 
2.   The train was on time. So, the train was on time, but the bus was late. 
3.   The train was on time. So, the bus was late. 
 

 
Negation 
261
 NEGATION 
 The next element of propositional logic we need to learn is  negation,  which 
is simply the use of the word  not (or an equivalent word or phrase) to deny a 
statement. Let’s return to the simple statement “Tina is tall.” The negation of 
this simple statement would be “Tina is  not  tall.” If we symbolize “Tina is tall” 
by assigning it the variable  p , we need a convenient way of symbolizing the 
negation of  p , “not  p. ” The conventional symbol for negation is the tilde, ˜. So, 
we can symbolize “Tina is not tall” with ˜ p. 
 As you might expect, the truth values for the negation of a statement are 
the opposite of those for the original statement. When  p is true, ˜ p is false. This 
makes sense when you consider that when “Tina is tall” is true, “Tina is not 
tall” must be false. The following, then, are the truth tables for  p and ˜ p :  
p
˜p
T
F
F
T
The same pattern holds true for all other variables. If we assign “Sarah is tall” 
the variable  q , we symbolize “Sarah is  not tall” with ˜ q: 
q
˜q
T
F
F
T
 Now let’s use negation and conjunction together. Consider the state-
ment “Tina is tall, and Sarah is not tall.” We can symbolize this as  p & ˜ q. To 
get the truth table for this statement, we ﬁ rst set up the four possible combina-
tions of  p ’s and  q ’s:
p
q
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
 Next we add the column for ˜ q , determining the truth value for ˜ q in 
each case by taking the opposite of the corresponding truth value for  q: 
p
q
˜q
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
 It is impossible for 
anything at the 
same time to be 
and not to be . . . 
this is the most 
indisputable of all 
principles. 
 —Aristotle 

262 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
 Finally, we add the column for  p & ˜ q. We determine the truth values for 
 p & ˜ q by examining the  p column and the ˜ q column.  Remember:  A conjunc-
tion is true only when both of its statements are true. So, in this case,  p & ˜ q 
will be true only when there is a  T in the  p column and a  T in the ˜ q column 
for the same line across:
p
q
˜q
p & ˜q
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
 Now we are ready to examine an argument that involves both negation 
and conjunction: “Tina is not tall, but Sarah is tall. So, Tina is not tall.” The 
symbolic form for the argument is 
 ˜ p &  q 
 ˜ p 
Let’s set up the truth table for the argument:
p
q
˜p
˜p & q∗
˜p C
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
Our argument has one premise and a conclusion. We have set up the premise 
and the conclusion so that they read from left to right and have marked them 
accordingly, to keep our attention focused and prevent careless mistakes. Now 
we must see if there are any cases in which all the premises are true (this argu-
ment has only one premise, ˜ p &  q ) and the conclusion is false. We ﬁ nd that our 
premise is true under only one condition, represented in the third line of the 
column. And we ﬁ nd that in that third line the conclusion is also true. There 
are no cases in which all the premises are true and the conclusion is false, so 
we know that the argument form is valid. 
 Consider another argument: 
 Frank does not drive a truck. 
 So, Frank does not drive a truck, and Vinny does not drive a minivan. 
The symbolic form for the argument is 
 ˜ p 
  ˜ p & ˜ q 

 
Negation 
263
Let’s set up the truth table for the argument:
p
q
˜p
˜q
˜p∗
˜p & ˜q C
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
T
The ﬁ rst two columns are “guide columns,” which lay out the truth values for 
the four possible occurrences of  p and  q. The third column lays out the truth 
values for ˜ p , and the fourth column lays out the truth values for ˜ q. (˜ q isn’t an 
independent statement in the argument, but we need it as a building block in 
forming ˜ p & ˜ q. ) The ﬁ nal column lays out the truth values for ˜ p & ˜ q. Re-
member that this conjunction is true only when there is a  T in the ˜ p column 
and a  T in the ˜ q column. This occurs once, in the fourth line across. 
 To determine whether the argument is valid or invalid, we examine the 
truth table to see if there are any cases in which the premise is true and the 
conclusion is false. In the third line across, the premise is true and the conclu-
sion is false. This alone tells us that the argument form is invalid. In the fourth 
line across, the premise is true and so is the conclusion, but that doesn’t matter. 
We already know from the third line that the argument form is invalid. 
 Be careful in dealing with negation. Sometimes a negation applies only 
to a single simple statement, as in “Lisa does not drive a Jeep,” symbolized as ˜ p. 
Sometimes there are two negations applying to both elements of a compound 
statement, as in “Lisa does not drive a Jeep, and Jennifer does not drive a Jeep,” 
symbolized as ˜ p & ˜ q.  At other times, one negation applies to a whole com-
pound statement. For example, “It is not the case that Lisa drives a Jeep and 
Jennifer drives a Jeep,” symbolized as ˜( p &  q ). We need to be clear about what 
this statement means to symbolize it properly. When we consider it carefully, 
we realize that this statement isn’t necessarily saying that Lisa does  not  drive a 
Jeep  and Jennifer does  not drive a Jeep. Rather, it is claiming that it is  not true 
that  both of them drive a Jeep. One of them may drive a Jeep, or neither of 
them may drive a Jeep. It is just claiming that it isn’t the case that both of them 
drive a Jeep. 
 To symbolize the statement “It is not the case that Lisa drives a Jeep and 
Jennifer drives a Jeep,” we need a way of showing that the negation applies to 
the whole statement rather than to just a speciﬁ c part. To make this distinction, 
we use parentheses. So, we symbolize “It is not the case that Lisa drives a Jeep 
and Jennifer drives a Jeep” as ˜( p  &  q ). As in mathematics we do the work inside 
the parentheses ﬁ rst. If there is more than one set of parentheses, we start with 
the innermost set and work outward. So, ﬁ rst we determine if  p &  q is true or 
false, then we negate our answer. So, for example, if  p &  q is true, we know that 
˜( p &  q ) is false. Thus, in forming the truth table for ˜( p &  q ), we ﬁ rst list the 
truth values for  p &  q , then we assign the opposite truth values to ˜(  p &  q ). 

264 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
p
q
p & q
˜( p & q)
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
 Accuracy in the placement of the negation is not an insigniﬁ cant detail. 
It affects the meaning of a statement. Consider this argument:
 It is not the case that Tina is tall and Sarah is tall. 
 So, Tina is not tall, and Sarah is not tall. 
Is the argument valid? If the premise and the conclusion really mean the same 
thing, the argument would have to be valid. 
 The symbolic form of the argument is
 ˜( p &  q ) 
 ˜ p & ˜ q 
Now let’s look at the truth table for the argument:
p
q
p & q
˜p
˜q
˜( p & q)∗
˜p & ˜q C
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
By examining the truth table, we can easily see that the argument form is not 
valid. In the second line, the premise is true and the conclusion is false. On 
that basis alone, we know that the argument form is invalid. This should make 
it clear that placement of the negation makes a big difference to what a state-
ment means and to whether the argument it is a part of is valid or invalid. 
 EXERCISE 10.3 
 I.   Assume that  a ,  b , and  c are true and  x ,  y , and  z are false, and then determine 
whether each of the following is true or false. 
 1.  ˜ a &  b 
 2.  ˜ x & ˜ y 
 3.  ˜( x &  y ) 
 4.  ˜( a &  b ) 
 5.  ˜ z & ˜ c 
 6.   c & ˜ z 
 7.  ˜( c & ˜ z ) 
 8.   y &  x 
 9.  ˜( y &  x ) 
 10.  ˜ x & ˜ z 
 II.  Translate each of the symbolic statements in Exercise I into a statement in 
English. 

 
Deeper Analysis of Negation and Conjunction 
265
 III.  Put the following statements in symbolic form. 
 1.  The bus was on time, but the train was not. 
 2.  The bus was not on time, and the train was not on time. 
 3.  It’s not the case that the bus and the train were on time. 
 4.  Lemons are not sweet, but sugar is. 
 5.  It’s not the case that lemons and sugar are sweet. 
 6.  Her friends don’t care, and her parents don’t, either. 
 7.  Her friends care, but her parents don’t. 
 8.  It’s not the case that her friends and her parents care. 
 9.  Intentions don’t matter, though actions do. 
 10.  It’s not the case that intentions and actions matter. 
 IV.  Determine the validity of the following arguments using truth tables. 
 1.  ˜ p 
 
  q 
 
  ˜ p &  q 
 2.  ˜ p 
 
 ˜ q 
 
  ˜( p &  q ) 
 3.  ˜ p & ˜ q 
 
  ˜( p &  q ) 
 4.  ˜( p &  q )
 
  p 
 
  ˜ q 
 5.  ˜( p &  q ) 
 
 ˜ p 
 
  ˜ q 
 V.  Put the following arguments in symbolic form, and then test them for 
validity using a truth table. 
 1.   Vegas Jack didn’t commit the crime, and the Weasel didn’t commit the crime. 
So, it is not the case that Vegas Jack and the Weasel committed the crime.  
 2.   It’s not the case that Vegas Jack and the Weasel committed the crime. So, the 
Weasel didn’t commit the crime. 
 3.   It’s not the case that John failed Calculus and Chemistry. John didn’t fail 
Calculus. So, he didn’t fail Chemistry. 
 4.   It’s not the case that John failed Calculus and Chemistry. John failed Calcu-
lus. So, he didn’t fail Chemistry.  
 5.   It’s not the case that John failed Calculus and Chemistry. So, John didn’t fail 
Calculus and didn’t fail Chemistry. 
 DEEPER ANALYSIS OF NEGATION AND CONJUNCTION 
 In learning propositional logic, we need to start with simple building blocks 
and gradually erect a more complex structure. So far all the arguments we have 
examined have had only two variables, but now we are ready to work with 

266 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
arguments that have three variables. 1 Everything we have learned so far holds 
true. The process just gets a little lengthier and more involved. 
 Consider this example:
 Tina is tall. 
 Sarah is not tall, but Missy is tall. 
 So, Tina is tall, and Missy is tall. 
Let  p  “Tina is tall,”  q  “Sarah is tall,” and  r  “Missy is tall.” The symbolic 
form of the argument is
 p 
 ˜ q &  r 
   p &  r 
 Before analyzing the argument, let’s see how to set up our three guide 
columns for the three basic variables. With two variables there are only four 
possible combinations of truth values; with three variables there are eight. The 
conventional way to set up the truth table for three variables is as follows: 
The ﬁ rst column contains four “trues” followed by four “falses.” The second 
column contains alternating pairs of true and false. The third column contains 
alternating trues and falses. 
p
q
r
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
 When working with three variables, we can keep things in order by 
numbering the lines 1 through 8. Once we have the three guide columns 
set up, everything else follows naturally. All the rules we have learned so far 
apply. For a conjunction to be true, both of its variables must be true. The 
truth value of a negation is the opposite of the truth value of the statement 
it negates. 
 Now let’s form the truth table for the argument form
 p 
 ˜ q &  r 
   p &  r 

 
Deeper Analysis of Negation and Conjunction 
267
p
q
r
˜q
p∗
˜q & r∗p & r C
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
The columns for  p ,  q , and  r are set up in the conventional way. The truth values 
in the ˜ q column are the opposite of the corresponding truth values in the 
 q column. The truth values for the ˜ q &  r column are determined by consult-
ing the ˜ q column and the  r column. Only in lines 3 and 7 is there a  T in both 
columns, so only lines 3 and 7 are true under the ˜ q &  r column. All other lines 
under ˜ q &  r are false. The truth values for the  p &  r column are determined 
by consulting the  p column and the  r column. Only in lines 1 and 3 are both 
premises true, so only in lines 1 and 3 is  p &  r true. 
 The validity of an argument with three variables is determined in the 
same way as the validity of an argument with two variables. There simply are 
eight lines to check instead of four.  If there is any line in which all the premises are 
true and the conclusion is false, we know the argument is invalid. If there is no such line, 
we know the argument is valid. Look at the table again.
p
q
r
˜q
p∗
˜q & r∗p & r C
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
Only in line 3 are both premises true, and in line 3 the conclusion is true as 
well. There are no cases in which both premises are true and the conclusion is 
false. So, the argument is valid. 
 Consider another three-variable example:
 ˜( p &  q ) 
 ˜ q &  r 
  ˜ p 
 First we set up the truth table, starting with the three basic variables and 
building from there. Then we examine the table to determine validity.

268 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
p
q
r
˜q
p & q
˜(p & q)∗
˜q & r∗
˜p C
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
To set up the truth table, we follow the familiar pattern. We derive the truth 
values for the ﬁ rst premise, ˜( p &  q ), by constructing a column for  p &  q and 
then taking the negation of each line’s corresponding truth value. We assign 
truth values to ˜ q &  r by consulting the column for ˜ q and the column for  r. 
We derive the truth values for the conclusion, ˜ p , by taking the negation of the 
truth values in the  p column. 
 To determine the validity of the argument, we look for any cases in 
which both of the premises are true and the conclusion is false. In line 3 both 
of the premises are true and the conclusion is false. From this line alone we 
know that the argument is invalid. It does not matter that in line 7 both of the 
premises are true and the conclusion is true. 
 Sometimes it makes things easier to assign a variable to a statement that will 
help us remember what the variable stands for. Consider the following argument:
 The train was on time, but the bus was not on time. 
 The plane was on time. 
  It’s not the case that the bus and the plane were on time. 
To symbolize the argument, let  t  “The train was on time,”  b  “The bus was 
on time,” and  p  “The plane was on time.” So, the argument form is
 t & ˜ b 
 p 
  ˜( b &  p ) 
Now let’s set up the truth table:
t
b
p
˜b
b & p
t & ˜b∗
p∗
˜(b & p) C
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T

 
Deeper Analysis of Negation and Conjunction 
269
We set up the truth table just as we would if the variables were  p ,  q , and  r. All 
the rules for determining the truth values assigned to the columns for the vari-
ous statements remain the same. And we set up the premises and conclusion so 
that they read from left to right, marking them accordingly. 
 Now let’s examine the truth table to determine the validity of the argument. 
Are there any cases in which all the premises are true and the conclusion is false?
t
b
p
˜b
b & p
t & ˜b∗
p∗
˜(b & p) C
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
There is only one case in which the premises are both true, and in this case the 
conclusion is true as well. So, we know that the argument is valid. 
 Consider this argument:
 Bill Clinton didn’t serve two terms in ofﬁ ce, but Jimmy Carter did. 
 George H. W. Bush served two terms in ofﬁ ce. 
 So, it is not the case that both Carter and Bush did not serve two terms in ofﬁ ce.  
You may notice that all the statements in the argument are false, but remember that 
an argument’s validity does not necessarily depend on the truth of its statements. 
 To symbolize this argument, let  b  “Bill Clinton served two terms in 
ofﬁ ce”; let  j  “Jimmy Carter served two terms in ofﬁ ce”; and let  g  “George 
H. W. Bush served two terms in ofﬁ ce.”  We can symbolize our argument in the 
following way:
 ˜ b &  j 
 g 
  ˜(˜ j & ˜ g ) 
Let’s set up the truth table:
b
j
g
˜b
˜j
˜g
˜j & ˜g
˜b & j∗
g∗
˜(˜j & ˜g) C
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F

270 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
We use  b ,  j , and  g as our guide variables and assign their truth values in the con-
ventional way, just as we would if we were using  p ,  q , and  r. Next we build up 
gradually, assembling the parts we need to state the truth values of the premises 
and conclusion. Finally, we line up the premises and conclusion from left to 
right, marking them accordingly. 
 Now let’s examine the truth table to determine the validity of the argu-
ment. Are there any cases in which all the premises are true and the conclusion 
is false?
b
j
g
˜b
˜j
˜g
˜j & ˜g ˜b & j∗
g∗˜(˜j & ˜g) C
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
There is only one case in which the premises are both true, and in this case the 
conclusion is true as well. So, we know that the argument is valid, even though 
we know that the premises are false. Remember that an argument can have all 
false premises and a false conclusion and still be valid. Such an argument is not 
sound, however. 
 EXERCISE 10.4 
 I.  Assume that  a ,  b , and  c are true and  x ,  y , and  z are false, and then determine 
whether each of the following is true or false. Remember to start with the 
innermost parentheses. 
 1.   a &  b &  c 
 2.  ˜( a &  b ) &  c 
 3.  ( a &  b ) & ˜ c 
 4.  ( b &  x ) &  a 
 5.   b & ˜( x &  y ) 
 6.  ˜ z & ˜( a &  c ) 
 7.  ˜ x & ˜(˜ b & ˜ c ) 
 8.  ˜ y  & ˜( a & ˜ c ) 
 9.  ˜[˜ y & ˜( a & ˜ c )] 
 10.  ˜[˜(˜ a & ˜ b ) & ( x & ˜ a )] 
 II.  Translate each of the symbolic statements in Exercise I into a statement in 
English. 
 III.  Put the following statements in symbolic form. 
 1.  Cats and dogs are mammals, but kangaroos are not mammals. 
 2.  Cats, dogs, and humans are mammals. 
 3.  It’s not the case that cats, dogs, and humans are mammals. 
 4.  Tuna and bass are ﬁ sh, but whales are not.  
 5.  It’s not the case that tuna and bass are ﬁ sh but whales are not.  

 
Disjunction 
271
 IV.  Determine the validity of the following arguments using truth tables. 
 1.   p &  q 
 
˜( q &  r ) 
 
 ˜ r 
 2.  ˜( a &  x ) 
 
˜ y 
 
 ˜ x & ˜ y 
 3.  ˜(˜ b &  f  ) 
 
 g 
 
  g &  f 
 4.   b & ˜ t 
 
˜( m &  b ) 
 
 ˜ m & ˜ t 
 5.  ˜(˜ k  & ˜ h ) 
 
 z 
 
 ˜(˜ z &  h ) 
 V.  Put the following arguments in symbolic form, and then test them for 
validity using a truth table. 
 1.  Frogs hop, and toads hop. Snakes don’t hop. So, it is not the case that frogs and 
snakes hop. 
 2.  Freshmen take required core courses, and so do sophomores. Seniors do not 
take required core courses. So, it’s not the case that sophomores and seniors take 
required core courses.  
 3.  It’s not the case that ﬁ sh is fattening and beef is fattening. Vegetables are not 
fattening. So, ﬁ sh and vegetables are not fattening.  
 4.  Students can raise their grades by studying hard, but not by doing extra-credit 
work. It’s not the case that students can raise their grades by doing extra-
credit work and getting a tutor. So, students can raise their grades by studying 
hard and by getting a tutor. 
 5.  It’s not the case that France and Japan are in Europe. China is not in Europe. 
So, Japan is not in Europe, and China is not in Europe. 
 DISJUNCTION 
 We have seen how to symbolize conjunctions, two statements joined together. 
Now we are ready to discuss  disjunctions,  two or more statements set apart, 
usually by the word  or. For example, “Frank is angry  or  Hank is tired.” The 
symbol for disjunction is the lowercase  v , also called the  wedge.  So, we can 
symbolize “Frank is angry or Hank is tired” in the following way:  p v  q. 
 It is important to note that the word  or  has two possible senses. In its 
 exclusive sense,  the word  or eliminates or excludes one of the possibilities. For 
example, if a waiter tells you, “You can have the soup  or  the salad,” he usually 
means that you can have  either  soup  or  salad  but not both.  In its  nonexclusive 
sense, the word  or does not exclude either possibility. For example, your advisor 

272 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
may inform you, “To fulﬁ ll the science requirement, you can take Biology  or 
Chemistry.” In all likelihood what your advisor means is that you can take 
Biology,  or Chemistry,  or both. 
 In which sense are we supposed to understand the word  or  for the pur-
poses of propositional logic? The convention is to take the word  or  in its non-
exclusive sense. This is the safest way to proceed. (Of course, outside our use 
of propositional logic, we should use the principle of charity to interpret an  or 
statement to the best of our ability in accord with the intention of the speaker 
or writer.) 
 A disjunction, such as “Frank is angry or Hank is tired,” is true if either 
Frank is angry or Hank is tired, or both. We can symbolize the disjunction as 
 p v  q , and the truth table for the disjunction is as follows:
p
q
p v q
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
The truth table shows that the only case in which  p v  q is false is the ﬁ nal line, 
in which both  p is false and  q is false. 
 Consider a simple argument that includes a disjunction:
 Frank is angry or Hank is tired. 
 So, Frank is angry.  
Let’s put our argument in symbolic form:
 p v  q 
   p 
Now we set up the truth table for the argument:
p
q
p v q∗
p C
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
Examining the truth table to determine validity, we notice that there are three 
cases in which the single premise is true. In the ﬁ rst two cases, the conclusion 
is true as well, but in the third case the conclusion is false. On that basis we 
know that the argument is invalid because one instance of all true premises and 
a false conclusion establishes that an argument is invalid, no matter what else 
we may ﬁ nd. 
 Just as conjunctions can involve negations, so too can disjunctions. And as 
with conjunctions, we must be careful to note what is being negated. Consider 
 Because language 
is misleading, as 
well as because 
it is diffuse and 
inexact when 
applied to logic 
(for which it was 
never intended), 
logical symbol-
ism is absolutely 
necessary to any 
exact or thorough 
treatment of our 
subject. 
 —Bertrand Russell 

 
Disjunction 
273
the following disjunctions. Each has the same subject matter, but each has a 
different truth table resulting from the differences in what is negated:
 Frank is not angry or Hank is tired.
p
q
˜ p
˜ p v q
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
Frank is not angry or Hank is not tired.
p
q
˜ p
˜q
˜ p v ˜q
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
It’s not the case that Frank is angry or Hank is tired.
p
q
p v q
˜ (p v q)
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
 Now consider a simple argument that involves disjunction, negation, and 
conjunction:
 It’s not the case that Frank is angry or Hank is tired. 
 So, Frank is not angry and Hank is not tired. 
The argument form is
 ˜( p v  q ) 
  ˜ p  & ˜ q 
The truth table looks like this:
p
q
˜p
˜q
p v q
˜(p v q)∗
˜ p & ˜qC
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
Examining the truth table to determine validity, we ﬁ nd that only in the ﬁ nal 
line is the premise true. And in that line the conclusion is true as well. On that 
basis we know that the argument is valid. 

274 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
 Consider an argument with three variables that involves disjunction, 
negation, and conjunction:
 Frank is angry or Hank is tired. 
 It’s not the case that Hank is tired and Larry is lonely. 
 So, Hank is tired.  
The argument form is
 p v  q 
 ˜( q &  r ) 
   q 
Here is the truth table:
p
q
r
q & r
p v q∗
˜(q & r)∗
qC
1.
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
2.
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
3.
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
4.
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
5.
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
6.
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
7.
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
8.
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
The only thing new to us in the truth table is the disjunction,  p v  q , with eight 
lines rather than four. There is nothing surprising about the truth values in this 
column, however. The disjunction is true in every case except lines 7 and 8, 
in which  p and  q are both false. Examining the truth table to determine valid-
ity, we ﬁ nd that both our premises are true in lines 2, 3, 4, and 6. In addition, 
however, we ﬁ nd that the conclusion is false in line 3; thus, we know that the 
argument is invalid. 
 EXERCISE 10.5 
 I.   Assume that  a ,  b , and  c are true, and  x ,  y , and  z are false, and then determine 
whether each of the following is true or false. 
  1.   a v  x 
 2.   ˜ a v ˜ x 
 3.   ˜( a v  x ) 
 4.   ( x v ˜ y ) &  a 
 5.   ( x v  y ) v  b 
 6.   ˜( x v  y ) v  z 
 7.   ( y v  z ) v ( a v  b ) 
 8.   ˜( y v  z ) v ˜( a v  b ) 
 9.   ( c v  z ) & ( b v ˜ x ) 
 10.   ˜(˜ c  v ˜ z ) & (˜ b v  x ) 
 II.   Translate each of the symbolic statements in Exercise I into a statement in 
English. 

 
Disjunction 
275
 III.   Put the following statements in symbolic form. 
  1.   The Democrat or the Republican won the election. 
 2.   The Democrat or the Republican won the election, but not the 
Socialist. 
 3.   It’s not the case that the Democrat or the Republican won the 
election. 
 4.   A whale is a mammal or a dolphin is a ﬁ sh.  
 5.   A whale is a mammal or a dolphin is not a ﬁ sh.  
 6.   A whale is a mammal or a dolphin is not a ﬁ sh, but a dog is not a 
marsupial. 
 7.   Lance passed the exam or he failed the course. 
 8.   It’s not the case that Lance passed the exam or he failed the course. 
 9.   Sheila is a soprano or an alto, but she is not both. 
 10.    It’s not the case that Tim is a handyman or Al is a tailor, but Wilson is a 
neighbor. 
 IV.   Determine the validity of the following arguments using truth tables. 
 1.    p v  q 
 
 ˜ p 
 
   q 
 2.   ˜(  p v  q ) 
 
  q 
 
  ˜ p 
 3.   ˜( t v  a ) 
 
  w 
 
  ˜ a &  w 
 4.   ˜( t &  a ) 
 
  a v  w 
 
  ˜ t &  a 
 5.   ˜[(  j v  m ) &  z ] 
 
  z v  m 
 
  ˜(  j &  z ) 
 V.   Put the following arguments in symbolic form, then test them for validity 
using a truth table. 
 1.    The Democrat or the Republican won the election.  The Republican did 
not win. So the Democrat did win. 
 2.    The Democrat or the Republican won the election, but not the Socialist. 
So, it’s not the case that the Socialist or the Democrat won. 
 3.    It’s not the case that Lance passed the exam or he failed the course. Lance 
failed the course. So, Lance did not pass the exam. 
 4.    Sheila is a soprano or an alto. Sheila is not both a soprano and an alto. Sheila 
is an alto. So, Sheila is a soprano. 
 5.    It’s not the case that Tim is a handyman or Al is a tailor. Al is a tailor or 
 Wilson is a neighbor. So, Tim is not a handyman. 
 

276 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
 CONDITIONAL STATEMENTS 
 The ﬁ nal element of propositional logic that we need to consider is the con-
ditional statement. We discussed conditional statements in Chapter 2. As you 
recall, a  conditional statement  is an  if-then statement consisting of two parts. 
The ﬁ rst part of the statement, which follows  if  and precedes  then,  is called the 
 antecedent. The second part of the statement, which follows  then,  is called 
the  consequent.  
 In the conditional statement “If it rained, then the ground is wet,”  it rained 
is the antecedent and  the ground is wet  is the consequent. In symbolizing the 
conditional, we assign one variable to the antecedent and another variable to the 
consequent. For example, we can let  p  “it rained” and  q  “the ground is wet.” 
The symbol for the implication involved in an  if-then  statement is the arrow, →.2 
We therefore symbolize “If it rained, then the ground is wet” as  p →  q.  
 The truth table for conditional statements can be a little tricky.  The only 
time a conditional is false is when the antecedent is true and the conclusion is 
false. 3 So, the truth table for  p →  q is as follows:
p
q
p → q
1.
T
T
T
2.
T
F
F
3.
F
T
T
4.
F
F
T
Clearly, the conditional should be assumed to be true in line 1. If the antecedent 
is true and the consequent is true, the conditional is true. Even more clear, the 
conditional must be false in line 2, where the antecedent is true and the con-
ditional is false. Line 3 might seem strange at ﬁ rst: A false antecedent and a true 
consequent give us a true conditional. It might seem even stranger, in line 4, 
that a false antecedent and a false consequent give us a true conditional. We can 
make sense of these peculiarities if we consider each of the four possibilities for 
the original example, “If it rained, then the ground is wet.” 
 1.   If it is true that “it rained” and it is true that “the ground is wet,” we 
have no reason to think that the conditional is false. So, the truth 
value for the conditional is assumed true. 
2.   If it is true that “it rained” but it is false that “the ground is wet,” 
we know that the conditional is false. Our information clearly 
demonstrates it. 
3.   If it is false that “it rained” but true that “the ground is wet,” we have 
no reason to think that the conditional is false. It didn’t rain, but the 
ground is wet. The conditional doesn’t suggest that the ground can 
become wet  only as a result of rain. It is perfectly possible that some-
one wet the ground while washing a car or watering a lawn. So, the 
conditional is assumed to be true. 

 
Conditional Statements 
277
4.   If it is false that “it rained” and false that “the ground is wet,” we 
have no reason to think that the conditional is false. It didn’t rain and 
the ground isn’t wet. This information doesn’t contradict the condi-
tional in any way. Without any reason to think that the conditional is 
false, we assume it is true. 
 It may be helpful to think of the truth table for conditional statements in 
terms of the guiding legal principle that a person is presumed innocent until 
proven guilty. In a similar way, a conditional is presumed true until proven false. 
The only thing that can deﬁ nitively show that a conditional is false is a true 
antecedent followed by a false consequent. 
 Let’s consider a basic argument using a conditional statement:
 If it rained, then the ground is wet. 
 It rained. 
 So, the ground is wet. 
We can symbolize this argument form, known as  modus ponens,  in the following 
way:
 p →  q 
 p 
   q 
Now let’s set up the truth table:
p
q
p → q∗
p∗
q C
1.
T
T
T
T
T
2.
T
F
F
T
F
3.
F
T
T
F
T
4.
F
F
T
F
F
We encounter no surprises in setting up the truth table. We begin with the 
columns for  p ,  q , and  p →  q.  Then we move left to right, adding the second 
premise,  p , and the conclusion,  q.  Examining the table to determine validity, 
we discover that only in line 1 are both of the premises true. In line 1 the con-
clusion is also true, so we know that the argument is valid. 
 Let’s consider another basic argument using a conditional statement:
 If it rained, then the ground is wet. 
 The ground is not wet. 
 So, it did not rain. 
We can symbolize this argument form, known as  modus tollens,  in the following 
way:
 p  →  q 
 ˜ q  
  ˜ p 
 Few persons care 
to study logic, 
because everybody 
conceives himself 
to be proﬁ cient 
enough in the 
art of reasoning 
already. But I 
observe that this 
satisfaction is lim-
ited to one’s own 
ratiocination, and 
does not extend to 
that of other men. 
 —Charles S. Peirce 

278 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
Now let’s set up the truth table:
p
q
p → q∗
˜q∗
˜p C
1.
T
T
T
F
F
2.
T
F
F
T
F
3.
F
T
T
F
T
4.
F
F
T
T
T
Again, we encounter no surprises in setting up the truth table. We begin with 
the columns for  p ,  q , and  p →  q. Then we move left to right, adding the second 
premise, ˜ q , and the conclusion, ˜ p. Examining the table to determine valid-
ity, we discover that only in line 4 are both of the premises true. In line 4 the 
conclusion is also true, so we know that the argument is valid. 
 As in symbolizing conjunction and disjunction, we must be careful in 
placing the negation sign in symbolizing a conditional statement. The place of 
the negation makes a big difference in the setup of the truth table. To illustrate 
that point, let’s look at three different possibilities. 
 Consider the ﬁ rst conditional:
 If it did  not rain, then the game was played. 
 ˜ p  →  q 
p
q 
˜p
˜p → q
1.
T
T
F
T
2.
T
F
F
T
3.
F
T
T
T
4.
F
F
T
F
To determine the truth values for ˜ p →  q , we set up the truth table as you would 
expect. Keep in mind here that ˜ p is the antecedent and  q is the consequent. So, 
to determine the truth values for the conditional, we must look from right to left, 
and we can remind ourselves of that by drawing an arrow from the ˜ p column to 
the  q column. The truth table shows that the only case in which the truth value 
for the conditional is false is in the fourth line, where ˜ p is true and  q is false. 
 Now consider the second conditional:
 If it did  not rain, then the game was  not played. 
 ˜ p → ˜ q 
p
q
˜ p
˜q
˜ p → ˜q
1.
T
T
F
F
T
2.
T
F
F
T
T
3.
F
T
T
F
F
4.
F
F
T
T
T
To determine the truth values for ˜ p → ˜ q , we set up the truth table as you 
would expect. We use the ˜ p column and the ˜ q column to determine the truth 
values. The only case in which the truth value for the conditional is false is in 
the third line, where the antecedent, ˜ p , is true and the consequent, ˜ q , is false. 

 
Conditional Statements 
279
A Georgia man was arrested for trying to open a bank account at an 
Aiken, S.C., bank with a phony million dollar bill. According to bank 
employees, the man started cursing at them when they refused to open 
an account for him. For the record, Uncle Sam has never printed a mil-
lion dollar bill.4
Critical Thinking Lapse
 Finally, consider this conditional:
  It is not the case that  if it rained then the game was played. 
 ˜( p  →  q ) 
p
q
p → q
˜ (p → q)
1.
T
T
T
F
2.
T
F
F
T
3.
F
T
T
F
4.
F
F
T
F
To determine the truth values for ˜( p →  q ), we set up the truth table as you would 
expect. We build up to  p →  q and derive the truth values for ˜( p →  q ) by simply 
taking the opposite of what is in the  p →  q column for each corresponding line. 
The only time the conditional is true is when its opposite,  p →  q , is false. 
 To analyze a three-variable argument involving a conditional, we simply 
follow what we have learned so far. We build the truth table by setting up the 
ﬁ rst three columns in the conventional way and representing the premises and 
the conclusion of the argument accordingly. With three variables, there will be 
two cases in which the antecedent is true and the conclusion is false, and thus 
the conditional will be false in two cases. 
 Consider this example:
 p →  q 
 p &  r 
   q 
p
q
r
p → q∗
p & r∗
q C
1.
T
T
T
T
T
T
2.
T
T
F
T
F
T
3.
T
F
T
F
T
F
4.
T
F
F
F
F
F
5.
F
T
T
T
F
T
6.
F
T
F
T
F
T
7.
F
F
T
T
F
F
8.
F
F
F
T
F
F

280 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
Having set up the columns for the three variables, we set up the column 
for the ﬁ rst premise,  p →  q.  There are two cases, lines 3 and 4, in which the 
antecedent,  p , is true and the consequent,  q , is false. In those cases,  p →  q is 
false. We set up the column for  p &  q by consulting the  p column and the 
 q column; and to facilitate reading the table, we repeat the  q column for 
the conclusion. Scanning the table, we see that only in line 1 are both of 
the premises true. The conclusion is also true in line 1, so we know that the 
argument is valid. 
 Let’s consider a slightly more complicated argument:
 ˜( p →  q ) 
 q  v  r 
   q  →  p  
p
q
r
p → q
˜( p → q)∗
q v r∗
q → p C
1.
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
2.
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
3.
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
4.
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
5.
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
6.
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
7.
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
8.
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
Having set up the columns for the three variables, we build up to the ﬁ rst 
premise, ˜( p →  q ). To set up the column for ˜( p →  q ), we set up the col-
umn for  p →  q and take the negation of it. We set up the column for  q v  r 
simply by consulting the  q column and the  r column. Finally, we set up 
the column for the conclusion,  q →  p , by looking from right to left at the 
ﬁ rst two columns. Only in lines 5 and 6 is the antecedent,  q , true and the 
consequent,  p , false, so only in lines 5 and 6 is  q →  p false. Now, looking at 
the table to determine validity, we see that only in line 3 are both of the 
premises true. In line 3 the conclusion is also true, so we know that the 
argument is valid. 
 Consider the following argument:
 If the Democrat wins the election, then she will raise taxes. 
 If taxes are raised, then individual savings will decrease. 
 So, if the Democrat wins, individual savings will decrease. 
Is this argument valid? Let’s symbolize it and test it for validity using a truth 
table. 
 d →  t 
 t →  s 
   d →  s 

 
Conditional Statements 
281
d
t
s
d → t ∗
 t → s∗
d → s C
1.
T
T
T
T
T
T
2.
T
T
F
T
F
F
3.
T
F
T
F
T
T
4.
T
F
F
F
T
F
5.
F
T
T
T
T
T
6.
F
T
F
T
F
T
7.
F
F
T
T
T
T
8.
F
F
F
T
T
T
 In lines 1, 5, 7, and 8, both of the premises are true. In each of these lines, the 
conclusion is true as well, so we know that the argument is valid. In fact, of 
course, this means that any argument ﬁ tting this pattern, known as the chain 
argument, is valid. 
 Finally, recall the following argument from earlier in this chapter:
 If the Democrat loses the Senate race, the Republicans will have a majority 
in the Senate. 
 If the Republicans have a majority in the Senate, the Senate will vote down 
the new bill. 
 It is not the case that the Senate will vote down the new bill or the Demo-
crat will lose the Senate race. 
 So, it is not the case that if the Democrat does not lose, the Senate will not 
vote down the new bill. 
Let’s test it for validity, symbolizing the argument and checking the truth 
table:
 d  →  r 
 r →  s 
 ˜( s v  d ) 
  ˜(˜ d → ˜ s ) 
d
r
s
~d
~s
~d → ~s
s v d
d → r∗
r → s∗
~(s v d)∗
~(~d → ~s)C
1.
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
2.
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
3.
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
4.
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
5.
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
6.
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
7.
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
8.
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
Line 8 is the only line in which all three premises are true. In line 8 the conclu-
sion is false, so the argument is invalid. 

282 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
 II.   Translate each of the symbolic statements in Exercise I into a statement in 
English. 
 III.   Put the following statements in symbolic form. 
 1.   If Bert is taking a bath, then Ernie is taking a bath. 
 2.   It’s not the case that if Hank is taking a bath, then Tiffany is taking a bath. 
 3.   If Bert is not taking a bath, then Ernie is not taking a bath. 
 4.   If there is helium in the balloon, then it can ﬂ oat.  
 5.   If the balloon can’t ﬂ oat, then there is no helium in the balloon. 
 6.   If Lisa passed the ﬁ nal exam, then she passed the course.  
 7.   If Lisa did not pass the course, then she did not pass the ﬁ nal exam.  
 8.   If the groundhog doesn’t see his shadow, then spring is not coming in six weeks.  
 9.   It’s not the case that if the groundhog doesn’t see his shadow, then spring is 
not coming in six weeks. 
 10.   If it is the case that if the sun shines then the game is on, then if the storm 
doesn’t hit, I’ll be at the park. 
 IV.   Determine the validity of the following arguments using truth tables. 
 1.   p →  q 
 
 ˜ p 
 
  ˜ q 
 2.   ˜( p →  q ) 
 
  q 
 
  ˜ p 
 3.   ˜ p →  q 
 
 ˜ p &  r 
 
   q &  r 
 4.   p →  q 
 
 ˜ q v  r 
 
  ˜ p &  r 
 5.   ˜ p →  q 
 
 ˜ r v ˜ p 
 
   r →  q 
 V.   Put the following arguments in symbolic form, and then test them for 
validity using a truth table. 
  1.   If Bert is taking a bath, then Ernie is taking a bath. Ernie is not taking a 
bath. So, Bert is not taking a bath. 
 EXERCISE 10.6 
 I.   Assume that  a ,  b , and  c are true, and  x ,  y , and  z are false, then determine 
whether each of the following is true or false. 
  1.   a →  y 
 2.   y →  a 
 3.   ˜( x →  y ) 
 4.   ( z →  b ) v ˜ c 
 5.   ( z → ˜ x ) v  y 
 6.   ( c →  a ) v ( z →  c ) 
 7.   ˜( b →  c ) & (˜ x → ˜ a ) 
 8.   ( a →  y ) →  y 
 9.   (˜ z →  x ) → (˜ a → ˜ c ) 
 10.   ˜(˜ c →  y ) → ˜(˜ b → ˜ z ) 

 
Summary 
283
 2.   If the balloon can’t ﬂ oat, then there is no helium in the balloon. The balloon 
can ﬂ oat. So, there is helium in the balloon. 
 3.   If Lisa passed the ﬁ nal exam, then she passed the course. Lisa did not pass the 
ﬁ nal exam. So, she did not pass the course.  
 4.   If the groundhog sees his shadow, then spring is coming in six weeks. So, if 
the groundhog doesn’t see his shadow, then spring isn’t coming in six weeks. 
 5.   The game is on if the sun shines. The game is on and the team is excited. So, 
the sun must be shining. 
 
 SUMMARY 
  1.   In propositional logic, the word  conjunction refers to a compound state-
ment. A compound statement, such as “This chapter was stimulating, and 
I learned a lot,” is symbolized by two variables joined by the ampersand, 
 & (for example,  p &  q ).  
 2.   If in any case we are unsure whether a statement is  simple or  compound , 
we must ask, “What does the statement mean?” Does the statement con-
sist of two simple statements? If it does, it is compound. If it doesn’t, it is 
simple. 
 3.   Truth values for a variable are indicated as true, T, or false, F. A  truth table is 
a list of all possible truth values for the variables in an argument form. 
 4.   For the purposes of propositional logic, the following words are all 
equivalent and can be symbolized by the ampersand:  and, but, yet, while, 
whereas, although, though, and  however. 
 5.   In a  valid argument, it is impossible for all of the premises to be true 
and the conclusion false. So, in examining the truth table, we look for 
instances in which all the premises are true. If there is any instance of 
all true premises followed by a false conclusion (an F in the conclusion 
column), the argument is  invalid . It doesn’t matter if there are other in-
stances in the truth table where all the premises are true and the conclu-
sion is true, too. 
 6.   Any two arguments that share the same argument form are either both 
valid or both invalid. When we know that an argument form is valid, we 
know that any argument that ﬁ ts that form is valid.  
 7.   Negation is the use of the word  not (or an equivalent word or phrase) to 
deny a statement. The conventional symbol for negation is the tilde, ˜. 
So, we can symbolize “Shaq is not short” with ˜ p. 
 8.   Sometimes a negation applies only to a single simple statement—for 
 example, “Sam is not a shortstop,” symbolized as ˜ p. Sometimes two ne-
gations apply to both elements of a compound statement—for example, 

284 
CHAPTER 10 A Little Propositional Logic 
“Sam is not a shortstop, and Diane is not an intellectual,” symbolized 
as ˜ p & ˜ q. At other times one negation applies to a whole compound 
 statement—for example, “It’s not the case that Sam is a bartender and 
Woody is a mailman,” symbolized as ˜( p &  q ). 
 9.   The setup and analysis for three variables is lengthier and more complex, 
but all the same rules apply. 
 10.   A  disjunction is an  or statement—that is, a statement that consists of two 
(or more) statements set apart, usually by the word  or. For example, 
“Norm is an accountant or Norm is unemployed.”  The symbol for dis-
junction is the lowercase  v , also called the  wedge. We can symbolize the 
previous disjunction as  p v  q. 
 11.   The word  or has two possible senses. The  exclusive sense eliminates one of 
the possibilities. For example, a ﬂ ight attendant may tell you, “For dinner 
you may have chicken or ﬁ sh.”  The  nonexclusive sense does not exclude 
either possibility. For example, a coach may advise you that “when you’re 
feeling dehydrated, you should drink water or Gatorade.” It is true when 
either of the two statements is true, and it is also true when both state-
ments are true. For the purposes of propositional logic, it is conventional 
to take the word  or in its nonexclusive sense. 
 12.   A  conditional statement is an  if-then statement consisting of two parts. The 
ﬁ rst part of the statement, which follows  if and precedes  then, is called 
the  antecedent. The second part of the statement, which follows  then, is 
called the  consequent. The symbol for the implication involved in an  if-
then statement is the arrow, →. We therefore symbolize “If he loves me, 
then he will call” as,  p →  q. 
 13.   The only time a conditional is false is when the antecedent is true and 
the consequent is false. It may be helpful to think of the truth table for 
conditional statements in terms of the guiding legal principle that a 
person is presumed innocent until proven guilty. In a similar way, a 
conditional is presumed true until proven false. The only thing that can 
deﬁ nitively show that a conditional is false is a true antecedent followed 
by a false consequent.   

285
 CHAPTER 11
 INDUCTIVE REASONING 
 INTRODUCTION TO INDUCTION 
 The topic of inductive reasoning is familiar to us from the discussion of deduc-
tive and inductive arguments in Chapter 3. Now it’s time to take a closer look 
at inductive arguments. An  inductive argument  is one in which the premises 
are intended to provide support, but not conclusive evidence, for the conclu-
sion. Because inductive arguments do not guarantee that their conclusions are 
true, we evaluate them according to the strength of the support they provide 
for their conclusions. An inductive argument is  strong  when its premises pro-
vide evidence that its conclusion is more likely true than false. An inductive 
argument is  weak  when its premises do  not  provide evidence that its conclusion 
is more likely true than false. As we shall see, arguments have varying degrees 
of strength and weakness. 
 As we saw in Chapter 3, not all inductive arguments move from speciﬁ c 
premises to a general conclusion. Here is an example of an inductive argument 
that moves from a general premise to a more speciﬁ c conclusion:
 Most critical thinking students improve greatly in their ability to analyze 
arguments. 
 So,  you will probably improve greatly in your ability to analyze arguments. 
This is an inductive argument that has a single premise dealing with a general 
group, “most students,” and a conclusion about a single speciﬁ c student, “you.” 
Notice that it is inductive because the premise provides support for the conclu-
sion, but the premise is not intended to guarantee the conclusion. Recall from 
Chapter 3 the  strict necessity test:  Either an argument’s conclusion follows with 
strict necessity from its premises or it does not. If the argument’s conclusion 
 does follow with strict logical necessity from its premises, the argument should 
always be treated as deductive. If the argument’s conclusion does not follow 
with strict logical necessity from its premises, the argument should normally 
be treated as inductive. Clearly, in the preceding example, the conclusion is not 

286 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
meant to follow, and does not follow, with strict necessity from its premises. 
The argument is inductive. 
 Another important clue that this is an inductive argument is the word 
 probably. In Chapter 3 we called such words induction  indicator words.  Among 
the important indicator words and phrases for inductive arguments are  likely, 
probably, it’s plausible to suppose that, it’s reasonable to believe that, one would expect 
that, it’s a good bet that, chances are that, and  odds are that.  Notice that most of 
these phrases can be, and often are, used in making predictions. When an argu-
ment makes a prediction, that is a good, but not foolproof, indication that the 
argument is inductive. Of course, the presence of one or more of these indica-
tor words in an argument does not guarantee that the argument is inductive, 
but chances are that it is. 
 Another way to identify inductive arguments is to look for their common 
patterns. Four of these are  inductive generalizations, statistical arguments,  arguments 
from analogy,  and  causal arguments. 1 This chapter looks at each of these inductive 
argument forms in turn. 
 INDUCTIVE GENERALIZATIONS 
 A  generalization  is a statement made about all or most members of a group. 
Inductive generalization is one of the most important kinds of inductive argu-
ments.  An  inductive generalization  is an argument that relies on characteristics 
of a sample population to make a claim about the population as a whole. In other 
words, it is an argument that uses evidence about a limited number of people or 
things of a certain type, the  sample population,  to make a claim about a larger 
group of people or things of that type, the  population as a whole.  
 Let’s consider an example:
 All the bass Hank has caught in the Susquehanna River have weighed less than 
one pound. 
 So, most of the bass in the Susquehanna River weigh less than one pound. 
The sample population is the bass Hank has caught in the Susquehanna River. 
The population as a whole is all the bass in the Susquehanna River. Induc-
tive generalizations, such as our example, ﬁ t the stereotype of induction. The 
argument moves from a speciﬁ c premise to a more general conclusion. But 
remember that the important thing about inductive arguments is that the truth 
of their premises is not intended to guarantee the truth of their conclusions.  At 
best the premises provide strong support for the conclusion. 
 A good inductive argument should reach a conclusion that is appropri-
ate to the evidence offered by its premises. The conclusion should not claim 
more than its premises can support. In the preceding example, the conclusion 
claims that most of the bass in the Susquehanna River weigh less than one 

 
Inductive Generalizations 
287
pound. The degree of support that the premise lends will depend in part on 
how much ﬁ shing Hank has done and how many bass Hank has caught, but 
it is unlikely that this will be enough support to make this a strong argument. 
We could make the argument stronger by making the conclusion less  sweeping; 
that is, the conclusion could cover less ground. For example, if we concluded 
that  many of the bass in the Susquehanna River weigh less than one pound, the 
argument would be stronger. Given the premise, the conclusion is more likely 
to be true if its claim is more limited, restricting itself to  many rather than  most 
bass. If we concluded that  all the bass in the Susquehanna River weigh less 
than one pound, the argument would be far weaker. Other phrases that could 
soften the conclusion are  possibly, probably,  and  likely.  If we soften the conclu-
sion by saying, “So, it is  possible (or  probable, or  likely ) that most of the bass in 
the Susquehanna River weigh less than one pound,” the argument is stronger 
because its conclusion is less forcefully asserted. 
 Inductive generalizations should not overstate their conclusions. For 
example:
 No rabbit Alan has come across has tried to attack him. 
 So, most rabbits are not inclined to attack human beings. 
This is a strong inductive generalization. Given its premise, it seems very likely 
that its conclusion is true. Let’s assume that Alan has come across thousands of 
rabbits and has yet to be attacked by one. The sample population, then, is the 
rabbits Alan has come across. The conclusion is about the population of rab-
bits as a whole. Notice that the conclusion is modest. It doesn’t go too far by 
claiming that all rabbits are not inclined to attack human beings. It recognizes 
that there could be an exception to the rule. 
 Here is another example:
 None of the medical doctors Jen has ever met smoked cigarettes while 
examining her. 
 So, no doctor smokes cigarettes while examining patients. 
Let’s assume that Jen has been examined by six medical doctors over the course 
of her life. We know that cigarette smoking causes cancer and that doctors 
in general have been outspoken about the dangers of smoking. This common 
knowledge aids the argument. However, the conclusion is so sweeping that the 
argument is not strong. After all, if there is just one doctor somewhere who 
smokes cigarettes while examining his or her patients, the conclusion is false. To 
play it safe, then, we might conclude instead that “very few, if any, doctors smoke 
cigarettes while examining patients.” This is still a sweeping conclusion, but it 
allows for the possibility of the occasional exception. Given the revised premise, 
it is likely that the conclusion is true, and thus the argument is strong. 
 Here is a third example:
 Tom has visited Cocoa Beach, Florida, in October several times, and the 
weather was always great—sunny skies and temperatures in the 80s. So, there’s 
a good chance that Cocoa Beach usually has great weather in October. 
 All generalizations 
are bad. 
 —R. H. Grenier 
 Very little is 
certain in this 
world. We live 
and breathe 
probabilities. 
 —Tom Morris 

288 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
The sample population is Tom’s experience of the weather in Cocoa Beach in 
October, based on several visits. The population as a whole is the weather in 
Cocoa Beach in October, in general. Tom’s several visits do not guarantee the 
conclusion about the weather in general, but they do lend it some support. The 
conclusion reﬂ ects the fact that the evidence is limited. The conclusion does not 
say that the weather is always great, but only that it  usually  is. Given the premise, 
it is likely that the conclusion is true, and thus the argument is strong. 
 EXERCISE 11.1 
 In each case, decide if the example is a strong inductive generalization or a 
weak inductive generalization. Be ready to explain and justify your answers. 
 1.   All the hunters Ted knows eat the meat from the animals they kill. So, it is 
possible that many hunters eat the animals they kill. 
 2.   All the blond men Sarah knows are exceedingly intelligent. So, it must be 
that all blond men are exceedingly intelligent. 
 3.   Some students sell back this textbook at the end of the semester. So, it is 
likely that all students sell back most of their textbooks at the end of the 
 semester. 
 4.   The ﬁ fteen winters Eric spent in New York City were cold. So, it may be 
that most winters in New York City are cold. 
 5.   Many of the children in Ms. Santuzzi’s ﬁ rst-grade class can read. So, most 
children in the ﬁ rst grade can read.  
 6.   Many of the unemployed steelworkers who hang out at the Dew Drop Inn 
are actively looking for work. So, it must be that many unemployed steel-
workers are actively looking for work. 
 7.   All the unemployed steelworkers who hang out at the Dew Drop Inn are 
not looking for work. So, it could be that most unemployed steelworkers are 
not looking for work. 
 8.   None of the many students Lisa knows at State College are majoring in 
anthropology. So, it may be that not many students at State are majoring in 
anthropology. 
 9.   Many of the women on the swim team are majoring in women’s studies. So, 
it is possible that some of the women on the swim team consider themselves 
feminists. 
 10.   None of the players on the New York Knicks is Serbian. So, there must not 
be any Serbian players in the NBA. 
 Evaluating Inductive Generalizations 
 So far we have been relying on our innate logical abilities and common sense 
to determine whether an inductive generalization is strong or weak. To a great 
extent, that is what we will continue to do. Although there are standard tests 
for determining whether a deductive argument is valid or invalid, there is 

 
Inductive Generalizations 
289
no standard test for determining whether an inductive argument is strong 
or weak. Still, we are not totally lost when it comes to evaluating inductive 
generalizations. There are three questions we must ask of each inductive gen-
eralization we examine:
 •  Are the premises true? 
 •  Is the sample large enough? 
 •  Is the sample representative? 
 Are the Premises True?   One thing that inductive arguments have in com-
mon with deductive arguments is the need for true premises. “Garbage in, 
garbage out” applies just as well to inductive generalizations as it does to de-
ductive arguments. As you know, a deductive argument that is valid and has 
all true premises leading to a true conclusion is called a  sound argument.  A 
deductive argument can have good—that is, valid—argumentation and still be 
unsound if the premises are not all true. In the same way, the premises of an 
inductive generalization can provide strong support for its conclusion, but if 
the premises are not all true, it is not a cogent inductive argument. A  cogent 
argument  has all true premises and supplies strong support for its conclusion. 
One or more false premises makes an inductive argument  uncogent,  even if its 
argumentation, its support for the conclusion, is strong. 
 Consider this example:
 Most CEOs of Fortune 500 companies are women. 
 So, the CEOs of most big businesses are probably women. 
The premise in this argument provides strong support for the conclusion. 
After all, if most of the CEOs of the most ﬁ nancially successful big businesses 
are women, it would seem likely that the CEOs of most big businesses are 
women. The premise is false, however (most CEOs are men), so it cannot 
legitimately be used to support the conclusion. The argument is not cogent.  
 Is the Sample Large Enough?   Common sense prompts us to ask that 
obvious question about an inductive generalization. The size of the sample 
population must be sufﬁ cient to justify the conclusion about the population as 
a whole. A sample is “large enough” when it is clear that we have not rushed 
to judgment, that we have not formed a  hasty generalization.  Admittedly, 
this business of specifying what we mean by “enough” is not easy. For the mo-
ment, we shall rely on common sense to determine whether the sample is large 
enough. In the next section of this chapter, we’ll take a look at the mathemati-
cal determination of sample size. 
 Let’s begin with a familiar example:
 None of the thousands of rabbits Alan has come across has tried to 
attack him. 
 So, most rabbits are not inclined to attack human beings. 
 If we are not to 
draw hasty 
conclusions, we 
must proceed step 
by step. 
 —Hans Küng 

290 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
Thousands of encounters with rabbits seems like a large enough sample size 
to support the modest conclusion that  most  rabbits are not inclined to attack 
human beings. No inductive argument can guarantee the truth of its conclu-
sion, but you don’t have to be an expert in statistics to see that this one is a 
pretty good bet. 
 On the other hand, consider this example:
 Brooke taught three students with purple hair last semester, and all of them 
were A students. 
 So, all students with purple hair must be A students. 
Considering the thousands of students with purple hair, three students is clearly 
not a large enough sample on which to base this conclusion. The conclusion 
may or may not be true; but given the small sample, the premise is not strong 
enough support for it. 
 Consider this example:
 Two nuclear bombs were dropped on Japan, and today Japan has one of the 
strongest economies in the world. 
 So, all the concern about nuclear warfare and the end of humankind is a bunch 
of nonsense. 
The two nuclear bombs dropped on Japan devastated that country, but the 
Japanese have recovered well. The use of two nuclear bombs, however, is not 
enough to tell us what would result from the use of more nuclear bombs; they 
are not a large enough sample. Beyond that, those two nuclear bombs may not 
be like other nuclear bombs that could be used, which leads us to the third 
question. 
 Is the Sample Representative?   An inductive generalization is weak if the 
sample population it draws on is not enough like the population as a whole 
about which it makes its claims. In technical terms, we want the sample popu-
lation to be  representative.  A  representative sample  is like the population as a 
whole in all relevant ways. It should be a miniversion of the population as 
a whole. 
 Let’s examine the previous example:
 Two nuclear bombs were dropped on Japan, and today Japan has one of the 
strongest economies in the world. 
 So, all the concern about nuclear warfare and the end of humankind is a bunch 
of nonsense. 
The sample population is the two nuclear bombs dropped on Japan. Not 
only is this sample too small, but it is also not representative. The two bombs 
dropped on Japan were not nearly as powerful as the nuclear bombs of today. 
Japan’s ability to recover after the bombing cannot be generalized correctly to 
humankind’s ability to survive and recover from the devastation that would be 
caused by the current generation of nuclear bombs. 

 
Inductive Generalizations 
291
 Recall the ﬁ rst inductive generalization we considered:
 All the bass Hank has caught in the Susquehanna River have weighed less than 
one pound. 
 So, most of the bass in the Susquehanna River weigh less than one pound. 
Let’s assume for the sake of argument that Hank has caught hundreds of bass 
in the Susquehanna River and that they all weighed less than one pound. That 
would seem to be a large enough sample, but the argument could still be weak. 
How? It could be that the hundreds of bass Hank caught were not truly repre-
sentative of the population of bass in the Susquehanna River as a whole. Why? 
There are many possible reasons. Perhaps Hank has ﬁ shed only a short stretch 
of the river, and there are actually much larger bass 20 miles north. Perhaps 
Hank has ﬁ shed only with artiﬁ cial lures, but if he used live bait he could catch 
three-pound bass right under the Market Street Bridge, where he usually ﬁ shes. 
Can you think of other reasons? 
 Often the size of the sample is closely connected to how representative it 
is. But, as we just saw, a large sample is no guarantee of a representative sample. 
It is also possible, though less common, for a sample to be representative but 
not large enough. If, for example, Hank has ﬁ shed every mile of the mighty 
Susquehanna with both artiﬁ cial lures and live bait but has caught only a 
dozen bass—all under one pound—the sample might be representative, in a 
sense. After all, he varied methods and locations. Still, a dozen bass would not 
be a large enough sample on which to base the conclusion that most of the 
bass in the Susquehanna River weigh less than one pound. Maybe there are 
many three-pounders, but Hank is just a poor ﬁ sherman. 
 EXERCISE 11.2 
 I.  Determine whether the following inductive generalizations are strong or 
weak. For the sake of this exercise, assume that all the information given is true. 
In each case, answer these questions: Is the sample large enough? Is the sample 
representative? 
Terminology Recap
A strong inductive argument has premises 
that provide evidence that its conclusion is 
more likely true than false.
 
A weak inductive argument has premises 
that do not provide evidence that its con-
clusion is more likely true than false.
 
A cogent inductive argument has all true 
premises and supplies strong support for 
its conclusion.
 
An uncogent inductive argument has one or 
more false premises or weak support for its 
conclusion.

292 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
 1.  All the millions of rubies gemologists have gathered from around the world 
are red. So, the chances are good that most of the rubies in the world are red. 
 2.  All the guys who live in Jim’s dorm room on the ﬁ rst ﬂ oor and Fred’s dorm 
room on the third ﬂ oor heard the ﬁ re alarm ring last night. So, it is plausible 
that many of the guys in the three-story dormitory heard it. 
 3.  Most guys who watch the Super Bowl at Wexford College are unprepared for 
class the next day. So, most students who watch the Super Bowl are probably 
unprepared for class the next day. 
 4.  Based on a survey of one hundred thousand American high school students, 
approximately half go on to attend college. So, it is probably the case that 
about half the people in the world have attended college. 
 5.  There has been at least some snowfall in New York City every January for 
the past one hundred years. So, the chances are good that there will be at least 
some snowfall in New York City every January for the next two hundred 
years. 
 II.  Consider each of the following weak inductive generalizations. Each is ﬂ awed 
in at least one way. For the sake of this exercise, assume that all the information 
given is true. In each case, answer these questions: Is the sample large enough? Is 
the sample representative? Explain and defend your answers. 
 1.   Chicago, Los Angeles, and Houston are all big cities with big crime problems. 
So, all big cities must have big crime problems. 
 2.  All former presidents of the United States have either died in ofﬁ ce or died 
within ﬁ fty years of leaving ofﬁ ce. So, it is likely that all future presidents will 
either die in ofﬁ ce or die within ﬁ fty years of leaving ofﬁ ce.  
 3.  All one thousand of the frogs in Springﬁ eld Pond, next to the nuclear plant, 
have only three legs. So, it is reasonable to believe that many other ponds in 
Springﬁ eld have at least some three-legged frogs as well.  
 4.  All four of the biology professors at Wexford College who were considered 
for tenure over the past twelve years received tenure. So, it is likely that almost 
all professors at Wexford who are considered for tenure receive tenure. 
 5.  All one hundred children who saw the advance screening of the latest Disney 
movie said it was great. So, chances are that nearly everyone who sees the 
movie will think it is great. 
 Opinion Polls and Inductive Generalizations 
 Opinion polls are an excellent source of inductive generalizations. In recent 
years polling has become an increasingly large part of the political process. 
Gallup and Harris polls are often very accurate in predicting the outcomes of 
national elections, for example. The aim of a poll is to determine what a large 
population thinks or believes about a certain issue. To make that determina-
tion, it is not necessary to ask every member of that population. Rather, the 
preferred method is to ask a question of a sample of the population that is both 
large enough and representative of the population as a whole. 

 
Inductive Generalizations 
293
 In the case of a presidential election, the population would be those who are 
eligible to vote and intend to vote in the election in question. Obviously, this is 
a very large population, consisting of more than one hundred million people in a 
U.S. presidential election. Do we need to survey a million people or more to have a 
large enough sample?  Your inclination might be to answer yes, but in actuality the 
number of people in the sample population does not have to be nearly that large. 
 No sample, no matter how large, will ever guarantee that poll results will 
be accurate. Still, we can use polls to arrive at a level of 95 percent2 certainty 
that a sample population will mirror the population as a whole within a small 
margin of error. The margin of error is usually indicated by a combination 
of the plus and minus signs, . This means that the results will be within a 
range of plus or minus the amount indicated. For example, let’s say that the 
latest poll shows Sacamano leading Lomez by a margin of 60 to 40 with a 
margin of error of 3. This suggests that there is a 95 percent chance that if 
the population as a whole voted, the result would be somewhere between 63 
and 37 percent and between 57 and 43 percent in favor of Sacamano. Not bad. 
So how large does the sample have to be to yield these kinds of results? The 
following table gives the breakdown. 3 
Number Polled
Margin of Error
4,000
1,500
1,000
750
600
400
200
100
2
3
4
4
5
6
8
11
As you can see, it doesn’t take a huge sample to yield a reasonable margin 
of error. With a sample of just 1,500, the margin of error is 3. We can add 
2,500 more people to the sample, and the margin of error decreases only 
slightly to 2. So, we can produce a fairly accurate poll on a presidential elec-
tion with millions of voters with a sample population of only 1,500 voters, 
but there’s a catch:  The sample must be representative too.  The millions of voters 
represent a great diversity of people, and somehow the sample must be repre-
sentative of this larger group. To get an idea of what kinds of things can cause a 
sample to fail in its attempt to be representative, let’s consider a classic case. 
 A well-respected periodical, the  Literary Digest,  conducted a telephone 
poll to predict the winner of the 1936 presidential election. The pollsters for 
the magazine understood that the sample had to be large enough. In fact, 
they went overboard, gathering more than two million responses. They also 
understood that the sample had to be representative, so they randomly picked 
names from phone books all over the country. Having gathered and tabulated 
 Wisdom should 
reckon on the 
unforeseen. 
 —Edgar Allan Poe 

294 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
all the responses, the  Literary Digest  predicted a landslide victory for Alf Landon 
over Franklin Delano Roosevelt. As it turned out, Roosevelt won by an even 
greater landslide. Although the sample was more than large enough, it was not 
representative, despite the effort to select the sample population randomly. 
 Why was the sample not representative? Because in 1936 many people 
did not have, and could not afford, a telephone in their home, and the people 
without telephones were mostly members of the lower and middle classes, 
who voted in droves for Roosevelt. Despite their efforts, the pollsters at the 
 Literary Digest  failed to draw upon a representative sample. They thought they 
had selected participants in the survey randomly, but in reality they had al-
lowed a bias in favor of wealthier voters to creep into their sample population. 
To have a truly representative sample, we must select subjects at random from 
within the appropriate pool.  This means that nothing is done at the outset of 
the selection process that would automatically eliminate any segment of the 
population. The selection is random only if each member of the population 
has an equal chance of being selected as a member of the sample population. 
As we shall see, many things can prevent random selection. 
 Some polls do not even attempt to utilize a truly random sample. In-
stead, they use  self-selecting samples.  Television talk shows and news broadcasts 
that invite you to call a certain phone number to cast your vote and register 
your opinion are prime examples of self-selecting samples.  The question of the 
day might be, for example, “Should ﬂ ag burning be protected under the First 
Amendment?” Although this is a controversial issue, it would not be surpris-
ing to ﬁ nd a large majority of votes against the protection and legality of ﬂ ag 
burning. Why? There could be many reasons. Perhaps the show during which 
this issue was raised has an overwhelming and nonrepresentative percentage 
of conservative viewers. Perhaps those against ﬂ ag burning are just more vocal 
and outspoken about their position and so are more inclined to call in to reg-
ister their opinion. 
 Such call-in polls face another problem: they have a signiﬁ cant percentage 
of  nonresponses.  The nonresponses leave us with the problem of a sample popula-
tion that is not likely to be representative of the population as a whole. The bias 
introduced by nonresponses will be even greater if the polling is done using an 
Internet Web site for people to register their votes. Those who respond to an 
Internet poll will likely be, on average, younger, better educated, and wealthier 
than the population as a whole. In fact, most people realize that such call-in 
polls and Internet surveys are not reliable. The shows responsible for them usu-
ally make clear that the results are not the product of a “scientiﬁ c poll.” In other 
words, aside from the entertainment aspect, they have little value at all. 
 What might seem random often isn’t. Choosing names out of a phone 
book will not necessarily produce a representative sample, but what about ap-
proaching people on the street? This could work, but there are potential pitfalls 
here too.  The pollster, the person taking the poll, might introduce bias into 
the sample because of a tendency to approach certain kinds of people and not 
others. Perhaps the pollster is not even aware that he is doing it. For example, 

 
Inductive Generalizations 
295
he might have a tendency to approach only people who look “friendly.”  This 
may mean that he is more inclined to approach a well-dressed businesswoman 
and much less inclined to approach a disheveled man. This may introduce a 
gender bias and a socioeconomic bias into the sample population, automati-
cally eliminating a signiﬁ cant portion of the population, namely, lower-class 
males. Perhaps the problem could be solved by randomly selecting the people 
on the street to be approached. For example, the pollster could be given in-
structions to approach every tenth person who walks down the block. This 
would certainly be a better strategy than simply allowing the pollster to ap-
proach the people he chooses on the basis of his own whims. Still, there can 
be problems. For example, if you asked every tenth high school student who 
walked down the street in Scarsdale, New York, if he or she was planning to 
go to college, you would get some uncharacteristic results. Perhaps 90 per-
cent of the high school students in this wealthy suburb would indicate that 
they were planning to go to college, whereas the national average is closer to 
60 percent. 
 Still another factor that may affect the reliability of polls is  dishonesty.  We 
all like to give the “right answer” to a question, even when the question does 
not have a right answer but is simply a matter of opinion or an attempt to collect 
information. The result is that some people lie in response to anonymous polls. 
For example, in response to the question, “Do you consider yourself racially 
prejudiced?” we can expect more people to respond no than is actually the 
case. People think that the “right answer” is no, so some will answer no even if 
they do indeed consider themselves racially prejudiced. Polling agencies often 
take advantage of this tendency of people to try to give the right answer by 
CALVIN AND HOBBES © Watterson. Reprinted with permission of Universal Press Syndicate. All rights reserved.

296 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
asking slanted questions. That is to say, polling agencies may not be interested 
in gathering objective data and so ask questions that clearly point toward one 
response as the right answer. For example, depending on the answer that a 
polling agency wants respondents to consider the right answer, they might 
ask two very different questions. On the subject of whether the United States 
should decrease the size of its nuclear arsenal, a polling agency might ask, “Are 
you in favor of peaceful multilateral nuclear disarmament?” Or, alternatively, 
“Are you against the weakening of the ability of the United States of America 
to offer a sufﬁ cient nuclear deterrent against foreign attack?” There is not much 
need to wonder what the right answer is in each case. Polling is big business, and 
those who hire polling agencies often have a vested interest in getting results 
that conﬁ rm their own position on an issue. 
 Another potential pitfall of objective polling is the person who is doing 
the poll. Even without intending to, he or she may provide a clue as to what 
the right answer is, or respondents may answer differently depending on the 
pollster. A white male is much less likely to admit that he considers himself 
racially prejudiced if he is polled in person by a black male. A woman is much 
less likely to admit that she has had a venereal disease when polled by a man 
rather than by a woman. If the polling question is “Do you believe in God?” 
we would expect a higher number of yes responses if the pollster is dressed 
in the garb of a priest or minister. What is the solution? Polling should be 
 double-blind; that is, the person taking the poll and the person responding 
should have no information about each other, or at least as little as possible. 
And neither the pollster nor the respondent should have any indication of the 
“right answer.” 
 EXERCISE 11.3 
 Put together your own plans for a campus poll on the death penalty. What 
questions will you ask? How will you phrase them to avoid pointing to a “right 
answer”? How will you gather responses? How many people will you include 
in the sample population? How will you ensure that the sample is represen-
tative? Be prepared to present your plans and defend them against possible 
objections. 
 STATISTICAL ARGUMENTS 
 Closely related to inductive generalization is another type of inductive argu-
ment. A  statistical argument  argues from premises regarding a percentage of a 
population to a conclusion about an individual member of that population or 
some part of that population. 4 For example:
 There are three 
kinds of lies: lies, 
damned lies, and 
statistics. 
 —Benjamin 
Disraeli 

 
Statistical Arguments 
297
 Ninety percent of college students are in favor of not having a cumulative ﬁ nal 
exam in their critical thinking class. 
 Vera Peterson is a college student. 
 So, Vera Peterson is in favor of not having a cumulative ﬁ nal exam in her critical 
thinking class. 
 Like other inductive arguments, statistical arguments are evaluated along 
a continuum of strong to weak. A statistical argument is strong when it pro-
vides evidence that its conclusion is more likely true than false—that is, when 
the chances that the conclusion is true are greater than 50 percent. A statistical 
argument is weak when it provides evidence that its conclusion is more likely 
false than true—that is, when the chances that the conclusion is true are less 
than 50 percent. The preceding example is thus a strong argument, providing 
evidence that there is a 90 percent chance its conclusion is true. The evidence 
does not logically guarantee that the conclusion is true, but the evidence in 
inductive arguments never does. 
 Let’s look at another example:
 Only 3 percent of  Wexford College students are against building the new 
gymnasium. 
 Johnny Z is a Wexford College student. 
 So, Johnny Z is not against building the new gymnasium. 
Again, this is a strong argument, offering evidence that there is a 97 percent 
chance that the conclusion is true. The argument could be made even stronger 
by softening the conclusion so that the argument would say instead
 Only 3 percent of Wexford College students are against building the new 
gymnasium. 
 Johnny Z is a Wexford College student. 
 So, Johnny Z is  probably not against building the new gymnasium. 
The word  probably safeguards this conclusion by claiming less than the con-
clusion in the original formulation did. Although there might be some doubt 
A 20-year-old South Bend, Indiana, man told police he was stabbed 
by his younger brother after a ﬁ ght broke out over a Hot Pocket. The 
victim told police the two began ﬁ ghting over who got to eat the 
microwave sandwich, pushing and grappling with each other into a 
hallway. He said his younger brother then grabbed a steak knife off  the 
kitchen counter and stabbed him in the left side. Police said the victim 
was able to wrestle the knife away from his brother, who then ﬂ ed 
on foot. The man was transported to a hospital with minor injuries, 
where he was treated and released. There was no word on who got the 
Hot Pocket.5
Critical Thinking Lapse

298 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
about the conclusion as originally stated, “So, Johnny Z is not against building 
the new gymnasium,” it would be tough to deny the softened version of the 
conclusion, “So, Johnny Z is  probably not against building the new gymna-
sium.” Given the evidence, Johnny Z “probably” is not against building the 
new gymnasium. Even if 49 percent of   Wexford College students were against 
building the new gymnasium, it would still follow that “Johnny Z is  probably 
not against building the new gymnasium.” 
 Let’s consider a different version of the argument:
 Only 3 percent of  Wexford College students are against building the new 
gymnasium. 
 Johnny Z is a Wexford College student. 
 So, Johnny Z is against building the new gymnasium. 
The evidence that this argument provides makes it unlikely that the conclu-
sion is true. In fact, there is a 97 percent chance it is false. The argument, then, 
is weak. What if we soften the conclusion with the word  probably ?
 Only 3 percent of  Wexford College students are against building the new 
gymnasium. 
 Johnny Z is a Wexford College student. 
 So, Johnny Z is  probably against building the new gymnasium. 
The argument is still weak because the evidence overwhelmingly suggests that 
Johnny Z is probably  not against building the new gymnasium. 
 Statistical arguments that approach 50 percent and offer evidence that 
their conclusion is more likely true than false are strong but  unreliable. 
There is no speciﬁ c percentage point at which a statistical argument is 
judged unreliable. The best way to determine reliability is to be practical. 
Ask yourself, “Would a reasonable person act or bet on it?” If the answer is 
yes, the argument is reliable. If the answer is no, the argument is unreliable. 
For example:
 Fifty-ﬁ ve percent of  Wexford students voted for Watkins as “Teacher of 
the Year.” 
 Eileen is a Wexford student. 
 So, Eileen voted for Watkins. 
Although it is true that a majority of students voted for Watkins, it would be 
going out on a limb to say Eileen voted for Watkins. A reasonable person cer-
tainly wouldn’t bet on it. It would be safer to say that “Eileen  probably voted 
for Watkins,” but even that would be relatively unreliable. After all, there is a 
45 percent chance that she  didn’t vote for Watkins. 
 Consider another example:
 Just 42 percent of  Wexford students come from out of state. 
 Gloria is a Wexford student. 
 So, Gloria doesn’t come from out of state. 
 A wise man pro-
portions his belief 
to the evidence. 
 —David Hume 

 
Statistical Arguments 
299
This too is a relatively unreliable argument. The fact that only 42 percent 
of  Wexford students come from out of state doesn’t make it very likely that 
Gloria doesn’t come from out of state. 
 Of course, we can have statistical arguments that are stronger than those 
in the 50 percent range but not as strong as those that approach the extreme of 
100 percent. Their strength and reliability depend, in part, on how much the 
conclusion claims. Consider this example:
 Seventy-six percent of new businesses in this state go out of business 
within the ﬁ rst year. 
 Dan the Man’s Hot Dog Stand is a new business in this state. 
 So, Dan the Man’s Hot Dog Stand will go out of business within 
the ﬁ rst year.  
This argument is strong but not very reliable. In fact, the numbers tell us that 
there is a 24 percent chance its conclusion is false. 
 Let’s consider a slightly different version of the argument:
 Seventy-six percent of new businesses in this state go out of business within the 
ﬁ rst year. 
 Dan the Man’s Hot Dog Stand is a new business in this state. 
 So, Dan the Man’s Hot Dog Stand will  probably go out of business within the 
ﬁ rst year.  
This argument makes use of the same information as the previous one, but 
the word  probably softens the conclusion, thus increasing the strength of the 
argument. 
 Statistics are the 
lantern by which 
we light our way 
through the dense 
darkness of the 
future. 
 —Daniel Sommer 
Robinson 
The Hot Hand in Basketball
Basketball players often speak of having a “hot hand”—of being “in 
the zone” and feeling that they just can’t miss. In recent years, how-
ever, a number of well-known scientists and statisticians (among 
them Stephen J. Gould and Thomas Gilovich) have argued that the 
hot hand is an illusion (similar to the illusion of being “hot” in poker 
or roulette). Studies of long-term shooting patterns, they claim, show 
that shooters are actually slightly less likely to make a shot if they have 
made their previous shot. Thus, contrary to what many players and 
fans believe, success does not breed success in basketball, and the 
hot hand is myth.
 
Suppose, as these studies suggest, there is a slight negative correla-
tion between making a basket and hitting the next shot. Does that 
show that the hot hand is an illusion? Why or why not?
Pop Culture Connection

300 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
 Reference Class 
 In examining opinion polls, we saw that the sample on which the conclusion 
is based must be representative. Similarly, in statistical arguments the subject of 
the premise should be as much like the subject of the conclusion as possible. 
Let’s return to our ﬁ rst example:
 Ninety percent of college students are in favor of not having a cumulative ﬁ nal 
exam in their critical thinking class. 
 Vera Peterson is a college student. 
 So, Vera Peterson is in favor of not having a cumulative ﬁ nal exam in her critical 
thinking class. 
All we know about Vera Peterson is that she is a college student, but surely 
there is more to know about her than that. And who are the students who 
want the cumulative ﬁ nal? Suppose we discovered that 85 percent of students 
who like writing essays want a cumulative ﬁ nal because there will be an essay 
on the cumulative ﬁ nal—and that Vera is a student who likes writing essays. 
That would change things. Now our argument is as follows: 
 Eighty-ﬁ ve percent of college students who like writing essays want the cumula-
tive ﬁ nal because it will have an essay. 
 Vera Peterson is a college student who likes writing essays. 
 So, Vera Peterson probably wants the cumulative ﬁ nal.  
 Now we have a strong argument that contradicts the conclusion of the origi-
nal version of the argument. With the added information, we have changed 
the reference class. The  reference class  is the group to which statistics apply. 
As a rule, the more speciﬁ c the reference class is, the better the argument is. In 
changing the reference class from “college students” to “college students who 
like writing essays,” we found that the conclusion about  Vera changed. Adding 
new information to an inductive argument can change its strength. In this case, 
changing reference classes called for a different conclusion. 
Terminology Recap
A strong argument has premises that pro-
vide evidence that its conclusion is more 
likely true than false.
 
A strong and reliable argument has premises 
that provide evidence that its conclusion is 
more likely true than false, and it is an argu-
ment that a reasonable person would act or 
bet on.
 
A strong but unreliable argument has prem-
ises that provide evidence that its conclu-
sion is more likely true than false, but it 
is an argument that a reasonable person 
would not act or bet on.

 
Statistical Arguments 
301
 Let’s return to another familiar example:
 Fifty-ﬁ ve percent of  Wexford students voted for Watkins as “Teacher of the Year.” 
 Eileen is a Wexford student. 
 So, Eileen probably voted for Watkins. 
Now let’s add more information to arrive at a different argument:
 Eighty-nine percent of  Wexford students who took Watkins’s critical thinking 
course voted for Watkins as “Teacher of the Year.” 
 Eileen took Watkins’s critical thinking course. 
 So, Eileen probably voted for Watkins as “Teacher of the Year.” 
We have changed the reference class, becoming more speciﬁ c in the second 
argument. Now we are no longer talking simply about “Wexford students” but 
about “Wexford students who took Watkins’s critical thinking course.” The 
change in reference class in this case changes the argument (though the con-
clusion remains the same) from a moderately strong but unreliable one to a 
stronger and more reliable one. 
 We should also note that a statistical argument can be used to support a 
conclusion about a group rather than an individual. For example:
 Ninety percent of college students are in favor of not having a cumulative ﬁ nal 
exam in their critical thinking class. 
 So, ninety percent of  Wexford College students are in favor of not having a 
cumulative ﬁ nal exam in their critical thinking class. 
Notice that the conclusion does not necessarily follow from the premise. The 
premise concerns all college students, whereas the conclusion concerns a lim-
ited group of college students—those who attend Wexford. Wexford students 
in general could be very much like the population of college students as a 
whole, or they could be quite different in signiﬁ cant ways. As in other induc-
tive arguments, the argument could be strengthened by softening the conclu-
sion with the word  probably. The argument is strong, but it might be stronger if 
the reference class were more speciﬁ c. 
 EXERCISE 11.4 
 I.  Decide whether each of the following statistical arguments is (a) weak, 
(b) strong but unreliable, or (c) strong and reliable.  Then rewrite each argument, 
changing the reference class to make weak arguments strong and strong argu-
ments weak. 
 1.   Only 5 percent of registered Republicans voted for the Democratic candi-
date in the previous presidential election. 
 
  Larry is a registered Republican. 
 
   So, Larry probably did not vote for the Democratic candidate in the 
previous presidential election. 
 Statistics are like 
a bikini. What 
they reveal is sug-
gestive, but what 
they conceal is 
vital. 
 —Aaron Levenstein 

302 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
 2.   Fifty-two percent of independent voters voted for the Republican candidate 
in the previous presidential election. 
 
  Shane is an independent voter. 
 
   So, Shane probably voted for the Republican candidate in the previous 
presidential election. 
 3.   Thirty percent of senior biology majors at Wexford College applied to 
medical school last year. 
 
  Catherine was a senior biology major at Wexford College last year. 
 
  So, Catherine probably applied to medical school. 
 4.   Ninety-ﬁ ve percent of people who lose weight on a diet gain most or all of 
it back within three years. 
 
  Ray lost ﬁ fty pounds on a diet ﬁ ve years ago. 
 
  So, Ray has probably gained most or all of the weight back by now. 
 5.   Only 5 percent of the students in Watkins’s critical thinking course received 
a grade of  D or F. 
 
  Sheila was a student in Watkins’s critical thinking course. 
 
  So, Sheila probably received a D. 
 6.   Forty-eight percent of graduating seniors at Wexford College have a grade 
point average of 2.9 or higher. 
 
  Dean is a graduating senior at Wexford. 
 
  So, Dean probably does not have a grade point average of 2.9 or higher. 
 7.   Eighty-eight percent of freshmen at Wexford College return for their 
sophomore year. 
 
  Lindsey was a freshman at Wexford last year. 
 
  So, chances are that Lindsey is back for her sophomore year. 
 8.  Only 5 percent of the population of  Springﬁ eld is unemployed. 
 
  Barney lives in Springﬁ eld. 
 
 So, Barney is probably unemployed. 
 9.  Forty-nine percent of marriages end in divorce. 
 
  Beth and Keith just got married. 
 
  So, Beth and Keith will probably end up getting divorced. 
 10.   Less than 1 percent of female high school students try out for their high 
school football team. 
 
  Patty is a female high school student. 
 
  So, Patty probably did not try out for her high school football team. 
 II.  Construct your own statistical arguments according to the following directions. 
 1.  Give your own example of a strong statistical argument. 
 2.  Give your own example of a strong but unreliable statistical argument. 
 3.  Give your own example of a strong but unreliable statistical argument, then 
change the reference class and give a stronger version of the argument. 
 4.  Give your own example of a weak statistical argument, then change the 
reference class and give a strong version of the argument. 
 5.  Give your own example of a strong but unreliable statistical argument with 
a conclusion dealing with a group rather than an individual; then change the 
reference class and give a stronger version of the argument. 

 
Induction and Analogy 
303
 INDUCTION AND ANALOGY 
 What Is an Analogy? 
 Up is to down as right is to? 
 Understanding analogies and arguments that use analogies is essential to criti-
cal thinking.  Analogies are not just the stuff of nightmares and entrance exams; 
they have a useful purpose. As you probably knew right away, the word  left is the 
correct answer to the analogy question above. Why? Because the relationship is 
one of opposites. Up is the opposite of down, and right is the opposite of left. 
 An  analogy is a comparison of things based on similarities those things 
share. Analogies, then, depend on what is similar or the same in two or more cases. 
Analogies are everywhere: on exams, in arguments, in newspapers, in poems, and 
in songs. In literature in general, and poetry in particular, analogies are common. 
 Similes, which are comparisons using  like or  as, are actually a type of analogy. 
In literature, similes can be quite moving even though they might not stand up 
well to critical analysis. For example, when a poet says, “My love is like the sun,” 
the comparison is a limited one. The poet may simply want to stress the beauty, 
warmth, and centrality of his beloved by comparing her to something else that 
is beautiful, warm, and central. The analogy stops there, however.  The poet’s love 
does not dwell in the sky, give off radiation, and so on. Most often poets intend 
these analogies to make us look at things differently, not to pass muster in a criti-
cal thinking textbook.  
 How Can We Argue by Analogy? 
 Although analogies are interesting and important for many reasons, including 
their use in poetry, we focus on one: their importance in constructing inductive 
arguments. An argument from analogy depends on an analogy or a similarity 
between two or more things. Analogies compare two or more things; arguments 
from analogy go one step further.  They often claim that another similarity exists, 
given the similarities already recognized. Whereas an analogy simply points 
out a similarity, an  argument from analogy  claims that certain similarities are 
evidence that there is  another  similarity (or other similarities). 6  
 Let’s look at an example:
 The Post Ofﬁ ce is a government agency. 
 The Department of Motor Vehicles is a government agency. 
 The Post Ofﬁ ce is closed for Martin Luther King Jr. Day. 
 So, the Department of Motor Vehicles must be closed for 
Martin Luther King Jr. Day. 
The example ﬁ rst notes a similarity between the Post Ofﬁ ce and the Department 
of  Motor  Vehicles.  Then it states something additional about the Post Ofﬁ ce. 
Last, it claims that the same thing is true of the Department of Motor Vehicles. 

304 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
 This example is, in fact, a general form of an argument from analogy. 
Rather than speak about speciﬁ c examples, we can give the general form of 
arguments from analogy by using letters as symbols.
 A has characteristic X. 
 B has characteristic X. 
 A has characteristic Y. 
 Therefore, B has characteristic Y. 
That is the basic form, though we can expand it to include even more details. 
For example:
 The Post Ofﬁ ce and the Department of Motor Vehicles are both government 
agencies, and both were closed on Veterans Day. 
 The Post Ofﬁ ce is closed for Martin Luther King Jr. Day. 
 So, the Department of Motor Vehicles must be closed for 
Martin Luther King Jr. Day. 
This is also an argument from analogy, but this version of the argument includes one 
additional detail: that both the Post Ofﬁ ce and the Department of Motor Vehicles 
were closed on Veterans Day. Now the form reﬂ ects the addi tional detail:
 A has characteristics X and Y. 
 B has characteristics X and Y. 
 A has characteristic Z. 
 Therefore, B has characteristic Z. 
 We could continue to add details represented by variables, but the basic 
form of the arguments from analogy would remain the same. 
CALVIN AND HOBBES © Watterson. Reprinted with permission of Universal Press Syndicate. All rights reserved.

 
Induction and Analogy 
305
 Evaluating Arguments from Analogy 
 Critical thinking involves more than just recognizing arguments from analogy; 
it also involves evaluating those arguments. All analogies break down . . . 
eventually. They wouldn’t be analogies otherwise because we make analogies 
only between things that are similar but not the same. If you claim, “A squirrel 
is just like a squirrel!” people will look at you funny. On the other hand, people 
may disagree, but they will want to know more if you claim, “Squirrels, which 
are like suburban rats, should be exterminated.” 
 In other words, there are good and bad analogies, and there are also good 
and bad arguments from analogy. Sometimes the points of similarity warrant 
a certain conclusion and sometimes they don’t. Most arguments from analogy 
are inductive arguments, so they are neither valid nor invalid. Rather, they are 
either strong or weak. Whereas there are cut-and-dried ways to test whether 
a deductive argument is valid or invalid, there are no such direct methods 
for determining whether inductive arguments are strong or weak. There are, 
however, some good questions to ask to help determine whether a particular 
argument from analogy is a strong or weak inductive argument. Consider the 
statement “Squirrels, which are like suburban rats, should be exterminated.” 
There must be some reason that you claimed this. Let’s suppose that it is the 
conclusion of the following argument:
 Squirrels and rats are rodents of similar size and appearance. 
 Rats cause problems in the city, and squirrels cause problems in the suburbs. 
 Rats should be exterminated. 
 So, squirrels should be exterminated. 
Is this a good argument? 
 EXERCISE 11.5 
 Before we go further in discussing how to determine whether an argument 
from analogy is a good one, test your logical instincts. Decide whether you 
think the preceding argument is a good argument by deciding whether the 
analogy is a good one. Don’t focus on whether you agree with the conclusion, 
just on how well or how poorly the premises support the conclusion. 
 Evaluating arguments from analogy is not totally new to you. Probably, 
you have done it for years without realizing it. In Chapter 6 you looked at 
arguments from analogy in a more formal way in the discussion of logical fal-
lacies. Remember the  fallacy of weak analogy ? It’s the fallacy that results from 
comparing two (or more) things that aren’t really comparable. It is a matter of 
claiming that two things share a certain similarity on the basis of other simi-
larities while overlooking important dissimilarities. For example:

306 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
 Tiffany and Heather are both tall and play basketball. 
 Tiffany also plays volleyball. 
 So, Heather must also play volleyball. 
Not necessarily, right? Clearly, we have come to recognize this kind of argument 
as a fallacy, but where exactly does the reasoning go wrong? Let’s return to this ex-
ample after we look at what to consider in evaluating an argument from analogy. 
 The ﬁ rst thing we want in an argument from analogy is what we want in 
all arguments, whether they are inductive or deductive:  true premises.  ( Remember: 
Garbage in, garbage out!) In the example, if Tiffany and Heather are not both 
tall or don’t both play basketball, the argument is doomed from the start. So, we 
must always ask if the premises are true. Assuming that the premises are true, at 
least as far as we can tell, we must move on to consider other things. 
 The second thing we must consider is the  relevance of the similarities.  In the 
case of Heather and Tiffany, the similarities are relevant because they make a dif-
ference as to whether the conclusion is likely to be true. Both women are tall, and 
height is an advantage in volleyball. They both play basketball, and this shows that 
they each have some interest in an athletic activity in which height is an advantage. 
Still, the similarities are not overwhelming. Some other similarities would not be 
relevant at all. For example, they are both women and have seven letters in their 
names. These similarities are irrelevant, meaning that they make no difference to 
whether the conclusion is true. There is no causal or statistical connection between 
one’s sex or the number of letters in one’s name and one’s athletic ability or inter-
est. In contrast, a truly relevant similarity might be that they both play basketball 
for a coach who insists that his players also play volleyball. Another might be that 
they are best friends who rarely do anything without each other; or that they are 
sisters whose mother insists that they play every sport they possibly can. 
 The third thing to consider is the  number of relevant similarities.  In the 
example, there are only two relevant similarities between Tiffany and Heather: 
they are tall and they play basketball. If additional relevant similarities could 
be noted, the strength of the argument would increase. For example, if it were 
noted that they are best friends, rarely do anything apart, have a coach who 
insists that his basketball players also play volleyball, and attend a college that 
gives scholarships only to athletes who play more than one sport, the argument 
would certainly be stronger because these similarities are directly related to 
Heather’s being a volleyball player. 
 A potential pitfall for all inductive arguments, including arguments from 
analogy, is “the unknown.” No information—no premise—can ever be added 
to a valid deductive argument to make it invalid. However, information—
premises—can be added to a strong inductive argument to make it weak. With 
regard to arguments from analogy, one important unknown, or neglected area 
of information, can be relevant differences or dissimilarities. We need to con-
sider both the  relevance and the  number of dissimilarities. 
 Not all differences or dissimilarities are important or relevant. For ex-
ample, Tiffany may have blonde hair, and Heather may have black hair; Tiffany 
 When men 
observe two things 
to be in some 
respect similar, 
they are wont to 
ascribe to each 
what they have 
found to be true 
of the other to the 
neglect of that in 
which they differ. 
 —René Descartes 

 
Induction and Analogy 
307
may be studying philosophy, and Heather may be studying accounting; 
 Tiffany may be left-handed, and Heather may be right-handed. None of 
these dissimilarities is relevant in arguing that Heather, like Tiffany, plays 
volleyball. There are, however, possible dissimilarities that would weaken 
the argument. For example, Heather may have to work at a part-time job, 
whereas Tiffany may not; Heather may have a medical condition that limits 
her physical activity, and Tiffany may not; or Heather may not like volleyball, 
whereas Tiffany thinks it’s great. All of these dissimilarities are relevant to the 
argument, some perhaps more than others. If any of these dissimilarities were 
actually true, the argument would be weaker. If more than one were true, it 
would be even weaker; if all were true, it would be weaker still. 
 In the example we have been discussing, there is a sample of only two, Tiffany 
and Heather. A larger sample would strengthen the argument, just as increasing 
the number of similarities increases the strength of the argument. Consider the 
following increase in the size of the sample in the original argument:
 Tiffany, Heather, Amber, and Krissy are all tall and play basketball. 
 Tiffany, Amber, and Krissy also play volleyball. 
 So, Heather must also play volleyball. 
This argument, with its increased sample size, is stronger than the original. 
 Still, there is another potential pitfall resulting from the unknown. This pitfall 
has to do with  diversity in the sample. In the original argument, we were con-
cerned with the similarities between just two people, Tiffany and Heather. What 
happens when we increase the size of the sample?  With increased sample size, diver-
sity becomes a mark of strength.   If  Tiffany, Amber, and Krissy were a diverse group in 
many ways, the argument would be strengthened. If these three had nothing much 
in common aside from being tall and playing both basketball and volleyball, there 
would be greater support for the conclusion that Heather must also play volleyball. 
If these three were very much alike in other ways—for example, all being A stu-
dents and coming from the same high school, whereas Heather is a C student who 
comes from a different high school—the argument would be weakened. 
 Let’s look at another example to highlight the importance of diversity 
with increased sample size:
 Jason’s German car was a lemon and so was Fred’s. 
 So, Dirk’s German car is probably a lemon, too. 
If Fred and Jason both owned Volkswagens and Dirk owned a BMW, the argu-
ment is very weak. If Jason owned a Volkswagen and Fred owned a BMW, the 
argument is stronger (though still weak) because we have a slightly better case 
and more evidence for our claim about Dirk’s German car. 
 If we increase the sample size, the importance of diversity becomes all 
the more apparent:
 Jason’s German car was a lemon and so was Fred’s, Joe’s, Roy’s, and Bob’s. 
 So, Dirk’s German car is probably a lemon, too. 

308 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
If they all owned Volkswagens, the argument is very weak. If Jason owned a 
Volkswagen, Fred owned a BMW, Roy owned a Mercedes, and Bob owned a 
Porsche, the argument would be stronger (though still perhaps weak because 
the number of individual cars is still small). The argument would be stronger 
because the diversity of German cars in the sample makes the claim about a 
particular German car more likely. 
 A ﬁ nal consideration in evaluating the strength of an argument from 
analogy is the  speciﬁ city of the conclusion relative to the premises;  that is, we don’t 
want to claim too much. The broader and less speciﬁ c the conclusion is, the 
stronger the argument is. In the volleyball example, the conclusion, “Heather 
must also play volleyball,” is narrow and speciﬁ c, particularly considering the 
evidence offered by the premises. We could increase the strength of the argu-
ment by instead concluding, “Heather must have played a game of volleyball 
at some time,” or “Heather may also play volleyball,” or, even better, “Heather 
may have played a game of volleyball at some time.” 
 To sum up, consider these things in evaluating the strength of an argument 
from analogy:
•   the truth of the premises 
•   the relevance of the similarities 
•   the number of relevant similarities 
•   the relevance of dissimilarities 
•   the number of relevant dissimilarities 
•   the diversity of the sample, especially with increased sample size 
•   the speciﬁ city of the conclusion relative to the premises  
 EXERCISE 11.6 
 Consider each of the following arguments from analogy. For the purposes of 
this exercise, assume that all the information is true. In each case, rank the argu-
ment along a continuum from weak to strong. Use numbers from 1 to 10 for 
your ranking, with 1 being extremely weak and 10 being extremely strong. Be 
prepared to justify your rankings. 
 1.   If you can learn to hit a baseball, you can learn to speak a foreign language 
ﬂ uently. They both take practice. 
 2.   Life is just like chess. It’s a complicated game, but you can win if you learn 
the rules and cheat a little. 
 3.   Taking care of your body is like taking care of your car. Preventive 
maintenance and a yearly inspection are required. 
 4.   My father did an excellent job of balancing the family budget, so they 
should let him try to balance the city budget. 
 5.   My brother changed the oil in my Chevy, so he can probably change the oil 
in your Ford. 

 
Induction and Analogy 
309
 6.   My brother changed the oil in my Chevy, so he can probably change the 
brakes on your BMW. 
 7.   Alex Rodriguez is a gifted athlete and a great baseball player who is inter-
ested in golf. So, with lots of practice, he could probably play golf fairly well. 
 8.   You like lobster and other seafood, and king crab legs taste like lobster. So, 
you would probably like king crab legs. 
 9.   When car dealers charge a lot of money for an automobile, people often 
assume it must be of higher quality than less expensive models. So, if 
Wexford College raises its tuition, people will think it’s a better school. 
 10.   In “real life,” Jerry Seinfeld must be just like the character Jerry Seinfeld on 
the show  Seinfeld. After all, the character is based on the person, and they 
have the same name. (Think carefully about this one.) 
 EXERCISE 11.7 
   1.   Read Judith Jarvis Thomson’s article “A Defense of Abortion” in  Philosophy 
and Public Affairs 1 (1971), pp. 47–66. Evaluate the argument from analogy 
that she offers. Is it weak, strong, or somewhere in between? Be prepared to 
give reasons in support of your evaluation. 
  2.   The First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution says, “Congress shall make no 
law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise 
thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right 
of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for 
a redress of grievances.” Construct an argument from analogy either for or 
against free speech in cyberspace on the basis of the First Amendment. Does 
your argument apply to pornography? Does it apply to “hate speech”?  
  3.   Construct your own argument from analogy for or against the death penalty. 
 EXERCISE 11.8 
 I.  Consider the following arguments from analogy. In each case, decide whether 
the argument is weak or strong. If the argument is weak, what makes it weak? 
Are there any ways to add to, or otherwise change, the argument to make it 
stronger? 
 1.   An umpire won’t give you ﬁ rst base for swinging hard in baseball. So, a 
teacher shouldn’t give you a passing grade just for trying hard. 
 2.   Animals are like human beings. They feel pain and pleasure and are part of 
the same chain of evolution. It is wrong to eat human beings, so it must be 
wrong to eat animals. 
 3.   Flag burning is, or can be, a form of political protest. Verbal political protest 
is protected and allowed as free speech. Free speech can be nonverbal, as is 
the case with dance. So, ﬂ ag burning, as a nonverbal form of political protest, 
should be allowed and protected as free speech. 
 4.   A man who carries a fat wallet in his back pocket while strolling through 
a tough neighborhood at night should not be surprised if he is robbed. So, 

310 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
a woman who wears tight and revealing clothes in a bar ﬁ lled with men 
should not be surprised if she is raped. 
 II.  Read each of the following arguments from analogy. Each is followed by four 
additional pieces of information. In each case, decide which of the individual 
pieces of information would strengthen the argument if added and which 
would weaken the argument if added. 
 1.  Luke and Frank are both students at Jefferson High School in a rural area of 
Indiana. Each lives on his family’s farm. Luke plans to work full-time on the 
farm after graduation and has no plans to go to college. So, Frank probably 
has no plans to go to college, either. 
Common Areas of Argument from Analogy
Arguments from analogy are found in 
many areas of study and have numerous 
practical applications. Let’s brieﬂ y con-
sider two: law and ethics.
 
American law has its roots in English 
common law, so legal decisions are often 
made on the basis of precedent. That is to 
say, a judge may often support a current 
decision by appealing to a decision made 
in a similar case at an earlier date. For ex-
ample, in deciding whether the free speech 
guaranteed by the First Amendment applies 
to cyberspace communications, a judge 
would be expected to appeal to earlier and 
analogous free-speech cases. Of course, 
in deciding whether an earlier case is truly 
analogous, we apply our criteria for evalu-
ation. Are there a good number of relevant 
similarities? Are there few, if any, relevant 
dissimilarities? Is the conclusion of the judi-
cial ruling properly speciﬁ c?
 
Arguments from analogy are particularly 
effective in matters of ethics. On the most 
basic level, the Golden Rule instructs, “Do 
unto others as you would have others do 
unto you.” In a sense the message is that 
you should treat others in a way analogous 
to the way you would like to be treated. A 
more involved strategy in moral reasoning 
is to argue that a controversial issue is 
analogous to one that is not controversial. 
Capital punishment is certainly a contro-
versial moral issue. Someone who is against 
capital punishment might argue that it is 
about as moral, and about as effective, 
to put murderers to death as it is to beat 
a child who hits his sister. In her article “A 
Defense of Abortion,” Judith Jarvis Thom-
son argues from analogy in favor of the mo-
rality of abortion. Using a creative scenario, 
Thomson argues that a person would have 
no moral obligation to stay connected to a 
famous violinist who was linked to her kid-
neys without her knowledge or consent. She 
then argues by analogy that a woman simi-
larly has no moral duty to carry her preg-
nancy to term. There are some similarities 
here. Neither the pregnant woman nor the 
woman hooked to the violinist may have 
wanted to be in their respective situations. 
In fact, they may have done everything to 
prevent it. Both have someone of great po-
tential dependent on them. There are also 
dissimilarities. The question is How rele-
vant are they? Does the analogy work? If we 
accept that the woman involuntarily linked 
to the violinist has no moral obligation to 
continue that way, does it follow by anal-
ogy that a pregnant woman has no moral 
obligation to continue her pregnancy?

 
Induction and Analogy 
311
 
   Consider whether each of the following would strengthen or weaken the 
argument:
 a.  Both Luke and Frank have no close relatives who have gone to college. 
 b.  Neither Luke nor Frank has ever traveled outside his home state. 
 c.  Luke is a C student, but Frank is an A student. 
 d.  Luke does not like farming, but Frank does. 
 2.  Lisa and Lauren are identical twins who were separated at birth. Lisa has been 
in trouble with the law for most of her life. So, it’s a good bet that Lauren has 
been in trouble with the law for most of her life. 
 
  Consider whether each of the following would strengthen or weaken the 
argument:
 a.  Lisa and Lauren were both shufﬂ ed from one foster home to another for 
the ﬁ rst eighteen years of their lives.  
 b.  Lisa was adopted and raised by a family in which the parents later di-
vorced. Lauren was adopted and raised by a distant relative whose family 
unit stayed together. 
 c.  Lisa and Lauren have each sought help for substance abuse. 
 d.  Lisa went to elite private schools, whereas Lauren went to public schools. 
 3.  Spartansville and Loyalton are both small cities in the northeastern part of the 
United States with populations under one hundred thousand people. Spar-
tansville has a museum. So, there’s a good chance that Loyalton has a museum. 
 
  Consider whether each of the following would strengthen or weaken the 
argument:
 a.  Spartansville is home to a major university, whereas Loyalton is not. 
 b.  Both cities have a symphony orchestra. 
 c.  Loyalton is having difﬁ culty obtaining funding for its libraries.  
 d.  Spartansville and Loyalton compete for tourists. 
 4.  Al and Dave are both unemployed steelworkers. Al has given up looking for 
work. So, Dave has probably given up looking for work. 
 
  Consider whether each of the following would strengthen or weaken the 
argument:
 a.  Al and Dave are the same age. 
 b.  Al has no family to support, whereas Dave has a sick wife and three chil-
dren. 
 c.  Al recently won the lottery. 
 d.  Al and Dave are both union members. 
 5.  Capital City and Metropolis are both cities of two million people located in 
the southern United States. Capital City has a terrible crime problem. So, it’s 
a good bet that Metropolis has a terrible crime problem, too. 
 
  Consider whether each of the following would strengthen or weaken the 
argument:
 a.  Both cities have high rates of unemployment. 
 b.  Capital City is known as the center of the drug trade in the South. 
 c.  Metropolis has a tough police commissioner and a well-respected police force.  
 d.  Neither city has affordable public housing. 
 

312 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
 Arguing by Analogy 
 So far we have been looking at how to evaluate arguments from analogy, but we 
should also consider how to construct arguments from analogy. As you might 
expect, the criteria for constructing a good argument from analogy are the same 
as those for evaluating an argument from analogy.  A strong argument from anal-
ogy can be very effective. People like comparisons, particularly when the com-
parison relates something difﬁ cult or foreign to something they consider easy or 
familiar. Still, not every position can be defended by an argument from analogy. 
Offering a weak argument from analogy will do more harm than good. 
 Here’s an example: If Parker wanted to explain to a group of students 
why they should study critical thinking, he might argue his point by using an 
analogy to karate. There are many ways in which learning karate and learn-
ing critical thinking are similar. They both require patience and discipline but 
result in greater conﬁ dence and increased self-esteem. They are both used for 
defense and offense. With karate you can defend yourself against attack, and 
you can attack others (though you should do so only when appropriate). With 
critical thinking you can defend your positions against the attacks of those who 
hold other positions, and you can attack the positions of others (though you 
should do so only when appropriate) or put forward a new position. Learn-
ing karate builds on your native abilities but is hard work. You may not always 
understand the reasons for everything involved in the training, even though it 
pays off in the end. In a similar way, learning critical thinking builds on your 
native abilities but is hard work. You may not always understand the reasons 
for everything involved in the training—the concepts, the terminology, the 
exercises, and so on. Most serious students of karate agree that there is much to 
gain and that your effort will be rewarded if you study karate. Therefore, if you 
are serious about studying critical thinking, you will ﬁ nd that there is much to 
gain and that your effort will be rewarded. 
 Here is the argument in more standard form:
 There are important similarities between learning karate and learning criti-
cal thinking. They both require patience and discipline and result in increased 
conﬁ dence and self-esteem. They both build on native abilities but involve hard 
work, of which you may not always immediately see the point. They are both of 
use for offense and defense. 
 Most serious students of karate agree that there is much to gain and that your 
effort will be rewarded if you study karate. 
 Therefore, if you are serious about studying critical thinking, you will ﬁ nd that 
there is much to gain and that your effort will be rewarded. 
Is this a good argument from analogy? Let’s see if it meets the criteria we have 
established. Are the premises true? Yes. Are the similarities relevant? Yes. Just 
consider the difﬁ culties involved in learning the skills of both critical thinking 
and karate and the parallels in the way they are used for defense and offense. 
There are also a good number of similarities, not merely one or two. How 
about dissimilarities? Well, karate is a physical activity used for physical defense 
 We can hardly 
think without 
analogies, com-
parisons, and 
metaphors. 
 —R. S. Jones 

 
Induction and Causal Arguments 
313
and offense, whereas critical thinking is an intellectual activity. That is a big 
difference, but it is not relevant to the point we are making. Another differ-
ence is that learning karate can actually be good for your cardiovascular system, 
whereas we cannot say the same thing about learning critical thinking. What 
about the speciﬁ city of the conclusion with regard to the premises? Does it 
claim too much? “If you are serious about studying critical thinking, you will 
ﬁ nd that there is much to gain and that your effort will be rewarded.” The con-
clusion is not overly speciﬁ c, nor does it claim too much. In fact, it is somewhat 
vague, though not to the point of being a fault. It claims only that  if  you are 
 serious about studying critical thinking, your effort will be  rewarded. In other 
words, if you expend a good deal of effort in studying critical thinking, you will 
ﬁ nd that there is some payback. This is, then, a good argument from analogy. 
 EXERCISE 11.9 
 Construct your own argument from analogy for each of the following. Decide 
and explain whether it is a good or a bad argument. 
 1.  Argue that Barbara would be a good mayor of her small town because she is a 
good employer. 
 2.  Argue that Mr. Sanders would be a good health-science teacher because he is 
a good football coach. 
 3.  Argue that Jezebel would be a good actress because she lives a life based on 
lies and deceit. 
 4.  Argue that Brad Pitt would be a good president because he is a good actor. 
 5.  Argue that Sam would be a bad police ofﬁ cer because he was a bad marine.  
 
 INDUCTION AND CAUSAL ARGUMENTS 
 Humans are a curious life form. Our very nature drives us to search for 
knowledge. One of the most basic, most common, and most important 
kinds of knowledge we seek is knowledge of  cause and effect.  Why didn’t 
my alarm clock go off when it was supposed to? Why is there no hot water 
left for my shower? We tend to look for causal connections when we are 
surprised (pleasantly or unpleasantly) by what occurs. We want to know the 
cause of what happened. In the absence of a good account, we will often 
accept a bad one—as in the case of superstition and mythology. In contrast, 
cats don’t care about cause and effect. If a ball rolls by a cat, she’ll chase after 
it if she’s in the mood, but she’ll never look to see where it came from. On 
the other hand, if a ball unexpectedly rolled by you, you’d ﬁ rst look to see 
whence it came. 7  

314 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
 Roughly speaking, a  cause  is that which brings about a change, that which 
produces an effect. The relationship of cause and effect, however, doesn’t come 
into play only when we’re surprised by something. We count on it all the time 
without realizing it. For example, you may rarely think much about the law 
of gravity, the law that tells us there is a cause-and-effect relationship making 
heavy objects fall to the ground. Something might have to unexpectedly ﬂ oat 
upward to get you thinking about gravity. You may count on your car starting 
every morning. But how often do you think about all the cause-and-effect 
relationships involved in that occurring? 
 Our focus here is on inductive arguments that try to identify a cause-
and-effect relationship. This kind of argument is notoriously difﬁ cult. When 
we search for the cause of a certain effect, we are looking to identify a cer-
tain relationship between two things or events. What  is that relationship? 
Certainly, the cause has to come before the effect, but, as we learned in 
Chapter 6 with the fallacy of questionable cause, not every event that  precedes 
another  causes the other. To a certain extent, that is just common sense, yet it 
is surprising how prone we are to commit the fallacy anyway. One piece of 
supporting evidence for a cause-and-effect relationship between two things 
or events is that one thing regularly comes before the other. For example, 
every time you let go of your coffee mug, the coffee mug falls to the ﬂ oor. 
So, you assume there is a cause-and-effect relationship at work between the 
release of the heavy object and its falling to the ground. To take another 
example, one that philosopher David Hume was fond of, every time you 
have seen one billiard ball strike another, it has caused the other to move. 
So, you assume that there is a cause-and-effect relationship there. You have 
witnessed the same pairing of events over and over again—it is no mere co-
incidence. But, Hume asks us, when you think about it, what have you really 
witnessed? Just the pairing of two events, one billiard ball striking the other 
CALVIN AND HOBBES © Watterson. Reprinted with permission of Universal Press Syndicate. All rights reserved.

 
Induction and Causal Arguments 
315
and then the other billiard ball moving. You have witnessed what Hume 
called “constant conjunction.” The two events always happen one before the 
other—they are “constantly conjoined.” You never really see any separate 
things that you could call “cause” and “effect.” You never see “necessary con-
nection” or “causal power.” 
 We don’t have to fully agree with Hume to get his point; it is tough to 
be certain about the cause-and-effect relationships we take for granted. They 
could simply be the result of coincidence. To make this same point, philosopher 
Bertrand Russell asks you to consider yourself in the position of a chicken on 
a farm. Every day that you can remember, the farmer’s wife has approached 
you and then fed you. You have come to associate the two in terms of cause 
and effect (even though chickens don’t really think this way). But then comes 
the day when the farmer’s wife approaches you and doesn’t feed you. Instead, 
she wrings your neck. The moral of the story is that we need to be careful in 
assuming a cause-and-effect relationship between two things. 
 As we saw, Hume introduced the issue of trying to understand the re-
lationship of cause and effect. That’s a tough issue to settle and, thankfully, is 
not our concern here. Instead, we want to look at arguments about particular 
relationships of cause and effect and learn how to evaluate them. As it turns 
out, it is easier to show that something  couldn’t be  the cause of a certain effect 
than it is to prove what  is the cause. 
 Let’s take a look at arguments of cause and effect. We should note that 
not all causal arguments contain the word  cause.  Other causal terms include 
 produces, is responsible for, affects, makes, changes,  and  contributes to.  Such arguments 
come in two broad types: (1) arguments about the cause of a single instance 
and (2) arguments about a general relationship. 
 Here’s an example of an argument about a single instance:
 Megan’s car wouldn’t start this morning, and she hasn’t replaced the battery 
since she bought the car six years ago. 
 So, it is probably a dead battery that caused the car not to start. 
Here’s an example of an argument about a general relationship:
 The Surgeon General has found that there is a strong link between smoking 
cigarettes and getting lung cancer. 
 So, smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer. 
In each case, it should be clear that the argument is inductive. The prem-
ises provide evidence (strong evidence) for the conclusion. The conclusion 
does not follow with strict necessity from the premises. It is always at least 
possible that the premises are true and the conclusion is false. Given what the 
argument says, it is at least possible that the car’s alternator is shot and the bat-
tery is ﬁ ne. Of course, there would be ways to investigate the matter further, 
but the argument, as it stands, does not do so. Given only what the second 
argument says, there is no guarantee that smoking is the cause of lung cancer. 
Two things can be linked without one causing the other. 
 Nor is it reason-
able to conclude, 
merely because 
one event, in one 
instance, precedes 
another, that one 
is the cause, the 
other the effect. 
 —David Hume 

316 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
 There is a very practical reason why most causal arguments are inductive. 
It is very difﬁ cult to take every conceivable possibility into account when 
attempting to form an argument concerning cause and effect. Still, some causal 
arguments are intended to be deductive. Here is one that we mentioned in 
Chapter 3:
 Whenever iron is exposed to oxygen, it rusts. 
 This iron pipe has been exposed to oxygen. 
 Therefore, it will rust. 
Certain relationships of cause and effect have been well established. Not only 
has iron exposed to oxygen rusted repeatedly, but there is also sound scientiﬁ c 
understanding of why this occurs. Aside from Hume’s skeptical concerns about 
observing cause and effect, this is a very well-established causal relationship. 
 Let’s consider arguments about general causal relationships. When speak-
ing about causality in a population, we usually mean that X causes a higher 
rate of   Y in the population. We do not usually mean that every individual 
who uses X will get Y. Consider, for example, the argument that smoking 
cigarettes causes cancer. This does not mean, or intend to claim, that everyone 
who smokes will get cancer. Rather, it means that smoking cigarettes results 
in a higher rate of cancer in people who smoke as opposed to people who 
don’t smoke. Some people who do not smoke do get cancer. And some rare 
individuals may smoke cigarettes every day until they die at one hundred years 
old without ever getting cancer. 
 As is the case with all arguments, deductive and inductive, we need true 
premises for our causal arguments to be of any value. In arguing for a cause-
and-effect relationship, we should base our premises on careful observation. 
 Selective attention and memory  can be problems here. That is, focusing attention 
on, or recalling from memory, only certain examples distorts the sample. Con-
sider the following example:
 Every time we have a full moon, people behave strangely. 
 So, the full moon must cause the strange behavior. 
How might a person be mistaken in this conclusion as a result of selective 
attention or memory? It could be that he is very alert for any signs of strange be-
havior every time the moon is full and is quick to interpret behavior as “strange” 
at those times. But if he thought about it more carefully, he would recall that 
there were many times that the moon was full and yet he observed no one be-
having strangely. Thinking about it some more, he may realize that he has wit-
nessed just as much strange behavior on nights when the moon was not full. 
 Another danger in forming premises for causal arguments is relying on 
anecdotal evidence—that is, what others tell us. As we just saw, sometimes we 
cannot trust our own observations as a result of selective attention or memory. 
This is all the more true when it comes to the observations of others. Oth-
ers are also subject to misreporting observations on the basis of their own 

 
Induction and Causal Arguments 
317
selective attention or memory. Others may also have reasons to distort the 
truth. They may have something to gain by deceiving us. As a general rule, we 
need to be careful and critical when basing causal arguments on the anecdotal 
evidence of others. 
 Of course, we must admit that we cannot observe everything for our-
selves. Thankfully, there are experts who investigate the causal connections 
between things the rest of us do not have the time, money, or expertise to ex-
plore. Scientists, for example, make use of experimental and control groups for 
determining causality. To see if chemical X prevents disease Y, a scientist gives 
chemical X to group one—the  experimental group —and does not give chemi-
cal X to group two—the  control group.  By keeping all conditions except the 
intake of chemical X the same for the two groups, the scientist can isolate the 
effects caused by chemical X. It is common for such experiments to initially be 
done on laboratory animals. Human subjects complicate the matter because a 
human subject who believes that the drug she is given will prevent or cure her 
disease will actually have a better chance of prevention or cure. This is known 
as the  placebo effect.  A  placebo  is a pill that does not contain any drug (or 
active ingredient). Often it is just a sugar pill. With human subjects, then, the 
experimental group is given the drug and the control group is given a placebo. 
To ensure that the results are not compromised, the study should be double-
blind. In a  double-blind study,  neither the subjects nor the experimenters 
know who is receiving the treatment and who is receiving the placebo until 
the experiment is ﬁ nished. 
 Correlation and Cause 
 Sometimes two things or events are clearly associated or linked: Where you ﬁ nd 
X, you will often ﬁ nd Y. A relationship such as this, in which two things are 
frequently, or even constantly, found together, is called a  correlation.  In a cor-
relation two things share a mutual relationship; where one is found, the other 
is often, or always, found. In contrast, in the relationship of causation, one thing 
 produces  or brings about the other. Sometimes a correlation is an indicator of a 
cause-and-effect relationship. For example, the high rate of lung cancer deaths 
among smokers led to the investigation and discovery of a causal link between 
them. We must be careful, though. Most correlations do not indicate a causal 
relationship between the two things or events correlated. For example, there 
is a strong correlation between shoe size and average ability in math among 
children. The larger the shoe size, the greater the average ability in math. For 
example, on average, children who wear a size 8 shoe score higher on the same 
exam than those who wear a size 6 shoe. Does this imply that having large feet 
causes an increase in mathematical ability? Or does it suggest that mathemati-
cal ability causes feet to grow? Of course not. There is an underlying explana-
tion for this phenomenon. A child’s age is correlated with both shoe size and 
mathematical ability. As a child grows older, both shoe size and mathematical 
ability tend to increase, but neither one causes the other. 

318 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
 Maybe the previous example was obvious, but there are correlations that 
are more easily and more convincingly mistaken as cause and effect. In fact, 
one of the biggest problems with popular news reports is their tendency to 
make a new study sound as if it proves a cause-and-effect relationship between 
two things, when all the study actually does is report a signiﬁ cant correlation. 
To critically evaluate such reports, we must grasp the nature of correlation. 
 The correlation of two things or events, their mutual presence or absence, 
can be positive or negative. If the two things are found together to exactly the 
same extent as they are found apart, there is no correlation. A  positive correla-
tion, one that indicates two things are found together more than 50 percent of 
the time,  may indicate a causal connection between one thing and the other. 
A  negative correlation,  one that indicates two things are found together less than 
50 percent of the time,  may indicate that one thing prevents the other. The 
important question is this: Is the correlation signiﬁ cant? The answer depends, 
in part, on the size of the sample. 
 The sample must be large enough to put our observations within an ac-
ceptable margin of error. For example, suppose we notice that of three people 
we know who took vitamin C all winter long, two never became sick. That is a 
strong correlation—nearly 67 percent—between taking vitamin C and remain-
ing healthy through the winter. But the sample of just three people is much 
too small for the correlation to be signiﬁ cant. If we did a controlled study using 
two thousand subjects and found that 67 percent of those who took vitamin C 
 remained healthy through the winter, we might have a signiﬁ cant correlation. 
Summary of Key Points on Cause and Correlation
1.  It is easier to show that something 
couldn’t be the cause of a certain effect 
than it is to prove what is the cause.
2.  Not all causal arguments contain the 
word cause.
3.  When speaking about causality in an 
entire population, we usually mean that 
X results in a higher rate of  Y in the pop-
ulation, not that every individual who 
uses X will get Y.
4.  When we are speaking of a cause, we 
do not always mean to suggest that it is 
a necessary or a sufﬁ cient condition for 
bringing about the effect.
5.  Sometimes two things or events are 
clearly associated or linked. Where you 
ﬁ nd X, you will often or always ﬁ nd Y. 
A mutual relationship such as this, 
in which two things are frequently or 
invariably found together, is called a 
correlation.
6.  Sometimes, but not always, a corre-
lation is a sign of a cause-and-effect 
relationship.
7.  The correlation of two things or events, 
their mutual presence or absence, can 
be positive or negative. If they are found 
together to exactly the same extent 
as they are found apart, there is no 
correlation.
8.  Is the correlation signiﬁ cant? The answer 
depends, in part, on the size of the 
sample.
9.  Correlation can always be a result of 
mere coincidence, and most of the time 
it is.

 
Induction and Causal Arguments 
319
We would have to compare it with the correlation between  not taking vitamin C 
and remaining healthy through the winter. If we found that 66 percent of those 
who did not take vitamin C remained healthy through the winter, our corre-
lation would no longer be useful as evidence for establishing cause and effect. 
Nearly the same percentage of people remained healthy without vitamin C. 
 Let’s suppose, however, that our study revealed that only 52 percent of 
those who did not take vitamin C remained healthy through the winter. Then 
the correlation of 67 percent would be good evidence to support the claim 
that vitamin C prevents illness. If the study were not properly controlled, this 
would not in itself, no matter how large and representative the sample, be con-
clusive evidence of a cause-and-effect relationship. Why? Because something 
else might be independently correlated with both the vitamin C intake and 
the good health. For example, the correlation between health and vitamin C 
intake could be the result of each being further correlated with proper rest. 
Perhaps proper rest promotes health and prevents illness, and people who get 
proper rest tend to do other things they think might promote health and pre-
vent illness, such as taking vitamin C. 
 We must always be on our guard against arguments that base their conclu-
sions about cause and effect on correlations. Correlation can always be a result of 
mere coincidence, and most of the time it is. When a correlation is not absolute, 
neither 0 percent nor 100 percent, we should be suspicious. The discovery of 
a signiﬁ cant correlation can be the beginning of an investigation, but it should 
never be the end of one, particularly when arguing about cause and effect. 
 EXERCISE 11.10 
 I.  Examine the following claims. In each case, decide whether what is being 
 reported is good or bad evidence for a cause-and-effect relationship. 
 1.   Most people who are over the age of seventy do not feel comfortable with 
computers. 
 2.   All ten of the people who ate the ﬁ sh at the buffet were sick the next day.  
 3.   Most National Hockey League Players are Caucasians. 
 4.   Eighty percent of students who studied more than ten hours for the exam 
earned a grade of B or higher, whereas only 5 percent of students who 
studied less than ten hours for the exam earned a grade of B or higher. 
 5.   Most people who quit smoking report at least some weight gain. 
 6.  All ﬁ fty-two Republicans in the Senate voted for the new bill. 
 7.   Ninety-three out of one hundred people who cut down their calorie intake 
and exercised more lost weight.  
 8.   All twelve of the students who went on the camping trip came back with a 
cold. 
 9.  All fourteen players on the basketball team are over six feet tall. 
 10.   None of the twenty experimental subjects who took the new ﬂ u shot 
caught the ﬂ u all season. 

320 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
 II.  For each example, decide what questions you would ask and what additional 
information, if any, you would need to tell if there is a cause-and-effect relation-
ship, a correlation, or no relationship. 
 1.   Gomez became violently ill after eating the ﬁ sh he caught under the Pierce 
Street Bridge. 
 2.   Whenever the space shuttle is launched in Florida, we have nasty weather in 
Pennsylvania.  
 3.  Chewing tobacco causes mouth cancer. 
 4.  Silicone breast implants cause connective tissue disease. 
 5.  People who drink vegetable juice every day never seem to get sick. 
 6.   More acts of violence are committed by children who watch professional 
wrestling than by children who do not watch professional wrestling. 
 7.  Students who sit in the front row tend to get higher-than-average grades. 
 8.  Minimizing salt in your diet can bring down high blood pressure. 
 9.  Dioxin in the soil leads to cancer in the population. 
 10.  Drinking two glasses of red wine per day will give you a healthier heart. 
 A FEW WORDS ABOUT PROBABILITY 
 Why discuss probability in a chapter on inductive reasoning? The answer is 
that there is an important connection between probability and induction. All 
inductive arguments are a matter of probability because they are not certain. 
They do not guarantee the truth of their conclusions, but only offer evidence 
that the conclusion is probably true. 
 We need to clarify what we mean by  probability because there are several 
different senses of the word. Consider these three examples:
 There is a pretty high probability that I’ll go to the beach sometime this summer. 
 There is a 90 percent probability that the operation will be successful. 
 There is a 50 percent probability of getting tails on a fair coin toss. 
 The ﬁ rst example, “There is a pretty high probability that I’ll go to the 
beach sometime this summer,” illustrates  epistemic probability,  which expresses 
how likely we think an event is given other things we believe. This is the kind 
of probability we assign to statements we believe but to which we cannot assign 
a probability on any truly mathematical basis. Knowing that I want to go to the 
beach sometime this summer and believing with good reason that I’ll have time 
to do so, I can rationally assert that there is a high probability that I will indeed 
go to the beach. Along the same lines, we can also assign low probabilities to 
certain events. For example, “Considering the way Sid and Nancy were arguing 
last night, I’d say there’s a pretty low probability that they will get married.” 
 The second example, “There is a 90 percent probability that the operation will 
be successful,” illustrates  relative frequency probability,  which takes information 
 Almost all human 
life depends on 
probabilities. 
 —Voltaire 

 
A Few Words about Probability 
321
about a group as a whole and applies it to an individual case. The application is 
based on accumulated data, derived from what has already been observed in the 
group. In this sense it is related to the statistical arguments discussed earlier in this 
chapter. For example, a surgeon may inform her patient that ninety out of one 
hundred of her patients who had this surgery found it improved their condition. 
Of course, it is always possible to improve the accuracy of a prediction based on 
relative frequency probability by increasing the size of the sample or by being more 
speciﬁ c about the group to which it applies. Perhaps the surgery has a 90 percent 
success rate with patients in general, but a 98 percent success rate for patients under 
thirty-ﬁ ve and only an 81 percent success rate for patients over eighty. What is the 
probability of an infant’s surviving the ﬁ rst year of life? More than 99 percent in 
the United States in general, but less than that in some inner-city areas. It is greater 
than 99 percent for infants with no apparent problems at birth, and far less than 
99 percent for infants with certain kinds of congenital birth defects. 
 The third example, “There is a 50 percent probability of getting tails on 
a fair coin toss,” illustrates  a priori probability —statements that have odds 
that can be calculated prior to, and independent of, sensory observation. Even 
if I have never seen a coin before, you can explain the nature of the coin toss, 
and I will be able to tell you that the probability of the coin coming up tails is 
50 percent and the probability of its coming up heads is likewise 50 percent. 
The same would be true of a deck of cards. Even if I have never seen one, you 
can explain to me that there is a total of ﬁ fty-two cards with thirteen different 
values and four different suits. I can then tell you that the chance of any one 
particular card’s being drawn is 1 in 52, or 1.92 percent. The chances of an ace’s 
being drawn are 4 in 52, or 1 in 13, or 7.7 percent. 
 EXERCISE 11.11 
 Decide whether each of the following is an example of epistemic probability, 
relative frequency probability, or a priori probability. 
 1.  The probability of a random student passing the next exam without studying. 
 2.  Your chances of picking the winning number in the state lottery. 
 Probabilities 
direct the conduct 
of the wise man. 
 —Cicero 
Could You Predict the Weather?
Some weather forecasters give a “5-degree guarantee.” They will 
“guarantee” that they can predict tomorrow’s high temperature within 
5 degrees. This sounds impressive until you consider that this means 
within a range of eleven. If the weatherperson predicts 51 degrees, she 
is right if the high temperature falls anywhere within the range of 46 to 
56 degrees. You don’t have to be a weather forecaster to make that 
kind of prediction most days.

322 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
 3.  The probability of a hurricane hitting the Northeast in October. 
 4.  The probability of your mother going to a Kanye West concert. 
 5.  The odds of the horse you bet on winning the Kentucky Derby. 
 6.  The probability of being dealt a royal ﬂ ush in poker. 
 7.  The chances of a random student getting an A in this course. 
 8.  The likelihood of your getting a perfect score in bowling. 
 9.  The odds of your favorite team winning the Super Bowl. 
 10.  The chances of rolling a 6 with two standard dice. 
 
 A Closer Look at a Priori Probability 
 Sometimes we want to know the probability of a situation involving two events. 
For example, let’s say you need to draw  either  a 7  or  a king from a full deck of 
ﬁ fty-two cards. What are the chances? The probability of either of two events 
occurring is the sum of their probabilities. In other words, add them: The odds 
of drawing a 7 are 1 in 13, or 7.7 percent, and the odds of drawing a king are 
also 1 in 13, or 7.7 percent. So, the chances of drawing either a 7 or a king 
are 1/13 + 1/13 = 2/13, or 15.4 percent. The probability of  both  of two independent 
events occurring is substantially less, however. Let’s say that this time you have 
to draw a 7 from a deck of ﬁ fty-two cards and then draw a king from another 
deck of ﬁ fty-two cards. What are the odds? The probability of both of two 
events occurring is the product of their probabilities. In other words, multiply 
them: The odds of drawing the 7 are 1 in 13, and the chances of drawing the 
king are also 1 in 13. So, the chances of drawing the 7 from one deck and then 
drawing the king from the other deck are 1/13 × 1/13 = 1/169, or 0.59 percent—less 
than 1 percent. 
 What are the chances of drawing a 7 from a deck of ﬁ fty-two if you have 
just drawn a 7 from the deck and randomly put it back? As we saw, the odds 
of drawing the 7 in the ﬁ rst case were 1 in 13, or 7.7 percent; but you may be 
surprised to ﬁ nd that the odds of randomly drawing the 7 again are also 1 in 
13, or 7.7 percent. If you thought the odds were much worse, you committed 
the  gambler’s fallacy —the mistaken belief that a past event has an impact on 
a current random event. In this example, the past event was the ﬁ rst draw of 
the 7 and the current random event was the second draw. The question wasn’t 
What are the odds of getting a 7 on two successive draws of the cards? The 
question was only What are the odds of getting a 7 on the second draw of the 
cards? Assuming the 7 card was returned to the deck, the past draw has no 
causal effect on the present one. The cards are dumb. They don’t know which 
one was drawn last. 
 Consider the case of betting on a roulette wheel. On a standard roulette 
wheel, there are thirty-eight spaces; eighteen of the spaces numbered 1–36 are 
black, and eighteen are red. There are also two green spaces numbered 0 and 
00. The chances of red coming in are 47.37 percent, and the chances are the 
same for black, 47.37 percent. If you observe that red has come in twice in a 
 The rules of prob-
able inference 
are the most 
difﬁ cult part of 
logic, but also the 
most useful. 
 —Bertrand Russell 
 Chance favors the 
prepared mind. 
 —Louis Pasteur 

 
A Few Words about Probability 
323
row, should you then put your money on black for the next spin of the wheel? 
No, there is no good reason to because there is no causal connection between 
one spin and another. The odds are not, as you might think, in your favor. 
There is still only a 47.37 percent chance of black coming in. Each spin of the 
wheel is a random event, unaffected by previous events—including previous 
spins of the wheel. What if you wanted to bet on your lucky number, say 15, 
but the wheel just came in 15 on the spin before you could get your bet down? 
Does that mean there is a good reason not to bet on 15 this time? Aside from 
the nonexistence of lucky numbers and the terrible odds of any one particu-
lar number coming in (only 2.63 percent), there is no reason not to bet on 
15. The chances of 15 coming in are the same for every spin of the wheel—
2.63 percent—even when the number just came in. 
 “But what about the law of averages?” you might object! Don’t things 
even out over the long run? Yes, they tend to do that. You might be surprised 
just how long the long run is, though. With thirty-eight different numbers, 
we’re talking about a very large number of spins of the roulette wheel before 
we are likely to see an even distribution of the numbers that come in. It will 
be easier to grasp this if we stick with a simple example that has only two 
possible outcomes—for example, a coin toss. The toss of a fair coin will result 
in 50 percent heads and 50 percent tails over the long run. No one would be 
shocked to see 60 percent heads if we tossed the coin ﬁ ve times—that would 
mean three heads and two tails. We wouldn’t be too surprised even if it were 
ten tosses—six heads and four tails—or twenty tosses—twelve heads and eight 
tails. It would be more surprising to toss the coin one hundred times and 
get sixty heads and forty tails, but this is not impossible or unheard of, even 
with a fair coin. The point is, according to the  law of large numbers,  the 
proximity of theoretically predicted and actual percentages tends to increase 
as the sample grows. In other words, the bigger the sample, the closer the ac-
tual results are likely to be to the predicted results. If we tossed the coin ten 
thousand times, it would be surprising if we didn’t have something very close 
to a 50-50 split. But it would also be surprising if we did have exactly that. An 
exact match between actual and theoretically predicted percentages is more 
likely with a smaller sample. This is easy to see, in that there is a better chance 
of having a 50-50 split after two coin tosses (there is a 50 percent chance of 
this) than there is after ten tosses. The same reasoning can be applied to spins 
Ya Say It’s Your Birthday . . .
Surprising odds: If you are sitting in a classroom with twenty-three 
other people, what are the odds that two people share the same birth-
day (excluding year)? Believe it or not, the odds are greater than 1 
in 2. Try it out.

324 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
of the roulette wheel. The chance of black coming in is just under 50 percent, 
at 47.37 percent, but strange things do happen. In 1918 in Monte Carlo, black 
came up twenty-six consecutive times on the roulette wheel. 
 There are different ways to assess the value of making a bet, ranging 
from the objective to the subjective.  Expected value  is essentially the payoff 
or loss you can expect from making a bet. Without getting heavily into the 
mathematics of it, we can fairly easily eyeball the expected value of a particular 
bet to see if it is positive, negative, or neutral. For example, if ﬁ ve hundred $1 
chances are being sold for a rafﬂ e in which the ﬁ rst and only prize is a bicycle 
worth $200, buying a rafﬂ e ticket is a pretty bad bet in terms of expected value. 
In fact, it has a negative expected value. How can you tell? Consider what 
would happen if you could somehow manage to buy all the rafﬂ e tickets. The 
good news is that you would be guaranteed to win. The bad news is that you 
would have spent $500 to win a $200 bicycle. If there were only two hundred 
$1 tickets sold for the rafﬂ e, the bet would have a neutral expected value of 0. 
If you bought all two hundred tickets, you would win a $200 bicycle. If there 
were only one hundred $1 tickets sold for the rafﬂ e, this would be a good bet 
with a positive expected value. If you could manage to buy all the tickets, you 
would have spent only $100 and be guaranteed to win a $200 bicycle. Un-
fortunately, bets with positive or even neutral expected values are rare. Most 
bets have a negative expected value. This gives “the house” the edge, making 
it proﬁ table for it to offer the bet. That is no big secret. Most people know the 
odds are against them when they make a bet or buy a rafﬂ e ticket. But they do 
it anyway! Why? 
 They do it because it’s fun and the bets are worth it to the people making 
them, even when they know that it is not a sound investment of their money. 
Perhaps they get some thrill out of the possibility of turning their $1 into a 
$200 bicycle. Maybe the proﬁ ts from the sale of the rafﬂ e tickets go to support 
a good cause, and that alone makes it worthwhile. What we see illustrated here 
is  relative value —the value a bet has in relation to an individual’s own needs, 
preferences, and resources. If spending $1 on a rafﬂ e ticket is not going to dam-
age your personal ﬁ nances and if you ﬁ nd it fun and worthwhile to have the 
chance of winning, it may make perfect sense for you to buy the ticket. The 
ticket represents a chance to win and has a high relative value. A second ticket, 
however, is not likely to have a relative value that is quite as high. The tenth 
ticket will likely have even less relative value. The more money you spend on 
tickets, the less relative value the tickets have. You had a chance to win with 
the purchase of the ﬁ rst ticket, and buying ten tickets hasn’t increased your 
 Wise venturing 
is the most com-
mendable part of 
human prudence. 
 —Marquis of 
Halifax 
Out for some Italian food one night, Yogi Berra was asked if he wanted 
his pizza cut into four slices or eight slices. His response: “Better make 
it four. I don’t think I could eat eight.”8
Critical Thinking Lapse

 
A Few Words about Probability 
325
odds enough to warrant their purchase. The relative value of the ﬁ rst ticket 
was enough to override the negative expected value; but with each ticket you 
purchase, the ability for relative value to override expected value gets less and 
less. This is a phenomenon known as  diminishing marginal value:  as quantity 
increases, relative value tends to decrease. 
 Diminishing marginal value (sometimes called  diminishing marginal utility ) 
is a basic economic concept, which your own experience will conﬁ rm. If you 
are hungry, one slice of pizza will have a very high relative value, probably 
making its cost worthwhile. But consider what happens as the number of slices 
you buy increases. The relative value tends to go down, doesn’t it? The second 
slice and maybe the third will also have a moderately high relative value, but 
likely less than the ﬁ rst one, which calmed your rumbling stomach. If you get 
to a ﬁ fth, sixth, or seventh slice, not only will you be a glutton, but you will also 
ﬁ nd that each slice has less and less value to you—less and less relative value. 
 Let’s consider how these value concepts apply to the lottery. Multistate 
lotteries, such as Powerball, have become increasingly popular in recent years. 
It costs one dollar to play one game of Powerball. To win you need to pick ﬁ ve 
numbers in any order and then pick one number exactly, the Powerball. The lot-
tery ofﬁ cials tell us that the chances of winning are 1 in 146,107,962. The impli-
cation is that there are just that many possible number combinations, given the 
rules of the game. So, does playing Powerball have a positive or a negative ex-
pected value? That depends both on what the jackpot is and on how many tick-
ets are sold. Let’s say the jackpot reaches $100 million. That sounds pretty good, 
but there is a negative expected value because you would have to spend more 
than $146 million to play all possible combinations and guarantee a win. 9  
 If the jackpot hits $150 million, the expected value could actually be 
positive. You could spend a little over $146 million and be guaranteed to hit 
the jackpot. Still, the expected value could be negative, depending on how 
many tickets are sold. If you are the only person allowed to buy tickets for this 
particular drawing (something not likely to happen), you will be guaranteed 
to win and the expected value will be positive—it is a good bet. If others are 
The Prisoner’s Dilemma
Two thieves are taken into custody and 
held in separate areas. They are given the 
following options:
1.  Confess and implicate your partner. If he 
does not confess, you go free and he will 
get ten years. If you confess and he also 
confesses, you will each get two years.
2.  Don’t confess. If neither one of you con-
fesses, you will get six months because 
we have enough evidence to tie you both 
to a different crime. If you don’t confess 
and your partner does and implicates 
you, you will get ten years.
What is the more rational strategy for a 
prisoner in this situation to adopt? What 
would you do?

326 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
playing, too (as you can be sure they will), the expected value will go down in 
proportion to the number of tickets sold. For example, if 300 million tickets 
are sold, there is a fair chance that there will be two winners who share the 
jackpot, that is, split it. D’oh! The bad news is that even if you alone hit the 
jackpot, you will have to split the prize money with the taxman. What was 
$150 million will soon be $75 million or less; and according to the rules of 
most lotteries, if you want it all at once rather than over a period of twenty 
years, you will get yet less. 
 It looks like any way you slice it, Powerball is a bad bet in terms of expected 
value. Most people know this. Still, even many of those who know it’s a bad 
bet will buy a ticket. Why? Because the relative value of one ticket is probably 
enough to override the negative expected value. For one dollar you can dream 
of winning a huge jackpot, telling off the boss, quitting your job, and dumping 
your husband for an Ashton Kutcher look-alike. Still, people don’t generally buy 
tons of Powerball tickets because the relative value goes down with each ticket 
purchased. Diminishing marginal value, remember? Unfortunately, not everyone 
gets the point. Many people travel for hours to a state where Powerball tickets 
are on sale and then proceed to buy hundreds or even thousands of tickets. The 
negative expected value tells us that with every ticket they purchase, they are in 
effect throwing money out the window. For some people it is an obsession, even 
an addiction. One Powerball ticket should be enough for anyone. 
 EXERCISE 11.12 
 I.  Decide whether each of the following has a positive, a negative, or a neutral 
expected value. 
 1.  Any 50-50 lottery, one in which ﬁ rst prize is half the amount collected from 
ticket sales. 
 2.  An even-money $100 bet on a single fair coin toss. 
 3.  Buying one ticket for a rafﬂ e in which there are ten tickets in total, each 
costing $1,000. The prize is a brand-new Mercedes. 
 4.  A $10 bet on red coming in on the next spin of the roulette wheel. 
 5.  Buying ten tickets for a rafﬂ e in which there are ﬁ ve hundred tickets in total, 
each costing $1. The prize is two tickets to a Broadway show. 
 II.  Give your own evaluation of the relative value of the bets in Exercise I. 
 III.  Give your own detailed example of a case of diminishing marginal value. 
 
 SUMMARY 
 1.  This chapter focused on forming and critically evaluating  inductive 
arguments —arguments whose premises are intended to provide support, 
but not conclusive evidence, for the conclusion. In particular, we 

 
Summary 
327
examined four common types:  inductive generalizations, arguments from 
analogy, causal arguments, and  statistical arguments. 
 2.  Inductive arguments do not guarantee their conclusions. We evaluate 
them according to the strength of the support they provide for their 
conclusions. An inductive argument is strong when its premises provide 
evidence that its conclusion is more likely true than false. An inductive 
argument is weak when its premises do  not provide evidence that its 
conclusion is more likely true than false. 
 3.  Among the important indicator words and phrases for inductive argu-
ments are  likely, probably, it’s plausible to suppose that, it’s reasonable to believe 
that, one would expect that, it’s a good bet that, chances are that, and  odds 
are that. 
 4.  An  inductive generalization is an argument that relies on characteristics of 
a sample population to make a claim about the population as a whole. In 
other words, it is an argument that uses evidence about a limited number 
of people or things of a certain type (the  sample population ) to make a 
claim about a larger group of people or things of that type (the  population 
as a whole ). 
 5.  Ask these questions in evaluating an inductive generalization:
 •  Are the premises true? 
 •  Is the sample large enough? (The size of the sample population 
must be sufﬁ cient to justify the conclusion about the population as a 
whole.) 
 •  Is the sample representative? (A  representative sample is like the 
population as a whole in all relevant ways. It should be a mini-version 
of the population as a whole.) 
 6.  A  strong inductive argument has premises that provide evidence that its 
conclusion is more likely true than false. A  cogent inductive argument has all 
true premises and supplies strong support for its conclusion. A  strong and 
reliable argument has premises that provide evidence that its conclusion is 
more likely true than false  and it is an argument that a reasonable person 
 would act or bet on. A  strong but unreliable argument has premises that pro-
vide evidence that its conclusion is more likely true than false,  but it is an 
argument that a reasonable person  would not act or bet on. 
 7.  Polling should be  double-blind; that is, the person taking the poll and 
the person responding should have no information about each other, or 
at least as little as possible. And neither the pollster nor the respondent 
should have any indication of the “right answer.” 
 8.  A  statistical argument argues from premises regarding a percentage of 
a population to a conclusion about an individual member of that 
population or some part of that population. 

328 
CHAPTER 11 Inductive Reasoning
 9.  Like other inductive arguments, statistical arguments are evaluated along 
a continuum of strong to weak. 
 10.  Statistical arguments that approach 50 percent may be strong but are to 
be considered relatively unreliable. 
 11.  The  reference class is the group to which statistics apply. As a rule, the 
more speciﬁ c the reference class is, the better the argument is.  
 12.  An  analogy is a comparison of things based on similarities those things 
share. Whereas analogies simply point out a similarity,  arguments from 
analogy claim that certain similarities are evidence that there is  another 
similarity (or other similarities). 
 13.  Things to consider in evaluating the strength of an argument from 
analogy include the  truth of the premises; the  relevance of the similarities; the 
 number of relevant similarities; the  relevance of dissimilarities; the  number of 
relevant dissimilarities; the  diversity of the sample (especially with increased 
sample size); and the  speciﬁ city of the conclusion relative to the premises. 
 14.  Not all causal arguments contain the word  cause. Other causal terms 
include  produces, is responsible for, and  affects. Such arguments come in two 
broad types: arguments about the cause of a single instance and argu-
ments about a general relationship. 
 15.  Sometimes, two things or events are clearly associated or linked: where 
you ﬁ nd X, you will often ﬁ nd Y. A relationship such as this, in which 
two things are frequently found together, is called a  correlation. Some-
times a correlation is an indicator of a cause-and-effect relationship. A 
 positive correlation, one that indicates two things are found together more 
than 50 percent of the time, may indicate a causal connection between 
one thing and the other. A  negative correlation, one that indicates two 
things are found together less than 50 percent of the time, may indicate 
that one thing prevents the other. The important question is this: Is the 
correlation signiﬁ cant? The answer depends, in part, on the size of the 
sample. 
 16.   Epistemic probability is the kind of probability we assign to things we have 
good reason to believe but to which we cannot assign a probability on 
any truly mathematical basis. 
 17.   Relative frequency probability is the kind of probability that takes information 
about a group as a whole and applies it to an individual case, based on ac-
cumulated data derived from what has already been observed in the group.  
 18.  Statements of  a priori probability have odds that can be calculated prior to, 
and independent of, sensory observation.  
 19.  The  gambler’s fallacy is the mistaken belief that a past event has an impact 
on a current random event. 

 
Summary 
329
 20.  According to the  law of large numbers, the proximity of theoretically pre-
dicted and actual percentages tends to increase as the sample grows. In 
other words, the bigger the sample, the closer the actual results are likely 
to be to the predicted results. 
 21.   Expected value is essentially the payoff or loss you can expect from 
making a bet. 
 22.   Relative value is the value a bet has in relation to an individual’s own 
needs, preferences, and resources. 
 23.   Diminishing marginal value is the principle that as quantity increases, 
relative value tends to decrease. 

330
CHAPTER 12
 FINDING, EVALUATING, 
AND USING SOURCES 
  Other than “oral presentation required,” perhaps no phrase on a syllabus 
throws students into more consternation than “research paper required.” Few 
students look forward to the long, sometimes grueling, often frustrating pro-
cess of ﬁ nding information and incorporating it into a paper. In this chapter 
we show you that research does not have to be an intimidating academic ex-
ercise. Arguments are stronger and more credible when bolstered by support. 
And for a critical thinker—one committed to truth, fairness, and precision—
research also develops the ability to ﬁ nd information, set the record straight, 
and advance the conversation. 
 It may be best to begin with some idea of  why research work is assigned 
in colleges and universities. Obviously, in researching a topic, you discover 
data and opinions that you can use as evidence to support the claims in your 
argument. But conducting research well has implications beyond the imme-
diate success of a single assignment, especially for someone studying critical 
thinking. Doing research lets you practice the skills of ﬁ nding, evaluating, sum-
marizing, and using information—skills necessary in just about every profes-
sion that requires a college degree. Accountants, physicians, lawyers, managers, 
computer experts, teachers—all must keep up with trends in the ﬁ eld, ﬁ nd 
causes and solutions, analyze precedent, collect data, and so forth. The good 
research habits developed in college will show up again in your nonprofes-
sional life as well. Successfully running for local ofﬁ ce, hiring a contractor or 
a lawyer, investing in the stock market, voting, and even deciding what movie 
to go to often depend on your ability to ﬁ nd and evaluate information. In fact, 
it is no exaggeration to say that many of the major decisions in our lives, and 
even some of the minor ones, would be more rewarding if we arrived at them 
only after investigation and study rather than on impulse and whim. 
 Good research can also help you set the record straight and avoid accept-
ing at face value what you hear and read. A politician may convincingly argue 
that her commitment to the environment is above reproach, but simple re-
search into her voting record on bills affecting clean water and air may  suggest 
otherwise. Often in the search for truth, you need to go directly to the primary 
 Research is for-
malized curiosity. 
It is poking and 
prying with a 
 purpose. 
 —Zora Neale 
Hurston 

 
Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources  
331
sources. If you want to know what the Constitution says about possessing 
ﬁ rearms, it might be wise to read the Constitution and not just what has been 
written  about it. Some secondhand sources are highly reliable, fair, and trust-
worthy, but others are sloppy, biased, or even unethical in their quoting, para-
phrasing, and summarizing and, as a result, may relay distorted and inaccurate 
information. Reading the primary sources lets you set the record straight. 
 Just as returning to the primary source can help you see more clearly, 
research can help you correct your own misconceptions and shatter some 
long-cherished assumptions. Often what people have ﬁ rmly accepted as true 
and unassailable has, upon further investigation, been shown to be baseless. 
What you believe, on just about any topic—welfare, culture, crime, religion, 
politics, education—might or might not hold up to objective and thorough in-
vestigation. Research can help clarify fuzzy, vague notions you may have about 
certain topics and can help you analyze a complex issue, including what posi-
tions are held by others and what evidence is generally provided in support 
or rebuttal of claims. Research allows you to become something of an expert 
on a small issue and to speak with some authority as you attempt to correct 
misunderstanding, speak the truth, and provide accurate information. 
 EXERCISE 12.1 
 In groups of four, complete the following test. Be sure to discuss each question or state-
ment as a group and record only one answer on which members of the group agree. 
A.  Decide whether each of the following is true or false. 
  1.   The ﬁ rst battle between ironclad ships took place between the  Monitor  and 
the  Merrimack .  
 2.   “Yankee Doodle” was written as a patriotic song of the American Revolution.  
 3.   “The Star-Spangled Banner” was written during the American Revolution 
and has been our national anthem for almost two hundred years. 
 4.   Ferdinand Magellan was the ﬁ rst person to circumnavigate the globe.  
 5.   Charles Lindbergh was the ﬁ rst person to ﬂ y across the Atlantic. 
 6.   The Declaration of Independence was signed on July 4, 1776. 
 7.   You should never end a sentence with a preposition or start one with  and 
or  but .  
 8.   The United States has never fought a war with China. 
 9.   A teacher with tenure can never be ﬁ red.  
 10.   A Catholic priest can never be married. 
 11.   Frankenstein was a monster. 
 12.   Abbreviating Christmas to  Xmas began as a way to insult Christians. 
 13.   The Emancipation Proclamation freed the slaves. 
 14. Robert Fulton invented the steamboat, which he named the  Clermont .  
 15.   A number of women accused of being witches were burned in Salem, 
Massachusetts. 
 16.   Benjamin Franklin discovered electricity. 

332 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
 17.   The Immaculate Conception refers to Christ’s having been born of a virgin. 
 18.   Lightning never strikes the same place twice. 
B.   Answer the following questions. 
  1.   Bagpipes were invented in what country? 
 2.   What is “circumstantial evidence”? 
 3.   Why is Los Angeles’s baseball team called the Dodgers? 
 4.   Who invented the sewing machine? 
 5.   Mr . is an abbreviation for  Mister . What is  Mrs . an abbreviation for? 
 6.   What was President Harry Truman’s middle name? 
 7.   What did Henry Ford invent? 
 8.   Who invented the lightbulb? 
 9.   Who invented the telephone? 
 10.   What does the distress signal “SOS” stand for? 
 11.   “Fourscore and seven years ago, our forefathers brought forth upon this 
continent a new nation” is the opening line of what famous document? Is 
the line quoted accurately? 
 12.   In Nova Scotia the sun rises in the ________ , but on the west coast of 
 Brazil, it rises in the _________ .  
 After you have ﬁ nished the test, divide up the thirty items among your 
group members. Each member of the group should research his or her items 
to determine if the group’s responses were correct. 
 Aside from teaching you how to ﬁ nd information and unveil the 
truth,  researching a topic allows you to enter the debate on an issue, perhaps 
 extending the conversation into new areas. Don’t think of research  merely  as 
gathering and repeating everything you can ﬁ nd on a given topic. Gathering 
information is certainly part of the task, but well-researched arguments are 
not simply repetitions of previous arguments or collections of published data. 
Look carefully, respectfully, and skeptically at what others have said about the 
research topic. Pore over the data collected by other researchers; read the reac-
tions and conclusions of other thinkers; accept, reject, or modify the claims of 
essayists, editorialists, and analysts; and ultimately add your own, perhaps in-
novative, thinking to the mix. Research provides the opportunity to discover 
and learn, but also to infer and create, to go beyond what has already been 
said. In fact, if we thought of research as a chance not only to bolster our ideas 
but also to combine old ideas into new ones and to propel us toward original 
thoughts, research would be less a boring chore and more an opportunity to 
increase our knowledge and to add something to the discourse. The great sci-
entist and mathematician Sir Isaac Newton wrote in a letter to Robert Hooke, 
“If I have seen further, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants.” Few of 
us will be Isaac Newtons, but our ability to see farther than our predecessors 
depends entirely on our ability to ﬁ nd and to look carefully at what they have 
already seen. 

 
Finding Sources 
333
 All too often, especially at the undergraduate level, students conduct-
ing  research become frustrated by the overwhelming amount of information 
available and select for their arguments whatever they discover ﬁ rst, assuming 
perhaps that  any support is  good  support. That is understandable, given how time-
consuming research can be: We are all reluctant to throw out the fruits of our 
labor, even what is sour and rotten. But an effective research project is based on 
reliable, accurate sources. When you use sources to support your own conclu-
sions, you are saying to your readers, “Here is someone who agrees with what I 
am saying,” or “Here is information that conﬁ rms what I have been claiming.” It 
is vital to the success of the argument that those sources be good ones. The rest 
of this chapter shows you how to ﬁ nd sources, how to evaluate the sources you 
ﬁ nd so that only the most accurate and reliable information makes it into your 
arguments, and how to place those sources into an argumentative essay. 
 FINDING SOURCES 
 Years ago, students doing research in their college libraries might have com-
plained that the library didn’t have the necessary resources to permit a thor-
ough investigation of a topic. Today, the opposite seems to be true:  You can 
easily feel overwhelmed by the amount of information available in a modern 
library and online. To conquer the modern world of research, you need assis-
tance. This section offers some basic instruction for locating sources of print 
and electronic information when researching an argumentative essay; but try-
ing to provide an exhaustive research guidebook in a few pages would be 
like attempting to draw a map of New York City on a postage stamp. In fact, 
the closest thing to an exhaustive guide, the  Guide to Reference Books,  a list of 
general reference materials (encyclopedias, dictionaries, indexes, and the like), 
 I will search 
far and wide 
to support my 
 conclusions. 
 —Job 36:3 
CALVIN AND HOBBES © Watterson.Reprinted with permission of Universal Press Syndicate. All rights reserved.

334 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
includes more than sixteen thousand entries in more than two thousand pages. 
The following advice is provided for the critical thinker preparing an argu-
ment, but anyone using a library today is strongly encouraged to seek the help 
of a reference librarian. 
 Refi ning Your Search: Questions and Keywords 
 Forming Questions   Most researchers approach the library or the Internet 
with two types of questions in mind. The ﬁ rst is a simple question that requires 
the retrieval of speciﬁ c data:
 What are the names of  Jupiter’s moons? 
 When did Babe Ruth play for the Boston Red Sox? 
 What does a hellgrammite look like? 
 Why is the sky blue? 
 Who said, “Freedom of the press belongs to those who own one”? 
The second type of question requires a more complicated and intensive search:
 What started the Persian Gulf  War? 
 How dangerous is hufﬁ ng?  
 Was there a conspiracy to assassinate President Kennedy? 
 What led to the nuclear arms race? 
 How effective is pet therapy? 
 This second type of question often calls for an extraordinary amount of 
research. Researching the nuclear arms race, for example, could lead you down 
many paths as you collect information and interpretations from political ﬁ gures, 
historians, scholars, and, depending on your purpose, even novelists and poets. 
 Before you begin searching for information, jot down speciﬁ c questions 
you want to answer and any general questions you have concerning areas you 
need to learn more about. For example, in researching hufﬁ ng, you might list 
the following questions: What is it, exactly? Does it go by any other names? 
What products are generally used? How does it inﬂ uence a person’s behav-
ior or consciousness? What physiological harm does hufﬁ ng cause? Can there 
be long-term psychological damage? How many people die each year from 
the practice? What have corporations or government agencies done to curtail 
hufﬁ ng? Is it illegal? And so on. 
 Use your questions to direct but not restrict your research. While you 
look for information and draft a paper, new questions will occur to you, re-
quiring additional research for answers. Working from questions helps guide 
your search and prevents you from approaching your research with ill-deﬁ ned 
needs and a sense of hopelessness. Whenever possible, begin the sometimes 
daunting task of ﬁ nding information by asking yourself, “What exactly is it 
that I’m looking for?” 
 A problem prop-
erly stated is 
partly solved. 
 —Henry Hazlitt 

 
Finding Sources 
335
 Keywords and Subject Headings   In a moment, we’ll tell you about the 
bibliographies and databases available in your library and online. Most of the 
sources we will discuss require you to state your search in what are called key-
words or subject headings.  Keywords  are natural language terms that describe 
your topic.  You could, for example, type the word “hufﬁ ng” into a database and 
see what happens. Other keywords from the questions above include “nuclear 
arms race,” “Kennedy assassination,” “conspiracy,” and “pet therapy.” Any of these 
terms will produce a number of hits in any search, whether you type the words 
into Google or into one of your library’s databases. But, as you know, each 
word or phrase might result in thousands or millions of hits, many of which will 
be useless to you. Your search for information on “hufﬁ ng,” for example, will 
produce articles or Internet sites that mention  the Big Bad Wolf  hufﬁ ng and 
pufﬁ ng and blowing down houses. 
 You can reﬁ ne your research by using  subject headings,  sometimes called 
descriptors. Subject headings describe the content of items such as books, jour-
nal articles, and so forth. They are a kind of  “ofﬁ cial” or “controlled” vocabulary 
applied to sources by librarians and publishers to make searching for information 
more manageable and productive. You’re familiar with the difference between 
keywords and subject headings if you’ve ever used the Yellow Pages. You might 
be looking for a new trombone for use in the college band. But looking up the 
keywords “trombone” or “band” in the  Yellow Pages won’t get you very far.  You 
have to look under the subject heading “Musical Instruments.” Jet Ski sellers? 
Look under “Boat Dealers.” Salons? Hairdressers? Stylists? Try “Beauty Salons.” 
 While searching by keywords can be helpful in generating many potential 
sources of information, searching by subject headings will help you ﬁ nd more rel-
evant results. You might begin by consulting the   Library of Congress Subject Headings  
(large red books in the reference section of the library) to determine how your 
topic is classiﬁ ed in reference works. In many database searches, after you’ve en-
tered and searched your keyword—say, “hufﬁ ng”—look at the top of the page or 
on the left to see if there is a tab or link called “subjects,”  “subject headings,”  “the-
saurus,”  “thesaurus term,” or something similar. For example, if you type  “huff-
ing” into Academic Search Premier, a left-hand tab labeled  “Subject:  Thesaurus 
Term” will let you know that you should conduct your search under the subject 
heading “INHALANT—abuse.”  Use that phrase and your search will instantly 
be limited to articles more relevant to your purposes (no wolves). Each data-
base uses its own subject headings. For example, for the keywords “pet therapy,” 
Academic Search Premier suggests the subject heading “PETS—therapeutic use.” 
PsychINFO, on the other hand, uses the heading “Animal-Assisted Therapy.” 
 Finally, you can retrieve additional subject headings for your topic, and 
therefore more ideas and potential sources, by opening the record for an item 
in the list of titles that a search generates. Click on the item to retrieve infor-
mation such as the article’s title, author, publisher, and publication date.  You’ll 
also see a list of subject headings (or descriptors) under which the article falls. 
If, for example, you typed the keyword “testing” into ERIC, the database for 
education-related research, you would get a long list of articles. Say the ﬁ rst 

336 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
 article is titled “Testing Reading Skills among Gifted Students.” Clicking on 
that title would open a window showing that the article is ﬁ led under nu-
merous descriptors, including Academically Gifted, Testing, Standardized Tests, 
Learning Strategies, and so on. In other words, the author of the article ad-
dresses topics that fall under all of these subjects headings, which you may wish 
to use in either widening or narrowing your search. 
 Once you have determined what you are looking for, you can begin your 
search. Two kinds of source material will be most helpful: material that will 
provide the   information you are looking for, and material that will  direct  you 
toward the material you are looking for. Informational material includes en-
cyclopedias, newspapers, journals, magazines, dictionaries, books, government 
documents, and Web sites. Directional materials include indexes, bibliogra-
phies, card catalogs, guides to reference sources, and online databases. 
 Directional Information 
 The following are among the most popular and accessible reference works 
and search engines for pointing you in the direction of information located 
in books and periodicals and on the Internet. To make the best use of these 
materials, consult the Library of Congress Subject Headings to determine how 
your topic is classiﬁ ed in reference works; otherwise, you might search in vain 
for books and articles on “free speech” and “religious tolerance” when your 
topics are listed in bibliographies and indexes under “freedom of speech” and 
“freedom of religion.” On the other hand, online databases may permit key-
word searches that will result in a number of hits whether you use your own 
terminology or the Library of Congress headings. 
 Bibliographies   Generally speaking, a  bibliography is a list of books that pro-
vides for each book the name of the author, the title, the place and date of pub-
lication, the name of the publisher, and, in some cases, the price of the book. 
Bibliographies can also include recordings, ﬁ lms, photographs, and computer 
software programs. The most familiar bibliography to student researchers is the 
catalog, available in nearly every library in electronic form and listing all the 
books held by the library and stored on the shelves (often called “stacks”) or in 
special collections areas. Other bibliographies, less well known but available in 
most academic libraries in print or in electronic format, include the Library of 
Congress’s  National Union Catalog,  which lists books published in the United 
States, and the  British National Bibliography,  which lists every work published 
in Great Britain since 1950.  Books in Print,  available in an electronic database, 
lists all books currently available from publishers as well as audiobooks, videos, 
forthcoming books, and, despite the title, out-of-print books. Other bibliog-
raphies, more generally deﬁ ned as “lists of publications,” catalog pamphlets, 
newspapers, and other periodicals. Such references as  Urlich’s International 
Periodical Directory, Gale Directory of Publications and Broadcast Media, Gale Direc-
tory of Databases,  and the  Vertical File Index  (for pamphlets) may be helpful in 
 Knowledge is of 
two kinds. We 
know a subject 
ourselves, or we 
know where we 
can ﬁ nd informa-
tion upon it. 
 —Samuel Johnson 
 When in doubt, 
go to the library. 
 —J.K. Rowling 

 
Finding Sources 
337
locating book titles, periodicals, and places of publication for a wide range of 
sources. Keep in mind that these bibliographies will usually provide only lists 
of what is available, with little additional information about the publication. 
One notable exception is  Magazines for Libraries,  which describes periodicals 
in some detail. 
 Indexes and Databases   If you’re looking for something published before 
the late 1980s, you may have to consult a print index such as  The Readers’ Guide 
to Periodical Literature  or  Poole’s Index to Periodical Literature.  Almost everything 
published after 1990 (and some older works) can be accessed through the elec-
tronic databases available through your library. Some databases are subject- or 
discipline-speciﬁ c. Depending on your topic, you could search, for instance, 
 Business Source Premier, Communications and Mass Media Complete, Philosopher’s 
Index, or  ERIC,  which indexes articles and documents in education. General 
databases, such as  LexisNexis, search a wider variety of sources in, for example, 
business, law, and communications. Some databases provide only the informa-
tion needed to locate a source (author’s name, title of the article, and so on), 
whereas others provide the full text of selected articles. Some databases are 
extremely expensive and are therefore not available in every library. For help 
in using these services, consult a reference librarian. 
 Internet Search Engines, Guides, and Directories   Nothing is more em-
blematic of the information age than the Internet, which has made millions of 
pages of text and illustrations available with only a few taps on the keyboard and 
a click of the mouse. But the blessing is also a curse: How do you sort through 
those millions upon millions of pages? Internet search engines ( www.google.com, 
www.yahoo.com, www.alltheweb.com,  to name a few) and metasearch engines ( www
.metacrawler.com, www.dogpile.com, www.infogrid.com,  for example) will help provide 
some direction when you are looking for information, but entering a keyword 
can result in thousands of  “hits,” many of which are only marginally related to 
your interests. Most search engines have indexes for subject areas such as travel, 
games, movies, sports, and jokes, and these indexes do help reduce the number 
of pages you need to surf through; however, they are generally limited to popular 
interests. You may prefer to search the sports pages, but you are not likely to ﬁ nd 
much support there for a paper on religion and medicine. 
 Using Google Scholar ( www.scholar.google.com ), you can limit the num-
ber of search “hits” to reliable sources from academic publishers. Many of the 
resulting links, however, will take you only to abstracts (brief summaries) of 
articles, the full text of which is available only to subscribers or those willing 
to pay a one-time fee. Before you agree to spend money for an article, check 
your library’s databases; many of the articles, whether scholarly or popular, that 
are available for sale online are free if accessed through databases. 
 If you have only a broad topic and want to ﬁ nd what you can about 
that subject, try one of the more helpful directories, such as Yahoo! (search 
yahoo.com/dir), which organize Web resources by categories such as  “science,” 

338 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
“ culture,” and “education.”  You can ﬁ nd links to useful sites by working your 
way through the subdirectories. For example, at Yahoo! the path “Social  Science 
→ Political Science → Public Policy → Institutes” will lead you to an annotated 
list of links to a great many of the various think tanks and policy research in-
stitutes that maintain Web sites. 
 Through the Internet you also can access information in discussion news-
groups and in listservs, discussion groups that operate by e-mail and to which 
you must subscribe. There are newsgroups and listservs on just about every 
subject imaginable (and some that are beyond what most of us can imagine). 
An earnest researcher may ﬁ nd helpful sources of information in some of the 
more academic and serious groups. Your search engine ( http://groups.google.com  
is among the best) and your Web browser will help you locate discussion 
groups and listservs. 
 Bibliographies, indexes, and Internet search engines and guides will help 
point you in the right direction, though they will not provide the actual in-
formation you are seeking, whether your inquiry is simple or complex. What 
follows are some of the informational sources you will ﬁ nd in libraries and the 
kinds of informational sites you will ﬁ nd on the Internet.  
 Informational Sources 
 The directional resources listed in the preceding section will guide you toward 
the books, articles, and Web sites that you are seeking. But you can ﬁ nd informa-
tion elsewhere, too.  When looking for information, consider the following refer-
ence materials and sources. Some of these sources can provide quick answers to 
simple questions or get you started in your attempt to familiarize yourself with a 
topic. Other sources will provide more in-depth analysis and information. 
 Encyclopedias   General encyclopedias such as  Encyclopaedia Britannica, Col-
lier’s, Encyclopedia Americana, Compton’s,  and  Grolier  are excellent starting points 
for ﬁ nding information about a topic, whether you are seeking speciﬁ c answers 
or overviews and historical perspectives. Several of these encyclopedias are 
available online (see if your school’s library subscribes to any of them), or you 
can consult a widely used, free online encyclopedia, Wikipedia ( wikipedia.org ). 
Because Wikipedia can be edited by anyone using the site, content does not pass 
though a review process before it appears on the page. Although well-educated 
and objective users are quick to remove false, overly subjective, or slanderous 
content, students using this site are cautioned to read with a critical eye and to 
be aware that their professor may forbid use of the site for research. 
 Although encyclopedias don’t always get the respect they deserve in 
colleges and universities, they can be helpful ﬁ rst steps toward understanding 
the basic concepts behind difﬁ cult subjects in disciplines such as psychology, 
philosophy, theology, science, and literature. In fact, many encyclopedia en-
tries conclude with a short bibliography of reliable sources for further study. 
For more-concentrated information about disciplines, you can consult sub-

 
Finding Sources 
339
ject  encyclopedias, which contain information pertinent to speciﬁ c topics: 
 Encyclopedia of Psychology, Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Encyclopedia of Religion,  the 
 McGraw-Hill Multimedia Encyclopedia of Science and Technology,  and  Benet’s Reader’s 
Encyclopedia  are just a few of the many subject encyclopedias available in most 
libraries. Additionally, the  Oxford Companion series  ( Oxford Companion to English 
Literature, Oxford Companion to Chess,  and so forth) provides an excellent starting 
place for researchers looking for basic information.  
 Almanacs, Yearbooks, Fact Books, Directories, Handbooks, Manuals, 
and Atlases   These are the volumes you will most often consult when you 
need factual answers to uncomplicated questions such as “How many Amer-
icans are on Social Security?” or “Where is Mozambique?” or “Who said, 
‘Neither a borrower nor a lender be’?” As we noted earlier, people frequently 
assume that their basic knowledge is accurate only to discover that they have 
been wrong all along. Ready-reference materials such as almanacs and fact 
books can help researchers ﬁ nd solid evidence to afﬁ rm or correct their as-
sumptions and support their claims. 
 Some of the more popular sources of factual information include  The 
New York Public Library Desk Reference, The Guinness Book of  World Records, In-
formation Please Almanac, World Almanac and Book of Facts, Statistical Abstract of the 
United States, Facts on File  (a weekly publication),  The New International World 
Atlas, Emily Post’s Etiquette,  and  Bartlett’s Familiar Quotations . These and other 
books of factual information can usually be located in one area of the library, 
most often close to the reference desk, and many are available online. Two 
excellent starting places for a search of the Web’s resources are the Virtual Ref-
erence Shelf ( www.loc.gov/rr/askalib/virtualref.html ), maintained by the Library 
of Congress, and the Internet Public Library ( www.ipl.org ). Additionally, many 
college libraries maintain a site dedicated to online research. Visit your library’s 
Web site or ask a librarian. 
 Biographical Sources   When you need to ﬁ nd out who someone is or 
was, you can turn to a host of biographical sources, some of which are highly 
reliable sources of information about a person’s life, accomplishments, con-
tributions, publications, and even misdeeds or crimes. The well-regarded 
 Who’s Who  series ( Who’s Who of American Women, Who’s Who among Black 
Americans, Who’s Who in the World,  and so forth) is complemented by other 
sources, such as  Current Biography, The New York Times Biographical Service,  the 
 Dictionary of National Biography  (usually referred to as the  DNB  and devoted 
solely to British and Irish notables), the  Dictionary of American Biography (DAB), 
World  Authors, and  Contemporary Authors . All of these sources provide sketches 
of political ﬁ gures, authors, scholars, dignitaries, executives, celebrities, social-
ites, and others whose contributions to their ﬁ elds, to society, or to the culture 
have been noteworthy. And, again, many biographical sources are available 
online and accessible through your library’s databases.  

340 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
 Dictionaries   When most students think of a dictionary, they think, sen-
sibly, of a book that provides deﬁ nitions of words, and there are plenty 
of such books in most college libraries. The best dictionaries for college 
use are unabridged, meaning that few English words have been excluded 
from the book no matter how colloquial, vulgar, esoteric, or archaic.  The 
Oxford English Dictionary  contains a half-million words.  Webster’s Third New 
International Dictionary  contains slightly fewer (roughly 475,000), and the 
 Random House Unabridged Electronic Dictionary  fewer still (about 315,000). 
These are available in most libraries, but for general use in college smaller 
dictionaries, including  Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary,  the  American 
Heritage Dictionary of the English Language,  and  Webster’s New World Diction-
ary, will serve. 
 But there are plenty of other dictionaries available, including diction-
aries of slang, legal terms, rhyming words, symbols, clichés, sign language, 
saints, theater, math, philosophy, ﬁ lm, names, music, ethics, archeology, poli-
tics, and myth. Many of these provide deﬁ nitions for the terminology unique 
to the ﬁ eld, but others contain short, introductory passages and, in some 
cases, bibliographies. These dictionaries are a great place to start in your 
search for the kind of basic information necessary for a deeper understand-
ing of an issue. 
 Several Internet dictionaries are convenient and reliable. Start with 
OneLook Dictionaries ( www.onelook.com ), which indexes more than six hun-
dred general and specialized online dictionary Web sites. Because OneLook 
is so thorough, further searches are often unnecessary; but, if you like, you 
can visit Merriam-Webster’s home site ( www.m-w.com ) and the Oxford English 
Dictionary if your school subscribes to it. 
 Government Documents   Many libraries have access to government doc-
uments through databases and online services, and a few libraries (at least one 
in every state) are depositories for government documents, meaning that hard 
copies are kept on hand. Government documents include everything pub-
lished by the U.S. government, though, obviously, only unclassiﬁ ed documents 
are available to the public. Topics range from biographical information about 
members of Congress to advice on repairing a home. In collecting research 
for an argument, you might wish to look at government-supplied information 
such as census reports, labor statistics, or budget information. In looking on the 
Internet for government documents, start with USA.gov ( www.usa.gov ) or the 
Government Printing Ofﬁ ce ( www.gpo.gov ). 
 Human Sources   Often overlooked in our dependence on the written 
word are human beings who could easily supply needed information. In look-
ing for library sources, you would be wise to consult a librarian. Although most 
librarians have advanced degrees and have had extensive, concentrated train-
ing in locating information, for some reason students will wander around for 

 
Evaluating Sources 
341
hours in a library before asking for help. Perhaps it’s because we don’t like to 
admit our shortcomings, and asking for someone’s assistance is like asking for 
directions:  We have to admit we’re lost. 
 People besides librarians can be great sources of information, expert 
advice, opinion, ﬁ rsthand observations; they may even direct you toward re-
sources you hadn’t thought of.  You might have a simple question that some-
one can answer quickly, or you might want to conduct an extended interview 
to collect an expert’s thoughts on your topic. First consider the human sources 
close at hand—faculty members, local experts, government ofﬁ cials, members 
of the business and legal community, even other students who might have 
extensive experience or training in a particular area. Most faculty members 
and local authorities are willing to grant students interviews. Look too at the 
names that have appeared in your research. With e-mail you might be able to 
contact an author or an editor for clarity on an issue or for additional infor-
mation. Otherwise, of course, you can write or phone. 
 Before you interview someone (whether in person, by phone, or in 
writing), prepare a list of questions you would like the interviewee to answer. 
Divide your queries into simple, fact-based questions (“How much revenue 
does the city take in each year in taxes?”) and questions that allow the inter-
viewee to expand on an issue or to think out loud (“Should the city lower 
the tax rate?” or “What beneﬁ ts do citizens enjoy because of taxes?”). Avoid 
vague questions or loaded ones (“What do you think of taxes?” or “Don’t you 
think taxes are an unfair burden on the elderly?”).  And don’t let your ques-
tions restrict you; as long as the interviewee stays on track and doesn’t digress 
into irrelevant areas, you might discover information and opinions that you 
hadn’t anticipated. 
 Remember to be courteous in requesting and conducting an interview. 
Arrive promptly, ﬁ nish the interview in a reasonable amount of time, and fol-
low up with a thank-you by e-mail or letter. 
 EVALUATING SOURCES 
 It is no exaggeration to say that we live in an information age: more than sixty-
eight thousand book titles are published each year (that’s almost two hundred 
a day); 1 by some accounts the Internet grows by three million pages a year; 
every day in the United States, more than ﬁ fteen hundred newspapers are 
published; and more than ten thousand radio stations broadcast programming 
around the country. 2 Information is so abundant that one edition of the  New 
York Times  contains more information than most of us could read in a week, let 
alone one day. But with all this information comes the difﬁ culty of separating 
the truth from the lies, the useful and reliable information that helps advance 
our understanding of the world from the efforts to manipulate our thinking or 
control our spending. In evaluating all this information, we need to ask several 

342 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
questions about the  content,  the  author  and the  publisher of the information, and 
the intended  audience . 
 Content: Facts and Everything Else 
 The research you use to support your claims will generally come from 
books, articles, interviews with experts, the Internet, and other sources in 
which writers and compilers inform or attempt to persuade their readers. 
 Occasionally,  you may also use creative literature—poems and stories—as ref-
erences or sources of allusions and quotes, but nonliterary works will provide 
your primary supply of evidence and expert testimony. As you read and listen 
to your sources, keep in mind that you are seeking both factual answers and 
nonfactual, subjective opinions, judgments, interpretations, and so forth. Al-
though both groups are important—facts and nonfacts—you must distinguish 
between them. 
 A  fact is an item of information that is objective and true. The sun is 
about ninety-three million miles from the earth. That is a fact, whether you 
knew it or not, believe it or not, live in North or South America, and so forth. 
The claim is veriﬁ able:  You could measure the distance using instruments well 
calibrated to gauge so great a measurement, and any scientist using such instru-
ments would come to the same conclusion. 
 Sometimes facts cannot be authenticated. Say, for example, that while 
golﬁ ng alone you hit a hole-in-one. You know that you did, in fact, hit a hole-
in-one, but you can’t verify or document the occurrence because no one else 
saw you and no cameras were rolling. In other words, some facts cannot be 
veriﬁ ed although they are  matters of fact . You really did, cross your heart and 
hope to die, hit a hole-in-one; you just can’t prove it. A writer’s failure to verify 
a fact does not mean that his or her statement is nonfactual. And, obviously, 
some “facts” can never be veriﬁ ed. Is it a fact that Abraham Lincoln thought of 
his wife moments before he died? Who knows? So, for the purposes of using 
sources to support your own arguments, it is best to separate  veriﬁ ed  and  docu-
mented  facts from everything else that a writer offers, including matters of fact 
that have yet to be veriﬁ ed. 
 Facts can be veriﬁ ed through eyewitness testimony, measurement, agree-
ment among several sources, and documentation. If you tell a professor that 
you missed class because of illness, the professor might ask for a doctor’s note, 
a document that helps verify your illness. If you tried to argue that a UFO 
appeared above your cornﬁ eld last night, you might want to prove it with a 
video or a snapshot. A driver’s license proves your age. This isn’t to say that 
apparent veriﬁ ability and documentation  always prove a fact; documents can 
be altered or forged, and eyewitnesses lie. But the United States Golf Associa-
tion will  record  your hole-in-one as “fact” only if at least one other person saw 
you do it. 

 
Evaluating Sources 
343
 To summarize, when looking for evidence to support your own claims, 
be careful to separate objective and veriﬁ ed facts from unveriﬁ ed facts, and 
all facts from everything else. When reading sources it is essential that you 
separate facts in your source from the opinions, interpretations, and so forth 
offered by the writer. What makes this a difﬁ cult task is the manner, some-
times subtle, in which nonfacts are presented as fact. Consider the following 
sentences:
 The fact that women must be regarded as having little sense of justice is no 
doubt related to the predominance of envy in their mental life; for the demand 
for justice is a modiﬁ cation of envy and lays down the condition subject to 
which one can put envy aside. We also regard women as weaker in their social 
interests and as having less capacity for sublimating their instincts than men. 3 
Not everyone reading Freud’s assessment of women’s moral character will 
agree with these “facts”; and despite Freud’s promise that his lecture contained 
“nothing but observed facts, almost without speculative additions,” some crit-
ics have taken him to task for the excess of speculation and assumption. What 
Freud claimed to be “fact” simply is not. 
 Another problem can occur even when information is presented as fact 
 and appears to be well documented and veriﬁ ed. The problem occurs most 
often in the reporting of the results of surveys. For example, you might read 
in an article that “75 percent of college students prefer to live in coed resi-
dence halls,” a claim that is backed up in the article by a recent survey of 
students. Could you use such a statistic in your own argument? Is it a fact that 
75 percent of college students prefer to live in coed dorms, or was the survey 
conducted in such a way that the results are not a reliable indicator of student 
opinion? It is not an easy call. When using such information in defense of your 
own claims, always inform your reader of the source of the “fact” and provide 
as much context as possible. You might write:
 According to a recent survey of one thousand college students conducted for 
Campus Harbinger magazine, “75 percent of college students prefer to live in 
coed residence halls.” The survey included students from all four classes in six 
colleges across the country. 
In providing the context, you are saying to the reader, “The facts are that a 
survey was conducted and that the survey showed X.” It is clear to the reader 
that you are presuming that the facts are true but that you are not stating with 
absolute certainty that they are. 
 Occasionally, the task of separating fact from opinion is simple: Almanacs, 
indexes, and statistical abstracts provide bare-bones information, usually given 
numerically (the population of Rhode Island or the number of reported AIDS 
cases, for instance). But in reading essays, arguments, and articles from  any 
source—even the most seemingly objective, such as encyclopedias, dictionar-
ies, and government documents—you must be vigilant. Be sure that any facts 
you collect are objective and veriﬁ able and that they could be documented. 

344 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
 One ﬁ nal and very important word of advice: What was fact last year or 
yesterday may be outdated today. Be sure that you do not rely on information 
that has been disproved or replaced by new discoveries. 
 Also remember that a writer’s choice of words may reveal his or her 
attitude toward the topic and that you are free to disagree with a writer’s in-
terpretation of the facts. If Senator Smith did not serve in the military, is it a 
 fact,  as one reporter might claim, that the senator “avoided” military service, 
or “evaded” the draft? An objective evaluation of the facts might lead you to a 
conclusion very different from the one proposed by the writer. You may have 
to further research Senator Smith’s past to get at the truth. 
 Finally, be certain that the facts are relevant to your purpose. Don’t, for 
instance, assume that you can use facts about the popularity of jazz music in 
New York City to prove your contention that jazz has national appeal. Simi-
larly, be certain that the facts are up-to-date. Innovations and new discover-
ies, especially in technology, medicine, and business, can quickly make facts 
 obsolete. Check the dates of your sources and try to ﬁ nd the most recent 
information. 
 When you have separated the facts from the nonfacts, you will be in 
a better position to judge the value of an author’s ideas. You can determine 
whether the opinions, judgments, interpretations, and so forth are backed by 
objective fact and, if so, whether those facts are presented in the essay or merely 
assumed. You can also evaluate the ideas on the basis of the writer’s authority 
to speak on the issues. 
 EXERCISE 12.2 
I.  Pay careful attention to what you read, watch, and hear in the next twenty-
four hours and list between ﬁ fteen and twenty facts from your observations. Be 
sure that the facts are indeed factual. Then list between ﬁ ve and ten opinions that 
you have heard or read in the same time period. 
II.  In groups of four, read the following passages and individually list the veriﬁ ed 
facts and the matters of fact that appear in each passage. Remember to list only 
information that can be stated objectively and that has been veriﬁ ed or that is 
at least veriﬁ able. When you are ﬁ nished, compare your work. Do you and your 
group members agree on what is fact and what is not? What accounts for any 
differences you have? 
 1.   The decline of broadcast journalism began in the late ’60s when I worked for 
NBC News. The advertising department, which had been mostly kept out 
of the news division during the tenure of NBC President Robert Kintner 
and his predecessor, Sylvester “Pat”  Weaver, was allowed in. Ratings for news 
started to matter, as they did for entertainment. Stories were increasingly 
selected for the type of audience they would bring, especially women.  The 
ratings declined anyway, along with the respect most people once had for the 
journalism profession. Add to story imbalance what many correctly perceive 
 Truth or certainty 
is obtained only 
from facts. Every 
day of my life 
makes me feel 
more and more 
how seldom a 
fact  is accurately 
stated; how al-
most invariably 
when a story has 
passed through 
the mind of a 
third person it 
becomes, so far 
as regards the im-
pression it makes 
in further repeti-
tions, little better 
than a falsehood. 
 —Nathaniel 
Hawthorne 

 
Evaluating Sources 
345
to be an ideological tilt to the left and you know why increasing numbers 
of people are looking elsewhere for real news. (Cal Thomas, “The Television 
People Kill Broadcast Journalism,”  Jewish World Review,  July 28, 1999.  Avail-
able online at  www.jewishworldreview.com/cols/thomas072899.asp. )  
 2.   We’re now in a modern, untransformed Manhattan, where the Joker’s open-
ing bank heist unfolds in a tense, realistic style with multiple point-blank 
shootings. It’s a shock—and very effective—to see a comic-book villain 
come on like a Quentin Tarantino reservoir dog. But then the novelty wears 
off and the lack of imagination, visual and otherwise, turns into a drag.  The 
Dark Knight  is noisy, jumbled, and sadistic. Even its most wondrous vision—
Batman’s plunges from skyscrapers, bat-wings snapping open as he glides 
through the night like a human kite—can’t keep the movie airborne. There’s 
an anvil attached to that cape. (David Edelstein, “Bat Out of Hell,”  New York 
Magazine 12 July 2008. Available online at  http://nymag.com/movies/reviews/
48514/. ) 
 
   
 In brief, Warner Bros. has continued to drain the poetry, fantasy, and 
comedy out of  Tim Burton’s original conception for “Batman” (1989), com-
pleting the job of coarsening the material into hyperviolent summer action 
spectacle. Yet “The Dark Knight” is hardly routine—it has a kicky sadism 
in scene after scene, which keeps you on edge and sends you out onto the 
street with post-movie stress disorder.  And it has one startling and artful ele-
ment: the sinister and frightening performance of the late Heath Ledger as 
the psychopathic murderer the Joker.  That part of the movie is upsetting to 
watch, and, in retrospect, both painful and stirring to think about. . . . The 
thunderous violence and the music jack the audience up. But all that screw-
tightening tension isn’t necessarily fun. “The Dark Knight” has been made 
in a time of terror, but it’s not ﬁ ghting terror; it’s embracing and unleashing 
it—while making sure, with proper calculation, to set up the next install-
ment of the corporate franchise. (David Denby,  “Past Shock,”   The New  Yorker  
21 July 2008. Available online at http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/cinema/ 
2008/07/21/080721crci_cinema_denby.) 
 
   
 “The Dark Knight” is the most anticipated movie of the summer, partly 
because it’s [Christopher] Nolan’s follow-up to the ﬁ ercely adored “Batman 
Begins” and partly because it features Heath Ledger’s last performance, as 
the Joker. . . . Nolan—who co-wrote the script with his brother,  Jonathan, 
working from a story he conceived with David S. Goyer—gives us enough 
multilayered subplots to at least fool us into thinking this is a work or 
intellectual and moral complexity. But as a piece of visual storytelling, 
from shot to shot, “The Dark Knight” is a mess. . . . [W]hat the Nolans 
have come up with here is just more pretentious poot, dumped onto the 
screen in a style that pretends to be fresh and energetic but is really only 
semicoherent. (Stephanie Zacharek, “The Dark Knight,” Salon.com 
17 July 2008. Available online at  http://www.salon.com/ent/movies/review/
2008/07/17/dark_knight/. ) 
 3.   Amy Goodman:  Professor Churchill, do you think that the World Trade 
Center was an acceptable target on September 11? Do you think it was a 
legitimate target? 

346 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
 
   
Ward Churchill: Do I personally think it was a legitimate target or should 
have been a legitimate target? Absolutely not. And that’s said on the basis of 
all but absolute rejection of and opposition to U.S. policy. But what you have 
to understand, and what the listeners have to understand, is that under U.S. 
rules, it was an acceptable target.  And the reason it was an acceptable target, 
if none other, was that because the C.I.A., the Defense Department, and 
other parts of the U.S. military intelligence infrastructure, had situated ofﬁ ces 
within it, and you’ll recall that that is precisely the justiﬁ cation advanced by 
the Donald Rumsfelds of the world, the Norman Schwarzkopfs, and the 
Colin Powells of the world, to explain why civilian targets had been bombed 
in Baghdad. Because that nefarious Saddam Hussein had situated elements 
of his command and control infrastructure within otherwise civilian occu-
pied facilities. They said that, in itself, justiﬁ ed their bombing of the civilian 
facilities in order to eliminate the parts of the command and control infra-
structure that were situated there. And of course, that then became Saddam 
Hussein’s fault. Well, if it was Saddam Hussein’s fault, sacriﬁ cing his own 
people, by encapsulating strategic targets within civilian facilities, the same 
rule would apply to the United States. So, if you’ve got a complaint out there 
with regard to the people who hit the World Trade Center, you should actu-
ally take it to the government of the United States, which, by the rubric they 
apply elsewhere in the world, everywhere else in the world ultimately, they 
converted them from civilian targets into legitimate military targets. Now, 
that logic is there, and it’s unassailable. It’s not something that I embrace. It’s 
something that I just spell out. (“The Justice of Roosting Chickens: Ward 
Churchill Speaks” [transcript],  DemocracyNow!,  February 18, 2005. Available 
online at  www.democracynow.org/article.pl?sid=05/02/18/157211. )  
 4.   The grande dame [of colleges and universities in the Greater Boston area], 
of course, is Harvard University, the country’s oldest institution of higher 
learning. Harvard grads are an impressive bunch: Among them are 33 Nobel 
Prize winners, 30 Pulitzer Prize winners and six U.S. presidents. While 
 living in a Cambridge dormitory, Bill Gates developed the programming 
language BASIC for the ﬁ rst microcomputer. Gates eventually dropped out 
of  Harvard to found Microsoft, the world’s leading provider of software for 
personal computers. 
 
   
 On the other side of Cambridge Common from the Harvard campus 
is Radcliffe College, founded in 1879 as a prestigious school for women. 
Co-ed since 1973, Radcliffe is indistinguishable from Harvard in terms of 
degrees and admission standards, and students share housing, classes and fa-
cilities. The former sister school does, however, function as an independent 
corporation and has its own president. 
 
   
 Sprawled along the Charles River in Cambridge is MIT, generally 
acknowledged to be the nation’s top school for science and engineering. 
The demanding curriculum ensures a student body of “eggheads” who 
nevertheless are expanding the boundaries of the information age. Across the 
river in Boston itself is Boston University, founded in 1839. Nearly 26,000 
 graduates and undergraduates attend its various schools (Martin Luther 
King Jr.  obtained his doctorate in theology there). BU was the ﬁ rst  university 

 
Evaluating Sources 
347
in the nation to make all of its programs available to women and minorities, 
and the ﬁ rst to offer a school of music. (Automobile Association of America, 
 Boston Destination Guide,  1999.)  
 5.   Every sentient, literate adult knows that the current spike in gas prices is 
90 percent due to forces completely beyond the control of Congress, the 
White House or even “Big Oil” itself. The laws of supply and demand 
determine gas prices the same way those laws determine the price of eggs, 
acid-washed blue jeans and Kanye West downloads. 
 
   
 What determines the price of college tuition? It certainly isn’t the qual-
ity of the product—as copiously demonstrated in David Horowitz’s new 
book,  The Professors: The 101 Most Dangerous Academics in America. 
 
   
 The two big topics on CNN last week were (1) high gas prices and 
(2) the high cost of college tuition. . . . 
 
   
 CNN reports that college tuition has risen an astonishing 40 percent 
since 2000. But the proposed solutions to the exact same problem—high 
prices for gasoline and tuition, respectively—were diametrically opposed. 
 
   
 The only solution to high gas prices considered on CNN was to pay oil 
company executives less, perhaps by order of the president. But somehow, no 
one ever suggested that the solution to the high price of college—far outpacing 
inﬂ ation—was to pay professors less. In that case, the solution is for the govern-
ment to subsidize college professors’ salaries even more than it already does. . . . 
 
   
 Liberals think hardworking taxpayers who can’t afford gas should pay 
more in taxes because it is vitally important that young people be taught that 
America is the worst country on Earth and that the American bond traders 
who were murdered on 9/11 deserved it. 
 
   
 Maybe with a little less subsidized tuition, colleges couldn’t afford 
luxuries like non-Indian Indian studies professor Ward Churchill. He makes 
$120,000 a year as a department head at the University of Colorado, in 
 addition to many speaking fees paid to him by other institutions of higher 
learning—all heavily subsidized by taxpayers. . . . 
 
   
 His list of academic achievements consists of his majoring in communica-
tions and graphic arts. That’s the only part of his resume that has not already 
been proved false, probably because no one would make that up. . . . (Ann 
Coulter, “Tuition Soars Due to Knowledge Shortfall,”  anncoulter.com, May 3, 
2006. Available online at  www.anncoulter.com/cgi-local/article.cgi?article=111. )  
 The Author and the Publisher 
 Since we were young, we have been taught to rely on people more experi-
enced, better educated, wiser, and stronger than we are to guide, protect, and 
nurture us. These authority ﬁ gures—parents, guardians, grandparents, teachers, 
ministers, and police ofﬁ cers, to name a few—have usually acted in our best 
interest, communicating the habits necessary for survival and the rules for suc-
cess in a civil society. We have learned to trust authority ﬁ gures and to respect 
their opinions and decisions. We would be lost without them. 

348 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
   But as critical thinkers, we must question and challenge the authorities 
we rely on for information and support. Not that we should become belliger-
ent and suspicious—constantly challenging the directives or recommendations 
of every authority becomes wearisome and could even be dangerous if we 
refused to accept the authority of, say, a crossing guard. But when looking to 
make our arguments more convincing, we should scrutinize our authoritative 
sources as carefully as we would an opponent’s arguments. After all, our op-
ponents will be scrutinizing us. 
 When it comes to gathering information, many of us do not question 
authority as often as we should. If you completed Exercise 12.1, ask yourself 
how you regarded “authorities” in the group. Were you more likely to agree 
with someone who  seemed  to know what he or she was talking about? If 
someone in the group aggressively insisted that an item was true or false, were 
you more likely to agree because of the aggressive stance? Did you accept the 
authority of the group, accept answers that were generally agreed upon? 
 Let’s analyze the notion of an authority. The word  authority  contains, ob-
viously, the word  author, and, sure enough, the two words derive from the same 
Latin word,  auctor, which means “creator.” An author creates, and an authority 
holds the power over that which he or she has created as parents have authority 
over their children. Because of the similarity between the two words, it may 
seem safe to assume that authors (creators) are also authorities, and, in fact, that 
is often the case; many authors have spent countless years studying their sub-
jects down to the ﬁ nest detail and can speak with great expertise to even the 
most learned audiences. But not always. One does not have to be an expert to 
become an author. In fact, some authors speak with very little authority. Some-
thing’s having been written—and  written  with all the appearances of objective 
truth—does not necessarily make it true. And although legitimate publishers 
of books, journals, and newspapers usually make every effort to ensure that 
their writers are knowledgeable and honest, publications often convey inac-
curate and misleading information. 
 When you read or listen to someone, ask the following questions:
•   What is the author’s background? 
•   What are the author’s bias and purpose? 
•   What are the author’s sources? 
•   Who is the publisher or sponsor? 
   What Is the Author’s Background?   What credentials does he or she have? 
What education and at what level? How much research went into the writer’s 
own work? How much experience does the author have? Is the writer an 
expert in the topic at issue? Is the author recognized by others as an authority 
in the ﬁ eld? For information on authors, you can consult several biographi-
cal resources, including the  Who’s Who  series and such works as the  Dictionary 
of American Biography.  When evaluating the background of an author, don’t 
base your assessment on only one criterion. Don’t assume, for instance, that 
 Our best guide to 
truth is free and 
rational inquiry; 
we should there-
fore not be bound 
by the dictates of 
arbitrary author-
ity, comfortable 
superstition, 
stiﬂ ing tradition, 
or suffocating 
 orthodoxy. 
 —“Statement of 
Purpose,”  Free 
Inquiry Magazine 
 No statement 
should be believed 
merely because it 
has been made by 
an authority. 
 —Hans 
Reichenbach 

 
Evaluating Sources 
349
the most highly educated writers speak with the greatest authority or that an 
uneducated person is ignorant. Be careful not to assume that only recognized 
authorities can speak knowledgeably on a subject. Fiction writers, for example, 
often exhaustively research their stories and seem to know as much about 
their topics as any recognized expert would. It is possible, too, that someone 
speaking outside his or her ﬁ eld may present a strikingly new and powerful 
idea. And the number of years that have gone into studying an issue can some-
times have relatively little to do with the writer’s expertise. Albert Einstein was 
only in his midtwenties when he published some of his most inﬂ uential work. 
But overall you should look for credible authors who have earned their right 
through careful study and sound analysis to speak on an issue. You may be 
tempted to argue that all opinions are equal because they are merely opinions, 
but some opinions are dangerous or ridiculous and some are valuable, sensible, 
and well defended. Find authors who express opinions that have been carefully 
arrived at through intelligent inquiry. In fact, even those authors who represent 
the  opposing side of the argument you intend to present should be the best 
representatives of that side. 
  What Are the Author’s Bias and Purpose?   Writers and speakers may 
have a personal or professional interest in the information they are presenting. 
And although they may not lie outright (some might), they may hide contra-
dictory information, “cherry-pick” evidence, or carefully select language in 
which to present information most favorably. Perhaps the author is speaking for 
a company, a special-interest group, an institute, a foundation, a think tank, or a 
political party. He or she might be getting paid for an endorsement or opinion. 
When a writer has no special or personal interest in the topic, nothing to gain 
or lose by the audience’s favorable or negative reaction to the topic, we say that 
the author is “disinterested,” impartial, objective. That does not mean that the 
information provided by “interested” authors is to be discounted. Surely, even 
advertisers can occasionally present trustworthy information. But knowing 
what stake an author has in our reactions can be useful in our attempt to evalu-
ate the information that has been ﬁ ltered through that author’s perspectives. 
 In the case of surveys or studies, the author may have worded the ques-
tions in such a way as to ensure the sought-after response. A corporation that 
sets out to prove that its product is better than everyone else’s is likely to devise 
a method that will not produce disappointing results. And an industry trying 
to defend its product will most certainly put the best spin on its information. 
Take, for example, the following paragraph:
 Measurements of atmospheric cigarette smoke taken under realistic conditions 
indicate that the contribution of tobacco smoke to the air we breathe is minimal. 
One study at Harvard found only very small amounts of nicotine in the atmo-
sphere of cocktail lounges, restaurants, bus stations and airline terminals. Based on 
those measurements of a substance speciﬁ c to tobacco smoke, one astute reader of 
the literature estimated that a nonsmoker would have to spend 100 hours straight 
in the smokiest bar to inhale the equivalent of a single ﬁ lter-tip cigarette. 4  
 The wise lend a 
very academic 
faith to every re-
port which favors 
the passion of the 
reporter. 
 —David Hume 

350 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
There may be truth in this statement, but because it is found in a pamphlet 
published by the Tobacco Institute we should be highly skeptical. Although 
we should be careful to evaluate all the information we ﬁ nd, the fact that this 
information on secondhand smoke comes from an industry that proﬁ ts from 
the sale of cigarettes should make us even more cautious of what we have 
read. When was the study done at Harvard? Was that the Harvard University 
in Cambridge, Massachusetts? What does “very small amounts” mean? “Small” 
by what standard? At what time of day were the tests done in the restaurants 
and lounges? Who is this mysterious “astute reader”? If we were preparing an 
argument on, say, suspending antismoking laws in restaurants, we would be 
well advised to look elsewhere for support. 
 In attempting to uncover an author’s point of view, try to determine the 
author’s purpose in writing. If the writer is making a claim or trying to per-
suade the reader toward a particular belief or action, look at how he or she has 
dealt with opposing points of view or evidence. Does the writer seem fair and 
evenhanded, or does he or she dismiss opposing points of view without regard 
to their possible value? Does the writer commit the straw man fallacy, misrep-
resenting opposing views to more easily mow them down? Does the writer use 
slanted language or commit personal attacks? Does the writer make sweeping 
generalizations or demonstrate an either/or approach to complicated issues, 
thereby revealing a strong bias toward one side? Be wary, too, of writers who 
claim only to inform or who pretend to objectivity.  The writer may be stack-
ing the deck in an effort to subtly direct the reader toward some unstated goal. 
 Remember: Biases and hidden agendas don’t disqualify the source.  You might 
ﬁ nd plenty of useful information—but useful only after a careful reading. 
 Treat sources fairly when judging their bias and purpose. Perhaps the 
writer intended simply to amuse the reader or to comment casually on some 
inconsequential topic. If a writer intends to be ironic or satirical, if he or she is 
clearly exaggerating for effect, or if the writer admits to guesswork and specu-
lation, be sure to fairly represent those intentions and admissions. 
 What Are the Author’s Sources?   Writers seldom write in a vacuum. Most 
writers, as Isaac Newton suggested, respond to those who have preceded them, 
contributing in some sense to a long, ongoing conversation among thinkers. 
When you read someone’s work, chances are that that writer has depended on 
other sources for information, ideas, and inspiration. The original sources that a 
writer cites are “primary sources.” It may be important for the success of your 
work to consider how reliable the primary sources are and to uncover those 
sources if necessary to ensure that they have not been misquoted or misrepre-
sented. For example, in researching Thomas Jefferson’s attitudes toward slavery, 
you might look at several books on the subject. In those “secondary sources,” 
the authors will most likely cite Jefferson’s own writings, his papers, letters, 
notebooks, and so forth—all of which are primary sources. 
 Returning to the primary sources is especially necessary when an au-
thor uses statistical information in defending a claim because statistics, like 

 
Evaluating Sources 
351
 literature, can be interpreted in various, often contradictory, ways. You might 
want to see the numbers for yourself. As we noted before, although many au-
thors are honest and trustworthy, not  all  writers are careful or ethical in their 
use of information, and others (careful  and ethical) may simply be offering 
a subjective interpretation of the information. When in doubt, look up the 
original source of information. 
 Be wary of unnamed, undocumented, or completely unreliable sources 
in a writer’s essay or argument. As we shall see in Chapter 14, writers often at-
tempt to give legitimacy to their work by referring to a well-known political 
ﬁ gure or celebrity as the source of information. Others allude to “an anony-
mous source” or “sources at the Pentagon” as the originators of important 
information. Other allusions include such phrases as “surveys have shown” or 
“according to recent studies.” What surveys? What studies? The wise critical 
thinker is always wary of unnamed sources or those whose reliability cannot 
be checked. 
 Who Is the Publisher or Sponsor?   Most students know that not all pub-
lications are equal, which is why you don’t usually ﬁ nd students using the 
 National Inquirer  or even  People  magazine as a source of factual evidence. If we 
want to know whether or not Elvis is dead and, if so, when he died, we usu-
ally turn instead to the archives of the  New York Times  or  U.S. News and World 
Report.  In fact, most national publications employ respected editors whose 
reputations and job security depend on the quality and the veracity of the 
writing they publish. Mistakes can happen, and unveriﬁ ed facts occasionally 
sneak by vigilant editors, but the information that appears in major newspa-
pers and daily, weekly, and monthly magazines is  generally reliable, although a 
critical reader, as always, would be wise to question even the most seemingly 
objective reports. Commercial interests often dictate editorial policy, and there 
have been several interesting cases of exceptional periodicals being the victims 
of hoaxes and sabotage, resulting in embarrassing retractions and even, in one 
famous case, the return of a Pulitzer Prize. 5 
 Published opinions are another matter. Many periodicals have an edito-
rial bias that governs not only the topics chosen but the perspective and slant 
of the writing as well. Although there is nothing wrong with a periodical’s 
having a political slant, the careful reader should know what that slant is. In 
 These Times  and  Mother Jones,  for example, publish articles and arguments from 
a working-class perspective, whereas  Commentary  usually takes a conservative 
stance on labor issues. Scanning the table of contents and looking at the ad-
vertisements and any editorials will give you a good sense of the political and 
cultural biases of the periodical. A reference book called  Magazines for Libraries  
provides brief descriptions, including the political dispositions, of periodicals 
available in libraries. 
 Publishers of academic books and journals are usually extremely careful 
to publish work of high quality, which is ensured by a rigorous system of peer 
review. Submissions to scholarly presses and journals (Oxford University Press 

352 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
or the  New England Journal of Medicine,  for example) are commonly sent to 
leading scholars familiar with the topic, who recommend the submission for 
publication, suggest revisions, or recommend that the submission be rejected. 
Ideally, the process helps guarantee that what gets published is trustworthy, al-
though even the most scrutinizing journals can get fooled by an unscrupulous 
contributor or a writer perpetrating a hoax. Still, while you should carefully 
evaluate everything you read, you can usually trust the content of scholarly 
publications. The box on pages 354–355 will help you distinguish between 
scholarly and nonscholarly periodicals. 
 In short, it is important to discover whatever you can, not only about 
the author of the piece, but about the publisher as well. Many publishers pro-
tect their well-deserved reputations by attempting to verify every statement 
they print. Some information makes it into print, however, without ever 
having passed through an exacting review process. Some presses (university 
presses, for example) publish only books of the highest caliber; others publish 
what they know will sell. Books can be published through vanity presses, in 
which the author pays all costs associated with publication—printing, mar-
keting, distributing, and so forth. Pamphlets and many newsletters are pub-
lished without editing or review by disinterested parties. Some newspapers 
publish op-ed pieces that contain misinformation and distortions. In an effort 
to antagonize their listeners, radio commentators often say blatantly false 
things. Certainly,  published  (literally, “made public”) is not synonymous with 
 truthful . 
 The Audience 
 Besides examining the content of sources and asking a great many questions 
about the author and the publisher, inquiring about the intended audience and 
studying reader reactions can provide insight into the quality of a source. 
 Who Is the Intended Audience?   Knowing something about the au-
thor’s intended audience can help you evaluate the information. In some 
cases, journals and books are aimed at readers far better versed than you are 
in the topic under study. 6 To familiarize yourself more completely with an 
issue, you may have to research a topic even more deeply than you ﬁ rst ex-
pected. On the other hand, writing intended for younger audiences, though 
accurate, may not contain the complete picture. Certain encyclopedias—
those published on CD or DVD for use in a computer, for example—are 
often written at levels that make them unreliable for research at the college 
level. They may be helpful in getting started, especially if you are com-
pletely unversed in a topic, but good research at the collegiate level must 
go beyond such sources. To help you determine the intended audience 
of an encyclopedia, consult Kenneth F. Kister’s  Kister’s Best Encyclopedias,  
which evaluates the reliability and objectivity of more than eight hundred 
encyclopedias. 

 
Evaluating Sources 
353
 Some authors write strictly for an audience that is predisposed to agree 
with the author’s point of view. Newsletters published by radio-talk-show 
hosts and many pages published on the Internet, for example, are intended 
to provide data and opinions to readers who are merely looking to support 
long-held convictions. Pages devoted to “proving” that one race is superior 
to another, that one political viewpoint is uniquely correct, that religious be-
liefs are dangerous, that conspirators are stealing our freedoms, and so forth 
should be treated with suspicion. It is possible that these sites and sources con-
tain some accurate or useful information, but the obviousness of the writer’s 
objectives—to speak to like-minded readers, to “preach to the choir,” as the 
cliché goes—can in some cases make the information nearly useless to a criti-
cal thinker. Knowing the intended audience, however, should not lead you 
to conclude automatically that the information is tainted. Several journals 
of opinion (the  Nation, Commentary,  and  National Review,  to name a few) 
have the highest editorial standards. Still, no critical thinker reads them with 
a closed mind.  
 How Has the Audience Responded?   Another part of the context of 
research is what has been written in  response  to the information you intend 
to use in your argument. Usually, after the publication of a scholarly book, 
for example, reviews written by other scholars will appear in journals and 
on Web sites. These reviews, although sometimes petty and personal (some 
reviewers are settling old scores or pushing their own agendas), can be 
helpful in alerting readers to the presence of misinformation or shoddy 
research. In doing research on a political, historical, or literary ﬁ gure, for 
example, you might consult reviews to determine if the biography you 
intend to quote from is considered by scholars to be accurate and fair to 
the subject. (Start with  Book Review Digest,  or the online database  Book  
 Review Digest Plus  if your library subscribes to it.) If it turns out that the 
biographer based the book on rumor and speculation, you are better off not 
using it. The methodology used in surveys and studies might be challenged 
in subsequent issues of a scholarly journal or even in the popular press. 
And the “letters” or “corrections” section of journals and magazines can 
rectify, or provide alternative interpretations of, information that appeared 
in previous issues. Even if you don’t have access to comments made about 
a speciﬁ c work, it can help to consider the writer’s reputation in the com-
munity for which she or he writes. Authors who are often cited by other 
writers or who show up often in bibliographies are usually considered 
experts in their ﬁ elds.  
 Evaluating Internet Sources 
 Where does the Internet ﬁ t into all of this? Honestly, it’s a mess. Whereas most 
information in most traditional print sources (periodicals, books, newspapers) 
has passed through some sort of quality control to ensure its accuracy and 

354 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
 Distinguishing Scholarly from Nonscholarly Periodicals 
 There is no sureﬁ re method for distin-
guishing scholarly journals from other 
periodicals, but the characteristics listed 
below will offer some guidance. Generally 
speaking, scholarly journals are trustwor-
thy because the information they contain 
has undergone rigorous review by experts 
and scholars. But that in no way sug-
gests that nonscholarly journals cannot be 
trusted or that scholarly journals are infal-
lible. The following guidelines will help you 
categorize a journal, but you will still have 
to determine whether the information you 
collect is credible. 
 SCHOLARLY JOURNALS 
•  Have a serious and professional look; 
generally contain few visuals except for 
graphs and charts; carry very few adver-
tisements, which are usually limited to 
announcements of upcoming confer-
ences and recently published books and 
calls for papers. 
•  Contain articles based on research and 
experimentation, written by scholars 
who cite their sources in footnotes and 
bibliographies. 
•  Are written for other scholars, practitio-
ners, and students who have some fa-
miliarity with the topic and the language 
used in the discipline. 
 •  Are often, but not always, published by 
colleges and universities, professional 
and scientiﬁ c societies, organizations, 
and associations. 
 Examples:  Journal of the American Medical 
Association;   New England Journal of Medicine; 
Philological Quarterly;   American Journal of Soci-
ology;   Reading Teacher; Journal of Accountancy; 
Harvard Business Review; and  College English. 
 NONSCHOLARLY PERIODICALS 
 Nonscholarly periodicals include  journals 
of opinion, news and general-interest 
 magazines, popular magazines, trade pub-
lications, and sensational publications. 
 Journals of Opinion 
(also called policy journals) 
•  Appearance can range from a sober 
 format to a glossier look; sometimes 
have the appearance of a newspa-
per; include few pictures, sometimes 
none; often contain political car-
toons;  contain limited and selective 
 advertisements. 
•  Usually have a professed or easily 
inferred editorial policy that falls 
somewhere along the political 
spectrum, although some journals of 
opinion collect viewpoints from across 
the spectrum. The writers are often 
well-respected and educated experts, 
commentators, and journalists who 
write frequently on political and social 
topics. Political ﬁ gures occasionally 
write for journals of opinion. Content 
is usually well researched; notes 
and bibliographies may appear with 
articles. Often contain book and 
movie reviews and sometimes include 
original poetry.  
•  Are aimed at a broad, educated audi-
ence familiar with and interested in 
current social, political, economic, and 
cultural events. Tone and style are usu-
ally serious but not as academic as that 
found in scholarly journals. 
•  Published by think tanks, private organi-
zations, political parties, policy institu-
tions, and other groups that hope to 
foster a particular opinion. 
 Examples:  Dissent; Mother Jones;   Nation; Utne 
Reader;   New Republic;   American Spectator; In-
sight; Human Events; Commentary; National Re-
view; Public Interest; Policy Review;   Progressive; 
Z Magazine; Reason; Weekly Standard; Christian 
Century; In These Times. 

 
Evaluating Sources 
355
 News and General-Interest Magazines 
•  Glossy, attractive appearance; illustrated 
with colorful photographs, charts, and 
graphs; wide range of advertisements.  
•  Wide range of authors from freelance 
journalists, staff writers, scholars, 
editors, invited guests, and so forth. 
Sometimes contain articles and essays 
reprinted from other sources. Language 
is nontechnical. Topics covered range 
widely—from current events and social 
trends to politics, the economy, and art. 
Coverage also ranges from short and 
superﬁ cial to extensive and thoughtful. 
Most periodicals in this category con-
tain movie and book reviews; some gen-
eral-interest magazines contain original 
art, such as poetry and ﬁ ction.  
•  Audience is educated and interested in 
current news and issues but does not 
necessarily have extensive knowledge of 
the topics covered. 
•  Published almost entirely by for-proﬁ t 
corporations. 
 Examples: News:  Time; Maclean’s  (Canada); 
 Newsweek; U.S. News & World Report.  General 
interest:  New Yorker; Harper’s; Atlantic Monthly; 
Scientiﬁ c American; National Geographic.  
 Popular Magazines 
 •  Glossy, attractive, colorful appearance 
with plenty of illustrations and advertise-
ments geared toward speciﬁ c groups.  
•    Written by staff and freelance writers. 
Some writers may know a great deal about 
their topics; others may simply be report-
ing what they have discovered. Topics are 
usually selected for speciﬁ c consumer 
groups and often include such things as 
recipes and “how-to” essays. Ads are also 
geared toward speciﬁ c groups.  
•    Audience is interested in topic of the 
magazine (sports, health, home decorat-
ing, and so forth); minimal reading skills 
necessary.  
•  Published for proﬁ t. 
 Examples:  People; Sports Illustrated; Rolling 
Stone; Ebony; Vanity Fair; Modern Maturity; 
Redbook; Southern Living; This Old House;  
and most health, ﬁ tness, and fashion 
 magazines. 
 Trade Publications 
 •  Similar in appearance to news and 
general-interest magazines: glossy ap-
pearance, many pictures and other il-
lustrations, such as easy-to-read graphs 
and charts. Advertisements for a wide 
range of products and services and many 
specialized ads aimed at practitioners in 
a particular ﬁ eld.  
•  Articles are usually written by practitio-
ners and educators, often in technical 
jargon common to the profession or 
industry. Focus on current trends and 
practical applications. Often include job 
announcements and personality proﬁ les.  
•    Written for practitioners and students in 
a particular ﬁ eld.  
•  Usually published through professional 
organizations but also by corporations. 
 Examples:  Industry Week; Advertising Age; 
Hotel and Motel Management;   Bookbag; Forbes; 
Fortune; Business Week; Publisher’s Weekly; 
Broadcasting and Cable; Variety. 
 Sensational Publications 
•  Often look like tabloid newspapers; often 
contain shocking or attention-grabbing 
photographs and equally astonishing 
advertisements promoting products of 
questionable value.  
•  Articles are written by staff and freelance 
writers to hold reader’s interest. Sources 
are seldom cited. Language is simple. 
Headlines often make outlandish claims. 
•  Audience is usually gullible and supersti-
tious, interested in pseudoscience and 
the paranormal. 
•  Published for proﬁ t. 
 Examples:  National Enquirer;  Globe;  National 
Examiner;   Star.   

356 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
value, anyone with a computer and access to a server can publish absolutely 
anything on the Internet. Surﬁ ng the Internet for information is like shopping 
blindfolded in the world’s largest grocery store. You might come away with 
exquisite gourmet delicacies, spices you had no idea existed, and nutritious 
fruits and vegetables; or you might ﬁ nd sweets that taste good but are harmful 
to your health, bland cereals, or even deadly poisons for cleaning bathrooms or 
killing rats. Because of the excess of poison available, some students and their 
professors refuse to use the World Wide Web as a source of scholarly infor-
mation; that is unfortunate given the riches a careful shopper can ﬁ nd there. 
When you shop around on the Internet, it is vital to your intellectual survival 
that you take off the blindfold. 
 Evaluating electronic sources is similar to evaluating print sources: ask a 
great many questions about the content and the author. When evaluating the 
site itself, give preference to those maintained by recognized and respected 
organizations and institutions such as universities (the Cornell University 
Library or Purdue University’s Online Writing Lab, for example), govern-
ment agencies (the Library of Congress or the Smithsonian Institution), 
and noncommercial, service-oriented sites (the American Cancer Society). 
Often the URL, the address of the site, will provide some information about 
the site’s sponsor. Internet addresses with . edu  (short for education) usually 
originate at colleges and universities. Other current URL sufﬁ xes include 
the following:
 .com  or .cc (commercial site) 
 .gov  (government agencies) 
 .info (information sites) 
 .mil  (military sites) 
 .net (networks and service providers) 
 .org  (nonproﬁ t organizations)  
 Because the Web is growing so fast, new sufﬁ xes will most likely be 
added soon, including, possibly, .kids (sites safe for children). A tilde (˜) in the 
address usually indicates that the page is maintained by an individual who may 
be working independently of the school, organization, or agency that provides 
the Web address. 
 At a helpful Web site called Whois ( www.whois.com ), you can ﬁ nd limited 
information about a site, including contact information for the person who 
registered the domain name. Whois won’t tell you whether the site is trust-
worthy, but it can get you started on ﬁ nding more information about a site. 
 Appearance can sometimes help distinguish scholarly sites from the 
more commercial ones: Scholarly sites are often the least ﬂ ashy, looking more 
like electronic versions of typed pages—no banners, few pictures, dull graph-
ics. But appearances, of course, can be deceiving, and some highly reliable 
sites are very attractive and user-friendly. All in all it is difﬁ cult to make 
any general statements about Web sites, the designers of which are clever 
indeed. If there were a clear indicator of a trustworthy site, Web masters at 

 
Evaluating Sources 
357
less legitimate sites would turn it to their advantage. In fact, some sites have 
managed to secure an  .edu sufﬁ x even though the sites are not legitimate 
schools. In an effort to assist readers, some organizations—the Librarians’ 
Internet Index ( www.lii.org ), for example—evaluate Web content, ﬁ lter out 
unreliable sites, and arrange links to trustworthy sites under headings such 
as “Arts and Humanities,” “Business,” and “Media.” Such ﬁ ltering organiza-
tions can be useful at times, but relying on them will do little to sharpen our 
critical thinking skills. 
 Colbert on “Truthiness” 
 We’ve been encouraging you in this chapter to back up your argu-
ments with information from reliable sources, a practice that, if you 
ask Stephen Colbert, seems to be unpopular today. In the ﬁ rst epi-
sode of  The Colbert Report,  in October of 2005, Colbert introduced his 
audience to the word “truthiness,” a word he invented to describe the 
tendency among some people to trust their instincts and their “guts” 
no matter what the facts or logic might suggest. People who demon-
strate “truthiness” offer little evidence for their claims other than their 
opinions and perceptions. Here’s Colbert: 
 I will speak to you in plain, simple English. And that brings us to to-
night’s word: “truthiness.” Now I’m sure some of the “word police,” 
the “wordinistas” over at  Webster’s, are going to say, “Hey, that’s not 
a word.” Well, anyone who knows me knows I’m no fan of dictionar-
ies or reference books. They’re elitist, constantly telling us what is or 
isn’t true, or what did or didn’t happen. Who’s  Britannica  to tell me 
the Panama Canal was ﬁ nished in 1914? If I want to say it happened 
in 1941, that’s my right. 
 I don’t trust books. They’re all fact, no heart. And that’s exactly 
what’s pulling our country apart today. ’Cause face it, folks, we are a 
divided nation. Not between Democrats and Republicans, or conser-
vatives and liberals, or tops and bottoms. No, we are divided between 
those who  think with their head, and those who  know with their heart. 
Consider Harriet Miers [President Bush’s ﬁ rst nomination to replace 
retiring Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O’Connor]. If you  think 
about Harriet Miers, of course her nomination’s absurd. But the 
president didn’t say he “thought” about his selection. He said this: 
(shows video clip of President Bush saying “I know her heart”). No-
tice how he said nothing about her brain? He didn’t have to. He 
“feels” the truth about Harriet Miers. And what about Iraq? If you 
 think  about it, maybe there are a few missing pieces to the rationale 
for war. But doesn’t taking Saddam out  feel  like the right thing—right 
here, right here in the gut? (video available at  www.comedycentral.com ) 
Pop Culture Connection

358 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
 To determine whether to believe that facts you ﬁ nd on a site are reliable and 
whether the opinions expressed on the site are trustworthy, try the following:
 •   See if you can ﬁ nd out more about the author or the sponsoring 
site. Are there links on the site that will lead you to a résumé or bi-
ography of the author? Use a search engine to see what others have 
written about the author or the organization. Perhaps current news 
articles will provide helpful information or even warnings. 
•   If an organization sponsors the site, see if you can ﬁ nd out more about 
the organization by following links to the home page, by clicking on 
any links labeled “About Us” or “Who We Are,” or by looking at the 
part of the URL before the ﬁ rst slash. Is the sponsor reputable?  
•   What does your common sense tell you about the site? Does the au-
thor seem to have a pronounced bias? Are opposing views ridiculed 
or misrepresented? Is the author attempting to sell you something or 
solicit a donation? Is the site littered with banner advertisements? 
•   Consider how you found the site. Did you link to it from another, 
reliable site, or did you ﬁ nd it through a search engine?  
•   Follow the author’s links to other sites. Do the linked sites reveal the 
same bias as that of the original site? Are the linked sites reliable and 
objective sources of information? 
•   How current is the information? Many Web sites are not updated 
regularly and may even have been abandoned by their creators. (For 
examples of seriously outdated information, check out the “About the 
Authors” section for this text on either Amazon.com or BarnesandNoble
.com. Trust us, some of us had a lot more hair when that information 
was current!) When you suspect information may be outdated, be sure 
to check other Web sites to compare. And if you ﬁ nd broken links, that’s 
usually a good sign that the information may not be current.  
 Assessing Web sites is a notoriously difﬁ cult task. It is probably no exag-
geration to say that only researchers already well informed about a topic can 
know for certain whether the information on a site is reliable. Besides keeping 
your eyes open, the best method to determine whether a site is a legitimate 
source of information is to use some of the guides mentioned in the second 
section of this chapter and to count on professors and librarians who can point 
you in the direction of trustworthy sites. If you have any doubts about what 
you ﬁ nd on the Internet, do your best to verify the information through other 
sources. Do not make the mistake of thinking that what you have found is any 
good just because you found it and it ﬁ ts your purpose. 
 EXERCISE 12.3 
 Suppose you want to use the following passages in an argument. How reliable do 
you judge them to be? Evaluate each passage according to the criteria outlined in 

 
Evaluating Sources 
359
this chapter: (1) author’s background, (2) author’s bias and purpose, (3) publisher or 
sponsor, and (4) intended audience. (The author’s sources will be unavailable as a 
criterion in these exercises.) In several cases, you may have to conduct a little re-
search to determine something about the speaker, the author, or the organization. 
  1.   Liberals tell kids in school all over America that the best way to protect 
themselves from AIDS is to wear condoms while engaging in sexual inter-
course. It’s a lie. They are imposing a death sentence on kids. The failure rate 
of condoms is around 17 percent. They’re teaching kids to play Russian rou-
lette. (Rush Limbaugh,  See, I Told You So,  1993) 
 2.   Awful. Avoid at all costs. Basically failed me to prove a point. Does not re-
spect anyone standing up for themselves. Horrible “teaching” methodology. 
Turns a three-hour class into a ﬁ ve-hour torture session. Don’t dare disagree 
with him, even with scientiﬁ c proof and hard numbers or you’ll be his next 
example. (Comment on Professor X, published on  ratemyprofessor.com ) 
 3.   The average breakage rate of all condoms is 5.6 percent. The average slip-
page rate of all condoms is 3.67 percent.  The total failure rate of all con-
doms is 9.13 percent. (Summary of  Table 16-3 in Robert A. Hatcher et al., 
 Contraceptive Technology, 17th ed., 1998) 
 4.   “Over 80% of Americans support very little or no immigration. Is anyone 
listening to us?” “Tired of sitting in trafﬁ c? Every day, another 6,000 im-
migrants arrive. Every day!” (Billboards in Queens and Brooklyn, New York, 
sponsored by Craig Nelson, founder of ProjectUSA,  www.projectusa.org ) 
 5.   Did you know that you can use a condom and still get pregnant? A variety 
of studies have found that condoms have an “annual failure rate” of 10% to 
36% when it comes to preventing pregnancy. . . . One of the studies found 
that among teenagers, the condom failure rate regarding pregnancy was 
36%! On average, that means that one out of every three teenage couples 
using condoms will become pregnant each year. (Pro-Life America,  www
.prolife.com, accessed July 2006)  
 6.   Emerson and Thoreau both learned from their experience as reformers that 
withdrawal of the good simply abandons the ﬁ eld to the evil. Both were 
involved with the Underground Railroad, and when John Brown came to 
Concord in 1856, seeking money to buy riﬂ es for his Kansas partisans, they 
gave generously. (Len Gougeon, professor of American literature, letter to 
the editor,  Harper’s Magazine, August 2006).  
 7.   Sixty-seven percent of people would prefer that the races be separated. That’s 
what a poll of my listeners is showing. (Mike Gallagher, radio-talk-show host) 
  8. There’s no such thing as a bad Picasso. (Pablo Picasso) 
 9.    PLANET-DISSOLVING DUST CLOUD IS HEADED TOWARD EARTH! It was spewed 
from a black hole 28,000 light-years from Earth and is vaporizing everything 
in its path, astronomers say! (headline in  Weekly World News ) 
 10.   More than 11,000 trendsetters, tastemakers, movers, and shakers gathered in 
Brooklyn’s Williamsburg neighborhood Monday to declare a strike against 
the broad segment of the American population that they say routinely cop-
ies their fashions, musical tastes, and sensibilities. Should the strike persist, 
experts said, it could bring the pop-cultural life of the nation to a standstill. 

360 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
(“U.S. Trendsetters Go On Strike: Nation’s ‘Hip’ Seek Recognition, Royal-
ties,”   The Onion, www.theonion.com, July 18, 2006) 
 11.   In 1994, faced with a national crime crisis, Congress passed the  Violent 
 Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act  (Crime Bill), which provided federal 
funds to allow state and local law enforcement to hire additional police of-
ﬁ cers. The results were dramatic: between 1994 and 2001, violent crime 
dropped by 29 percent, the most sustained decline in 40 years. 
 
   
Since 2001, however, the President and the Republican-controlled 
Congress have cut more than $2 billion in funding for state and local law 
enforcement. And the results have been equally dramatic: violent crime is on 
the rise again. In 2005, violent crime increased at the fastest rate in ﬁ fteen 
years. These statistics foreshadow what could be a troubling trend, a backslid-
ing into the “bad old days” of the 1980s and early 1990s when we were los-
ing the war on crime. (“Bush Republicans Cut Law Enforcement  Funding, 
Crime Rate Increases at the Fastest Rate in Fifteen Years,” Democratic 
Policy Committee,  www.democrats.senate.gov,  July 10, 2006) 
 12.   The scary claims about heat waves and droughts are based on computer mod-
els. But computer models are lousy at predicting climate because water vapor 
and cloud effects cause changes that computers fail to predict. They were un-
able to anticipate the massive amounts of heat energy that escaped the tropics 
over the past 15 years, forcing modelers back to the drawing board. In the 
mid-1970s, computer models told us we should prepare for global cooling. 
 
   
The fundamentalist doom-mongers ignore scientists who say the ef-
fects of global warming may be benign. Harvard astrophysicist Sallie Baliunas 
says added carbon dioxide in the atmosphere may actually beneﬁ t the world 
because more CO 2 helps plants grow. Warmer winters would give farmers a 
longer harvest season. (Tracy, blogger, posted on Anti-Strib,  http://anti-strib
.blogspot.com, July 10, 2006) 
 13.   When the Founders sat down to create this new civil order, they had two 
central truths in mind. One, representative democracy would be the most 
stable and lasting form of government. Two, when the Constitutional Con-
vention wrapped up, they were all going to be out of work. The latter led to 
the formulation of what historians would come to know as the “ Madison 
Hypothesis.” “What if,” opined the diminutive Virginian, “we created a 
 national legislature copious enough in membership, and curious enough in 
structure, as to provide the whole of us a gig for life?” (  Jon Stewart, Ben 
Karlin, David Javerbaum,  America (  The Book),  2004) 
 14.   In 2003, 791 Hispanic workers were fatally injured while at work, down 
12 percent from a high of 895 in 2001. Hispanic worker fatalities accounted 
for 14 percent of the 5,559 total fatal work injuries that occurred in the U.S. 
in 2003. The rate of 4.5 fatalities per 100,000 workers recorded for Hispanic 
workers was a 13 percent higher rate than the rate of 4.0 fatalities per 
100,000 employed recorded for all workers. (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics) 
 15.   The little park originally had been the city’s Potter’s Field, the ﬁ nal  resting 
place of its unclaimed dead, but in the nineteenth century  Washington 
Square became the city’s most fashionable area. By 1911 the old town 

 
Taking Notes 
361
houses stood as a rear guard of an aristocratic past facing the invasions 
of industry from Broadway to the east, low-income groups from the 
crowded streets to the south, and the ﬁ rst inﬁ ltration of artists and writers 
into Greenwich Village to the west. (Leon Stein,  The Triangle Fire  [1962], 
 reprinted in 2001 by Cornell University Press) 
 
 TAKING NOTES 
 When reading, some college students, perhaps overwhelmed by the amount 
of new information they discover in college, tend to highlight an excessive 
number of sentences and paragraphs in their textbooks, waste hundreds of 
dimes at the photocopier, and attempt to write down every word a professor 
utters. That is an understandable reaction, especially since success on tests and 
projects often depends on the ability to recount what was read or heard. But 
remembering every detail is impossible, and trying to take note of every idea 
sinks the most important content in a sea of yellow highlighting and ink. Tak-
ing notes on what you have read, especially when researching a topic, means 
 carefully  selecting what is important and useful as you try to faithfully represent 
the  opposing argument and support your own claims. 
 There are probably as many ways to take notes as there are writers, rang-
ing from simple notations in a notebook to elaborate computer ﬁ les, but the 
easiest and most effective method of note-taking is still the 3-by-5-inch or 
4-by-6-inch index card. The process of recording information on cards is not 
difﬁ cult, and the use of cards can make the initial drafting of an essay much 
easier than using notes recorded in a notebook or even on a computer because 
the cards can be arranged and rearranged as you see ﬁ t.  Arranging the cards is 
easier if you record only a small amount of information on each card.  And be 
sure to number the cards; you’ll know why after you drop them all the ﬁ rst 
time. If you decide not to use note cards, be sure to devise a system that you can 
keep control over and that will serve you well when you begin to draft your 
essay. Some students prefer to photocopy or print out their sources on sheets of 
paper and then to highlight the important information or even cut and paste 
the quotes to their draft. Whatever system you use, your notes will be of two 
kinds: bibliographical and content. Although some of the following advice as-
sumes that you will use note cards, you can modify the advice to ﬁ t whatever 
system you prefer. 
 Bibliographical Information 
 Use one card to record the publication information for each work you will cite 
in your paper. Later in this chapter, you will see what publication information 
(author, title, place of publication, date, page numbers, and so forth) is needed 
in a list of works cited or a bibliography. Be sure to devote one card to this in-
formation for each source, and remember to record everything you will need. 

362 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
There is nothing more frustrating than scrambling around the night before a 
paper is due, looking for bibliographical information. (You’re not the only per-
son to have just thought to yourself,  “I’ll just make it up.”  Don’t forget, your 
professors know the tricks and are usually on the lookout for them!) 
 Content Notes: Quotes, Summaries, and Paraphrases 
 Most of your cards will contain summaries, paraphrases, and quotations from 
sources. You can decide how you want your cards to look, but be consistent in 
whatever format you choose. One possibility is to record a shortened form of 
the source (perhaps the author’s last name), the page number of the source, and 
the note-card number at the top of the card.  Then record your note. 
 Quotations   Obviously,  the easiest note to record is a quotation. Select quo-
tations carefully; as you will see shortly, it is far better for both you and your 
reader to paraphrase when possible. But when you do record a quotation, be 
very careful to place quotation marks around the material and to transcribe the 
quotation accurately. It is best not to omit anything if you copy a quotation, 
but if you do, replace the omission with ellipsis points (three dots). If you add 
anything to the quotation, place the addition in brackets so that you don’t later 
forget that it was not part of the original. Keep in mind that you will not have 
the original passage before you when you write your essay, so it is vitally im-
portant that you indicate clearly in your notes all the information you’ll need to 
accurately cite the quotation. Finally, if you use index cards, be sure to organize 
them in a uniform manner. For example, you might give a shortened form of 
the author’s name and the page number at the top of the card along with the 
number of the card. Below is a passage from an essay by William Carlos  Williams, 
followed by several examples of cards with quotations. 
 Hamilton had hounded him for years. At length he openly called Burr “politi-
cally dangerous.”  What did he mean? Burr wrote demanding an explanation. 
To the party in power,  yes, dangerous he may have been, but to the country—
How? Hamilton refused to answer.  Then let it be pinned down. Either it must 
be one or the other. Burr was not angry. If any one feared it was not he. His 
head was clear, he slept well, he was refreshed and went to the place of the duel. 
Hamilton was ﬁ fty-seven. Burr somewhat younger.  
 
 Hamilton ﬁ red ﬁ rst, the bullet clipping a twig above Burr’s head. His hand was 
trembling. Did he ﬁ re wild, as his seconds say he did, on purpose? Burr’s seconds 
said no, and stuck to it; the bullet came too close to their man’s head to have been 
anything but a plain miss due to a shaking hand. Then Burr ﬁ red. He shot coolly, 
seriously and with conviction. He killed his man, logically and as he meant to 
do and knew he must. For a moment, as he saw his adversary fall, he was over-
come with compassion, then he turned away. Hamilton, before he died, dictated his 
 astonishing testament, in which he says—imagine the ﬂ imsy nature of his lifelong 
enmity toward the man—that, regarding Burr, he “might have been misinformed 
of his intentions.” Good God, what an answer! Work till you are ﬁ fty-seven to ruin 
a man, insult him, malign him and then say, dying: I may have been misinformed. 7 
 Quoting: the act 
of repeating erro-
neously the words 
of another. 
 —Ambrose Bierce 

 
Taking Notes 
363
 
 Williams, page 201             12 
 “He [Burr] shot coolly, seriously and with conviction. He killed 
his man, logically and as he meant to do and knew he must. For a 
moment, as he saw his adversary fall, he was overcome with com-
passion, then he turned away.” 
 QUOTATION 
 
 Williams, page 201             13 
  “Hamilton, before he died, dictated his astonishing testament, 
in which he says—imagine the ﬂ imsy nature of his lifelong enmity 
toward the man—that, regarding Burr, he, might have been misin-
formed of his intentions.’ Good God, what an answer! Work till 
you are ﬁ fty-seven to ruin a man, insult him, malign him and then 
say, dying: I may have been misinformed.” 
 QUOTATION 
 Summaries   In Chapter 7 we looked at methods for summarizing and para-
phrasing arguments, and some of what we discuss here will refresh your memory. In 
using sources, you will often ﬁ nd that you need to summarize and paraphrase not 
just arguments but also essays, reports, explanations, and other materials that will 
aid in the defense of your own claim. A  summary  of an  argument, essay, or article 
contains only the main idea (the thesis) or the claim and, depending on the purpose 
of the summary, the main premises or supporting points. A summary of an essay 
might contain the thesis sentence and the topic idea from each body paragraph. 
How much you summarize depends on how much of the original work you will 
need to remember and how much you intend to use. If you’re simply going to 
refer to the article or argument or highlight its main idea, you can limit yourself 
to a sentence or two, perhaps to an outline; but if you hope to recall some of the 
author’s evidence, you should record that evidence in your summary, as well. 
 To write a summary, read the original several times, underlining (if the 
book or periodical is your property) the main idea and subpoints on the  second 
or third reading. Much of what you learned in Chapter 7 about analyzing argu-
ments will come in handy here. Then try to write the summary without looking 
at the source. You can start with a sentence like “The author is saying that . . .” 
or “The author is arguing that . . .” or “The author is trying to prove that. . . .” If 
you are using cards, you can write this sentence on one card. Then try to recall 
the main developmental points, writing each on a separate card. After you have 

364 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
given the recall method your best shot, go back to the source to see how closely 
you captured the author’s ideas. Revise your cards if necessary, being careful to 
use your own words whenever possible and to put quotation marks around any 
key words and phrases that appear in the original. At this point you can also enter 
additional information under the main points. Sloppy cards full of crossouts and 
revisions should be rewritten to make the task of drafting your essay easier. 
 The following court decision, written by Judge Learned Hand, is sum-
marized on the cards that follow.  
 Repouille v. United States  
 165 F. 2 d  152 (Dec. 5, 1947) 
 Learned Hand, Circuit Judge 
 
 The District Attorney, on behalf of the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service, has appealed from an order, naturalizing the appellee, Repouille. The 
ground of the objection in the district court and here is that he did not show 
himself to have been a person of  “good moral character” for the ﬁ ve years which 
preceded the ﬁ ling of his petition. The facts were as follows. The petition was 
ﬁ led on September 22, 1944, and on October 12, 1939, he had deliberately put 
to death his son, a boy of thirteen, by means of chloroform. His reason for this 
tragic deed was that the child had “suffered from birth from a brain injury which 
destined him to be an idiot and a physical monstrosity malformed in all four limbs. 
The child was blind, mute, and deformed. He had to be fed; the movements of his 
bladder and bowels were involuntary, and his entire life was spent in a small crib.” 
Repouille had four other children at the time towards whom he had always been 
a dutiful and responsible parent; it may be assumed that his act was to help him in 
their nurture, which was being compromised by the burden imposed upon him in 
the care of the ﬁ fth. The family was altogether dependent upon his industry for its 
support. He was indicted for manslaughter in the ﬁ rst degree; but the jury brought 
in a verdict of manslaughter in the second degree with a recommendation of the 
“utmost clemency”; and the judge sentenced him to not less than ﬁ ve years nor 
more than ten, execution to be stayed, and the defendant to be placed on proba-
tion, from which he was discharged in December, 1945. Concededly, except for 
this act he conducted himself as a person of “good moral character” during the 
ﬁ ve years before he ﬁ led his petition. Indeed, if he had waited before ﬁ ling his pe-
tition from September 22, to October 14, 1944, he would have had a clear record 
for the necessary period, and would have been admitted without question. 
 
 Very recently we had to pass upon the phrase “good moral character” in the Na-
tionality Act; 1 and we said that it set as a test, not those standards which we might 
ourselves approve, but whether “the moral feelings, now prevalent  generally in this 
country” would “be outraged” by the conduct in question: that is, whether it con-
formed to “the generally accepted moral conventions current at the time.” [  United 
States v. Francioso,  164 F2d 163 (2d Cir., 1947)]. In the absence of some national 
inquisition, like a Gallup poll, that is indeed a difﬁ cult test to apply; often questions 
will arise to which the answer is not ascertainable, and where the petitioner must 
fail only because he has the afﬁ rmative. Indeed, in the case at bar itself the answer 
is not wholly certain; for we all know that there are great numbers of people of the 
most unimpeachable virtue, who think it morally justiﬁ able to put an end to a life 
so inexorably destined to be a burden to others, and so far as any possible interest of 

 
Taking Notes 
365
its own is concerned—condemned to a brutish existence, lower indeed than all but 
the lowest forms of sentient life. Nor is it inevitably an answer to say that it must be 
immoral to do this, until the law provides security against the abuses which would 
inevitably follow, unless the practice were regulated. Many people—probably most 
people—do not make it a ﬁ nal ethical test of conduct that it should not violate law; 
few of us exact of ourselves or of others the unﬂ inching obedience of a Socrates. 
There being no lawful means of accomplishing an end, which they believe to be 
righteous in itself, there have always been conscientious persons who feel no scru-
ple in acting in deﬁ ance of a law which is repugnant to their personal convictions, 
and who even regard as martyrs those who suffer by doing so. In our own history it 
is only necessary to recall the Abolitionists. It is reasonably clear that the jury which 
tried Repouille did not feel any moral repulsion at his crime. Although it was ines-
capably murder in the ﬁ rst degree, not only did they bring in a verdict that was ﬂ atly 
in the face of the facts and utterly absurd—for manslaughter in the second degree 
presupposes that the killing has not been deliberate—but they coupled even that 
with a recommendation which showed that in substance they wished to exculpate 
the offender. Moreover, it is also plain, from the sentence which he imposed, that 
the judge could not have seriously disagreed with their recommendation. 
 
 One might be tempted to seize upon all this as a reliable measure of current 
morals; and no doubt it should have its place in the scale; but we should hesitate 
to accept it as decisive, when, for example, we compare it with the fate of a similar 
offender in Massachusetts, who, although he was not executed, was imprisoned for 
life. Left at large as we are, without means of verifying our conclusion, and without 
authority to substitute our individual beliefs, the outcome must needs be tenta-
tive; and not much is gained by discussion. We can say no more than that, quite 
independently of what may be the current moral feeling as to legally administered 
euthanasia, we feel reasonably secure in holding that only a minority of virtuous 
persons would deem the practice morally justiﬁ able, while it remains in private 
hands, even when the provocation is as overwhelming as it was in this instance. 
 
 However, we wish to make it plain that a new petition would not be open 
to this objection; and that the pitiable event, now long passed, will not prevent 
Repouille from taking his place among us as a citizen. The assertion in his brief 
that he did not “intend” the petition to be ﬁ led until 1945, unhappily is irrel-
evant; the statute makes crucial the actual date of ﬁ ling. 
 
 Order reversed; petition dismissed without prejudice to the ﬁ ling of a second 
petition. 
 Here is a one-card summary, highlighting only the main point: 
 Hand ( Repouille v. United States )            1 
 Supporting an appeal from the Immigration and Naturaliza-
tion Service, the court reverses a lower court order that granted 
 Repouille citizenship since Repouille had not shown himself to be 
a person of  “good moral character” over the ﬁ ve years preceding 
his application for citizenship. 
 SUMMARY 
 

366 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
 Here is an additional card giving a more detailed summary of the central 
argument: 
 
 Hand ( Repouille v. United States )              2 
 Hand reversed the lower court’s order granting citizenship for the 
 following reasons: 
 The law requires that applicants for citizenship show themselves to 
be persons of “good moral character” for the ﬁ ve years preceding 
their application. 
 In euthanizing his son less than ﬁ ve years before his application, 
 Repouille had shown himself not to be a person of “good moral 
character.” 
 Therefore, he cannot be considered for citizenship. 
 SUMMARY 
 
 And here is a third card providing a summary of the second premise in the main 
argument: 
 Hand ( Repouille v. United States )             3 
 In euthanizing his son, Repouille had shown himself not to be a person 
of “good moral character.” 
 A person of “good moral character” commits no actions that (as 
stated in another court decision,  United States v. Francioso) outrage the 
“generally accepted moral convictions current at the time.” 
 While some evidence suggests that some people (the jury in 
 Repouille’s trial for manslaughter, for example) do  not consider 
 private euthanasia an immoral act, there is no “reliable measure” of 
whether euthanasia outrages prevailing moral convictions. 
 In the absence of a reliable measure of public morals, the court holds 
that “only a minority of virtuous persons would deem the practice 
morally justiﬁ able.” 
 Therefore someone committing euthanasia is not a person of 
“good moral character.” 
 SUMMARY (subargument) 
 

 
Taking Notes 
367
 How you intend to use Hand’s argument will dictate what you sum-
marize. Whatever your purpose, be sure to represent the original writer fairly 
and accurately. 
 Paraphrasing   Whereas a summary condenses an entire argument or article, 
a paraphrase restates a passage in different words. Just as explaining a complex 
process to someone else helps you better learn the process, recasting an idea 
into your own words helps you take possession of the idea. You still have to 
acknowledge your source, but you will be better able to use the idea for your 
own purposes if you have stated it in a manner that you understand. Consider, 
for example, the following passage, written by Francis Bacon in the seven-
teenth century:
 Studies serve for delight, for ornament, and for ability. Their chief use for delight 
is in privateness and retiring; for ornament, is in discourse; and for ability, is in 
judgment and disposition of business. For expert men can execute and perhaps 
judge of particulars, one by one; but the general counsels, and the plots and mar-
shaling of affairs, come best from those that are learned. To spend too much time 
in studies is sloth; to use them too much for ornament is affectation; to make 
judgment wholly by their rules is the humor of a scholler. 8 
 Some modern readers, faced with this passage, might give up a few sen-
tences into it. The expression appears alien to us; some words even seem to 
have been misspelled. But a close examination of the passage allows us to 
rephrase Bacon’s Renaissance style and language and to take from the passage 
an interesting idea. 
 For the sake of comparison, the original passage is given on the left:
Studies serve for delight, for 
ornament, and for ability. 
Their chief use for delight is 
in  privateness and retiring; for 
 ornament, is in discourse; and 
for ability, is in judgment and 
disposition of business.
Reading and pursuing knowl-
edge (“study”) allows us to do 
three things: entertain (“delight”) 
 ourselves in private, adorn or em-
bellish (“ornament”) our speech 
(“discourse”), and increase our 
 abilities to, for example, make 
better decisions (“judgment and 
disposition”) in conducting our 
business.
For expert men can execute and 
perhaps judge of particulars, one 
by one; but the general counsels, 
and the plots and marshaling of 
affairs, come best from those that 
are learned.
Experts, those who excel at or 
specialize in one thing, are good 
at handling particular problems 
within their area of expertise, but 
the larger issues of life (“the general 
counsels,” etc.) are handled best 
by those who have studied more 
widely, who are more “learned.”

368 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
To spend too much time in 
studies is sloth; to use them too 
much for ornament is affecta-
tion; to make judgment wholly 
by their rules is the humor of a 
scholler.
Of course, spending too much 
time reading is laziness (“sloth”); 
referring too much to our reading, 
dropping quotes in everywhere, 
for example, is just showing off 
(“affectation”); and reacting to life 
according to the rules we’ve read 
is the characteristic (“humor” in 
the old sense) of a scholar, some-
one who spends too much time in 
school, someone who doesn’t get 
out much into the real world.
 You will notice that paraphrasing means more than just substituting syn-
onyms for original words. Paraphrasing is almost like translating—looking up 
words to discover their meanings ( sloth  means “laziness”), using language you 
are more comfortable with, condensing phrases into words, turning words into 
phrases, and adding details to help clarify the point. If necessary, you can break 
up sentences and rearrange the parts as long as you don’t lose the original 
meaning. You don’t have to replace every word of the original, struggling to 
ﬁ nd your own words for common expressions (“too much time” appears in 
both the original and the paraphrase). Nor do you have to “translate” every 
word, especially those that you believe are essential (our paraphrase retains 
the word  learned  ). The goal of a good paraphrase is to capture the essence of 
the original passage and to repeat the original in your own voice, proving 
to the reader that you have full  possession  of the idea, even though you had to 
borrow it. 
 In other words, paraphrasing is not easy, primarily because it requires that 
you know what you are doing. You must actively, energetically engage the text 
you are reading, think about it, and understand it. Your instinct may be to give 
up, to say to yourself, “What?! I don’t get it!” and to move on, or fall asleep, or 
order a pizza. Paraphrasing is harder than quoting because it requires greater 
understanding of the original so that the author’s meaning is not misrepre-
sented or distorted. When paraphrasing, imagine the original author looking 
over your shoulder, reading every word that you write. If he or she gives you 
a funny look or says, “Hey, I didn’t mean that!” you must start again. If while 
recording your notes you run out of energy trying to paraphrase, copy down 
the entire quotation (be sure to mark it as a quotation); you can always work 
on the paraphrase when you get to your draft.  
 EXERCISE 12.4 
 Split into groups of three or four and, working individually, paraphrase each of the 
following passages on an index card. (The passages get progressively more  difﬁ cult.) 
Then compare your paraphrases. Are there any differences between individual 

 
Taking Notes 
369
cards? If so, what accounts for those differences: a misreading of the original, an 
ill-chosen synonym, a detail not warranted in the original? 
1.   College students dream of the clean sheets, good food and private bath-
room that are home. Many schools have a long weekend break in October, 
and frosh who live nearby often come home for the ﬁ rst time then. They 
may bring along new friends, or arrive with only their dirty laundry and 
new ideas. Many other students don’t make it home until Thanksgiving. Still 
 others, who attend distant schools, ﬁ rst return at Christmas. That four-week 
or four-month absence feels like an eon, and the distance from school to 
home—even if it’s only an hour—seems like travel from outer space to Earth 
or the other way around. (Linda Polland Puner,  Starting Out Suburban: A Frosh 
Year Survival Guide ) 
2.   America is also the inventor of that most mythic individual hero, the  cowboy, 
who again and again saves a society he can never completely ﬁ t into. The 
cowboy has a special talent—he can shoot straighter and faster than other 
men—and a special sense of justice. But these characteristics make him so 
unique that he can never fully belong to society. His destiny is to defend 
society without ever really joining it. He rides off alone into the sunset like 
Shane, or like the Lone Ranger moves on accompanied only by his Indian 
companion. But the cowboy’s importance is not that he is isolated or antiso-
cial. Rather, his signiﬁ cance lies in his unique, individual virtue and special 
skill, and it is because of those qualities that society needs and welcomes him. 
(Robert N. Bellah et al.,  Habits of the Heart: Individualism and Commitment in 
American Life ) 
3.   The photograph—to narrow it down—reduces us to two dimensions and it 
makes us small enough to be represented on a piece of paper or a frame of 
ﬁ lm. We have been trained by the camera to see the external world. We look 
at and not  into, as one philosopher has put it. We do not allow ourselves to 
be  drawn  into what we see. We have been trained to go by the externals. The 
camera shows us only those, and it is we who do the rest. What we do this 
 with is the imagination. What photographs have to show us is the external 
 appearance of objects or beings in the real world, and this is only a portion of 
their reality. It is after all a convention. (Saul Bellow, “Graven Images”) 
4.  One of many insights that individuals must gain along the path to literacy is 
phonemic awareness. Research has shown that phonemic awareness is a more 
potent predictor of success in reading than IQ or measures of vocabulary and 
listening comprehension and that if it is lacking, emergent readers are  unlikely to 
gain mastery over print. However, teachers can provide activities that facilitate the 
acquisition of phonemic awareness. With an assessment device readily available, 
practitioners can quickly identify those children who may beneﬁ t most from 
phonemic awareness activities and reduce the role that one factor—phonemic 
awareness—plays in inhibiting their success in reading and spelling. (Hallie Kay 
Yopp, “A Test for Assessing Phonemic Awareness in Young Children”)  
5.   Hip-hop culture is quickly becoming American culture. 
 
  Children as young as ﬁ ve years old are singing hip-hop lyrics, not knowing 
what they mean. 

370 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
 
  Unfortunately, more and more messages of sexism and misogyny are being 
taught through lyrics and music videos. As these ideas and thoughts continue 
to cultivate in mainstream hip-hop, narrow-mindedness ﬂ oods the brains of 
listeners of all races. 
 
  As this new “lifestyle” gains more popularity, the inﬂ uence on society 
 becomes apparent. Women are no longer seen as human beings, but sex 
 objects, more or less fashion accessories. These feelings and ideas then force 
themselves into conventional thinking. Directly or indirectly, listeners are 
 supporting an environment that consents to sexism. . . . 
 
  . . . [W]ith the rise in rap and hip-hop popularity, there seems to be a rise 
in violence against women, too. Coincidentally, violence against women is 
rising steadily with females being more and more sexualized in mainstream 
media. Not only that, but there is also a steady increase in the imprisonment 
of minority youths alongside the glamorization of rap music. . . . (Shandra 
Liyanarchi, “Hip-Hop Culture Degrades Women,”  The Kentucky Kernel,  
February 16, 2005. Available online  at www.kykernel.com/media/storage/paper305/
news/2005/02/16/Opinions/HipHop.Culture.Degrades.Women-865462
.shtml?norewrite200608011132&sourcedomain=www.kykernel.com. )  
 If summarizing and paraphrasing are so difﬁ cult, why not just quote? For 
one thing, it can be very confusing for the reader to see so many quotations 
stitched together in a paper. Because you write, whether you know it or not, 
in a particular style and voice, the reader gets accustomed to that voice, which 
is interrupted by a different voice each time you drop in a quotation. Many 
inexperienced writers quote too often, creating a harsh blend of dissonant 
sounds and producing a paper that suggests the writer is uncomfortable with 
his or her own voice and ideas. But more important, quoting should be saved 
for words that are truly worth quoting. If it is the writer’s  idea you want to use, 
there is no reason to use the words; but if you want to analyze the writer’s lan-
guage, or if the words are particularly signiﬁ cant, quoting is warranted. The last 
sentences of   The Communist Manifesto,  for instance, would lose their impact if 
translated into a paraphrase:
 Quotation:  At the end of their manifesto, Marx and Engels must have terriﬁ ed 
many of Europe’s capitalists: “Let the ruling classes tremble at a communist revo-
lution. The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world 
to win. Working men of all countries, unite!” 
 Paraphrase:  Marx and Engels must have terriﬁ ed many of Europe’s capitalists 
when they mentioned revolution in the last lines of their manifesto. They called 
on the world’s workers to join together. After all, the workers had little to sacri-
ﬁ ce and much to gain.  
Although the paraphrase doesn’t misrepresent the intent of the original, it 
washes it clean of any power or signiﬁ cance. In a case like this, it might be best 
to let the writers speak for themselves. 
 I hate quotations. 
Tell me what you 
know. 
 —Ralph Waldo 
Emerson 

 
Taking Notes 
371
 EXERCISE 12.5 
 Below are quotations from various sources. If you were using these sources in a 
paper, would you quote, summarize, or paraphrase? Explain your decision.  
 1. A player loses the point if in playing the ball he deliberately carries or catches 
it on his racket or deliberately touches it with his racket more than once. 
(United States Tennis Association, rule 20d) 
2.   I am in awe of them, and I feel privileged to have been a witness to their 
lives and their sacriﬁ ces. There were so many other people whose stories 
could have been in this book, who embodied the standards of greatness in 
the everyday that the people in this book represent, and that give this gen-
eration its special quality and distinction. As I came to know many of them, 
and their stories, I became more convinced of my judgment on that day 
marking the ﬁ ftieth anniversary of D-Day. This is the greatest generation 
any society has produced. (Tom Brokaw,  The Greatest Generation; Brokaw’s 
book is about American men and women who came of age during the Great 
 Depression and World War II.)  
3.   Gym class was another brush with fascism. You line up in your squads, and 
you better be wearing your little gym suits. If you are not wearing the gym 
suit, you are not taking gym class. “Remember kids, exercise has no effect 
unless you’re wearing these special suits.” ( Jerry Seinfeld,  SeinLanguage ) 
 4. American athletes tend to be an obsessed bunch, but the trend toward en-
durance extremes has sounded alarms in the medical community. In the 
short term, common consequences of prolonged, strenuous exercise include 
tendonitis, stress fractures and chronic fatigue syndrome. But research is be-
ginning to show that by racing ever farther and longer, athletes may also be 
putting themselves at risk for a host of chronic diseases, even cancer. (Andrew 
Tabor, “Using Up Too Much Too Soon: Pushing the Body to Athletic Ex-
tremes May Be Harmful to Your Health,” Salon, July 26, 1999. Available on-
line at www.salon.com/health/feature/1999/07/26/ultrathletics/index.html.) 
5.   We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that 
they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that 
among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. That to secure these 
rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers 
from the consent of the governed. That whenever any form of government 
becomes destructive to these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or to 
abolish it, and to institute new government, laying its foundation on such 
principles and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem 
most likely to effect their safety and happiness. (Thomas Jefferson,  Declaration 
of Independence ) 
 A ﬁ nal word about taking notes: As you read—quoting, summarizing, 
and paraphrasing on your note cards or in your notebook—you will inevi-
tably have ideas of your own, reactions to what you have read or thoughts 
about where to place quotations and paraphrases in your ﬁ nal paper. If you 

372 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
are actively engaged with what you read, you will be shocked or upset to 
 discover evidence contrary to your claims, thrilled to ﬁ nd supporting evidence, 
 disturbed at the tone of a writer, incredulous at some author’s outrageous as-
sertions, and puzzled over another’s implausible conclusions. As we said earlier 
in this chapter, you will also be inspired toward your own inferences, and you 
will see connections previously unknown. Whenever these thoughts and reac-
tions occur to you, write them down! We all know the frustration of being 
unable to recall the insights that pop like a soap bubble in our heads and are 
gone forever. When you record these reactions and thoughts, be sure to indi-
cate clearly that they are yours. If using cards, use a different color of card or 
give the card a distinguishing heading. But whatever you do, write it down. 
 USING SOURCES 
 So now you have a stack of note cards and a head full of ideas. In Chapter 13, 
we address the process of drafting and revising essays, advice that is applicable 
to this chapter as well if you are going to assemble your thoughts and notes 
into an effective paper, so you might want to read Chapter 13 before you begin 
writing. Keep in mind that it is  your  paper that is being written—don’t turn 
your essay over to your sources, allowing them to carry the weight or speak for 
you. Think of your paper as a conversation between you, the reader, and the 
various outsiders you have brought in to help you defend your viewpoint or 
represent your opponent. Your quotations, summaries, and paraphrases should 
ﬂ ow naturally with your own writing, creating an almost seamless presenta-
tion from start to ﬁ nish. What follows are recommendations on incorporating 
outside sources into your essay.  
 Acknowledging Sources 
 Plagiarism.  It would be almost impossible to ﬁ nd a college student who hasn’t 
heard that ugly word, and, honestly, it might be just as difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd one 
who hasn’t committed some small act of plagiarism somewhere in his or her 
academic life—the lifted passages from the World Book Encyclopedia in fourth 
grade, the middle-school essay that a parent contributed more than a few sen-
tences to, the fabricated bibliography entry in a high school research project. 
Although these actions may have been disregarded or gone unnoticed, plagia-
rism, especially in college, is considered one of the most severe forms of aca-
demic dishonesty. Punishments for those who are caught range from failure on 
the speciﬁ c paper to expulsion from school. Even those who get away with it 
suffer, primarily because the failure to develop research skills inevitably shows 
up at some point in the future. 
 There are probably as many reasons for cheating as there are cheaters. 
Students may panic because they have waited too long to begin a paper or 
because they can’t ﬁ nd the best words to express their ideas. Some students 

 
Using Sources 
373
lack the conﬁ dence to trust their own thoughts, or they argue to themselves, 
frustrated and defeated, that someone else has already expressed those thoughts 
in better language. 
 There may be students who simply feel overwhelmed by the course 
material—in over their heads to the point where it seems better to hand in 
someone else’s paper than to submit a sure failure of one’s own. Some stu-
dents claim that cheating is a common practice and necessary to get ahead 
in the world, and others seem to believe that the goal of higher education is 
to receive a degree, not to learn skills or develop the dispositions and habits 
of an educated person. Whatever the reason, plagiarism is wrong. Period. It 
is theft: It violates the principles of academic integrity; it provides an unfair 
advantage over students who work hard at their own writing; it shows great 
disrespect for the original author and contempt for the reader; it wastes tuition 
dollars; it cheapens the institution the student attends; it leaves the thief with 
no skills other than deception; and it can be discovered, even years later, with 
dire consequences. And because most students know that plagiarism is wrong, 
it seems to us that real plagiarists—the ones who buy papers on the Internet 
or copy whole passages from obscure journals—are rare. Most plagiarism, we 
contend, occurs because students are not sure exactly what plagiarism is and 
how to avoid it.  
 Plagiarism comes from the Latin plagium, meaning “kidnapping.” A pla-
giarist, in other words, is a kidnapper. Not only does the origin of the word 
show how serious the crime is considered to be, it also gives some idea of how 
authors feel when their words are stolen. To plagiarize means to kidnap, or, to 
be more modern about it, to take, the creations—thoughts, words, writings, 
inventions, charts, or tables—of another person, whether those creations have 
been published or not, and to pass them off as one’s own creations. And even 
if you take those creations and dress them up a bit differently, using synonyms 
or rearranging the sentences, you are still guilty of plagiarism if you fail to tell 
your readers or listeners who the original creator is. Although most students 
haven’t yet published their ideas, many of us know the feeling of having our 
creations stolen. Have you ever, in a moment of inspiration, produced a snappy 
one-liner, sending your friends into hysterical laughter, only to hear your line 
repeated later by someone else who fails to acknowledge you? Or have you 
ever proposed a truly insightful solution to a problem, only to have the solu-
tion repeated to you days later as if you had never heard it before? If so, you 
know the feeling of having your creations plagiarized. 
 Better thine own 
work is, though 
done with fault, 
than doing 
 others’ work, even 
 excellently. 
 —Bhagavad-Gita 
 A student at Texas Tech University submitted a paper to a professor 
who immediately recognized the work. The professor himself had writ-
ten the paper years earlier while a student at the same university. It had 
apparently ended up in a fraternity’s ﬁ les. 
 Critical Thinking Lapse 

374 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
 When plagiarism appears in a scholarly work, it usually takes one of three 
forms: 
•   Material from an outside source is presented word-for-word or detail-
for-detail as the student’s original work with no acknowledgment 
whatsoever of the source. In this type of plagiarism, a student is tak-
ing credit for an author’s words and ideas. 
•   Material from an outside source is  paraphrased  with no acknowledg-
ment of the source. In this type of plagiarism, the student is taking 
credit for an author’s idea. 
•   Material from an outside source is incorporated into a student’s 
work and a weak effort is made to acknowledge the source. Usually, 
the student fails to use the conventional means of acknowledgment: 
introductions to quotations, quotation marks where necessary, par-
enthetical mention of page numbers, indentation of longer quotes, 
internal references (“the author goes on to argue . . .”), footnotes, and 
so forth. This kind of plagiarism is usually the result of indifference, 
uncertainty, carelessness, or ignorance. 
 It is this last sort of plagiarism—cheating from ignorance—that shows up 
most often in student papers. So let’s assume that no student wants to plagia-
rize. No student wants to deliberately take credit for ideas that are not his or 
her own. How is plagiarism to be avoided? 
 First, know what  does not  have to be acknowledged. All writers owe a 
great debt to the millions of writers who have preceded them. Many of the 
ideas that we hold are the result of years of reading and thinking about what 
others have taught us. Much of what we know and think does not have to be 
credited. Any generally known fact, facts available in a wide variety of sources, 
and indisputable facts—Hemingway wrote  A Farewell to Arms;  the Great 
 Depression began in 1929; Canada has ten provinces; Barack Obama was born 
in 1961—need not be footnoted. Even if you are discovering the fact for the 
ﬁ rst time, it might not have to be cited. For example, in doing research for an 
argument on capital punishment, you might discover that capital punishment 
was suspended for several years in this country, from 1972 to 1976. Although 
that fact is new to you, it is one that many people are aware of or one that can 
be veriﬁ ed in many sources, so it need not be cited. 
 Some phrases and quotations do not have to be cited, but these are rare 
and usually amount to proverbs, clichés, and recognized literary quotations. If 
you started a paper with, for example, “The Lord is my shepherd,” or “To err 
is human,” or “To be or not to be,” you would not necessarily have to men-
tion the Bible, Alexander Pope, or Shakespeare. You could if you liked, but 
without acknowledgment the reader would know that the saying is not your 
creation. 
 You  do have to acknowledge the following and provide documentation: 
•   Direct quotations. 

 
Using Sources 
375
•   Statistics and results of surveys. If you ﬁ nd in a paragraph, a table, or a 
chart, for example, that Americans watch an average of ﬁ ve hours of tele-
vision a day, you must tell your reader who provided that information.  
•   Facts not currently widely known, especially new discoveries. If, for 
example, a writer uncovered the truth about a historical event or 
person, you must give the writer credit. Eventually, the discovery 
may become extensively known, but until it does, acknowledge the 
source. 
•   Facts that have not yet gained acceptance, that are still considered 
controversial, or that you feel your reader might ﬁ nd hard to believe.  
•   Descriptions of events and any plans, graphics, drawings, tables, charts, 
or other visual items that you reproduce in a paper. 
•   Unusual verbal illustrations. If a writer clariﬁ es a point by providing 
an illustration that is unique, unusual, very creative, and so forth, give 
the writer credit if you borrow the illustration. 
•   Any ideas not your own. The judgments, opinions, interpretations, 
explanations, deﬁ nitions, and claims made by other thinkers, includ-
ing writers, speakers, and professors, must be cited. 
 Use your best judgment in deciding when to cite sources. It can be very 
discouraging to discover that our best thoughts have been expressed elsewhere. 
Many students who fail to give credit to their sources do so because they feel 
that if they attribute their ideas to someone else, the reader will think them 
ignorant for coming up with nothing new. There are ways to incorporate the 
ideas of other writers without turning your essay over to those writers. We 
 address these methods in the following section.  
 EXERCISE 12.6 
 In groups of four, individually examine the following facts, all of which are true. 
Which of these facts do you feel should be documented? Which do you feel could 
be used in an essay without reference to a source? After you have decided, share 
your answers as a group. What differences do you note? Discuss those differences 
and try to reach agreement on what should be documented and what can appear 
without citation.  
 1.   With the Gulf of  Tonkin Resolution, the U.S. Congress authorized in-
creased military action in Vietnam. 
 2.   In 1764, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed a symphony. He was eight 
years old. 
 3.   In one Amish community in Pennsylvania, roughly three-quarters of all sui-
cides that occurred in a one-hundred-year period were in just four families. 
 4.   The best-selling album of all time is The Eagles’  Their Greatest Hits .  
 5.   Alabama imports rocks from other states for prison chain gangs to crush. 
 6.   Johnny Rotten, lead singer of the Sex Pistols, was born John Lydon. 

376 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
 7.  Audrey Hepburn, not Julie Andrews, starred in the 1964 movie version of 
 My Fair Lady .  
 8.  The two most prevalent judicial systems in the world are the inquisitorial 
system and the adversarial system. The United States uses the latter. 
 9.  The Bill of Rights originally applied only to the federal government, not to 
the states. 
10.   Charles Dickens’s childhood experiences of humiliation, including his 
 father’s imprisonment for debt and Dickens’s subsequent work in a 
 shoe-polish factory, inﬂ uenced his work as a novelist. 
11.   Hoping to become an artist, Adolf Hitler applied to the Vienna Academy of 
Fine Arts in October 1907 but was rejected. Later, penniless and unwilling 
to work, he ended up in a homeless shelter. 
12.   Because digital circuits operate in the binary number system, all circuit vari-
ables are either 1 or 0. Information in digital systems is processed through 
the use of Boolean algebra, which is based on the idea that logical proposi-
tions are either true or false. “True” corresponds to the digital value of 1; 
“false” corresponds to 0. 
13.   There is water on Mars. 
14.   Barry Bonds holds the record for home runs in a season: 73. 
15.   The rings of Jupiter are made up of dust created when Jupiter’s four inner-
most moons collided with comets, asteroids, and other material.  
 Incorporating Sources 
 A researched argument should be more than a collection of source material. 
The argument you write should present your conclusion, your point of view, 
your opinion, backed up by the evidence and arguments that you have col-
lected. One method for ensuring that your paper is your own is to write the 
argument ﬁ rst without sources and then to plug in your sources where needed. 
If you use this method, be careful not to “accidentally” borrow some ideas that 
you fail to credit. 
 When you write, remember that the paper is yours: your name is on it; 
you will receive a grade for the work, including the quality of the writing, the 
strength of the argument, the caliber of your sources, and the appropriate use of 
those sources. Because it is your paper, let your sources serve you rather than the 
other way around. Present your case and use your sources to bolster your argu-
ment. In other words, as you write, think, “This is my argument and so-and-so 
agrees with me,” or “This is my argument and here’s the evidence I found to 
prove it.” Don’t think, “This is what everyone else said, and I agree with them.” 
 The trick to using quoted material is to make the quotation ﬁ t gracefully 
and logically into your own writing. Even with quotations added, your sen-
tences must make grammatical sense, and your paragraphs must be  coherent. 
The quoted material cannot interrupt the ﬂ ow of your prose. Following is 
some advice on incorporating sources into your writing. All documentation 

 
Using Sources 
377
in this section accords with guidelines established by the Modern Language 
 Association (MLA). These guidelines are generally used by writers of research 
papers in the humanities (philosophy, literature, foreign languages, and so 
forth). Not all disciplines use MLA style; some use, for example, the guidelines 
of the American Psychological Association (APA). Your professor will tell you 
which he or she prefers. 
 Quoting Words and Phrases   Often the passage you ﬁ nd useful will 
amount to no more than a word or a phrase. Even such short passages must be 
quoted if the word or phrase is unique to the writer or if it clearly indicates 
the writer’s point of view or opinion. If you use a quoted word within a para-
phrase, be sure to use quotation marks around the word: 
 So great was essayist William Cobbett’s hatred for cities and upper-class gov-
ernment ofﬁ cials that he often referred to London as “The Wen,” which means 
pimple, and to Parliament as “The Thing.” 
 One especially poor customer saved a few pennies for “luxury” items, a packet 
of Kool-Aid and a small angel food cake for his children (Fetterman 117). 
Notice how the quoted words ﬁ t neatly into each sentence. The same smooth 
effect can be accomplished when quoting longer passages. 
 Quoting and Paraphrasing Longer Passages   In quoting a sentence or 
two (usually under ﬁ fty words) from the original, provide an introduction to 
the sentence that establishes its context and helps the reader understand its 
meaning and relevance to your point. Your introduction can include the author 
of the quote and, if necessary and applicable, the printed source of the quote. 
The following are examples of a quoted sentence that follows from the intro-
duction and the same quotation introduced with the author’s name.  
 Before the new student union is constructed, we should gather items to place 
in the foundation, in much the same way ancient builders “buried under cor-
nerstones and posts and thresholds and inside walls and chimney piles these 
among other items: food, gems, coins, pottery, plants, statues, arrowheads, 
bottles of wine, carcasses of cattle and sheep, horses’ heads and hoofs, and, as 
many legends have it, living human beings” (Kidder 304). 
 Before the new student union is constructed, we should gather items to place 
in the foundation, in much the same way ancient builders, as Tracey Kidder 
 reminds us, “buried under cornerstones and posts . . .” (304). 
 You can introduce your quotation in a variety of ways. Use dialogue tags 
at the beginning of the sentence or within it, or use an introductory phrase 
and the word  that , or use an introductory phrase and a colon or a comma: 
 As Tracey Kidder points out, “. . .” 
 As Albert Camus once noted, “. . .” 
 According to Julia Kristeva, “. . .” 
 From this evidence, concludes Caute, “. . .” 

378 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
 In a recent lecture on John Donne’s later poems, Professor Marian Williams 
pointed out that “. . .” 
 One look at the transcript of the trial reminds us that “. . .” 
 Churchill decided quickly: “. . .” 
 Darrow’s argument seemed irrefutable: “. . .” 
 Occasionally, an introductory comment or phrase can be omitted, as 
when, for example, you want to start your essay with a quotation or when you 
want to segue into a quotation without announcing it. The transition between 
your words and the quoted passage must be smooth so as not to jar the reader, 
and the connection between your words and the quotation must be appar-
ent. Notice how in the following paragraph John Kenneth Galbraith leads his 
reader gracefully to the quotation:
 Economics, not entirely by accident, became a subject of serious study at an 
important turning point in the history of western man. This was when the 
wealth of national communities began, for the ﬁ rst time, to show a steady and 
persistent improvement. This change, which in advanced countries like England 
and Holland came some time in the eighteenth century, must be counted one 
of the momentous events in the history of the world. “From the earliest times of 
which we have record—back, say, to two thousand years before Christ—down 
to the beginning of the eighteenth century, there was no very great change in 
the standard of living of the average man living in the civilized centers of the 
earth. Ups and downs certainly. Visitations of plague, famine and war. Golden 
intervals. But no progressive violent change.” 9 
 If you want to include a paraphrase in your paper, you must be sure 
to credit the source of the idea, which means you must be a bit more care-
ful about your introduction because there are no quotation marks to tell the 
reader where the borrowed idea begins. Compare, for example, the following 
two paragraphs: 
 If we hope to cure some of the ills plaguing our system of education in America, 
we might do well to look to China, where the education system has produced 
children steeped in the basics and often capable of great accomplishments. 
China cannot solve all of our educational problems, but the fact that its chil-
dren generally grow up happy may indicate something about the success of 
education there (Gardner 317–318). 
 If we hope to cure some of the ills plaguing our system of education in America, 
we might take Howard Gardner’s advice and look to China, where the education 
system has produced children steeped in the basics and often capable of great 
accomplishments. China cannot solve all of our educational problems, Gardner 
concedes, but the fact that its children generally grow up happy may indicate 
something about the success of education there (Gardner 317–318).  
In the ﬁ rst paragraph, it is impossible to tell where Gardner’s contribution 
begins and ends. The reader might assume that only the last sentence or even 
the last phrase has come from Gardner’s book. In paraphrasing, be careful to 
provide a clear introduction and reminders along the way. Phrases like “Gard-
ner continues,” “He further notes that,” “In a later passage, Gardner  retracts his 

 
Summary 
379
comments,” and so forth will make your writing clear and keep you free from 
charges of plagiarism. 
 If you are following one quotation or paraphrase with another, be sure to 
let the reader know how the two passages relate to each other. Is the second a 
refutation, a clariﬁ cation, a conﬁ rmation, or what? A simple transition might 
do the trick: 
 Shelley responded emphatically, “. . .” 
Or you might need a somewhat more elaborate transition: 
 Refusing to accept Peacock’s deﬁ nition of poetry, Shelley offered his own: “. . .” 
 Block Quotations   If a quotation amounts to more than four or ﬁ ve lines of 
type in your text (generally ﬁ fty or more words), you should block the quota-
tion, maintaining the double spacing, omitting quotation marks, and indenting 
the left margin ﬁ ve spaces. 
 It’s difﬁ cult not to be moved by Lincoln’s testament to the fallen soldiers at 
Gettysburg: 
 The world will little note nor long remember what we say here, but it can 
never forget what they did here. It is for us the living rather to be dedicated 
here to the unﬁ nished work which they who fought here have thus far so 
nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task 
remaining before us—that from these honored dead we take increased devo-
tion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion—that 
we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain, that this 
nation under God shall have a new birth of freedom, and that government 
of the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth. 
Because of the indentation, readers know where the quotation begins and 
ends, which is why quotation marks are unnecessary, as are reminders or dia-
logue tags. 
 Conducting research, reading carefully and critically, taking notes, and 
coherently and accurately incorporating what you have found into your own 
work is not easy, but if you remember that it is your argument you are defend-
ing with the help of outside sources, not someone else’s argument that you are 
repeating or copying, and if you approach research with the right attitude—
that we can all learn a great deal from the giants on whose shoulders we 
stand—your work as a researcher and writer will be gratifying and rewarding. 
You can quote us on that. 
 SUMMARY 
1.   Research does not have to be an intimidating task. Besides helping you 
to write more-solid arguments, research can assist you in your effort as a 
critical thinker to correct misunderstandings, discover the truth, and set 

380 
CHAPTER 12 Finding, Evaluating, and Using Sources 
the record straight. If you approach research with the right attitude, treat-
ing it less as a chore and more as an opportunity, you will ﬁ nd yourself 
amply rewarded, not only with the skills necessary to speak more intel-
ligently, convincingly, and truthfully on your topics, but also with the skills 
you will need to succeed in your career. 
2.   Modern libraries are astonishing and often confusing places. With the help 
of a reference librarian and the many directional sources available, you can 
ﬁ nd a wealth of information without ever leaving campus. Focus your 
search so that you don’t waste time and effort chasing too much infor-
mation. Consult bibliographies, indexes, and abstracting services to help 
locate information in the library and in databases. Use Internet search en-
gines and guides to sort out the best information available on the Internet. 
3.   When searching for information on your topic, use periodicals and the 
books in the stacks, but also consult encyclopedias, almanacs, yearbooks, 
fact books, directories, handbooks, manuals, atlases, biographies, diction-
aries, and government documents both to get started and to provide in 
some cases advanced and specialized knowledge about a subject. Human 
sources of information—faculty members, businesspeople, local experts, 
and so forth—are often overlooked but can provide quick answers to 
simple questions and the kind of in-depth knowledge that comes from 
 experience. 
4.   Evaluating sources means asking a great many questions about the infor-
mation you uncover, including questions about the content, the author, 
the publisher, and the audience. Be sure to separate facts from opinions 
in a writer’s work. Don’t repeat a writer’s opinions as if they were factual, 
and don’t repeat a writer’s facts without being certain that they are indeed 
true. Be sure that the facts are complete and up-to-date. 
5.   When evaluating an author and a publisher, ask the following questions: 
What is the author’s background? What is the author’s bias and purpose? 
What are the author’s sources? Who is the publisher or sponsor? 
6.   Ask the following questions about the audience: Who is the intended 
 audience? How has the audience responded? 
7.   Good research depends on good note-taking skills. Be sure to copy down 
all the bibliographical information you will need to cite your sources and 
document your research. When recording quotations, be accurate and 
careful. When summarizing an essay or argument for use in your own 
paper, decide how extensive your summary should be. When paraphrasing, 
be faithful to the intent of the original. Choose to paraphrase more than 
to quote. Be sure to separate your own impressions and reactions from the 
quotations, summaries, and paraphrases that you record. Whatever system 
you use for note-keeping, be consistent and remember that the extra effort 
put forth while taking notes will pay off when drafting your essay. 

 
Summary 
381
8.   Be exceptionally careful when incorporating sources into your argument. 
Plagiarism is among the most serious of academic offenses and can result 
in severe consequences. Learn well what does and does not have to be 
 acknowledged. Always err on the side of giving credit. 
9.   Make your researched material ﬁ t gracefully into your own writing. Keep 
the reader in mind as you write: introduce your quotes rather than just 
drop them into your paragraphs. Cite your sources in the text and provide 
an accurate list of references. 

382
 We have all been there: The Fight. The heart-pounding, teeth-clenching, 
name-calling, blood-boiling battle of words, from our ﬁ rst “ You are !” “No, 
 you are !” and “Did  not ,” “Did  too !” to the more memorable and emotionally 
charged moments of our lives— 
 “Give me one reason why I should let you go to the ball game.” 
 “Is that my sweater you’re wearing?” 
 “It’s my house, and while you’re living in it . . .” 
 “You spend too much time with your friends and not enough with me.” 
 “Can’t you see why we’re meant to be together?” 
—and a thousand other familiar lines that have been the catalyst for our most 
heated arguments with one another. 
 Of course, at this point in your reading of this text, you should be saying, 
“Wait a minute! An argument is not a quarrel or a ﬁ ght; it’s a   _______,” and 
you should ﬁ ll in the blank without batting an eye. If we are honest, though, 
we all have to admit that even when we know we’re supposed to coolly, ratio-
nally present evidence to support our claims, we often resort to the kinds of 
argument we are most familiar with: the kinds of no-holds-barred matches 
that take place between us and our families and friends. The “ﬂ aming” that 
goes on in some newsgroups and chat rooms is one example of the nasty com-
bats we allow ourselves to engage in, so much so that many newsgroups have 
established “Netiquette” rules to help cool down the scorching rhetoric that 
participants throw at one another. 
 The ﬁ rst rule of argument should be to consider logical discourse less as 
a battle for supremacy and more as an attempt to work as a community that 
 communi cates in an effort to arrive at the truth or at least, when it comes to 
practical matters and decision making, to arrive at compromises that make life 
easier and more enjoyable. As we have mentioned several times throughout this 
book, thinking critically often depends on applying the  principle of charity,  which 
 In all disputes, so 
much as there is of 
passion, so much 
is there nothing to 
the purpose.  
 —Sir Thomas 
Browne 
 When you dis-
agree, do so rea-
sonably, and not 
disputatiously or 
contentiously. 
 —Mortimer Adler 
and Charles Van 
Doren 
 CHAPTER 13
 WRITING 
ARGUMENTATIVE  ESSAYS 

 
Writing Argumentative Essays  
383
means that unless there is evidence to the contrary, you should assume that your 
opponents are rational people and that their arguments are sound and cogent. 
In other words, thinking critically does not mean intellectually beating people 
up or using your thinking skills to take advantage of others. Arguing, as op-
posed to ﬁ ghting, means that you respect your opponents, accurately and fairly 
represent their points of view, and support your conclusions with true premises 
and sound reasoning. Writers who construct arguments merely to “win,” who 
go for the jugular or manufacture evidence or appeal unfairly to the emotions 
of their readers, do little to advance knowledge or understanding.  
 You should always strive to present a solid argument; if you convert oth-
ers to your way of thinking, great. But if you have presented a powerful and 
sensible case, you have done your job, even if someone says, “I don’t agree 
with your position, and I’m still voting Democrat” (or voting Republican, 
or supporting capital punishment, or getting married, or quitting my job, or 
whatever). Think of it this way: When you write an argument, make it your 
goal to be heard and listened to, to have your ideas considered and measured, 
to be regarded as an intelligent, rational, and sensitive person. If you win the 
argument in the process, congratulations; but the true measure of your success 
lies in what you have said or written and how you have said or written it, not 
in who agrees with you.  
 EXERCISE 13.1 
 We have been maintaining that your objective in writing an argument should be 
to present a rational, well-evidenced, solid defense of your claim. Blatant emo-
tional appeals are, we claim, inappropriate in a good argument. What do you think? 
 Reason must be 
our last judge 
and guide in 
everything. 
 —John Locke 
 CALVIN AND HOBBES © Watterson. Reprinted with permission of Universal Press Syndicate. All rights reserved. 

384 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
Is it always the case that you should choose a well-reasoned approach over an 
emotional approach? Can you think of any occasions (real or imagined) when it 
would be appropriate to appeal to emotions to win your point? 
 WRITING A SUCCESSFUL ARGUMENT 
 Writing takes place in three very broad stages: what you do before you begin 
the ﬁ rst draft, what you do during the writing of the ﬁ rst draft, and what you 
do after you have completed the ﬁ rst draft. This chapter shows you how to 
prepare and write an argument, but you should keep one important point in 
mind as you read: Although the advice and information is arranged in a step-
by-step fashion, writing an argumentative essay is not a linear process. You can’t 
write a paper the way you follow a recipe, carefully adding one ingredient after 
the other until the dish is prepared. Writing a paper is more like decorating 
a room. You start with a vision of what you want the room to look like, but 
halfway through the process you might change your mind and move the desk 
to another location or tack your favorite poster to a different wall. You try 
to move the bookcase, but it won’t ﬁ t in the new spot, so you return it to its 
original spot. Or you throw it out and buy one that does ﬁ t. Maybe you give 
up, buy all new furniture and decorations, and start again. Like decorating a 
room, writing a paper means thinking and rethinking, backing up, adding and 
subtracting, rearranging ideas, throwing out what doesn’t ﬁ t, and bringing in 
new ideas to achieve the look you want. In the process of writing, you may 
discover an idea that changes the entire focus and point of your paper. You may 
throw everything out and start again. 
 The following outline will help you keep track of the steps in the process 
of writing an argument. 
 Before You Write 
 Know yourself 
 Know your audience 
 Choose and narrow your topic 
 Write a sentence that expresses your claim 
 Gather ideas: brainstorm and research 
 Organize your ideas 
 Writing the First Draft 
 Provide an interesting opening 
 Include a thesis statement 
 Develop your body paragraphs 
 Provide a satisfying conclusion 

 
Before You Write 
385
 After the First Draft 
 Read what you have written and revise 
 Consider what you have not written and revise 
 Show your work 
 Edit your work 
 Hand it in 
 BEFORE YOU WRITE 
 You should spend a great deal of time just preparing to write your ﬁ rst draft; 
in fact, the more time you spend preparing to write, the less difﬁ culty you will 
have with the actual writing. Taking the time to think before you write will 
help prevent the panic that comes from plunging into a paper without any 
clear idea of how cold or deep the water is and then thrashing about without 
any idea of where you are going or how to get out. Before you write, take 
some time to think about how well you know your topic and who will be 
reading your argument. Decide what claim you would like to defend, and 
gather and organize your ideas for defending that claim.  
 Know Yourself 
 To write a good argument, you ﬁ rst must  want to write a good argument and 
you must be willing to inventory your critical thinking dispositions: Are you 
prepared to be precise and accurate, to offer only premises you believe to be 
true, to fairly represent opposing points of view, to credit your sources, and so 
forth? If you want only to win the ﬁ ght, you can resort to sucker punches and 
taunting; but to present a good argument, you must be willing to work hard at 
constructing a fair and honest case. 
 A healthy approach to writing arguments for a college class is to ask 
yourself  why  you are writing an argument. Of course, you are writing an argu-
ment because your professor requires you to. That’s true, but you will be in 
college for only a small fraction of your life. In the “real world,” you may be 
called on to voice a claim and defend it on many occasions—at work, at the 
PTA meeting, as a member of the school board, in letters to editors or clients 
or constituents. Learning to argue well in writing allows you to use your 
talents for good purposes, to defend someone or some group that you feel is 
being maligned, to oppose what you believe to be an unethical or immoral act, 
to bring an end to a dangerous situation, or to prevent a disaster. It may sound 
trite or ﬂ attering, but you do have something to say, and you should be willing 
to take the time to say it well. 
 You must also be willing to ask yourself how well you know the issue 
you are going to address. We all have opinions, but we don’t often stop to ask 
 Make it thy 
business to know 
thyself, which is 
the most difﬁ cult 
lesson in the 
world. 
 —Cervantes 

386 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
why we hold those opinions or how we arrived at them. If you have had a 
long-standing opinion on an issue, ask yourself where that opinion may have 
come from. It is possible that you can ﬁ nd many reasons to  explain  where a 
belief came from (perhaps from your parents, your church, or your studies), but 
if you are going to  argue in support of your beliefs, you will have to provide 
justiﬁ cation and support that goes beyond explaining their origin. In other 
words, you may know how you  feel  about something, but what your readers 
want to know is what you  think. 
 If you want to write about a topic you don’t know very well, take the 
time to learn as much as you can about it. If you feel strongly about an issue, 
you should be willing to defend it intelligently and rationally. That doesn’t 
mean, of course, that you must know all there is to know about an issue before 
you begin to formulate your opinion and take your stand or that you must 
present your case in an absolute or exhaustive manner. Few of us can maintain 
that we know all there is to know about any issue, or that we are absolutely, 
certiﬁ ably correct about our point of view, or that new evidence won’t be dis-
covered to prove us wrong, or that the opposing side is wholly without merit. 
It is no crime, when warranted, to use words such as “could be” and “possibly,” 
to modify generalizations with “many” and “some,” or to temper advice by 
saying, “I suggest” or “I recommend.” We don’t have to be overly humble, but 
we should be willing to grant our opponent his or her good points and to 
defend our own gracefully and considerately.   
 Know Your Audience 
 Some writers present arguments as if the reader were either an archenemy or 
a devoted fan. Neither is usually the case, but let’s suppose for a moment that 
one or the other is true. Take the ﬁ rst hypothetical reader, our enemy. If our 
purpose is to be understood and to present a well-reasoned argument in sup-
port of our claim, does it make sense to antagonize the person we hope will 
judge us fairly? And if we actually do hope to “win” the argument, forget it! 
Jabbing at someone, taunting him, or hurling insults will almost always result 
in retaliation. 
 The second hypothetical reader—our loving champion—may agree 
with everything we say and, at the end of our presentation, tell us that we have 
presented a beautiful argument, full of truth and well structured, but there is 
very little to be gained from being evaluated by someone who is predisposed 
to compliment us. And what purpose is served, what progress is made, if our 
arguments are aimed at those who are ready to agree with everything we say? 
Certainly, we can ﬁ nd examples all around us of “arguments” presented to 
these two audiences. Listen, for instance, to any number of talk-show hosts 
on the radio, most of whom speak to an audience that is divided among the 
true believers and those who despise the host but listen, almost masochistically, 
because they “can’t believe what I’m hearing.” Radio hosts know that their 
audiences are divided this way; few people listen to popular talk radio for a 
 Turn your eyes 
inward, look into 
your own depths, 
learn ﬁ rst to 
know yourself! 
 —Sigmund Freud 
 Doubt and 
 ignorance are 
sanctiﬁ ed when 
based on a ﬁ rm 
resolve to believe 
nothing but truth. 
 —William Irvine 

 
Before You Write 
387
keen analysis of complicated issues. For the sake of the show’s sponsors, a radio 
host must keep the listeners tuned in, so he or she targets two audiences—the 
committed fans and those who vehemently disagree.  
 Perhaps we shouldn’t fault the talk-show hosts for targeting their audi-
ence; that’s what they are supposed to do. In fact, the ﬁ rst rule of all com-
munication is to know who your audience is and adjust your style (though 
not necessarily your point) accordingly. If you were to write a letter to your 
grandmother, telling her about your romantic weekend, you would most likely 
use language and a tone different from what you would use in an e-mail to 
your best friend. If you were asked to prepare a speech on the difﬁ culties of 
being a ﬁ rst-year college student, how would that speech be different if you 
were speaking to seniors in high school, business leaders from the commu-
nity, elementary students, parents with children in college, and so forth? When 
 Blog Etiquette 
 If you want your argument to be taken seriously by your readers, it’s a 
good idea not to insult them. This simple truth doesn’t seem to apply 
to Internet bloggers. Consider these excerpts from a blog entry, entitled 
“Put on your bras, shave your armpits and quit your bitching,” ostensi-
bly directed at feminist readers. (The passage is quoted verbatim.) 
 
 Why the hell do women get offended when they’re called  chicks ? 
I don’t see how that word can be remotely offensive in anyway. 
But, some women think it’s derogatory and belittling. Some women are 
so petty, that they resent any male implication in the english language. 
Who cares? What if guys suddenly felt like bitching and wanted to erad-
icate all the derogatory male phrases from the language?  Buster, Pal, 
Buddy, Stud, Hunk. Oooh, don’t call me a buster, I’ll be offended. . . . 
 
 I can usually pick out a feminist in a croud of women. She’ll usually 
have short hair, regular pants, a regular shirt, and an unbathed look; 
she’ll look very much like a stereotypical guy. I think why a feminist 
might appear like this is to make a statement that “if men can do it 
and be accepted, then women should be able to.” How bold, to go 
around and look like a stereotypical guy as opposed to a stereotypical 
girl. Who cares? Either way, you’re an ass for thinking anybody cares 
about the statement you’re making. ( http://setharius.spaces.live.com/
Blog  /cns!DC9D22BCF284F905!148.entry ) 
 Does this writer really hope to convince feminists to see things his 
way? Or does blogging come with a whole new set of rules? What do 
you think? Should arguments in blogs follow the same rules outlined 
in your textbook? Who is the intended audience? What are the ben-
eﬁ ts of blogs? What are the dangers? 
 Pop Culture Connection 

388 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
 preparing an argument, you should try whenever possible to know who your 
audience is: Are you writing for the citizens of your community, students of 
your age and background, professionals in the ﬁ eld, political ﬁ gures, adminis-
trators in the school? Knowing who will be reading your argument will help 
you decide what tone to use, how sophisticated your word choices can be, 
how much background you must provide, and how much detail you need to 
go into. In the business world, even your position in a company or ﬁ rm can 
dictate how you write your argument or proposal. Are your readers highly 
skeptical, or are they open to even the riskiest proposals? Do they hate to spend 
a dime on new ideas, or do they enjoy taking a gamble on costly innovations? 
Are you in a position of some authority so that your readers must implement 
your suggestions, or do you have to work hard at proving your case? 
 Anticipate Your Readers’ Reactions   On the basis of what you know 
about your topic and your audience, try to determine how your audience 
might react to your claim and its defense. Perhaps your topic is appealing and 
your audience will receive your argument graciously. Say, for example, that you 
are writing to your classmates urging them to oppose 7:00  A.M.  classes. Some 
of your classmates—those who start work at 8:00  A.M. —might actually want 
early-morning classes, but it’s a safe bet that most of your audience will agree 
with your claim. If you were to present the same claim to the administration, 
on the other hand, you could probably assume that their reaction would differ 
from that of your classmates and that they would offer all sorts of reasons why 
7:00  A.M.  classes are a good idea. The administration would not necessarily act 
with hostility toward you or your ideas, but they probably would not embrace 
your idea without a very solid defense. You might ﬁ nd a more neutral audience 
in a group of people unafﬁ liated with the college. We often face neutral audi-
ences when we address topics that our readers or listeners have little knowl-
edge about or issues about which they are undecided. You might ﬁ nd a largely 
neutral audience if, for example, you argued that life existed on other planets 
or that Pete Rose should be allowed into the Baseball Hall of Fame. 
 When you consider how your audience will react to your claim, you 
almost automatically begin thinking about their reasons for reacting that way. 
You begin considering their points of view, their claims, their counterargu-
ments. Predicting what an audience might say in response to your claim will 
help you to create a stronger argument. You should argue courageously and 
never change your point of view to placate your audience; on the contrary, you 
will be better able to defend your claim if you are prepared for the reactions 
you will encounter. Anticipating some of the administration’s primary reasons 
for beginning the class day at 7:00  A.M.  will help you head off some of those 
reasons when you present your case. 
 Often you can predict your audience’s reactions by considering how you 
would feel as a reader. For example, people generally don’t like to be told that 
they are wrong about something; so, instead of telling your readers that they 
are wrong, try to discover what values you and they have in common and 
 If I know your 
sect, I anticipate 
your argument. 
 —Ralph Waldo 
Emerson 

 
Before You Write 
389
show that your approach is based on those values, not detrimental to them. If 
you want to correct what you believe to be dangerous behavior, point out to 
your readers what you see to be the terrible consequences of continuing to act 
as they are. If you hope to change their thinking on moral or ethical grounds, 
don’t insult them or write in a haughty or superior tone. Showing an audience 
that you share their concerns, that you respect them, and that you believe there 
is merit in both your view and theirs can go a long way toward getting your 
viewpoint heard. 
 In the absence of information about your readers, or when writing for 
a general readership, there are a few things you can assume. First, assume that 
your readers are slightly skeptical, that they do not necessarily agree with ev-
erything you say, but that they are open-minded and fair. Believing that they 
are impartial and objective will prevent you from overstating your case. Assume 
that your readers are intelligent, rational, and humane. You don’t necessarily 
have to prove that accepting your claim will beneﬁ t each reader individually, 
but you should try to show, when the topic warrants it, that your argument 
takes into consideration the lives of people other than yourself. Surely, you 
wouldn’t argue that speed limits should be raised because you enjoy driving 
fast. How would you argue that claim to a slightly skeptical, open-minded, 
intelligent, rational, humane person? Always assume the best about your audi-
ence, but keep in mind that even if a close-minded, prejudicial audience re-
fuses to listen to you, if you have defended your claim with solid evidence and 
clear reasoning, you have done your job. 
 EXERCISE 13.2 
 Look at the following letter, written to the editor of a newspaper. The paper had 
recently reported that Pennsylvania teachers were among the best paid in the 
country. Summarize the key points of the argument in a few sentences. Look for 
fallacies and examples of vague or slanted language. Then consider the overall 
effect of the argument. Determine as speciﬁ cally as you can the writer’s purpose. 
Does he seem to be writing to an audience inclined to agree with him, or is he 
trying to convince neutral readers and members of the opposition that he is cor-
rect in his thinking? How do you think the newspaper’s readers would respond to 
this letter? How would a student of critical thinking evaluate this letter? 
 Editor: 
 
 Once again, the taxpayers of the Wyoming Area School District are being 
ordered to “open wide” and not for the purpose of checking for cavities. The 
dentist in this case is the Wyoming Area School Board and the order to open 
wide is directed to our wallets. With the passage of the 1998 budget, Wyoming 
Area has the dubious honor of joining the 200 and Above Club. The new 
budget includes a 15-mill tax hike, putting Wyoming Area’s millage at 200. 
 
 When property owners are writing the check to pay that bill, they should 
remember that the largest part of that check, by far, is going into the pockets 
of members of the Wyoming Area “Education” Association. The current 
average cost per teacher to the taxpayers of Wyoming Area is $53 per hour. 

390 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
 
 To make matters worse, our school board is currently negotiating with 
the teachers union for a new contract. Unless we act now and let our board 
members know we will no longer accept big give-away contracts for the sake of 
peace, we will continue to pay for our silence and complacency with more big 
tax hikes in the future. 
 
 A mere 2 percent pay raise for one year for the $53-per-hour people will 
cost the taxpayers of Wyoming Area an additional $125,000, or 3.5 mills. 
 
 The teachers union is able to extort this money from the taxpayers of 
Pennsylvania; through their forced union dues, they are able to pour huge sums 
of money into the campaigns of their lap-dog political candidates. Under the 
guise of “doing it for the children,” these teacher-union lackeys pass laws which 
make it very easy for the teachers union to get what it wants. 
 
 With the upcoming elections in November, taxpayers should know two 
things: 
 
 According to ﬁ gures I have seen, approximately 40 percent of the delegates 
at the last Democratic National Convention were members of the teachers 
union. They apparently have plenty of time on their hands to corrupt our 
nation’s political system. 
 
 Secondly, about 90 percent of all teacher union PAC money goes to Demo-
cratic candidates. They apparently have plenty of extra money with which they 
can corrupt our nation’s political system. With ﬁ gures like this, can there be 
any doubt about who controls the Democratic Party? 
 
 In my opinion, the teachers union is the taxpayers’ greatest enemy, and a 
vote for a Democrat, generally speaking, is a vote for the enemy. Had it not 
been for a Republican governor and a Republican-controlled state House 
and Senate, we would never have had tenure reform, sabbatical leave reform, 
charter school legislation, or this meager but promising attempt at tax reform 
in Pennsylvania. 
 
 On the national level, the Democrats and President Clinton have stopped 
every single attempt made by Republicans to improve education in our country. 
As the cost of public education continues to sky-rocket with no corresponding 
improvement in results, the teachers union monopoly must not go on 
unchallenged. 
 
 As bad as things seem, they would be worse without the existence of 
taxpayer groups. Taxpayer groups are organized all around the state and every 
taxpayer who cares about ﬁ scal responsibility in government functions should 
join and support their local group. We do make a difference. 
 George R. Race 
 President 
 Wyoming Area Taxpayers Association 
 Wyoming, Pennsylvania 
 
 Choose and Narrow Your Topic 
 If your professor has not assigned a topic to be investigated but has, instead, 
given you freedom to choose, decide on a topic that is both controversial and 
interesting to you. It does not have to be one you are familiar with; in fact, you 

 
Before You Write 
391
might want to select one that you have always been curious about or one that 
you have always wanted to learn more about so that you can argue your case 
more convincingly. Also, pick a topic that you can manage to cover completely 
in the space allowed for your paper. Often the ﬁ rst question students ask is how 
long the essay should be. It’s a fair question. If you are to write a 500- or 750-
word essay, you are going to choose a different topic from the one you would 
select for a 10,000-word essay. 
 Say the required length is 750 words, or three double-spaced pages, and 
say you are interested in the topic of work or labor. You could easily list 
a dozen topics that fall under the broad heading of work: working parents, 
minimum wage, unemployment, welfare, and so on. To help prepare yourself 
for an argument in which you must make a claim, list your potential topics in 
the form of questions:
 •  Are families harmed when both parents work? 
 •  Do company perks such as on-site gyms and day care hurt employees 
more than help them? 
 •  Should the minimum wage be increased? 
 •  Should welfare recipients be required to work? 
 •  Should employers be required to give advance notice to employees 
who are about to be laid off ? 
 •  How necessary (useful, outdated, relevant) are labor unions? 
 •  Should child labor laws be relaxed? 
 •  Should your college bookstore sell clothes made in sweatshops? 
 •  Does the U.S. government interfere too much in overseeing 
workplace safety? 
 •  How serious a problem is sexual harassment in the workplace? 
 •  How far can companies go in “invading the privacy” of workers? 
 •  Should the U.S. institute a four-day workweek? 
 •  Should a law be passed mandating equal pay to both sexes for 
comparable work? 
 •  Should companies offer beneﬁ ts to same-sex partners?  
 Your list of controversial topics could go on for pages if you knew 
enough about the subject of work. Certainly, because you couldn’t write about 
all these topics in a short argument, you would have to limit yourself to one. 
But you could also continue to narrow your focus by limiting one of the 
subtopics listed above. Take the invasion-of-privacy issue, which is narrower 
than the issue of work, but which could be further narrowed to something 
more manageable:
 •  How far can employers go in using surveillance cameras in the 
workplace? 

392 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
 •  Does an employer have the right to know what an employee does in 
his or her off-hours? 
 •  How far can an employer go in conducting background checks on a 
potential employee? 
 •  What questions should and should not be asked in a job interview? 
 •  If an employee receives e-mail from outside the company, does the 
employer have a right to read it? 
 •  Should an employer have unlimited access to an employee’s desk, 
computer, and ﬁ le cabinets?  
 •  Should any employer be allowed to randomly test for drugs? 
 •  Does an employer have the right to know an employee’s sexual 
orientation? 
 Any one of these topics could serve for a short essay, but you could actu-
ally narrow the topic even further. The ﬁ rst three topics in the list above, for 
example, might become
 •  Should airlines install surveillance cameras in the cockpits of com-
mercial airliners? 
 •  Can an employer with a no-smoking policy ﬁ re employees who 
smoke after business hours and off company property? 
 •  In deciding whether to hire a prospective employee, should an em-
ployer consider the applicant’s proﬁ le on an online social network 
such as MySpace or Facebook? 
You may initially feel that if you narrow the topic down you won’t have 
enough to say, but it is better to work at developing a focused topic than to 
leave a large issue undeveloped. And as you improve your writing and arguing 
skills, you will usually ﬁ nd that you have too much to say even about the most 
slender of topics. 
 Finally, keep in mind that the best arguments are often those that pre-
sent an unusual point of view or a claim few people have considered. When 
deciding what to write about, don’t hesitate to take a risk and choose a topic 
that is controversial or uncommon. Several of the topics in our ﬁ rst list—“Do 
company perks such as on-site gyms and day care hurt employees more than 
help them?” “Should child labor laws be relaxed?”—may strike you as unusual 
or absurd, but on second thought or after researching the topic, you might see 
some reason to answer yes to both. 
 EXERCISE 13.3 
  I.  Choose one of the broad topics below and narrow the topic to one that 
could be addressed in a three-page (750-word) argument. Start by listing as many 
 Out of clutter, 
ﬁ nd simplicity.  
 —Albert Einstein 

 
Before You Write 
393
controversial issues as you can; then narrow even further until you have a work-
able topic.
the environment
AIDS
alcoholism
gambling
HMOs
child abuse
birth control
domestic violence
free trade
Cuba
smoking
cloning
television
professional athletics
NCAA
genetic testing
9/11 prisons
hip hop
 II.   The following list of questions provides topics that can be used to practice 
the skills we discuss in this chapter. In groups of three or individually, choose 
a question from the list and use it to arrive at a narrow topic that you could 
address in a three- to four-page argument. As you proceed through the chapter, 
apply what you are learning to the topic you have selected. 
 1.  Should the government be responsible for the unemployed? 
 2.  Are minorities discriminated against in the media? 
 3.  Should physician-assisted suicide be permitted? 
 4.  Should the United States provide foreign aid to developing nations? 
 5.  Is community service an appropriate punishment for criminals? 
 6.  Isn’t police brutality sometimes the only proper response to some situations? 
 7.  Are beauty pageants harmful to those who participate in them? 
 8.  Is feminism an outdated ideology? 
 9.  Have historians been guilty recently of revising history? 
 10.  Have environmentalists gone too far in their efforts to stop global warming? 
 11.  Is there a date-rape crisis in society? On your campus? 
 12.  Has racism diminished at all over the past ﬁ fty years in America?  
 13.  Is the mainstream media liberal? 
 14.  Do we need a return to family values? 
 15.  Which does more damage, street crime or white-collar crime? 
 16.  Should pornography be outlawed? 
 17.  Can a businessperson be both successful and ethical? 
 18.   Should Congress continue to propose an amendment outlawing desecration 
of the American ﬂ ag?  
 19.  Should taxpayers receive vouchers to send their children to private schools? 
 20.  Do you think marine mammals should be held in tanks and used in shows? 
 
 Write a Sentence That Expresses Your Claim 
 Once you have decided what you want to write about, formulate a single 
sentence that presents the central claim of your argument and write it on a 
blank sheet of paper: “I think . . . ,” “People should . . . ,” “We must . . . ,” “It’s 
time for . . . ,” “It is true that . . . ,” and so forth. State your claim as forthrightly 
as you can and be sure that your claim is debatable, something with which 
someone could disagree. You might write, for instance, “An employer has no 
right to read an employee’s private e-mail messages,” or “Lee Harvey Oswald 

394 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
was the lone assassin of JFK,” or “The college should eliminate the football 
program.” At this point you are only focusing your argument, so don’t worry 
about how clumsy or awkward your claim sounds. You can always revise it as 
your paper gets going. 
 Gather Ideas: Brainstorm and Research 
 Writers generally get their ideas from two sources: their own heads and the 
heads of other people, usually other writers. As with the larger process of writ-
ing, the gathering of ideas does not proceed strictly step-by-step. Some writers 
do a great deal of reading and research before formulating ideas and approaches 
for a paper; others record their own thoughts ﬁ rst and then look for additional 
ideas and support; still others combine the two approaches in a variety of ways. 
The approach you take will depend on your own habits, your familiarity with 
the topic, and your need for facts and expert opinion to back you up. 
 Brainstorming  is a method for generating ideas for a paper. Like any 
other kind of storm, brainstorming is spontaneous and wild, but many writers 
make the mistake of trying to channel their creative thinking into grammatical 
sentences and coherent paragraphs. When you brainstorm, allow your ideas to 
ﬂ ow freely. Write down whatever occurs to you, and don’t censor any ideas as 
irrelevant or uninteresting. Don’t worry about being incorrect or even sound-
ing foolish. No one will judge your argument on your brainstorming. It is like 
a dialogue with yourself. You can always cut ideas after you have listed them. 
 You can brainstorm in several ways. Some writers like to freewrite, which 
entails writing for a measure of time, usually ﬁ fteen minutes, without stopping. 
Other writers favor the technique “mapping,” in which the writer freely as-
sociates ideas, writes them down, and connects them in a weblike fashion. 
The method we recommend here is slightly more structured than traditional 
methods of brainstorming, but it will better help you generate ideas for sup-
porting an argument. 
 List Supporting Premises   First, when brainstorming for an argument, list as 
many reasons as you can to support your claim. For the claim that an employer 
should not read private e-mail, you might list the following premises:
 E-mail is like regular mail, and it’s illegal to open someone else’s regular 
mail, so it should be illegal to open someone’s e-mail. 
 Even if it weren’t illegal to read e-mail, it’s unfair to the recipient of the e-mail, 
who might be discussing personal matters, such as medical or family problems. 
 If people know that their private correspondence might be read by 
someone else, they might be reluctant to speak freely, which would limit 
their ideas and perhaps encourage them to be dishonest. 
 If an employee knows that his e-mail might be read by the boss, he could 
take advantage of the situation by telling his friends to send him e-mail 
about how great the boss is. 

 
Before You Write 
395
Some of these premises might not sound too convincing, and after consider-
ation you might eliminate one or two. That last premise, for example, sounds 
especially weak and may be impossible to defend. 
 If you ﬁ nd that you can’t think of more than one or two premises, you 
may want to change your topic. But the inability to come up with premises is 
not always a sign that you should abandon your topic. If you believe in your 
claim but cannot think of support for it, you might have to seek help through 
research. In fact, reading more about your topic and examining the arguments 
made by other writers can bring on a storm of ideas that otherwise would not 
have arisen.  
 List Opposing Premises   Second, write down as many premises as you 
can think of to  oppose your claim. What would someone who disagreed with 
you say?
 Employers have paid for the computer, the lines, and the service provider 
and therefore have a right to see how e-mail is being used. 
 Employees waste time writing and reading personal e-mail. 
 E-mail coming into the company or going out might contain sensitive ma-
terial that the company needs to keep under wraps. 
Like your own premises, some of these might be eliminated, and you might 
have to research your topic to determine if you have overlooked any opposing 
arguments. Sometimes it helps to get another mind involved at this point. Ask 
a friend, a family member, or a professor to play devil’s advocate and tell you 
how someone might disagree with you. 
 Think Critically about Your Claim   Are you overgeneralizing in any 
way? Are there any exceptions to your claim? Maybe, for example, some em-
ployers (e.g., the Defense Department) must read all incoming e-mail. Are you 
creating false alternatives? Is there some middle ground you have overlooked? 
Are there solutions you have ignored? Has someone else already solved the 
problem or proposed a viable solution? Do you need to modify your claim 
to allow room for uncertainty? Don’t hesitate to get into an argument with 
yourself at this point. Remember, your reader is a critical thinker. 
 Think on Paper   Now write down what you know or think you know 
about your topic. In this part of brainstorming, you are simply trying to create 
and gather ideas from your own mind; in other words, you are thinking on 
paper. Some of the ideas you come up with will serve as additional premises 
to support your central claim; others will serve to clarify, illustrate, and defend 
the central premises. You may ﬁ nd that in thinking on paper, you begin to 
conceive a structure for your argument, a structure that includes both central 
premises and subarguments. 
 If you have trouble coming up with ideas, ask yourself some questions: 
“Why did I choose this topic?” “Why does it bother me so much?” “What 
 A doctrine is 
not  judged at all 
until it is judged 
in its best form. 
 —John Stuart Mill 

396 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
do I want my readers or listeners to do, to believe, to think?” “What are my 
experiences with this issue?” 
 Methods of Development   A very productive method for generating ideas 
is to think about the ways we usually develop and detail our communication 
with one another: We tell stories, describe people and places, compare and 
contrast events or things, give examples, deﬁ ne our words, and so on. These 
methods of development can be very useful both in discovering material to 
ﬂ esh out a paper and in prompting new thoughts in support of your claims. 
 Narration   A narration tells a  story in chronological order.  Are there any stories 
associated with your topic? Do you know of anyone whose experiences would 
be worth recounting? For example, perhaps you or someone you know has 
a story about working in a place where private e-mail is ﬁ ltered or read by 
managers. 
 Description  A description gives  concrete details to paint a verbal picture  of a 
person, place, or thing. There may be in your topic something that can be 
described. 
 Cause   Causes are  reasons  for the occurrence of an event, a decision, an ac-
tion, and so forth. Look at your topic and ask, “Why did this happen?” “What 
caused this?” Ask why some companies began the practice of intercepting and 
opening private e-mail. Do employees, in fact, dislike the practice? If so, what 
reasons do they give? Be careful not to commit any of the fallacies that can 
result from arguing for causes where none may exist. 
 Effect   Effects are the results of an event, a decision, an action, and so forth. What 
effects are associated with your topic? Ask yourself, “What will happen if . . . ?” 
and “What has happened?” “What has the outcome been?” Ask what effect 
intercepting e-mail has had on companies. Has white-collar crime decreased? 
Have employees worked harder? Have employees revolted? Has production im-
proved? What was the intended effect in the ﬁ rst place? What might happen if 
the practice continues? Be careful not to commit a slippery-slope fallacy.  
 Classiﬁ cation and Division   When we classify, we take a large group and break 
it down into smaller, more manageable, groups. All the students in a college 
can be grouped by class (freshman, sophomore, junior), major, living status, and 
so forth. When we divide, we take one thing (a car) and break it down into 
its various parts, such as systems (electrical, fuel, cooling) or individual items 
(seats, battery, rear bumper). Look at your topic to see if classiﬁ cation and di-
vision lead to any ideas. Perhaps you are grouping all private e-mail together, 
when, in fact, you could classify it by sender or where it comes from. Perhaps 
you could divide, messages into header and text, leading to a compromise in 
your argument: Managers could see from whom e-mail was coming but could 
not read the message. ( Remember:  You’re just thinking on paper here; some of 
this—all of it, even—could end up on the cutting-room ﬂ oor, as they say in 
the movie industry.) 

 
Before You Write 
397
 Contrast   When we contrast two things, we show them to be  dissimilar in 
important ways. Could you develop your topic through contrasts? Perhaps 
two companies have widely differing approaches to improving employee work 
habits, and one of those companies does it without opening e-mail. 
 Comparison   When we compare two things, we discuss the  similarities be-
tween them. Is there anything in your topic that calls for a comparison? Can 
you defend your claim by comparing the situation under study to something 
similar? If you were arguing that your workplace should not intercept e-mail, 
you might be able to point to other companies that have eliminated the prac-
tice without harmful consequences. 
 As you saw in Chapter 11, a comparison used to support a claim is called 
an  analogy , a useful but tricky device when used in an argument. In fact, analo-
gies must be used so carefully that it is sometimes wiser to avoid them. Any 
major weak spots in a comparison, and the analogy—and the argument—falls 
apart. For example, if you tried to claim that students should always follow 
their teacher’s advice and offered as support the fact that soldiers must always 
follow their leaders’ orders and salespeople must always follow their managers’ 
instructions, some reader is going to point out all the differences between stu-
dents, soldiers, and salespeople and between teachers, generals, and managers. 
You can see why some analogies don’t work. 
 Illustration   When we illustrate, we provide  examples to help clarify a point 
and defend a general comment. If, for example, you said to someone, “My 
classmates are very bright,” you might follow with, “Take Dawn, for example; 
she’s double-majoring in neuroscience and English.” To illustrate the claim 
that “that movie was terribly frightening,” you might say, “In this scene. . . .” 
 Examples can be very helpful as you begin to build support for your 
conclusion, but keep in mind that examples have to be carefully chosen. They 
can come from personal experience or history, or they can be created, depend-
ing on your purpose and the topic. If you were trying to support the claim 
that noise in the dorms sometimes continues past the quiet hour, you might 
cite some examples of particular nights in the past month on which parties, 
music, ﬁ ghts, and so forth awakened you in the early hours of the morning. If 
you were trying to support the claim that U.S. presidents have often had ex-
tramarital affairs, you could refer to them by name. Both of those claims could 
be supported by real examples. Be cautious when you use either personal or 
historical examples:  Your experiences may be unique, and you may be unable 
to generalize from your historical examples. Be sure that your examples are 
representative and that you have chosen as many as you need to establish your 
conclusion. Rarely are only a few examples sufﬁ cient. The best arguments 
from example usually combine examples with other support, such as expert 
opinion. 
 A hypothetical example is used to support a claim for which there may 
be no readily available real-life examples or for which a hypothetical example 
works just as well or better. Say the argument is over whether we are obligated 
 One thing will 
grow plain when 
compared to 
another. 
 —Lucretius 

398 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
to help someone who is in danger. If you were to argue that we are not, you 
might begin your defense with “Well, suppose, for example, . . . ” You are about 
to give a hypothetical example. The word  suppose  shows that the illustration 
is one you are creating, although it will serve your point: “Well, suppose, for 
example, that someone is drowning and I can’t swim. Am I obligated to jump 
into the water anyway?” Someone might respond that you are obligated to 
throw a ﬂ otation device or run for help, but your example has helped clarify 
the issue and your position. As you continue the discussion, you can further 
clarify both, perhaps reaching a more discerning position on when we are and 
are not obligated to help one another. 
 Deﬁ nition   When we deﬁ ne a word, we tell our readers or listeners exactly 
 what we mean by a word or a concept. In daily discourse with one another, we 
often use deﬁ nitions to, for example, clarify our use of speciﬁ c words (“He’s 
not very  romantic ; he never brings me ﬂ owers”) or to persuade (“I wouldn’t 
call her a friend; a ‘friend’ is someone who never judges you”). While brain-
storming for ideas, look at your claim and your premises and ask if there are 
any words that should be deﬁ ned for the reader. In the example on e-mail 
privacy, perhaps  private  could be deﬁ ned, or even the larger concept of privacy: 
What exactly is  private in the context of the workplace? 
 Look Over Your Brainstorming   Look over the results of your brain-
storming and ask yourself the following questions:
 •  Should I reﬁ ne my claim? Your brainstorming may lead you to re-
evaluate your claim. Decide if you need to modify what you intend 
to prove. For instance, you may want to limit the scope of your argu-
ment or qualify your generalizations: “With a few rare exceptions, 
employers should not have the right to intercept and read the private 
e-mails received by employees.” 
 •  Are there any additional premises in my rough collection of thoughts 
and ideas? Did my unstructured thinking on paper produce any addi-
tional reasons to support my claim? At this point you should be able 
to revise your original list of premises. 
 •  What do I still need to ﬁ nd out? Of your premises ask, “Is that really 
true?” “Do I know that for a fact?” “Where did I hear that?” “Who 
told me that?” “When did I learn that or hear that?” “What evidence 
do I have that I’m right?” (I’m not exactly sure, for example, that it’s 
illegal to open someone else’s regular mail. I would need to ﬁ nd out.) 
Ask yourself what more you will need to do or to ﬁ nd out to make 
your premises acceptable to a reader. At this point, think long and 
hard about your audience. What questions might a reader have for 
you? What evidence might a reader challenge? You may have to con-
duct research at this point to ﬁ ll in the gaps, supply more support for 
your argument, and so forth. 

 
Before You Write 
399
 •  What can I use, and what do I need to exclude? Often, if you are 
lucky, your brainstorming will lead to more ideas than you can use 
in your argument. Your brainstorming may have led you off the 
track, or you may have gotten into areas (causes, for example) that 
are not immediately relevant to your claim. If you want to argue 
that plagiarism is a problem on campus that needs to be stopped, the 
causes of plagiarism may not be relevant to your argument. You, of 
course, have to decide. Use caution and be selective when deciding 
what will end up in your argument: more is not always better. It is 
also a good idea to ﬁ le away the ideas you don’t use; what doesn’t 
make it into this argument could be useful in another.  
 EXERCISE 13.4 
 As a group, write out a claim and brainstorm ideas for an argument on the topic 
you chose in Exercise 13.3, part II. When brainstorming, one member of the 
group should act as secretary while all members of the group provide premises, 
raise opposing premises, ask critical questions, “think on paper,” and look over the 
ideas that have emerged. 
 
 Do Some Research   If you haven’t already done so, you may at this point 
need to do research to support your claim and your premises. The support you 
seek will generally fall into two broad categories—facts and opinions. You can 
draw from a wide variety of reliable sources, including experts in the ﬁ eld, sta-
tistical abstracts, textbooks, encyclopedias, journals, and reliable Internet sites. 
Because Chapter 12 provided extensive advice for conducting research, we 
will just recap some key points here. 
 Facts  Certainly, facts are very useful for supporting an argument, but deter-
mining what is and is not a “fact” can be tricky; what appears to be certain 
and indisputable may not be true at all or may actually be a matter of opinion. 
Loosely deﬁ ned, a  fact is something that has objective reality; it is not a matter 
of perception or opinion. Usually, a fact can be known with some measure of 
certainty and can be veriﬁ ed with data. Facts include statistical data, reports of 
observations, and examples of actual occurrences and events. 
 When using facts to support your argument, keep a few things in mind:
 •  You may be mistaken about what you believe to be fact. Don’t always 
rely on your memory, on “conventional wisdom,” or on what you have 
always assumed to be true. Spend the extra time to verify your facts.  
 •  For the most part, use facts that have been veriﬁ ed by reliable sources. 
If you have any doubt about the truth of information, consult more 
than one source. 
 The word “fact” is 
vital to us. With-
out it we would be 
virtually speech-
less if asked to 
describe the kind 
of knowledge we 
prize. 
 —Parker J. Palmer 

400 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
 •  Ask yourself how widely known your facts are. Some facts are gener-
ally agreed upon, but some are not. If you are using factual informa-
tion that your audience is unfamiliar with or that it will have a hard 
time believing, you should give the source of your information. 
 Opinions  Yes, we are all entitled to our opinions, but that doesn’t mean that 
we are rationally entitled to believe them or that all opinions are true. Unlike 
facts, opinions can be so subjective that they are sometimes based on nothing 
more than prejudice or wishful thinking. Or they can be based on a thorough 
examination of the facts, formed in a sensitive and reasonable mind and backed 
by years of experience, study, and research. Clearly, you should choose to sup-
port your claims in the second way. 
 In seeking expert opinion to support your argument, look for opinions 
from experts who prove that they have the knowledge, fair-mindedness, and 
clear thinking skills necessary to offer informed opinions. Try to rely on dis-
interested authorities; and if your readers may be unfamiliar with the authors 
you rely on, be sure to tell who your experts are, providing their respective 
backgrounds to make your citation more persuasive. 
 Finally, don’t discount the authority of creative writers such as poets and 
novelists. You may be able to ﬁ nd some appropriate and useful thoughts from 
great writers who, although they may not have “studied” the topic you are ad-
dressing, may nonetheless have written eloquently and powerfully in defense 
of your claim. You may be able to use the insights of a writer to help support 
your argument—Henry James on privacy or Joyce Carol Oates on boxing, for 
example—or your own thinking might be sparked by those insights. 
 Organize Your Ideas 
 Of all the difﬁ culties faced by writers, organizing ideas seems to be the one 
that presents the most trouble. But the “block” that can occur from trying to 
organize ideas is actually a good sign that the writer is trying to communicate 
effectively with the reader. If we weren’t worried about the reader, we could 
just blabber on in any way we liked. In setting up your organization, use your 
intuitive “audience-sense” to your advantage by looking at organization not 
so much from your point of view as from your reader’s. Given the claim you 
are making, how would a reader want to see your evidence and defense pre-
sented? What would be the most logical or natural way to present the case? 
What would be the least confusing way to set up the presentation? You should 
endeavor not to bore your reader, but there is no need to get too creative or to 
impress the reader, either. Just present a good, solid, well-reasoned argument. 
 Once again, remember that the process of writing is nonlinear. New ideas 
may occur to you as you decide how to organize your essay. You may even 
change your entire approach. Be prepared to keep thinking and creating. There 
are many ways to organize an argument. We’ll focus on several in this section. 

 
Before You Write 
401
 Organize by Premises   In deciding how to organize your argument, 
keep in mind that each paragraph in the body of the argument will be 
related somehow to your central claim. In most cases, the body paragraph 
will present a topic idea that is a premise for the claim made in the thesis. 
For example, if you were defending the claim that your hometown coun-
cil should approve the placement of a trafﬁ c light at an intersection that 
currently has a four-way stop, you might organize your argument in the 
following manner:
 Claim:  Council should approve a trafﬁ c light for several reasons.  
 First body ¶: An average of six thousand cars pass through the intersec-
tion each day. Other equally busy intersections in the city have trafﬁ c 
lights. 
 Second body ¶: There has been a relatively high number of accidents at 
that intersection. Trafﬁ c lights have been shown to reduce the number 
of accidents at an intersection. 
 Third body ¶: A busy elementary school and a popular restaurant are 
located at the intersection. 
 Each paragraph helps support the claim being made. You might decide 
to divide some ideas into two separate paragraphs. For example, the two ideas 
given in the second body paragraph—the number of accidents at the intersec-
tion and the study showing how lights reduce the number of accidents—could 
be divided into two paragraphs:
 Claim:  Council should approve a trafﬁ c light for several reasons.  
 First body ¶: An average of six thousand cars pass through the intersec-
tion each day. Other equally busy intersections in the city have trafﬁ c 
lights. 
 Second body ¶: There has been a relatively high number of accidents at 
that intersection. [The paragraph would give the number of accidents, 
perhaps collected from a study of police reports, and would compare 
that number with the number of accidents at other intersections in the 
city. The paragraph could also include a description of representative 
accidents that have occurred at that intersection.] 
 Third body ¶: Trafﬁ c lights have been shown to reduce the number of 
accidents at an intersection. [The paragraph would include statistics to 
show how many accidents occurred at intersections before and after a 
trafﬁ c light was installed. Examples might be provided for a number of 
representative intersections.]  
 Fourth body ¶: A busy elementary school and a popular restaurant are 
located at the intersection. 
 If you had a long list of facts and expert opinion to present in support 
of your claim, you could devote a paragraph to each fact and opinion. For 

402 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
example, if you were arguing that someone is guilty of a crime, you could 
organize in the following manner:
 Claim : Colonel Mustard is guilty. 
 First body ¶: He was in the billiard room when the murder took place. 
 Second body ¶: His ﬁ ngerprints are on the murder weapon, the lead pipe.  
 Third body ¶: He confessed to the police. 
 Fourth body ¶: All other suspects have been cleared. 
 Fifth body ¶: Experts from the Parker Brothers Crime Lab have all 
testiﬁ ed that only he could have committed the murder.  
 Sixth body ¶: The psychologist Professor Plum claims that Mustard is 
just crazy enough to do something like this. 
 Seventh body ¶: Ms. Scarlet saw him do it. 
 Eighth body ¶: Professor Plum heard him do it. 
Well, you get the picture. Each premise could be developed in its own para-
graph so that, for example, you would prove in the ﬁ rst body paragraph that 
Colonel Mustard was in the billiard room when the murder took place. You 
couldn’t just assert it; you would have to prove it. 
 If you have too many short paragraphs, you may be able to combine 
several of them. For example, paragraphs seven (eyewitness) and eight (ear-
witness) could be combined into one with a topic sentence about witnesses to 
the crime. Paragraphs ﬁ ve and six could be combined as well. 
 Consider Unstated Premises   When organizing by premises, be sure to deter-
mine whether your claim is supported by any unstated premises or assump-
tions that may need to be defended. Suppose, for instance, that you wanted to 
argue that the sale of radar detectors should be outlawed in all states because 
radar detectors are designed for no purpose other than to break the law. Your 
argument would look like this:
 Premise: Radar detectors are designed for no purpose other than to 
break the law. 
 Claim:  The sale of radar detectors should be outlawed. 
The missing premise in this argument is that  It is illegal to sell any device designed 
solely to break the law.  Your organized essay would look like this (rearranged 
with the claim stated ﬁ rst):
 Claim : The sale of radar detectors should be outlawed. 
 Premise: Radar detectors are designed for no purpose other than to 
break the law. [Here you would show that radar detectors are intended 
to alert speeding drivers to the presence of radar, allowing the speeding 
driver to slow down and avoid a ticket. You would show that radar de-
tectors have no other use, despite some creative advertising claims that 
radar detectors can be used for lawful purposes.] 

 
Before You Write 
403
 Premise: It is illegal to sell a device designed solely to break the law. 
[Here you would show that nothing can be sold in the United States if 
the product’s sole purpose is to allow citizens to break the law. For ex-
ample, no one can legally sell a “marijuana pipe.” You would be careful 
in this paragraph to show that you are not suggesting that any device 
that  can be used illegally should be outlawed; baseball bats can be used by 
vandals, but they shouldn’t be outlawed. You are showing only that any 
device created solely to facilitate illegal activity is itself illegal and cannot 
be sold.] 
 Organize by Methods of Development 
 In the writing of an argument, all the methods of development (as discussed 
on pages 396–398) can come into play. Say, for example, you made the claim 
that citizens of the United States hate warfare. You could support your claim 
through  illustration , calling on history to provide examples of how Americans 
have hesitated to go to war or have protested involvement in war. Of course, your 
generalization would need to be modiﬁ ed as you found examples showing that 
some Americans have supported the country’s involvement in war. If you wanted 
to look at two possible  causes for an event, you might organize your argument 
along the lines of a  contrast  or  comparison  essay, looking at one cause, then the 
other. You could argue that some decision or action would lead to several  effects . 
For example, a group of citizens in a town in New Jersey argued before their city 
council that anyone using a laser pointer to “target” other people should be penal-
ized. Such an argument would most likely be built on an analysis of the harmful 
effects of such devices, perhaps combining causal analysis with illustrations of the 
damage that has been done by people misusing laser pointers. 
 Finally, if your claim were intended to show that a particular action or 
event does or does not ﬁ t the  deﬁ nition  of a term, you could provide the 
deﬁ nition in the ﬁ rst half of your argument and then discuss the event in the 
second half:
 Claim : Buying a paper from an Internet supplier is plagiarism. 
 First body ¶: Deﬁ nition of plagiarism: passing off the work of others as 
your own. 
 Second body ¶: How buying a paper ﬁ ts the deﬁ nition of plagiarism.  
 If the deﬁ nition were complicated, you could devote a paragraph to 
showing how each component of the deﬁ nition applies to the event:
 Claim : Despite what some people claim, stock car racing is a sport. 
 First body ¶: A sport is competitive; stock car racing is competitive. 
 Second body ¶: A sport involves physical activity; stock car racing in-
volves physical activity. 
 Third body ¶: A sport is governed by rules; stock car racing . . . 

404 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
 Use the Problem-Solution Pattern   If you were proposing to solve a dif-
ﬁ cult problem, you might choose this pattern, which has three options: 
1.   State the problem and give the solution: 
 
 Claim: Binge drinking could be reduced if the school provided 
more nonalcohol weekend events. 
 
 First body ¶: The presence of binge drinking on campus (illustrations, 
perhaps). 
 
 Second body ¶: How nonalcohol events could reduce binge drinking. 
2.   State the solution and then look at the problem that motivated you 
to discover a solution: 
 
 Claim: The campus needs more security guards in the evening. 
 
 First body ¶: Why more security is needed (to escort people to their 
dorms, to prevent uninvited visitors from getting into campus build-
ings, to stop drivers who speed through the campus, and so forth; of 
course, each premise could receive its own paragraph). 
 
 Second body ¶: More security would prevent some of the problems 
we have seen in the past few months. 
3.   State the problem and consider alternative solutions before arguing 
for your own: 
 
 Claim: Computer access on campus must be improved. 
 
 First body ¶:  We could give all students laptops (too expensive). 
 
 Second body ¶:  We could leave the computer labs open all night (not 
secure enough). 
 
 Third body ¶:  We could wire every room in the residence halls 
(cheaper, and security is not an issue). 
 Use the Evaluative Pattern   This pattern works best when you are trying 
to determine the worth of something according to certain established criteria. 
For example, if a professor were to judge the value of a paper you had written, 
he or she might start by deﬁ ning what a good paper is, laying out all the crite-
ria for making a judgment: interesting topic and approach, clear organization, 
coherent paragraphs, and so forth. Then the professor would show how your 
essay does or does not meet those criteria. You will notice that this pattern 
makes use of deﬁ nition in that “good essay” is deﬁ ned before the question of 
whether your essay ﬁ ts the deﬁ nition is asked.  
 Use Your Opponent’s Arguments   Before you decide exactly how to 
organize your argument, consider what your opponent will say. If you have 
brainstormed ahead of time, you have given some consideration to your op-
ponent’s argument, and you may have even prepared some rebuttal comments. 
On the other hand, you may have realized that your opponent has some points 
 Hear the other 
side. 
 —Saint Augustine 

 
Before You Write 
405
you simply cannot refute. Either way, you should work those opposing argu-
ments into your paper somehow. 
 There are at least three ways to do so: 
1.   Start the paper with the opposing viewpoints and then organize 
your argument around a refutation of each point. This approach 
works well if you are proposing a claim that your readers might 
ﬁ nd upsetting. You can soften the ground a bit if you show your 
readers up front that you are familiar with their objections. You 
may, in fact, show that you share your audience’s concerns and 
 values.  
2.   Mention the opposition within each of your premise paragraphs. 
Some might argue that it is not a good idea to interrupt a paragraph 
with the opposing view, but most readers will not be disturbed by 
the interruption and might prefer that the opposition be dealt with 
on individual points rather than at the end. 
3.   Save the opposition for the end, showing that your opponent will 
raise some objections to your argument. 
 In any case, you have to decide how to deal with opposing views when 
you do raise them. If you have a stronger case, present it. If your opponent 
has a good point, don’t overlook it. Your reader will consider you more intel-
ligent and fair-minded if you acknowledge and even concede your opponent’s 
strongest points or at least show that you and your adversary have something in 
common, perhaps a similar ethical code or a similar desire to do good. 
 Combine Patterns   Often, the most effective method for organizing an 
argument is to combine some of the patterns given above. An argument about 
the connection between eating disorders and advertisers’ portrayal of beauty 
might be organized in the following manner: 
 Claim :  The advertising industry’s exclusive use of slender models has 
contributed to the increase in eating disorders among young women. 
 First body ¶:  Illustrations of advertising’s use of slender women;  descriptions 
of some ads. (Be careful not to overgeneralize.) 
 Second body ¶: Facts about the prevalence of eating disorders among 
young women;  comparison with previous years; some  deﬁ nition of  
“eating disorder.” 
 Third body ¶: Argument to show that advertisements have some  causal 
connection to the presence of eating disorders. (Be careful to avoid a 
questionable cause argument.) 
 Fourth body ¶: Opposing argument (there is no causal connection); 
response to opposing argument. 
 Fifth body ¶: Possible  effects if current advertising trends continue. (Be 
sure to avoid a slippery-slope argument.) 
 Do not ﬁ nd 
fault before 
examining the 
evidence; think 
ﬁ rst, and criticize 
afterwards. 
 —Ecclesiasticus 
11:7 

406 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
 When you have decided how you want to proceed in your argument, 
draw up an outline to keep you on track. Your outline does not have to be 
elaborate; a few phrases and sentences should do the trick. 
 EXERCISE 13.5 
 Working individually, examine the brainstorming and research your topic has gen-
erated and produce an outline for the ﬁ rst draft of your argument. Your outline 
should indicate what you intend to do in each of the body paragraphs and what 
support (facts, examples, comparisons, expert opinion, and so forth) you will in-
clude in each paragraph. Do not write out long paragraphs; in other words, don’t 
write a draft—just outline one. 
 
 After you have completed your outline, compare it with the outlines of the 
others from your group. Discuss with one another why you chose the pattern you 
did. As a group, can you decide that any one pattern is better than the others? You 
should realize from doing this exercise that arguments can be organized in any 
number of ways. It is also true, however, that one pattern may occur more naturally 
given the topic, your purpose, and your audience. 
 
 WRITING THE FIRST DRAFT 
 The fact that you are more than three-quarters of the way through this chap-
ter should indicate the importance of the activities that lead to the writing 
of an argument. If you have narrowed your topic, gathered your support, and 
organized your ideas, you will ﬁ nd writing the ﬁ rst draft of your argument to 
be much easier and more rewarding than if you had begun your paper with 
little idea of what you wanted to say, where you wanted to start, or where you 
wanted to go. 
 Now it is time to write the ﬁ rst draft. You do not have to follow the 
advice chronologically. Depending on your own methods for writing papers, 
you might, for example, write your body paragraphs before you begin your 
introduction. But your readers will expect your ﬁ nished product to look like 
a standard essay, and most successful essays (and arguments) have the following 
elements: An interesting and relevant opening, a clear thesis, a deﬁ nition of 
key terms, well-organized ideas in coherent paragraphs, solidly defended topic 
ideas within those paragraphs, and a satisfying conclusion. 
 One more word of advice before you start: Writing the draft of an argu-
ment can lead you to more ideas than you discovered in your brainstorming, 
researching, and organizing. In fact, the act of writing can inspire such  creativity 
that you may be surprised at the ideas you are coming up with. Don’t slavishly 
adhere to your outline if you ﬁ nd yourself discovering new and better support 

 
Writing the First Draft 
407
or if your writing takes you in new directions. Finally, remember that you are 
writing a draft; you can—and will!—revise it.  
 Provide an Interesting Opening 
 You don’t have to begin with your claim, but you can if it is startling, very con-
troversial, or attention-grabbing. Otherwise, start with some background on 
your topic or show why the issue is an important one. Start with some surpris-
ing statistics, an apt quote, a little-known fact, or an interesting story relevant 
to the topic. A personal account of an event can make a good opening. If you 
are writing to oppose an argument, you might begin with the point that you 
intend to oppose or with some mention of the values and ideals you hold in 
common with the opposing side. 
 Here are some examples for an argument claiming that boxing should 
be outlawed.  
•   S TOP THE F IGHT ! For good. The start of the twenty-ﬁ rst century is the 
perfect time to end one of the most brutal, deadliest sports on earth: 
boxing. [Opening with catchy sentence, followed immediately by the 
claim] 
•   In May 1995 a young man named Jimmy Garcia was beaten to 
death in Las Vegas. Although such a violent act is not uncommon 
on  American streets, this beating took place in front of thousands of 
people—during a boxing match at Caesar’s Palace, the site of another 
boxing fatality thirteen years earlier, when Korean boxer Duk Koo 
Kim died in a match with Ray Mancini. Unfortunately, Kim and 
Garcia are not alone. In the hundred years since boxing has been a 
sport, nearly ﬁ ve hundred athletes have died as a result of injuries 
 sustained in the ring. [Opening with facts and statistics] 
•   “Boxing is just show business with blood,” claimed Frank Bruno, the 
famed British boxer and sometime-actor. But, of course, actors don’t 
often get killed on the job. [Opening with quote] 
•   Boxing is still among the most popular sports in the world. In fact, 
perhaps the most recognizable athlete in any country is Muhammad 
Ali, who, although he now suffers from a form of Parkinson’s disease 
that may have been caused by a career of ﬁ ghting, still draws huge 
crowds of fans wherever he goes and who still occasionally appears in 
television commercials. For many people, Ali might represent what is 
best about boxing, a sport in which the smarter, more adroit, better-
conditioned athlete prevails. Because it is in many ways a beautiful 
sport to watch—a dance in which the point is to avoid contact as 
much as to make it—it’s hard to convince the sport’s greatest fans 
that boxing should be banned. [Opening with concessions to the 
 opposing argument] 

408 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
 Include a Thesis Statement 
 If you haven’t already done so in the opening sentence or two, give a clear, 
carefully worded statement of your claim (sometimes called a  thesis statement ) 
somewhere in the opening paragraph. Not all writers place their thesis state-
ment in the ﬁ rst paragraph, and some only imply their thesis. But it is always a 
good idea to state the claim early in the essay so that your readers know exactly 
what your point is and can therefore assess the relevance of your claims as they 
read your argument. 
 What form your thesis statement takes is up to you. You can give your 
statement in its own sentence or include it as part of a larger sentence: “Given 
the popularity of raves and the fact that few problems have been reported in 
the press, the citizens of Springﬁ eld may not realize just how  dangerous these 
dances can be. ” In the thesis statement of this long sentence, the writer is telling 
readers that this is the claim that will be defended. 
 Be sure to limit your thesis statement to the claim you are trying to de-
fend. Say, for example, that you wanted to argue that public schools should not 
eliminate art and music courses from their curricula, but through brainstorm-
ing and research you narrowed your topic to public  elementary  schools and only 
 music  programs. You might have narrowed it even further to a particular school. 
Your thesis statement, then, would be “Kingston Elementary should not elimi-
nate music courses from the curriculum.” 
 Your thesis statement can also give some idea of how you plan to defend 
your claim or some idea of how your paper is organized. The following thesis 
sentence tells the reader what premises will be offered: 
 Because music allows children to express their emotions, helps keep them 
calm and relaxed, and teaches them to cooperate with one another, Kings-
ton Elementary should not eliminate its music program. 
In such a thesis statement, you are announcing your premises and your or-
ganization because you will deal with your premises in the order you have 
presented them. 
 The following thesis statement also hints at the organization of the argu-
ment but does not give away the premises: 
 Although music programs are expensive and often hard to staff, Kingston 
Elementary should retain its program for the beneﬁ ts it brings to our com-
munity’s children. 
This thesis statement tells the readers that you intend to look at the reasons 
why the program is being eliminated and then to counter that argument with 
your own, better reasons to retain the program. 
 Of course, you are not required to mention either your reasons or the 
opposition in your thesis; however, your argument should never contradict the 
thesis statement or digress into areas for which you haven’t prepared. If your 
thesis concerns music programs at Kingston Elementary, you shouldn’t start 
talking about art classes in high school. 

 
Writing the First Draft 
409
 Develop Your Body Paragraphs 
 Start each body paragraph with a topic sentence and develop the paragraph 
with details that support your topic sentence. Help your readers to better fol-
low your line of thinking by organizing your ideas in a logical, ﬂ uid manner 
and, when necessary, by providing transitional words and phrases that link ideas 
in a coherent ﬂ ow. 
 The following paragraphs, both from Neil Postman’s  Amusing Ourselves to 
Death, are well developed, organized, and coherent. The ﬁ rst paragraph  provides 
many examples, organized chronologically, to illustrate the idea given in the 
topic sentence. Coherency—or ﬂ ow—is achieved through the use of parallel 
sentence structures. In the second paragraph, Postman lists  several  reasons for 
the popularity of  Sesame Street  among parents. In that paragraph Postman uses 
several transitional words and phrases, which we have italicized. 
 It is difﬁ cult to say exactly when politicians began to put themselves forward, 
intentionally, as sources of amusement. In the 1950’s, Senator Everett Dirksen 
appeared as a guest on “What’s My Line?” When he was running for ofﬁ ce, John 
F. Kennedy allowed the television cameras of Ed Murrow’s “Person to Person” 
to invade his home. When he was not running for ofﬁ ce, Richard Nixon ap-
peared for a few seconds on “Laugh-In,” an hour-long comedy show based on 
the format of a television commercial. By the 1970’s, the public had started to 
become accustomed to the notion that political ﬁ gures were to be taken as part 
of the world of show business. In the 1980’s came the deluge. Vice-presidential 
candidate William Miller did a commercial for American Express. So did the 
star of the Watergate Hearings, Senator Sam Ervin. Former President Gerald 
Ford joined with former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger for brief roles on 
“Dynasty.” Massachusetts Governor Mike Dukakis appeared on “St. Elsewhere.” 
Speaker of the House Tip O’Neill did a stint on “Cheers.” Consumer advocate 
Ralph Nader, George McGovern and Mayor Edward Koch hosted “Saturday 
Night Live.” Koch also played the role of a ﬁ ght manager in a made-for-televi-
sion movie starring James Cagney. Mrs. Nancy Reagan appeared on “Diff’rent 
Strokes.” Would anyone be surprised if Gary Hart turned up on “Hill Street 
Blues”? Or if Geraldine Ferraro played a small role as a Queens housewife in a 
Francis Coppola ﬁ lm? 
 Parents embraced “Sesame Street” for several reasons,  among them  that it assuaged 
their guilt over the fact that they could not or would not restrict their children’s 
access to television. “Sesame Street” appeared to justify allowing a four- or ﬁ ve-
year-old to sit transﬁ xed in front of a television screen for unnatural periods of 
time. Parents were eager to hope that television could teach their children some-
thing other than which breakfast cereal has the most crackle.  At the same time, 
“Sesame Street” relieved them of the responsibility of teaching their pre-school 
children how to read—no small matter in a culture where children are apt to 
be considered a nuisance. They could  also plainly see that in spite of its faults, 
“Sesame Street” was entirely consonant with the prevailing spirit of America. Its 
use of cute puppets, celebrities, catchy tunes, and rapid-ﬁ re editing was certain 
to give pleasure to the children and would  therefore  serve as adequate preparation 
for their entry into a fun-loving culture. 

410 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
 Just as your paragraphs should ﬂ ow smoothly, so should the entire essay. 
Make sure that your reader can follow you from paragraph to paragraph. If 
the connection between topics is not immediately clear, give the reader some 
help with phrases such as “Another reason . . . ,” “In contrast to [the reason just 
stated] . . . ,” and “Finally. . . .” Don’t force transitional words to do the job that 
the content should do: Your argument should move smoothly through para-
graphs that are held together by a clear thesis sentence. But if a transitional tag 
will help, by all means use one.  
 Provide a Satisfying Conclusion 
 Almost every example of human communication has a beginning, a mid-
dle, and an end. Even a simple phone call begins with “hello” and ends with 
“goodbye.” If one of those elements is missing, we are uncomfortable and we 
usually aren’t sure what to do. If a phone call ends abruptly, we might feel we 
had been hung up on or that the line had been disconnected. 
 The same is true in writing an essay. You do not want your readers to 
feel that you have hung up without saying good-bye, which is the purpose of 
a conclusion. It lets your readers know that the essay is complete, that there 
are no missing pages, and that you have said what you intended to say. How 
you say good-bye will depend on your thesis statement, your organization, 
your details, and even the length of your argument. If, for example, you have 
written a short piece—say, an editorial for your campus newspaper—there 
may be no reason to repeat what you said in your thesis statement or your 
central premises. After all, most readers can remember the claim and the topic 
ideas in a short piece, so repeating them may look like an attempt to take up 
space. If, on the other hand, you write a lengthier or more complicated argu-
ment, you might ﬁ nd it necessary to summarize your main ideas. Whatever 
you do, don’t attach a cookie-cutter ending to everything you write. Each 
essay or argument that you write is unique; try writing conclusions that ﬁ t 
the essay. 
 Try one of the following ways to conclude your argument: 
•   Return to the opening. Your readers might ﬁ nd your essay more 
 satisfying if it comes full circle to its opening. Suppose you began 
with a quotation or a story; you might ﬁ nd a way to return to the 
quotation, providing a new interpretation or reminding your  readers 
of its aptness, or to return to the story, telling the readers what 
 happened next or simply referring to some of the details. 
•   Make a prediction. Tell your readers that things might get worse or 
better or that new problems might arise. Be careful not to make an 
unfair appeal to your readers’ emotions. They may feel that you have 
taken a cheap shot to end your argument. 

 
Writing the First Draft 
411
•   Ask a question. Let your readers know that your argument raises some 
questions that still must be answered. 
•   Call for action. Very often a good argument will leave readers wonder-
ing what they can do. Encourage your readers, if appropriate, to take 
action in support of your claim: spread the word, avoid certain be-
haviors, write letters, join a campaign, and so forth. Be careful not to 
preach at your readers. 
•   End with a story different from the one you started with. If returning to 
your original opening is not an option, a new story may help close 
your argument. If you do opt to tell a story, be sure it is a true one. 
Making something up will only anger readers who know or suspect 
that the story is fabricated. 
•   Emphasize the importance of your claim. This strategy works very well 
if you feel your readers might not see the signiﬁ cance of your argu-
ment. For example, in the paper about 7:00  A.M.  classes, your read-
ers might say that with all the important issues on campus, this one 
doesn’t deserve the attention you have lavished upon it. The conclu-
sion might provide an opportunity to say that it does indeed. 
 Whatever method you choose to conclude your essay, keep in mind that 
your purpose is to end the essay, to say good-bye. Try to do so in a manner 
that is pleasing and satisfying to the readers and that ﬁ ts your purpose and your 
point.  
 EXERCISE 13.6 
 Write an argument. Although the exercises throughout this chapter have been 
designed to help you create a group paper, your professor may prefer that you 
write your argument individually. 
 
 If you are to work as a group, keep in mind that collaborating on the writing 
is somewhat more difﬁ cult than working as a group to gather and organize ideas. 
There are several ways to collaborate on a paper: One member can write the en-
tire draft and hand it to the next group member for revisions, who revises it and 
hands it to the third. Or group members could sit in a circle and, like a three-
headed writer, draft the argument. Or each member could take a certain section 
or number of paragraphs. Although any method will work, the last works best for 
longer papers such as business reports. For a short paper, the ﬁ rst or the second 
works well. The ﬁ rst method (one draft writer at a time) is a good option if your 
group will be writing more than one argument during the semester because each 
member can have his or her turn at the ﬁ rst draft. If your professor has no prefer-
ence, your group will have to choose which method to employ as you write the 
ﬁ rst draft of your collective argument.  
 

412 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
 AFTER THE FIRST DRAFT 
 Once you have organized and defended your argument, you will have a draft 
of your essay. Most writers like to set their work aside for a short time before 
they begin revising or editing. Doing so will help you get some distance from 
your own words, which can seem too familiar if you read them too soon after 
writing them. It is easy to miss errors if our minds are ﬁ lling in what we meant 
instead of what actually appears on the page. 
 When you return to your ﬁ rst draft, you must be willing to see it as a 
rough sketch of what your ﬁ nal draft will look like. Few writers are entirely 
happy with the ﬁ rst words that ﬂ ow from their pens or appear on the screen. 
Can you imagine what life would be like if in conversations with one another 
we had no opportunity to correct what we said or take back a comment or 
clarify our meaning? Take advantage of the opportunity to correct and clarify 
your ﬁ rst draft, and take as many drafts as you need to get the argument as you 
want it.  
 Read What You Have Written and Revise 
 After you have written a draft of your essay and given your brain time to cool, 
return to your essay and read it again with a critical eye. Don’t look only for 
clumsy expressions, grammatical problems, meaningless or repetitive sentences, 
and the like. Look for the large issues and evaluate your argument from the 
point of view of someone who disagrees with you. Be honest with yourself; 
question your evidence. Ask yourself if you are simply repeating what you have 
heard or what you assume to be true. Check your logic. Put your essay through 
the same rigorous test you have put other arguments through. Revise your 
draft to correct any problems.  
 Consider What You Have Not Written and Revise 
 Most important, consider what you have  not  said. Very often we are so com-
mitted to our viewpoints that we fail to examine the ideas and assumptions 
upon which those views are based. When you look critically at your essay, 
try to disagree with what you have written by ﬁ nding a way to reject each 
of the premises you have offered as support. It may sound like you’re being 
awfully rough on yourself, but it will help reveal areas where connections are 
left unexplored or where unexamined assumptions are guiding your thinking. 
You don’t have to abandon what you have written; you may simply have to 
defend it better. Suppose the topic were salaries and someone had suggested 
that salaries in the United States should be capped at, say, $250,000. You are 
asked for your argument on the issue, and you write, “Capping salaries is not a 
good idea because it would reduce competition.”  You might write a brilliant 
 I have rewrit-
ten—often sev-
eral times—every 
word I have ever 
published. My 
pencils outlast 
their erasers. 
 —Vladimir 
Nabokov 

 
After the First Draft 
413
paragraph showing that capping salaries would indeed reduce competition. 
You might provide historical examples and the testimony of experts to back 
you up. But you need to ask, “So what?” So what if competition is reduced? 
What’s so great about competition anyway? It may be great, but you need to 
 show that it is. Your readers may not have the same values that you have. In a 
case such as this, it is best not to leave anything to chance. If you discover that 
you have taken too much for granted or that you need to better defend your 
assertions, revise your essay.  
 Show Your Work 
 Show your draft to someone—a friend, a family member, a professor, a tutor 
in the writing lab—someone who will do you the favor of critically reviewing 
your essay. Don’t let a friend tell you what you want to hear: “It’s great. Hand it 
in.” Ask if anything is confusing or undeveloped. Ask your reader to show you 
where the argument may be weak or unconvincing. Ask if the organization is 
clear and effective, if the opening paragraph is interesting, and if the conclu-
sion is satisfying. Never hesitate to get advice from a reader. It is not a sign of 
weakness or insecurity but of strength and intelligence to ask for a critique on 
a draft. Not even a professional writer considers a piece ﬁ nished until it has 
been reviewed by one or more people who can offer advice for improving the 
writing.  
 Edit Your Work 
 When you have revised your argument several times and are happy with 
the content and organization, look over your sentences very carefully one 
last time for grammatical mistakes, misused or missing punctuation, mis-
spellings, and typographical errors. And, again, there is no shame in seek-
ing help if you are unsure about things such as comma usage and sentence 
fragments. Finally, try reading your paper out loud to hear how it sounds. 
Doing so can sometimes help reveal awkward phrases or repetitive sentence 
structures.  
 Hand It In 
 Someone once said that good writing is never ﬁ nished, it’s just published or, 
in this case, handed in. You can probably rest assured that your reader—your 
professor—is the intelligent, impartial, sensitive reader that you have been ad-
vised to write for and that your argument will be evaluated on its strength, its 
form and content, its support, and so forth. If you have done your work well, 
you will at least get a fair hearing.  

414 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
 Evans 1 
 Samantha Evans 
 Professor Gaughran 
 Humanities 101: Critical Thinking 
 December 5, 2010 
 
 No Public Prayer in Public Schools 
 
 In the nearly ﬁ fty years since the Supreme Court 
banned teacher-led prayer in public schools, members 
of Congress have proposed almost 150 constitutional 
amendments to return prayer in some form to classrooms 
(Epstein 212). Their efforts reﬂ ect what many 
Americans, including many students, want. In fact, in 
a 2005 Gallup poll, slightly more than half of today’s 
teenagers said that schools should be permitted to 
conduct spoken, non-denominational prayers (Ott). 
Undoubtedly, daily prayer is important in the lives 
of many Americans, and we are all entitled to offer 
private, silent prayers whenever and wherever we wish 
and even to shout our prayers in our backyards or on 
street corners. And some prayer must be permitted even 
in public schools; no one would deny Muslim students, 
for example, the right to gather to pray at prescribed 
times during the school day. But such prayers should 
be conducted in areas removed from the student body, 
not publicly in classrooms or assemblies where non-
Muslim students are gathered. Public prayer on public 
school grounds, whether organized by school ofﬁ cials or 
by groups within the student body, must be prohibited. 
While prayer is permitted in exclusively religious 
 Interesting opening. 
 Offers a balanced 
view: Doesn’t try to 
argue in either/or 
terms; shows good 
sense of audience. 
 Deﬁ nes  prayer in a 
speciﬁ c context.  
 Thesis provides some 
idea of how paper 
will proceed. 
 Sample Argumentative Essay 
This essay is published with the kind permission of the author.

 
After the First Draft 
415
schools, private schools or colleges, organized public 
prayer in public schools not only violates the First 
Amendment, it discourages students from expressing 
minority views for fear of appearing to go against 
the majority. Furthermore, allowing prayers in school 
interferes with parents’ rights to raise their children 
as they see ﬁ t. 
 
 First, prayer in public schools violates the First 
Amendment: “Congress shall make no law respecting an 
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free 
exercise thereof, or abridging the freedom of speech, 
or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably 
to assemble, and to petition the government for a 
redress of grievances.” The rights guaranteed by the 
First Amendment of the Constitution are familiar 
to most Americans, and the amendment’s underlying 
principle--personal freedom--plays a part in our daily 
lives: we may, without government interference, choose 
our spouse, job, place of residence, college, and 
so on. That same freedom also applies to religion, 
a concept that is explicitly protected by two 
constitutional provisions, namely the establishment 
and free exercise clauses. Brieﬂ y, the establishment 
clause, in the most basic sense, prohibits the 
government (interpreted by the Supreme Court to mean 
both national and state governments) from advancing 
or inhibiting religion. 
1 The second provision--the 
free exercise clause--allows an individual to practice 
whatever religion he or she chooses. We take advantage 
of that simple freedom when we worship at a church or 
synagogue, or when we choose not to worship at all. 
 First premise: Public 
school prayer violates 
First Amendment. 
 Quotes First Amend-
ment because some 
readers might be 
unfamiliar with the 
exact language. 
 Uses illustrations to 
explain “personal 
freedoms.” 
 Divides the First 
Amendment state-
ment on religious 
freedom into two 
parts, the establish-
ment clause and the 
free exercise clause, 
and deﬁ nes each.  
Evans 2

416 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
 
 School-sponsored prayer violates the establishment 
clause, since a public school is funded by tax money 
and acts as an agent of the state. Just as the 
government couldn’t lead us in a prayer before our 
driver’s test at the Department of Motor Vehicles, it 
cannot conduct prayer in its schools. As decided in a 
1963 case questioning a school’s required reading of 
ten Bible passages per day and in a 2000 case involving 
the constitutionality of displaying the motto “In 
God We Trust” in Colorado classrooms, schools cannot 
perpetuate established religions associated with the 
Bible and God (Epstein 196–7; Janofsky A9). This fact 
holds true regardless of how many people believe in 
and practice that religion. Even if the school did 
not require but merely supervised organized prayer on 
school grounds, the school would be in violation of the 
establishment clause since it would appear to promote 
or assist in religion. 
 
 If a school did require its students to pray, it 
would also, obviously, violate the second provision, 
the free exercise clause, which allows us to choose 
 not to worship if that’s what we desire. But, some 
might ask, doesn’t the free exercise clause also give 
us the right to freely express our religious views? 
In other words, shouldn’t the students themselves be 
free to assemble to pray in the cafeteria, in the 
school yard or parking lot, or in the locker room, 
for example? This very position was taken by a school 
district in Sante Fe, Texas, where a student was chosen 
by her classmates, and therefore not a school ofﬁ cial, 
to recite “an invocation and/or message” over the 
 Shows how school 
prayer violates the es-
tablishment clause. 
 Supports claim with 
an analogy. 
 Provides illustrations. 
 Shows how school 
prayer violates the 
free exercise clause. 
 Considers oppos-
ing point of view: 
Shouldn’t free exer-
cise clause permit us 
to freely exercise our 
religious beliefs? 
Evans 3

 
After the First Draft 
417
loudspeaker during home football games. The school was 
obviously aware that this practice was occurring and 
claimed that it was allowable considering the students’ 
right to free exercise (Epstein 210–2). Unfortunately, 
the argument is ﬂ awed in two areas. Primarily, the 
activity of prayer itself continues to occur on school 
grounds, and regardless of whether or not a school 
ofﬁ cial chose the speaker, simply allowing prayer on 
school property in this context could be interpreted 
as promoting the religion advocated by the student 
representative. Put more plainly, the school is not 
remaining neutral on issues of religion. 
 
 Second, such an argument overlooks the tension 
inherent in the establishment and free exercise 
provisions, a tension so strong that it may seem to 
be a contradiction: On the one hand, if the government 
allows prayer on public property, it promotes religion; 
if the government  prohibits prayer, it is denying 
our freedom to exercise our religious beliefs. Since 
tension unquestionably exists, one clause must take 
precedence over the other in certain public locations 
such as schools. In a public school setting, the 
precedence of the establishment clause preserves the 
school’s neutrality. Simultaneously, such a choice 
still allows for and encourages the free exercise of 
religion to occur elsewhere, namely in the privacy of 
one’s home (or anywhere else not linked to a public 
school). Those who argue that the free exercise clause 
should prevail sometimes resort to emotional appeals, 
as does Armstrong William in “Supreme Court Quivers 
over Prayer Possibility.” Mr. William suggests, in 
 Responds to oppos-
ing argument: First, 
prayer is still taking 
place on school 
grounds in violation 
of establishment 
clause. 
 Further response to 
opposing argument: 
Two clauses create a 
tension that can be 
resolved only by giv-
ing precedence to the 
establishment clause, 
not to the free exer-
cise clause. 
 Considers one 
opposing argument—
that if one clause 
should take pre-
cedence, it should 
be the free exercise 
clause. 
Evans 4

418 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
the wake of recent Supreme Court decisions regarding 
school prayer, that the Supreme Court will eventually 
abolish Christmas and similar religious holidays. By 
overstating the case and playing on the fear of the 
public, he makes it seem as if all religious values 
are being questioned and that we are on the slippery 
slope toward a completely secular society. What the 
Court correctly questioned, however, was a school’s 
 position  in perpetuating religious values. Upholding 
the establishment clause ensures that schools do not 
promote religion while allowing personal religious 
practices to continue without restriction. 
 
 What if a school’s ofﬁ cials, however, are unaware 
of and therefore unable to stop attempts to pray 
collectively and publicly on school grounds? Couldn’t 
we simply ignore the small prayer groups formed, 
sometimes spontaneously, by students who pray aloud in 
hallways and during assemblies? Couldn’t we somehow get 
around the First Amendment and let students who want to 
pray gather with one another the way some NFL players 
do on the ﬁ eld after a game? After all, what harm is 
done? 
 
 Actually, the potential exists for much harm. 
All of us have felt in grade school and high school 
(and, yes, even in college) pressure to conform to the 
wishes of the group around us. It’s often better to 
laugh at a friend’s unfunny joke simply to be accepted 
by that friend. The same can and does hold true for 
young adults who practice a religion other than that 
of their classmates. If public prayer is allowed, we 
are creating an extremely tense and stressful situation 
 Responds to the 
opposing argument. 
 Introduces second 
premise with 
questions . . . 
 . . . and with an 
 analogy. 
 Second premise: 
One effect of school 
prayer is that it 
creates a stressful 
situation for some 
students. 
Evans 5

 
After the First Draft 
419
for students who might fear that their choice of a 
“different” religion, or no religion, could divide them 
from classmates and friends, resulting, possibly, in 
their being ostracized or ridiculed. 
 
 Their fear is warranted. At around the time that 
the school district in Sante Fe, Texas, was arguing to 
allow student-led prayers, several stories appeared in 
the popular press describing incidents of coercion or 
retribution aimed at those who refused to participate 
in majority prayer.  At a school in Maryland, one young 
man, refusing to participate in a spontaneous prayer 
begun by audience members at commencement, left the 
auditorium as a way of expressing his disapproval of 
the intended religious message. Security guards refused 
to allow the student back into the proceedings, and 
school ofﬁ cials subsequently barred him from a school 
party occurring on the same evening (Chavez). Consider 
the case of Greg Thomas. A former teacher in Hamilton 
High School, Thomas suddenly lost the support of his 
once-friendly neighbors after complaining about the 
predominance of Christian teachings in the schools. 
Fellow teachers, previous supporters of the community 
art program, stopped bringing their students to plays 
produced by Thomas, leading eventually to the cutting 
of the program and loss of Thomas’s job. The consensus 
seemed to be that the community feared Thomas’s 
attempts at turning the Christian school into “the 
Jewish league” (Reeves). Without a doubt, if adults 
are willing to treat fellow adults with such disdain 
over a difference of religion, it sends the message to 
students of minority faiths to keep quiet. We should 
 Premise supported 
through illustrations. 
Evans 6

420 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
not be placing children, or even young adults, in a 
situation where they must choose between their faith 
and their friends. Students are learning that choosing 
the former may result in ridicule, while choosing the 
latter is a denial of oneself. Simply keeping public, 
collective prayer out of school eliminates any such 
dilemma. 
 
 A ﬁ nal reason to reject school prayer is to prevent 
inﬂ uencing individuals whose religious beliefs have not 
been completely forged. Schools that permit or ignore 
even spontaneous prayer are in effect robbing parents 
of the right to instruct their children on religious 
matters if their children are hearing beliefs in school 
contrary to those being taught at home. 
 
 Some proponents of school prayer argue that 
morality must be injected into our classrooms. In the 
2000 case involving the use of “In God We Trust,” 
advocates for prayer feared a replay of the tragic 
events at Columbine, contending that such a phrase 
might help “reinforce the precepts of moral rectitude” 
throughout our schools (Janofsky). Although no one 
denies the hideous nature of the events at Columbine, 
it is conceivable that some parents do not deﬁ ne 
“morality” on the basis of any established religious 
teachings and may wish to inculcate moral values 
through a process that does not involve religion. 
Religion must remain a private family issue. This is 
not a question of shared responsibility among parents, 
community and schools. Realistically, that type of 
cooperation is beneﬁ cial when used to encourage student 
involvement in school sports teams, clubs or community 
  Third premise: 
School prayer inter-
feres with parents’ 
right to instruct 
children on religious 
matters. 
 Considers opposing 
view that morality 
must be injected into 
schools. 
 Responds to oppos-
ing argument: Par-
ents will not all agree 
on how morality 
should be taught. 
Evans 7

 
After the First Draft 
421
programs. We can identify a uniﬁ ed goal for this type 
of cooperation, such as helping children make friends. 
On the contrary, it is nearly impossible to ﬁ nd one 
religious absolute that would cover all students in 
a school. And not only do we hold beliefs different 
from those held in another denomination, but even 
within our own faith what we accept and do not accept 
may vary widely among members of the same church or 
synagogue. Therefore, worrying about what should be and 
should not be included when designing a prayer is an 
overwhelmingly difﬁ cult task. The task is much easier 
when religion is not addressed in public schools at 
all, but remains a subject dealt with at home. 
 
 The solution would appear to be what many teenagers 
apparently want: a scheduled period of silence in which 
students could pray voluntarily. In fact, the same 
Gallup poll that showed more than half of all teenagers 
supporting a spoken prayer revealed that the great 
majority of teens (84 percent) would be satisﬁ ed with 
a scheduled moment of silence (Ott). But even this 
proposal is fraught with problems. In 1985, the Supreme 
Court struck down an Alabama law that authorized a 
moment of silence allowing students to meditate or pray, 
agreeing with opponents of the law who contended that it 
had no secular purpose and appeared to be a roundabout 
way to restore prayer to public schools. Nonetheless, 
school districts across the country have included 
mandatory moments of silence at the start of the 
school day, but this may again come before the Supreme 
Court. In November 2007 a federal judge in Chicago 
ordered school boards in Illinois to stop enforcing a 
 Development 
through contrasts: 
Some shared goals, 
such as helping stu-
dents make friends, 
can be achieved, but 
we do not all share 
the same religious 
beliefs. 
Evans 8

422 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
one-month-old state law mandating a moment of silence 
(Keen). Whether such scheduled, public periods of silent 
meditation or prayer violate the First Amendment may be 
determined by the highest court in the years to come. 
 
 For many of us, prayer is a vital part of our 
lives; it can help us cope with and understand our 
earthly existence. No doubt a bit more religion in 
our lives could help curb our violent tendencies. But 
prayer does not belong in schools. Schools should teach 
subjects that are beneﬁ cial to all students, while 
refraining from getting involved in subjects certain 
to increase tension between classmates and within 
individual students. Surely much could be done in our 
schools to decrease the overwhelming tension that 
already exists between factions or to provide a more 
secure and safe environment. But while we might pray 
at home for providential guidance for ourselves, our 
teachers and our classmates, praying together in school 
can only cause more harm than good. 
 Satisfying conclusion: 
Shows sensitivity to 
audience and . . . 
 . . . comes back to is-
sues addressed in the 
opening paragraph. 
Evans 9
Evans 10
Note
1 There is much debate, even among past and current 
Supreme Court justices, over the meaning of the phrase 
“establishment of religion” in the First Amendment. In 
a 1971 case  (Lemon v. Kurtzjnari), the Court created 
a three-pronged test, now called the Lemon test, to 
determine whether a government action violated the 
establishment clause. My argument relies on the second 

 
After the First Draft 
423
prong of the test: A government action should not 
have the primary effect of advancing or inhibiting 
religion. The usefulness and legitimacy of the Lemon 
test itself is also a matter of debate among justices 
and constitutional scholars, but it continues to 
inﬂ uence court decisions. For an explanation of the 
Lemon test and a more developed discussion of the First 
Amendment, see ﬁ rstamendementcenter.org (http://www.
ﬁ rstamendmentcenter.org/rel_liberty/establishment/
index.aspx). 
 Works Cited 
 Chavez, Linda. “Most Americans Want to Return to a Tra-
dition of Public Prayer.”  Salt Lake  City Enterprise 
7 June 1999: 24. 
 Epstein, Lee, and Thomas G.  Walker. Constitutional 
Law for a Changing America: Rights Liberties and 
Justice. 5 
th ed. Washington, D.C.: Congressional 
Quarterly Press, 2004. 
 Janofsky, Michael. “Colorado Asks: Is ‘In God We Trust’ 
A Religious Statement?”  New York Times  3 July 2000, 
natl. ed.: A9. 
 Keen, Judy. “Judge Stops Enforcement of Silence Law.” 
 USA Today 16 Nov. 2007: A3. 
 Ott, Bryan. “School Prayer: Teen Support Hinges on 
Type.” 26 July 2005. The Gallup Organization. 
22 Nov. 2007 <http://www.gallup.com/poll/17494/
School-Prayer-Teen-Support-Hinges-Type.aspx>.  
 Reeves, Jay. “Alabama Man Crusades Against School 
Prayer.”  Community College Week 10 July 2000: 3. 
 Williams, Armstrong. “Supreme Court Quivers over Prayer 
Possibility.”  New York Amsterdam News 29 June 2000: 8.  
Evans 11

424 
CHAPTER 13 Writing Argumentative  Essays 
 SUMMARY 
1.   An argument is not a ﬁ ght. Although your objective might be to win, 
your success in an argument should be measured by how well you defend 
your claim and how fair, accurate, and honest you are in presenting your 
case. Whether your opponent agrees or disagrees with you in the end, you 
should strive to put forward the most rational and evenhanded presenta-
tion you can muster. 
2.   Before writing an argument, know yourself, your audience, and your topic. 
Present yourself as a humane and generous person. Don’t try to write an 
argument on an issue you know nothing about even though you might 
have strong opinions concerning it. Know your topic well, even if you 
have to conduct research. Speak to your audience; don’t lecture, antago-
nize, or bully them. Expect your readers to be fair but skeptical. Try to 
foresee your readers’ reactions and objections. 
3.   To get started, focus your topic so that you can cover the issue in the 
number of pages assigned. Brainstorm for ideas and organize your 
thoughts. 
4.   When writing the argument, provide a single statement of your central 
claim and organize your material in a manner that will allow your readers 
to easily recognize your premises. You can organize your argument in any 
number of ways. Try organizing according to your premises, both stated 
and unstated, or around any of the standard developmental patterns for 
writing essays (illustration, comparison/contrast, cause-and-effect, classiﬁ -
cation, deﬁ nition). Depending on the topic, a problem-solution or evalu-
ative pattern might work well. You might use your opponent’s claims to 
help organize your own argument. Give your argument a conclusion that 
your readers will ﬁ nd satisfying.  
5.   Defend your central claim with factual evidence, expert opinion, ex-
amples, and, when appropriate, analogies. Don’t hesitate to research your 
topic to provide the best support possible. 
6.   After you have written your argument, read what you have written. Be 
certain that you have defended your premises and any assumptions on 
which your argument is based. Before you write your ﬁ nal, edited draft, 
seek the advice of your professor, a tutor, or a peer who might alert you to 
any shortcomings in the argument you may have failed to notice. 

425
CHAPTER 14
 THINKING CRITICALLY
ABOUT THE MEDIA 
 We live today in the “information age” and work in a “knowledge-based 
economy.” Throughout the day we are bombarded with information from 
radio, television, computers, newspapers, books, magazines, phones, faxes, pag-
ers, message boards, signs, and billboards. This daily barrage of information can 
be so overwhelming that it’s easy to allow our intellectual ﬁ lters to shut down 
and to fall into the habit of passively absorbing whatever is thrown at us. This 
chapter will help you develop methods for applying your critical thinking 
skills to the evaluation of information you encounter in your daily life. 
 THE MASS MEDIA 
 Much of what you hear and read comes to you through what is called the 
 mass media. Some people mistakenly believe that the word  mass  in this context 
refers to the size of the organization that delivers news and entertainment, and, 
certainly, most mass media organizations such as ABC and the New York Times 
Company are quite large. But the mass media are deﬁ ned not so much by the 
size of the organizations as by the size of the audiences they reach through 
such devices as televisions, radios, computers, cameras, printing presses, copy 
machines, and so forth. The  mass media  include all print or electronic media 
intended to inform, entertain, or persuade large audiences and include news 
broadcasts, sitcoms, talk shows, soap operas, music videos, movies, magazines, 
newspapers, radio shows, CDs, posters, ﬂ iers, advertisements, comic books, 
novels, and textbooks. The term  media is also used to indicate the producers of, 
and contributors to, media creations; thus, we refer to journalists, news anchors, 
camera operators, performers, and so forth as “the media.” 
 The media in America face an enormous challenge in their efforts to 
reach very large and diverse audiences. In some cases, the prospective audience 
is narrowed by the content of the particular production.  Sporting News, Field 
and Stream, Popular Science, Cosmopolitan, Harper’s,  and many other specialized 

426 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
publications are aimed at audiences whose interests or needs distinguish them 
from other groups. Other publications and productions, such as the  New York 
Times, the Washington Post,  the  Wall Street Journal,  and  All Things Considered 
(on National Public Radio), are aimed at educated audiences interested in 
more-extensive coverage and analysis of national and international events. An-
other branch of the media narrows its audience through editorial policies that 
openly declare a political point of view. Often referred to as  journals of opinion, 
partisan publications such as the  Nation, Commentary,  the  New Republic,  and 
 National Review  occasionally report the news but more frequently comment 
on current events from one side of the political spectrum or the other. A reader 
has a slightly easier task of evaluating materials from these sources because the 
editorial policies are stated forthrightly. 1 
 But the majority of media productions in the United States profess to 
maintain an objective political stance and are aimed at audiences whose diver-
sity makes it difﬁ cult to assume any common ground, political or otherwise. 
Local and national daily papers and radio programs; the local and national 
nightly news on ABC, NBC, and CBS; programming on CNN, MSNBC, 
and Fox; and the popular newsmagazines ( Time, Newsweek,  and  U.S. News and 
World Report )—all reach audiences whose political viewpoints run the spec-
trum from the most liberal to the most conservative. Although these produc-
tions may target particular groups of people deﬁ ned by age and literacy, they 
all reach a larger audience than specialized publications. The magazine  Mother 
Jones  is aimed at progressives, or liberals, who are interested in its investigative 
reporting and coverage of issues regarding labor, political, and environmental 
issues. But the managing editor of  World News Tonight,  the editor of your local 
paper, and the writers for  Time magazine must assume that their audiences 
have widely varied interests and viewpoints. A perceived or stated bias on the 
part of the network, newspaper, or magazine would speak to one segment of 
the audience and alienate others. 
 Clearly, the media constitute a large and complex institution. Because a 
thorough discussion of critical thinking and the media would be impossible in 
a single chapter, we limit ourselves to two related institutions that we encoun-
ter every day: news and advertising. 
 THE NEWS MEDIA 
  The Importance of Context 
 The word  media is the plural form of  medium, a word derived from the Latin 
 medius , from which we get many words— mediate, medieval, mediocre, median, 
and others—with a common meaning: they all refer to something “in the 
middle.” A mediator tries to resolve conﬂ icts by working with both sides, a 
median strip separates lanes of trafﬁ c, and so on. Similarly, the news media act 
as middle-agents, a bridge between us and the world of events occurring all 
around us. Since we cannot be in Iraq or South Africa or on the other side 

 
The News Media 
427
of town this afternoon to see for ourselves the events taking place there, the 
media will bring those events to us. 
 When we watch or read the news, we cannot say for certain that we  know 
what happened in the world today—we know only what a complex web of 
journalists, editors, camera operators, technicians, engineers, news anchors, and 
so forth have shown and told us about the world’s events. The news media act 
as a sort of wire mesh through which the day’s events have been sifted and 
delivered to a massive audience. What gets through the mesh is only a small 
fraction of what is really going on. 
 Because of space limitations and because the audience is so large and 
diverse, most popular news media are forced to exclude any broad discussion 
of contexts that would give more meaning to the small bits of information 
we do receive or make them more useful to us. Important, even vital, stories 
get sifted down to pebbles of information. One example with which many 
readers will be familiar is the “sound bite.” The broadcast media often snip 
very small segments of a speaker’s comments from a longer, more complex, 
discourse. Although the media may try to clip the most important passages 
for broadcast, ones that, for example, summarize a political candidate’s posi-
tion on an issue, the practice of using sound bites extracts a comment from 
its context, which means that a listener has no way of knowing  precisely what 
may have been intended by a comment or how to interpret it. Knowing the 
media’s penchant for using sound bites, political advisors and speechwrit-
ers often attempt to stay a step ahead of the media by including succinct, 
snappy lines that will make the nightly news as sound bites. Although politi-
cians can use the sound bite phenomenon to their advantage, the practice 
does little to help viewers and readers understand intentions and meanings 
because the surrounding introductions, explanations, qualiﬁ ers, and so forth 
are missing. In fact, in the worst examples of the practice, a speaker is quoted 
out of context and the audience is given a false impression of the speaker’s 
intentions. 
 The practice of using sound bites illustrates what amounts to a minor 
problem given the larger, more consequential, effect of stripping information 
from its context. In many cases, rather than offer a thorough examination of an 
issue in all its complexity, the media actually distort meaning in their presenta-
tion of the news. In place of complexity, which would require an audience’s 
active, intelligent participation, the media usually employ attention-grabbing 
techniques that do little to increase our knowledge of a topic. Although some 
media productions, most notably national newspapers such as the  New York 
Times  and the  Washington Post , do undertake extensive investigations and at-
tempt to provide extended analysis, most news outlets provide little, if any, 
insight into events and issues. Ironically, some network news organizations 
label segments of the news “In-depth” or “A Closer Look,” even though these 
segments are only a minute or two longer than other segments of the news. 
The titles do little more than call attention to the usual lack of depth and close 
analysis. 
Without context, 
there is no truth.
—Thomas P. 
Kasulis

428 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
   Yet another illustration of how lack of context can make information 
meaningless can be found in the clipped stories that take up much space and 
time in the media. In an effort to pack as many stories as possible into a broad-
cast or a newspaper, managers and editors may devote a few moments of time 
or a few inches of newsprint to the selected national and international events in 
a segment usually titled something like “The World in a Minute,” “Around the 
Nation,” or “Nationline.” Newsmagazines are especially fond of presenting pages 
full of abbreviated news, statistics, quotes, snapshots, and so forth. And in order 
to get the news out as quickly as possible, many news sources, perhaps especially 
Internet sites and 24-hour cable news networks, announce events within mo-
ments of their occurrence, often sacriﬁ cing accuracy for speed. These brief seg-
ments and scraps of information are usually so far removed from their contexts 
as to be not only useless but sometimes dangerously misleading as well. 
 In a typical broadcast fragment, an announcer might declare that a for-
eign government ofﬁ cial has stepped down and that a celebrity has ﬁ led a 
protection-from-abuse order, giving the impression that these events are of 
equal importance and leaving us with no idea why the foreign leader resigned 
or what will happen next. A brief segment on health issues, such as the intro-
duction of new medications or the latest research ﬁ ndings on nutrition, can 
be especially hazardous to audiences who fail to realize that the whole story 
is far more complicated than the segment suggests. Even more useless and po-
tentially detrimental are popular reports of scientiﬁ c ﬁ ndings, which are often 
misrepresented by science writers working under deadlines and with limited 
scientiﬁ c knowledge. Without sufﬁ cient training in the practice of interpreting 
results and measuring the value of evidence, science writers, unlike scientists 
who write, often overstate the signiﬁ cance of scientiﬁ c news, predicting, for 
example, that cures for deadly diseases are close at hand. 
 Online news sources such as  CNN.com and  usatoday.com  help readers 
ﬁ ll in contextual information by providing links to related stories and vid-
eos and to off-site sources such as maps, transcripts, and other documents. 
But the traditional media are limited in how much information they can 
provide in a small amount of time and space. Even with the slightly more 
extended coverage and analysis found in such shows as  Nightline, 60 Minutes, 
20/20 , and  Dateline, there inevitably remains in every story cultural, politi-
cal, and social implications that the media fail to examine. Very few news 
organizations make the effort to help us understand isolated events by ex-
amining them in larger social or political contexts. To put the matter in 
personal terms, imagine a decision you made in your life that took a great 
deal of thought (choosing to live with one parent or the other, breaking up 
with a girlfriend, quitting a job, selecting a college); then imagine that you 
have two minutes to tell your entire story to the world so that listeners or 
readers fully understand your motives, feelings, attitudes, regrets, and so on. 
Would ﬁ ve minutes be enough? Ten? 
 But let’s suppose you had all of thirty minutes to tell your story, and, to 
make the task still more challenging, suppose you were only one of several 
When distant and 
unfamiliar and 
complex things are 
communicated to 
great masses of 
people, the truth 
suffers a consider-
able and often 
radical distortion. 
The complex is 
made over into the 
simple, the hypo-
thetical into the 
dogmatic, and 
the relative into 
the absolute.
—Walter Lippmann

 
The News Media 
429
people with a story to tell and your audience could get up and walk out on 
you at any point in your tale. You might ﬁ rst ﬁ nd yourself inventing more ways 
to hold your audience’s attention than ways to persuade them of your inno-
cence or convince them of your regret. In a similar manner, the news media are 
motivated less by the desire to educate or inform than they are by the need to 
get and hold the attention of the largest possible audience. 
 EXERCISE 14.1  
 I.  Form groups of three and, for the next class, get a copy of  USA Today , another 
newspaper with national distribution (the  New York Times , the  Washington Post , the 
 Wall Street Journal  ), and a local paper. Each member of the group can be responsible 
for one paper; be sure to decide in advance and to get papers issued on the same day. 
 
  Working as a group in the next class, look through all three papers until you 
ﬁ nd a story that is covered by all three. Read the longest of the articles ﬁ rst, then 
the second longest, then the shortest. As a group, compare the coverage, paying 
close attention to the following questions: 
 
  •  Which paper covers the story in the greatest depth? List some speciﬁ c 
differences in the details that are included and excluded. Be careful not to 
assume that the longer piece is the more developed because it may simply 
be repetitive. 
 •  Do any of the papers attempt to discuss the event in a broader context—
looking, for example, at historical episodes that may have led to the current 
event; discussing the impact or possible consequences of the event; compar-
ing the event with similar occurrences; or discussing it in terms of larger 
political, social, or economic issues? You don’t have to know a lot about 
these broader issues; just ascertain which paper attempts to set the events in 
a larger context. 
 •  Looking at the difference in how the three papers cover the same story, 
try to determine how readers might react to each paper. If one paper has 
excluded some important contextual information, what is the effect on the 
reader? What kinds of questions might an interested reader have? 
 •  Compare the headlines for similar stories. What does each headline emphasize? 
How might the headline affect the reader’s conception of the story?  
When you have ﬁ nished discussing these questions in your group, report your 
ﬁ ndings to the class.  
II.    Find and compare two articles about the same subject. Choose one article 
from a newspaper and the other from a newsmagazine. Read the newspaper 
article ﬁ rst and then the one from the newsmagazine. List the aspects of the 
magazine story not covered in the newspaper story, and answer this question: 
How is your understanding of the subject changed by the inclusion of additional 
information in the magazine? 

430 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
 GETTING US TO PAY ATTENTION: 
WHAT REALLY DRIVES THE MEDIA 
 So why do the news media go to all this trouble to attract and hold the atten-
tion of a large audience? After all, if the purpose is to deliver news into our 
homes, what does it matter how many of us are reading or watching? The 
mainstream news media do not exist solely to deliver the news, however, just 
as sitcoms and dramas are not intended only to entertain us. Although the 
news media certainly hope to inform us of daily events, they are constrained 
by the need to achieve an additional objective: to promote and sell commercial 
products and services to a large audience. The sitcoms and newscasts, radio talk 
shows and newspaper headlines are intended ﬁ rst to grab our attention so that 
we will stay tuned for the commercials or read the ads.   
 This revelation might not startle those of us who have grown accustomed 
to full-page newspaper ads, annoying radio jingles, banner ads on nearly every 
Web page, and the constant interruption of television commercials. Some-
times, in fact, it seems as if the show is interrupting the advertisements. But 
surely the news is exempt from such commercialism; surely the news operates 
on a higher plane. Unfortunately, no. Whereas we might hope in a perfect 
world to tune into a half-hour of uninterrupted news every night or to buy a 
paper that devoted all of its space to detailed reporting and analysis, the news 
media could not survive without advertisements because it is not the consum-
ers but the sponsors who pay for the production of the news. No one gets a 
bill each month for listening to AM or FM radio. And the seventy-ﬁ ve cents 
or so that you pay for your daily paper is just a drop in the bucket of the costs 
of producing it. 
 How can these media afford to provide services at little or no charge 
to consumers? By selling advertising. A sponsor, say, Ford Motor Company, 
buys commercial time on CBS, which uses the money to produce the news. 
If viewers stay tuned to the news and the ad is successful, Ford will sell cars 
and buy more time on CBS. Ford and other corporations keep a close eye 
on CBS’s nightly news ratings to see how many people are watching the 
broadcasts. If the ratings are too low, meaning that a relatively small number 
of people are watching the news on CBS, Ford might go to another network, 
one with higher ratings and a greater share of the news-watching audience. 
Without sponsorship to pay the bills, the mainstream media would simply 
collapse. 
 Some exceptions to commercial media should be noted. In the case of 
 public  television and radio (Public Broadcast System, National Public Radio, 
Public Radio International), survival depends on contributions from private 
corporations, contributing members, and government grants. Church-afﬁ liated 
radio and television stations survive with contributions from listeners and 
viewers and, of course, with church sponsorship. And the U.S. government, 
funded by tax money, produces many informative documents. But for almost 
The press owes to 
society a truthful, 
comprehensive 
and intelligent ac-
count of the day’s 
events in a context 
that gives them 
meaning.
—Freedom of the 
Press Commission, 
1947

 
Getting Us to Pay Attention: What Really Drives the Media  
431
everyone else in the media, survival depends on advertising revenue. This, ob-
viously, presents a problem—a clash of values represented on the one hand by 
an audience’s need for information and on the other by the media’s need to 
survive. Put bluntly, the mass media in America are businesses, powerfully mo-
tivated by the need to sustain themselves and, in the case of privately owned 
corporations, to make a proﬁ t. Certainly, making money is no crime; and be-
cause most of us like to be informed, the mass media should have no trouble 
garnering audiences large enough to sustain the individual companies that 
supply the information. But it’s not that simple.     
 Simply presenting information—often complicated, detailed, and 
dense—won’t usually do the trick of holding your attention and coaxing 
you back to the same newspaper or television network again and again. Let’s 
be brutally honest with ourselves here: Many Americans, unfortunately, don’t 
enjoy reading long and complicated articles or watching detailed and serious 
analyses concerning issues unconnected to their everyday lives. And to be 
fair, a large number of American adults (estimates go as high as 50 percent) 
cannot read complicated material or follow intricate and demanding analy-
sis. Because the media know this (and may in fact be partly responsible for 
it), they surround the advertisements with stories and reports that will not 
Charles D. McKinley, 25, was homesick and looking for a cheap way 
to get home. So he had himself shipped from New York to Dallas in an 
airline shipping crate.
 
Packed into the 42  36  15–inch crate, McKinley traveled by truck 
from New York’s Kennedy Airport to Newark, New Jersey. The box was 
then loaded onto a pressurized, heated cargo plane and ﬂ own to 
Niagara Falls, New York; then to Fort Wayne, Indiana; and on to Dallas. 
The crate was then delivered by truck by Pilot Air Freight to McKinley’s 
parents’ home in suburban Desoto.
 
McKinley startled his parents—and a deliveryman—when he broke 
out of the box outside his parents’ home. The delivery driver called 
police, and McKinley was arrested.
 
McKinley took no food or water on the 15-hour journey, just a cell 
phone, which did not work.
 
McKinley was lucky, said Richard G. Phillips, chief executive of Pilot 
Air Freight. His box was carried in the pressurized, heated cabins, but 
it could just as easily have been placed in the lower, unpressurized 
holds.
 
“He could easily have died,” Phillips said.
 
Incidentally, the freight cost was $550. At that rate, said Phillips, 
“he could have ﬂ own ﬁ rst-class.”2
Critical Thinking Lapse
“Are you a 
businessman or 
a newsman?”
—Lowell Bergman 
(Al Pacino)
in The Insider

432 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
tax our intelligence and that will instead attract and keep our interest. With 
competition from so many contenders for our attention (the Internet, video 
games, movies, other media sources, family obligations, work, relationships), 
with the remote control providing a means to silence a news reporter in 
midsentence, and with the growing lack of interest in reading the printed 
word, the mass media in America have found themselves with the challenge 
of delivering information in a manner that keeps the interest of a large, busy, 
and easily distracted audience. They meet this challenge daily so that we’ll 
keep buying Fords, laxatives, allergy medicines, or whatever else is being sold 
on the nightly news.  
 EXERCISE 14.2 
 Compare the ads in a local newspaper, a national newsmagazine such as  Time  or 
 Newsweek , and a more upscale news commentary magazine such as the  New
Republic  or  National Review . How do the ads reﬂ ect differences in the readership of 
the newspaper and magazines you have selected? Consider such characteristics as 
the education, interests, hobbies, economic class, political views, and social status 
of the intended readers. 
 KEEPING OUR INTEREST: THE NEWS AS ENTERTAINMENT 
 Operating on the premise that our interest is held best by what we ﬁ nd en-
tertaining, the media direct almost all their efforts, even those involved in the 
production of news, toward keeping us entertained by making the delivery of 
information more fun, enjoyable, and amusing—which isn’t easy to do when 
the news involves earthquakes and plane crashes.   
 We should admit quickly that for most of us, this is perfectly all right. 
After all, who doesn’t like to be entertained? Many people, of course, enjoy 
intellectual pursuits and are entertained by working out complex ideas, but 
many of us ﬁ nd that complicated information is more palatable when it has 
been made enjoyable to consume. The book you are reading is one example. 
It has been our purpose throughout to provide information useful in your ef-
fort to become a better thinker, but how successful would we be if you found 
the text dull and boring? Information presented in an entertaining or amusing 
manner is perfectly acceptable; so long as it has not been compromised, no 
harm is done. 
 But in their effort to hold our attention, the mass media often do com-
promise information by subordinating depth, substance, and complexity to 
entertainment and human interest. The goal is to keep us in front of the set or 
holding on to the newspaper so that we will absorb (even subconsciously) the 
messages of the advertisers and buy the products that keep the money coming 
in so that the media operations will survive. 
If lust and hate
is the candy, if 
blood and love 
taste so sweet, 
then we give ’em 
what they want.
—Natalie 
Merchant,
10,000 Maniacs

 
Keeping Our Interest: The News as Entertainment 
433
 How the Media Entertain Us 
 We all know just how hard critical thinking can be. Critical thinking requires 
self-knowledge, concentration, mental discipline, respect for others, awareness 
of fallacious reasoning, sensitivity to language, and, above all, a willingness to 
look carefully at arguments and to base evaluations on standards and criteria. 
 The news media take advantage of our unwillingness to think too rigor-
ously and deliver the news in a noncontextual, entertaining manner that has 
the added result of tricking us out of critical analysis. In some respects the 
news media do precisely the opposite of what the authors of this textbook 
have been encouraging you to do. Instead of information that can clarify our 
thinking and help us make decisions we get what F. Scott Fitzgerald called, in 
 This Side of Paradise,  “predigested food”—the “politics, prejudices, and phi-
losophy” appetizingly served up by the media for our consumption. Rather 
than provide a thorough look at the world’s events, the media carefully select 
events, exaggerate them or play them down, and present them without helpful 
analysis. The result is an entertaining array of facts and opinions intended to 
satisfy our less critical faculties. In the sections that follow, we look at some of 
the ways in which the media dole out what amounts to a sort of intellectual 
candy—fun to eat, but ultimately unsatisfying and unhealthy.    
 Selecting Events and Details   In a world of nearly seven billion people, 
enough events are taking place at this very moment that recording even a small 
fraction of them would take thousands of hours and millions of pages. But to 
ﬁ nd out what happened during the time you have been reading your critical 
thinking textbook, you can scan the twenty or so links on a news-gathering 
Web site, tune in this evening to one of the three main television networks 
and watch, subtracting commercials, about twenty minutes of world news, or 
buy tomorrow’s paper and “read all about it” in a few dozen pages. The entire 
world in twenty links? Twenty minutes? Twenty pages? 
 Obviously, not everything makes the papers or the news broadcast. In 
selecting some events and excluding others, the media determine what is and 
is not important for us to know; and because thoroughly examining an event 
is virtually impossible given time and space limitations, the media select from 
each newsworthy occurrence a relatively small sliver of the event itself, ignor-
ing, as we showed earlier, much of the larger context that might make the event 
more meaningful to us. Some selectivity is inescapable. A reporter working 
under a deadline and allocated only a few inches of space or a few minutes of 
time in which to ﬁ le a report inevitably selects what he or she believes to be 
essential or interesting moments, comments, or facts. But where a reporter de-
cides to set his or her focus can reveal much about the reporter’s attentiveness, 
worldview, and attitudes. In some cases, a journalist’s deliberate or unwitting 
failure to see certain key facts can call the accuracy of the report into ques-
tion. How can we be sure that we have been told everything? And how can 
we be sure, without all relevant information, that we aren’t being manipulated 
Cinema, radio, 
television, maga-
zines are a school 
of inattention: 
people look 
without seeing, 
listen in without 
hearing.
—Robert Bresson

434 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
by carefully chosen facts to see the event in the way the reporter wants us to? 
Think back to your own story for a moment. If you had only a few moments 
to tell your story, you’d most likely decide what effect you wanted to produce 
in your audience—approval or sympathy, for example—and then cautiously 
select some details and ignore others in an effort to create the desired effect 
and avoid negative responses. The effect, of course, can be far different from the 
one at which your readers or listeners might have arrived with  all  the facts in 
their possession. Like a funhouse mirror, a reporter’s selectivity distorts reality 
so that the original event and our perception of the event diverge greatly. 
 Similar to the way in which a reporter must decide what to focus on 
in a single story, news editors and managers must be selective when deciding 
which of the thousands of stories that are collected every day will make the pa-
pers or the nightly news. Traditionally, editors and managers have insisted that 
“newsworthiness” is determined solely on two criteria: a story must be true 
and it must serve the “public interest,” meaning that it must somehow beneﬁ t 
the audience. Although the great majority of mass media news outlets do not 
lie to their audiences, news organizations often select stories of questionable 
beneﬁ t to the public. In fact, most stories are chosen not because they  serve 
the public interest, but because they reﬂ ect the entertainment preferences of 
viewers or readers. 
 What Makes the News   With daily events too plentiful and complicated for the 
space available, what makes the cut? Judging from what gets selected, we would 
have to conclude that newsworthy events are those which a reader or viewer 
will ﬁ nd entertaining, that is, exciting, titillating, shocking, disturbing, frighten-
ing, unusual, heartwarming, or easy to comprehend and identify with— “all sex, 
scandal, brutal crime, sports, children with incurable diseases, and lost puppies,” 
as Diana Christensen describes the nightly news in the ﬁ lm  Network . This is not 
to suggest that “hard news” stories have been excluded from the mainstream 
press; indeed, signiﬁ cant issues of national and global impact often lead the 
news. But in an effort to hold the attention of a large and diverse audience, the 
news media often appeal to the lowest common interests among us—sex, gos-
sip, scandal, violence, death, and crime—and to our common emotions—fear 
for our safety, joy over rescues, anger at injustice, and sympathy for victims. The 
news media’s view of its audience is hinted at in the recent increase in stories 
intended to alert us to all of the potential dangers in our homes, on the road, in 
the air, at work, on the athletic ﬁ eld, and so forth. Are we really in such grave 
danger, or is it simply hard to turn off the television when, “coming up next,” 
we’ll be told just how our mattresses might be killing us in our sleep?     
 And, of course, if there is video or a photo of some disturbing or violent 
event, it’s almost guaranteed to make the news. Many local news stations air 
videotape of such events as parachute failures and police chases even though 
neither event may be of signiﬁ cance to a large audience. Without a context the 
medium itself becomes context: The importance of the event is determined 
merely by its being “caught on tape.” In fact, for the broadcast media an event’s 
If you want to 
take your mind 
off the troubles 
of the real world, 
you should watch 
local TV news 
shows. I know of 
no better way to 
escape reality, 
except perhaps 
heavy drinking.
—Dave Barry
The public have 
an insatiable 
curiosity to know 
everything, except 
what is worth 
knowing.
—Oscar Wilde

 
Keeping Our Interest: The News as Entertainment 
435
newsworthiness is often determined not by its true importance but by its 
visual impact. In a particularly gruesome example, a major network afﬁ liate 
in the area where this book is being written aired video of a man drown-
ing. A state trooper in a distant state, the man had gone into a raging river to 
save someone and had become trapped between rocks. The video showed 
his desperate, futile attempts to free himself. According to the news anchor, 
“no additional information” was available. His name, his age, his history, his 
relationship, if any, to the local area, the reasons for showing his awful death—
none of those points was ever made. The video was selected for broadcast 
apparently because it was attention-grabbing and available for broadcast. 
 To hold our attention, much of the news is presented with all the drama and 
excitement of literature, complete with suspense, intriguing characters, surprise 
endings, and, especially, conﬂ ict between opposing parties. Because court trials 
contain all those elements, the media seldom miss a chance to provide extensive 
coverage of criminal cases, but other favorites in the media include battles 
between neighbors, political candidates and parties, school boards and teachers, 
and the government and constituents. The ﬁ xation on conﬂ ict has spilled 
over into the coverage itself as reporters and analysts (often called, sarcastically, 
“pundits”) take up sides and shout each other down or one-up each other on 
political talk shows such as  Meet the Press, This Week with George Stephanopoulos, 
Hannity,  and  Hardball with Chris Matthews.  Lost in all this focus on conﬂ ict and 
controversy are the important political issues that affect our lives.  
 What Doesn’t Make the News   What doesn’t usually make the newspapers 
and the nightly news broadcasts are stories too complicated for quick and 
painless consumption and stories too critical of American corporations, pow-
erful nonproﬁ t organizations, the government, and the news media itself. Each 
As Americans’ appetite for hard news seems 
to wane, it is becoming ever more difﬁ cult to 
distinguish television news broadcasts from 
some of the entertainment and celebrity 
gossip programs that ﬂ ood the airwaves. 
For example, six weeks after the Septem-
ber 11 terrorist attacks, these are the lead 
stories that topped the news on KCAL 9, 
a major Los Angeles television station, on 
one of its nightly news broadcasts:
1.  A Britney Spears concert in Anaheim.
2.  A local Jennifer Lopez concert.
3.  A story about a strip club, in which a 
strip club lawyer complained that 
Americans want Afghan women to 
come out from under the veil, but at 
the same time want American women 
to cover up.
4.  A story about shopping for lingerie.
5.  A story about Operation Playmate, in 
which Playboy bunnies entertain the 
troops.3
All the Entertainment That’s Fit to Broadcast
If it bleeds, it 
leads.
—Television 
news maxim

436 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
year for the past quarter-century, Project Censored, a media-watch organiza-
tion at Sonoma State University in California, has, according to its Web site, 
“conduct[ed] research on important national news stories that are underre-
ported, ignored, misrepresented, or censored by the U.S. corporate media.” 
( www.projectcensored.org/about/  )  
 According to Project Censored, among the topics largely ignored by the 
mass media in recent years were the collaboration between multinational cor-
porations and governments suspected of “signiﬁ cant human rights violations,” 
the custom among pharmaceutical companies to devote their resources to the 
development of proﬁ t-making drugs rather than much-needed cures for deadly 
diseases, the apparent misdirection of revenue within the “increasingly wealthy” 
American Cancer Society, and a report from a British research group claiming 
that more than a million Iraqis have died as a result of the 2003 invasion of Iraq. 
All of these stories appeared somewhere in the media, but primarily in journals 
of opinion (the  Nation, Mother Jones ), not in the mainstream press. Some might 
accuse the news media of having an agenda in excluding certain topics; and 
because news organizations are increasingly under the control of corporate 
parent companies (NBC is owned by General Electric, ABC by Disney, CBS 
by media giant, National Amusements,  Time and CNN by Time Warner, and 
so on), news organizations may, indeed, be reluctant or forbidden to investigate 
their owners and subsidiaries. So, the accusation that the news media have an 
agenda has some grounding, but in many instances complicated and discour-
aging stories about the Defense Department or the American Cancer Society 
are omitted merely to make room for stories presumably more interesting to a 
mass audience. Whatever the reason, it is clear from a study of the mainstream 
press that certain topics get very little coverage. 
 Of course, some media sources are more guilty than others of pandering to 
their audiences, and, conversely, some publications take great pains to publish more 
than just the scurrilous and sensational, to publish, in the motto of the  New York 
Times, “all the news that’s ﬁ t to print.” But even the Times has to make choices, 
and although the bar for determining what’s ﬁ t to print might be set higher in 
national papers, all media, from the most venerable on down, must decide what to 
select and what to exclude. Even online news aggregators such as  news.google.com, 
yahoo.com , and  inform.com , which retrieve content from a wide variety of news 
sources, are limited by what those sources have decided to write about.   
 The Internet has allowed for some challenge to the traditional sifting 
of news stories by large media outlets. Many nonprofessional but dedicated 
writers routinely post information, photos, and opinions to blogs and online 
newsletters and in online commentaries on the Web pages of large media out-
lets. This practice, known as  citizen or  participatory journalism , helps bring 
attention to stories that would otherwise have gone unnoticed, stretching the 
boundaries imposed on the world by limited and very large news organizations. 
But while this kind of journalism, for better or worse, will continue to grow, 
what we call “news” is still determined by the major media corporations. In 
fact, “news” does not really happen; events are not news until they are selected 
The most impor-
tant service 
rendered by the 
press and the 
magazines is that 
of educating peo-
ple to approach 
printed matter 
with distrust.
—Samuel Butler

 
Keeping Our Interest: The News as Entertainment 
437
and labeled as such by the media. The effect of all this cannot be overstated. 
Because we tend to talk around the dinner table or at work or in the classroom 
about “the day’s news,” what is selected becomes part of the social dialogue; 
what doesn’t make the news, obviously, draws little attention from us. The 
news media, as the saying goes, “set the agenda,” determining what’s important 
enough to warrant our concern and perhaps our involvement. Unfortunately, 
when time and space that might be better spent unraveling complicated issues 
of race relations, public education, labor, poverty, pollution, and so forth are 
sacriﬁ ced to stories of sex scandals and animal rescues, the public receives little 
education in issues that really matter in our lives.  
 EXERCISE 14.3  
 I.   List all of the stories covered in one edition of your local nightly news and 
on one of the major networks. How many of those stories center on a conﬂ ict? 
What are the two sides that are apparently pitted against one another? Does the 
news seem to be creating a battle where one does not exist, exaggerating a battle 
that does exist but that could easily be resolved, or justly calling attention to a 
serious conﬂ ict? Are there broader, more important, issues being ignored in favor 
of the conﬂ ict, or is the controversy a serious one that you feel should be exam-
ined? What use will you make of what you learned about the conﬂ ict?  
 II.   Watch the local and national news broadcasts for one evening in your town 
and make a list of the stories carried in the broadcast. You can ignore the sports 
and weather. Do the same for one edition of a local paper. When your list is com-
plete, answer the following: How many stories are apparently intended to appeal 
to our emotions and our sympathies? Which stories seem to have been intended 
to grab our attention by appealing to our curiosity or love of scandal? Which 
seem to have been selected for their entertainment value? How many stories 
seem intended to make us fearful for our safety or grateful for our security?  
 III.   This exercise requires a partner and a stopwatch (or a watch with a second 
hand). Pair off with someone in your class and designate yourselves person A and 
person B. Now spend twenty minutes talking to one another. Each of you tell 
about your hometowns, your families, your high schools, your greatest accom-
plishments, your proudest moments, your major, your plans, your living situation, 
your sport teams, and so forth. Take notes as you listen to each other, but don’t 
merely transcribe each other’s comments. Your objective here is to see what you 
can ﬁ nd out about each other. 
 
 After your conversation, each of you write an introduction of the other 
that you can read aloud to the class in only  ten seconds at a normal, natural pace. 
Although our speaking patterns differ, you should be able to read aloud between 
twenty-ﬁ ve and forty words in ten seconds. Your job is to tell the class something 
about your partner in the allotted time. After everyone in the class has written a 
ten-second introduction, everyone takes a turn reading to the class. So that no 
one exceeds the limit, have someone with a stopwatch keep time. 

438 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
 
 After you have read your ten-second presentation, write an additional ten 
seconds’ worth of material. And then another.  You should now have three 
10-second segments.  Your instructor may or may not choose to have you read 
these additions. 
 
 When the exercise is complete, consider the following questions and be 
prepared to discuss them in class: 
1.   In your ﬁ rst ten-second spot, what facts did you select and which did you 
omit? When you chose details for the ﬁ rst ten seconds, you were probably 
trying to capture the essence of the stories or the person you listened to. Ex-
plain how you selected the details that found their way into your ﬁ rst report.  
2.   What frustrations, if any, did you feel at trying to select ten seconds’ worth of 
material? Did you at any point get the feeling that you were pulling facts out 
of context and that your listeners would fail to understand what you were 
trying to get at? 
3.   Look carefully at your selections. Does what you chose to include say anything 
about you? Are you more impressed with education, accomplishments in sports, 
work history, personal achievements, family background, where a person comes 
from, his or her current status (sophomore English major), plans (wants to be a 
doctor)? Your selections are not wrong; no one can say you should have chosen 
differently. But what you selected  may  reveal something about your values.  
4.   When you chose details for the ﬁ rst ten seconds, were you trying to achieve 
a particular effect in the students who would be listening to your words? Did 
you want to evoke their interest, sympathy, or curiosity about your partner? 
5.   Now look at your twenty- and thirty-second reports. How are they different 
from the ﬁ rst list? Is there a pattern to your selections? Did you, for example, 
start with what you thought was most important and add details of decreasing 
importance? Did you add any direct quotes from your partner? 
6.   When  your story was being told in ten seconds, how did you feel about the 
events that were chosen? Do you think the narrator caught the essential ele-
ments of your life? Were you surprised at what was selected? 
7.   Write a paragraph in which you reﬂ ect on this exercise. What you have done 
here is played the role of a news writer or reporter. Of course, in the real world 
you would have a little more time to collect your facts, but, interestingly, many 
stories on television and radio broadcasts are no longer than ten to thirty sec-
onds. What has this exercise shown you about the nature of news gathering?  
 
 Arranging and Organizing Stories   Along with selecting or ignoring sto-
ries depending on their appeal to audiences, the media employ other techniques 
for attracting our attention and challenging our critical thinking skills—namely, 
arranging stories and organizing their content to make some events appear more 
or less signiﬁ cant than they are. The print media use a variety of techniques to 
achieve this. A newspaper can highlight a story by placing it on the front page 
or diminish a story’s worth by burying it deep inside, where it is likely to be 
overlooked. Editors of traditional papers (nontabloid style) must decide what 
front-page stories to prominently display “above the fold” to attract the attention 

 
Keeping Our Interest: The News as Entertainment 
439
of potential readers as they pass the newsstand or coin-operated dispensers. 
The paper can further heighten the sense of importance of a story by including 
a dramatic photo, placing the event in the top headline, using large font sizes, or 
allotting more space. Details can be arranged to slant a story in one direction 
or the other: the paragraph telling you that an arrested suspect has an iron-clad 
alibi might appear so late in a story that you’ll quit reading before you get to it, 
thereby emphasizing the crime over the suspect’s apparent innocence. Mass media 
magazines can elevate a story to grand status by featuring it on the cover. This 
isn’t to say that a story covered in this manner by newspapers and magazines isn’t 
signiﬁ cant, but we have become so accustomed to seeing screaming headlines on 
page 1 that whatever we see there takes on an aura of great importance simply by 
virtue of its location and the attention given the story by media editors. 
 Similarly, television and radio news editors can determine the worth of a 
story in several ways. Stories deemed most important will “lead” the broadcast 
or receive extended coverage, whereas less important stories are quickly cov-
ered later in the broadcast. Extensive, wall-to-wall broadcast coverage is rare and 
predictable: Plane crashes, dead celebrities, military actions, catastrophic natural 
disasters, and grand-scale violence will almost always set off round-the-clock 
reporting complete, when carried by the networks, with an attention-grabbing 
tagline:  “Crisis in the Middle East,”  “Death of a Princess,”  “Farewell to a Pop 
Icon.”  This kind of endless attention is reserved for the “big event,” such as the 
1999 crash of John F.  Kennedy Jr.’s plane, which the major networks and CNN 
covered from the ﬁ rst word of the plane’s disappearance through the search for 
and burial of the bodies of Kennedy, his wife, and her sister. 
 In these extensive-coverage episodes (the early months of the Iraq War, 
the 9/11 terrorist attacks, Hurricane Katrina, the Clinton impeachment), 
additional effort is given to providing context as analysts and commenta-
tors examine the event from a variety of angles and ﬁ ll airtime and column 
inches with some exploration of causes and implications, but the result is 
usually the same: We are left with far more questions than answers. In some 
cases, the exaggerated coverage distorts the truth. The saturation coverage 
of the Columbine shootings, for example, while powerful and moving in 
many respects, might have left us with the impression that young people are 
hyperviolent or that only single, isolated cases of extreme violence against 
youth are worth investigating. 
 News organizations could, but usually don’t, devote their extensive re-
sources to exploring persistent trends, perennial issues, or the root causes and 
possible solutions of common, everyday problems such as poverty, pollution, or 
HIV/AIDS. When war breaks out in what we regard as a “remote” part of the 
world, we are ﬁ nally informed about the conﬂ ict even though tensions may 
have been present for decades. Likewise, what was once presented as vital and 
urgent will disappear from the spotlight when the topic has worn thin. We are 
told of widespread starvation in Ethiopia, but after the story has run its course 
it disappears from the headlines, leaving us to wonder if the situation has been 
rectiﬁ ed or if mass starvation has simply become boring.   
Newspapers are 
unable, seemingly, 
to discriminate 
between a bicycle 
accident and 
the collapse of 
civilization.
—George Bernard 
Shaw

440 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
 Ironically, the media often exhaust issues that mean nothing to us in 
the long run. The broadcast “newsmagazines” such as  20/20 and  Dateline 
will take a long, dramatic, sensationalized look at a single rescue, crime, or 
police investigation and tell us all there is to know about these relatively 
inconsequential matters. One reason for the media’s reluctance to investigate 
and report on trends and enduring issues is that long-term investigations 
cost money, whereas sending a camera crew and reporters to the scene of an 
accident or the front lawn of the White House takes far fewer resources and 
less work. But, perhaps more signiﬁ cant, the media are merely giving us what 
we apparently want—conﬂ ict, titillation, mystery, death, and violence—and 
the big stories have it all.  
 EXERCISE 14.4 4  
 This exercise asks you to select and arrange information in the manner of a news 
reporter. 
 
 The following is the chronology of Daria Jones, a ﬁ ctitious person. Suppose 
you were going to write about her for your local paper. Write one short biogra-
phy (about one hundred words) to make your readers like her and a second short 
biography to make your readers dislike her. Select and omit details as you wish, 
but don’t make anything up. Try not to reveal your opinion overtly. Use language 
that will evoke the response you’re seeking. ( Remember: Don’t falsify any of the 
information.)  
 •   She was born in October 1966. 
 •   Her father worked as a printer for a newspaper; her mother was a nurse. 
 •   She was one of ﬁ ve children.  
 •   She attended a Catholic grade school, where she played basketball and 
earned A’s in 65 percent of her classes and B’s in the other 35 percent. 
 •   She attended a preparatory high school, where she played basketball for a 
team that never lost a game in the four years she was there. 
 •   When she was sixteen, her ten-year-old brother died suddenly of a 
misdiagnosed illness. 
 •   Her GPA in high school was 3.05. She ﬁ nished 109th in a class of 220.  
 •   She attended Barre College, a Division III school, and played in the national 
title game in basketball in her freshman year. The team lost. 
 •   She transferred to a Division I school, Maine State University, on a full 
athletic scholarship, but a knee injury in the ﬁ rst season ended her career. 
She continued on the scholarship and graduated. 
 •   She switched majors from accounting to communications and earned a 
GPA of 2.99 over three years. 
 •   In her senior year, she interned at a recognized public relations ﬁ rm in 
New York City and met many of the day’s most famous athletes, including 
Muhammad Ali, Mike Schmidt, Michael Jordan, and Martina Navratilova. 
 •   Her job for the PR ﬁ rm was to drive the athletes from the airport to the 
company’s headquarters. 

 
Keeping Our Interest: The News as Entertainment 
441
 •   After college she worked in a day-care center for a year, then as a ﬁ tness 
trainer for children, then again at a day-care center, then as an ofﬁ ce 
assistant at the paper where her father worked. She earned less than $8,000 
a year in each position. 
 •   In 1988 she married an executive in an advertising ﬁ rm.  
 •   In 1988 she returned to school for a degree in elementary education. 
 •   She divorced in 1993. 
 •   After several years of teaching, she received two master’s degrees and 
published several articles on teaching methods. 
 •   She remarried in 1996. 
 •   She received her ﬁ rst teaching job in 1997 and has taught in three different 
school districts since then. 
 •   She has no children. 
 
 Slanting the News 
 Mainstream news organizations select and arrange stories in the most enter-
taining fashion to capture and keep our attention, but that doesn’t mean that 
individual journalists are unconcerned about the quality of their reporting. 
In fact, it is probably safe to assume that nearly all journalists, if asked, would 
claim to follow a code of ethics that prohibits deliberately lying or distorting 
the truth. With rare exceptions, journalists attempt to relay information ac-
curately, avoid error, and achieve some level of objectivity, which we might 
deﬁ ne as the ability to describe an event or a situation without being overly 
inﬂ uenced by personal attitudes, values, emotions, beliefs, and so forth. Earlier 
in this book, however, we proposed the notion that total objectivity is almost 
impossible. We may be able to report a simple event without bias (“The cat 
is on the kitchen table again”), but  how we report even that simple event—in 
this case, the tone of our voice—can reveal whether we are amazed, amused, 
or angered at the cat’s disregard for authority. Obviously, more-complicated 
events are even more difﬁ cult to report without allowing our point of view 
to intrude: we ignore certain facts and focus on others, choose language that 
evokes emotional or prejudicial responses in our audiences, reveal our attitudes 
through tone and organization, and so forth.   
 Many journalists, well aware that personal values can inﬂ uence percep-
tion and communication, strive to remain conscious of bias and to eliminate it 
from their work by investigating all sides of a story and by remaining neutral 
when reporting on controversial issues. In this approach, however, the media 
often fall into the trap of simply delivering information that has been gathered. 
The result is a mishmash of information that a journalist has collected without 
sorting out what’s reliable, useful, and meaningful. Often the media will publish 
unedited, unveriﬁ ed press releases, which public relations directors routinely 
submit, or provide uncritical coverage of staged events such as award ceremonies 
and press conferences. One famous example comes from the 1990 Gulf  War. 
The greatest 
felony in the news 
business today is 
to be behind or 
miss a big story. 
So speed and 
quantity substi-
tute for thorough-
ness and quality, 
for accuracy and 
context. The pres-
sure to compete, 
the fear somebody 
else will make 
the splash ﬁ rst, 
creates a frenzied 
environment in 
which a blizzard 
of information 
is presented and 
serious questions 
may not be raised.
—Carl Bernstein

442 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
Reporters stationed at the Pentagon acted more as intermediaries, some might 
say, “agents,” of the military, dutifully reporting whatever information the 
military presented and asking few questions that challenged ofﬁ cial claims. 
Military accounts regarding the accuracy of “smart bombs” and the success 
of Patriot missiles were channeled through reporters into American homes 
with little investigation of the truth of the military’s claims. Several prominent 
journalists, including CNN’s Christiane Amanpour, have argued that leading 
American news organizations similarly failed to ask tough questions about the 
Bush administration’s justiﬁ cations for the Iraq War. 
 The danger in this kind of “objectivity” is apparent. We are left knowing 
only what someone has said, but not the truth of what was said, and news be-
comes indistinguishable from rumor. During Hurricane Katrina and the ﬂ ood-
ing of New Orleans in 2005, many journalists passed along unsubstantiated 
reports of near anarchy among survivors, including stories of rape and murder 
in the Superdome, where nearly 20,000 evacuees were sheltered. The reports 
turned out to be based on little more than rumor. Rather than investigating 
the rumor, ﬁ nding it baseless, and dismissing it, news outlets across the country, 
most likely fearful of missing out on a possible big story, reported the story as 
factual. In 2004, Dan Rather informed viewers of  60 Minutes that CBS News 
had uncovered documents calling into question George W. Bush’s service in 
the National Guard. Although the documents have never been proved to be 
either genuine or forged, an investigation into CBS’s handling of the docu-
ments showed that the news agency had done nothing to authenticate them 
before sharing them with the viewing public. In this case, as in all others in-
volving “sources” of information, readers would be better served by a reporter’s 
willingness to test the reliability of the source and not just repeat suppositions. 
Unfortunately, many journalists today are, in the most limited sense of the word, 
“reporters,” merely reporting what they have been told by sources. 
 It’s easy to see why the mass media in the United States might choose the 
path of complete neutrality. With such a large and diverse audience, with blog-
gers on all sides watching a newsperson’s every move, and with high journalistic 
standards to uphold, it might be safer to simply pass along in its original form 
whatever information has been collected. Because such an approach sometimes 
leads to the behavior cited above, and convinced that objectivity is impossible 
anyway, some media consumers look not to the mainstream media for news, but 
to the alternative press and its practice of advocacy journalism, a form of re-
porting that, though fact-based, allows writers and editors to promote a point of 
view on important social, political or economic issues. Alternative news sources 
such as the  Progressive  and the  New Republic  openly declare their position, for 
example, on the Enron scandal or the Iraq War or advocate for better treatment 
of the homeless or lower taxes. Opposing points of view do not have to be 
represented, but journalists working for the alternative press are expected to fol-
low the canon of journalistic ethics requiring accuracy, truthfulness, and so on. 
Proponents of advocacy journalism believe that readers and viewers are better 
served by a media that admits to the impossibility of pure objectivity and declares 

 
Keeping Our Interest: The News as Entertainment 
443
more openly its moral, philosophical, and political stand on issues. Whether such 
an approach to news gathering could or should replace the traditional, objective, 
approach taken by the mainstream media is a matter of debate.  
 EXERCISE 14.5 
 Do you believe that absolute objectivity is possible? Can a reporter describe an 
event without revealing his or her cultural and political biases? Is objectivity always 
desirable? Should mainstream news organizations in the United States declare a 
position on the controversial issues of the day and shape the news to match that 
position? What would be lost if the mass media no longer attempted to achieve 
objectivity when reporting major events? Defend your answers. 
 Perceived Bias: Is There a Liberal Press?   A central claim in our discus-
sion of the mass media has been that news organizations select and arrange 
stories in an effort to entertain a large audience. Some critics of the media, 
however, argue that selection and arrangement are decided not on entertain-
ment value but on the political biases of either the reporter or the organiza-
tion. When CBS News failed to authenticate the memos discrediting President 
Bush’s National Guard service, some commentators charged that Dan Rather 
had allowed his supposed liberal bias and dislike for the President to inﬂ uence 
his reporting. Some analysts pointed to the event as evidence that the news 
media in the United States already practice a form of advocacy journalism 
with a pronounced liberal slant. A 2004 survey of journalists conducted by 
the Pew Research Center for the People & the Press appears to support this 
contention. Asked to rate their own political ideologies, slightly over a third 
of national journalists (34 percent) listed themselves as liberals compared to 
20 percent of the general public. Only 7 percent of journalists identiﬁ ed them-
selves as conservative, compared to 33 percent of the public at large. 5 
 Of course, the fact that an individual journalist may be liberal, or conser-
vative, does not mean that her or his news coverage reﬂ ects personal attitudes. 
The survey shows only the reported political leanings of journalists, not the 
effect of their political views on their coverage of the news. In fact, it is closer 
to the truth to suggest that even though the political orientation of many jour-
nalists seems clear, and though editorial writers often take a stand on political 
issues, it is not likely that a mainstream newspaper, network, or newsmagazine 
has a pronounced political bias because doing so would alienate too many po-
tential audience members. An analysis of the overall coverage by a mainstream 
news organization will show that, although an individual reporter may put a 
liberal or conservative slant on an issue, the great majority of articles are going 
to ﬁ t into a narrow band of ideology that hovers around the center of the po-
litical spectrum, where most Americans locate themselves.   
Thoughtfully 
written analysis 
is out. . . . Do 
powder-puff, not 
probing, inter-
views. Stay away 
from controversial 
subjects. Kiss ass, 
move with the 
mass, and for 
heaven’s and the 
ratings’ sake don’t 
make anybody 
mad. . . . Make 
nice, not news.
—Dan Rather

444 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
 In fact, the products of the mainstream press are often interchangeable. 
An article in  Time could easily appear in  Newsweek (in fact, the covers are often 
similar), and the nightly news on CBS, ABC, and NBC are hardly distinguish-
able from one another (though Fox has a distinctly conservative slant). Local 
newscasts and newspapers may lean toward one side of the political spectrum 
depending on the voter registration in a particular area, and many newspapers 
adhere to the tradition of endorsing a political candidate during campaigns, 
a practice recalling the fact that many newspapers in America were founded 
by political parties. And some newspapers—the  Washington Times,  for one— do 
have an advertised political slant. But the goal of reaching a large and diverse 
audience is more easily achieved by avoiding controversy and appearing to 
strike a political balance in the reporting of news. The news sells better when 
the media dodge stories involving hallowed subjects (corporate sponsors) and 
boring or unpopular topics (welfare, pollution) and avoid swimming against 
the current of prevailing public opinion. It is much safer and more lucrative to 
simply ﬂ oat benignly on the surface.   
 Nonetheless, the media will often give the impression of favoring or 
opposing, depending on your political point of view, one political perspec-
tive over another. Conservatives charge that the media are soft on Democrats 
and sympathetic to liberal causes such as gay rights, environmental protection, 
entitlement programs, and abortion. Liberals claim that corporate ownership 
and sponsorship of the mainstream press preclude covering events embarrass-
ing to big business or examining issues from the perspective of the poor and 
disenfranchised. Several organizations are committed to watching for bias in 
the media whether from the right or the left. Groups like FAIR (Fairness 
and Accuracy in Reporting,  fair.org ) and NewsWatch ( newswatch.org ) root out 
inaccuracies and incidents of perceived bias in the mainstream press. FAIR 
provides an additional service to media watchers by alerting readers to the lack 
of context in some national newspaper articles and ﬂ agging articles that are 
especially good in providing context. 
 Opinion in the Media   While most journalists strive for fairness and de-
tachment, and while most mainstream news organizations go to great lengths 
to appear evenhanded and politically neutral, a study of the entire spectrum of 
contemporary media suggests that, on the whole, there has been an explosion 
of opinion in print, on the airwaves, and online. Traditionally, argumentative 
viewpoints could be located in the editorial and letters-to-the-editor sections 
of newspapers and journals. These sections were, and still are, clearly labeled—
“editorial,” “commentary,” “opinion,” “letters”—to differentiate them from 
the more objective, fact-based, reports. More and more, however, the mass 
media are ﬁ lled with opinion, much of it unsupported and prejudicial. Re-
porters routinely speculate about causes of events and support their conjecture 
with the opinions of  “experts” who may have no familiarity with the topic at 
issue. Some radio-talk-show hosts broadcast personal attacks and unsubstanti-
ated claims, mainly in an effort to keep both fans and detractors tuned in to 
The corporate grip
on opinion in the 
United States is
one of the wonders
of the Western 
World. No First 
World country 
has ever managed 
to eliminate so 
entirely from its 
media all 
objectivity—much 
less dissent.
—Gore Vidal

 
Media Literacy 
445
the show (sponsors don’t care if the listeners love or hate the host). Networks 
have introduced editorial programs done in the style of news broadcasts: On 
programs such as  Countdown with Keith Olbermann and The O’Reilly Factor  (and 
parodies such as  The Colbert Report ), the more outrageous the opinion, the 
more entertained we are. Callers to radio talk shows and television “talkback” 
lines are invited to brieﬂ y air their views on complicated issues. Some news-
papers have taken the almost ludicrous step of publishing anonymous phone 
calls to the paper. And there is never a shortage of opinion among the mil-
lions of bloggers working every day online. Surely we are all “entitled to an 
opinion,” and, admittedly, the more insightful and well-reasoned opinions that 
we encounter in print, on television, and online can help us formulate our 
own point of view on signiﬁ cant issues. But the proliferation of published and 
broadcast opinions that are too often undefended underscores our need to stay 
alert and think critically when reading and watching media productions. 
 We have focused in this chapter on only some of the methods that news 
producers use to entertain us in an effort to keep and hold our attention and 
to inﬂ uence our reactions. There are, of course, many other techniques, such 
as using music during newsmagazine shows to heighten dramatic effects, edit-
ing ﬁ lm to juxtapose events that may not have occurred near one another in 
real time, using steep camera angles to distort a subject’s size, cropping photos 
to eliminate context, doctoring photos to suggest relationships or to achieve 
desired effects, and on and on. All of these techniques work toward keeping us 
interested, even if truth might be sacriﬁ ced. Because the “facts” in a news story 
are often subordinated to efforts to entertain an audience, today’s consumer of 
news needs a high degree of media literacy.  
 EXERCISE 14.6 
 One of the best sources for an examination of the news media is your own college 
newspaper. Pick up a copy of your campus paper and examine it for the qualities 
we’ve discussed in this chapter. Look especially for how events are selected for 
inclusion in the paper, the emphasis that’s placed on some stories, the appearance 
of objectivity (are sources quoted without analysis and comment?), and evidence 
of slanting on the part of individual writers. 
 
 MEDIA LITERACY 
 It is easy to trash the media, to blame them for everything from violence in the 
schools to the dumbing down of higher education. Occasionally the media are 
demonized by politicians and ideologues looking to blame the messenger for 
the shortcomings of an administration or a political party. Ironically, the movie 

446 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
industry, part of the mass media, has reveled in pointing out the shallowness, 
deceptiveness, and even cowardice of television news broadcasts in such mov-
ies as  Network, Broadcast News, Wag the Dog,  and  The Insider.  And television 
occasionally pokes fun at its own news industry in such shows as  Saturday 
Night Live  and  The Daily Show with Jon Stewart . Flaws notwithstanding, the 
media have contributed greatly to our understanding and acceptance of other 
cultures, alerted us to the pain and suffering endured by victims of natural and 
human-created disasters, shown us the surface of the moon and the faces of 
refugees, warned us about fraud and consumer rip-offs, and uncovered politi-
cal corruption. In short, the news media have done much good, and our lives 
would be greatly diminished without them. 
 Although we admit that the media are not the villains they are sometimes 
portrayed to be, we can also admit that their need to survive has forced the 
industry to provide a service more entertaining than informative. And they’ve 
done it very successfully, artfully blurring the line between news, entertain-
ment, and advertising. 
 For a critical thinker faced with a mass media that have substituted en-
tertainment for context, the task of staying alert is more daunting than ever. 
The relationship between news, entertainment, and advertising has become 
so sophisticated and seamless that it is difﬁ cult to tell them apart. A growing 
percentage of airtime in nightly news broadcasts is dedicated to promoting 
upcoming stories and other news shows. Gossip shows about the lives of ce-
lebrities and the making of movies, shows like  Entertainment Tonight,  which are 
intended primarily to promote the entertainment industry, are presented in 
the format of a news broadcast. News organizations routinely reenact events 
using actors and stage sets, which further blurs the distinction between what is 
real and what is not. Advertisers have been very creative in that regard. Many 
products, for example, are advertised through “infomercials,” usually thirty-
minute commercials that take the form of documentaries, talk shows, or news 
broadcasts. We may be fooled momentarily into thinking that the expert or 
eyewitness commentary in support of beauty products, exercise equipment, 
and hair-replacement procedures is unscripted and objective. 
 Other examples of the increasingly blurry line between news and adver-
tisement are plentiful. It was revealed in 2005 that Armstrong Williams, host of 
a syndicated television talk show, had been paid $240,000 to promote the No 
Child Left Behind Act, essentially turning his program into an advertisement 
for the Bush administration. In perhaps the most egregious example of blur-
ring the line between information and propaganda, some local broadcast news 
organizations air short, prepackaged video news releases supplied by corpora-
tions or the U.S. government. Such videos, which have all the appearances of 
a news report, might promote a new product or service or tout a government 
agency’s successes. The unwary television viewer has no idea that he or she 
is watching a form of advertising. Critical thinkers struggling to separate fact 
from opinion in today’s media have their work cut out for them. 
Things are not 
as simple as they 
seem.
—Milan Kundera

 
Advertising 
447
 To counter the mind-numbing effects of news media devoted primarily 
to entertaining us, we need to develop  media literacy —“the ability to effec-
tively and efﬁ ciently comprehend and utilize mass communication.” 6 Below 
are some questions that should be asked about any news item, whether on 
television or the radio, in the papers or newsmagazines. Many of these ques-
tions call upon critical thinking skills that we have discussed throughout this 
book: 
1.   What message is being sent? What speciﬁ c, factual information is 
being delivered? Am I willing to regard the information as accurate? 
Or should I investigate other sources to be certain that the source 
has the facts straight? 
2.   Can I separate the information from how the information is de-
livered? How much of a reporter’s involvement can I detect in the 
information? Does the reporter, news anchor, or writer subtly or 
blatantly offer opinion and speculation? Does the report appear to 
be slanted in any direction? Is the reporter’s language emotionally 
charged, euphemistic, vague, or ambiguous? 
3.   What is the larger context from which the information has been 
selected? What do I need to know about what happened before 
this event took place? What questions do I have about the history 
leading up to this event? What more would I need to know about 
this event and its history before I could make use of this informa-
tion? 
4.   What can I do with what I have heard, read, or seen? Is the informa-
tion I’ve just received giving me nothing more than a cat’s-eye view 
of the world, or can I use it to change my plans, take some action, 
or solve a problem? Or is the information essentially useless, nothing 
more than trivia? 
5.   What methods did the medium use to attract my attention to this 
piece of information and to hold my interest? In the selection of 
both the story and the elements in it, what appeals were made to the 
audience’s interest in glamour, gossip, conﬂ ict, violence, and tragedy? 
What appeals were made to the audience’s emotions? 
6.   Who appears to be best served by the way in which the story is 
told? Is there a clear tie-in with a manufacturer, corporation, or ser-
vice provider?
 ADVERTISING 
 As we have seen, the media have a great inﬂ uence on our beliefs and values. 
Television, newspaper, radio, billboards, and the Internet inject their inﬂ u-
ence into every aspect of our lives; and advertising, using these media, is a 

448 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
pervasive, powerful force shaping attitudes and behavior in today’s world. 
Advertising is very big business. Advertisers in the United States spend ap-
proximately $300 billion annually marketing their products and services 
to U.S. consumers. The average American sees 3,000 commercial messages 
a day and more than 2 million of them by the time he or she is age 25. 7 
 Today, ads are encountered not only in traditional venues (magazines, bill-
boards, television, etc.), but in movie theaters, cell phones, video games, sub-
ways, classrooms, even the bottom of golf cups. As advertisers try to break 
through the ever-increasing “clutter” of commercial messages, they rely less 
on rational appeals (“Here’s why this is the best buy for your money”) and 
more on sophisticated psychological ploys that appeal to consumers’ often 
subconscious desires and emotions (“Here’s why you need this”). Studying 
advertising—and its standard gimmicks—can help us become more critical 
and insightful consumers.  
 What Ads Do 
 Advertisements have two basic functions: to inform and to motivate. Some-
times these two functions support each another, but often they do not. A good 
ad is truthful, informative, and persuasive. If it is humorous, thought-provoking, 
or entertaining, that’s all the better.   
 Some advertisements seek to motivate without providing any informa-
tion at all. Slogans and jingles, such as “J. C. Penney. It’s all inside,” “Drivers 
Wanted,” and “Just Do It,” are examples of ads that seek to sell on the basis of 
brand recognition alone. No informative claims are made; only snappy phrases 
or catchy jingles are used. 
 Some advertisements make a mockery of the function of informing by 
making false or misleading claims. Listerine mouthwash was long advertised as 
preventing colds and sore throats or lessening their severity. The Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC) eventually required the manufacturer to drop the ads and 
issue corrective advertisements to inform consumers that using Listerine does 
not in fact have these effects. 
 Do ads shape society’s values or merely reﬂ ect them? Without ques-
tion, advertising does mirror society’s values to a considerable degree. But, 
as a multibillion-dollar commercial enterprise, advertising does more than 
passively reﬂ ect the attitudes and values of its culture—it helps to create 
them. It does this by selecting certain values and ignoring others. Subtly 
or not so subtly, ads suggest that consumers should pursue wealth, status, 
popularity, and prestige. What ads largely ignore are the values of being 
your own person and thinking for yourself; of focusing on quality of life 
rather than on mere material afﬂ uence; and of being good stewards of the 
environment.   
 The fact that advertisers selectively emphasize certain values rather than 
others gives the lie to the notion that advertising does no more than simply 
reﬂ ect existing values. Television, which has been the dominant medium for 
Advertising 
campaigns are not 
sources of product 
information. They 
are exercises in 
behavior 
modiﬁ cation.
—Jack Solomon
The superior 
man understands 
what is right; 
the inferior man 
understands what 
will sell.
—Confucius

 
Advertising 
449
the past sixty years, best illustrates the point. Given the enormous ﬁ nan-
cial resources that TV programs require, corporate advertisers like Procter & 
Gamble, General Motors, and RJR Nabisco largely determine what we see 
and how we see it. Television is much more than a mere medium. It is also 
an industry and an institution that has as great an inﬂ uence on people’s lives 
as the institutions of family and government. George Gerbner, former dean 
of the University of Pennsylvania’s Annenberg School of Communications, 
calls television the “contemporary mythmaker,” much in the way that the 
church was in the Middle Ages. A  myth,  as Gerbner uses the term, is a story 
that teaches, explains, and justiﬁ es the practices and institutions of a given 
society to the people in that society. Myths deal with our deepest hopes and 
fears and have a profound inﬂ uence on the way we see the world and our-
selves. They are found in television’s dramas, sitcoms, sports programs—and 
in its advertisements. 8      
 Moreover, corporate advertisers do not want just any audience. They 
seek the largest possible audience that is receptive to the advertiser’s message. 
That is why advertisers target certain groups of people according to their 
age, race, gender, or economic status to more effectively deliver their message. 
Given this selectivity, advertisers inevitably present a somewhat distorted view 
of society’s real features, values, and needs.  
 EXERCISE 14.7  
 I.  Get a copy of a local daily paper, a national paper, and a national 
newsmagazine and bring each to class. Rather than look at the articles, focus on 
the advertisements. You can ignore the “supplements” that often come with the 
paper. Take a guess at what the ratio of ads to articles is, then count the number of 
ads in the ﬁ rst section of each newspaper or an entire newsmagazine and compare 
it to the number of news articles. Look at the sizes of ads and their content. Take 
note of the ads that appear in particular sections, such as Sports or Business. What 
can you conclude about the kind of audience toward which the ads are directed? 
Are there any obvious or subtle connections between any of the advertisements 
and the stories in the paper? Do any of the stories have the quality of an ad—
announcing the opening of a new store, for example? Are there any ads that have 
the quality of a news story—making claims about a new weight-reducing pill, for 
example? Are the ads clearly labeled as advertisements or distinguished from the 
news in other ways, such as being enclosed in a border?   
II.  Divide the four major television networks—ABC, CBS, NBC, and Fox—
among your group members, watch the nightly news on your assigned network, 
and do the same with the evening news that you did with the print media. Take 
careful notes of how many ads appear, when they appear, and what they are for. 
If possible, use a watch to estimate how much of the half hour is taken up with 
ads. What audience is indicated in the ads? Is there any connection between ads 
and news? Also, within the news itself, take note of the promotions for upcoming 
It is in the inter-
ests of commercial 
enterprises to 
skew the hierarchy 
of our needs, to 
promote a mate-
rial vision of the 
good and down-
play the unsale-
able one.
—Alain de Botton
You can tell 
the ideals of a 
nation by its 
advertisements.
—Norman Douglas
Advertising may 
be described as 
the science of ar-
resting the human 
intelligence long 
enough to get 
money from it.
—Stephen Leacock

450 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
news shows and tie-ins with Internet sites and other broadcast stations. Finally, 
note the “teasers” that are intended to keep your ﬁ nger off the remote control—
phrases like “When we return . . .” and “Coming up later in our broadcast. . . .” 
What sorts of appeals do these self-advertisements make? 
 Defenses of Advertising 
 Defenders of advertising claim that it provides many beneﬁ ts. In addition to 
employing a large number of talented writers and producers, it informs con-
sumers about available products and services. Some ads promote the public 
interest by informing consumers about health and safety issues. Volvos, for ex-
ample, were among the ﬁ rst vehicles to provide side-door air bags, a deﬁ nite 
safety advantage. 
 Defenders of advertising also argue that by giving media the ﬁ nancial 
backing it requires, advertisements allow “free” non-government-regulated 
programming, thus promoting greater freedom of expression. The survival 
of many media outlets, such as television and radio stations, depends on 
advertising revenue. Finally, proponents of advertising claim that it stim-
ulates competition and fuels our mass-consumption economy, raising the 
standard of living for everyone by making possible what economists call 
the “economy of large-scale production.” Mass production reduces the cost 
of manufacturing a product, thus making it less expensive to buy; but mass 
production requires mass consumption, and mass consumption of a product 
cannot occur unless consumers know that the product exists and where it 
can be bought. So, advertising is required if we are to reap the beneﬁ ts of 
large-scale production.   
 Criticisms of Advertising 
 Despite these beneﬁ ts, numerous criticisms have been leveled at advertising. 
First, some critics argue, advertising is intrusive. It interferes with almost ev-
erything we do (reading, driving, watching TV, lying on the beach) to deliver 
a generally unwanted message and therefore constitutes an invasion of privacy. 
Second, critics say, advertising demeans and corrupts culture, making citizens 
materialistic, preoccupied with things and with possessing more and more. Of 
course, there is nothing wrong with improving one’s standard of living, but 
by encouraging consumers to measure their worth solely by what they  have, 
rather than by who they  are, advertising weakens social bonds, harms the en-
vironment, and contributes to a shallow, materialistic culture. Third, advertis-
ing exploits children by targeting dubious messages (sugary cereals are good, 
parents and teachers are clueless, cool kids wear brand-name clothing) at an 
audience that is too young and unsophisticated to rationally evaluate their 
content. Fourth, advertising reinforces harmful sexist and other stereotypes 

 
Advertising 
451
(only women do the laundry, only boys play with trucks). Fifth, critics charge, 
many ads are manipulative or deceptive. 
 This last criticism of advertising—that it manipulates and deceives us 
with sophisticated psychological ploys and other strategies—is the one we 
are least likely to believe. We don’t like to think of ourselves as mere pawns of 
advertising geniuses, buying products we neither want nor need. Young people, 
including college students, generally claim that advertising does not inﬂ uence 
them. They insist that they simply buy what they want and need. Ad makers 
know better. Studies show that a well-designed ad campaign can greatly in-
crease a product’s market share. 
 Why do we ﬁ nd it so difﬁ cult to realize how powerfully advertising 
inﬂ uences us? Max Sutherland, author of  Advertising and the Mind of the Con-
sumer, says that it is because we ask the wrong questions, make the wrong 
assumptions, and look for major effects rather than minor ones. 9 Too often 
we look for the ability of a  particular ad to persuade us. To appreciate the 
persuasive power of an ad, one has to understand its minor, cumulative ef-
fects. Few people notice the effects of the calories from that second helping 
of food or that second bottle of beer. Determining how much weight you 
put on in twenty-four hours is like evaluating the effect of being exposed 
to a single commercial. In both cases, the changes are too small to notice. 
But even the small effects of advertising can inﬂ uence which brands we 
choose—especially when all other factors are equal and one brand is much 
the same as another. 
 The majority of the things we buy—toothpaste, shampoo, or soft 
drinks, for example—involve what Sutherland calls “low-involvement buy-
ing.” These are purchases to which we give little thought. High-involvement 
buying involves high-priced items, such as cars and homes. When people are 
spending a good deal of their hard-earned money to buy a TV, a car, or a 
home, they do not take the decision lightly. Before buying such items, they 
talk with friends, read  Consumer Reports,  and generally get as much informa-
tion as they can about the item. At this level of cost, there are also usually 
signiﬁ cant differences between one brand and another. Low-involvement 
buying, on the other hand, because it involves low-cost items, is no big deal. 
We have more important things to think about, and we are not going to 
agonize over which brand to buy every time we need a box of facial tissue. 
This is the way low-involvement buying works. It is like a scale on which 
each brand weighs the same, and with one brand on each side, the scale is 
balanced. It takes only a feather added to one side of the balance, however, to 
tip it in favor of the brand on that side.  
 EXERCISE 14.8 
 Group discussion:  For a week or more before you answer the following questions, 
consider how many times during the week you have thought about the things you 

452 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
really need as opposed to the things you would like to have. Where did these needs 
and desires come from? Does our culture put too much emphasis on material 
things? If so, give some examples. Are ads primarily responsible for persuading us 
that we cannot be happy without the latest fad clothing or gadget? If so, give some 
examples of how ads do this. 
 Common Advertising Ploys 
 There are a number of standard gimmicks that advertisers use to short-circuit 
rational decision making and con the unwary. These include humor, catchy 
slogans and jingles, anxiety ads, emotive language, weasel words, ﬁ ne-print 
disclaimers, puffery, sex appeals, feel-good ads, image ads, and celebrity en-
dorsements. 
 Humor   The use of humor in ads can be very effective in grabbing our 
attention—and in closing down our critical defenses. The purpose of humor 
in advertising is to create in the viewer or listener a pleasant and memorable 
association with the product. The top-ranked ad on  USA Today’ s Ad Meter for 
the 2006 Super Bowl commercials involved a secret fridge stocked with Bud 
Light. The fridge’s owner, as a way of keeping his stock of Bud Light secure, 
has it disappear via a revolving wall into the adjoining apartment. For the guys 
next door it was a fridge that miraculously ﬁ lled itself and so was the “magic 
fridge”—an idol to be worshiped. 
 Catchy Slogans and Jingles   Although the strategies used in advertise-
ments are often subtle and difﬁ cult to categorize, most ads use some variety of 
the fallacies we have already studied. An example of a strategy difﬁ cult to cat-
egorize is the use of endlessly repeated slogans and jingles. Over time, through 
the process of repetition, such slogans as “There are some things money can’t 
buy. For everything else there’s MasterCard” and catchy jingles such as the ear-
worm ditties in the FreeCreditReport.com commercials can, by small incre-
ments, produce major perceived differences between brands. But we are rarely 
aware that this process is taking place. Often the ﬁ rst brand remembered is the 
one most likely to be purchased. A simple way of gaining easy retrieval from 
memory is the use of repetition. As simple as it sounds, it’s the tried-and-true 
way of getting an ad remembered.    
 EXERCISE 14.9 
 See how well you can match a jingle or slogan from column A with a product or 
company from column B. Like most of us, you will probably do well on this quiz. 
What does that tell you about the effectiveness of advertisements? 
When you have 
nothing to say, 
sing it.
—David Ogilvy

 
Advertising 
453
Column A 
Column B
— 1. More bars in more places. 
a. Home Depot
— 2. Can you hear me now? 
b. Skittles
— 3. Grab life by the horns. 
c. Capital One
— 4. So easy a caveman could do it. 
d. Taco Bell
— 5. You can do it, we can help. 
e. Kellogg’s Frosted Flakes
— 6. They keep going and going. 
f. AT&T
— 7. The great American chocolate bar. 
g. Cingular Wireless
— 8. Think outside the bun. 
h. Dodge
— 9. Like a rock. 
i. Chevy trucks
—10. What’s in your wallet? 
j. Hershey’s
—11. Eat fresh. 
k. Geico
—12. I’m lovin’ it. 
l. Subway
—13. Finger-lickin’ good. 
m. Captain Morgan Rum
—14. Raising the bar. 
n. KFC
—15. We’ll pick you up. 
o. Verizon Wireless
—16. M’m, m’m good. 
p. Wal-Mart
—17. They’re grrreat! 
q. Carnival Cruise Lines
—18. Got a little Captain in YOU? 
r. Las  Vegas Convention Authority
—19. Moving forward. 
s. Olive Garden
—20. Obey your thirst. 
t. McDonald’s
—21. What happens here stays here. 
u. Campbell’s
—22. When you’re here, you’re family. 
v. Enterprise Rent-a-Car
—23. Save money, live better. 
w. Toyota
—24. The fun ships. 
x. Energizer
—25. Taste the rainbow. 
y. Sprite  
 Anxiety Ads   Anxiety ads play on our fears, anxieties, and insecurities. Most 
of us strive for what psychologists call cognitive balance. Simply put, we are 
most comfortable when all of our beliefs, actions, and relationships are harmo-
niously balanced. Advertisers attempt to upset this balance by making us worry 
that we are not as attractive or well-off as we may believe. An ad might suggest 
that you have dandruff or bad breath; this loss of balance will, of course, be 
restored by the use of the advertised hair treatment or breath mint. 
 There are plenty of ads that play on people’s fears and anxieties. If you 
are a young man, you may fear losing your hair; of course, there’s an advertise-
ment for a product that’s guaranteed to get your hair growing again. If you are 
a young woman, you may fear that your bosom is too small. Again, of course, 
there’s an ad for a bra that will give you the look you desire. Worries about 
having body odor, being overweight, or having teeth that aren’t white enough 
can all upset your cognitive balance, your self-conﬁ dence. You can be certain 
there is an ad that will promise to allay your fears and restore your conﬁ dence. 
Sometimes these products really do live up to their claims. In many cases, 
Promise, large 
promise, is the 
soul of advertising.
—Samuel Johnson

454 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
however, the results are disappointing, and then you are off searching for an-
other product that will restore your lost self-esteem.    
 Emotive Language   As we saw in Chapter 4, words often have an emotional 
impact that goes beyond their purely cognitive or informational meanings. For 
example,  passed on, died,  and  croaked all have approximately the same cognitive 
meaning (the ending of a life), but they differ radically in their  emotive mean-
ing—their power to express or evoke feelings. Advertisers are well aware of the 
emotive power of language. As Naomi Klein notes in her best-selling book  No 
Logo, 10 advertising today is increasingly focused on creating cultlike “brand loy-
alty” rooted in emotion rather than reason. Often, use of the correct word can 
instill an enticing mood and attitude. Think of what is implied, for example, by 
 joystick , a control handle used with some computer games, or a computer game 
itself called PlayStation2. When you go ﬁ shing, you do not just want bait, an 
ad proclaims, you want “Power Bait.”  Power  is a positive and dynamic emotive 
word, useful in selling many things. On the other hand, think of the unfortunate 
connotations of a restaurant named for a family called Hare, Foote, or Mudd.   
 Advertisers choose words that evoke positive feelings about their prod-
uct. Among the most common of these words are  pleasure, fresh, clean,  and 
 natural . An ad for Newport cigarettes claims they are “Alive with pleasure.” An 
ad for Winston cigarettes claims “It’s only natural.” (Is there such a thing as an 
artiﬁ cial tobacco?) Kool cigarettes aren’t just Kool, they’re Kool Natural Lights. 
That’s because, as the copy in the advertisement reads, “they are a blend of to-
baccos and natural menthol with other natural ﬂ avors for a smooth, fresh taste.” 
To drive the point home, this one ad uses the word  natural three times. 
 Weasel Words   Weasel words  are used to water down or qualify a claim so that 
it ends up being practically meaningless. The term is appropriately taken from 
the egg-eating habits of weasels, who suck out the inside of an egg, giving the 
appearance to the casual observer that the egg is still whole. Claims couched 
in weasel words practically evaporate on closer examination. 
 Common weasel words include  helps, may, can be, ﬁ ghts, as low as, as much 
as,  and  up to.  Countless ads claim that their product “helps ﬁ ght —— [ﬁ ll in 
the blank] with regular use.” Marketing research shows that many consum-
ers mistakenly assume that  helps means “cures,” when in fact it means only 
“provides some positive beneﬁ t.” An ad for Hollywood’s 48-hour Miracle Diet 
claims that you can “lose up to 10 pounds this weekend,” failing to note, how-
ever, that such results are far from typical. When a sign in a sporting goods store 
says “Running shoes as low as $19,” you can be sure that only a few shoes will 
be priced that low and that most likely they are returns that have been drooled 
on by somebody’s Doberman pinscher.    
 Fine-Print Disclaimers   How many times have you seen an ad in a news-
paper in big, bold letters claiming “Sale 50% off” at one of your favorite stores, 
only to notice at the bottom of the page, in very small, easy-to-overlook, type 
Words and 
images act at 
the level of the 
subconscious 
before they 
persuade at 
the level of the 
conscious.
—Frank 
Easterbrook
A dollar spent on 
brainwashing is 
more cost-effective 
than a dollar 
spent on product 
improvement.
—Scott Adams
Advertisers bur-
row beneath our 
rational minds to 
get us to pull out 
our wallets.
—Martin 
Lindstrom

 
Advertising 
455
that the price cut is only on certain marked items? These are called  ﬁ ne-print dis-
claimers.  Perhaps the most blatant use of ﬁ ne-print disclaimers is in sweepstakes
advertisements, which often use big, blaring headlines like this: “YOU, MELVIN 
SCHLOCK, OF 16 WOODSIDE LANE, ARE DEFINITELY OUR GRAND PRIZE WINNER AND 
WILL RECEIVE $10,000,000.00 CASH! Only when you read the ﬁ ne print do you 
discover that the prize is yours if you return the winning number and that the 
chances of winning are smaller than the odds of being trampled by a herd of 
rampaging caribou.   
 Puffery   “Prices so hot the ﬁ re department comes by to hose off the store 
every half hour.” That’s a Radio Shack ad and a good example of what is called 
puffery in advertising.  
 One of the biggest problems the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) faces 
in regulating advertising is drawing a line between false or deceptive advertis-
ing and  puffery —an exaggerated claim that skirts the literal truth but does so 
in a way that does not deceive most audiences. Most of us know that, although 
hair dyes will hide the gray, they are not going to make us look as great as the 
models in their commercials. A run-down, roach-infested restaurant in the 
Florida Keys claims it serves “the best Mexican food north of the border”; a 
car dealer claims that “nobody sells for less”; a radio announcer for KOW 98.5 
reminds listeners of the new livestock stud service that “everyone is talking 
about.” Few rational consumers would be taken it by such obvious exaggera-
tions, but, as advertisers know all too well, not everybody is rational.  
 Sex Appeals   There is hardly a brand of soap, car, cigarette, beer, or jeans 
that has not used sex appeals in its ads. In recent years such appeals have be-
come increasingly blatant, as in Pony shoes’ recent ads featuring porn star 
Jenna Jameson or Miller Lite’s notorious “catﬁ ght” commercial in which two 
women rip off each others’ clothes and wrestle in cement.  
 Is there a connection between shampooing your hair and sexual pleasure 
and excitement? Ads for Herbal Essences shampoo would like you to believe 
there is. One of their commercials shows a woman stepping into a shower to 
 Fictitious Fine-Print Disclaimer 
from Humorist Dave Barry 
 Warning: Use of this product may cause 
nausea, insomnia, euphoria, déjà vu, 
menopause, tax audits, demonic pos-
session, lung ﬂ ukes, eyeball worms, de-
capitation, and mudslides. We would not 
even dare to sell this product if we did not 
have a huge, carnivorous legal department 
that could squash you in court like a baby 
mouse under a sledgehammer. We frankly 
can’t believe that you were so stupid as to 
purchase this product. Your only hope is 
to set this product down very gently, back 
slowly away from it, then turn and sprint 
for your home, never to return. 
 We live today in 
a world of hype, 
exaggeration, 
and hyperbole. 
Illusions rule the 
world. 
 —Tom Morris 
 Sex never fails 
as an attention-
getter. 
 —Jack Solomon 

456 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
wash her hair. She’s using Herbal Essences shampoo. As she lathers up, she cries 
loudly three times, “Yes, yes, yes!” and then there’s an “ooh” and an “ah.” It 
clearly suggests that using this shampoo will send you into a state of orgasmic 
sexual abandon. 
 Another magazine advertisement shows a smiling, young, beautiful 
woman with copy that reads, “Amber O’Brien, 25, is having the time of her 
life. Recently, she decided it was time to have breast augmentation.” The sug-
gestion being made by this advertisement is obvious: If you want a happy sex 
life, you should have your breasts augmented. It’s clear: Sex sells. 
 Feel-Good Ads   Like humorous ads, feel-good ads work by creating posi-
tive emotional associations. They link the good feelings elicited by the ad with 
the brand. Take a closer look at the next new car commercial you see. They 
almost always show a car on a quiet rained-soaked road, and  there’s no trafﬁ c. 
There’s never any trafﬁ c in car commercials, even when they ﬁ lm these ads in 
the middle of major cities. All you see is a trafﬁ c-free street or a wide-open 
highway with no other cars in sight. The camera zooms in on the driver be-
hind the wheel, the music picks up, and the car takes off, purring smoothly 
as it gracefully zips out of sight down the road into a beautiful sunset. Who 
wouldn’t like to be in a shiny new car on a scenic deserted highway? 
 Cigarette advertisements targeted at women, such as those for Virginia 
Slims, typically show a young, attractive, very slim woman at a table in a fash-
ionable restaurant, with a handsome young man staring into her eyes, or the 
same woman walking along a beautiful, sunlit beach, again with a handsome 
young man at her side. The message is clear: If you want to be in similar sur-
roundings, looking slim and attractive and pursued by guys who look like 
 Playgirl centerfold models, smoke Virginia Slims. 
 Image Ads   Image ads are used to appeal to certain images people have 
of themselves—for example, as competent, cool, rugged, responsible, sophisti-
cated, or discriminating. 
 Many image ads seek to butter up consumers or play on their image 
of themselves as being better than the average person is. Virginia Slims says, 
“You’ve come a long way, baby.”  Hallmark claims, “When you care enough to 
send the very best.” Piaget watches have “exceptional character,” and Saks Fifth 
Avenue’s clothes are “deﬁ ning style.” 
 Lots of people think that if a product is the most expensive in its class, it’s 
got to be the best. Many advertisements play on this belief, including ads for 
Mont Blanc pens, Saks Fifth Avenue, and Inﬁ niti cars. Talbot’s clothing touts, 
“A look that says you’ve arrived.” A young newlywed wants to impress her 
mother-in-law, who is coming to her house for Thanksgiving for the ﬁ rst time. 
If she buys a cheaper brand of turkey, the turkey may be too dry, and the hap-
less bride is sure to be seen as a failure in her mother-in-law’s eyes. An ad for 
Butterball, well known to be more expensive than most frozen turkeys, assures 
her that her Thanksgiving turkey will be moist and sure to impress. 
 Males are predict-
able creatures. 
That makes it 
easy to craft a 
marketing mes-
sage that appeals 
to them. All suc-
cessful advertising 
campaigns that 
target men in-
clude one of two 
messages: 
 1.  This product 
will help you 
get dates with 
bikini models. 
 2.  This product 
will save you 
time and 
money, which 
you’ll need if 
you want to 
date bikini 
models. 
 —Scott Adams 

 
Advertising 
457
 Celebrity Endorsements   We all tend to identify with people we envy and 
admire for their celebrity status. Advertisers play on this tendency by featuring 
sports stars, famous actors, or other celebrities. Maybe you will never play ball 
like a LeBron James, but you can feel a little more like him if you wear the 
same brand of basketball shoes he does. Such ads don’t sell just a product; they 
also sell a lifestyle that people identify with. Often such ads don’t even bother 
to give reasons for purchasing the product; it is enough in the consumer’s mind 
that some celebrity endorses the product. The successful “Got milk?” ads do 
no more than show a famous celebrity with a milk-mustache. Apparently, that’s 
enough to get some consumers to buy more milk. 
 EXERCISE 14.10 
 I. Read the advertisements in current newspapers and magazines and ﬁ nd ﬁ ve 
that are based on mere emotional appeals, slogans, or jingles and that give no 
reasons for buying their product. Check the criteria given early in this chapter 
for a good ad and then ﬁ nd ﬁ ve ads that meet these criteria.  
 II. Choose an ad from a current magazine or newspaper, then analyze it in the 
following manner: 
 
  • Identify the strategy or ploy the ad uses to reach its audience. 
 
  • Determine if the ad is using a fallacious appeal and, if so, explain what it is. 
 III. Here are examples of ads taken from various sources. Evaluate each ad for 
its informational and motivational aspects; then explain which, if any, of the 
following advertising gimmicks are used: humor, catchy slogan or jingle, anxiety, 
emotive language, weasel words, ﬁ ne-print disclaimer, puffery, sex appeal, feel-
good ad, image ad, or celebrity endorsement. (Keep in mind that more than one 
gimmick may be used.) 
 1. Listerine mouthwash ad: “Listerine ﬁ ghts bad breath.”  
 2. Financial-services ad depicting three attractive young sisters sitting on a 
couch: “Three car payments. Three private colleges. Three weddings. I think 
I am having chest pains. How are we going to pay for all this? Invest? Invest 
in what? The market is more unpredictable than our daughters.” The ad copy 
continues: “Emotional times require sound, unemotional ﬁ nancial advice. 
Morgan Stanley. One client at a time.” 
 3. Ad for Grey Goose vodka: “There’s something wonderful about a late night 
dinner. When no reservations are needed.  The intimacy.  The company of 
insiders. The spontaneous swapping of stories and seats at the table. The 
impromptu pleasure of lingering over a meal long after the day players have 
gone to bed.” 
 4. Gatorade ad: “Is it in you?” 
 5. Notorious car dealer ad, listing cars at remarkably low prices: “1/2 price 
sale. * ” (In small print the ad notes, “ * The price you see is half the price 
you pay.”) (Note: Read this one carefully.) 
 I want Barack 
Obama to be the 
next president of 
the United States. 
As an ofﬁ cial 
celebrity, I know 
that my endorse-
ment has just 
made your mind 
up for you. 
 —Tom Hanks 
 Consumers no 
longer buy prod-
ucts but rather 
lifestyles and the 
stories, experi-
ences, and emo-
tions products 
convey. 
 —Revco Group 

458 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
 6.  Ad for Fuddruckers restaurant: “Hey, if you ain’t eating Fuddrucker’s, you 
ain’t eating.” 
 7.  IBC root beer commercial, featuring a hung-over man who wakes up in a 
zoo cage with a chimpanzee eyeing and petting him affectionately: “Some-
times the best beer is a root beer.” 
 8.  A 1980s commercial: “I am stuck on Band-Aid brand, ‘cause Band-Aid’s 
stuck on me.” 
 9.  Ad for Dodge Stratus: “With a trunk so deep you need lifeguards to watch 
over it.” 
10.   Lands’ End catalog: “Lands’ End Sport: Six pages dedicated to your  VITALITY. 
BALANCE. SPIRIT.”  
11.   Department store commercial: “25–40% off every stitch of clothing.” 
(A qualiﬁ cation that ﬂ ashes on the screen only brieﬂ y in the ad notes 
that the discounts do not apply to underwear, socks, hosiery, and other 
“accessories.”) 
12.   An American Dairy Council ad features Olympic track-star Marion Jones 
wearing a milk moustache. The copy reads, “Wanna race? Milk has nine 
essential nutrients active bodies need. It can’t be beat and neither can I.” 
13.   An ad for Five Star grease gun cartridges shows a sultry woman leaning 
forward, exposing an impressive cleavage. The ad reads, “This is Debbie. She 
wants you to have this pair in your car.” The rest of the ad talks about buying 
the grease gun cartridges she holds in her hands. 
14.   Ad for Kay jewelry: “Every kiss begins with Kay.” 
15.   Bank ad: “You work hard.  You save your money. And you’re probably one 
heck of a nice person. So why not do something special for yourself—like 
take advantage of First Liberty Bank and Trust’s limited-time Prime Money 
Market rate.  Just like you, it’s solid, stable, and well, special.” 
16.   Head & Shoulders dandruff shampoo ad: “You only have one chance to 
make a ﬁ rst impression.”  
17.   Commercial: “Springﬁ eld, Missouri: It’s everyone’s deﬁ nition of fun.”  
18.   Airline ad: “Nonstop to Orlando from $99.” At the bottom of the page the 
following restrictions, among others, are noted: “Seats are limited and fares 
may not be available on all ﬂ ights. All fares are one-way. . . . 10-day advance 
purchase required. Prices do not include PFC, segment tax or Sept. 11 secu-
rity fee of up to $10.30 per segment.” 
19.   Lowe’s ad: “Let’s build something together.” 
20.   Verbal Advantage ad: “Let me give you the secrets of fearless conversation! 
I promise you the ability to walk into a room full of strangers—and talk to 
anyone with total conﬁ dence, authority and ﬂ air.”  
21.   Ad for Lincoln’s sport utility vehicle: “Urban Assault Luxury Vehicle. Lincoln 
Navigator. American Luxury.”  
22.   Imodium A-D ad: A man with a mortiﬁ ed look on his face is shown in a 
hot tub sitting between two attractive women. The ad copy reads, “Where 
will you be when your diarrhea comes back?” 
23.   Ad for Chanel perfume: “Chanel No. 5 is sensual but shy. Not for all women, 
but perfect for some.” 

 
Summary 
459
24.   A magazine ad for Hamburger Helper shows a mother in her kitchen, a 
smiling pigtailed child, and a plate of Hamburger Helper Cheeseburger 
Macaroni. The mother says, “Tonight, I will turn this hamburger into a great 
meal.” The child says, “Tonight, you’re getting a big hug.” The caption below 
the plate of macaroni reads, “Tonight, you’re having a home-cooked meal. 
One pound. One pan. One happy family.” 
25.   An ad for Tag Body Spray shows an attractive young man in his underwear, 
socks, and T-shirt, being strip-searched by three attractive female airport se-
curity guards. The ad copy reads, “Warning: Introducing new pocket-size Tag 
Body Shots. Load it, lock it, and rock it at your own risk. Consider yourself 
warned.”  
 SUMMARY 
1.   We are assailed daily by messages from the media. While some media 
sources target speciﬁ c audiences, the mass media deliver their messages to 
a large and diverse audience with varying interests, levels of education, po-
litical viewpoints, and so forth. 
2.   To assign meaning to a message, we need to know something about 
the context of the message—the background of the information, 
the intentions or perceived intentions of the speaker, and the wider 
implications and circumstances that surround it. Without context, messages 
can be meaningless and useless. Unfortunately, the news media extract 
information from the wider context, leaving us with some facts but little 
knowledge. 
3.   In place of context, which would require thorough, extensive investigation 
and demand much of the audience, the media substitute appeals to our 
noncritical natures and common emotions, selecting stories of crime, scan-
dal, violence, and whatever else will disturb, frighten, or shock audiences. 
Heartwarming stories about animals and children are common as well, as 
are stories of rescues and warnings about hidden dangers. Stories critical of 
corporations and the media do not usually appear in the mainstream press. 
In general, stories are selected for their entertainment value. 
4.   The media employ a number of techniques to exaggerate the importance 
of some stories and to play down others. Often these techniques result in 
a distortion of reality, especially since extensive coverage is reserved for big 
events that are uncommon or trivial matters that are inconsequential. Per-
sistent issues and trends receive relatively little coverage. 
5.   Although “objectivity” is difﬁ cult to attain, some members of the news 
media attempt to be objective by reporting news without commentary 

460 
CHAPTER 14 Thinking Critically about the Media
or analysis. This approach to the news often leads to problems when the 
media pass along information that is not credible or that has not been 
veriﬁ ed. Although some critics contend that the news media are biased 
toward a political viewpoint, most media organizations, preferring not to 
alienate current or potential customers, choose not to stir up controversy 
with pronounced political viewpoints. Some news personnel have on oc-
casion blatantly offered their opinions on issues. In fact, some audiences 
now, unfortunately, look more and more to news reporters for their opin-
ions and insights. 
6.   The media-literate critical thinker is aware of the techniques used in the 
news media to entertain an audience in an effort to keep them reading 
and watching. A media-literate consumer of news knows that stories have 
been stripped of their contexts and can separate fact from opinion in news 
stories. 
7.   The point of studying advertising ploys and strategies is to become a more 
critical, insightful, and selective consumer of the barrage of advertising ap-
peals we experience. 
8.   Advertising permeates our environment. Using a host of ploys that appeal 
to both our physiological needs—food, drink, sleep—and our psychologi-
cal needs—afﬁ liation, affection, acceptance, self-esteem, status—advertisers 
invest vast amounts of money to break through our rational defenses to 
sell us their products. 
9.   Some of the more common strategies of advertisements include humor, 
catchy slogans and jingles, anxiety ads, emotive language, weasel words, 
ﬁ ne-print disclaimers, puffery, sex appeals, feel-good ads, image ads, and 
celebrity endorsements. 

461
 CHAPTER 15
 SCIENCE AND 
PSEUDOSCIENCE 
 Science is the most powerful intellectual tool ever discovered. It has trans-
formed the way we live, work, travel, and communicate. It has given us comput-
ers, telephones, televisions, VCRs, DVD players, refrigerators, and a thousand 
other conveniences of modern life. It has improved health care, raised living 
standards, and signiﬁ cantly increased average life expectancy worldwide. Most 
signiﬁ cant, science has added enormously to the sum of human knowledge 
and has, after ages of more or less blind groping, ﬁ nally provided human beings 
with a proven method for answering age-old questions about ourselves and 
the awe-inspiring physical universe in which we live. 
 Despite the profound impact science has on our daily lives, studies show 
that a large percentage of Americans are “scientiﬁ cally illiterate.”1 Evidence 
of this can be seen in scientiﬁ c literacy surveys (see box, “What Americans 
Believe . . .”), in the dismal performance of American high school students 
on international math and science tests,2 and in the upsurge in interest in 
“New Age” or occult phenomena such as ESP, astrology, reincarnation, ghosts, 
psychic prediction, levitation, psychic surgery, the Bermuda Triangle, the lost 
continent of Atlantis, the prophecies of Nostradamus, healing crystals, pyramid 
power, out-of-body experiences, and trance channeling. 
 In this chapter we offer a brief introduction to science and scientiﬁ c 
reasoning, discuss the limitations of science, explain how to distinguish real 
science from pseudoscience, and explore in detail one example of pseudosci-
entiﬁ c thinking: astrology. 
 THE BASIC PATTERN OF SCIENTIFIC REASONING 
 Science  is a method of inquiry that seeks to describe, explain, and predict oc-
currences in the physical or natural world by means of careful observation and 
rigorous experiment. 3 Although there is no single “scientiﬁ c method” that all 
 All our science, 
measured against 
reality, is primitive 
and childlike—
and yet it is the 
most precious 
thing we have.  
 —Albert Einstein 
 The true men 
of action in our 
time, those who 
transform the 
world, are not the 
politicians and 
statesmen, but 
the scientists. 
 —W. H. Auden 

462 
CHAPTER 15 Science and Pseudoscience 
scientists use, most scientiﬁ c reasoning does follow a certain general pattern. 
That pattern can be summarized as follows:
 The Basic Pattern of Scientiﬁ c Reasoning  
 1.  Identify the problem. 
 2.  Gather relevant data. 
 3.  Formulate hypotheses to explain the data. 
 4.  Test the hypotheses by observation or experiment. 
 Identifying the Problem   Try to remember the last time you thought really 
hard about something. We’d be willing to bet there was some  problem  you were 
trying to solve: Should I change my major? Quit my dead-end job? Move into 
my own apartment? Talk to my friend about his drinking problem? Tell my 
boyfriend about my planned sex-change operation? In fact, as John Dewey 
and other philosophers have pointed out, most of the serious thinking we do 
is problem-solving thinking. 
 Science, by its very nature, is a kind of problem-solving activity. It always 
begins with a question or puzzle that researchers believe can be answered 
by means of observation or experiment: Do vaccines cause autism? Does 
drinking red wine lower the risk of heart attack? Did the universe begin 
with a big bang? What are the fundamental building blocks of matter? Were 
dinosaurs wiped out by the impact of a large asteroid? How do honeybees 
What Americans Believe about Science 
and the Paranormal
The term paranormal refers to mysterious, 
unusual, or supernatural phenomena that 
supposedly transcend the limits of exist-
ing science and are due to hidden or oc-
cult causes.4 Here is a sampling of things 
Americans believe about science and the 
paranormal:
 
18 percent of adult Americans believe 
that the sun revolves around the earth, 
rather than vice versa.5
 
More than 50 percent of adult Ameri-
cans don’t know that the earth takes a year 
to orbit the sun.6
 
63 percent of adult Americans don’t 
know that the last dinosaur died before the 
ﬁ rst human arose.
 
57 percent of adult Americans don’t 
know that electrons are smaller than 
atoms.7
 
47 percent of adult Americans believe 
that God created human beings at one 
time within the past 10,000 years pretty 
much in their present form.8
 
73 percent of adult Americans believe in 
some form of paranormal phenomena.
 
41 percent of adult Americans believe 
in ESP.
 
25 percent of adult Americans believe in 
astrology.
 
21 percent of adult Americans believe in 
communication with the dead.9

 
The Basic Pattern of Scientiﬁ c Reasoning 
463
communicate? What genes determine eye color? Did life once exist on Mars? 
What causes those amazing bubbles to percolate up from the bottom of a glass 
of beer? Science seeks to answer such puzzles by means of careful observation 
and rigorous testing.  
 Gathering Relevant Data   The ultimate test of a scientiﬁ c theory or hy-
pothesis is whether it ﬁ ts the observable facts. No matter how popular, com-
forting, or long accepted a scientiﬁ c idea may be, it must be rejected if it fails 
to agree with the clear evidence of our senses. 
 Sometimes it is possible to conﬁ rm or refute a scientiﬁ c hypothesis by 
means of a single decisive observation or experiment. That was the case, for 
example, when Galileo, according to a famous but possibly apocryphal story, 
refuted Aristotle’s claim that heavy objects fall faster than light objects by drop-
ping two iron balls of different weights from the Leaning Tower of Pisa and 
noting that the two balls struck the ground at the same instant. In most cases, 
however, a scientiﬁ c hypothesis can be effectively conﬁ rmed or refuted only 
by collecting a great deal of observational evidence. To ﬁ nd out, for example, 
whether coffee drinking contributes to coronary heart disease, scientists would 
need to collect information on the coffee-drinking habits and other health-
related characteristics of literally thousands of people over a period of many 
years. The patient, methodical collection of facts is what consumes most of the 
time and energy of most working scientists. 
 Formulating Hypotheses   Contrary to a popular misconception, scientists 
don’t just go around collecting facts blindly or indiscriminately. All scientiﬁ c 
investigation is guided by certain presuppositions that inﬂ uence the kinds of 
observations and experiments scientists think are worth making. Among these 
presuppositions are a class of tentative, or “working,” assumptions scientists call 
 hypotheses. Let’s consider a few examples. 
 Suppose you are a doctor investigating an outbreak of serious stomach-
ﬂ u-like symptoms onboard a commercial jet airliner. Five passengers, all 
from the same family and all seated in the ﬁ rst-class cabin, became sick 
during a long overseas ﬂ ight. Your job is to ﬁ nd out why. How would you 
begin? 
 Clearly, you wouldn’t begin just by collecting facts at random: noting the 
color of the sick passengers’ socks, the number of coins in their pockets, their 
favorite sports teams, the kinds of toothpaste they prefer, and so on. Based on 
your knowledge of how things normally work in the world, you would assume 
that those facts aren’t pertinent to your investigation. Instead, you would start 
by looking for  relevant facts, guided by a kind of working hypothesis such as 
the following:
 H 1 : The passengers became sick because of the food they ate on the plane. 
 Suppose you do some quick checking, however, and discover that two of 
the ﬁ ve sick passengers were fasting and ate nothing on the plane. Naturally, 
 The great tragedy 
of Science—the 
slaying of a beau-
tiful hypothesis by 
an ugly fact. 
 —Thomas Henry 
Huxley 
 Often the most 
difﬁ cult step in 
the discovery 
of what is true 
is thinking of a 
hypothesis which 
may be true. 
 —Bertrand Russell 

464 
CHAPTER 15 Science and Pseudoscience 
you would then set aside your initial hypothesis and formulate another, such 
as the following:
 H 2 : The passengers became sick because they all came down with the stomach ﬂ u. 
 You might then call for some medical tests, which, let’s suppose, conﬁ rm 
that the passengers did indeed come down with a severe case of viral gastroen-
teritis, more commonly known as stomach ﬂ u. 
 As this example makes clear, there is a complex interplay between ob-
servations and hypotheses in science. Hypotheses inevitably  guide observations 
because scientists wouldn’t have a clue where to begin their investigations 
without at least some initial assumptions about what sorts of data are worth 
collecting. Observations, in turn, are used to  test  hypotheses—to modify, con-
ﬁ rm, or refute them in the light of empirical evidence and experimentation. It 
is this complex interplay between careful observation and rigorous testing that 
is the touchstone of modern science.  
 Testing the Hypotheses   Scientiﬁ c hypotheses are tested by  considering their 
implications and then  testing those implications  by means of observation or experi-
ment. Consider, again, the problem of the sick airline passengers. 
 Recall that we were able to quickly rule out our initial hypothesis—that 
the passengers became sick because of the food they ate on the plane—simply 
by noting that two of the passengers who became sick did not eat on the plane. 
In effect, we reasoned like this:
 1.  If the passengers became sick because of the food they ate on the plane, 
then all the passengers who became sick must have eaten on the plane. 
 2.  But it is not the case that all the passengers who became sick ate on the plane. 
 3.  So, it is not the case that the passengers became sick because of the food 
they ate on the plane. 
Let  H stand for the hypothesis that the ﬁ ve passengers became sick because 
of the food they ate on the plane. Let  I stand for the implication of  H, that all 
the ﬁ ve passengers did, in fact, eat on the plane. The pattern of our reasoning 
is thus:
 1.  If  H, then  I. 
 2.  Not  I. 
 3.  So, not  H. 
As you will recall from Chapter 3, this is a deductively valid pattern of reason-
ing called  modus tollens. Modus tollens  arguments are widely used in scientiﬁ c 
reasoning as a way of  disconﬁ rming, or falsifying, scientiﬁ c hypotheses. 
 A different pattern of scientiﬁ c reasoning is often used to  conﬁ rm  scientiﬁ c 
hypotheses. Consider the reasoning we used to verify our second hypothesis—
the stomach ﬂ u hypothesis—in our example above:
 1.  If the ﬁ ve passengers became sick because they came down with the stom-
ach ﬂ u, then medical tests should conﬁ rm that diagnosis. 
 Science is nothing 
but trained and 
organized com-
mon sense, differ-
ing from the latter 
only as a veteran 
may differ from a 
raw recruit. 
 —Thomas Henry 
Huxley 

 
The Basic Pattern of Scientiﬁ c Reasoning 
465
 2.  Medical tests do conﬁ rm that diagnosis. 
 3.  So, the ﬁ ve passengers did become sick because they came down with the 
stomach ﬂ u. 
Here the pattern of reasoning is
 1.  If  H, then  I. 
 2.  I. 
 3.  So,  H. 
This is a pattern of reasoning called  afﬁ rming the consequent.  As we saw in Chap-
ter 3, arguments of this pattern are  not deductively valid. For example:
 1.  If JFK died in a bungee-jumping accident, then JFK is dead. 
 2.  JFK is dead. 
 3.  So, JFK did die in a bungee-jumping accident. 
In this argument the premises are both true and the conclusion is clearly false. 
Thus, arguments of this pattern are not deductively valid. 
 Does this mean that scientiﬁ c reasoning is inherently ﬂ awed? No. Ar-
guments of this pattern can provide  persuasive evidence  for a conclusion, even 
though they are not deductively valid. For example:
 If it rained, then the streets are wet. 
 The streets are wet. 
 Therefore, it rained. 
Clearly, this argument does not  prove that it rained. It might be the case that the 
streets are wet because some pranksters from the local volunteer ﬁ re depart-
ment hosed them down during the night. But given the fact that rain and wet 
streets are regularly associated in our experience, the fact that the streets are 
wet does provide strong  presumptive  evidence that it rained. By a similar pro-
cess of reasoning, scientists are often able to provide strong (but not logically 
conclusive) evidence for a hypothesis by a process of (1) deducing speciﬁ c im-
plications from the hypothesis (i.e., asking what  would be true  if the hypothesis 
were true); (2) testing those implications by observation or experiment; and 
(3) ﬁ nding that those implications consistently turn out to be true across a 
variety of demanding test conditions. 
 Because of the inherent theoretical and practical difﬁ culties in conﬁ rm-
ing scientiﬁ c hypotheses, scientiﬁ c conclusions can never be 100 percent cer-
tain. No matter how much evidence we amass for a scientiﬁ c “law” of the 
form “All A’s are B’s,” it is always possible that tomorrow we will discover an A 
that is  not a B. No matter how carefully we make our observations or conduct 
our experiments, it is always possible that some hidden cause or overlooked 
variable will bias our conclusions. For those reasons scientiﬁ c conclusions are 
always tentative and open to revision. 
 Does this mean that everything is up for grabs in science? By no means. 
Many scientiﬁ c conclusions  can be afﬁ rmed with a high degree of conﬁ dence. 
 No amount of 
experimentation 
can ever prove 
me right; a single 
experiment can 
prove me wrong. 
 —Albert Einstein 

466 
CHAPTER 15 Science and Pseudoscience 
One way in which scientists are able to achieve such conﬁ dent conclusions is 
by conducting controlled studies. 
 A  controlled study,  as we noted brieﬂ y in Chapter 11, is a rigorous, 
carefully structured test in which scientists use a baseline comparison, or con-
trol group, to answer questions of the form “Does A cause B?” Suppose you 
want to discover, for example, whether vitamin C prevents colds. Here is the 
most reliable way to ﬁ nd out:
 1.  Randomly select a large number of people from the whole 
population. 
 2.  Randomly divide them into two groups: an  experimental group and a 
 control group. 
 3.  Treat the two groups exactly alike, except that you give the ex-
perimental group a speciﬁ ed dosage of vitamin C and you give the 
control group a  placebo —that is, a sugar pill or some other known 
inactive substance. 
 4.  Conduct the study  double-blind. That is, you make sure that neither 
the scientists nor the subjects know which of the subjects is getting 
the vitamin C and which is getting the placebo. 
 5.  Check to see if there is a  statistically signiﬁ cant difference in the fre-
quency with which the two groups get colds. If the experimental 
group gets signiﬁ cantly fewer colds than the control group, it is rea-
sonable to conclude that vitamin C does help prevent colds. 10 
Each of these ﬁ ve steps is generally necessary to establish the effectiveness of a 
treatment beyond a reasonable doubt. 
 Randomly  selecting a  large number of subjects from the population as a 
whole is necessary to ensure that you have a sample that is representative of 
the population as a whole. 
 Using a  control group  is necessary to determine that it is the substance being 
tested, and not some other factor, that explains any apparent causal effects. 
 Using a  placebo is necessary because studies have shown that many people 
will experience improvement in their condition even if they are given a sugar 
pill or some other treatment that is known to be worthless. The only way to 
control for this “placebo effect” is to give one group the real stuff (the sub-
stance being tested) and another group a placebo, without telling either group 
which they are receiving. 
 Making the study  double-blind is necessary to make sure, ﬁ rst, that the  sci-
entists don’t bias the results by consciously or unconsciously treating one group 
differently from the other and, second, that the  subjects  don’t bias the results by 
knowing which group is receiving the real stuff and which isn’t. 
 Last, checking to see if there is a  statistically signiﬁ cant difference  in the 
frequencies of the measured effect is necessary to ensure that any observed 
differences are not simply due to chance. 
 The type of controlled study just described is called a  randomized ex-
perimental study  because it involves deliberate “interventions,” or tests, on 
 The power which 
a man’s imagina-
tion has over his 
body to heal it 
or make it sick 
is a force which 
none of us is born 
without. 
 —Mark Twain 

 
The Basic Pattern of Scientiﬁ c Reasoning 
467
groups that have been randomly selected. Sometimes, for ethical or other rea-
sons, it is not possible to conduct studies of this kind. For example, suppose 
you wanted to ﬁ nd out if low-level lead poisoning causes hearing loss in young 
children. Clearly, it would be unethical to deliberately expose children to po-
tentially harmful levels of lead. Nevertheless, there are two types of controlled 
tests you could use to try to answer your question scientiﬁ cally. Speciﬁ cally, 
you could perform either a nonrandomized prospective study or a nonran-
domized retrospective study. 
 In a  nonrandomized prospective study,  you begin with a group of 
people that has  already been exposed  to a suspected causal agent (in our example, 
low levels of lead poisoning). This group (or a representative sample) serves as 
the experimental group. You then ﬁ nd a group of people that has not been 
exposed to the suspected causal agent but matches the ﬁ rst group in all other 
relevant respects. (For the study to be reliable, great care must be taken to en-
sure that the two groups really are alike in all relevant respects.) This second 
group serves as the control group. You then track the two groups over time. 
If the experimental group exhibits the suspected effect at signiﬁ cantly higher 
rates than the control group, this provides evidence for the suspected cause-
and-effect relationship. 
 In a  nonrandomized retrospective study,  you start with a group of 
people that  already exhibits a certain effect.  You then ﬁ nd a control group that is 
as similar as possible to the ﬁ rst group except that its members do  not  exhibit 
the observed effect. You then work backward to try to determine the cause of 
the observed effect. In the lead-poisoning example, for instance, if a researcher 
were to ﬁ nd that children with hearing loss suffer from low-level lead poison-
ing at signiﬁ cantly higher rates than children in the control group, this would 
provide evidence that such poisoning does cause hearing loss in children. 
 We are constantly bombarded by claims about “miracle” or “alternative” 
cures. Does shark cartilage cure cancer? Do magnets ease back pain? Does zinc 
cure colds? Do copper bracelets alleviate motion sickness? To answer these 
questions, you might try one or more of the following ever-popular techniques:
Popular Methods for Assessing “Miracle” or “Alternative” Cures
The method of personal experience: “I tried it, and it worked.”
The method of anecdotal evidence: 
 “Someone else tried it, and it 
worked.”
The method of paid testimonials: 
 “A famous actor or sports hero 
was paid to say it works.”
The method of folklore: 
 “An ancient practice or folklore 
says it works.”11
Each of these methods, however, has been proven time and again to be unre-
liable. Sick people often feel better for all sorts of reasons that have nothing 
to do with any treatments they may be receiving. So, the only way to know 
 He who proves 
things by experi-
ence increases 
his knowledge; 
he who believes 
blindly increases 
his errors. 
 —Chinese proverb 

468 
CHAPTER 15 Science and Pseudoscience 
beyond a reasonable doubt that a “cure” is effective is through careful, con-
trolled scientiﬁ c testing. 
 EXERCISE 15.1 
 In small groups, design reliable scientiﬁ c studies to test the following hypoth-
eses. Be prepared to share your study designs with the class as a whole. 
 1.  Magnets can ease chronic back pain. 
 2.  Sleeping with a night-light can cause near-sightedness in young children. 
 3.  Drinking two or three cups of green tea a day reduces the risk of heart attack. 
 4.  Teen pregnancy-prevention programs that emphasize abstinence are less effec-
tive than programs that emphasize both abstinence and safer-sex education. 
 5.  The chemical defoliant Agent Orange caused birth defects in the children of 
American soldiers who served in Vietnam. 
 THE LIMITATIONS OF SCIENCE 
 Science is the most reliable method we have for discovering empirically veri-
ﬁ able truths about the physical universe. There are, however, many important 
questions that science cannot answer. Among these are fundamental questions 
of  meaning and  value. 
Shortly before his death, science writer Carl Sagan published an article 
in Parade magazine, in which he bemoaned the fact that American high 
school students perform poorly on international math and science 
tests. A tenth-grade teacher in Minnesota handed out copies of the 
article to her class and asked what they thought. Here’s what some of 
the students wrote in response (all quotes are verbatim):
• Not a Americans are stupid We just rank lower in school big deal.
•  Maybe that’s good that we are not as smart as the other countries. 
So then we can just import all of their products and then we don’t 
have to spend all of our money on the parts for the goods.
•  And if other countries are doing better, what does it matter, their 
most likely going to come over the U.S. anyway?
•  Not one kid in this school likes science. I really didn’t understand 
the point of the article. I thought it was very boreing. I’m just not 
into anything like that.
•  I think your facts were inconclusive and the evidence very ﬂ imsy. All 
in all, you raised a good point.12
Critical Thinking Lapse

 
The Limitations of Science 
469
 Questions of Meaning   Science deals with empirically observable facts. But 
many of life’s most important questions deal not with empirically observable 
facts but with the meaning or signiﬁ cance of those facts. Thus, for example, 
science cannot answer fundamental questions such as these:
 •  Does the universe have a purpose? 
 •  Does my life have a purpose? 
 •  What things in life are truly meaningful and important? 
 •  Does my suffering have meaning? 
 •  Does anything I do have enduring meaning or signiﬁ cance?  
Although science can provide evidence relevant to these questions, these are 
not scientiﬁ c questions because they are not questions of objective, empirically 
veriﬁ able fact. 13 
 Questions of Value   Questions of value, or  normative questions,  are ques-
tions about what is good or bad, right or wrong, better or worse, beautiful 
or ugly, desirable or undesirable. Here are some examples of questions of 
value:
 •  Is abortion always wrong?  
 •  Is capital punishment justiﬁ able?  
 •  Should gay marriage be legal? 
 •  Is it ever right to lie? 
 •  Should embryonic stem cell research be permitted? 
 •  What is a just society? 
 •  Is freedom more important than equality? 
These are important questions we can argue about well or badly, reasonably 
or unreasonably. But they are not scientiﬁ c questions because they cannot be 
settled by any conceivable empirical observation or experiment. 
 Some people claim that science can, in fact, answer questions of 
meaning and value. Speciﬁ cally, they claim that modern science shows us 
that the universe has  no meaning or purpose and that values are only sub-
jective. Often they defend this claim with some version of the following 
argument:
 1.  Either beliefs are mere subjective opinions or they are facts. 
 2.  All facts are scientiﬁ c facts.  
 3.  Beliefs about meanings or values are not scientiﬁ c facts.  
 4.  Therefore, beliefs about meanings or values are mere subjective opinions. 
This argument can be challenged in several ways. Here, let’s focus just on (2), the 
claim that
 All facts are scientiﬁ c facts.  
 Science can only 
ascertain what 
is,  but not what 
should be. 
 —Albert Einstein 

470 
CHAPTER 15 Science and Pseudoscience 
A little reﬂ ection shows that this claim cannot possibly be true. The statement 
“All facts are scientiﬁ c facts” is not itself a scientiﬁ c fact. It cannot be validated 
by any scientiﬁ c observation or procedure. Consequently, the statement is  self-
refuting —that is, false even in its own terms. The statement cannot be true 
because it undermines itself. 
 Statements such as “All facts are scientiﬁ c facts” or “Science is the only 
reliable guide to truth” are not, in fact, scientiﬁ c claims but expressions of an 
uncritical form of science-worship called  scientism.   Scientism  is the view that 
science is the only reliable way of knowing. 14 
 Scientism must be carefully distinguished from science. Whereas science 
is cautious and empirical, scientism is arrogant and dogmatic. For example, de-
fenders of scientism often claim that science has shown that all the following 
beliefs are false or unwarranted:
 •  God exists. 
 •  There is life after death. 
 •  The universe has a purpose. 
 •  Religious experience is sometimes a valid way of knowing. 
 •  Some things are objectively right or wrong. 
These claims may be true or false, warranted or unwarranted. Our point is 
simply that they are philosophical or religious claims, not scientiﬁ c ones. No 
amount of scientiﬁ c evidence will ever prove that the universe has no purpose. 
You will never hear a scientist exclaim, “Aha! The litmus paper turned blue. I 
 told you there are no objective moral values!” Science limits itself to what can 
be observed, measured, and tested. It doesn’t pretend to answer fundamental 
questions of meaning or value.  
 HOW TO DISTINGUISH SCIENCE FROM PSEUDOSCIENCE 
 Pseudoscience  is false science—that is, unscientiﬁ c thinking masquerading 
as scientiﬁ c thinking. It is thinking that appears to be scientiﬁ c but is, in 
fact, faithless to science’s basic values and methods. 15 Because pseudoscientiﬁ c 
thinking often looks and sounds like real science, it can be hard for nonscien-
tists to tell them apart. Luckily, there are certain marks of pseudoscience that 
any educated person can use to distinguish it from true science, 16 including 
the following:
 Six Marks of Pseudoscience 
 1.  It makes claims that are not testable. 
 2.  It makes claims that are inconsistent with well-established scientiﬁ c 
truths. 
 3.  It explains away or ignores falsifying data. 
 4.  It uses vague language. 
 They do not re-
quire to be refuted 
by others, but 
their enemy . . . 
inhabits the same 
home with them.  
 —Plato 
 Wisdom lies in 
understanding our 
limitations.  
 —Carl Sagan 

 
How to Distinguish Science from Pseudoscience 
471
 5.  It is not progressive. 
 6.  It often involves no serious effort to conduct research. 
 Scientists, of course, aren’t perfect. Consequently, even genuine science 
will sometimes display one or two of these marks (though rarely in a serious 
or systematic way). But if an allegedly “scientiﬁ c” discipline displays several of 
these marks (or even one in a particularly blatant way), that is a strong indica-
tion that it is pseudoscience rather than science. 
 Absence of Testability   Science seeks to answer questions about the natural 
world, not through myth, intuition, or guesswork, but through careful observa-
tion and experiment. Thus, by the very nature of the scientiﬁ c enterprise, all 
genuinely scientiﬁ c claims must be testable. 
 A scientiﬁ c claim is  testable when we can make observations that would 
show the claim to be true or false. In thinking about this criterion, we must 
avoid two common mistakes. 
 First, scientiﬁ c claims need not be  directly  testable. Obviously, we can 
never go back in time to obtain direct observational evidence that birds 
evolved from dinosaurs. However, there is a great deal of  indirect  evidence 
that supports this hypothesis, including DNA evidence, structural similarities 
(homologies) between birds and certain species of dinosaurs, and transitional 
fossil forms. The fact that scientists can argue for or against this hypothesis 
by appealing to such indirect evidence is enough to make the hypothesis a 
genuinely scientiﬁ c one. 
 Second, scientiﬁ c claims need not be  immediately testable. For example, 
when Einstein proposed in 1916 that clocks run faster in space than they do 
on Earth, it wasn’t possible to test this hypothesis experimentally with the 
technology available at the time. It wasn’t until many decades later that the 
invention of jet aircraft and high-precision atomic clocks allowed scientists to 
test Einstein’s hypothesis and prove that it was true. 17 
 Although scientiﬁ c claims need not be directly or immediately testable, 
they must at least be  testable in principle;  that is, there must be at least some ob-
servations we can realistically imagine making that would show the claim to 
be true or false. If we can’t conceive of any observations that would count for 
or against the claim, it is not a claim about empirically observable reality, and 
hence not a claim that can be studied scientiﬁ cally. 
 Here are some examples of claims that are  not scientiﬁ cally testable:
 There are invisible, completely undetectable gremlins that live deep in the 
interior of the earth. 
 An exact duplicate of you exists in a parallel universe that is completely inacces-
sible to us. 
 All reality is spiritual; matter is only an illusion. 
 The earth was once visited by superintelligent aliens who left no trace of their 
visit. 
 Every time a bell rings, an angel gets its wings. 
 A theory’s valid-
ity depends on 
whether or not it 
can be veriﬁ ed. 
 —John Paul II 

472 
CHAPTER 15 Science and Pseudoscience 
Each of these claims may, for all we know, be true. But they are not scientiﬁ c 
claims because there is no possible observation or experiment that would tell 
us whether they are true or false. 18 
 To be scientiﬁ c a claim must be testable in two senses: It must be veriﬁ -
able in principle and falsiﬁ able in principle. A claim is  veriﬁ able in principle  when 
we can imagine some possible observation that would provide good reason 
to believe that the claim is true. A claim is  falsiﬁ able in principle  when we can 
imagine some possible observation that would provide good reason to believe 
that the claim is false. 
 Pseudoscientists commonly make claims that violate the second of these 
two conditions. That is, they often make claims that are not falsiﬁ able even in 
principle. 
 A good example of this comes from the ﬁ eld of ESP research. ESP (ex-
trasensory perception) is the alleged ability to sense or perceive things without 
the aid of the ﬁ ve senses. Believers in ESP often point to experiments that 
seem to provide evidence for claims of the form
 X has genuine powers of ESP. 
Unfortunately, every time scientists have sought to repeat such experiments 
under tightly controlled conditions, no evidence of ESP abilities has been found. 
To explain this failure, believers in ESP often offer the following two excuses:
 • ESP works sometimes but not others. 
 • ESP doesn’t work when skeptics are present. 19 
 These excuses may sound plausible—until you notice the kind of “heads-I-win, 
tails-you-lose” logic behind them. For those who offer such excuses, there can 
be evidence  for ESP but not evidence  against it. By resorting to such rationaliza-
tions, believers in ESP render their claim unfalsiﬁ able and hence unscientiﬁ c. 
 Catch-22 cop-outs like this are commonplace in pseudoscience. For ex-
ample, when researchers in the 1970s failed to conﬁ rm poorly controlled ex-
periments suggesting that plants were sensitive and aware, die-hard believers 
in plant consciousness retorted that this was because the skeptical researchers 
weren’t emotionally “in tune” with the plants. 20 Similarly, when scientists in 
the 1960s failed to ﬁ nd evidence supporting James V. McConnell’s startling 
claim that cannibalistic ﬂ atworms acquired their fellow worms’ knowledge, 
McConnell’s colleague Allan Jacobson defended McConnell’s work by charg-
ing that the scientists lacked feelings for the worms. 21 
 EXERCISE 15.2 
 Determine whether the following items are scientiﬁ cally testable. If so, how? If 
not, why not? 
 1.  Joey swims well because he was a dolphin in a previous life. 
 2.  Everyone has a guardian angel. 
 The most exciting 
phrase to hear 
in science, the 
one that heralds 
new discoveries, 
is not “Eureka! 
I have found 
it” but “That’s 
funny. . . .” 
 —Isaac Asimov 
 Fallibility is the 
hallmark of 
science. 
 —Philip Kitcher 
 The human species 
has a perverse 
streak that runs 
deep in its nature. 
It is the capacity 
for being deceived, 
the tendency to 
allow wishes, 
desires, fantasies, 
hopes or fears to 
color the imagina-
tion or inﬂ uence 
judgment or 
beliefs.  
 —Paul Kurtz 

 
How to Distinguish Science from Pseudoscience 
473
 3.   Razor blades stay sharp when placed inside a pyramid. 
 4.   Disobeying the law is always morally wrong. 
 5.   The entire universe sprang into existence from nothing ﬁ ve minutes ago, exactly 
as it then was, apparent fossils in the ground, wrinkles on people’s faces, and 
other signs of age all instantly formed and thoroughly deceptive. 22  
 6.   The Loch Ness monster exists. 
 7.   Human beings are the most intelligent species in the universe. 
 8.   “The chief purpose of life, for anyone of us, is to increase according to our 
capacity our knowledge of God by all the means we have, and to be moved 
by it to praise and thanks.” (  J. R. R. Tolkien) 23 
 9.   Tarot card reader: You have unresolved issues in your love life. 
10.   There are exactly 19, 367, 401, 303 living trees in Canada. 
11.   All human actions and choices are fundamentally selﬁ sh.  
12.   Some diseases can be cured by prayer. 
13.   The universe and everything in it doubled in size last night while we were 
sleeping. 
 Inconsistency with Well-Established Scientiﬁ c Findings  Science is cu-
mulative and progressive. It constantly changes and grows. Sometimes these 
changes involve big “paradigm shifts”—whole new ways of looking at the 
world or a particular area of science, such as that which occurred in the seven-
teenth century when scientists abandoned the traditional Earth-centered view 
of the universe. Even in these big revolutions, however, science advances not 
by throwing out well-established scientiﬁ c truths but by extending those truths 
into new domains. Science progresses by building on existing knowledge, not 
by starting from scratch. 
 In contrast, in pseudoscience one often encounters claims that conﬂ ict 
with well-conﬁ rmed scientiﬁ c conclusions. Young-earth creationism is a case 
in point. 
 Young-earth creationists are religious conservatives who believe, as a lit-
eral reading of Genesis would have it, that the universe is only six thousand to 
ten thousand years old, that the theory of evolution is false, and that the fossil 
record and the major geological features of the earth can be explained by the 
Great Flood described in Genesis 6:5–8:22. 
 Young-earth creationism conﬂ icts with many well-established scientiﬁ c 
ﬁ ndings. In fact, as Isaac Asimov notes with only slight exaggeration, young-
earth creationism cannot be accepted “without discarding all of modern bi-
ology, biochemistry, geology, astronomy—in short, without discarding all of 
science.” 24 Consider just a few of the problems faced by those who insist on a 
literal reading of the Genesis account of Noah’s ark and the Great Flood:
 • How could a 600-year-old man have constructed a wooden boat 
larger than any supertanker? How many years would this have taken? 
How much wood would this have required? 
 In science every 
stone that has 
been laid remains 
as the foundation 
of another. 
 —William H. 
Prescott 

474 
CHAPTER 15 Science and Pseudoscience 
•   There are well over a million species of animals alive today. 
Millions of other animal species are now extinct. According to 
Genesis, Noah took into the ark seven pairs of all “clean” animals, 
seven pairs of all birds, and two pairs of all “unclean” animals 
(Gen. 7:2–5). How could all these living and now-extinct animals 
have ﬁ t on the ark? How could Noah, his wife, three sons, and 
their wives have gathered and stored enough food and water for 
all of these animals? (Did Noah, for example, travel to Australia to 
gather the fresh eucalyptus leaves that koalas need to survive? If 
so, how did he keep the leaves fresh on the journey home?) How 
could all of these creatures have gotten to the ark from the far-
ﬂ ung portions of the globe? How could saltwater marine species 
have survived in a freshwater environment? How could plants and 
trees have survived underwater for nearly a year? What did the ani-
mals eat when they got off the ark? How did they travel to their 
current habitats? Why did marsupials, but no placental mammals, 
manage to get to Australia?  
•   Young-earth creationists claim that ﬂ oodwaters covered the entire 
earth to a depth of 3 miles. Scientists have calculated that this would 
require 3.4 times more water than exists in all of the earth’s oceans. 25 
Where did all of this water come from? Where did it all go? 
•   Earth’s continents are covered with sedimentary deposits to an aver-
age depth of 1 mile. In some places, these deposits consist of millions 
of distinct, alternating layers of light and dark sediment. Geological 
observations indicate that such deposits take millions of years to 
form. How could these millions of alternating layers have been laid 
down in a single ﬂ ood that lasted less than a year? 26 
•   Earth’s fossil record shows a remarkably consistent pattern: more-
primitive plant and animal species in the lower geological strata, 
more-advanced species in the higher. Young-earth creationists seek 
to explain the fossil record by invoking three principles of “ﬂ ood 
geology”: (1) lower-dwelling creatures (e.g., marine invertebrates) 
would be deposited before higher-dwelling creatures (e.g., amphibi-
ans and reptiles); (2) less buoyant creatures would be deposited before 
more buoyant creatures; and (3) less mobile creatures (e.g., tortoises 
and snails) would be deposited before more mobile creatures (e.g., 
humans and horses) because the latter would be able to ﬂ ee to the 
hilltops before being overwhelmed by the ﬂ ood. 27 
    This explanation, however, conﬂ icts starkly with both the fos-
sil record and common sense. Marine invertebrates are found at 
all levels of the fossil record. Flowering plants and trees are never 
found with more-primitive plants and trees. Modern ﬁ sh are never 
found at the same levels as ancient extinct ﬁ sh. Whales and dol-
phins are always found at higher levels than extinct marine reptiles. 

 
How to Distinguish Science from Pseudoscience 
475
And many highly mobile creatures, such as carnivorous dinosaurs 
and ﬂ ying reptiles, are always found at lower levels than modern 
mammals and birds.  
In short, young-earth creationism conﬂ icts at many points with extremely 
well-conﬁ rmed scientiﬁ c ﬁ ndings. This demonstrates clearly that it is pseudo-
science rather than science. 
 Explaining Away or Ignoring Falsifying Evidence   Science is self-
correcting. It advances by continually seeking to  disprove  its own hypotheses 
and then learning from its own mistakes. For this reason, scientists don’t fear 
or ignore falsifying evidence; they welcome it as essential to scientiﬁ c progress. 
This attitude is reﬂ ected in the following story told by Oxford biologist 
Richard Dawkins:
 One of the formative experiences of my Oxford undergraduate years occurred 
when a visiting lecturer from America presented evidence that conclusively dis-
proved the pet theory of a deeply respected elder statesman of our zoology 
department, the theory that we had all been brought up on. At the end of the 
lecture, the old man rose, strode to the front of the hall, shook the American 
warmly by the hand and declared, in ringing emotional tones, “My dear fellow, 
I wish to thank you. I have been wrong these ﬁ fteen years.” We clapped our 
hands red. Is any other profession so generous towards its admitted mistakes? 28 
   In contrast, pseudoscientists often ignore or seek to explain away evi-
dence that conﬂ icts with their favored theories. A good example of this in-
volves the famed Israeli entertainer Uri Geller. 
 Geller, a nightclub magician, became something of a psychic celebrity in 
the 1970s. Audiences and even respected scientists were astounded at his appar-
ent ability to read minds, peer inside sealed envelopes, and bend keys and spoons 
with the power of his mind alone. In fact, Geller was a complete fraud who used 
parlor tricks and sleight-of-hand to perform his “psychic” feats. He was ﬁ nally 
exposed when hidden cameras caught him blatantly cheating. When proof of 
Geller’s guilt was shown to his fans, some sought to explain this by claiming that 
Geller resorted to cheating only when his psychic powers failed! 29  
 Or consider another form of psychic humbug that created a stir in the 
1970s: “psychic surgery.” Psychic surgeons are people who claim to be able 
to remove diseased tissue or dangerous tumors from a patient’s body without 
conventional surgery. Psychologist Terence Hines describes how the procedure 
supposedly works:
 As the psychic surgeon performs “surgery,” his hand is seen to disappear into 
the patient’s belly and a pool of blood appears. After groping around, apparently 
inside the body cavity, the psychic surgeon dramatically pulls his hand “out” 
of the body, clutching what is said to be the tumor or diseased tissue that was 
causing the patient’s problem. The offending tissue is promptly tossed in a handy 
nearby ﬁ re to be puriﬁ ed. When the patient’s belly is wiped clean of the blood, 
no incision is found. 30 
 The hallmark of 
science is not the 
question “Do I 
wish to believe 
this?” but the 
question “What is 
the evidence?”  
 —Douglas J. 
Futuyma 
 Those who lose an 
argument win if, 
in the discipline 
or tradition with 
which they iden-
tify, better argu-
ments prevail. 
 —Holmes 
Rolston III 
 Believers in the 
paranormal are 
like unsinkable 
rubber ducks. 
 —James Randi 

476 
CHAPTER 15 Science and Pseudoscience 
In fact, the procedure is performed through simple sleight-of-hand, with fake 
blood and animal tissue typically concealed in a false plastic thumb. When 
laboratory tests showed that the “tumors” were actually chicken livers or other 
animal remains, some hard-core believers in the procedure remained uncon-
vinced. How amazing, they said, that these miracle workers can not only per-
form operations without making an incision but can also transform deadly 
tumors into harmless animal tissue! 31 
   Rationalizations of this sort are completely opposed to the spirit of sci-
ence. Science learns from its mistakes or failures; it does not ignore them or 
sweep them under the rug. 
 Use of Vague Language   To be scientiﬁ c a claim must be testable, and 
to be testable it must be expressed in clear, speciﬁ c language. A predic-
tion like “A big change will occur in your life next year” is not a scientiﬁ c 
prediction because it is so vague that almost anything could be counted as 
conﬁ rming it. 
 Pseudoscientists often use language that is too vague to be testable. Con-
sider “psychic readers,” for example. Psychic readers claim to be able to know 
all sorts of things about people through mysterious “psychic” abilities. Although 
there is no credible scientiﬁ c evidence that such abilities are real, psychics 
employ a variety of ruses to convince people that they are. One of these ploys 
involves the skillful use of vague or general language. 
 To be successful a psychic reader must be able to convince complete 
strangers that he knows all about their problems and experiences. To accom-
plish this, psychics use a technique called “cold reading.” 
   Cold reading  is a sophisticated set of skills used by palm readers, psy-
chics, tarot card readers, and other professional “readers” for gathering surpris-
ingly accurate information about persons whom the reader has never met 
before. The method works largely through a combination of close observation; 
knowledge of human commonalities; ﬂ attering “feel-good” statements; the use 
of vague, general language; and the natural human tendency to remember hits 
and forget misses. Here let’s focus on psychic readers’ use of vague or general 
language. 
 A psychic reading usually begins with a “stock spiel”—a set of general 
statements that apply to practically everybody. Here is a stock spiel that has 
been shown to be particularly effective with college students:
 Some of your aspirations tend to be pretty unrealistic. At times you are extro-
verted, affable, sociable, while at other times you are introverted, wary and re-
served. You have found it unwise to be too frank in revealing yourself to others. 
You pride yourself on being an independent thinker and do not accept others’ 
opinions without satisfactory proof. You prefer a certain amount of change and 
variety, and become dissatisﬁ ed when hemmed in by restrictions and limitations. 
At times you have serious doubts as to whether you have made the right deci-
sion or done the right thing. Disciplined and controlled on the outside, you tend 
to be worrisome and insecure on the inside. . . . 
 A man should 
never be ashamed 
to own he has 
been in the 
wrong, which is 
but saying, in 
other words, that 
he is wiser today 
than he was 
yesterday. 
 —Jonathan Swift 
 Glendower:  I can 
call spirits from 
the vasty deep. 
Hotspur: Why, 
so can I, or so can 
any man; but will 
they come when 
you call them?  
 —Shakespeare 

 
How to Distinguish Science from Pseudoscience 
477
 
 While you have some personality weaknesses, you are generally able to 
compensate for them. You have a great deal of unused capacity which you have 
not turned to your advantage. You have a tendency to be critical of yourself. 
You have a strong need for other people to like you and for them to admire 
you. 32  
Studies have shown that when people are presented with general personality 
descriptions like this, they are often amazed at their accuracy. Psychologists call 
this the “Barnum effect,” after the nineteenth-century showman P. T. Barnum, 
who once famously declared, “There’s a sucker born every minute.” 
 In a manipulative technique called  ﬁ shing for details,  psychic readers 
use a combination of vague, exploratory language and close observation of 
verbal and visual clues to subtly elicit detailed information from a subject. Two 
types of vague expressions are especially crucial to this technique: multiple-out 
expressions and try-ons. 
 Multiple-out expressions  are statements or questions that are so 
vague that they can easily be interpreted, often after the fact, as ﬁ tting many 
different outcomes. 33 For example, a reader might say, “Someone close to 
you is having problems in his or her love life.” Her surprised client might 
respond, “That’s amazing! How did you know my friend Marta is getting 
a divorce?” Of course, the reader didn’t know anything about Marta or 
her divorce, but the expressions “close to you” and “having problems in 
his or her love life” are so broad and elastic that almost anyone can think 
of at least one person (and on reﬂ ection, probably several) who ﬁ ts these 
descriptions. 
 Try-ons  are subtle statements designed to prompt a reaction, but care-
fully phrased so that they are easily interpreted as hits but not so easily inter-
preted as misses. 34 For example, a reader might say, “I’m getting a feeling you 
may have some serious ﬁ nancial concerns you’re dealing with.” If the client 
does have “serious ﬁ nancial concerns” (note the vague language), this will 
naturally be counted as a hit. On the other hand, if the client does not have se-
rious ﬁ nancial concerns, this may not be counted as a miss. After all, the reader 
hasn’t positively stated that the client  does  have serious ﬁ nancial worries—only 
that he’s  getting a feeling that the client  may have such worries. 
 A skilled cold reader can learn an amazing amount of information about 
a client simply by making a few vague statements and then watching closely 
how the client reacts. Extremely subtle visual clues—downcast eyes, a slight 
nod of the head, an almost imperceptible ﬂ ushing of the cheeks—can tell 
an experienced cold reader whether she’s on the right track. Such abilities 
can seem uncanny, but in reality there is nothing mysterious or “paranormal” 
about them. In fact, now that you know the secrets of cold reading, you too 
can amaze your friends with your “psychic” abilities. 
   Lack of Progressiveness   Science is progressive. It continually advances and 
grows. Pseudoscience, in contrast, is often intellectually static. It gets stuck at a 
certain point and stops changing and progressing. 
 It is a typical 
soothsayer’s trick 
to predict things 
so vaguely that 
the predictions 
can hardly fail. 
 —Karl Popper 
 We humans are 
best deﬁ ned not 
as “the ratio-
nal” but as “the 
self-deceiving” 
animal. 
 —Richard Paul 

478 
CHAPTER 15 Science and Pseudoscience 
 A good example of this is the ﬂ at-earth hypothesis supported by the 
International Flat Earth Research Society. (Yes, there really is such a society.) 
Flat-Earthers believe that the earth is shaped like a pancake, with the North 
Pole at the center and an enormous wall of ice at the perimeter. It is this wall 
of ice, presumably, that prevents ships and planes from falling off the edge of 
the world or ﬂ ying off into space. 
 Many centuries ago belief in a ﬂ at earth was perfectly reasonable. After 
all, the earth  looks ﬂ at, even from a high mountaintop. Moreover, it doesn’t feel 
like we’re whirling around at 1,000 miles per hour, as scientists tell us we are. 
And if the earth is spinning at 1,000 miles per hour, why is it that when we 
shoot an arrow straight up in the air, it lands at our feet instead of many miles 
away? 
   These may have been more or less reasonable grounds for belief in a 
ﬂ at earth at one time. But, of course, not any longer. To paraphrase Richard 
Dawkins: It is absolutely safe to say that if you meet someone who claims not 
to believe that the earth is round, that person is ignorant, stupid, or insane (or 
joking, which we would hope is the case). 
 Failure to Conduct Research   Science is a body of well-conﬁ rmed facts. 
More important, science is a  method,  a set of proven techniques for advancing 
the frontiers of human understanding. As we have seen, science by its very 
nature is constantly asking questions, seeking solutions, collecting data, try-
ing out hypotheses, and searching for new insights and deeper understanding. 
Thus, systematic, disciplined inquiry—in short,  research —lies at the heart of the 
scientiﬁ c enterprise. 
   Pseudosciences, on the other hand, often fail to engage in any serious 
program of research. Consider the “water cure,” an alternative medical treat-
ment touted by Dr. Fereydoon Batmanghelidj, author of the 1992 book  Your 
Body’s Many Cries for Water. 35 
 The idea behind the water cure is simple. The root cause of most 
illnesses is lack of water in the body—chronic dehydration. To maintain 
proper hydration, people should drink eight to ten glasses of water a day, 
consume salt liberally, and avoid caffeine and alcohol. Among the many 
diseases Dr. Batmanghelidj claims can be prevented or cured by this simple 
natural remedy are asthma, arthritis, back pain, cancer, depression, erectile 
dysfunction, high blood pressure, migraines, muscular dystrophy, and multiple 
sclerosis. 
 What proof does Dr. Batmanghelidj have that drinking large amounts 
of water can actually prevent and cure all of these various diseases? The 
evidence he presents is almost purely anecdotal. Both Dr. Batmanghelidj’s 
book and his Web site are full of testimonials by people saying, “I tried it 
and it worked!” 
 We have seen, however, that anecdotal evidence of this sort is highly un-
reliable. Every useless quack remedy and snake-oil treatment since the dawn of 
civilization has been supported by anecdotal evidence. The only way to be sure 
 It is the glory 
of science to 
progress. 
 —C. S. Lewis 
 Science is more 
than a body of 
knowledge; it is a 
way of thinking. 
 —Carl Sagan 

 
How to Distinguish Science from Pseudoscience 
479
that a treatment is effective is to test it scientiﬁ cally under rigorous, controlled 
conditions. 
 Bob Butts, a prominent supporter of Dr. Batmanghelidj, has argued that 
it is pointless to test the water cure scientiﬁ cally. “The need for testing makes 
about as much sense as someone suggesting that we do research to see if day-
light exists,” Butts claims. It is just common sense, he argues, that “the body’s 
cure for drought is water.” 36 
 It may be common sense that chronic dehydration can be harmful to 
one’s health, but it is not common sense to suppose that dehydration is the root 
cause of most diseases. This is, in fact, quite implausible in the light of modern 
medical knowledge. The causes of most diseases are now well understood, and 
there is no reason to suspect that chronic dehydration is a signiﬁ cant causal 
factor in most of them. The water cure  may have the amazing health beneﬁ ts 
Dr. Batmanghelidj claims, but the only way to  know whether it does is to 
subject it to rigorous scientiﬁ c testing. 
 In summary, science can be contrasted with pseudoscience in the follow-
ing ways:
Science
Pseudoscience
Makes claims that can be rigor-
ously tested through observation 
or experiment.
Makes claims that are consistent 
with well-established scientiﬁ c 
ﬁ ndings.
Actively seeks out falsifying data 
and confronts it openly and 
honestly.
Uses language that is clear and 
speciﬁ c.
Constantly changes and progresses.
Engages in serious ongoing 
research.
Makes claims that cannot be 
tested, even in principle.
Makes claims that conﬂ ict with 
well-established scientiﬁ c 
ﬁ ndings.
Ignores or explains away falsifying 
data.
Uses language that is vague and 
imprecise.
Often fails to change or progress.
Usually makes no serious effort to 
conduct research.
 EXERCISE 15.3 
 Use what you have learned in this and previous chapters to evaluate the thinking 
in the following passages. Identify any marks of pseudoscientiﬁ c thinking you 
ﬁ nd. 
1.   I know that herbal medicines work for me. Last night I had a splitting 
headache after work. I drank a cup of herbal tea, and before I knew it the 
headache was gone. 

480 
CHAPTER 15 Science and Pseudoscience 
 2.   I’m convinced that Nostradamus, the sixteenth-century astrologer and phy-
sician, could foresee the future. Consider this prophecy, for example:
 At night they will think they have seen the sun, 
 When they see the half pig man: 
 Noise, screams, battles seen fought in the skies: 
 The brute beast will be heard to speak. 
 
  Clearly, this is a prophecy of the bombing of Baghdad at the outset of the 
Gulf War. The sun is the light of exploding bombs, the half pig man is a 
Stealth bomber pilot wearing goggles and an oxygen mask, and the beast 
that speaks refers to the use of the radio. 37 
 3.   This paper has been sent to you for Good Luck! The original copy is in 
New England. It has been around the world nine times. The Luck has been 
sent to you. You will receive Good Luck in four days. This is no joke. 
 
   
 You will receive it in the mail. Send copies to the people you think 
need Good Luck. Do not send cash, as fate has no price. Do not keep this 
letter. It must leave your hands within 96 hours. . . . Since the copy must 
make the tour of the world, you must make twenty copies and send them 
to your friends and associates. After a few days you will get a surprise. This is 
true even if you are not superstitious. 
 
   
 Note the following: Constantine Dess received the chain in 1953. He 
asked his secretary to make twenty copies and send them out. A few days 
later he won the lottery for two million dollars. Andy Duddit, an ofﬁ ce em-
ployee, received the letter and he forgot it had to leave his hands in 96 hours. 
He lost his job. Later, after ﬁ nding the letter again, he mailed out twenty 
copies. A few days later he got a better job. Mr. Fairchild received the letter 
and not believing it, threw it away. Nine days later he died. 
 
   
 Please send no money. Please do not ignore it! It works. . . . Good Luck 
is coming your way! (chain letter) 
 4.   I see where the guy that took the famous 1934 photograph of the Loch 
Ness monster has confessed that the picture was a fake. But I don’t believe 
him. How do we know the guy isn’t saying that just to get his name in the 
newspapers again? 
 5.   Sure, psychics disagree all the time, but so do scientists. One month they tell 
us coffee is bad for us, the next month they tell us it’s not. So, science isn’t 
any more reliable than what you call “pseudoscience.” 
 6.   I believe in ESP. A few years ago, I woke up in the middle of the night in a 
cold sweat. I had this terrible feeling my sister was in trouble. I phoned her 
immediately, and her husband told me she had been in a serious car accident 
and was in the hospital. Surely that couldn’t have been a mere coincidence. 
 7.   Graphologist (handwriting expert): I can tell from your ﬁ rm, ﬂ owing script 
that you like feeling happy, but don’t like feeling lonely, depressed, or anx-
ious. In fact, the more miserable you are, the more you dislike it. 38 
 8.   Stefan:  Nothing bad ever happens to a person unless he or she deserves it. 
 
   Lucy: Oh yeah? What about babies who die from AIDS? What have they 
done to deserve that? 

 
How to Distinguish Science from Pseudoscience 
481
 
  Stefan: Obviously, they did something bad in a previous life. 
 9.   Seventeenth-century cardinal  (explaining why he refuses to look into Galileo’s 
telescope): I have no reason to look in your telescope; I know what I shall 
see. Aristotle has said there are no moons around planets other than our 
own, and I trust the authority of Aristotle more than I trust that newfangled 
instrument of yours. 
10.    If astrology were valid, twins would presumably have similar fates, since the 
stars and planets were all in the same positions at the time of their births. Yet 
plainly there are cases in which one twin dies in childhood and the other 
lives to a ripe old age. Astrologer Robert Parry offers the following response 
to this obvious objection: “Twins may not always share the same character-
istics, of course, but their lives do generally develop at a similar pace. The 
differences when they occur are subtle ones, which is exactly what astrology 
would expect. Even in your example, where one twin dies while the other 
lives, clearly the same event, namely death, has entered both lives at the same 
time. One twin dies, while the other is touched radically by the sorrow and 
tragedy of the death of the other. Surely this is an argument for, rather than 
against astrology.” 39 
11.   Earl: Aliens abduct millions of people every year. They take them up to 
their spaceships and conduct all kinds of weird genetic and reproductive 
experiments on them. 
 
   Zoe: Why don’t these alien spacecraft ever show up on our radar? 
 
    Earl: They have cloaking devices. Their technology is vastly superior to ours. 
 
    Zoe: How come these aliens never set off burglar alarms or appear on home 
surveillance cameras? Why don’t husbands or wives ever wake up and notice 
their spouses are missing? 
 
    Earl: I told you, they’re much too advanced ever to be detected by us. They 
probably just beam people up to their spaceships and put android look-alikes 
in their places. 
12.    God always answers prayers. But sometimes He gives us what is good for us, 
not what we ask for. 
13.    Of course dowsing works. I’ve seen my grandfather do it several times. 
Every time his well on his farm runs dry, he takes a forked stick and walks 
out into his pasture. When the stick dips toward to the ground, he knows 
just where to dig. Works every time. 
14.    Many so-called scientiﬁ c studies have cast doubt on magnet therapy—a 
form of alternative treatment that claims that magnets can relieve pain and 
a host of other bodily ills. But why should we trust these studies? Doctors, 
scientists, and pharmaceutical companies stand to lose billions if this simple, 
natural remedy were shown to be effective. 
15.   Whenever harmonious music is being played in the presence of your crys-
tal or amethyst, the mood and thoughts of the composer become deeply 
embedded within the very heart of the crystal and if you “listen” to the 
crystal afterward with your inner ear, you will often be able to pick up the 
esoteric meaning of the music itself. (from a healing-crystals Web site)  
 Never ignore, 
never refuse to 
see what may be 
thought against 
your own thought. 
 —Friedrich 
Nietzsche 

482 
CHAPTER 15 Science and Pseudoscience 
 A CASE STUDY IN PSEUDOSCIENTIFIC 
THINKING: ASTROLOGY 
 Can the stars and the planets affect people’s personality and destiny? For thou-
sands of years, believers in the ancient divinatory art of astrology have claimed 
that they can. Even in our own advanced scientiﬁ c age, belief in astrology re-
mains surprisingly strong. Polls show that about 25 percent of adult Americans 
believe that astrology works. 40 More than twelve hundred U.S. newspapers 
have a daily column on astrology. There are ten times more astrologers in the 
United States than there are astronomers. 41 And more money is spent each 
year in the United States on astrology than is spent on all astronomical research 
combined (excluding NASA). 
 Belief in astrology is very ancient. It began more than four thousand years 
ago in Mesopotamia (modern-day Iraq and Syria) and then spread throughout 
the ancient world. The form in which astrology exists today in the Western 
world is based largely on the work of Ptolemy, a Greek astronomer and as-
trologer who lived in Alexandria in the second century A.D. 
 Astrologers claim that human personality, behavior, and destiny are all 
strongly inﬂ uenced by the position of the sun, moon, planets, and stars at the 
time of one’s birth. Here, in a nutshell, is how astrology supposedly works. 
 Each year the sun appears to travel a certain path around the earth. This 
path is called the  ecliptic. Astrologers take a 16-degree-wide belt of sky cen-
tering on the ecliptic and divide it into twelve equal 30-degree parts. These 
are the familiar  signs of the zodiac:  Aquarius, Pisces, Libra, Capricorn, and so 
forth. These signs are so named because they correspond roughly with the star-
groupings, or constellations, that bear the same names. A person’s “sun sign” is 
the sign of the zodiac the sun appeared to be in on the day of his or her birth. 
Thus, for example, anyone born between December 23 and January 19 is a 
Capricorn because the sun appears to be in the same part of the sky as the 
constellation Capricorn during that period. 42 
 Sun signs are the basis for “pop astrology,” the kind of astrology you ﬁ nd 
in newspaper horoscopes and popular astrology Web sites. Professional astrolo-
gers tend to be highly skeptical of these one-size-ﬁ ts-all daily horoscopes. For 
really serious astrology, they insist, you need to take into account not only a 
person’s sun sign but also the precise time and place of his or her birth, the 
positions of the planets, and a host of other factors. 
 Despite its antiquity and widespread acceptance, astrology has absolutely 
no scientiﬁ c basis. Let’s look at six reasons why this is so: 43 
 1.  Astrologers fail to identify a plausible physical force or mechanism 
that could explain astrology’s alleged inﬂ uences.  
 2.  Astrologers fail to provide a convincing response to the problem of 
precession. 
 3.  Astrologers fail to deal adequately with the discovery of three planets 
and other recent astronomical discoveries. 
 You can make a 
better living in the 
world as a sooth-
sayer than as a 
truthsayer. 
 —G. C. 
Lichtenberg 

 
A Case Study in Pseudoscientiﬁ c Thinking: Astrology  
483
 4.  Astrologers often use vague, untestable language. 
 5.  Astrologers fail to offer a convincing response to the problems of 
time twins and mass disasters. 
 6.  Scientiﬁ c tests do not support astrology’s claims.   
 Astrologers Fail to Identify a Plausible Physical Force or Mechanism  
 Astrologers claim that extremely remote celestial objects have powerful effects 
on human personality, destiny, and behavior. But how, exactly? What forces or 
mechanisms could possibly explain such remarkable effects? 
 For the ancients the answer was simple: magic. The stars and planets were 
believed to be divine and were often associated with particular mythological 
beings. The planet Venus, for example, was named after the Roman goddess of 
love and beauty. Accordingly, it was believed that anyone born under the inﬂ u-
ence of the planet Venus must be romantic, sensitive, emotional, and artistic. 
Similarly, anyone born under the inﬂ uence of the planet Mars was thought to 
be aggressive and courageous, since Mars was the Roman god of war. 
 We, of course, no longer believe in these mythical associations. So what 
mechanisms or forces could possibly explain astrology’s alleged inﬂ uences? 
 Astrologers have proposed ﬁ ve possible explanations:
 •  gravity 
 •  tidal forces 
 •  electromagnetic forces 
 •  magnetic ﬁ elds  
 •  emitted particles 
Unfortunately, none of these mechanisms is an even remotely plausible can-
didate. Gravity, tidal forces, and electromagnetic forces are all far too weak 
to have any signiﬁ cant effect on human behavior over the vast distances of 
space. In fact, many ordinary objects around you exert far stronger forces on 
you than remote planets and stars. For example, the book you are now hold-
ing exerts about  one billion times as much tidal force on you as does the planet 
Mars. 44 Magnetic ﬁ elds and emitted particles are even less plausible mecha-
nisms because not all astrologically signiﬁ cant celestial objects have magnetic 
ﬁ elds (   Venus and the moon do not, for example), and none of the planets in 
our solar system emits any particles. 45 
 Of course, it is possible that there is some mysterious, not-yet-discovered 
force that could explain astrology’s alleged inﬂ uences on human life. But as 
astronomer George Abell points out, this force would have to be one with very 
strange properties:
 It would have to emanate from some but not all celestial bodies, have to affect 
some but not all things on earth, and its strength could not depend on the dis-
tances, masses, or other characteristics of those [celestial bodies] giving rise to it. 
In other words it would lack the universality, order, and harmony found for every 
other force and natural law ever discovered that applies in the real universe. 46  

484 
CHAPTER 15 Science and Pseudoscience 
Although the existence of such a force cannot be completely ruled out, it 
seems very unlikely given what we know about the fundamental laws and 
forces of nature. 
 The Problem of Precession   Scientists have long known that, owing to 
the gravitational pull of the sun and the moon, the earth slowly “wobbles” in 
its orbit, much like a spinning top or gyroscope. As a consequence the apparent 
positions of the stars relative to the sun slowly change over time. This is a phe-
nomenon astronomers call  precession.  This shift in the apparent positions of the 
stars is extremely slow—only about 1 degree every seventy-one years—but in 
the two thousand years since the signs of the zodiac became ﬁ xed, the change 
has been signiﬁ cant. The position of the sun relative to the constellations has 
now shifted almost a whole astrological sign to the east. So, for example, if 
your horoscope says you are an Aries, it is very likely that the sun was actually 
in the constellation of Pisces on the day of your birth. Professional astrologers 
are well aware of this fact but are divided over the best way to deal with it. 
Most astrologers simply shrug off the problem, claiming that “constellations are 
simply not that important.” 47 This response, however, is inconsistent with the 
vital role constellations have always played in astrological theory, and it leaves it 
utterly mysterious how an arbitrary division of signs can fundamentally affect 
human character and destiny. Other astrologers claim that the constellations 
“remember” the inﬂ uences they had two thousand years ago! They fail to ex-
plain, however, why the constellations don’t remember the inﬂ uences they had 
in even earlier epochs. 48 
 Astrology Is Not Progressive   We have seen that pseudoscience, unlike 
real science, is often static; it fails to change in the light of advancing knowl-
edge. Let’s consider two examples of astrology’s stagnant character: (1) its in-
ability to deal convincingly with the discovery of three more planets and other 
recently discovered celestial objects and (2) its failure to take into account the 
arbitrary nature of constellations. 
 For thousands of years, astrologers consistently taught that there are only 
seven celestial bodies in the solar system other than Earth: the sun, the moon, 
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Saturn, and Jupiter. In recent centuries, however, as-
tronomers have discovered the planet Uranus in 1781, Neptune in 1846, and 
the “dwarf planet” Pluto in 1930, as well as a multitude of moons and many 
large asteroids and comets. These discoveries pose two major problems for 
astrology. 
 First, if astrology were true, why weren’t astrologers able to deduce the 
existence of Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto long before scientists discovered 
them? If, as astrologers now claim, these planets have effects on human life, 
then astrologers’ predictions must have been systematically in error for the past 
two thousand years. 49 Why during these centuries wasn’t there even a single 
astrologer who noticed these errors and predicted the eventual discovery of 
unknown planets to account for them? 50 
 Funeral by fu-
neral, scientiﬁ c 
theory advances. 
 —Paul Samuelson 

 
A Case Study in Pseudoscientiﬁ c Thinking: Astrology  
485
 Second, why is it that only stars, planets, the sun, and our own moon 
have any astrological inﬂ uences? Since the time of Galileo (1564–1642), 
scientists have discovered more than ﬁ fty additional moons in our solar 
system. Two of these moons (Ganymede and Titan) are larger than the 
planets Pluto and Mercury. In addition, many thousands of asteroids have 
been discovered. Some of these asteroids are larger than all but a few of 
the moons in our solar system. (One asteroid has even been found to have 
its own satellite.) Why does remote Pluto, for example, have astrological 
inﬂ uences when closer and, in a few instances, more massive moons and 
asteroids do not? 51  
 Another problem for astrology is its failure to deal convincingly with our 
modern scientiﬁ c understanding of constellations. Ancient astrologers believed 
that the constellations really were ﬁ xed, neutrally observable “pictures in the 
sky.” We now know that this is totally false. Other cultures see quite different 
pictures from those we see; the appearance of the constellations changes over 
time (one million years ago the Big Dipper looked like a spear to our ancestors 
on the African savanna); and stars that appear to us to be close together in space 
may in fact be millions of light-years apart from one another. 
 Why is this a problem for astrology? Because the personality character-
istics astrologers associate with particular sun signs presuppose that the con-
stellations are real rather than merely perceiver-relative human constructions. 
Consider the following list, which shows the constellations of the zodiac, their 
namesakes, and selected sun-sign personality characteristics:
Constellation 
and Symbol
Namesake
Selected Characteristics
Aries
Taurus
Gemini
Cancer
Leo
Virgo
Libra
Scorpius
Sagittarius
Capricorn
Aquarius
Pisces
ram
bull
twins
crab
lion
virgin
scales
scorpion
archer
goat
water carrier
ﬁ sh
headstrong, impulsive, quick-tempered
plodding, patient, stubborn
vacillating, split personality
clinging, protective exterior shell
proud, forceful, born leader
reticent, modest
just, harmonious, balanced
secretive, troublesome, aggressive
active, aims for target
tenacious
humanitarian, serving mankind
attracted to sea and alcohol52
Notice the kind of thinking implicit in these associations: “The constellation 
Taurus sort of looks like a bull. Bulls are stubborn and plodding. Therefore, 
Tauruses must be stubborn and plodding.” This makes clear at a glance the 
kind of magical thinking that has always been the true basis of astrology.  
 You can only pre-
dict things after 
they’ve happened. 
 —Eugene Ionesco 
 Science is what 
we have learned 
about how not to 
fool ourselves. 
 —Richard 
Feynman 

486 
CHAPTER 15 Science and Pseudoscience 
 Astrology Uses Vague, Untestable Language   One of the clearest signs 
that astrology is a pseudoscience is its frequent use of vague, untestable lan-
guage. Here, for example, is a recent daily horoscope for Taurus people offered 
on the Excite.com astrology Web site:
 Taurus  (April 20–May 20): Your plans with friends could go awry. If you’re stub-
born enough to keep going, you may still achieve your goals. The longer you 
hang on, the more likely you are to achieve your goals. 
This passage contains two deceptive uses of language. First, it uses the weasel 
words  could and  may .  Weasel words,  as you will recall, are words used to water 
down a claim so that it ends up saying much less than it may appear to say. 
In saying only that “your plans with friends  could  go awry” and that “you  may 
achieve your goals,” the writer is making claims that are so vague and highly 
qualiﬁ ed that almost nothing could be counted as disproving them. Second, 
the passage uses general Barnum-type language that can readily be interpreted 
as applying to almost anyone. (Isn’t it virtually true by deﬁ nition that the lon-
ger you keep going the more likely you are to achieve your goals?) By using 
vague and deceptive language like this, a skillful horoscope writer can fool 
millions into believing that he or she can really foresee the future. 
 Of course, astrologers do sometimes make statements that are speciﬁ c 
enough to be checked. For example, according to the astrology.com Web site, 
the principal writer of this chapter, as an Aquarian, should have the following 
preferences in music:
 Music:  The Water Bearer’s favorite goal is to change the world. You’ve already 
worn out several copies of the  Hair soundtrack, as you like to listen to music 
based on an era where everyone was trying to make the world a better and more 
uniﬁ ed place. From the Grateful Dead to the Allman Brothers, you are now 
likely to be an avid fan of Phish—or any party band for that matter. Aquarians 
are social and appreciate a good sing-along classic. 53 
As a matter of fact, my tastes run more to classical and folk music—though 
I confess I do sometimes ﬁ nd myself humming some of the racier lyrics 
from  Hair.  
 EXERCISE 15.4 
 I.  Visit the astrology Web site at  astrology.com  (or a similar Web site) and check 
out the supposed preferences for food, music, sports, and television for people 
with your sun sign. Then check out the alleged preferences for your parents. Do 
you ﬁ nd any difference in the accuracy of the proﬁ les? If so, what might explain 
the difference?  
 II.  Can people accurately pick out their own daily horoscopes? Here is a simple 
way to ﬁ nd out. The day before your next class meeting, a student volunteer will 
copy down the twelve daily horoscopes from a major daily newspaper or an as-
trology Web site. The horoscopes should be typed or pasted randomly on a single 
 The astrologers 
have an easy 
game when they 
warn us, as they 
do, of great and 
imminent changes 
and revolutions; 
their prophecies 
are present and 
palpable; no need 
to go to the stars 
for that. 
 —Michel de 
Montaigne 
 Astrology rests on 
a proven principle, 
namely that if you 
know the exact 
positions where 
the moon and the 
various planets 
were when a 
person was born, 
you can get this 
person to give you 
money. 
 —Dave Barry 

 
A Case Study in Pseudoscientiﬁ c Thinking: Astrology  
487
page, numbered 1–12, with all references to speciﬁ c zodiac signs removed. Here’s 
an example of how the page might look:
 Please write your zodiac sign here:  
  
 Circle the number that best describes the type of day you had yesterday. 
 (1)  Love is a whirlwind. This is a day when you’ll explain, announce, and 
persuade. On the job, realize that you have more to offer. 
 (2)  A lucky meeting produces revenue. There are monetary limits on fun, but 
this should only be an incentive to the creative imagination. 
 (3)  A dashing, desirous urgency manifests itself in marvelous romantic ges-
tures. Ignore one who tries to compete with you. . . . 54 
[And so on, for all twelve horoscopes.] 
 Make enough copies for each student in the class, then administer the 
test and tabulate the results. 
 
 The Problems of Time Twins and Mass Disasters   Most astrologers 
claim that a person’s destiny is strongly inﬂ uenced by the position of the stars 
and the planets at the moment of that person’s birth. Since ancient times crit-
ics have noted two obvious objections to such a claim. First, if astrology were 
true, shouldn’t  time twins  (i.e., biologically unrelated persons born at exactly 
the same time and place) have very similar destinies? 55 Second, how can as-
trologers explain  mass disasters —tragic events such as earthquakes or hurricanes 
in which hundreds or thousands of people may die at the same time? Are we 
to believe, for example, that everyone who drowned aboard the  Titanic had the 
same foreboding horoscope? 
 Astrologers commonly respond to the time-twins objection by claim-
ing that there are many well-documented cases in which time twins have 
been found to have led remarkably similar lives. 56 One often-cited example 
involves actor Rudolph Valentino. When Valentino died, the movie industry 
launched a nationwide search for a double. One of the most convincing can-
didates turned out to have been born in the same area and on the same day 
as Valentino. 57  
 Isolated examples like this, however, don’t prove anything. One would 
expect to ﬁ nd a certain number of “amazing parallels” like this purely by 
chance. The relevant question is whether time twins exhibit similarities in 
personality, destiny, career choice, and so forth  that cannot be explained by mere 
chance. Studies of time twins have found no evidence that this is the case. 58 
 Astrologers often attempt to explain mass disasters by claiming that 
whole  nations have horoscopes just as individuals do and that sometimes the 
horoscopes of nations override those of individuals. 59 This response is uncon-
vincing for several reasons. First, many mass disasters (e.g., some hurricanes, 
earthquakes, and plane crashes) involve people from many different nations. 
Second, there are many relevant differences between nations and individuals. 

488 
CHAPTER 15 Science and Pseudoscience 
For example, nations, unlike individuals, often have ﬂ uid borders and no clear 
“date of birth.” Third, there is no agreement among astrologers about how 
to determine when a nation’s horoscope will override those of individuals. 
Fourth, numerous studies have found no evidence that astrologers can accu-
rately predict major national events. 60 
 Scientiﬁ c Tests Do Not Support Astrology’s Claims   In science the 
bottom-line question is always:  Does it work?  Dozens of scientiﬁ c studies of 
astrology have been conducted over the past few decades. The clear verdict of 
these studies is that astrology does  not  work. Let’s look at a few representative 
studies. 
 Many astrologers claim there is a correlation between sun sign and physi-
cal appearance. According to astrologer Sandra Shulman, for example, those 
born under the sign of Aries tend to be roundheaded and snub-nosed, with 
reddish or light brown hair. 61 To test such claims, researchers R. B. Culver and 
P. A. Ianna surveyed hundreds of college students. They studied more than 
thirty physical characteristics, including height, weight, hair color, skin com-
plexion, and head size. Not a single physical feature they examined had any 
correlation with sun sign. 62 
 Most astrologers also claim that some sun signs make for compatible per-
sonal relationships and others do not. If that were true, reasoned psychologist 
Bernard I. Silverman, then pairs with compatible sun signs should show higher 
rates of marriage and lower rates of divorce than pairs with incompatible sun 
signs. When Silverman looked at the birth dates of 2,978 Michigan couples 
who were getting married and 478 couples who were getting divorced, 
however, he found no correlation between sun sign and rates of marriage or 
divorce. 63 
 Another claim commonly made by astrologers is that a person’s sun sign 
strongly inﬂ uences his or her choice of a career. Many astrologers claim, for 
example, that Leos tend to become politicians. To test such claims, scientist 
John D. McGervey looked at the birth dates of 16,634 scientists and 6,475 
politicians. He found no correlation between sun sign and either of these 
two career choices. 64 Studies of some sixty other careers and occupations 
have likewise found no correlation between astrological sign and choice of 
profession. 65  
 In addition, most astrologers also claim that personality is strongly inﬂ u-
enced by sun signs. Psychologist W. Grant Dahlstrom and his associates tested 
this claim by administering the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 
(MMPI) to 2,600 adults. They found no signiﬁ cant correlations between sun 
sign and any of the many personality traits measured by the MMPI. 66 
 It might be objected that statistical studies of this kind are not fair tests of 
astrology because sun signs alone are not enough for an accurate astrological 
reading. Virtually all astrologers admit, however, that sun signs have at least 
some inﬂ uence on personality, career choice, and so on. If that were true, then 
some systematic statistical correlations should be discoverable. 
 Men are more 
easily ruled by 
imagination than 
by science. 
 —Will Durant 

 
A Case Study in Pseudoscientiﬁ c Thinking: Astrology  
489
 In fact, several scientiﬁ c studies have been done that involved complete as-
trological birth charts, not just subjects’ sun signs. One of the best known of these 
studies was conducted by San Diego State University physicist Shawn Carlson. 
 Carlson gave thirty of the world’s most prominent astrologers the com-
plete natal horoscopes of 116 subjects. He then asked the astrologers to match 
these horoscopes against three California Personality Inventory (CPI) psycho-
logical proﬁ les. One proﬁ le was the subject’s actual psychological proﬁ le; the 
other two were chosen at random. The result: The astrologers did no better 
than chance. 67 
 A few scientiﬁ c studies have found evidence that  weakly  supports certain 
claims of astrology. For example, Michael Gauquelin, a respected French re-
searcher, published a study in 1955 that indicated a statistically signiﬁ cant 
correlation between certain positions of the planet Mars and the births of 
sports champions. More recent studies, however, have generally failed to rep-
licate Gauquelin’s ﬁ ndings, and serious questions have been raised about the 
reliability of his data. 68 
 In short, scientiﬁ c tests do  not  support astrology’s claims. For these and 
other reasons we have noted, astrology must be regarded as a pseudoscience. 
 EXERCISE 15.5 
 I.  Discuss the following questions in small groups. Be prepared to share the 
highlights of your discussions with the class as a whole. 
 1.  Do you agree that astrology is a pseudoscience? Why or why not? 
 2.  If astrology has no scientiﬁ c basis, why do so many people believe in it? What 
accounts for its persistent appeal? 
 II.  In small groups, design a scientiﬁ c study to test the hypothesis that time 
twins tend to have similar personalities and destinies. 
 III.  In small groups, research and present to the class one of the following topics. 
Is the phenomenon an example of pseudoscience? Why or why not?
alien abductions 
creation science 
palmistry
ancient astronauts 
dowsing 
precognition
Atlantis 
healing crystals 
pyramid power
Bermuda Triangle 
homeopathy 
reﬂ exology
Bible code 
Loch Ness monster 
reincarnation
Bigfoot 
magnet therapy 
Roswell crash
channeling 
moon madness 
therapeutic touch
clairvoyance 
Nostradamus 
UFOs  
 IV.  Write a short argumentative paper (the precise length will be determined by 
your instructor) on one of the topics listed in Exercise III. Consult Chapters 12 
and 13 for guidelines on writing argumentative papers. 
 
 My business is to 
teach my aspira-
tions to conform 
themselves to 
fact, not to try to 
make facts har-
monize with my 
aspirations. 
 —Thomas Henry 
Huxley 

490 
CHAPTER 15 Science and Pseudoscience 
 SUMMARY 
 1.   Science is a method of inquiry that seeks to describe, explain, and predict 
occurrences in the physical or natural world by means of careful observa-
tion and experiment. Science is the most powerful intellectual tool ever 
discovered, and it profoundly inﬂ uences almost every aspect of our daily 
lives. Yet surveys show that a large percentage of Americans know distress-
ingly little about science or its methods and values. 
 2.  Although there is no single “scientiﬁ c method” that all scientists use, most 
scientiﬁ c reasoning does follow a basic pattern. That pattern consists of 
four steps:
 •  Identify the problem. 
 •  Gather relevant data. 
 •  Formulate hypotheses to explain the data. 
 •  Test the hypotheses by observation or experiment. 
 3.  Science is the most reliable method we have for discovering empirically 
veriﬁ able truths about the physical or natural world. But there are many 
important questions that science cannot answer. Among these are questions 
of meaning and questions of value.  
 4.   Pseudoscience is false science—that is, unscientiﬁ c thinking masquerading as 
scientiﬁ c thinking. We looked at six common marks of pseudoscience:
 •  It makes claims that are not testable. 
 •   It makes claims that are inconsistent with well-established scientiﬁ c truths.  
 •  It explains away or ignores falsifying data. 
 •  It uses vague language. 
 •  It is not progressive. 
 •  It often involves no serious effort to conduct research. 
 5.  We looked in detail at an example of pseudoscientiﬁ c thinking: astrology. 
We argued that astrology is a pseudoscience for the following reasons:
 •   Astrologers fail to identify a plausible physical force or mechanism that 
could explain astrology’s alleged inﬂ uences.  
 •  Astrologers fail to provide a convincing response to the problem of precession.  
 •   Astrologers fail to deal adequately with the discovery of three planets 
and other recent astronomical discoveries. 
 •  Astrologers often use vague, untestable language. 
 •   Astrologers fail to offer a convincing response to the problems of time 
twins and mass disasters. 
 •  Scientiﬁ c tests do not support astrology’s claims.  

 
A-1
associate with whomever they please, and get news and 
information from a free and independent press. It gives 
citizens a right to have grievances redressed. To limit 
those rights especially for so trivial a reason is to say 
they are no longer sacrosanct. 
 They should be. They are what makes America 
unique. 
 If Congress banned something as pathetic as flag 
desecration to score political points, surely it would 
consider limiting other unpopular speech. 
 The amendment’s wording virtually guarantees that 
outcome. Would it, for instance, cover depictions of 
flags as well as actual cloth banners? Would sitting on a 
flag patch sewn onto the back of a pair of jeans count? 
 And what about the issue of flying a flag upside 
down? This has already become the preferred form 
of protest for people pushing for everything from an 
immediate withdrawal from Iraq to better psychiatric 
care for veterans. These protestors often say that they 
respect the values the flag represents, but that they 
believe those values are being subverted by people in 
power. Does this country really want to criminalize 
such a nuanced form of political dissent? 
 These issues would be left to legislation drafted by 
future Congresses and interpreted by courts. All of 
that, in turn, would weaken individual rights that are 
at the Constitution’s heart. 
 And for what gain? Proponents of an amendment 
say the flag is such an important symbol of American 
democracy that it deserves a special status. But the 
Connecticut flag burner was charged with seven of-
fenses ranging from public consumption of alcohol to 
criminal mischief. Surely, that is sufficient. 
 In fact, what makes the flag so special is this: It 
stands for a nation that deems individual liberties so 
important, it tolerates unpopular minority opinion. 
 The main threat to the flag comes not from the oc-
casional burning of Old Glory. It comes from those 
who would sacrifice the principles the flag represents.  
 APPENDIX 
 ESSAYS FOR CRITICAL ANALYSIS 
 ESSAY 1 
 CONGRESS NEARS CHOICE: PROTECT 
FREEDOM OR STOKE ANGER?  
 USA TODAY  
JUNE 20, 2006 
 In early June an allegedly drunken man in West 
Haven, Conn., yelled racial epithets and tore up an 
American flag while arguing with police and pass-
ersby. Earlier in the spring, instances of vandalism 
involving flags were reported in New Hampshire and 
New York. 
 Those three episodes of 2006—as compiled by the 
Citizens Flag Alliance, a group pushing for a constitu-
tional amendment to protect the flag—constitute the 
raging menace of flag desecration. 
 In fact, they show what a non-issue flag desecra-
tion is. 
 Instances are rare and easily addressed by local laws. 
They hardly require the extraordinary act of amending 
the Constitution. 
 But in a Congress unwilling to address important 
matters—its own ruinous spending and flagrant cor-
ruption to name just two—symbolism is the politi-
cally convenient substitute for substance. The Senate 
will soon take up an amendment to stop flag burning, 
and the vote is expected to be razor close. The House 
of Representatives has passed it, meaning that it could 
soon be sent to state legislatures, where it would be 
ratified if three-quarters approve. 
 While it’s tempting to dismiss this as trivial election-
year posturing, the precedent is troubling. It would for 
the first time alter the cornerstone of American free-
dom, the Constitution’s First Amendment. 
 That is not a small matter. The First Amendment is 
the reason Americans are free to say what they think. It 
is also the reason people here can worship as they wish, 

A-2 
Appendix: Essays for Critical Analysis
International Olympic Committee hasn’t steered their 
athletes free of controversy. 
 Why not take some more of that money and pass it 
on to some lobbyists on Capital Hill? Argue to those 
grandstanding Congressmen that the juicing of players 
can’t be policed, not when the code of the clubhouse is 
even more impenetrable than that of the Mafia. 
 Heck, argue that performance enhancers have be-
come necessary. Seasons start in mid-February and can 
run as long as early November. Fewer double-headers 
mean fewer days off. A team can play one game at night 
on the East Coast, then play early the next evening on 
the West Coast. 
 In other words, the body is subject to punish-
ment that didn’t exist 30 years ago. And this doesn’t 
even take into account the grueling nature of foot-
ball, hoops and all the other big-time sports, none 
of which should be discounted because doping is a 
professional sports problem, not just a baseball one. 
 So it’s time, at the very least, for some discussion 
about an idea that’s as radical as the repealing of pro-
hibition. And while the juice should not be as easily 
attainable as alcohol—make it available only by a pre-
scription from an MLB doctor at the central office with 
no puny deductible—why shouldn’t it be available for 
those who decide it’s worth the cost? As for what that 
might be, only the experts would know. 
 Keep this in mind, however: A culture schooled in 
the convenience of remote controls and online shop-
ping will need far more than some salacious name-
dropping to change its spending habits. 
 Keep this in mind, also: The availability of such 
everyday drugs as Viagra—now there’s a performance 
enhancer—is everywhere, and we keep flocking to 
them despite the paragraph’s worth of risks with which 
they’re usually associated. 
 It would seem that the greater hazard would be to 
allow baseball to keep on keepin’ on, enabling a cul-
ture that forces their players to prove their innocence 
and causes our athletic sons and daughters to make a 
choice—follow the cheaters or go through the back al-
leys to keep up—that seems cruel and unusual. 
 So please, everybody to the table and start discuss-
ing it. Maybe the idea is out of the box, but at least it’s 
not status quo. 
 That, after all, would be the greatest danger of all.  
 ESSAY 3 
 AGE 18 ISN’T THE ANSWER  
USA   TODAY  
AUGUST 27, 2008 
 Let’s see whether we have this right: College students 
are getting drunk more than ever (if that’s possible). 
 ESSAY 2 
 LEGAL STEROIDS THE SOLUTION  
RICK HURD  
OAKLAND TRIBUNE  
DECEMBER 15, 2007  
Time to call the doctor. 
 Heck, dial several of them. In the wake of M-
Day—the landmark Thursday in which former Senate 
Majority Leader George Mitchell dumped baseball’s 
tawdriness on the public like so much dirty laundry—
the sport really doesn’t have any other choice. 
 It’s time for Major League Baseball to consider 
making performance-enhancing drugs a welcome, and 
legal, part of its culture. 
 Lunacy? Perhaps, but no more than the notion of 
a 26-year-old pitcher on the downside of his career 
winning fourteen consecutive decisions out of the 
blue without help. Well, maybe Roger Clemens be-
lieves that’s what happened in 1998, but after read-
ing the Mitchell Report, the rational among us no 
longer do. 
 Of course, Clemens is in the same mode that in-
fected almost every modern athlete with smoke at-
tached to this fire. Deny, deny, deny. Then throw in 
the requisite, “I passed every drug test.” 
 Honestly, isn’t that so insulting to the intelligence 
that it makes you want to toss your lunch? All of which, 
if nothing else, speaks to the cultural ill that exists in the 
disgraced old game, and the disconnect it has with real-
ity. Commissioner Bud Selig has been prone to stand on 
his soap box over the years and preach that the game has 
never been healthier, and the players never more popu-
lar. And judging by the financial books, it’s been a pretty 
good argument. 
 The Mitchell Report changed that. Yes, there are 
holes in it, but the one thing it proves beyond a reason-
able doubt is this: Baseball has never been more sick, 
and its players never more shady. 
 And this is where doctors would enter the picture. 
And why some serious consideration should be given 
to this idea. 
 You see, juice will be exterminated from the game 
about the time universal health care is adopted. The use 
of performance-enhancing drugs is a runaway fire, and 
the testers are the firemen desperately trying to catch 
up. The magic of baseball’s numbers are gone. 
 So why not take a new approach? 
 Why not take some of that record $6.2 billion in rev-
enue that the sport generated a season ago and establish a 
central medical office, one that’s staffed with the leading 
experts in the performance-enhancing area that can be 
made available for players from the majors to high school. 
After all, investing in an independent drug-testing orga-
nization wouldn’t be a cure-all; such an approach by the 

 
Appendix: Essays for Critical Analysis 
A-3
alcohol-related incidents, driving under the influence 
and engaging in unprotected sex. 
 Passing the buck and asking for a lower drinking age 
is one approach. But there are other, better options. 
 ESSAY 4 
 OPPOSING VIEW: LAW MAKES MATTERS WORSE  
DAVID OXTOBY  
 USA TODAY  
AUGUST 27, 2008  
 As president of Pomoma College, I know the same 
thing every college and university president knows—
that Americans under 21 are drinking in great num-
bers, drinking in secret, frequently drinking to excess, 
too often drinking themselves into an emergency 
room. They’re doing it in spite of the most determined 
efforts of college administrations across the country 
to prevent it. And they’re doing it in casual defiance 
of the law. 
 The truth is that the current drinking age laws are 
not merely failing our children; they’re making mat-
ters worse. They force college-age drinking out of the 
open, where it can be monitored and moderated, be-
hind closed doors, where young people can put them-
selves and others at even greater risk. Recent years have 
shown a significant increase in binge drinking, leading 
to alcohol poisoning and causing hundreds of deaths 
per year. 
 I recently spoke with a 20-year-old student who 
had returned from a study-abroad semester in Spain. 
He told me that students he got to know there drank 
occasionally, but rarely to such a degree as to put 
themselves in danger. Upon returning to the United 
States, he was struck by the “obsession” with alco-
hol that Americans students showed: drinking to get 
drunk, clandestine drinking, encouraging peers to 
drink excessively. 
 There are, of course, many other factors to con-
sider. Some relate to fairness—such as the fact that an 
18-year-old can die for his country but cannot legally 
buy a glass of beer. Others relate to safety—such as 
concerns over drinking and driving. The problem 
stretches beyond America’s college campuses into our 
high schools and middle schools. There are no easy 
answers. 
 But the one thing I know for sure is that the national 
debate on this issue that has arisen due to the Amethyst 
Initiative is a vital one. Let us continue it in earnest. 
Let us look at real data and put the health and safety of 
our young people ahead of ideological beliefs. If we do, 
I think we might find that some form of lowered age, 
combined with effective education, could reduce the 
drinking problems in America today.  
This is causing all kinds of problems on campus, not 
least killing young people. So more than 100 college 
presidents are mobilizing to do something about it. 
 So far, so good. 
 What’s harder to understand is the response the 
presidents are suggesting. They want to consider 
lowering the legal drinking age from 21 to 18, giv-
ing nearly every student on campus easy access to 
alcohol. 
 If the idea weren’t coming from some of the most 
learned people in America, you’d have to think they 
skipped logic class. 
 To be sure, the presidents are right to draw atten-
tion in their Amethyst Initiative to the problem—and 
it is a problem, no matter how fondly alums might 
remember their own carefree college days. A report 
last year from the National Center on Addiction and 
Substance Abuse concluded that while the proportion 
of students who drink has remained steady, “rates of 
excessive drinking have jumped.” Binge drinking 
leads to fights, sexual assaults and alcohol-poisoning 
deaths. 
 The college presidents cite several reasons for seek-
ing “an informed and dispassionate public debate” 
about dropping the drinking age: Keeping it at 21, 
they say, prevents young adults from learning respon-
sible drinking at home. Further, when students arrive 
on campus, they can’t drink sociably and moderately 
in bars and restaurants, so they overindulge in dorm 
rooms and private houses. 
 What the presidents don’t mention is that lowering 
the age to 18 would kick the problem down to the high 
school level, where 18-year-olds would buy alcohol for 
younger friends and siblings who can’t pass for 18 with 
their own fake IDs. 
 The most serious flaw with the presidents’ cam-
paign is that when young people drink, traffic fatali-
ties rise sharply. Inexperienced drivers and alcohol are a 
particularly toxic mix. Multiple major studies arrive at 
the same conclusion: After the drinking age rose from 
18 to 21, traffic fatalities dropped by 16%. Since 1984, 
the year Congress effectively set a national drinking 
age at 21 by withholding highway money from any 
state with a lower age, an estimated 25,000 lives have 
been saved. 
 There’s no doubt that the higher drinking age 
creates enforcement headaches for college adminis-
trators. But instead of trying to wash their hands of 
the problem, perhaps they should look at new ways to 
confront it. 
 One such approach is found at the University of 
Virginia, where campus surveys revealed that fewer 
students drink excessively than students themselves 
believed. A campaign using posters, articles, websites 
and ads got the results of those surveys to students. 
Once students knew that  not everyone  was drinking 
to excess, peer pressure eased. Over six years, univer-
sity officials were able to measure a significant drop in 

A-4 
Appendix: Essays for Critical Analysis
 ESSAY 6 
 DEFENDING MY RIGHT TO CLAIM MY “STEAK” 
IN THE ANIMAL KINGDOM  
JACK PYTLESKI  
WILKES-BARRE  TIMES LEADER  
JULY 10, 1997  
 . . . [A recent caller to a newspaper call-in column] 
opined that the “healthiest way to prepare and eat meat 
is not to eat it at all.” 
 Who cares! 
 I love a good steak. . . . But I’m not about to start 
carrying a sign that promotes a carnivorous diet. Your 
health is your business, not mine. If you wish to clog 
your arteries with cholesterol, saturated fat and other 
toxins, go right ahead. Just make sure you’ve made 
plenty of room at your table for me. And pass the butter 
for that ear of roast corn while you’re at it, OK? 
 Let’s quickly examine two of the three popular rea-
sons for vegetarianism, the health aspect and the ani-
mal rights point of view. . . . The third reason, the use 
of edible grain and arable land for animal feed, is worth 
an entire column at another time. 
 I freely admit that excessive consumption of meat 
is probably not the best thing for your body. I contend, 
however, that gastronomic preference is a highly personal 
choice, and claim refuge under my “constitutional right 
to privacy” (feminists, take note) and the privilege of 
doing whatever I please with my body. 
 Once you’re born, death is inevitable. Since I’ll die 
no matter what I eat, I plan to enjoy every minute of 
my alloted time on earth, including consuming my fa-
vorite foods. Am I killing myself? Possibly, but I’m as 
good as dead anyway, aren’t I? 
 Now some of you might say that eating meat short-
ens my natural life span. Maybe. But given the choice 
of sitting around drooling all over myself in something 
euphemistically called a “personal care home” and 
punching out earlier with a massive thrombosis, guess 
which deal I’ll take, Monty? You’ve got it—the one 
behind Door Number Two. . . . 
 Pass the sour cream, please. . . . 
 There are just some things I take on faith. One of 
those is that some animals, like it or not, have another 
purpose besides wandering around doing animal-like 
things in the weeds. This includes everything from 
guide and companion duties to gracing the body on 
the table. Unfortunately for most herbivores and some 
carnivores, . . . they haven’t become accepted as care-
givers or companions. So we eat ’em or wear ’em. At 
least I do. What you do is your business. . . . 
 Don’t misunderstand. I’m on the side of a certain 
degree of animal rights. I believe that all animals de-
serve humane treatment. . . . Companion animals 
should be spayed or neutered and properly fed, loved 
and sheltered. 
 ESSAY 5 
 WHY PARENTS SHOULDN’T TEACH THEIR KIDS 
TO BELIEVE IN SANTA CLAUS*  
DAVID KYLE JOHNSON  
 Parents shouldn’t teach their kids that Santa is real. 
Tell the stories? Fine. Encourage generosity and 
imagination? Great! But leading them to believe that 
a jolly, all-seeing fat man in a red suit will fly to their 
house on a reindeer-driven sled, come down the chim-
ney, and leave Christmas presents under the tree—well, 
that is just wrong. 
 For one, it’s a lie, and lying is immoral. A lie to save 
someone’s life is one thing. But don’t kid yourself. 
Parents do it because it’s fun to watch their kids get 
excited—hardly a noble cause. It’s not harmless either. 
Given the stories I have collected, when kids find out 
that Santa is a myth, they often get mad at their parents 
for deceiving them. Kids want to know the truth about 
the world, and they trust their parents to give it to them. 
When you violate someone’s trust, you shouldn’t be sur-
prised when they get mad. Besides, no one likes to be 
made a fool. 
 Also, if the child comes to the parent with evidence 
against Santa, and the parent tells the child to ignore it, 
the parent is encouraging their child to think that be-
lieving what you want is more important than weighing 
evidence and believing the truth. If the parent tries to 
explain the evidence away with half-baked explanations, 
he or she is skewing the child’s view of what counts as 
good evidence. If the parent simply says, “it’s magic” . . . 
well, do we really want our kids to believe that magic is 
real? In short, to perpetuate the lie, the parent has to tell 
the child to shut off their brain, stop thinking about it, 
and just believe. That is not what we should be teaching 
our children, at least if we want them to grow up to be 
critical thinkers. 
 Parents do need to protect their children from 
the world, to a degree. And sometimes this requires a 
bit of deception; parents often rightly conceal things 
from their young children that they would find dis-
turbing or too complicated to grasp. But teaching a 
child to believe in Santa does not contribute to his or 
her “sense of security.” Awe and wonder at Christmas? 
Maybe. But it doesn’t make your kid feel safer. In fact, 
I even found a few kids to whom Santa was a security 
risk. His secretive chimney entry is just too much like 
an unwanted home invasion. “Can’t he just leave the 
presents at the door?” 
 If someone tricked their kids into believing that 
the story of Jack and the Bean Stalk was true, you’d 
think that was wrong. Why is the story of Santa any 
different?  
*This essay was commissioned by the authors expressly for the 
fourth edition of this text.

 
Appendix: Essays for Critical Analysis 
A-5
dropped, workers disappeared, church attendance 
shrank and Latino businesses lost customers. 
 What’s missing is simple humanity—a recogni-
tion that the vast majority of those affected lack any 
malicious intent. They came not to rob banks but to 
improve their lives through hard work. Yet families 
are uprooted, and parents are separated from their 
kids. Legal residents and citizens are hurt, too. When 
spouses, parents or children are illegal, a relative can be 
placed at risk for “harboring” them at home or “trans-
porting” them to church. There are persistent reports 
that police in some places target Hispanic drivers for 
roadside stops and document checks. Some citizens 
have taken to carrying passports or birth certificates to 
avoid being jailed. 
 By intent, the laws have also hit businesses, which 
have scrambled to replace lost workers. Employers say 
they’re being asked to become immigration police 
with imperfect tools. A study in Oklahoma predicted 
that the law could cost the state’s economy more than 
$1 billion a year, and a firm that specializes in finding 
new locations for businesses said some companies have 
crossed Oklahoma off their lists. The state Chamber 
of Commerce and other business groups filed suit to 
block the law. 
 If there’s virtue in all this, it is to highlight the hypoc-
risy that has long been at the heart of ineffectual federal 
immigration law. The nation doesn’t want illegal immi-
grants, but it does want the cheap labor they provide. So 
it passes laws then doesn’t pay to enforce them. 
 Laws such as Oklahoma’s may now expose the 
downside of being harsh, just as federal law has exposed 
the downside of being lax. 
 There’s a better remedy, of course, but Congress 
gave up on it last year. President Bush’s immigration 
bill would have toughened workplace enforcement 
with a strong verification system and effective ID re-
quirements. It would also have acknowledged reality 
by fostering a temporary worker program and provid-
ing a rigorous path to citizenship for the most qualified 
of the estimated 12 million illegal immigrants already 
here. That’s still a worthwhile proposal. 
 Laws such as Oklahoma’s are satisfying to those who 
seethe over illegal immigration. But they worsen a po-
larized, anti-immigrant atmosphere that ill-serves the 
nation.  
 Some animals shouldn’t be kept as companions, and 
even animals used for food or clothing ought to be kept 
in clean and compassionate surroundings—until that 
final two hundred and thirty grains catches them be-
tween the running lights. 
 As I stated at the outset, what you eat is your busi-
ness. What I eat is mine. But whoever you are, if you 
feel you have the right to dictate something so fun-
damental as my diet I reserve the privilege to answer 
accordingly. 
 Stick that in your Brussels sprouts! And pass the 
bacon.  
 ESSAY 7 
 NEW IMMIGRATION LAWS EXPOSE DOWNSIDE 
OF GETTING TOUGH  
 USA TODAY  
APRIL 16, 2008  
 When Congress gave up trying to pass a balanced im-
migration law last year, it opened the door for states, 
counties and towns to write their own immigration 
laws. The result has been a disquieting national ex-
periment in handling illegal immigration almost solely 
with arrest and deportation. 
 Several states have enacted laws that show no mercy, 
even for immigrants with steady jobs, deep community 
roots, a history of paying taxes and children who are 
citizens. They have just one goal: Get illegals out. 
 As a matter of ice-cold reasoning, those states make 
a case that would pass any logician’s test: The law must 
have meaning, so if the federal government won’t act 
against wanton law-breaking, then the states must. 
Oklahoma, which has one of the toughest new laws, 
now bars illegal immigrants from receiving state ser-
vices, requires employers to verify that new workers 
are legal, gives people a way to sue companies that hire 
illegal immigrants, and makes it a felony to transport, 
harbor or conceal an illegal immigrant. It was meant to 
be harsh, and it is. 
 It’s also undeniably effective. Oklahoma Hispanic 
groups estimate that as many as 25,000 left the state 
after the law was approved last year. School attendance 


 
N-1
 CHAPTER 1 
  1. Our discussion of critical thinking standards is indebted to 
Richard Paul,  Critical Thinking: What Every Person Needs 
to Survive in a Rapidly Changing World (Rohnert Park, CA: 
Center for Critical Thinking and Moral Critique, 1990), 
pp. 51–52. 
   2. Martin Heidegger,  Being and Time,  trans. John Macquarrie 
and Edward Robinson (San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 
1962), pp. 376–377. Originally published in 1927.  
   3. William Strunk Jr. and E. B. White,  The Elements of Style, 
3rd ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1979), p. 79.  
   4. William H. Herndon, quoted in David Hackett Fischer, 
 Historians’ Fallacies: Toward a Logic of Historical Thought 
(New York: Harper & Row, 1970), p. 291.  
  5. Harold Kushner,  When All You’ve Ever Wanted Isn’t 
Enough: The Search for a Life That Matters  (New York: 
Pocket Books, 1986), p. 15. 
   6. Used by permission of Kenneth R. Merrill. 
   7. Erma Bombeck,  All I Know about Animal Behavior I 
Learned in Loehmann’s Dressing Room (New York: Harper-
Paperbacks, 1995), p. 66.  
   8. Bertrand Russell,  Unpopular Essays (New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 1950), pp. 75–76.  
   9. Cited in Thomas Gilovich,  How We Know What Isn’t 
So: The Fallibility of Human Reason in Everyday Life  (New 
York: Free Press, 1991), p. 77. The same survey found 
that only 2 percent of respondents rated themselves below 
average in their leadership ability. Another survey found 
that 86 percent of Australians rate their job performance 
as above average. David G. Myers,  The Pursuit of Happiness 
(New York: Avon, 1993), p. 111. 
  10. Adapted from J. E. Russo and P. J. H. Schoemaker,  Deci-
sionTraps: Ten Barriers to Brilliant Decision Making and How 
to Overcome Them (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1989), 
p. 71. 
   11. Answers: 1. 39 years; 2. 4,187 miles; 3. 12.3% (2005); 
4. 39 books; 5. 2,160 miles; 6. 390,000 pounds; 
7. 36,756,666 (U.S. Census Bureau 2008 estimate); 8. 
1756; 9. 5,959 miles; 10. 36,198 feet. 
 12. For a discussion of common critical thinking errors in 
poker, see Gregory Bassham and Marc C. Marchese, 
“Don’t Play on Tilt! Avoiding Seven Costly Critical 
Thinking Errors in Poker,” in Eric Bronson, ed.,  Poker 
and Philosophy (Chicago: Open Court, 2005), pp. 81–92. 
  13. Doyle Brunson,  Poker Wisdom of a Champion  (Cooper Sta-
tion, NY: Cardoza Publishing, 2003), pp. 90–91. 
  14. Quoted in Paul,  Critical Thinking, pp. 91–92.  
  15. See Stanley Milgram,  Obedience to Authority: An Experi-
mental View (New York: Harper & Row, 1974).  
  16. Joel Rudinow and Vincent E. Barry,  Invitation to Criti-
cal Thinking,  4th ed. (Ft. Worth, TX: Harcourt College 
Publishers, 1999), p. 20. 
   17. Grant H. Cornwell, “From Pluralism to Relativism and 
Back Again: Philosophy’s Role in an Inclusive Curricu-
lum,”  Teaching Philosophy 14:2 (June 1991), pp. 143–153. 
Used with permission. 
  18. There is a third way in which moral relativism can lead 
to conflicting moral duties, namely, when a relativist be-
longs to a culture that holds conflicting moral beliefs. As a 
little Socratic questioning quickly makes clear, most peo-
ple unwittingly hold conflicting moral beliefs. To take a 
simple example, a child might believe both that “I should 
always do what my teacher tells me” and that “I should 
always do what my parents tell me,” without realizing that 
these two rules can conflict. A whole society, of course, 
can also hold inconsistent moral beliefs and, indeed, is 
even more likely to do so than an individual, since a soci-
ety has no single, unifying mind to iron out conflicts. At 
one time, for instance, a majority of Americans believed 
both that “unjustified discrimination is wrong” and that 
“women should not be permitted to vote,” which we rec-
ognize to be inconsistent, though few people at the time 
did. Because a relativist must share the moral beliefs of his 
society (or at least those beliefs he is aware of), he may 
find himself committed to inconsistent beliefs.  
   19.  Weekly World News, March 11, 2000. 
 20. This list of critical thinking dispositions is drawn largely 
from three sources: Vincent Ryan Ruggiero,  Beyond 
Feelings: A Guide to Critical Thinking, 5th ed. (Mountain 
View, CA: Mayfleld, 1998), pp. 13–14; John Chaffee, 
 The Thinker’s Way  (Boston: Little, Brown, 1998), 
pp. 34–37; and Paul,  Critical Thinking, p. 54. 
 NOTES 

N-2 
Notes
of this pattern are known as  disjunctive syllogisms and are 
one variety of arguments by elimination.  
  10. Thus, not all arguments that refer to numbers or quanti-
ties are arguments based on mathematics. Statistical ar-
guments, for example, as we see shortly, are usually best 
treated as inductive. 
   11. Dave Barry,  Dave Barry Turns 50  (New York: Crown 
Publishers, 1998), p. 176. 
 12. Robert Fulghum,  It Was on Fire When I Lay Down on It 
(New York: Ivy Books, 1989), p. 3.  
  13. It should be noted that  cogent is used here in a techni-
cal sense that does not conform perfectly with ordinary 
usage. (In ordinary usage,  cogent means something like 
“forcible or properly convincing.”) An inductive argu-
ment can certainly be powerful and convincing (and in 
that sense a “good” inductive argument) even if some of 
its premises are false. A lawyer, for example, might pres-
ent to a jury an inductive argument with seven absolutely 
knockdown reasons why Sturdley is guilty of robbing his 
local Piggly-Wiggly store, plus an eighth premise that is 
false. Overall, the lawyer’s argument would be properly 
convincing but not  cogent in the sense we have defined. 
Our thanks to Sean Martin and his colleagues for draw-
ing our attention to this issue.  
  14. This example is borrowed from David A. Conway and 
Ronald Munson,  The Elements of Reasoning, 2nd ed. 
(Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1997), p. 40. 
  15. This is a stock example that exists in many versions. This 
version is borrowed from Hurley,  A Concise Introduction to 
Logic, p. 142. 
 CHAPTER 4 
  1. Parade, December 27, 1998, p. 8. 
   2. Adapted from an example in Andrea Lunsford and Robert 
Connors,  The St. Martin’s Handbook,  2nd ed. (New York: 
St. Martin’s Press, 1992), p. 288. 
   3. Richard L. Epstein,  Workbook for Critical Thinking (Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth, 1999), p. 19.  
   4. Quoted in Clifton Fadiman, ed.,  The Little, Brown Book of 
Anecdotes (Boston: Little, Brown, 1985), p. 504.  
  5. Quoted in Sherry Diestler,  Becoming a Critical Thinker: A 
User-Friendly Manual (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1998), p. 282. 
   6. Fadiman,  The Little, Brown Book of Anecdotes, p. 140. 
   7. Ibid., p. 171.  
   8. Leon Jaroff, “The Magic Is Back,”  Time, October 10, 
1988, p. 20. 
   9. “Steve Goldstein, “Soviets Bask in Success of First Shut-
tle,”  Philadelphia Inquirer, November 16, 1988, p. A3. 
  10. Quoted in Keith St. Clair, “Legendary Comic Mourned,” 
 Wilkes-Barre Times Leader,  June 24, 2008, p. 2A.  
   11. William Lutz, “The New Doublespeak,”  Newsweek, August 
12, 1996, p. 57.  
 CHAPTER 5 
  1. It follows from this definition that an argument is not 
fallacious simply because it contains false premises. Some 
logicians prefer to define fallacy more broadly as “any 
faulty or defective argument.” Given the eclectic mix of 
argumentative errors and deceptive tactics traditionally 
classified as “fallacies,” neither definition is completely 
 CHAPTER 2 
  1. More precisely, a statement (or proposition) is the truth 
claim asserted by a sentence or part of a sentence that is 
capable of standing alone as a declarative sentence. Thus, 
the French sentence Le ciel est bleu and the English sen-
tence The sky is blue have the same meaning, and hence 
express the same statement, even though they are differ-
ent sentences in different languages. For purposes of this 
text, the distinction between declarative sentences and 
statements will largely be ignored. 
   2.  Washington Post, December 26, 1999, p. B3. 
   3. This list is adapted from Sherry Diestler,  Becoming a Criti-
cal Thinker: A User-Friendly Manual,  2nd ed. (Upper Sad-
dle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), pp. 8, 10.  
   4. “Truck Driver Takes to Skies in Lawn Chair,”  New York 
Times, July 3, 1982; “Lawn-Chair Pilot Faces $4,000 in 
Fines,”  New York Times, December 19, 1982. 
  5. John M. Murrin et al.,  Liberty, Equality, Power: A His-
tory of the American People, 2nd ed. (Fort Worth, TX: 
Harcourt Brace, 1999), p. 1067.  
   6. Stephen Nathanson,  Should We Consent to Be Governed? 
A Short Introduction to Political Philosophy (Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth, 1992), p. 70.  
   7. Harold Kushner,  When All You’ve Ever Wanted Isn’t 
Enough: The Search for a Life That Matters  (New York: 
Pocket Books, 1986), p. 156. 
   8. Adapted from an example in Wilson Follett,  Modern 
American Usage (New York: Hill and Wang, 1966), p. 93. 
   9. Nadine Strossen, “Regulating Racist Speech on Cam-
pus: A Modest Proposal?”  1990 Duke Law Journal  (June 
1990), p. 489. 
 CHAPTER 3 
  1. These exercises are loosely adapted from similar exercises 
in Kathleen Dean Moore, Reasoning and Writing (New 
York: Macmillan, 1993), p. 103.  
   2. Adapted from John Hoagland,  Critical Thinking, 2nd ed. 
(Newport News, VA: Vale Press, 1995), p. 68. 
   3. In logic a  particular statement refers to  some but not all mem-
bers of a particular class. For example, “Tom Cruise is an 
actor” and “Some mushrooms are poisonous” are par-
ticular statements. A  general statement refers to  all mem-
bers of a particular class—for example, “All dogs are 
mammals.”  
   4. There are cases in which an arguer mistakenly believes 
that his premises provide only probable support for the 
truth of his conclusion when in fact they provide logically 
conclusive support. Such cases are rare, however, and for 
purposes of this text they will be ignored. 
  5. In this section and the following, we are indebted to 
Patrick J. Hurley,  A Concise Introduction to Logic,  10th ed. 
(Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2006), pp. 32–36.  
   6. Some critical thinking texts define  hypothetical syllogism 
more narrowly, as an argument that has the following 
form: “If A then B; if B then C; therefore, if A then C.” 
We prefer to call arguments of this pattern  pure hypotheti-
cal syllogisms or  chain arguments. 
   7. Latin for “denying mode” or “the way of denying.”  
   8. A more precise definition is offered in Chapter 9. 
   9. Notice the pattern of this argument: “Either A is true or B 
is true. But A isn’t true; therefore, B is true.” Arguments 

 
Notes 
N-3
argument or claim,  rather than examining the worth of the 
argument or claim itself.  In these examples, questioning the 
testifier’s motives is necessary to evaluate the worth of the 
argument. 
   3.  Weekly World News, October 10, 1999. 
   4. Quoted in Dr. Laurence J. Peter,  Peter’s Quotations (New 
York: Morrow, 1977), p. 296.  
  5. Other names for this fallacy include  false dilemma, false 
dichotomy, the  either-or fallacy, and the  black-and-white fal-
lacy. Our discussion of this fallacy is indebted to Patrick 
Hurley,  A Concise Introduction to Logic,  9th ed. (Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth, 2006), pp. 149–50. 
   6. Notice that the only thing wrong with these arguments is 
that they have a false premise: they falsely claim that there 
are only two relevant alternatives when in fact there are 
more than two. Strictly speaking, therefore, the fallacy 
of false alternatives, like the fallacy of begging the ques-
tion, is not a fallacy. We follow convention, however, in 
treating them as fallacies. 
   7. House of Commons Debates of Canada, June 10, 1982. 
Quoted in Douglas N. Walton,  Begging the Question  (New 
York: Greenwood Press, 1991), p. 239.  
   8. For a fuller discussion of the post hoc fallacy and other 
forms of the questionable cause fallacy, see pages 323–330.  
   9. This example is adapted from Hurley,  A Concise Introduc-
tion to Logic, p. 142. 
  10. This example is adapted from a similar example in 
C. Stephen Layman,  The Power of Logic (Mountain View, 
CA: Mayfield, 1999), p. 180. 
   11. According to a 1996 poll, only 39 percent of scientists 
believe in a personal God, compared with more than 
90 percent of the general population. See Edward J. 
Larson and Larry Witham, “Scientists Are Still Keeping 
the Faith,”  Nature 386 (1997), pp. 435–36.  
 12. The argument does commit a fallacy. Specifically, it 
commits the fallacy of hasty conclusion. The  fallacy of 
hasty conclusion occurs when an arguer jumps to a conclu-
sion without adequate evidence. Most of the fallacies we 
discuss in this chapter are subvarieties of the fallacy of 
hasty conclusion. 
  13. This threefold analysis is adapted from Ralph H. Johnson 
and J. Anthony Blair,  Logical Self-Defense, U.S. ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1994), p. 183.  
  14. From a newspaper call-in column,  Wilkes-Barre Times 
Leader, January 23, 2000. 
  15. For a fuller discussion of reasoning by analogy, see pages 
303–313.  
  16. Adapted from an oft-quoted saying of Yogi Berra. See 
Clifton Fadiman, ed.,  The Little, Brown Book of Anecdotes 
(Boston: Little, Brown, 1985), p. 61.  
   17. This example is adapted from an anecdote told by 
Bertrand Russell in his book  Human Knowledge: Its Scope 
and Limits (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1948), p. 180. 
  18. This example was inspired by a remark made by Ronald 
Reagan.  
   19. Quoted in David Halberstam,  The Fifties (New York: 
Fawcett Columbine, 1993), p. 10. 
 20. Quoted in Stephen E. Ambrose,  Citizen Soldiers 
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997), p. 105 (slightly 
adapted).  
   21. Our thanks to Brooke Moore and Richard Parker for 
helpful suggestions on this exercise. 
adequate. We prefer our narrower definition because it 
fits more closely with traditional usage.  
   2. Many critical thinking texts distinguish between 
“formal” and “informal” fallacies. The distinction is 
roughly this:  Formal fallacies are fallacious arguments that 
involve  explicit use of an invalid argument form, whereas 
 informal fallacies are fallacious arguments that do not. Ac-
cording to this definition, most of the arguments we dis-
cuss in this chapter and the next are informal fallacies. 
In this text we avoid the distinction between formal and 
informal fallacies because (a) students find it confusing 
and (b) in practice the distinction often breaks down. 
For more on the traditional distinction between formal 
and informal fallacies, see Patrick J. Hurley,  A Concise 
Introduction to Logic, 9th ed. (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 
2006), pp. 110–111.  
   3. These helpful distinctions are borrowed from Trudy 
Govier,  A Practical Study of Argument,  5th ed. (Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth, 2001), pp. 174–175.  
   4. An argument’s premises provide “probable reasons” for a 
conclusion if the premises, if true, make the conclusion 
likely.  
  5. Scott Adams,  The Dilbert Principle  (New York: Harper 
Business, 1996), p. 9. 
   6. Quoted in Clifton Fadiman, ed.,  The Little, Brown Book of 
Anecdotes (Boston: Little, Brown, 1985), p. 357.  
   7. The traditional name of this fallacy is  ad hominem  abusive. 
( Ad hominem is a Latin phrase meaning “against the 
person.”) 
   8. The traditional name for this fallacy is  ad hominem cir-
cumstantial. Some critical thinking texts define the fal-
lacy slightly more broadly than we do.  
   9. The traditional name for this fallacy is  tu quoque (pro-
nounced “too-kwo-kway”), which is Latin for “you 
too.” The fallacy is often treated as a variety of the per-
sonal attack fallacy. 
  10. Quoted in the  Wilkes-Barre Times Leader,  January 27, 
2000.  
   11. Quoted in Eleanor and Reginald Jebb,  Belloc, The Man 
(Westminster, MD: The Newman Press, 1957), p. 19.  
 12. Often called appeal to fear or appeal to force. The tradi-
tional Latin name for this fallacy is  argumentum ad baculum 
(literally, “argument to the stick”). 
  13. The traditional name for this fallacy is  argumentum ad 
misericordiam (Latin for “argument to mercy”). 
  14. Adapted from Alan Brinton, “Pathos and the ‘Appeal to 
Emotion’: An Aristotelian Analysis,”  History of Philosophy 
Quarterly 5 (1989), p. 211.  
  15. See the definition of  red herring  and the supporting pas-
sage cited from the third edition of Nicholas Cox’s  The 
Gentleman’s Recreation (1686) in  The Compact Edition of the 
Oxford English Dictionary (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1971).  
  16. This example is adapted from Hurley,  A Concise Introduc-
tion to Logic, p. 152. 
 CHAPTER 6 
  1. Alvin Plantinga, Warrant and Proper Function (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1993), p. 77.  
   2. Notice that this is consistent with what we said in Chapter 5 
about the fallacy of attacking the motive—the fallacy of 
criticizing a person’s motivation for offering a particular 

N-4 
Notes
   2. One exception should be noted here. In some arguments 
the premises may still provide good reason for the con-
clusion even though the argument contains a premise that 
is false. This occurs when the false premise is  superfluous, 
that is, not needed to prove or establish the conclusion. 
Having noted this complication, we shall ignore it in 
what follows.  
   3. This follows from the definition of a valid argument—
one in which it is impossible to have both all true prem-
ises and a false conclusion. Thus, if any premises in an 
argument deductively entail the conclusion, the argu-
ment as a whole remains valid no matter how many false 
or irrelevant premises the argument may contain. 
   4. If an argument is inconsistent, at least one of its claims 
must be false. Strictly speaking, therefore, consistency is 
included in the standard of accuracy and is not a sepa-
rate standard in its own right. Inconsistency is such an 
important and pervasive form of inaccuracy, however, 
that it is useful for our purposes to treat it as a separate 
standard.  
  5. It should be noted that these guidelines are not intended 
to be comprehensive. Many specific guidelines for evalu-
ating arguments are presented throughout the text. 
   6. Our discussion of this principle is indebted to Brooke 
Noel Moore and Richard Parker,  Critical Thinking, 5th ed. 
(Mountain View, CA: Mayfield, 1998), pp. 71–79. 
   7. Answer: 11. (Many people overlook the  f ’s in the word 
 of. ) This exercise is borrowed from Scott Plous,  The 
Psychology of Judgment and Decision Making (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1993), p. 9.  
   8. Our discussion of this principle is indebted to Brooke 
Noel Moore and Richard Parker,  Critical Thinking, 5th 
ed. (Mountain View, CA: Mayfield, 1998), p. 84. 
   9. For a helpful general discussion, see Theodore Schick 
Jr. and Lewis Vaughn,  How to Think about Weird Things: 
Critical Thinking for a New Age,  2nd ed. (1999), chap. 3.  
  10. Tom Morris,  Philosophy for Dummies (Indianapolis: Wiley, 
1999), p. 51. 
   11. This exercise is inspired by one in John Chaffee,  The 
Thinker’s Way  (Boston: Little, Brown, 1998), p. 64.  
 12. “Gun Safety Training”; available online at  www
.darwinawards.com. 
  13. This exercise is adapted from Moore and Parker,  Critical 
Thinking, p. 74. 
  14.  Weekly World News, September 3, 1999. 
  15. Stan Daniels, letter to the editor,  Wilkes-Barre Times 
Leader, June 10, 1996.  
  16. Leonard Pitts, “Don’t Use God’s Law to Beat Up on 
Gays,”  Wilkes-Barre Times Leader,  June 8, 1997.  
   17. Constance Hilliard, “We’re Spendthrift ‘Environmental-
ists,’”  USA Today, December 8, 2000. 
  18. Editorial, “Campus Rules Overreach,”  USA Today, 
March 3, 2004. 
   19. Richard Delgado, “Hate Cannot Be Tolerated,”  USA 
Today, March 3, 2004. 
 20. Sean Curtis, “Why Cats Make Better Pets than Dogs,” 
 Helium. February 19, 2009, http://www.helium.com/items/
911664-which-makes-a-better-pet-a-dog-or-a-cat. 
   21. John Tierney, “On Campus, a Good Man Is Hard to 
Find,”  New York Times, March 25, 2006. 
 22. Editorial, “Don’t Blame the Burgers,”  USA Today, Janu-
ary 31, 2005. 
 CHAPTER 7 
  1. More precisely still, a premise is linked just in case (1) the 
amount of support it provides for the conclusion would 
be affected (i.e., either weakened or strengthened) by 
the omission of some other premise in the argument, or 
(2) its omission from the argument would affect the 
amount of support provided by some other premise in 
the argument. Similarly, a premise is independent when 
neither of these two conditions obtains. For a fuller dis-
cussion, see Gregory Bassham, “Linked and Independent 
Premises: A New Analysis,” in Frans H. van Eemeren et 
al., eds., Proceedings of the Fifth Conference of the International 
Society for the Study of Argumentation (Amsterdam: Sic Sat, 
2003), pp. 69–73. For purposes of this introductory text, 
these technical refinements can be safely ignored. 
   2. Thomas Lickona,  Educating for Character: How Our Schools 
Can Teach Respect and Responsibility  (New York: Bantam, 
1991), p. 77. 
   3. Our discussion in this section is indebted to C. Stephen 
Layman,  The Power of Logic  (Mountain View, CA: 
Mayfield, 1999), pp. 73–74.  
   4. This example is adapted from an argument discussed (but 
not endorsed) by C. S. Lewis in his book  God in the Dock: 
Essays on Theology and Ethics (Grand Rapids, MI: William 
B. Eerdmans Publishing, 1970), p. 105.  
  5. This argument is stated but not endorsed by Pierce and 
VanDeveer. 
   6. Thanks to our colleague Len Gorney for passing along 
this (slightly adapted) example to us. 
   7. David Hume,  Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, ed. 
Norman Kemp Smith (Indianapolis: BobbsMerrill Edu-
cational Publishing, 1947), p. 143.  
   8. See pages 43–44 above for a discussion of the principle of 
charity.  
   9. “No Sex in Show Me State?”  Wilkes-Barre Times Leader, 
November 6, 1994. 
  10. Our formulation of these rules is indebted to Robert Paul 
Churchill,  Logic: An Introduction, 2nd ed. (New York: 
St. Martin’s Press, 1990), pp. 61–63; and David A. 
Conway and Ronald Munson,  The Elements of Reasoning, 
2nd ed. (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1997), pp. 9–10. 
   11. This example is borrowed from Thomas V. Morris,  Making 
Sense of It All: Pascal and the Meaning of Life (Grand Rapids, 
MI: William B. Eerdmans Publishing, 1992), p. 55.  
 12. Charles E. Sheedy,  The Christian Virtues, 2nd ed. (Notre 
Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1951), 
p. 15. 
  13. Theodore Schick Jr., “Fate, Freedom and Foreknowl-
edge,” in William Irwin, ed.,  The Matrix and Philosophy: 
Welcome to the Desert of the Real  (Chicago: Open Court, 
2003), pp. 94–95.  
  14.  Baton Rouge Advocate,  April 4, 1998. Our thanks to 
Professor Barbara Forrest for this example and the 
accompanying standardization.  
  15. Bob Butts, letter to the editor,  Wilkes-Barre Times Leader, 
September 16, 1998. 
 CHAPTER 8 
  1. Some of these examples are borrowed from Tom Morris, 
Philosophy for Dummies (Forest City, CA: IDG Books 
Worldwide, 1999), pp. 92–94.  

 
Notes 
N-5
 CHAPTER 11 
  1. In Chapter 3 we discussed six patterns, but here our dis-
cussion focuses on four.  
   2. For a thorough explanation of how this figure is calculated, 
see A. Agresti and B. Finley,  Statistical Methods for the Social 
Sciences, 2nd ed. (San Francisco: Dellen, 1986), p. 103.  
   3. These are the figures used and made available by the 
Gallup Poll. See Charles W. Roll and Albert H. Cantril, 
 Polls: Their Use and Misuse in Politics  (New York: Basic 
Books, 1972), p. 72.  
   4. Statistics can also be used to make inductive generaliza-
tions, especially when they argue to a conclusion about 
most members of a class. Some, but not all, statistical argu-
ments are also inductive generalizations. And, clearly, not 
all inductive generalizations are statistical arguments.  
  5. Beth Boehne, “Brother Says He Was Stabbed over Hot 
Pocket,”  South Bend Tribune, September 17, 2008. 
   6. It is also possible to have negative arguments from anal-
ogy. For example, x and y are not similar in ways a, b, and 
c. So, they are probably not similar in d either. 
   7. This example is adapted from Jostein Gaarder’s  Sophie’s 
World: A Novel about the History of Philosophy (New York: 
Berkley Books, 1994), p. 328.  
   8. Clifton Fadiman, ed.,  The Little, Brown Book of Anecdotes 
(Boston: Little, Brown, 1985), p. 61.  
   9. This analysis ignores prizes less than The Grand Prize. 
For more information, visit Powerball.com.  
 CHAPTER 12 
  1. Gary Ink, “Book Title Output and Average Prices: 1996 
Final and 1997 Preliminary Figures,” The Bowker Annual 
Library and Book Trade Almanac, 43rd ed. (New Provi-
dence, NJ: R. R. Bowker, 1998), p. 521. 
   2. “Leading U.S. Daily Newspapers” and “U.S. Commer-
cial Radio Stations, by Format, 1992–98,”  The World 
Almanac and Book of Facts,   1999 (Mahwah, NJ: World 
Almanac Books, 1999), pp. 185, 186. 
   3. Sigmund Freud, “Femininity,” in  New Introductory Lec-
tures on Psychoanalysis (New York: Norton, 1965). 
   4.  Answers to the Most Asked Questions about Cigarettes 
(Washington, DC: The Tobacco Institute, n.d.). 
  5. In 1981 a  Washington Post Pulitzer Prize–winning article 
about an eight-year-old heroin addict had been fabricated.  
   6. Although the terms are often used interchangeably, a 
 journal is a periodical limited to a particular subject (med-
icine, politics, literature, sociology, etc.) and aimed at an 
audience familiar with the subject. A  magazine includes 
articles on various subjects and is aimed at a more general 
readership.  
   7. William Carlos Williams, “The Virtue of History,” in  In 
the American Grain  (New York: New Directions, 1925, 
1956), p. 201. Hamilton, in fact, was forty-nine when 
he died. 
   8. “Of Studies,” in  Essays or Counsels Civil and Moral (1625).  
   9.  The Affluent Society  (Boston: Houghton-Riverside, 1958), 
p. 21.  
 CHAPTER 14 
  1. For recommendations on evaluating information in jour-
nals of opinion, see Chapter 12.  
 23. “I’m a Man, I Can Handle It.” Available online at  www
.darwinawards.com/darwin/index_darwin1997.html. 
 24. Editorial,  USA Today, April 8, 1994. 
 CHAPTER 9 
  1. The method is named after its inventor, English logician 
John Venn (1834–1923). 
   2. These numbers aren’t normally included in Venn dia-
grams. They are added here temporarily to make it easier 
to refer to the relevant areas. 
   3. In math, shading an area generally means that the area 
is  not empty. In logic, shading has just the opposite 
meaning.  
   4. “The 1999 Darwin Award Wannabes”; available online 
at  www.tiac.net/users/cri/darwin99a.html. 
  5. Many logic and critical thinking texts adopt the conven-
tion that ambiguous generalizations like these should 
always be translated as “all.” Although this convention 
certainly simplifies matters for students, it is more im-
portant, we think, to respect the principle that speakers’ 
intentions be interpreted plausibly and charitably.  
   6. Our discussion of stylistic variants of standard categorical 
forms is indebted to C. Stephen Layman,  The Power of Logic 
(Mountain View, CA: Mayfield, 1999), pp. 129–131.  
   7. Strictly speaking, quantifying expressions such as  many, 
most, and  nearly all aren’t really stylistic variants of  some 
because they convey more-specific quantitative informa-
tion than  some does. For example, “Nearly all Canadians 
are friendly” clearly says something much stronger than 
“Some [i.e., at least one] Canadian is friendly.” With 
rare exceptions, however, these verbal differences are ir-
relevant for purposes of categorical logic. Thus, so long 
as due care is exercised, quantifying expressions such 
as  many, most, and  nearly all can be safely translated as 
 some.  
   8. William H. Halverson,  A Concise Logic  (New York: 
Random House, 1984), p. 83. 
   9. The 1999 Darwin Award Wannabes”; available online at 
 www.tiac.net/users/cri/darwin99a.html. 
  10. “Underpants Fail to Mask Robber’s Identity,” AOL 
News, October 13, 2001. 
 CHAPTER 10 
  1. In this chapter we will not consider arguments with more 
than three variables because such arguments become im-
practical to analyze by means of truth tables. The number 
of columns needed is determined exponentially. With two 
variables we need four columns, two squared. With three 
variables we need eight columns, two cubed. With four 
variables we would need sixteen columns, two to the 
fourth power. This quickly becomes work that is more 
suitable for a computer than a human being.  
   2. A horseshoe, , is also an acceptable symbol for this 
operation.  
   3. Counterfactual conditionals, such as “If Caesar had 
fought in the Revolutionary War, he would have used 
firearms,” are another matter altogether. Consideration 
of counterfactuals would take us beyond the aims and 
scope of this chapter. 
   4. “Teller: Man Tried to Deposit $1 Million Bill,” Decem-
ber 3, 2007, www.kfoxtv.com/money/14713831/detail.html. 

N-6 
Notes
  10  . In fact, controlled studies have found no evidence that 
vitamin C prevents or cures colds. 
   11. Our discussion of these methods is indebted to Theodore 
Schick Jr. and Lewis Vaughn,  How to Think about Weird 
Things: Critical Thinking for a New Age, 4th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 2005), p. 233.  
 12. Sagan,  The Demon-Haunted World,  pp. 339–340.  
  13. When we speak of “questions of meaning or purpose,” 
we have in mind primarily questions of existential or 
cosmic meaning or purpose. We don’t mean to deny that 
there are some kinds of “meanings” and “purposes” that 
science is competent to deal with. 
  14. This is one standard sense of  scientism. See, for example, 
John F. Haught,  Science and Religion: From Conflict to Con-
versation (Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, 1995), p. 16. In a 
weaker sense, scientism is the view that the methods of 
the natural sciences should be applied in every field of 
human knowing. Robert Todd Carroll, “Scientism”; 
available online at  http://skeptic.com/scientism/html. 
  15. This definition is indebted to Sagan,  The Demon-Haunted 
World, p. 13. 
  16. Our discussion in this section is indebted to William D. 
Gray,  Thinking Critically about New Age Ideas  (Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth, 1991), chap. 5.  
   17. Nigel Calder,  Einstein’s Universe (Harmondsworth, 
England: Penguin Books, 1980), pp. 72–83.  
  18. Of course, any of these statements might reasonably be 
believed on the basis of religious revelation, provided 
there is ample proof that the revelation is genuine. When 
we speak of “possible observations or experiments,” we 
have in mind observations or experiments that don’t 
rely on supernatural agencies or rest on mere appeals to 
authority.  
   19. For representative statements of these excuses, see Rob-
ert H. Ashby,  The Guidebook for the Study of Psychical 
Research (London: Rider and Company, 1972), excerpt 
reprinted in O’Neill,  Paranormal Phenomena, p. 132; D. 
Scott Rogo, “The Making of Psi Failure,”  Fate (April 
1986), pp. 76–80. For a helpful critical discussion, see 
Ray Hyman,  The Elusive Quarry: A Scientific Appraisal 
of Psychical Research (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 
1989), pp. 210–215.  
 20. See Arthur W. Galston and Clifford L. Slayman, “The 
Not-So-Secret Life of Plants,”  American Scientist 67 (May 
1979), pp. 337–344.  
   21. Barry Singer, “Double Standards,” in Abell and Singer, 
 Science and the Paranormal,  p. 144.  
 22. This is Bertrand Russell’s famous “five minute hypoth-
esis.” This formulation of the argument is borrowed from 
Tom Morris,  Philosophy for Dummies (Foster City, CA: 
IDG Books Worldwide, 1999), p. 62.  
 23. Humphrey Carpenter, ed.,  The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien 
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1981), p. 400. 
 24. Isaac Asimov and Duane Gish, “The Genesis War,”  Sci-
ence Digest, October 1981, pp. 82–87. 
 25. Lee Tiffin,  Creationism’s Upside-Down Pyramid: How Sci-
ence Refutes Fundamentalism (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus 
Books, 1994), p. 28. 
 26. Robert J. Schadewald, “Six ‘Flood’ Arguments 
Creationists Can’t Answer,” in  Evolution versus Creationism: 
The Public Education Controversy, ed. J. Peter Zetterberg 
(Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press, 1983), p. 450.  
   2. “Homesick Man Who Flew as Cargo Recounts Journey”; 
available online at  www.cnn.com/2003/US/Southwest/
09/10/ stowaway.flight.ap (adapted).  
   3. Stanley J. Baran,  Introduction to Mass Communication, 
3rd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004), p. 27 (citing 
 Los Angeles Times reporter Steve Lopez). 
   4. Inspired by an exercise in Stephen S. Carey,  The Uses 
and Abuses of Argument: Critical Thinking and Fallacious 
Reasoning (Mountain View, CA: Mayfield, 2000), 
p. 167.  
  5. Pew Research Center for the People & the Press, 
“Bottom-Line Pressures Now Hurting Coverage, Say 
Journalists,” May 23, 2004. Accessed January 3, 2009. 
<http://people-press.org/report/?pageid=829>.  
   6. Baran,  Introduction to Mass Communication, p. 50. 
   7. Baran,  Introduction to Mass Communication, p. 378.  
   8. George Gerbner, “The Stories We Tell,”  Media Develop-
ment (April 1996), pp. 13–17. 
   9. Max Sutherland,  Advertising and the Mind of the Con-
sumer (St. Leonards, Australia: Allen & Unwin, 1993), 
pp. 6–12.  
  10. New York: Picador, 2002.  
 CHAPTER 15 
  1. Carl Sagan, The Demon-Haunted World: Science as a Candle 
in the Dark (New York: Random House, 1995), p. 6. 
   2. For example, in a 1998 international test, American high 
school students finished eighteenth out of twenty-one 
nations in math and science literacy, and the test didn’t 
even include any of the traditionally high performing 
Asian countries. James Freeman, “To Improve Schools, 
Forget Computers,”  USA Today Online,  September 
10, 1999; available online at  www.usatoday.com/news/
comment/columnists/freeman/ncjf38.htm. A recent Trends 
in International Mathematics and Science Study report 
found no measurable improvement in science achieve-
ment for either U.S. fourth- or eigth-graders from 
1995–2007. “Science Achievement of Fourth- and 
Eighth-Graders between 1995 and 2007,” National 
Center for Education Statistics, http://nces.ed.gov/
timss/results07_science95.asp. Accessed February 19, 
2009.  
   3. Sometimes,  science is defined more broadly to include 
nonempirical disciplines such as logic and mathematics. 
When we speak of “science,” we mean  empirical science 
in the sense defined. 
   4. This definition is adapted from Paul Kurtz, “Believing 
the Unbelievable: The Scientific Response—A Fore-
word,” in  Science and the Paranormal: Probing the Existence 
of the Supernatural,  eds. George O. Abell and Barry Singer 
(New York: Scribner’s, 1981), pp. vii–viii. 
  5. Poll cited in  Parade, December 26, 1999, p. 7. 
   6. National Science Foundation poll, reported in the  Wilkes-
Barre Times Leader, May 23, 1996. 
   7. This and the preceding statistic are cited in Sagan,  The 
Demon-Haunted World, p. 324.  
   8. Poll cited in the  Gallup Poll Monthly, August 1999, 
p. 35.  
   9. This and the preceding three statistics are cited in a 2005 
Gallup Poll, available online at http://www.gallup.com/
poll/16915/Three-Four-Americans-Believe-Paranormal.aspx.  

 
Notes 
N-7
 48. Abell, “Astrology,” p. 86. 
  49. Many astrologers are reluctant to concede that the dis-
covery of the three new planets proves that astrologers’ 
predictions have been systematically in error for the 
past two thousand years. Noted astrologer Linda Good-
man, for example, argues that ancient astrologers’ claims 
weren’t mistaken because planets  have no astrological in-
fluences until they are discovered! Cited in Hines,  Pseu-
doscience and the Paranormal,  p. 146.  
 50. It is also instructive to note how astrologers sought to 
determine what astrological influences the newly dis-
covered planets possessed. They did this not by empirical 
investigation but by resort to Greek and Roman mythol-
ogy. For example, Pluto (Hades) was the Greek god of 
the underworld. From this it was inferred that the planet 
Pluto must influence matters connected with death. 
See Ronny Martens and Tim Trachet,  Making Sense 
of Astrology (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1998), 
pp. 100–101.  
   51. Some astrologers do claim that asteroids (at least the 
larger ones) do have astrological influences. The claimed 
influences, however, are invariably based on myth, not 
empirical observation. See, for example, “Astrology on 
the Web,” available online at  www.astrologycom.com/aster
.html. 
 52. Paul Kurtz,  The Transcendental Temptation: A Critique of 
Religion and the Paranormal  (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus 
Books, 1986); excerpt reprinted in O’Neill,  Paranormal 
Phenomena, pp. 154–155.  
  53. “Aquarius: Your Preferences”; available online at  www
.astrology.com/prefs_aquarius.htm. 
 54. These horoscopes are taken from astrologer Joyce Jillson’s 
syndicated column,  Wilkes-Barre Times Leader,  November 
24, 2000. 
  55. As Saint Augustine pointed out, essentially the same 
problem arises with biological twins. Time twins pres-
ent an even greater challenge for astrologers, however, 
because with time twins quibbles cannot be raised about 
their being born even a few minutes apart. 
 56. See, for example, Parry,  In Defense of Astrology, p. 100. 
   57. Ibid.  
 58. See, for example, Christopher C. French, Antony Lead-
better, and Geoffrey Dean, “The Anatomy of Time 
Twins: A Re-Analysis,”  Journal of Scientific Exploration 11, 
No. 2 (1997), p. 147. 
   59. See, for example, Parry,  In Defense of Astrology, 
pp. 106–107.  
 60. R. B. Culver and P. A. Ianna,  The Gemini Syndrome: A 
Scientific Evaluation of Astrology (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus 
Books, 1984), pp. 169–170; R. N. Hunter and J. S. Derr, 
“Prediction Monitoring and Evaluation Program: A 
Progress Report,”  Earthquake Information Bulletin 10, 
No. 3 (1978), pp. 93–96. 
   61. Sandra Shulman,  The Encyclopedia of Astrology  (New York: 
Hamlyn Publishing Group, Ltd., 1976), p. 168; cited in 
Culver and Ianna,  Gemini Syndrome, p. 125.  
 62. Culver and Ianna,  Gemini Syndrome, pp. 125–127.  
 63. Bernard I. Silverman, “Studies of Astrology,”  Journal of 
Psychology 77 (1971), pp. 141–149; cited in Culver and 
Ianna,  Gemini Syndrome, p. 131. 
 64. John D. McGervey, “A Statistical Test of Sun-Sign 
Astrology,” in  Paranormal Borderlands of Science, ed. 
   27. See, for example, Henry M. Morris, ed.,  Scientific Cre-
ationism (San Diego, CA: Creation-Life Publishers, 1974), 
pp. 118–119.  
 28. Richard Dawkins,  Unweaving the Rainbow: Science, De-
lusion and the Appetite for Wonder  (Boston: Houghton 
Miffiin, 1998), p. 31. 
  29. Terence Hines,  Pseudoscience and the Paranormal  (Buf-
falo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1988), p. 93. See generally 
James Randi,  The Truth about Uri Geller  (Buffalo, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1975).  
 30. Hines,  Pseudoscience and the Paranormal,  pp. 245–246.  
   31. James Randi, “Science and the Chimera,” in Abell and 
Singer,  Science and the Paranormal,  p. 214.  
 32. C. R. Snyder and R. J. Shenkel, “The P. T. Barnum Ef-
fect,”  Psychology Today 8 (March 1975), pp. 52–54.  
  33. Hines,  Pseudoscience and the Paranormal, p. 34. 
 34. Robert Novella, “Cold Reading”; available online at 
 www.factsource.com/cut/coldreading.html. This article origi-
nally appeared in  The Connecticut Skeptic  2, No. 2 (Spring 
1997), p. 3.  
  35. Fereydoon Batmanghelidj,  Your Body’s Many Cries for 
Water, 2nd ed. (Falls River, VA: Global Health Solutions, 
1997). For more on Dr. Batmanghelidj and the water 
cure, see the Global Health Solutions Web site at  www
.watercure.com. 
 36. Bob Butts, letter to the editor,  Wilkes-Barre Times Leader, 
September 3, 1997. Butts, owner of an auto-parts store in 
Moosic, Pennsylvania, has spent more than $300,000 of 
his own money in recent years touting the water cure. For 
more on Butts and his crusade, see Michael Rubinkam, 
“The Water Man,” online at  www.abcnews.go.com/sections/
living/DailyNews/water000619.html. 
   37. This example is inspired by an example in Gray,  Thinking 
Critically about New Age Ideas, p. 110. 
 38. This example is adapted from an example in David A. 
Levy,  Tools of Critical Thinking: Metathoughts for Psychology 
(Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 1997), p. 53. 
   39. Robert Parry,  In Defense of Astrology: Astrology’s Answers to 
Its Critics  (St. Paul, MN: Llewellyn Publications, 1991), 
p. 88. 
 40.  See note 9 . A 1984 Gallup Poll found that 55 percent of 
American teenagers believe in astrology. Paul Kurtz and 
Andrew Franknoi, “Scientific Tests of Astrology Do Not 
Support Its Claims,” reprinted in  The Outer Edge: Clas-
sic Investigations of the Paranormal, eds. Joe Nickell, Barry 
Karr, and Tom Genoni (Amherst, NY: Committee for 
the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal, 
1996), p. 36. 
   41. Carl Sagan,  Cosmos (New York: Random House, 1980), 
p. 48. 
 42. An important qualification to this statement is noted 
below.  
  43. Our discussion in this section is indebted to Hines,  Pseu-
doscience and the Paranormal, pp. 141–156. 
 44. George O. Abell, “Astrology,” in Abell and Singer,  Sci-
ence and the Paranormal, p. 87. 
  45. Hines,  Pseudoscience and the Paranormal,  p. 147. It can also 
be asked why these forces have no effect on human be-
havior until the precise moment of birth. After all, most 
of these forces also operate in the womb. 
 46. Abell, “Astrology,” p. 88. 
   47. Parry,  In Defense of Astrology,  p. 113.  

N-8 
Notes
news/stories/s1623400.htm (reporting on a study by Peter 
Hartmann).  
   67. Shawn Carlson, “A Double-Blind Test of Astrology,” 
 Nature 318 (December 5, 1985), pp. 419–425. A follow-up 
study, addressing astrologers’ objections to the design of 
Carlson’s study, was conducted a few years later. See J. H. 
McGrew and R. M. McFall, “A Scientific Inquiry into 
the Validity of Astrology,”  Journal of Scientific Exploration  4 
(1990), pp. 75–83. This study also failed to support 
astrology’s claims. 
 68. See, for example, Claude Benski et al.,  The Mars Effect: A 
French Test of Over 1,000 Sports Champions (Buffalo, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1996); P. Kurtz, J. W. Nienhuys, and 
R. Sandhu, “Is the ‘Mars Effect’ Genuine?”  Journal of Sci-
entific Exploration 11 (1997), pp. 19–39. 
Kendrick Frazier (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 
1981), pp. 235–240. 
 65. Culver and Ianna,  Gemini Syndrome, pp. 127–129.  
 66. W. Grant Dahlstrom et al., “MMPI Findings on Astro-
logical and Other Folklore Concepts of Personality,” 
 Psychological Reports 78 (1996), pp. 1059–1070. Simi-
lar results were found in more recent large-scale stud-
ies. See Robert Matthews, “Comprehensive Study of 
‘Time Twins’ Debunks Astrology,”  Washington Times, 
August 18, 2003, available at http://web.archive.org/
web/20070522093713 /http://www.washtimes.com/world/
20030817-105449-9384r.htm (reporting on a study by 
Geoffrey Dean and Ivan Kelly), and Jennifer Viegas, 
“Scientists Dump Cold Water on Astrology,”  News 
in Science, available at http://www.abc.net.au/science/

 
ANS-1
 CHAPTER 2 
 EXER CISE 2.1 
 I. 
  1. Statement. 
  4. Nonstatement; suggestion. 
  7. Statement. (This is a brief and emphatic way of 
saying “This is great.”) 
  10. Statement. (You might be lying.) 
 13. Nonstatement; request. 
  16. Statement. (This is an emphatic way of saying 
“This is a crock.”) 
  19. Nonstatement; request. 
 22. Statement. (Spanish for “My house is your house.”) 
 25. Nonstatement; exclamation. 
 II. 
  1. Yes. 
  4. Yes. 
  7. Yes. 
  10. Yes. 
 13. Yes. 
 
 EXER CISE 2.2 
 I. 
  1.  Premise: Light takes time to reach our eyes. 
 
   Conclusion: All that we see really existed in the 
past. 
  4.  Premise: Faith means believing a proposition when 
there is no good reason for believing it. 
 
   Conclusion: Faith is a vice. 
  7.  Premise: Science is based on experiment, on a will-
ingness to see the universe as it really is. 
 
   Conclusion: Science sometimes requires courage—
at the very least the courage to question the con-
ventional wisdom. 
  10.  Premise: The lowest animal is a lot nicer and kinder 
than most of the humans beings that inhabit this 
earth. 
 
   Conclusion: Animals have souls. 
 13.  Premise: Oil isn’t helping anyone when it sits in the 
ground. 
 
   Conclusion: There is nothing wrong with burning 
crude oil like crazy—so long as there’s a plan for 
energy alternatives when the cheap oil runs out. 
  16.  Premise: If we encourage each other to blame God 
for injustices, we are giving the evil or dark side a 
victory by keeping God’s precious children—that’s 
all of us—away from His loving arms. 
 
   Conclusion: Although it is part of human nature to 
be angry at God when bad things happen, there is 
no point in doing so. 
  19.  Premise 1: More than 99 percent of all the creatures 
that have ever lived have died without progeny. 
 
   Premise 2: Not a single one of your ancestors falls 
into this group. 
 
   Conclusion: You are lucky to be alive. 
 II. 
  1.  Premise 1: Man knows that he is dying. 
 
   Premise 2: Of its victory over man, the universe 
knows nothing. 
 
   Conclusion: When the universe has crushed him, 
man will be nobler than that which kills him. 
  4.  Premise 1: Moral responsibility presupposes free-
will. 
 
   Premise 2: This freedom is not compatible with 
universal causal determination. 
 
   Premise 3: Universal causal determinism appears to 
be the case. 
 ANSWERS TO SELECTED EXERCISES 
 

ANS-2
Answers to Selected Exercises
  16. Nonargument, report of an explanation. 
  19. Nonargument; unsupported assertion. (Notice that 
the word  because does not function as a premise in-
dicator in either sentence of this passage.) 
 22. Nonargument. (No conclusion is drawn.) 
 25. Nonargument; illustration. 
 28. Nonargument; conditional statement. ( When here 
means “if.”) 
 II. 
  1. Explanation. 
  4. Argument. 
  7. Explanation. 
  10. Explanation. 
 13. Explanation. 
  16. Explanation. 
  19. Explanation.  
 CHAPTER 3 
 EXER CISE 3.1 
 I. 
 Problem 1: Moriarty. 
 II. 
 Problem 1:  Mike: Grape juice. 
 Amy: Pepsi. 
 Brian: Diet Coke. 
 Lisa: Ice tea. 
 Bill: 7-Up. 
 EXER CISE 3.2 
  1.  Modus tollens. 
  4. Chain argument. 
  7. Denying the antecedent. 
  10. Affirming the consequent.  
 EXER CISE 3.3 
  1. Deductive. (Argument based on mathematics; 
also the conclusion follows necessarily from the 
premises.) 
  4. Deductive. (Argument by elimination; also the 
conclusion follows necessarily from the premises.) 
  7. Inductive. (Given that signs can be wrong, 
the conclusion follows only probably from the 
premises.) 
  10. Inductive. (Argument from authority; also a pre-
diction; also  probably is an induction indicator 
word.) 
 13. Inductive. (The principle of charity dictates that the 
argument be regarded as inductive because the con-
clusion follows at best probably from the premises.) 
 
   Conclusion: Contrary to what most people believe, 
human beings are not morally responsible. 
  7.  Premise 1: If you’re not speeding, you don’t have to 
worry about speed traps. 
 
   Premise 2: A speed trap could save your life if some 
other speeder is stopped. 
 
   Conclusion: No one in his right mind should criti-
cize the state police for the speed traps. 
  10.  Premise: He that loveth not his brother whom he 
hath seen, cannot love God whom he hath not 
seen. 
 
   Conclusion: If a man say, “I love God,” and hateth 
his brother, he is a liar. 
 13.  Premise: Your alternative to accepting reality the 
way it occurs is continuous anxiety and desperate 
disappointments. 
 
   Conclusion: Whether you like it or not, you’d better 
accept reality the way it occurs: as highly imperfect 
and filled with the most fallible human beings. 
  16.  Premise 1: Those who develop the first-thing-in-
the-morning routine tend to be more consistent in 
their training. 
 
   Premise 2: Morning runs avoid the heat and peak 
air pollution. 
 
   Premise 3: You can enjoy your runs without car-
rying along all the stress that builds up during the 
day. 
 
   Premise 4: Early-morning runs save time by com-
bining your morning and postrun shower. 
 
   Conclusion: Getting in your run early certainly has 
its advantages. 
  19.  Premise 1: You’ll begin to eat food in season, when 
it is at the peak of its nutritional value and flavor. 
 
   Premise 2: You won’t find anything processed or 
microwavable. 
 
   Premise 3  (subconclusion): You’ll cook. 
 
   Premise 4: You’ll be supporting the farmers in your 
community. 
 
   Premise 5: You’ll be helping defend the countryside 
from sprawl. 
 
   Premise 6: You’ll be saving oil by eating food pro-
duced nearby. 
 
   Premise 7:  You’ll be teaching your children that a 
carrot is a root, not a machine-lathed orange bullet 
that comes in a plastic bag. 
 
   Conclusion: Shop at the farmer’s market. 
 EXER CISE 2.4 
 I. 
  1. Nonargument; explanation. 
  4. Nonargument; conditional statement. 
  7. Nonargument; report of an argument. 
  10. Nonargument; illustration. 
 13. Nonargument; report of an argument. 

Answers to Selected Exercises
ANS-3
 CHAPTER 4 
 EXER CISE 4.1 
 I. 
  1. Vague and overgeneral. 
  4. Overgeneral. 
  7. Overgeneral. 
  10. Vague and overgeneral. 
 II. 
  1.  Vague and overgeneral (not to mention ungram-
matical). Terms such as “verbal assaults” and 
“derogatory comments” are highly vague. Much of 
the language is also overgeneral (e.g., any language 
or behavior that “challenges” another person or 
puts that person “in a state of fear or anxiety” ap-
parently counts as harassment). 
  4.  Vague. “A chance of rain” could mean anything 
from a tiny chance of rain to a virtual certainty. 
  7.  Ambiguous. Whose enormous bottom is exposed to 
the sky, Ellen’s or  Titanic ’s? 
  10.  Ambiguous. Who is hot, Bob or Devlin? And “hot” 
in what sense? 
 13.  Ambiguous . 
  16.  Ambiguous. Does Disraeli mean he will read the 
manuscript in the near future or that he won’t 
waste his time by bothering to read it? 
  19.  Ambiguous. She can refer to Jana or her sister. 
 III. 
  1. Verbal. (Two senses of “religious” are used.) 
  4. Factual. (What time did the coach say the game 
starts?) 
  7. Factual. (Who had the higher batting average, 
Cobb or Hornsby?)  
 EXER CISE 4.2 
 III. 
  1. Stipulative. 
  4. Precising. 
  7. Lexical. 
  10. Persuasive. 
 13. Lexical. 
  16. Lexical. 
  19. Lexical. 
 IV. 
  1. Enumerative. 
  4. Subclass. 
  7. Ostensive. 
  10. Genus and difference. 
 13. Synonymous. 
  16. Etymological. 
  19. Synonymous. 
  16. Inductive. (Conclusion does not follow necessar-
ily from the premises; argument from authority: 
“Kevin says. . . .”) 
  19. Inductive. (The principle of charity dictates that 
the argument be regarded as inductive because the 
conclusion does not follow necessarily from the 
premises.) 
 22. Deductive. (Argument by elimination; also the 
conclusion follows necessarily from the premises.) 
 25. Deductive. (Argument based on mathematics; also 
conclusion follows necessarily from the premises; also 
 it necessarily follows is a deduction indicator phrase.)  
 EXER CISE 3.4 
  1. Beta. 
  4. Delta is not an alpha. 
  7. If Delta is an alpha, then Delta is a theta. 
  10. Some alphas are thetas. (Or: Some thetas are 
alphas.)  
 EXER CISE 3.5 
 I. 
 1. Valid. 
  4. Invalid (denying the antecedent). 
  7. Valid. 
  10. Invalid. 
 II. 
  1. Sound. 
  4. Unsound (invalid argument: affirming the 
consequent). 
  7. Unsound (invalid argument: denying the antecedent). 
  10. Unsound (false premise). 
 III. 
  1. Cogent. 
  4. Uncogent. (The argument compares two activi-
ties that are different in relevant respects. “Lying 
and deception” is a known and accepted strategy 
in poker and so is not sufficiently similar to the 
real-world lying and deception that can occur in 
business.) 
  7. Cogent. 
  10. Uncogent. (The conclusion does not follow prob-
ably from the premises.) 
 IV. 
 1. Deductive, valid. 
  4. Inductive, weak. 
  7. Inductive, strong. 
  10. Inductive, weak. 
 13. Inductive, weak. 
  16. Inductive, weak. 
  19. Inductive, strong.  

ANS-4
Answers to Selected Exercises
description of women’s work is relevant to the point 
suggested in the final sentence. We’re not sure it is.  
 CHAPTER 5 
 EXER CISE 5.1 
  1. Positively relevant. 
  4. Logically irrelevant. 
  7. Negatively relevant. 
  10. Positively relevant. (Although the premises don’t 
provide evidence for God’s existence, they do pro-
vide prudential, or self-interested, reasons for  belief 
in God. Whether these prudential reasons are prop-
erly convincing is, of course, another question.) 
 13. The first premise is negatively relevant, and the 
second premise is positively relevant. 
 EXER CISE 5.2 
 I. 
  1. Bandwagon argument. 
  4. Straw man. 
  7. Begging the question. 
  10. Two wrongs make a right. 
 13. Equivocation. 
  16. No fallacy. 
  19. No fallacy. 
 22. Straw man. 
 25. Red herring. 
 28. Attacking the motive. 
  31. Bandwagon argument. 
 34. Bandwagon argument. 
  37. Red herring. 
 40. No fallacy.  
 CHAPTER 6 
 EXER CISE 6.1 
 I. 
  1. Inappropriate appeal to authority. 
  4. Inappropriate appeal to authority. 
  7. Hasty generalization. 
  10. Inappropriate appeal to authority. 
 13. Weak analogy. 
  16. Inappropriate appeal to authority. 
  19. No fallacy. 
 22. Hasty generalization. 
 25. Inappropriate appeal to authority. 
 28. Inconsistency. 
  31. False alternatives. 
 V. 
  1. Too broad. 
  4. Lacking in context. 
  7. Circular. ( Knowledge is used in the definition of 
 knowledge. ) 
  10. Lacking in context. 
 13. Too broad. 
  16. Slanted. (Only a Catholic would agree that the 
pope is the “infallible Vicar of Christ.”) 
  19. Obscure.  
 EXER CISE 4.4 
 I. 
  4. Possible choices:  begged, pleaded, requested, implored, 
insisted, and  demanded.  Begged, pleaded, and  implored 
suggest that the speaker is dependent on the listener 
or that she is desperate.  Demanded shows that she has 
more power over the listener, making “please” in 
the sentence merely courteous or perhaps sarcastic. 
  7. Possible choices:  gripped, grabbed, clutched, seized, 
and  squeezed. A word like  gripped connotes aggres-
sion or dominance; a word such as  clutched might 
suggest fear or protection. 
  10. Possible choices:  cold, hard-hearted, apathetic, callous, 
insensitive, and  unsympathetic. These words are all 
close in meaning, but  callous might imply a rough-
ness developed after many disappointments, whereas 
 apathetic suggests indifference and a lack of concern. 
 13. Possible choices:  accepted, okayed, endorsed, praised, 
admired, and  celebrated. These words all have dif-
ferent meanings, but they share the notion of 
approval. However, some of the words ( praised, cel-
ebrated ) suggest something far more positive than 
others ( accepted, okayed ). 
 II. 
  1. Emotive words and phrases in the advertisement 
include  charming, cozy (code for “small”?),  older 
neighborhood, lower-level recreation room (basement?), 
 modern, and  tender loving care (needs lots of work?). 
All of these words are used to create a warm and 
receptive attitude in the prospective buyer. 
  4. This passage does not have the obvious kinds of 
emotive language that critical thinking students get 
accustomed to looking for—the blatant emotional 
appeals, sarcastic slanting, and name-calling char-
acteristic of the preceding passages. We think it’s 
important to let students know that some writing 
(such as you find in literary essays) contains more-
subtle emotional appeals. The emotive words and 
phrases in this passage include  family herd, grandma’s 
practiced eye, desperate families, flooded, seeking, bundle, 
toddlers, hang, unswaddle,  and  species. Students might 
be asked how Kingsolver carefully sets up her final 
sentence with a subtle, emotionally charged passage. 
They might also comment on whether the historical 

Answers to Selected Exercises
ANS-5
  10. Several states have abolished the insanity defense 
against criminal responsibility. ➀ This may be 
popular with voters, but it is morally indefensible. 
➁ Insanity removes moral responsibility, and ➂ it 
is wrong to punish someone who is not morally re-
sponsible for his crime. Moreover, ➃ it is pointless 
to punish the insane because ➄ punishment has no 
deterrent effect on a person who cannot appreci-
ate the wrongfulness or criminality of his or her 
actions. 
 
➁

➂
➀
➄
➃
 13. ➀ If today is Saturday, then tomorrow is Sunday. 
➁ If tomorrow is Sunday, then we’ll be having 
pasta for dinner. ➂ If we’ll be having pasta for din-
ner, then I should pick up some red wine today 
because ➃ in this state wine can be purchased only 
at liquor stores, and ➄ the liquor stores are closed 
on Sundays. ➅ Today is Saturday. Therefore, ➆ I 
should pick up some red wine today. 
 
➀



➁
➂
➆
➅
➃
➄
 II. 
  1. Since ➀ our feelings, desires, and preferences can 
be either beneficial or harmful, noble or ignoble, 
praiseworthy or damnable, and since ➁ they can be 
either in harmony or in conflict with other people’s 
feelings, desires, and preferences, ➂ they are obvi-
ously not accurate tools for analysis of moral issues 
or trustworthy guidelines to action. 
 
➀
➂
➁
  4. ➀ School tests should be abolished. ➁ Tests intro-
duce competition where it does not belong. ➂ They 
deny the individuality of students’ talents and inter-
ests. ➃ They degrade education by encouraging pas-
sivity, mindlessness, and triviality. Finally, ➄ they 
 34. Weak analogy. 
  37. Hasty generalization. 
 40. Slippery slope. 
 II. 
 1. Loaded question. 
  4. False alternatives. 
  7. False alternatives. 
  10. Questionable cause. 
 13. Equivocation. 
  16. Hasty generalization. 
  19. False alternatives. 
 22. Hasty generalization. 
 25. Weak analogy. 
 28. Appeal to ignorance.  
 CHAPTER 7 
 EXER CISE 7.1 
 I. 
  1. ➀ Bertie probably isn’t home. ➁ His car isn’t in the 
driveway, and ➂ there are no lights on in his house. 
 
➁
➀
➂
  4. ➀ Affirmative action in higher education is mor-
ally justifiable because ➁ it compensates for past 
discrimination, ➂ provides valuable role models 
for women and minorities, and ➃ promotes multi-
cultural understanding. 
 
➁
➂
➀
➃
 7.  ➀ Only three people could have stolen the CD: 
Danny, Stacy, or Patrick. But ➁ Stacy couldn’t 
have stolen the CD because ➂ she was out riding 
her bike. ➃ Patrick couldn’t have stolen the CD 
because ➄ he was at a friend’s house. Therefore, 
➅ Danny must have stolen the CD. 
 
➀


➁
➃
➅
➂
➄

ANS-6
Answers to Selected Exercises
  16. ➀ All students should study a foreign language. 
➁ It improves mastery of English. ➂ It helps to 
avoid cultural provincialism by expanding the cul-
tural experience of students. ➃ It is useful for travel 
and commerce. ➄ It makes it possible to do ad-
vanced work in a foreign language, including the 
study of the major literary works in that language. 
Finally, ➅ the ability to read, speak, and think in a 
second language is a source of pleasure and satisfac-
tion even if this language is not used for travel and 
business and even if it does not become a field of 
further study. 
 
➁
➂
➃
➀
➄
➅
  19. ➀ Lefty Grove was the greatest pitcher of all time, 
period. ➁ The one best indicator of a pitcher’s abil-
ity is his ERA, and ➂ Lefty Grove led leagues in 
earned run average nine times. ➃ No one else even 
approaches this record. ➄ The second-best indica-
tor of a pitcher’s ability is his winning percentage. 
Guess what? ➅ Grove also led the league in that 
more times than anyone else. 
 
➁
➀


➂
➃
➄

➅
 
 EXERCISE 7.2 
  1. Most Californians are friendly. 
  4. Human beings are the only rational creatures (on 
Earth). 
  7. Having a lot of money is not the secret to true 
happiness. 
  10. Because a well-regulated citizen militia is neces-
sary to the security of a free state, the right of in-
dividual citizens to keep and bear arms shall not be 
infringed. [ Not: The right of the individual citi-
zens to keep and bear such arms as are necessary for 
the maintenance of well-regulated citizen militias 
shall not be infringed.] 
 13. Common sense tells us that long-established gov-
ernments should not be changed without compel-
ling reasons. That is why, as all experience shows, 
people tend to be willing to endure political abuses, 
while those abuses are tolerable, rather than cor-
rect them by abolishing the forms of government 
to which they are accustomed. But when a long 
series of abuses and injustices, all with the same 
purpose, makes clear that the government is at-
tempting to establish a complete dictatorship, it is 
their right and duty to throw off the government 
send the wrong messages about what is valuable in 
education and in life. 
 
➁
➂
➀
➃
➄
  7. ➀ Everything eternal is necessary. But ➁ whatever 
God wills, he wills from eternity, for ➂ otherwise 
His will would be mutable. Therefore, ➃ whatever 
He wills, He wills necessarily. 
➀

➁
➃
➂
 
  10. ➀ Education implies teaching. ➁ Teaching implies 
knowledge. ➂ Knowledge is truth. ➃ The truth is 
everywhere the same. Hence ➄ education should 
be everywhere the same. 
 
➀


➁
➂
➄
➃
 13. ➀ Planetary exploration has many virtues. ➁ It 
permits us to refine insights derived from such 
Earth-bound sciences as meteorology, climatol-
ogy, geology, and biology, to broaden their pow-
ers and improve their practical applications here 
on Earth. ➂ It provides cautionary tales on the 
alternative fates of worlds. ➃ It is an aperture to 
future high technologies important for life here 
on Earth. ➄ It provides an outlet for the tradi-
tional human zest for exploration and discovery, 
our passion to find out, which has been to a very 
large degree responsible for our success as a spe-
cies. And ➅ it permits us, for the first time in his-
tory, to approach with rigor, with a significant 
chance of finding out the true answers, questions 
on the origins and destinies of worlds, the begin-
nings and ends of life, and the possibilities of other 
beings who live in the skies—questions as basic to 
the human enterprise as thinking is, as natural as 
breathing. 
 
➁
➂
➃
➀
➄
➅

Answers to Selected Exercises
ANS-7
  5. Thus, to deny meaningful instruction in thinking 
to students below a certain IQ or proficiency level 
is to deny them an essential part of their humanity. 
(from 4) 
  6. The constitutional guarantees of freedom to speak, 
to choose one’s own religion, and so on, lose much 
of their meaning when only some individuals are 
trained to evaluate and choose among competing 
views. 
  7. Therefore, thinking instruction in elementary and 
secondary education should not be limited to the 
honors program. (from 1, 5, and 6) 
  7. 
  1. All sorrow or pain is either for something that is 
truly evil or for something that is apparently evil, 
but good in reality. 
  2. There is something worse than pain or sorrow 
for that which is truly evil, namely, either not to 
reckon as evil that which is really evil or not to 
reject it. 
  3. Thus, pain or sorrow for that which is truly evil 
cannot be the greatest evil. (from 2) 
  4. There is something worse than sorrow or pain 
for that which is apparently evil, but really good, 
namely, to be altogether separated from that which 
is truly good. 
  5. Thus, pain or sorrow for what is apparently evil, 
but good in reality, cannot be the greatest evil. 
(from 4) 
  6. Therefore, it is impossible for sorrow or pain to be 
man’s greatest evil. (from 1, 3, and 5) 
 10.  
  1. The economic cost of legal drugs is two-and-a-
half times greater than that of illicit drugs. 
  2. [Thus, although legalizing drugs may take the 
profit motive away from the street and clandes-
tine manufacturers, these drugs will continue to 
be manufactured and the economic costs of drugs 
will still be high (from 1).] 
  3. Drug use not only has impacts on the user, but also 
has serious implications for families, the commu-
nity, consumers, and others. 
  4. Legalizing drugs would open the floodgates of ac-
cess to these mood-altering chemicals and would 
send a message that drugs are not harmful. 
  5. Thus, legalizing drugs would increase the risk that 
pilots, surgeons, and school bus drivers would use 
drugs on the job. (from 4) 
  6. Thus, drug use is not a right and should never be. 
(from 3 and 5) 
  7. [It is ridiculous to say that child abuse laws should be 
repealed because abuse of children is escalating.] 
  8. Saying drugs should be legalized because drug use 
is escalating is like saying child abuse laws should be 
repealed because abuse of children is escalating. 
and provide new safeguards for their future 
security.  
 EXER CISE 7.3 
 I. 
  1.  Missing premise: All Mazda Miatas are convertibles. 
  4.  Missing premise: This is not a Honda. 
  7.  Missing premise (subconclusion): This is a Toyota. 
  10.  Missing premise: Some Fords are Rangers. 
 II. 
  1.  Missing premise: Most people from Singapore speak 
English. 
  4.  Missing premise (subconclusion): It is not cold. 
 
   Missing premise (subconclusion): It is not snowing. 
 
   Missing conclusion:  Uncle Fred will be coming over 
for dinner. 
  7.  Missing premise: Today is Thursday. 
 
   Missing premise: Zoe is not on the golf course. 
  10.  Missing premise: Jay is a Hampton College student. 
 
   Missing premise: Anyone who voted the straight 
Republican ticket in the last election and regu-
larly attends meetings of the Young Republicans is 
probably a Republican. 
 
   Missing premise: Most Republicans favor a constitu-
tional amendment banning abortion.  
 EXER CISE 7.4 
  1.  
  1. Asking the question “Will this be on the exam?” 
indicates that your main interest is in getting 
through the course with a good grade rather than 
in learning what the instructor has to teach. 
  2. The question is insulting to the teacher, who has 
worked hard to put you in a position to appreciate 
the material—its intrinsic interest, its subtlety, its 
complexity. 
  3. Thus, the question “Will this be on the exam?” 
infuriates many instructors, and rightly so. (from 1 
and 2) 
  4. Therefore, you should not ask, nor be tempted 
to ask, the question “Will this be on the exam?” 
(from 3) 
  4. 
  1. Everyone needs thinking skills to meet the de-
mands of career and citizenship. 
  2. The highest of Abraham Maslow’s hierarchy of 
human needs, self-actualization, is unachievable 
without the ability to think productively. 
  3. [Maslow correctly identifies self-actualization as 
the highest human need.] 
  4. Thus, everyone needs thinking skills to realize his 
or her potential as a human being. (from 2 and 3) 

ANS-8
Answers to Selected Exercises
 III. 
  1. Answers will vary. Pertinent counterpoints 
include: Not all colleges cost a fortune. Often 
students who were bored in high school find that 
they enjoy college work. Though jobs like truck-
ing and construction may be relatively high-
paying, the work may be more dangerous, less 
enjoyable, less prestigious, and less secure than 
many jobs that require a college education. The 
difference in earning power may also be greater 
than this individual supposes. Studies consistently 
show that college graduates make on average 
about 45 percent more than those who have only 
a high school diploma. 
  4. Answers will vary. Some pertinent counterpoints 
include: Although the meaning of the Second 
Amendment is hotly debated, few would argue that 
the “right to bear arms” extends to military-style 
weapons that are neither necessary for personal 
protection nor suitable for hunting. Moreover, 
the risks of legalizing such weapons would seem 
to outweigh the gains. The risks of foreign inva-
sion or a breakdown of society are probably pretty 
remote. By contrast, the risk that such weapons 
could fall into the hands of criminals or be used 
in Columbine-type massacres, domestic disputes, 
and accidental shootings is high. 
  7. Answers will vary. Pertinent points that arguably 
weaken or refute the argument include: There is 
a likelihood that legalizing hard drugs would lead 
to greatly increased use and addiction rates, with 
all the personal and societal costs this would en-
tail: more overdoses, hospitalizations, car accidents, 
industrial accidents, suicides, family break-ups, 
unemployable workers, lower productivity, and so 
forth. Legalizing hard drugs would also likely make 
these drugs more readily available to children and 
implicitly send a message that these drugs aren’t 
harmful.  
 CHAPTER 9 
 EXERCISE 9.1 
  1.  
 Artichokes
Fruits
  4.  
 
  Skateboarders
Jazz fans
X
  9. [Thus, it is ridiculous to say that drugs should be 
legalized because drug use is escalating (from 7 
and 8).] 
  10. Common sense and state experiments with the 
decriminalization of marijuana in the 1970s tell us 
that when there are fewer controls, there will be 
more incidents. 
  11. America’s two favorite legal drugs—alcohol and 
nicotine—have a tremendous negative impact on 
the physiological, social, psychological, economic, 
and spiritual aspects of our lives. 
 12. Thus, if drugs were legalized, hospitalizations, 
crimes, car accidents, addicted babies, industrial 
accidents, family break-ups, and other problems 
affiicting our society would worsen significantly. 
(from 10 and 11) 
 13. [Therefore, drugs should not be legalized (from 2, 
6, 9, and 12).]  
 CHAPTER 8 
 EXERCISE 8.3 
 I. 
  1. The statement is self-refuting. If no statements are 
true, then the statement that no statements are true 
isn’t true either. So, if the statement is true, it’s 
false, which is a contradiction. 
  4. The statement is self-refuting. If no beliefs are jus-
tified, then the belief that no beliefs are justified 
isn’t justified either. So, if the statement is true, 
it’s false, which is contradictory. Looked at another 
way, if we should be absolute and total skeptics 
(i.e., hold that no beliefs are justified), we should 
be skeptical of the claim that we should be absolute 
and total skeptics, and hence  not be absolute and 
total skeptics. The statement asserts that we should 
be absolute and total skeptics, yet implies that we 
shouldn’t, which is contradictory. 
  7. If the claim here is that all children in Lake 
Wobegon are above average with respect to  other 
Lake Wobegon children, the claim is necessarily false, 
for something can be above average in a compari-
son group only if some other things in the group 
are below average. The statement is not necessarily 
false if it means that all children in Lake Wobegon 
are above the  national average. 
 II. 
  1. What about polar bears, seals, walruses, and orcas, 
to name a few? 
  4. Plausible 
counterexamples 
include 
Thoreau, 
Melville, Hawthorne, Poe, Fitzgerald, Hemingway, 
and Faulkner, among others. 
  7. Don’t forget good ol’ Ohio and Utah. 

Answers to Selected Exercises
ANS-9
  4. Some bankers are vegetarians. 
 
  No anarchists are bankers. 
 
  So, some anarchists are not vegetarians. 
 
Bankers
Anarchists
Vegetarians
X
Invalid
  7. No poker players are early-risers. 
 
  Some firefighters are early-risers. 
 
  So, some firefighters are not poker players. 
 
Early–risers
Firefighters
Poker players
X
Valid
  10. No Fords are Pontiacs. 
 
  All Escorts are Fords. 
 
  So, some Escorts are not Pontiacs. 
 
Fords
Escorts
Pontiacs
Invalid
 13. No landlubbers are sailors. 
 
  Some sailors are not pirates. 
 
  So, some pirates are not landlubbers. 
 
Sailors
Pirates
Landlubbers
Invalid
X
  16. No fish are reptiles. 
 
  All trout are fish. 
 
  So, some trout are not reptiles. 
 
Fish
Trout
Reptiles
Invalid
  7. 
 Women
U.S. presidents or vice presidents 
  10. 
 World's greatest golfers
South Americans
X
 EXERCISE 9.2 
  1. All psychiatrists are doctors. 
  4. All Mustangs are Fords. 
  7. All players due to report on Monday are persons 
who are pitchers or catchers. 
  10. All persons who may use the Teachers’ Lounge are 
teachers. 
 13. All persons God loves are persons that dwelleth in 
wisdom.  
 EXERCISE 9.3 
 I. 
  1. All maples are trees. 
  4. All insects are animals. 
  7. Some things that glitter are not gold things. 
  10. All persons that hit are persons who swing the 
bat. 
 13. Some birds are birds that cannot fly. (Or: Some 
birds are not things that fly.) 
  16. All places where the grass is greener are places on 
the other side. 
  19. Some polar bears are bears that live in Canada. 
 22. All liars are thieves. 
 25. Most humans are humans who live lives of quiet 
desperation. 
 28. All persons who persevere in error are fools. 
  31. All statements that are certain are statements iden-
tical to the statement “Nothing is certain.” 
 34. All villains dwelling in Denmark are arrant knaves.  
 EXERCISE 9.4 
 I. 
  1. No barracuda are pets. 
 
  No sharks are barracuda. 
 
  So, no sharks are pets. 
 
Barracuda
Sharks
Pets
Invalid

ANS-10
Answers to Selected Exercises
 
Political scientists
Persons who favor 
campaign finance reform
Social scientists
Valid
X
 13. All tax evaders are lawbreakers. 
 
  No lawbreakers are model citizens. 
 
  So, no model citizens are tax evaders. 
 
Lawbreakers
Model citizens
Tax evaders
Valid
  16. No harmless acts are immoral acts. 
 
  Some lies are not harmless acts. 
 
  So, some lies are not immoral acts. 
 
Harmless acts
Lies
Immoral acts
Invalid
X
  19. All persons who eat pizza every night are persons 
at risk for heart disease. 
 
  Some persons who are at risk for heart disease are 
cab drivers. 
 
  So, some cab drivers are persons who eat pizza 
every night. 
 
Persons at risk for heart disease
Cab drivers
Persons who eat
pizza every night
Invalid
X
 CHAPTER 10 
 EXERCISE 10.1 
I.
II.
III.
 1. p
 1. T
 1. T
 4. p & q
 4. T
 4. T
 7. p & q
 7. F
 7. F
10. p & q
10. F
10. T
  19. Some butchers are not bakers. 
 
  No butchers are candlestick makers. 
 
  So, some candlestick makers are not bakers. 
 
Butchers
Candlestick makers
Bakers
X
Invalid
 II. 
  1. No Nobel Prize winners are rock stars. 
 
  Some astrophysicists are Nobel Prize winners. 
 
  Therefore, some astrophysicists are not rock stars. 
 
Nobel Prize winners
Astrophysicists
Rock stars
Valid
X
  4. All liberals are big spenders. 
 
  All persons identical to Senator Crumley are big 
spenders. 
 
  So, all persons identical to Senator Crumley are 
liberals. 
 
Big spenders
Senator Crumley
Liberals
Invalid
 7. Some lawyers are not golfers. 
 
  All lawyers are persons who have attended law 
school. 
 
  So, some persons who have attended law school are 
not golfers. 
 
Lawyers
Persons who have
attended law school
Golfers
Valid
X
  10. All political scientists are social scientists. 
 
  Some political scientists are persons who favor 
campaign finance reform. 
 
  So, some persons who favor campaign finance 
reform are social scientists. 

Answers to Selected Exercises
ANS-11
 V. 
  1. ˜ p & ˜ q 
 
  ... ˜( p &  q ) 
p
q
˜p
˜q
p & q
˜p & ˜q* ˜(p & q) C
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
 Valid. 
 4. ˜( p &  q ) 
 
   p 
 
  ... ˜ q 
p
q
p & q
˜(p & q)*
p*
˜q C
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
 Valid.  
 EXER CISE 10 .4 
 I. 
  1. T 
 4. F 
  7. T 
  10. T 
 III. 
 1. ( c &  d ) & ˜ k 
  4. ( t &  b ) & ˜ w 
 IV. 
  1.  p &  q 
 
  ˜( q &  r ) 
 
  ... ˜ r 
p
q
r
q & r
p & q*
˜(q & r)*
˜r C
1.
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
2.
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
3.
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
4.
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
5.
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
6.
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
7.
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
8.
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
 Valid. 
  4.  b & ˜ t 
 
  ˜( m &  b ) 
 
 ...  ˜ m & ˜ t 
 EXER CISE 10 .2 
 I. 
  1. 
p*
q*
p & q C
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
 Valid. 
  4. 
r*
s C
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
 Invalid. 
 II. 
  1.  p 
 
   q  
 
  ...  p &  q 
p*
q*
p & q C
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
 Valid. 
 EXER CISE 10 .3 
 I.    
 
 III. 
 1. F   
 1.  p & ˜ q 
  4. F   
  4. ˜ p &  q 
  7. F   
  7.  p & ˜ q 
  10. T  
 10. ˜( p &  q ) 
 IV. 
 1. 
p
q*
˜p*
˜p & q C
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
 Valid. 
  4. 
p
q
p & q
˜(p & q)*
p*
˜q C
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
 Valid. 

ANS-12
Answers to Selected Exercises
  4. 
t
a
w
˜t
t & a
˜(t & a)*
a v w*
˜t & a C
1.
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
2.
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
3.
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
4.
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
5.
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
6.
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
7.
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
F
8.
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
F
 Invalid. 
 V. 
  1.  d v  r 
 
  ˜ r 
 
 ...  d 
d
r
d v r*
˜r*
d C
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
 Valid. 
  4.  s v  a 
 
  ˜( s &  a ) 
 
   a 
 
 ...  s 
s
a
s & a
s v a*
˜(s & a)*
a*
s C
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
 Invalid.  
 EXER CISE 10 .6 
 I. 
  1. F 
  4. T 
  7. F 
  10. T 
 III. 
  1.  b →  e 
  4.  h →  f 
  7. ˜ c → ˜ e 
  10. ( s →  g ) → (˜ s →  p ) 
 IV. 
  1. 
p
q
p → q*
˜p*
˜q C
1.
T
T
T
F
F
2.
T
F
F
F
T
3.
F
T
T
T
F
4.
F
F
T
T
T
 Invalid. 
b
m
t ˜m
˜t
m & b b & ˜t* ˜(m & b)* ˜m & ˜t C
1. T T T
F
F
T
F
F
F
2. T T F
F
T
T
T
F
F
3. T F T
T
F
F
F
T
F
4. T F
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
5. F T T
F
F
F
F
T
F
6. F T F
F
T
F
F
T
F
7. F
F T
T
F
F
F
T
F
8. F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
 Valid. 
 V. 
  1.  f &  t 
 
  ˜ s 
 
  ... ˜( f &  s ) 
f
t
s
f & s
f & t*
˜s*
˜( f & s)C
1.
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
2.
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
3.
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
4.
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
5.
F
T
T
F
F
F
T
6.
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
7.
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
8.
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
 Valid. 
  4.  s & ˜ e 
 
  ˜( e &  t ) 
 
  ...  s &  t 
s
e
t
˜e
e & t
s & ˜e* ˜(e & t)* s & t C
1.
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
2.
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
3.
T
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
4.
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
5.
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
6.
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
7.
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
8.
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
 Invalid.  
 EXER CISE 10 .5 
 I.     
 
 III. 
 1. T   
  1.  d v  r 
  4. T   
  4.  w v  d 
  7. T   
  7.  p v  f 
  10. F   
  10. ˜( t v  a ) &  w 
 IV. 
  1. 
p
q
p v q*
˜p*
q C
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
 Valid. 

Answers to Selected Exercises
ANS-13
  4. Is the sample large enough? Possibly, depending on 
the size of the faculty. Is the sample representa-
tive? No, they are all from one department. Other 
departments may tenure far fewer applicants for 
tenure.  
 EXER CISE 11.4 
 I. 
  1. (c) Strong and reliable. 
  4. (c) Strong and reliable. 
  7. (c) Strong and reliable. 
  10. (c) Strong and reliable.  
 EXER CISE 11.6 
  1. 2: The skills involved are very different. 
  4. 5: There are big differences between a small family 
budget and a large city budget. 
  7. 7: The argument does not claim very much, and 
considering Jordan’s athletic ability, love for the 
game, and practice, it isn’t unreasonable to claim 
he could learn to play tennis fairly well. 
  10. 3: The conclusion is too strong in claiming he must 
be “just like” the character. There are a couple of 
important similarities but not enough to fully sup-
port the conclusion.  
 EXER CISE 11.8 
 I. 
  1. Strong. 
  4. Weak. 
 II. 
  1. a. Strengthen. 
 
  b. Strengthen. 
 
  c. Weaken. 
 
  d. Strengthen. 
  4. a. Strengthen. 
 
  b. Weaken. 
 
  c. Weaken. 
 
  d. Strengthen.  
 EXER CISE 11.10 
 I. 
  1. Bad evidence. 
  4. Good evidence. 
  7. Good evidence. 
  10. Good evidence. 
 II. 
  1. What else did he eat? Did anyone else become sick 
from eating it? 
  4. The percentage of women with breast implants who 
have connective tissue disease; the percentage of 
  4. 
p
q
r
˜p
˜q
p → q*
˜q v r*
˜p & r C
1.
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
2.
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
3.
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
4.
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
5.
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
6.
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
7.
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
8.
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
 Invalid. 
 V. 
  1.  b  →  e 
 
  ˜ e 
 
 ...  ˜ b 
b
e
b → e*
˜e*
˜b C
1.
T
T
T
F
F
2.
T
F
F
T
F
3.
F
T
T
F
T
4.
F
F
T
T
T
 Valid. 
  4.  g →  s 
 
 ...  ˜ g → ˜ s 
g
s
˜g
˜s
g → s*
˜g → ˜s C
1.
T
T
F
F
T
T
2.
T
F
F
T
F
T
3.
F
T
T
F
T
F
4.
F
F
T
T
T
T
 Invalid.  
 CHAPTER 11 
 EXER CISE 11.1 
  1. Strong. 
  4. Strong. 
  7. Strong. 
  10. Weak.  
 EXER CISE 11.2 
 I. 
  1. Strong. Is the sample large enough? Yes. Is the 
sample representative? Yes 
  4. Weak. Is the sample large enough? Yes. Is the sam-
ple representative? No. 
 II. 
 1. Is the sample large enough? No, there are just three 
cities. Is the sample representative? No, not neces-
sarily; for example, at least two of the cities have 
problems with illegal immigration that may add to 
the crime problem. 

ANS-14
Answers to Selected Exercises
language—“generally acknowledged”—makes the 
statement more opinion than fact. Qualifying the 
statement might bring it closer to a matter of fact: 
“MIT is regarded among college presidents as the 
nation’s best school for engineering.” At least such 
a claim could be verified.  
 EXER CISE 12.3 
  1. Rush Limbaugh is a radio-talk-show host and au-
thor who espouses a conservative point of view. 
His claim that condoms fail “around” 17 percent 
of the time should be cautiously considered and 
verified with more-reliable sources. One key to 
Limbaugh’s bias is his characterization of liberals 
in the first sentence of the quoted item. (Could he 
be charged here with a straw man fallacy?) 
  4. The billboards proclaiming these “facts” are spon-
sored by someone who is attempting to reduce 
the level of immigration into the United States. 
The figures on the billboards may or may not be 
correct, but anyone hoping to use them in an ar-
gument would do well to corroborate the infor-
mation with other sources. (A careful reader will 
notice the slippery language and less-than-reliable 
information. In the first billboard, how little is 
“very little”? In the second, “arrive” is a vague 
word with several possible meanings, including 
“visit.”) 
  7. It may well be true that 67 percent of listeners 
“would prefer that the races be separated,” but that 
doesn’t prove that “67 percent of  people ” prefer the 
same. Are the callers to a radio talk show a repre-
sentative sample of “people” everywhere? Hardly. 
  10.  The Onion  is an online parody newspaper that pub-
lishes satirical articles about newsworthy events 
(and nonevents). Its intended audience—primarily 
regular readers who appreciate  The Onions’ s biting 
satire—won’t be misled by the passage. Given the 
patent implausibility of such an event, few others 
will be either. 
 13.  America (The Book)  is a satirical romp through 
American history written by Jon Stewart and the 
writers of Comedy Central’s fake news program, 
 The Daily Show . The passage is obviously a joke, 
but a pointed one given long-standing debates 
about how disinterested the founding fathers’ 
motives were.  
 EXER CISE 12.4 
  1. Answers will vary. Here is one possibility: In her 
book  Starting Out Suburban: A Frosh Year Survival 
Guide, Linda Polland Puner suggests that most 
freshmen find it difficult to be away from home 
for the first time. They miss some of the comforts, 
such as good meals and privacy. Some are lucky 
enough, particularly if their family lives nearby, 
to get home within the first month of school, 
women in the general public who have connective 
tissue disease; the percentage of women with sili-
cone breast implants who have connective tissue 
disease; the percentage of women with saline breast 
implants who have connective tissue disease. 
  7. Why do students choose to sit in the front row? 
  10. How do we define a “healthy heart”? Just red wine, 
or other alcoholic beverages?  
 EXER CISE 11.11 
  1. Relative frequency. 
  4. Epistemic. 
 7. Relative frequency. 
  10. A priori.  
 EXER CISE 11.12 
 I. 
  1. Negative. 
  4. Negative.  
 CHAPTER 12 
 EXER CISE 12.2 
 II. 
  1.  Facts: Cal Thomas worked for NBC News in the 
late 1960s. Robert Kitner was at one time presi-
dent of NBC, as was Sylvester Weaver, who went 
by the name of Pat.  Matters of fact: Stories were 
selected based on the audience they would attract 
(this could be verified with interviews, for exam-
ple, or with corporate correspondence). Whether 
or not “ratings for news started to matter, as they 
did for entertainment” could be verified in similar 
ways, though some words, such as  mattered, would 
need to be clarified. The decline in the ratings 
could easily be documented. But what about the 
claim that “the respect most people once had for 
the journalism profession” also declined? Could 
that be documented through surveys or opinion 
polls? Could such a statement be shown to be 
factual? 
  4.  Facts: Harvard is the oldest institution of higher 
learning in America; thirty-three Nobel Prize 
winners graduated from Harvard; Bill Gates 
developed the programming language BASIC; 
Radcliff was founded in 1879 and started admit-
ting men in 1973; Martin Luther King Jr. received 
a doctorate in theology from Boston University, 
and so forth. Some statements, however, are not 
immediately verifiable. For example, it would be 
very difficult to document the claim that MIT is 
“generally acknowledged to be the nation’s top 
school for science and engineering.” The imprecise 

Answers to Selected Exercises
ANS-15
novelist’s childhood experiences, including his 
father’s imprisonment for debt and Dickens’s sub-
sequent work in a shoe-polish factory, influenced 
his work as a novelist.” (You would also need, of 
course, to supply the appropriate reference infor-
mation.) 
 13. This is still being debated, so it would be best to 
tell your reader what source you are using.  
 CHAPTER 14 
 EXER CISE 14.9 
  1. f 
  4. k 
  7. j 
  10. c 
 13. n 
  16. u 
  19. w 
 22. s 
 25. b  
 EXER CISE 14.10 
 III. 
  1. Weasel word. 
  4. Catchy slogan. 
  7. Humor. 
  10. Emotive words. 
 13. Sex appeal and humor. 
  16. Anxiety ad. 
  19. Catchy slogan. 
 22. Anxiety ad. 
 25. Sex appeal. Possible puffery and catchy slogan.  
 CHAPTER 15 
 EXER CISE 15.2 
  1. Not testable. (Not realistically verifiable or falsifi-
able, though scientific evidence no doubt bears on 
the issue.) 
  4. Not testable. (Value statement.) 
  7. Not testable. (We can imagine evidence that would 
falsify the claim—superintelligent extraterrestrials 
might visit the earth, for example—but the claim is 
not realistically verifiable because we have no way 
to search the immensity of space.) 
  10. Not realistically verifiable. Not only would tree-
counters have to resolve difficult borderline cases 
(“Is this a tree or a bush?” “Is this scraggly-looking 
but others must wait until Thanksgiving or even 
Christmas. Even just a semester away from home 
can seem very long, and the distances can seem 
longer than they really are. 
  4. Answers will vary. Here is one possibility: In her 
article “A Test for Assessing Phonemic Aware-
ness in Young Children,” Hallie Kay Yopp claims 
that researchers have found that phonemic aware-
ness, or the ability to sound out words, is perhaps 
the single most important requirement for good 
reading skills. This ability appears to be a more 
important indica  tor of reading success than IQ 
scores and vocabulary and listening comprehen-
sion tests. Having a proper assessment tool in place, 
therefore, can help direct the teacher to awareness 
of potential problems and to the use of available 
exercises that will enable the student to acquire 
stronger spelling and reading skills. 
 EXER CISE 12.5 
 1. Because rules are precise and must be followed to 
the letter, it would be best to quote the rule or 
the relevant part of the rule exactly as it appears 
in the book. In claiming that a player should have 
lost a tournament, someone might write, “In hit-
ting the ball twice, Sampras clearly violated Rule 
20d, which prohibits the player from ‘deliberately 
touch[ing] it [the ball] with his racket more than 
once’ in a given point.” The writer would need, of 
course, to prove that the action was “deliberate.” 
  4. The passage could be paraphrased or summarized 
with some phrases quoted if necessary. The fol-
lowing sentence might appear in a student’s paper: 
“Athletes who push themselves to the limit often 
incur injuries, but the medical community is now 
considering whether athletes who push too hard 
might be susceptible to ‘a host of chronic diseases, 
even cancer’” (Tabor).  
 EXER CISE 12.6 
  1. Fact available in wide variety of sources; does not 
need to be documented. 
  4. This fact should be documented. It is not widely 
known. 
  7. No need to document this fact; it is widely known 
and available. 
  10. This one is tricky. For scholars of Dickens’s life and 
work, this is a commonly known fact: Dickens’s 
childhood experiences are indeed reflected in sev-
eral of his novels. Therefore, in preparing an argu-
ment for a literature class, you would most likely 
find this information in several sources and would 
not have to cite it. However, you would not be in-
correct in giving a source if you chose to do so. In 
your paper you might write, “According to Charles 
Dickens’s friend and biographer, John Forster, the 

ANS-16
Answers to Selected Exercises
it worked”). The herbal tea might have worked 
because of the placebo effect. Alternatively, the 
headache might have gone away by itself. 
  4. Pseudoscientific thinking. The arguer is explain-
ing away falsifying evidence. 
  7. Pseudoscientific thinking. The graphologist is 
relying on general, Barnum-type language that 
applies to practically everybody. 
  10. Pseudoscientific thinking. Parry is explaining 
away falsifying data. 
 13. Pseudoscientific thinking. It’s not surprising that 
dowsing sometimes works because underground 
water is abundant. The only way to  know whether 
dowsing consistently works, however, is to test it 
under controlled conditions.  
tree alive or dead?”), but there is no way, even 
with an army of counters, that all living trees in 
Canada could be located (many are in remote loca-
tions, growing in tall grasses, hidden under leaves, 
etc.). And even if these obstacles could somehow 
be overcome, any ongoing count would be con-
tinually invalidated by the growth of new trees and 
the deaths of others. There are ways, however, in 
which the claim might be reasonably falsified. 
 13. Not testable. (If absolutely everything doubled in 
size—including all yardsticks and other standards 
of measurement—there would be no way to detect 
the difference.) 
 EXER CISE 15.3 
  1. Pseudoscientific thinking. The arguer relies on 
an appeal to personal experience (“I tried it and 

 
C-1
 CREDITS 
 5 Reprinted by permission of Kenneth R. Merrill.   13 From 
 Decision Traps  by J. Edward Russo and Paul J. H. Schoe-
maker. Copyright © 1989 by J. Edward Russo and Paul J. H. 
Schoemaker. Used by permission of Doubleday, a division of 
Random House, Inc.   20 Grant H. Cornwell, “From Plural-
ism to Relativism and Back Again: Philosophy’s Role in an 
Inclusive Curriculum,”  Teaching Philosophy  14:2 (June 1991), 
pp. 143–153. Used with permission.   54 Adapted from John 
Hoaglund,  Critical Thinking , Third Edition, Newport News, 
VA: Vale Press, 1999, p. 65. Reprinted with permission from 
the publisher.   184 “EBR’s Students Need Your Vote,” edito-
rial,  The Baton Rouge Advocate , April 4, 1998. Reprinted with 
permission from the publisher.   185 “SAT Scores,” Letter to 
the Editor,  Wilkes-Barre Times Leader , September 16, 1998. 
Reprinted with permission from Robert Butts.   190 “Don’t 
Rush to Adopt Mail Voting System,” editorial,  The Baton 
Rouge Advocate , February 6, 1996. Reprinted with permission 
from the publisher.   191 Carmen F. Ambrosino, “Legalizing 
Drugs Spawns Many Problems, Solves None,”  Wilkes-Barre 
Times Leader , February 17, 1997. Reprinted with permission 
from the publisher.   210 Letter to the Editor of  Wilkes-
Barre Times Leader , June 10, 1996. Reprinted with permission 
from Stan Daniels.   210 From Leonard Pitts, Jr., “Don’t Use 
God’s Law to Beat Up on Gays,”  Miami-Herald , June 8, 1997.  
 211 Constance Hilliard, “We’re Spendthrift ‘Environmentalists,’” 
 USA Today , December 8, 2000. Reprinted with permis-
sion of the author.   212  USA Today. (3-3-04). Reprinted 
with permission.   213 Richard Delgado, “Hate Cannot Be 
Tolerated,”  USA Today , March 3, 2004.   214  Sean Curtis, 
“Why Cats Make Better Pets than Dogs.”   214  John Tierney. “A 
Good Man is Hard to Find,” March 25, 2006. Copyright © The 
New York Times Co. Reprinted with permission.   216 USA 
Today. (1-31-05). Reprinted with permission.   217 USA Today. 
(4-8-94). Reprinted with permission.   389  Letter to the Editor, 
 Wilkes-Barre Times Leader , August 1998. Reprinted with permis-
sion from George R. Race.   409  From  Amusing Ourselves to Death 
by Neil Postman. Copyright © 1985 by Neil Postman. Used by 
permission of Viking Penguin, a division of Penguin Group (USA) 
Inc.   485  From Paul Kurtz, The  Transcendental Temptation , Pro-
metheus Books. Copyright © 1986 Prometheus Books. Reprinted 
by permission of the publisher.
 A-1   USA Today . (6-20-06) Reprinted with permission.   
 A-2  Rick Hurd. “Legal Steroids the Solution,”  Oakland 
 Tribune , December 15, 2007. This is a re-print of a column 
by Rick Hurd of the Bay Area News Group-East Bay in Wal-
nut Creek, CA.    A-2   USA Today.  (8-27-08). Reprinted with 
permission.    A-3  David Oxtoby. Reprinted by permission. 
“Law Makes Matters Worse,”  USA Today , August 27, 2008.   
 A-4  David Kyle Johnson. “Why Parents Shouldn’t Teach 
Their Kids to Believe in Santa Claus,” written speciﬁ cally 
for this book.    A-4   Jack Pytleski, “Defending My Right 
to Claim My ‘Steak’ in the Animal Kingdom,”  Wilkes-Barre 
Times Leader , July 10, 1997.  Reprinted with permission from 
the author.    A-5   USA Today.  (4-16-08). Reprinted with 
 permission.  


INDEX 
 Note: Page numbers in  bold indicate definitions. Page numbers in  italics indicate boxes or illustrations. 
 A
accuracy, as critical thinking 
standard, 3
acknowledgment of sources, 372–376
ad hominem (personal attack) fallacy, 
122–123, 137
advertising, 447–459
common ploys of, 452–457
criticisms of, 450–451
defenses of, 450
functions of, 448–449
in news media, 430–432
Advertising and the Mind of the Consumer 
(Sutherland), 451
advocacy journalism, 442–443
afﬁ rming the consequent, 64–65, 465
almanacs, 339
ambiguity, 89–91, 101
American Psychological Association 
(APA), 377
ampersand (symbol), 254, 255
Amusing Ourselves to Death 
(Postman), 409
analogy, 70, 303
argument from, 70–71, 303–313
constructing, 312–313, 397
evaluating, 305–311
in law and ethics, 310
weak, fallacy of, 151–154, 305–306
and statements, 253–254. See also 
conjunction
antecedent, 41, 276, 284
appeal to ignorance fallacy, 144–145, 
154, 162
appeal to pity fallacy, 128, 133
a priori probability, 321, 322–326
argumentative essays, 382–424
ﬁ rst draft, 406–411
body paragraphs, 409–410
conclusion, 410–411
opening, 407
thesis statement, 408
methods of development, 396–398
preparation, 385–406
brainstorming and research, 
394–400
choosing/narrowing topic, 
390–393
know your audience, 386–389
know yourself, 385–386
organizing ideas, 400–406
thesis sentence, 393–394
revision and editing, 412–413
sample, 414–423
arguments, 29–52
from analogy, 70–71, 303–313
analyzing, 164–194
diagramming short arguments, 
164–175
ﬁ nding missing premises and 
conclusions, 180–182
paraphrasing, 176–179
summarizing extended arguments, 
182–193
summarizing longer arguments, 
175–182
from authority, 69
bandwagon, 128–129, 133
based on mathematics, 66–67
causal, 69, 313–320
chain, 42, 63, 65
cogent vs. uncogent, 80, 81, 289, 
291
conditional statements in, 42
deductive and inductive (See also 
deductive reasoning; inductive 
reasoning), 53–56
common pattern test, 58–59
deductive patterns, 62–67
deductive validity, 73–76
distinguishing between, 56–62
indicator word test, 57–58
inductive patterns, 67–73
inductive strength, 77–80
principle of charity test, 59–60
sound vs. unsound, 77
strict necessity test, 58
deﬁ ned, 29, 51, 81
from deﬁ nition, 67
diagramming, 80, 164–175
distinguishing from explanations, 
44–47, 52
by elimination, 66
enthymemes, 180–181
evaluating, 53, 195–224, 252–283
“good argument”, deﬁ ning, 
194–198
guidelines for, 198
key questions in, 219
principle of rational acceptance, 
198–203
modus ponens, 59, 63–64
modus tollens, 63–64, 277
opponent’s, organizing around, 
404–405
predictive, 68, 320–326
premises and conclusions in, 29, 
33–39
indicators of, 33–36
refuting, 203–219
rules and goals for, 382–383
sound, 77, 81
standardization, 175, 182–193
standard logical form, 182
statements in, 29–33, 51
statistical, 70, 296–300
summaries of, 175–193
 
I-1

I-2 
Index
arguments (continued)
support for (See sources)
with three variables, 266–270
validity in, 73–76, 196–197
what is not an argument, 40–47, 52
conditional statements, 41–42
explanations, 43–47, 44
illustrations, 43
reports, 40–41
unsupported assertions, 41
Asch, Solomon, 15
assertions, unsupported, 41, 52
assumptions, 16–18, 27
astrology, 482–489
attacking the motive fallacy, 
123–124, 133
audience
evaluating, 352–353
knowing, 386–389
authority
argument from, 69
inappropriate appeal to, 
140–144, 154
in sources, 347–348
authors, evaluating, 347–351
author’s intent test, 45, 46
B
bandwagon argument, 128–129, 133
Barnum effect, 477
Barry, Dave, 455
begging the question fallacy, 
132–133
Being and Time (Heidegger), 2
Belloc, Hillaire, 127
bias
of authors, 349–350
group, 13–14
in news media, 443–444
sampling, 294–295
self-serving, 12
of sources, 141–142
bibliographies, 336–337
biographical sources, 339, 348
block quotations, 379
blog etiquette, 387
Book Review Digest, 353
brainstorming, 394–399
Brunson, Doyle, 14
C
“Calvin and Hobbes”, 12, 295, 304, 
314, 333, 383
categorical logic, 225–251
categorical statements, 225–230
categorical syllogisms, 237–250
translating into standard categorical 
form, 230–237
categorical statements, 225–230
categorical syllogisms, 65–66, 237–250
Venn diagrams of, 238–248
causal arguments, 69, 313–320
cause and effect, 313–314, 396
correlation and, 317–319, 328
questionable cause fallacy, 147–149
chain arguments, 42, 63, 65
charity. See principle of charity
circular deﬁ nitions, 101–102
circular reasoning, 133
citizen/participatory journalism, 
436–437
clarity, 2
classiﬁ cation, 396
Clinton, Bill, 93
cogent arguments, 80, 81, 289, 291
Colbert Report, The, 357
cold reading, 476–477
common-knowledge test, 45
common pattern test, 58–59
comparison, 396, 403
completeness, 6
compound statements, 253–255, 283
conclusions, 29, 51–52
in argumentative essays, 410–411
false, 74–75, 206–208
ﬁ nding missing or unstated, 180–182
following necessarily from premise, 
56, 73
identifying, 33–39
independent support for, 165
indicators of, 33, 34–36
truth of, 79–80, 257
conditional statements, 41–42, 276–283
arguments compared with, 41–42
in hypothetical syllogisms, 62–63
truth tables and, 276–283
conformism, 14–16
conjunction, 253–260, 283
negation and, 265–271
validity and, 256–260
connotation, 108
consequent, 41, 276, 284
afﬁ rming the, 64–65, 465
consistency, 4–5
content notes, 362–371
context, 101
in news media, 426–429
contrast, 396, 403
control group, 317, 466
controlled study, 466–467
copula, 231, 232
correlation, 317, 318, 328
cause and, 317–319
positive vs. negative, 318, 328
counterexample, refutation by, 206, 
218–219
creationism, 473–475
critical essays, 209–217, 219–224
critical premises, 204
critical thinking
barriers to, 10–25
beneﬁ ts of, 7–10
characteristics of, 25–27
deﬁ ned, 1–2, 27
hyper-critical, 200
standards in, 2–7, 198
critical thinking lapses
air travel by shipping crate, 431
bungee jump, 231
cobra bite, 218
drunken robber, 238
dynamite in car, 237
ﬁ ght over Hot Pocket, 297
math/science performance, 468
million dollar bill, 279
plagiarized professor, 373
Russian roulette, 202
smoldering bed, 77
snakebite, 6
.22-caliber bullet, 32
weather balloons, 40
“Weekender” camera, 121
Yogi Berra’s pizza, 324
cultural moral relativism, 20, 
22–24, 28
cultural relativism, 19
D
databases, 335–336, 337
death, euphemisms for, 114, 115
deductive arguments, 53–56, 81. 
See also deductive reasoning
distinguishing from inductive, 
56–62, 84–85
invalid, 75
sound vs. unsound, 77
valid, 73–76, 196–197
deductive reasoning, 53–85. See also 
inductive reasoning
basics of, 53–62
distinguishing from induction, 
56–62
basic guidelines, 61–62
common pattern test, 58–59
differences in, 55–56, 61–62
indicator word test, 57–58
principle of charity test, 59–60
strict necessity test, 58, 61–62
indicator words, 57–58, 62
patterns of, 62–67
afﬁ rming the consequent, 64–65
argument based on mathematics, 
66–67
argument by elimination, 66
argument from deﬁ nition, 67
categorical syllogism, 65–66
chain arguments, 63

 
Index 
I-3
denying the antecedent, 64
hypothetical syllogism, 62–65
validity in, 73–76, 81, 196–197
deﬁ nitions, 93–107
in argumentative essays, 398, 403
argument from, 67
constructs to avoid, 100–102
precise, 93–95, 117
rules for constructing, 100–102
slanted, ﬁ gurative, obscure, and 
circular, 101–102
strategies for, 97–100, 103
enumerative deﬁ nitions, 97
etymological deﬁ nitions, 98
genus and difference, 99–100
ostensive deﬁ nitions, 97
subclass, 98
synonymous deﬁ nitions, 99
types of, 95–97, 103
lexical, 96
persuasive, 94–95
precising, 96–97
stipulative, 94
denotation, 108
denying the antecedent, 64, 65
description, 396
diagramming arguments, 164–175
steps in, 164–169
tips on, 169–171
dictionaries, 98, 340
diminishing marginal value, 325–326
directional information, 336–338
disjunction, 271–275
documentation guidelines, 376–379. 
See also sources
“Doonesbury”, 8
double-blind studies, 296, 317, 466
downsizing, 115
Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan, 2
E
ecliptic, 482
egocentrism, 11–13, 27
either-or statements, 54–55, 66, 145–146
Elements of Style, The (Strunk and 
White), 2
elimination, argument by, 66
emotive force, 107–108
emotive language, 107–114
in advertising, 454
emotive power, 108–109
test for, 110–111
encyclopedias, 338–339, 352
enthymemes, 180–181
enumerative deﬁ nitions, 97, 103
epistemic probability, 320, 328
equivocation fallacy, 131–132, 133
essays. See argumentative essays; 
critical essays
ethics, 19–24, 310
etymological deﬁ nitions, 98, 103
euphemisms, 114–117, 115
evaluative pattern of organization, 
404
evidence, 465. See also facts; sources
exclusive sense, 271–272, 284
expected value, 324
experimental group, 317, 466
explanandum, 44
explanans, 44
explanations, 43–47, 44
F
fact books, 339
facts, 342–344. See also sources
acknowledging/citing, 374, 375
ﬁ nding and evaluating, 342–347
researching, 399–400
factual dispute, 91
FAIR (Fairness and Accuracy in 
Reporting), 444
fairness, 6–7
fallacies of logic. See logical fallacies
false alternatives fallacy, 145–146, 
154, 162
ﬁ ne-print disclaimers, 454–455
ﬁ shing for details, 477
Fitzgerald, F. Scott, 433
footnotes, 376–379
G
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 378
Galileo, 463, 481, 485
gambler’s fallacy, 322–323
gambling, probability and, 322–326
Geller, Uri, 475
generalizations, 68, 286
hasty, 16, 149–150, 154, 289
inductive, 68, 286–296
overgenerality, 88
genus and difference, deﬁ nition by, 
99–100, 103
Gerbner, George, 449
Golden Rule, 310
government documents, 340
group bias, 13–14
Guide to Reference Books, 333–334
H
Halberstam, David, 3
Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone 
(Rowling), 64
hasty generalizations, 16, 149–150, 
154, 289
Holmes, Sherlock, 2–3
hyper-critical thinking, 200
hypotheses, 463–468
hypothetical syllogism, 62–65
I
if-then premises, 62–65
if-then statements, 41–42, 276–283
illustrations, 43, 52, 397–398, 403
imperative statements, 31
inappropriate appeal to authority 
fallacy, 140–144, 154, 162
inconsistency, 4–5, 5, 73
fallacy of, 154–155, 163
with scientiﬁ c ﬁ ndings, 473–475
independent premises, 166–167
independent support, 165
indexes, 337
indicator words, 57–58, 62, 286
conclusion, 33, 34–36
deduction, 57–58, 62
induction, 57, 286
premise, 33–34
indicator word test, 57–58
inductive arguments, 53–56, 81, 
285–286. See also inductive 
reasoning
cogent vs. uncogent, 80, 81
distinguishing from deductive, 
56–62, 84–85
evaluating, 326–327
indicator words in, 57, 286
strong, 77–80, 81, 285, 291, 300
weak, 78–79, 81, 291
inductive generalizations, 68, 286–296
evaluating, 288–292
opinion polls and, 292–296
inductive reasoning, 53–85, 285–329. 
See also deductive reasoning; 
inductive arguments
basics of, 53–62
distinguishing from deduction, 
56–62, 84–85
basic guidelines, 61–62
common pattern test, 58–59
differences in, 55–56, 61–62
indicator word test, 57–58
principle of charity test, 59–60
strict necessity test, 58, 61–62
patterns of, 67–73
argument based on mathematics, 
67
argument from analogy, 70–71, 
303–313
argument from authority, 69
causal argument, 69, 313–320
inductive generalization, 68
predictive argument, 68, 
320–326
statistical arguments, 70, 296–300
probability and, 320–326
reference class and, 300–301
strength in, 77–80, 297
informational sources. See sources

I-4 
Index
Internet
databases, 335–336, 337
dictionaries, 340
online news sources, 428–429, 436
search engines, 337–338
search techniques, 334–336
sources, evaluating, 353–358
invalid argument, 81
irrelevance, logical, 120
J
journalism. See also media
advocacy, 442–443
citizen/participatory, 436–437
journals of opinion, 353, 354, 426
journals, scholarly vs. nonscholarly, 
354–355
K
keywords, 335–336
Kister’s Best Encyclopedias (Kister), 352
Klein, Naomi, 454
Kushner, Harold, 4, 34
L
language, 86–118
deﬁ nitions
precise, 93–95
rules for constructing, 100–102
strategies for, 97–100, 103
types of, 95–97, 103
denotation vs. connotation, 108
emotive, 107–114
euphemisms/political correctness, 
114–117, 115
imprecision in, 87–91
ambiguity, 89–91, 101
overgenerality, 88
vagueness, 87–88
precision in, 86–95
law, arguments from analogy in, 310
law of averages, 323
law of large numbers, 323–324
letters of recommendation, 90
lexical deﬁ nitions, 96, 103
liberal press, question of, 443–444
libraries/librarians, 333–334, 357, 380
Library of Congress Subject Headings, 335
Lincoln, Abraham, 4, 122
linked premises, 165–166
Literary Digest, 293–294
loaded question fallacy, 146–147, 154
logical concepts, 53–85. See also 
deductive reasoning; inductive 
reasoning
logical correctness, 5–6
logical fallacies, 119–163
deﬁ ned, 119
gambler’s fallacy, 322–323
of insufﬁ cient evidence, 119, 
140–163, 154
appeal to ignorance, 144–145
false alternatives, 145–146
hasty generalization, 149–150
inappropriate appeal to authority, 
140–144
inconsistency, 154–155
loaded question, 146–147
questionable cause, 147–149
slippery slope, 150–151
weak analogy, 151–154
of relevance, 119–139, 133
appeal to pity, 128
attacking the motive, 123–124
bandwagon argument, 128–129
begging the question, 132–133
concept of relevance, 119–121
distinguishing between, 
126, 131
equivocation, 131–132
logical irrelevance, 120
look who’s talking (tu quoque), 
124–125, 126
personal attack (ad hominem), 
122–123
positive vs. negative relevance, 
120
red herring, 130–131
scare tactics, 127
straw man, 129–130, 131
two wrongs make a right, 
125–127
logical inconsistency, 4–5
logical irrelevance, 120
look who’s talking fallacy, 124–125, 
126, 133
lotteries, probability and, 324–326
M
magazines, 355
mass disasters, 487–488
mass media, 425–426. See also media
mathematics, arguments based on, 
66–67
meaning, questions of, 469
media, 425–460
advertising and, 430–432, 
447–459
attention-getting techniques, 
430–432
attention-keeping techniques, 
432–441
mass, 425–426
news, 426–445
advertising in, 430–432
bias in, 443–444
context and, 426–429
as entertainment, 432–441
opinion in, 444–445
slanting of, 441–445
watch groups, 436, 444
media literacy, 445–447
mere correlation fallacy, 148
Merrill, Kenneth R., 5
Milgram, Stanley, 15
Modern Language Association 
(MLA), 377
modus ponens, 59, 63–64, 65
modus tollens, 63–64, 65, 277, 464
Monty Python skits, 124, 161
moral relativism, 20, 22–23, 28
moral subjectivism, 20, 28
Morris, Tom, 34, 200
motor vehicles, names for, 108
multiple-out expressions, 477
N
narration, 396
negation, 261–271, 283–284
conjunctions and, 265–271
disjunctions and, 272–274
negative correlation, 318
negative relevance, 120
news media, 426–445. See also media
Newton, Isaac, 332, 350
New York Times, 341, 351, 426, 
427, 436
No Logo (Klein), 454
nonexclusive sense, 271–272, 284
nonrandomized prospective study, 467
nonrandomized retrospective 
study, 467
nonscholarly periodicals, 354–355
normative questions, 469–470
note taking, 361–372
bibliographical information, 
361–362
content notes, 362–371
paraphrasing, 367–370
quotations, 362–363
summaries, 363–367
O
only statements, 233–234
opinions, 343–344, 400
in news media, 444–445
polls of, 292–296
organization of ideas, 400–406
or statements, 271–275, 284
ostensive deﬁ nitions, 97, 103
ought imperative, 31
“Outline of Intellectual Rubbish, An” 
(Russell), 6
overgenerality, 88
oversimpliﬁ ed cause fallacy, 148–149
Oxford English Dictionary (OED), 
98, 340

 
Index 
I-5
P
paranormal, 461
paraphrasing, 176–179
acknowledgments for, 377–379
during note-taking, 367–370
participatory journalism, 436–437
past-event test, 45
periodicals, scholarly vs. nonscholarly, 
354–355
personal attack fallacy, 122–123, 133
persuasive arguments, 196. See also 
argumentative essays
persuasive deﬁ nitions, 94–95, 103
persuasive evidence, 465
Philadelphia Inquirer, 109, 110
Philosophy for Dummies (Morris), 200
pity, appeal to, 128, 133
placebo/placebo effect, 317, 466
plagiarism, 372–374
poker players, 14
political correctness, 116–117
polls, opinion, 292–296
population as a whole, 286
positive correlation, 318
positive relevance, 120
post hoc fallacy, 148
Postman, Neil, 409
practical inconsistency, 4
precession, 484
precising deﬁ nitions, 96–97, 103
precision
as critical thinking standard, 2–3
in deﬁ nitions, 93–95
in language, 86–93
predicate term, 231, 250
prediction, 68
predictive argument, 68, 320–326
premise indicators, 33–34, 51–52
premises, 29, 51
critical, 204
false or dubious, refuting, 203–206
ﬁ nding missing or unstated, 
180–182
identifying, 33–39
indicators of, 33–34, 51–52
linked vs. independent, 165–167, 
194
listing, 394–395
opposing, 395
organizing by, 401–403
rational acceptance of, 198–203
true, 77, 289, 306, 316
unstated, 402–403
presumptive evidence, 465
principle of charity, 44, 59–60
in argumentative essays, 382–383
illustrations and, 43
in paraphrasing, 178
principle of charity test, 45–46, 59–60
principle of rational acceptance, 
198–203
prisoner’s dilemma, 325
probability, 320–326
epistemic, 320
a priori, 321, 322–326
relative frequency, 320–321
probably, use in inductive arguments, 
286, 287, 297–299, 301
problem-solution pattern, 404
Project Censored, 436
propositional logic, 252–284
conditional statements, 276–283
conjunction, 253–260, 265–271
disjunction, 271–275
negation, 261–271
variables in, 252–253
pseudoscience, 470–489
astrology case study, 482–489
falsifying evidence, response to, 
475–476
inconsistency with scientiﬁ c 
ﬁ ndings, 473–475, 488–489
lack of progressiveness in, 477–478, 
484–485
research, failure to conduct, 
478–479
testability absence in, 471–472
time twins and mass disasters, 
487–488
vague language in, 476–477, 486
“psychic” abilities, 475–477
Ptolemy, 482
publishers, evaluating, 347–348, 
351–352
puffery, 455
Q
quantiﬁ ers, 22, 231, 250
questionable cause fallacy, 147–149, 
154, 163
quotations, 376–379
note-taking and, 362–363
R
randomized experimental study, 
466–467
random sample/population, 294–295, 
466
rational acceptance, principle of, 
198–203
red herring fallacy, 130–131, 133
reducing to the absurd (reductio ad 
absurdum), 206
reference class, 300–301
references. See sources
refuting arguments, 203–219
relative frequency probability, 
320–321
relative value, 324–325
relativism, 19–24
cultural, 19
cultural moral, 20, 22–24
relativistic thinking, 19–24, 28
relevance, 119–121
as critical thinking standard, 3–4
fallacies of (See logical fallacies)
positive vs. negative, 120
of similarities, 306–307
reports, 40–41, 52
representative sample, 290–291, 293
research, 330–333, 379–380, 399–400. 
See also sources
rhetorical question, 31
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 294
Rowling, J. K., 64
Russell, Bertrand, 6
S
Sagan, Carl, 468
sample
bias in, 294–295
diversity in, 307–308
population, 286–288
random, 294–295, 466
representative, 290–291, 293
self-selecting, 294
size, 289–290, 318
sample population, 286–288
scare tactics fallacy, 127, 133
scholarly journals, 354
science, 461–470, 490
controlled studies, 466–467
distinguishing from pseudoscience, 
470–489
limitations of, 468–470
scientiﬁ c illiteracy, 461, 462
scientiﬁ c reasoning, 461–468
scientiﬁ c testability, 471–472
scientism, 470
search engines, Internet, 337–338
searches, Internet, 334–336
selective attention and memory, 316
selective targeting, 204–205
self-interested thinking, 11
self-refuting statement, 470
self-selecting sample, 294
self-serving bias, 12
semantic ambiguities, 89–90
sensational publications, 355
Sesame Street, 409
sex appeals, in advertising, 455–456
shuttle launch, articles describing, 
109–110
signs, misleading language on, 153
similarities, in argumentative 
essays, 396
simple statements, 253, 254–255, 283

I-6 
Index
Simpsons, The, 94
singular statements, 232
slippery-slope fallacy, 150–151, 
154, 163
sociocentrism, 13–16, 27
Socrates, 5, 46
some statements, 227–230, 235, 
241–247
sound deductive arguments, 77, 81
sources, 330–381
acknowledging, 372–376
credible, 201
evaluating, 341–361, 380
audience, 352–353
author, 347–351
content, 342–347
Internet sources, 353–358
publisher, 347–348, 351–352
ﬁ nding, 333–341
directional information, 
336–338
informational sources, 338–341
Internet searching, 334–336
questions and keywords, 
334–336
human, 340–341
incorporating, 376–379
plagiarism and, 372–374
primary, 350–351
scholarly vs. nonscholarly 
periodicals, 354–355
taking notes from, 361–372
using, 372–379
standard-form categorical statements, 
225–230
overview, 225, 230–231
stylistic variants, 233, 234–236
translating into, 230–237
standardization (of arguments), 175, 
182–193
mistakes to avoid in, 197–198
standard logical form, 182
standards of critical thinking, 
2–7, 198
statements, 29–33, 51, 253
categorical, 225–230, 250
compound, 253–255
conditional, 41–42, 276–283
negation in, 261–271
ought imperative, 31
rhetorical questions, 31
self-refuting, 470
simple, 253, 254–255
singular, 232
thesis, 393–394, 408
statistical arguments, 70, 296–300
statistically signiﬁ cant difference, 466
statistics, 66–67, 300–301, 323–324. 
See also probability
stereotypes, 16–18, 27
stipulative deﬁ nitions, 94, 103
straw man fallacy, 129–130, 
131, 133
strict necessity test, 58, 285
exceptions to, 61–62
strong inductive arguments, 77–80, 
81, 285, 291, 300
stylistic variants, 233, 234–236
subclass, deﬁ nitions by, 98, 103
subject headings, 335–336
subjectivism, 19
subject term, 231, 250
summaries
of arguments, 175–193
note-taking and, 363–367
Sutherland, Max, 451
syllogisms, 237
categorical, 65–66, 237–250
hypothetical, 62–65
symbols, in propositional logic, 
257–259, 261, 271
synonymous deﬁ nitions, 99, 103
syntactical ambiguities, 90–91
T
testability, scientiﬁ c, 471–472
thesis statement, 393–394, 408
This Side of Paradise (Fitzgerald), 433
Thomson, Judith Jarvis, 310
Time magazine, 109–110
time twins, 487–488
trade publications, 355
truth
slanting with emotive language, 
107–114
true premises, 77, 289, 306, 316
validity and, 76–77
truth tables, 253–260, 283
conditional statements, 276–283
conjunction and, 253–260
negation and, 261–265
for three variables, 266–270, 284
truth values, 253, 266, 283
try-ons, 477
tu quoque (look who’s talking) fallacy, 
124–125, 126, 133
two wrongs make a right fallacy, 
125–127, 133
U
uncogent arguments, 80, 81, 291
unsound deductive arguments, 77, 81
unsupported assertions, 41, 52
unwarranted assumptions, 16–18, 27
URL sufﬁ xes, 356, 357
U.S. News and World Report, 351, 
355, 426
V
vagueness, 87–88, 476–477
validity
of categorical syllogisms, 238–248
conjunction and, 256–260
of deductive arguments, 73–76, 81, 
196–197
truth and, 76–77
value, questions of, 469–470
values
diminishing marginal, 325–326
expected, 324
relative, 324–325
truth values, 253, 266
variables, 252–253
Venn diagrams, 226–230, 238–248
W
water cure, 478–479
weak analogy fallacy, 151–154
weak inductive arguments, 78–79, 
81, 291
weasel words, 454, 486
weather prediction, 321
Web sites, assessing, 356–358
wedge, 271, 284
who’s talking fallacy, 124–125, 126
Who’s Who series, 339, 348
Wikipedia, 338
Williams, William Carlos, 362–363
wishful thinking, 24–25
words. See also deﬁ nitions; language
ambiguity in, 89–91
denotation vs. connotation, 108
emotive power of, 108–109
imprecision in, 87–91
meaning of, 98, 100–101
precision in, 86–93
Z
zodiac, 482, 485

KEY CRITICAL THINKING STANDARDS
GooD THINKING IS
 
CLEAR .................................rather than .............................. MUDDLED
 
PRECISE ................................rather than ................................... VAGUE
 
ACCURATE .............................rather than ...........................INACCURATE
 
CONSISTENT ...........................rather than .........................INCONSISTENT
 
LOGICAL ...............................rather than ..............................ILLOGICAL
 
COMPLETE .............................rather than ...........................INCOMPLETE
 
FAIR ...................................rather than ...................................BIASED
CoMMoN CRITICAL THINKING HINDRANCES
Egocentrism: Self-centered thinking. For example, 
thinking that you are an above-average driver, despite 
the six tickets you’ve received for reckless driving.
Sociocentrism: Group-centered thinking. For  
example, thinking that the referees are always biased 
against your team.
Unwarranted assumptions: Beliefs that are presumed 
to be true without adequate evidence or justiﬁcation.
Relativistic thinking: Thinking that truth “is just a 
matter of opinion,” and so varies from individual to 
individual, or from culture to culture.
Wishful thinking: Believing that something is true 
because one wishes it were true.
20 CoMMoN FALLACIES
Personal attack (ad hominem): Attacking a person’s 
character rather than his or her argument or claim.
Attacking the motive: Criticizing a person’s 
motivation for offering a particular argument or claim, 
rather than examining the worth of the argument or 
claim itself.
Look who’s talking (tu quoque): Rejecting a person’s 
argument or claim because he or she is a hypocrite.
Two wrongs make a right: Attempting to justify a 
wrongful act by claiming that some other act is just as 
bad or worse.
Scare tactics: Attempting to scare someone into 
believing something, rather than presenting relevant 
evidence or reasons.
Appeal to pity: Attempting to evoke feelings of pity or 
compassion when such feelings are not relevant to the 
arguer’s conclusion.
Bandwagon argument: Appealing to a person’s desire 
to be popular or part of the “in crowd,” rather than to 
relevant reasons or evidence.
Straw man: Distorting or misrepresenting a person’s 
position in order to make it easier to attack.
Red herring: Trying to sidetrack an audience by  
raising an irrelevant issue and then claiming that 
the original issue has been effectively settled by the 
irrelevant diversion.
Equivocation: Using a key word in an argument in 
two (or more) different senses.
Begging the question: Stating or assuming as a 
premise the very thing one is attempting to prove as a 
conclusion.
Inappropriate appeal to authority: Citing a witness 
or authority that is untrustworthy.
Appeal to ignorance: Claiming that something is true 
because no one has proven it false, or vice versa.
False alternatives: Posing a false either /or choice.
Loaded question: Posing a question that contains an 
unfair or unwarranted presupposition.
Questionable cause: Claiming, without sufﬁcient 
evidence, that one thing is the cause of something else.
Hasty generalization: Drawing a general conclusion 
from a sample that is biased or too small.
Slippery slope: Claiming, without sufﬁcient evidence, 
that a seemingly harmless action, if taken, will lead to a 
disastrous outcome.
Weak analogy: Comparing things that aren’t really 
comparable.
Inconsistency: Asserting inconsistent or contradictory 
claims.

This clear, learner-friendly text helps today’s students bridge the gap between 
everyday culture and critical thinking. It covers all the basics of critical 
thinking, using real-world examples and a proven step-by-step approach. 
Its comprehensiveness allows instructors to tailor the material to their 
individual teaching styles, resulting in an exceptionally versatile text.
Highlights of the Fourth Edition:
 Additional readings and essays in a new Appendix as well as in Chapters 7 
and 8 nearly double the number of readings available for critical analysis and 
classroom discussion. 
 An online chapter, available on the instructor portion of the book’s Web site, 
addresses critical reading, a vital skill for success in college and beyond.  
 Chapter 12 features an expanded and reorganized discussion of evaluating 
Internet sources.
 New and updated exercises and examples throughout the text allow students 
to practice and apply what they learn.
Visit www.mhhe.com/bassham4e 
for a wealth of additional student and instructor resources.  

