Parts and Logistics 
Centre Opens in 
Regina, SK … 7
CLAAS Celebrates 
with World Family 
Day … 8
LEXION helps 
Double Bar D Farms 
Expand… 3
Fall
2013
corner talk
ct
$10,000 Off Your First 
TWO Annual Payments*
OFFER 1
FREE 2nd and 3rd Year 
xtraCARE Warranty*
OFFER 2
LEXION STRONG
The New 700 Series … page 4 
– OR –
*See offer details on page 9.

BOB ARMSTRONG – Editorial Director
2
	 3	 Hard Work & LEXION  
	
	 Efficiency Helps Family  
	
	 Farm Expand	
	 4	 The New LEXION  
	
	 700 Series
	 7 	 New Regina, SK Parts 
Facility Opens
	 8 	 CLAAS Celebrates with  
	
	 World Family Day
	10	 Driven to Win 2012 Winner
	11	 North America's  
	
	 Fan Feature
Features
L E T T E R  F R O M  T H E  E D I T O R
We’ve spent the last 100 years trying to make the lives of growers better through 
innovation, technology and customer service. But what lies at the core of CLAAS is family. 
In this issue, we’ve focused on families who live, farm, work and celebrate just as we do.
Not every company gets to mark 100 years of moving growers forward, and we’re 
extremely proud to do just that. It wouldn’t be possible if you didn’t believe in our family 
commitment and our goal of bringing you better and better harvesting technologies.
We like to think that every LEXION owner feels as if they are part of our extended family. 
That’s how we think of you. After all, without you, we wouldn’t be here.
Many things change, but family tends to be there for you – to listen and to provide 
support every step of the way. And that's what we're here for too, now and for the next 
100 years.  
100 Years of 
Family Pride
Your CLAAS website is now easier to 
use, and not just from your PC or laptop. 
Now, with the completely redesigned 
and retooled site, you can easily navigate 
www.claas.com from your smartphone, 
tablet or any other device that provides 
you with Internet access.
The CLAAS site gives you access to 
information about equipment, parts and 
service, financing options and more. 
Take a tour around the new LEXION 780 
combine and see videos of it in action. 
Get a good look at the latest machine 
features. Take a virtual journey through 
the 100 years of CLAAS company  
history and even discover how your 
CLAAS equipment can help with your 
precision farming.
See what CLAAS has in store for you. Get 
mobile and get to www.claas.com today!
CLAAS Website Goes Mobile
www.claas.com
www.facebook.com/yourclaas
@CLAAS_America
www.youtube.com/user/CLAASofAmerica
Other ways to connect with CLAAS

corner talk
F A L L  E D I T I O N
&
3
LEXION  
 Efficiency
HELPS FAMILY FARM EXPAND
 HARD 
WORK
Double Bar D Farms lies in the plains of south Saskatchewan, where the 
land is fertile and the growing season is short. Richard Dimler, his two sons 
Ken and Mark and their families own the farms. Together, they grow canola, 
wheat, barley, oats and corn. They also have 10,000 head of cattle for beef 
and breeding.
“It’s also good to have the expanded 
CLAAS parts warehouse close by in 
Regina, SK so we can get parts quickly,” 
he says. “The expansion of that facility 
really shows their commitment to this area. 
And it’s great to see that.”
“With our LEXION combines and our 
JAGUAR 930 chopper, we get really 
high quality straw for baling.” 
A REAL FAMILY AFFAIR
“Ken and I grew up on the Double Bar 
D Farms. We’ve been farming with our 
dad since we were kids,” says Mark. 
The men of the family aren’t the only 
ones working on the farm, though. 
Mark’s wife Julie also drives a combine 
and helps with the livestock. They 
have two sons, and their 11-year-
old got behind the wheel this year, 
driving a grain cart and even a LEXION 
combine. Mark laughs, “It’s his natural 
place to be. I could see him staying 
here just as we did.”
Mark says his mother Marcia 
and Ken’s wife Shauna also do 
bookkeeping for the farm. “It’s nice 
having the family work together. It 
makes a difference when you can 
keep it all in the family, just as CLAAS 
has done,” he states.
If you’d like to know more about the 
Double Bar D Farms, visit their website 
at www.doublebardfarms.com.
PUREBRED CATTLE  
BENEFIT, TOO
While most of their crops are sold,  
some of the grain is used to feed their 
own cattle. A variation of corn, barley  
and oats are used as silage for that side  
of the business.
“We’ve got purebred Simmental, Fullblood 
Fleckvieh and Red Angus,” Dimler says. 
“They’re beef cattle that we raise for 
breeding. We host an annual bull sale 
every February.”
“Our LEXION combines can keep up with 
everything we need for our purebred line 
of cattle.”
Mark says the Dimler family has seen 
their operation grow with larger capacity 
machines. “In 2005, we got a LEXION 460  
to run along with four other machines. 
The next year, we traded all of those other 
combines for two LEXION 580 combines. 
We did as many acres (12,000) with those 
three combines as we had with five the  
year before.”
This year, the Dimlers operated three  
LEXION 770TT combines and two 760TT 
combines on 25,000 acres. Since the 
LEXION machines have the largest capacity 
on the market, Dimler says they can get all  
of that added harvesting done in a very 
timely manner.
“We often harvest in pretty high moisture 
conditions, since we’ve got a grain drying 
facility here,” he explains. “The LEXION 
machines are really efficient for harvesting 
grain with higher moisture levels.”
Soil conditions are no longer an issue for 
the Dimler family either. “We have all TERRA 
TRAC machines now, and the ride quality is 
really good. It’s smooth and comfortable.”
“We never have to wait for a LEXION part,” 
Mark says. “Our CLAAS dealer has a solid 
inventory on hand.”
That’s another benefit the Dimlers have seen. 
“We’ve never had a LEXION combine down 
and waiting for a part,” Mark says. “Our 
CLAAS dealer always has parts on hand.” 

4
LEXION owners know their combines are the  
best in the field and CLAAS continues to build 
upon that success with the NEW LEXION 700 
Series combines.  
Adding to the launch of the LEXION 670 and  
the class 10 LEXION 780 combines this past 
January, the next generation of LEXION 700  
Series combines were launched with updated 
design and enhanced features at the August  
Farm Progress Show.
“We’ve had such success with our LEXION 
combines that we decided not to start from 
scratch,” says Jeff Gray, Product Coordinator, 
CLAAS of America Inc. “Yes, we did develop some 
new technology, but we also enhanced those tried 
and true features and designs to make harvesting 
faster, more efficient and even more enjoyable.”  
Those enhancements include a bump in 
horsepower for all of the new LEXION combines, 
while delivering greater fuel efficiency and fewer 
emissions. The new series offers a horsepower 
range of 320 to 543 HP at 1,900 rpm.
With the strongest lineup of 
combines in the industry, LEXION 
showcases its strength with a 
range in capacity, horsepower 
and options to fit any field.
The New LEXION 700 Series Enhances 
Performance and Efficiency
MODEL
CLASS
HP  
(Rated/Max)
Grain Tank 
(bu.)
TERRA TRAC 
(TT) option
LEXION 780
10
543 / 590
360
X
LEXION 760
9
503 / 543
360
X
LEXION 750
8
456 / 436
330
X
LEXION 740
7
402 / 394
300/330 opt.
X
LEXION 730P
7
348 / 375
300/330 opt.
LEXION 730
6
320 / 354
300/330 opt.
LEXION 670 
(Straw Walker)
7
360 / 394
300/330 opt.
X
LEXION 
STRONG
tinyurl.com/jwqa6mh

corner talk
F A L L  E D I T I O N
5
tinyurl.com/kexc7c3
tinyurl.com/kh6s2tu
tinyurl.com/nybxxyw
tinyurl.com/kznany5
With 543 rated horsepower, a 
360-bushel expandable grain tank 
and a TERRA TRAC option, the 
new Class 10 LEXION 780 replaces 
the 770 model as the combine with 
the highest capacity.
We didn’t forget about grower 
comfort either. For those long 
days in the field, we’ve enhanced 
the LEXION combine with simple 
cab comforts like deluxe leather 
seats and new design elements 
for greater efficiency.
The LEXION 
760 and 780 
models both 
feature enhanced 
suspension and 
stability with a 
4-link rear axle, 
which also allows for lateral movement, more 
flexibility, a smaller turning radius and increased 
mobility for wheels up to 67.3 inches high. The 
LEXION 730 through 750 models feature a new 
center link suspension to help better transfer the 
weight of the combine.
“That design is exclusive to 
CLAAS. It allows the rear axle to 
pivot and gives a swing motion 
for enhanced turning capability,” 
explains Gray. 
One of the substantial improvements 
on the new LEXION 700 Series 
combines is DYNAMIC 
COOLING. This new 
technology works as an 
efficient cleaning system, 
preventing dust and 
debris from building up 
on the radiator. It sits 
directly behind the 
engine compartment, 
drawing clean, cool air 
from above the combine, pulling 
it through the radiator and finally 
venting it through the engine 
compartment and side cooling vents. 
While the largest, top-of-the-line LEXION 780 can provide 
the greatest capacity and the highest horsepower of any 
LEXION available, every combine in the LEXION family has 
been enhanced and improved. 
Vice President of Product Marketing Bob Armstrong states,
“EVERY TIME A LEXION GROWER STEPS INTO THAT 
COMBINE, WE WANT THEM TO KNOW THAT THEY  
HAVE THE ABSOLUTE BEST MACHINE WORKING  
FOR THEM. AFTER ALL, THE HARVEST IS THE 
CULMINATION OF MONTHS OF HARD WORK. EACH  
AND EVERY LEXION IS BUILT WITH THAT IN MIND.”
The new header drive provides for better fuel efficiency  
and performance on larger heads. And of course, LEXION 
still provides the greatest throughput and grain retention in 
the industry.
Continued on next page

6
Every new LEXION combine has more horsepower with greater fuel efficiency and fewer emissions. 
LEXION FEATURES MAKE 
HARVEST EFFICIENT
•	 New header drive for 
improved fuel conservation 
and performance on larger 
heads
•	 Accelerated Pre-Separation 
(APS) system in the 
threshing unit for high 
performance
•	 ROTO PLUS works with 
APS to maximize threshing 
and separation efficiency.
•	 Optional 29.2-foot auger 
to accommodate wide 
headers.
•	 Larger grain tank on the  
670 combine
•	 Longer and faster unloading 
auger on the 700 Series
•	 In-cab hydraulic HP 
feederhouse adjustment
•	 High performance 
cutterbars for faster cutting
tinyurl.com/mw62r38
TERRA TRAC (TT) equipped LEXION 
combines deliver a smoother, more stable 
ride in all kinds of field conditions. 
They are the fastest tracked combines in 
the field or on the road and with the new  
TERRA TRAC undercarriage, every 
component has its own 
suspension for even 
greater stability. 
POWER TRAC keeps the harvest 
going, too, with all-wheel drive at the 
press of a button, even on the move. 
The hydrostatic drive on the rear 
axle provides the rare combination of 
added power and 
fuel savings.
With an unloading rate of up 
to 3.8 bushels per second, 
the new 29.2 foot auger adds 
to the unloading capacity of 
the new LEXION combines. 
Coupled with the new auger 
is the PROFI CAM camera 
system, which is positioned to 
monitor the unloading process 
and residue management 
system performance.
CEMOS (CLAAS Electronic Machine 
Optimization System) AUTOMATIC 
continuously adjusts small grain separation 
and cleaning settings in constantly changing 
harvesting conditions. As a result, the machine 
is able to automatically deliver maximum 
throughput in wheat, canola, oats and other 
small grains while maintaining the highest grain 
quality standards and optimizing fuel efficiency.  
These features and more add up to 
an amazing harvesting experience. 
Find out all the details and see the 
new LEXION 700 Series in action!
www.LEXIONSTRONG.com 
YOU’VE GOT OPTIONS!
tinyurl.com/mwkm8k8
tinyurl.com/kznany5

corner talk
F A L L  E D I T I O N
7
Hadland said that the small harvesting window in Western Canada means 
producers need capacity to take the crops off in a timely manner. “With this 
facility, we can deliver parts to our dealers one or even two days faster than 
if we had to ship them from the parts center based in Columbus, Indiana. It 
saves the customer freight charges as well.”
Regina has been home to a small CLAAS parts centre from the beginning,  
and most LEXION combines are found within the region, so it made sense 
to build the expanded facility there. A city of about 180,000, Regina is ideally 
located, with easy access to major cities in Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Alberta 
and British Columbia. 
“Eighty percent of all Canadian parts will be supplied out of this facility,” 
explained Mohr. “Previously, our Regina facility supplied 40 percent.”
The Parts and Logistics Centre features 20,000 square feet of storage  
with another 10,000 square feet for training. It’s the first of its kind in  
North America. 
“We need to make sure our dealers are properly trained to handle the 
increased demand for CLAAS equipment,” said Hadland. “The new training 
facility allows us to train at any time of year on products, parts and sales.”
The training centre also serves customers on their CLAAS equipment, so they 
can make the most of every feature. 
“Since opening in May, we have already trained over 300 people,” said 
Hadland. “We’re going to keep busy.”
“CLAAS products have a reputation for being extremely productive 
machines,” said Division Manager for Western Canada Torey 
Hadland, “and our sales have increased every year. The purpose of 
the Parts and Logistics Centre is to provide superior parts support 
for our dealers and ultimately our customers.”
One of the ways CLAAS celebrated their 100th anniversary was by opening 
the new CLAAS Parts and Logistics Centre to support dealers and growers 
in Western Canada.
The new facility in Regina, Saskatchewan, serves as both the Canadian 
distribution hub and a training academy for all of North America. Opened in 
May 2013, it’s part of the CLAAS mission to double its Canadian sales over 
the next five years.
CLAAS introduced LEXION combines to the Canadian market about 10 
years ago. According to Jan-Hendrik Mohr, Executive Vice President of 
CLAAS Sales and Service based in Harsewinkel, Germany, they’ve seen 
great success, selling about 2,000 units, with an average yearly growth of 
about 20 percent.
“Demand was very high,” Mohr stated. “We had so much downstream 
parts and service business that we had to expand.”
“Eighty percent of the 
parts will be supplied out 
of this facility,” explained 
Mohr. “Previously, our 
Regina facility supplied 
40 percent.”
New Regina, SK Facility 
Delivers Parts & Smarts
Cutting the ribbon at the new Regina, SK facility.
Mr. Mohr addresses the audience at a recent open house 
event at the new CLAAS Parts and Logistics Centre.

8
CLAAS is the fourth largest agricultural equipment company in the world, employing thousands 
of people around the world. But it’s also a family company – family-owned and operated since 
its inception in 1913.
So when it was time for CLAAS to celebrate their 100th anniversary in business, they did it 
the only way they knew how – with family. In September, more than 400 employees and their 
families attended CLAAS World Family Day at their North American headquarters in Omaha, 
Nebraska, and another 200 were at the CLAAS Parts facility in Columbus, Indiana. The day 
included a jumbotron worldwide “live” webcast so members at corporate headquarters in 
Harsewinkel, Germany, could join them. As well, dignitaries U.S. Senator Deb Fischer and U.S. 
Congressman Lee Terry ignited the audience along with members of CLAAS in Germany as 
they relayed the economic impact the North American CLAAS facility has on Nebraska.
Family is the CLAAS culture. After founding CLAAS in 1913 and 
securing the company's first patent for the "knotter", August Claas 
built the company with the help of his three brothers. August’s 
son Helmut took the helm in the 1950s, and Helmut’s daughter 
Cathrina Claas-Muhlhauser is now Chairwoman and Member of the 
Supervisory Board, managing daily activities of the company.
“Even as we’ve grown by leaps and bounds, we’ve remained a 
family company,” says Bob Armstrong, CLAAS Vice President of 
Product Marketing. “From August and his 
three brothers to Helmut and Cathrina, all of 
the family members have really developed the 
company. We’re looking forward to even more 
advancement in the years to come.”
100 Years
CLAAS Celebrates with WORLD FAMILY DAY
Engineering & Artistry
While CLAAS was thrilled to celebrate  
their 100th with the production of their 
450,000th combine, they also celebrated in a less conventional 
way – through music.
Omaha is not only known for being the CLAAS North American 
headquarters, it’s also topping the charts in production of indie 
music. In honor of that heritage, indie artists performed a song 
that CLAAS employees across the globe could 
enjoy. The results aired at CLAAS World Family 
Day beginning on one side of the globe and 
ending on the other. 
   http://tinyurl.com/ljjaw2t
“The creativity and excitement that our employees had with this 
was just incredible,” states Leif Magnusson, President of CLAAS 
of America Inc. “It was really a great experience.” In addition 
to the 100 year celebration, groups gathered for the soap box 
derby racing offsite which brought ingenuity, skilled engineering 
and creativity to the forefront plus a chance for Magnusson 
to earn his racing stripes. “CLAAS is family and to be able to 
showcase this experience of how close our family is to our 
growers is to know that CLAAS is building a 
better way with family,” stated Magnusson.
   http://tinyurl.com/mm8bjhy
U.S. Senator Deb Fischer and President of 
CLAAS of America Inc., Leif Magnusson.
in the Making
Merle Henry, from New Vienna, OH and his wife, Sylvia traveled 
to Omaha as part of a very special “LEXION First Glance” visit. 
The owners of the 450,000th combine produced by CLAAS met 
CLAAS of America CFO Holger Krumel and many of the workers 
who helped assemble their new LEXION 740 TT. 

corner talk
F A L L  E D I T I O N
9
STRONG 
SAVINGS
– OR –
$10,000 Off Your First 
TWO Annual Payments*
That’s a total of $20,000 off when you 
finance your new combine through 
CLAAS Financial Services!
FREE 2nd and 3rd Year 
xtraCARE Warranty*
That’s a total of 3 years warranty 
coverage on your new LEXION combine.  
*The LEXION Early Action Program incentives are valid on new LEXION 
combine sales from July 1, 2013 through December 31, 2013 (with delivery 
after October 1, 2013). With the purchase of a new LEXION combine, one of 
two incentives may be selected by the purchaser: 1) $10,000 off the first and 
second annual payments of a 36-month or greater retail installment contract 
through CLAAS Financial Services on a new combine purchase. Subject to 
credit approval. OR 2) receive a 2nd and 3rd year xtraCARE Warranty, giving 
the LEXION owner 3 years of warranty coverage. Only one incentive may be 
selected by the purchaser.
1913 
August Claas founds Gerbuder Claas and quickly  
brings his brothers into the venture
1921 
The CLAAS Knotter is patented
1929 
CLAAS expands to fertilizer spreaders
1934 
CLAAS builds the first pick-up baler
1936 
CLAAS engineers and manufactures their first combine  
for Germany
1953 
CLAAS produces its first self-propelled combine
1973 
CLAAS creates its first self-propelled forage harvester
1979 
CLAAS of America is formed
1998 
LEXION combines are introduced
2001 
CLAAS and Caterpillar join forces to build the Omaha 
production facility for LEXION
2002
Caterpillar exits all agricultural manufacturing and CLAAS 
purchases 50% share from joint venture to continue 
assembly of LEXION combine range
2003 
CLAAS purchases Renault Agriculture, and moves the 
North American headquarters from Columbus, IN to 
Omaha, NE
2006 
CLAAS expands their Columbus parts facility
2010 
CLAAS introduces the LEXION 700 Series to  
North America
2011 
CLAAS manufactures its 30,000th JAGUAR, and the  
LEXION 770 sets a new world record for harvesting  
675.84 tons of wheat in eight hours
2013 
CLAAS Parts and Logistics Centre opens in Regina, SK,  
the 450,000th combine is produced, and CLAAS 
celebrates 100 years of harvesting excellence
100 HISTORICAL YEARS
“We’re really pleased to celebrate the last 
100 years of harvest excellence,” explains 
Magnusson, “but we’re even more excited 
about the next 100 years of innovation.  
   We’re not slowing down!”

10
It was one hour before the 2012 LEXION Driven to Win Giveaway ended when 
Ryan Albin submitted his entry. Then, just for good measure, he entered the 
name of his longtime farming partner Denny Long. One hour before the end of  
the contest.
After nearly missing their window of opportunity and being among thousands of 
entries, Long and Albin won the use of a LEXION 750TT high-speed combine for 
a year, ideally suited for their operation – a 3,000 acre farm of corn and beans 
outside of Camargo, Illinois. Along with the strength of the LEXION combine's 
performance, they will also receive the strength of support from their local dealer 
Altorfer, Inc.
“We’re excited to try this combine because the LEXION is something different 
than what we have used before,” Denny Long said. “I’m looking forward to the 
new TERRA TRAC design, the cab amenities and CLAAS APS threshing system.” 
*©2013 CLAAS of America Inc. LEXION is a registered trademark of CLAAS KGaA mbH. Void where prohibited. 
No purchase necessary. The Driven to Win promotion is open to legal residents of the United States, the District of 
Columbia and residents of Canada (except residents of New York, Florida and the Providence of Quebec) who are 
at least (21) years of age as of the date of entry. Subject to Terms & Conditions. To view full rules and regulations, 
visit www.lexiondriventowin.com.
Register now for your chance to win a 
customized LEXION combine and header for a 
full harvest season.* Ask you dealer for details.
Entry deadline is December 31, 2013.
www.lexiondriventowin.com 
WIN a LEXION 
Combine for a YEAR!
Pictured L to R: Kragh Johnson, NHC, Doug Ruskamp 
and Gary Ruskamp.
TO
GIVEAWAY
Central Illinois Farming Duo are Driven to Win
2012 DRIVEN TO WIN WINNER

corner talk
F A L L  E D I T I O N
11
Janelle Nadeau has two loves: playing the harp and 
driving the LEXION combine every harvest season.
It may seem like a strange combination, but for Nadeau, 
it’s just the way it’s always been.
“I grew up on the farm, which I absolutely loved,” she 
says. “My heart is still there. But I’ve also always loved 
music. I started playing harp when I was seven years old.
“When I graduated from high school and I wanted to 
farm and play my harp, I knew it wouldn’t work. For 
either one, you have to give it everything you’ve got. I 
chose music, and I have no regrets.” 
“I still get to go back to the farm for harvest, though!”
The “farm” is Nadeau Seeds, a family farm and seed 
cleaning operation just outside of Fannystelle, Manitoba. 
Janelle and her sister Kara – who works at the farm full 
time with parents Brian and Rachelle – are the fourth 
generation to farm the land, where they grow flax, wheat, 
oats, canola, soybeans, alfalfa, rye and more.
Janelle goes back every August for the harvest, 
combining and cultivating the land. She smiles as she 
describes their first LEXION combine, which is still 
operating today.
“We got this CLAAS combine from another farmer about 
eight or nine years ago, and I think it was only a few 
years old then. Anyway, it had that farm’s name on a 
decal on the combine. Part of that name was “Blue,” 
and we kept that part of the sticker on the combine and 
somehow, the name “Old Blue” just stuck. It’s one of 
those funny family things.”
“Even when we’ve had issues with other combines, 
Old Blue just keeps trucking away,” says Nadeau of the 
LEXION 480. “My sister always tries to pretend that it’s 
a burden to drive the old combine, but we all know she 
really wants to drive her.”
NORTH AMERICA’S LEXION FAN FEATURE
HAVE A LEXION FAN IN YOUR HOUSE?
If you’re a big fan of CLAAS, or know someone who is, send your LEXION 
Fan Feature story and photo to:
CLAAS of America Inc., 8401 S. 132nd Street, Omaha, NE 68138  
or email contactus@claas.com.
Passion for Farming Keeps Harpist Coming Back for More
That means Janelle is usually behind the wheel of the LEXION 760TT, which she 
enjoys. “The machine is comfortable!” she says. “It does a great job and Old 
Blue keeps up pretty well.”
Nadeau does manage to bring her two lives together at times. Just take a look 
at her talent in the field, as it’s not something you’ll see everyday! 
www.janellenadeau.com/news
While you’re on her website enjoying the music, check her booking calendar. 
Nadeau provides private concerts and music for weddings and other events in 
the Vancouver area all with a sense of passion for music and farming.
When you own a LEXION, you become part of the 
family – the LEXION Owners’ Club. And, being part 
of this family can have real benefits, especially when 
you bring others into the fold!
The LEXION Owners’ Club Referral Program gives 
you the opportunity to win one of three grand 
prizes, simply by submitting names and contact 
information of friends or neighbors who are 
considering purchasing a new combine. 
Gary Ruskamp (Ruskamp Feedyards) of Dodge, 
Nebraska is our 2012 Referral Program Winner and 
chose a Grand Prize of $5,000 in Cabela’s Cash. 
So, if you’re a LEXION Owner, take into account all those who may be 
watching what your LEXION is doing in the field – saving time, fuel and 
bringing in the harvest faster – it may just be that they’d like to be riding in 
a LEXION too! Take a chance and you could be our next big winner.
After all, the bigger the LEXION family, the better!
Pat Sherle  
Sherle Farms  
Hobart, OK
PRIZE: $5,000 
Cabela’s Cash
Gerald Hayes  
Hayes Farms  
Emden, IL
PRIZE: German 
Adventure
2009 WINNER
2010 WINNER
2011 WINNER
2012 REFERRAL PROGRAM WINNER
Steve Leesman  
Leesman Farms  
Hartsburg, IL
PRIZE: German 
Adventure

© 2013 CLAAS of America Inc. LEXION is a registered trademark of CLAAS KGaA mbH. CLAAS continually develops its products to 
meet customer requirements. This means that all products are subject to change without notice. All descriptions and specifications in this 
brochure should be considered as approximate and may include optional equipment that is not part of the standard specifications. Please 
refer to your nearest LEXION dealer and their price list for local specification details. Some protective panels may have been removed for 
photographic purposes in order to present the function clearly. To avoid any risk of danger, never remove these protective panels yourself. 
In this respect, please refer to the relevant instructions in the operator’s manual.
CLAAS of America Inc.
8401 S. 132nd Street
Omaha, NE 68138
www.claas.com
PRSRT STD
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID
OMAHA, NE
PERMIT NO. 207
BRING your 
LEXION in for 
a PITSTOP ...  
     on CLAAS
Estimated 1:100 chance of winning. Lubricant package valued up to 
$1500 USD. Labor costs not included. One coupon per customer or 
farm. Available at participating dealers only. Winners notified by mail no 
later than March 15, 2014. Dealers: See the applicable Parts Bulletin 
for details. Valid through February 28, 2014.
Get ready, as it’s our first 
feature calendar of LEXION 
combines from growers 
like you! We asked you to 
be creative, intriguing and to 
capture the prize shot. 
With an overwhelming amount 
of entries, the winners are 
about to be revealed and 
the calendar is soon to be 
found on your doorstep!
LEXION 2014 Calendar
COMING SOON!
•	 AGRIMOT© Engine Oil 
•	 AGRISHIFT© Transmission Oil 
•	 AGRIHYD© Hydraulic Oil 
•	 AGRICOOL© Engine Coolant
•	 AGRIGREASE© Lubricating 
Grease
Send this coupon along with your CLAAS 
dealership name and location, your name 
and location and your machine serial #, to:
Attention: PITSTOP 2014
CLAAS of America
3030 Norcross Dr.
Columbus, IN 47201
We thank all of those who entered this year and 
continue to look forward and see what our  
LEXION Owners will share next year!
Enter for a chance 
to win a full CLAAS 
lubricant package for 
your CLAAS Harvester.

