CV of Sky Darmos 
21.03.2023 
 
Basic information 
 
Name: Sky Darmos (Σκαυ Νταρμος). 
Birthday: 13.02.1985. 
Nationality: German and Greek.  
Occupation: Physicist and etymographist.  
Fields: Quantum gravity, cosmology, consciousness (parapsychology) and 
etymography (scripts based on etymons instead of phonemes).  
E-mail: Skydarmos@protonmail.com; skydarmos@zohomail.eu.  
Languages spoken: German, Greek, English, Mandarin, Cantonese, Vietnamese 
and Spanish.  
Academia website: https://polyu.academia.edu/SkyDarmos 
Etymography website: https://skydarmos.github.io/Etymography/  
(22,400 entries for English etymography and 11,000 entries for German 
etymography. ) 
 
Introduction 
 
Sky Darmos is a quantum gravity researcher who started developing his own approach to quantum gravity in 2005. It 
consists of two parts that were originally developed independently. The first part was conceived in 2003 and is called 
‘similar worlds interpretation’ (SWI). It is a new way of describing superpositions and entanglement. The second part 
was conceived in 2005 and is called ‘space particle dualism theory’ (SPD). It is a quantization of space and gravity 
treating gravity as an emergent property. According to SPD, gravity does not depend on mass or energy, but on 
quark/baryon count. This has been confirmed to great accuracy by a meta-analysis of all G-measurements of the last 
200 years.  
 
Space particle dualism theory is based on a variation of the Von Neumann-Wigner interpretation. It explains 
superpositions in a totally new way (2003), solves the ERP-paradox (2004) and gives a new interpretation for quantum 
spin (2006; 2015). It leads to a cosmological dynamic in which a natural explanation for the accelerated expansion is 
possible and that is linked to entropy (2014 – 2019). 
 
This so-called entropic expansion leads to an age of the universe that is much larger than the age assumed by the 
mainstream. Counting from when the universe became transparent it is already 42 trillion years old. This age for the 
universe explains why there is such an abundance of heavy elements on earth, and why 90% of the Milky Way’s mass 
is invisible. In a very old universe, there are naturally the remains of many generations of stars that have burned out 
and turned either into black holes or black dwarfs. Only using this age, the abundance of elements and the amount of 
non-luminous matter can be predicted accurately. 
 
Due to the fact that in SPD gravity is a side effect of hypercharge and that photons don’t have hypercharge, the theory 
predicts that black holes don’t evaporate (2017). The flatness problem and the vacuum catastrophe are prevented by 
having gravity acting only locally and only depending on density differences, not on absolute mass-energy values 
(2005). The horizon problem is solved from within the entropic expansion model of the theory (2015). Entropic 
expansion is non-isotropic, and this provides an explanation for the missing local expansion (2022). Space particle 
dualism theory uses the vacuum energy density to derive the weakness of gravity. The calculated weakness matches 
exactly the observed (2016 - 2018). Space particle dualism theory provides an explanation for the different generations 
of matter and predicts the masses of nearly all elementary particles (2018 - 2022). 
 
Aside from Quantum Gravity research, Sky Darmos also develops etymographies for Western languages, based on 
sinographemes (2008 - 2022).  
 
 
 
 

Published books 
 
1. 
“Quantum Gravity, Cosmology and Consciousness” (620 pages; 2022 - 2023) (1,059 Readers, 392 Highly 
Engaged; Top 3%). On Amazon, or here: 
https://www.academia.edu/34051559/Quantum_Gravity_Cosmology_and_Consciousness 
2. 
“The German Language in Chinese script” (540 pages; 2013). Available on Amazon.  
 
Published peer-reviewed papers 
 
1. 
APA Newsletter on Computers and Philosophy, Volume 17, number 2 (spring 2018); pages 22 – 28. Link: 
https://www.apaonline.org/?computers_newsletter Direct link: 
https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.apaonline.org/resource/collection/EADE8D52-8D02-4136-9A2A-
729368501E43/ComputersV17n2.pdf  (It is chapter 2.4 and 2.5 of my book. Since the 11.08.2018 the paper is 
somewhat outdated, because the approach for slowing down light suggested in the paper is unrealistic. The 
correct way is using a sodium-2 gas. ) 
2. 
Advances in Theoretical & Computational Physics; Volume 2 | Issue 4 | 1 of 5; Predicting the Masses of the 
electron, the Neutrino, the Proton, the Neutrino and possibly the W-and Z-Bosons & Additional Prediction of a 
Small Non-Zero Mass for Gluons; Research Article; Link: www.doi.org/10.33140/ATCP.02.04.03. (It is 
chapter 3.8 of my book. Since my last update in January 2023 the chapter has changed so much that the paper 
is very outdated. ) 
3. 
Advances in Theoretical & Computational Physics; Volume 2 | Issue 4 | 1 of 6; Using Space Particle Dualism 
Theory to Solve the Hierarchy Problem; Research Article; Sky Darmos; Advances in Theoretical and 
Computational Physics (Volume 2, Issue 4) (winter 2019). Link: www.doi.org/10.33140/ATCP.02.04.02.  
4. 
“Entropic expansion and the true age of the universe – based on space particle dualism theory”. Sky Darmos. 
Academia Journal of Scientific Research 8(10): 290-319, October 2020. DOI: 10.15413/ajsr.2020.0124. ISSN 
2315-7712. ©2020 Academia Publishing. Link: 
https://academiapublishing.org/journals/ajsr/pdf/2020/Oct/Darmos.pdf (Contains two serious mistakes. The 
correct version is chapter 4.12 of my book. ) 
5. 
“The Origin of Gravity from first principles”. 2021. Chapter: “Gravity without the equivalence principle”.  
 
Research funding history 
 
2016 - 2017: 95,000 RMB (12,804 Euro) (From Xin Jian (辛建), a teacher, for establishing an education center in 
Zhongshan). Sep. 2020 – Sep. 2022: 5,000 RMB (about 700 Euro) per month (From Lin Yi Song (林宜松), a real 
estate owner, for quantum gravity and etymography research). Since Jun. 2022: 500 Euro per month (From Henning 
Conle, a billionaire real estate owner).  
 
Proposed technologies 
 
(1) Chromogravity-based sensors to detect illegal cargo on freighters (partially inspired by Ashraf Elkady), (2) 
entanglement projector for superluminal communication (valuable input from Dean Radin), (3) ultra-delayed quantum 
eraser for detecting consciousness (endorsed and promoted by Ben Goertzel), (4) chromogravity-based aircraft that 
decreases freefall speed (partially inspired by Henning Conle), (5) electrogravity blocker, (6) gravity cancellation 
through manipulation of wavefunctions, enabling LENR by widening of wavefunction (inspired by Ashraf Elkady), 
(7) quantum oracles and quantum mind (inspired by Steve Huff), (8) pan-referendism platform (inspired by Swiss and 
Taiwan), (9) Etymography input system editors (IMEs) (programmed by Nguyễn Quốc Trung (阮國忠) & Nguyễn 
Việt Khôi (阮越魁), (10) using my data), (11) telekinetic enhancer using visual stimulus (inspired by Dean Radin).  
 
Full or partial endorsements 
 
Bernhard Umlauf [German physicist], Ralf Kannenberg [Swiss mathematician], Ludovic Krundel [French 
cybernetician; PhD], Doros Kiriakoulis [Greek bachelor-physicist and master-neuroscientist], Prof. Gino Yu [Sino-
American consciousness researcher], Piotr Boltuc [PhD; American-Polish professor of philosophy], Prof. Mohammad 
Reza Sanaye [Iranian medical researcher and polymath], Stephan A. Schwartz [American parapsychologist], Ben 
Goertzel PhD [American mathematician and AI expert], Dean Radin PhD [American parapsychologist], Scott S. 

Gordon [American surgeon and hobby physicist], Hari Malla [Indian philosopher], Jesse Timron Brown [American 
mathematician], Ruud Loeffen [Dutch scholar], Will Shields [Reader from the US], Savyasanchi Ghose [Physics 
student from India], Rupert Sheldrake [British biologist and parapsychologist], John Walton† [American aerospace 
and satellite engineer], Thomas Southern [U.S. Navy, Sonar Technician Submarines, Oceanographer], Kitsos Tripos 
[Philosophical physicist, M.S., University of Essex], Stuart Sidgwick [Canadian biochemist & physicist, University 
of Toronto], Silas Mohale [South African physicist], Dante Alughieri [American reader], David Chen [American 
investor who invested in the robot Sophia], David Chester [PhD; UCLA & MIT; American particle physicist], Amelia 
Vogler [American energy medicine professional], George Soli [American retired space physicist; NASA Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory], Necati Demiroğlu [Turkish physicist and electrical engineer], Prof. Richard Gauthier 
[American chemist and physicist; Santa Rosa Junior College], Thad Roberts [American physicist], David Heggli 
[German research investor], Dirk K F Meijer [Dutch toxicologist and physicist], Massimo Melli [Italian physicist], 
Prof. Erik Lindberg [Danish physicist], John Baxter [American physicist; ITT, AIAA, NSS], Stephen Farrugia 
[Maltese physicist], Atticus Myser [American reader], Bahadır Arıtay [Turkish reader], Prof. Mark Aaron Simpson 
[American theoretical physicist], Prof. Konrad Kleinknecht [German physicist and personal friend of Heisenberg and 
his son], Volodymyr Krasnoholovets [Ukrainian nuclear physicist; PhD], Prof. Dr. Santosh K. Karn [Indian physicist], 
Prof. Carlos Perelman  [Mathematical physicist from the US], Prof. Ashraf Elkady [Egyptian nuclear physicist], Prof. 
Menas Kafatos [Most prominent Greek physicist]. 
 
Research history 
 
2003: Established the similar worlds interpretation: we exist in all worlds that are temporarily indistinguishable to us.  
 
2004: (1) SWI solves the Einstein-Rosen-Podolsky paradox & explains neutral particle mixing. (2) Local flatness 
concept (used again in 2021). (3) Conscious set theory: identity theory (mind body problem) is wrong; holistic nature 
of consciousness; temporally extended nature of consciousness & world of experience; world of relations.  
 
2005: (1) Theory on qualia. (2) Established SPD. (3) Symmetry group of the standard model follows naturally from 
SPD.  
 
2006: (1) Established conscious set theory. (2) SPD explains quantum spin. (3) Unified SWI and SPD: SPD explains 
waviness of quantum probability distributions.  
 
2007 – 2011: focused on etymography, which I started working on in 2006, and more seriously in 2008.  
 
2012: QM and in particular the SWI require an absolute frame of reference.  
 
2013: Proposed entropic expansion: the universe expands in order to compensate for the entropy increase in black 
holes.  
 
2014: (1) Used SWI and QM to predict that there are no aliens. (2) Started calculations to show that the three 
generations of matter are based on merged space quanta. (3) Entropic expansion explains quasar redshifts (suggested 
by Bernhard Umlauf).  
 
2015: (1) Entropy equals number of similar worlds in similar worlds interpretation. (2) Shift from conscious relations 
to conscious sets. (3) Correct formula for granular dimensionality & calculation of vacuum energy. (4) Entropic 
expansion is accelerating only due to the squared mass in the formula for BH-entropy. (5) Denied the notion that 
matter emerged from a matter antimatter annihilation war in the early universe. (6) First proposed using quantum 
erasers to test consciousness.  
 
2016: (1) Calculated the maximal density of the early universe based on the entropic expansion principle. (2) the 
influence of our thoughts on our surroundings is mainly limited by entropy and the high frequency of observation. (3) 
Aerokinesis does not reduce entropy and is therefore the easiest type of PK. (4) CMB anomalies show that life on 
earth brought the universe into existence. (5) Calculated the frequency at which the space quanta radius becomes 
larger than the wavelength.  
 

2017: (1) Predicted the effect size of micro-PK on RNGs. (2) Using an ultra-delayed quantum eraser to probe the 
wavefunction collapse. (3) Gravity depends on baryon count and not on mass. (4) I also used the phenomenon of mass 
defect to predict that different materials have different gravitational constants. (5) Gravitational time dilation is caused 
by increased density of the quantum vacuum. (6) Proposed that we constantly remote view the time when we wake up 
at the right time. I also encountered Schwartz and his archeological remote viewing confirmed to me my 2006-
introduction of the ‘world of experience’. (7) Proposed a model for reincarnation which introduces various subsets to 
a conscious set. The subsets represent how a person is viewed by different people. (8) Calculated the initial mass of 
primordial black holes, which later evolved to become supermassive black holes. (9) First calculation of delay of 
photons due to zigzagging in granular space. (10) The smallness of the neutrino mass shows that all masses can be 
explained as self-energy of charged particles. (11) Calculated the radius and the entropy of the coherence horizon. (12) 
Discovered that in SPD black holes can’t shrink. (13) Calculated the quantum entropy of a photon.   
 
2018: (1) Ultra-delayed quantum eraser: Feasible approach using Sodium-2 gas. (2) Last observer is connected to first 
observer through morphic resonance. (3) Fischbach’s work from 1986, which shows that gravity is material-dependent; 
confirming SPD. (4) Radin’s precognition experiment is really enhanced PK and his experiment testing PK on RNG-
data stored in a computer shows that superpositioned states can be maintained for a very long time. (5) Speed-related 
time dilation is caused by energy-dependence of space quanta radii. (6) The space quanta scale factor 𝐺𝐸 can be known 
independently from 𝐺. (7) Solved the hierarchy problem by deriving the strength of gravity from the granular space 
of SPD. (8) Exo-transparency of exotic matter black holes.  
 
2019: (1) Complex oscillating mass. Negative imaginary component represents anti-matter. Negative real component 
represents negative mass. (2) Derived the time redshift equation from entropic expansion. I thereby was able to 
calculate that the post-decoupling age of the universe is 42 trillion years. (3) Calculated the entropy density of the 
universe based on the SPD-intergalactic distances and black hole entropies. I thereby was able to calculate that the 
full age of the universe, which is 86 trillion years. (4) In an old universe there is no need for dark matter. All dark 
matter is just burned-out stars and stellar BHs. (5) Local Hubble values for different galaxies. (6) Correctly predicted 
the size of baryonic acoustic oscillations (BAO). (7) Supernovae: 46% of GR-luminosities violate stellar physics. 
None of the SPD-luminosities violate stellar physics. (8) Predicted that gluons have a very small non-zero mass. (9) 
Computationally demonstrated that all energy in the universe comes from the uncertainty principle.  
 
2020: (1) Used date from 8,846 supernovae to test the inverse square law of luminosity. GR failed this test, while SPD 
passed it. (2) Calculated the age of 35,000 white dwarfs and discovered that 99% of them are older than the GR-
universe, but all are younger than the SPD-universe. The oldest is 36 trillion years old. (3) Compared real world 
example of psychokinetic levitation with my own theoretic predictions. (4) Predicted correct black hole-bulk ratio. (5) 
Conducted experiments to compare the gravity of water and iron. The experiments confirmed SPD. (6) Particles feel 
the density differences/curvature of space through their wavefunctions. (7) CMB irregularities are due to sustained 
micro-psychokinesis throughout the history of life on earth. (8) Predicted the frequency of brainwaves. (9) Using 
entangled quantum oracles for superluminal communication. (10) Voyager probe for finding the fundamental frame 
of reference of the universe.  
 
2021: (1) Worked out the gravity equations that will replace Newton’s and Einstein’s laws of gravity. (2) Calculated 
the expected temperature of 16 black dwarfs. (3) Superluminal communication. (4) Relativistic correction for the 
Bekenstein-Hawking entropy.  
 
2022: (1) Conducted a redshift survey on 225 galaxies to show that the expansion of the universe is not homogeneous. 
(2) First proposal for a chromogravity spacecraft that is capable of manipulating gravity. (3) Conducted a meta-
analysis of 91 experiments that measure 𝐺. I correctly predicted the G-value for every chemical composition. (4) 
Alternative measure for the size of infinite sets. (5) More precise value for the coupling constant of the weak force. 
(6) Eliminated the mass gap between neutron stars and black holes by calculating the true mass of black holes and 
neutron stars.  
 
2023: (1) Correctly predicted the mass of neutrinos, quarks and the Higgs boson. (2) First realistic proposal for a 
chromogravity spacecraft. (3) Third delay-method for the ultra-delayed quantum eraser: storing light in a liquid ring 
suspended in midair under zero-gravity. (4) predicted the mass of the muon and the mass of the tauon with 99.91% 
and 98.91% accuracy respectively (5) I used non-oscillating flavor mixing and assumed that the discrepancy for the 
muon is spin related, and by extrapolating to the tauon, I reach an accuracy of 100% for the tauon.  

