Unpredictability and Indeterminism in Human Behavior: Arguments and Implications for
Educational Research
Author(s): Gary A. Cziko
Reviewed work(s):
Source: Educational Researcher, Vol. 18, No. 3 (Apr., 1989), pp. 17-25
Published by: American Educational Research Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1174887 .
Accessed: 21/02/2012 00:13
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
American Educational Research Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend
access to Educational Researcher.
http://www.jstor.org

Unpredictability 
and 
Indeterminism 
in 
Human 
Behavior: 
Arguments 
and 
Implications 
for 
Educational 
Research 
GARY A. CZIKO 
This essay presents arguments for the view that complex human 
behavior of the type that interests educational researchers 
is by its 
nature unpredictable 
if not indeterminate, 
a view that raises serious 
questions about the validity of a quantitative, experimental, 
positivist approach to educational research. The arguments are 
based on (a) individual differences, (b) chaos, (c) the evolutionary 
nature of learning and development, (d) the role of consciousness 
and free will in human behavior, and (e) the implications of quan- 
tum mechanics. Consequently 
it is argued that educational 
research 
that attempts to predict and control educational outcomes cannot 
be successful and that educational research should focus on pro- 
viding descriptions and interpretations 
of educational phenomena 
to provide findings that can be used to improve our understanding 
of learning, development, and education and to facilitate their 
evolution. 
Educational Researcher, Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 17-25 
Asked 
to find a recurring theme in the issues of Educa- 
tional Researcher 
from the late 1970s and throughout the 
1980s, one would have little difficulty discovering a contin- 
uing preoccupation and debate concerning the epistemology 
of educational research. This debate, centered on issues 
related to quantitative versus qualitative approaches to 
research, has at the very least raised serious questions about 
the quantitative, experimental, positivist approach to educa- 
tional research, an approach that nevertheless continues to 
dominate mainstream educational research. 
There appears, however, to have been little discussion 
among educational researchers of what may be an even 
more basic issue, that is, the possibility that the phenomena 
studied in the social and behavioral sciences are essentially 
unpredictable and indeterminate. This essay presents five 
arguments for the unpredictability and indeterminacy of 
complex human behavior of the type of interest to educators 
and educational researchers (hereafter referred to simply as 
"behavior") and begins a discussion of the implications for 
educational research. 
Arguments for the Unpredictability of Human Behavior 
Arguments From a Deterministic Perspective 
The first two arguments to be considered for the unpredic- 
tability of human behavior are presented within a deter- 
ministic perspective. It is argued that even if we do inhabit 
a completely deterministic universe, there are nonetheless 
compelling reasons to believe that it is impossible to make 
accurate, nontrivial predictions concerning human behavior. 
Individual differences. Probably the best-known argument 
for limits on the predictability of human behavior within 
educational contexts is that of Lee J. Cronbach and Richard 
Snow. Cronbach and Snow (Cronbach 1975, 1982; Cron- 
bach & Snow, 1977; Snow, 1977) have argued that indi- 
vidual differences interact with educational treatments in 
such a way that, for example, whereas Method A might be 
the most effective way to teach a child of Type 1 to learn 
to read, this same method might be quite ineffective for 
teaching another child of Type 2 for whom a much better 
method is Method B. These aptitude-treatment interactions 
(ATI) may themselves interact with other factors such as 
time so that in 10 years' time Method 1 may become less 
effective for teaching Type 1 children and become better 
suited to Type 2 children (an aptitude by treatment by time 
interaction). 
Considering the complexity of the constantly changing in- 
teracting factors influencing human behavior, Cronbach and 
Snow conclude that comprehensive and definitive exper- 
iments in the social sciences are not possible and that the 
most we can ever realistically hope to achieve in educational 
research is not prediction and control but rather only tem- 
porary understanding. It is important to point out that in 
taking this position Cronbach does not consider human 
behavior unlawful and unpredictable in itself but rather that 
the interacting nature of aptitude, treatment, and time 
variables means 
that we cannot store up generalizations and constructs 
for ultimate assembly into a network. It is as if we need- 
ed a gross of dry cells to power an engine, and could only 
make one a month. The energy would leak out of the 
first cells before we had half the battery completed. (1975, 
p. 123) 
Recently, Phillips (1987) has taken exception to Cronbach 
and Snow's pessimistic view of educational research in argu- 
ing that research in the social sciences is not fundamentally 
different from research in the physical sciences. First, Phil- 
lips contends that complex interactions also occur in the 
physical sciences where, for example, "pressure and volume 
interact to affect the behavior of a gas-but temperature in 
turn is another interacting factor, and so is the initial mass 
GARY A. CZIKO, 
Associate Professor, Department of Educational 
Psychology, University of Illinois, 1310 S. Sixth St., Champaign, 
IL 61820, specializes in first- and second-language 
acquisition and 
applications of the biological and physical sciences to the cognitive 
sciences and education. 
APRIL 1989 
17 

of the gas and its purity" (p. 55). 
Although the interactions of the type Phillips describes 
certainly do occur in the physical sciences, they are none- 
theless fundamentally different from ATI effects, because 
ATI effects are due to individual differences among people, 
differences that are complex, extremely difficult (if not im- 
possible) to measure accurately, and rarely amenable to ex- 
perimental control and manipulation. In contrast, all 
molecules of a given gas are essentially identical to each 
other, and factors such as mass, temperature, and pressure 
are easily controlled in the laboratory. Even if two samples 
of gas differ in their purity, it is quite easy to mix the two 
samples and redivide them into two new samples that are 
then, for all practical purposes, identical. Indeed, it is this 
very control of physical factors that makes the discovery of 
the physical laws of nature possible. In contrast, student 
variables such as intelligence, motivation, cognitive style, 
socioeconomic status, and background knowledge are at 
best extremely difficult to measure and impossible to control. 
Phillips also argues that although time itself may be an 
interacting independent variable in the social sciences, this 
is also the case in the physical and biological sciences where 
objects, organisms, and species also change over time. 
Phillips once again seems to ignore a crucial distinction, 
however, because in the social sciences the ATI perspec- 
tive recognizes that the "laws" themselves may change over 
time, a possibility that is not a concern in the physical 
sciences. Thus, although no one supposes that the biological 
process of mitosis (cell division) will change in the coming 
years as a result of our increasing knowledge of this pro- 
cess and its dissemination, it is easy to imagine how a 
teacher's use of schedules of reinforcement to maintain 
discipline in a high school classroom may lose its effec- 
tiveness after the establishment of a high school course in 
psychology in which the principles of operant condition- 
ing are made known to the students. 
Although Cronbach and Snow's discussion of ATI prob- 
lems implies considerable difficulty for educational research- 
ers, it could easily be argued from a less positivistic and 
more ethnographic and phenomenological perspective that 
their ATI perspective does not go nearly far enough to ap- 
preciate fully the role of individual differences in behavior. 
This is because Cronbach and Snow imply that the data nec- 
essary for a comprehensive theory of human behavior are 
in principle obtainable using current quantitative ("etic") 
data collection and analytic techniques, but that time limita- 
tions and other practical constraints make it impossible to 
obtain simultaneously all the data necessary for weaving into 
a comprehensive theory. However, a more qualitative, 
ethnographic ("emic") approach to the problem of under- 
standing human behavior would consider that it is not the 
environment or external stimuli described in "objective," 
etic terms that influences our behavior but rather it is the 
meaning that each individual attaches to his or her ex- 
periences of the environment and that this meaning is in- 
fluenced by an extremely complex myriad of social and 
cultural factors. Such a perspective would appear to make 
predicting human behavior even more problematic than the 
perspective provided by Cronbach and Snow because the 
meaning one attaches to one's experiences is a function of 
the totality of all previous experiences, something to which 
the researcher cannot possibly have access. 
A final perspective on the complexities of individual 
human differences is given by Sagan (1977), who estimates 
that the human brain has some 1013 synapses permitting 
some 2 raised to the power 1013 different possible states, "an 
unimaginably large number, far greater, for example, than 
the total number of elementary particles (electrons and pro- 
tons) in the entire universe" and that "it is because of this 
immense number of functionally different configurations of 
the human brain that no two humans, even identical twins 
raised together, can ever be really very much alike." Sagan 
goes on to speculate that "these enormous numbers may 
also explain something of the unpredictability of human 
behavior and those moments when we surprise even 
ourselves by what we do" (p. 42). A consideration of the 
interaction of these individual brain differences with educa- 
tional treatments leads to an appreciation of the enormous 
difficulty in attempting to predict the effect of an educational 
treatment on the behavior of any given individual student 
or group of students, regardless of the findings of previous 
educational research on the treatment in question. Thus 
even from what many today would consider a simplistic and 
outdated positivistic, etic approach to the behavioral 
sciences, there appear to be serious difficulties in expecting 
educational research to be able to discover laws of human 
behavior in educational settings that would permit predic- 
tion and control. 
Chaos. Developments in the field of physics also have im- 
portant implications for arguments concerning the predict- 
ability of human behavior. The adoption by the behavioral 
sciences toward of the end of the 19th century of the re- 
search perspective and methodology used in the physical 
sciences is usually considered to mark the birth of "scien- 
tific" sociological, psychological, and educational research. 
The emphasis on quantification, objectivity, experimenta- 
tion, and inferential statistical techniques still found in 
mainstream behavioral science clearly shows the influence 
of the research methods of the physical sciences on those 
of the behavioral sciences. 
It is not surprising that the research model originally 
adopted from the physical sciences by the behavioral 
sciences was that of then current and quite successful New- 
tonian physics, in which it was assumed that all relevant 
variables could be measured objectively and all physical 
events were determined completely by (and therefore pre- 
dictable by knowledge of) preceding events. What is sur- 
prising, however, is that whereas the physical sciences have 
now clearly discarded this view of the physical universe as 
a giant, predetermined dock, this perspective still dominates 
mainstream "scientific" educational research. In the field 
of physics, the Newtonian view has given way this century 
to a much more complex and puzzling view of nature. To 
borrow Popper's (1979) analogy, the Newtonian view that 
all seemingly unpredictable phenomena (such as the for- 
mation and movements of clouds) are actually in essence 
as predictable as clocks has been replaced by the opposite 
view that all physical phenomena (including all phenomena 
seemingly as predictable as clocks) are in essence as un- 
predictable as clouds (pp. 206-255). The two major events 
responsible for this shift in perspective have been the 
development of the field of quantum mechanics and the 
discovery of chaos. Although the development of quantum 
mechanics predates by several decades the discovery of 
chaos, chaos is discussed first because it provides a deter- 
ministic perspective on unpredictability; quantum mechan- 
18 
EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER 

ics is considered later, along with other indeterminate argu- 
ments for unpredictability. 
The discovery of chaos by the physical sciences is quite 
recent, and although Lorenz's (1963) landmark paper on 
chaos appeared more than a quarter of a century ago, it is 
only within the last several 'years that physicists have begun 
paying serious attention to chaotic phenomena. Chaos has 
since provided startling new insights into the behavior of 
physical phenomena ranging from dripping faucets to 
weather systems (Crutchfield, Farmer, Packard, & Shaw, 
1986); in the life sciences, chaos has already been applied 
with some success to problems involving the spread of 
diseases (Schaffer & Kot, 1985), the rise and fall of animal 
populations (Schaffer, 1984) and the functioning of the 
human brain (Skarda & Freeman, 1987; see Gleick, 1987, 
for a fascinating and readable description of chaos, its 
history, and current applications). It thus appears only a 
matter of time before chaos is applied also to problems of 
human behavior and education. 
A process demonstrating chaos is one in which strict de- 
terministic causality holds at each individual step in an un- 
folding process, and yet it is impossible to predict the out- 
come over any sequence of steps in the process. A simple 
example of chaos is given by the iterative function y = 
3.7x(1 - x) in which the initial value substituted for x is 
between zero and one and the obtained value of y is used 
to replace x to obtain the next value of y, and so on. Such 
an equation might be used to model the population dy- 
namics of a temperate zone insect whose generations do not 
overlap and whose population size for any year determines 
the population size for the following year. 
What is remarkable about this simple equation is that, 
although all the values it generates iteratively are determined 
completely by the initial value of x, it is nonetheless impos- 
sible to predict what any ith value of y will be. One must in- 
stead let history run its course by actually putting through 
the equation the original x value and each new generated 
x value a total of i times to determine the desired ith value 
of y. In addition, the values generated by the equation fail 
to form any sort of recognizable pattern and instead generate 
values that appear completely random. Thus, although this 
relationship is characterized by a strict and quite simple 
deterministic law, the outcome is completely unpredictable, 
even with the most precise available knowledge of the relevant ini- 
tial conditions. Furthermore, the nonlinearity and iterative 
nature of the chaotic systems described by this equation 
causes infinitesimally tiny differences in the initial value of x 
to lead ultimately to large, unpredictable 
differences 
in the equa- 
tion's output. This sensitive dependence on initial condi- 
tions, more popularly known as the "butterfly effect," was 
first made widely known by MIT meteorologist Edward 
Lorenz (1963, 1979), whose research demonstrated how the 
flap of a butterfly's wings in Brazil could set off a tornado 
in Texas (1979). It was Lorenz's discovery of the chaotic 
nature of the equations governing the weather that led him 
to his startling conclusion that accurate, long-range weather 
forecasting was impossible regardless of the amount and 
precision of data available and the computing power avail- 
able to process it (see Gleick, 1987, p. 17). 
Chaos is now the subject of much interest among phy- 
sicists, mathematicians, biologists, astronomers, and econ- 
omists and the significance of its discovery has been com- 
pared to that of evolution, relativity, and quantum me- 
chanics. Although apparently still unknown by most (if not 
all) social and behavioral scientists, chaos has very impor- 
tant implications for the predictability of human behavior 
and educational research because it holds that even though 
the relationship between two variables may be both quite 
simple and completely deterministic, a nonlinear relation- 
ship may nevertheless lead to outcomes that are entirely 
unpredictable. 
It is not hard to imagine how chaos might be applicable 
to educational settings. For example, it seems reasonable 
to suppose that the amount of mathematics Lionel will learn 
today is determined at least in part by what he learned 
yesterday, and what he will learn tomorrow is influenced 
by what he learns today, and so forth. In addition, the rela- 
tionship between the amount of mathematics learned on day 
d and day d + 1 may not be linear so that although in general 
the more Lionel learns on day d the more the learns on day 
d + 1, learning very much on day d could have the effect 
of decreasing the amount learned on day d + 1 if, for exam- 
ple, his teacher and classmates can no longer keep up with 
him or his excellent performance on day d leads him to 
overestimate his abilities and reduce his attention and ef- 
fort the following day. Lionel's mathematics achievement 
(as well as that of his classmates) could then well be char- 
acterized as chaotic because although what he learns by the 
end of grade 4 may be determined completely by what he 
knew at the beginning of grade 4, his year-end achievement 
may be nonetheless completely unpredictable. 
To make matters even more chaotic, minuscule differences 
in mathematics knowledge between Lionel and a classmate 
at the beginning of the school year may lead to quite large, 
unpredictable differences in achievement between the two 
students by year end. Thus the concept of chaos assumes 
particular importance for educational research when viewed 
from the ATI perspective of individual differences discussed 
earlier in that it provides a model for understanding how 
even infinitesimally tiny initial differences in any of a 
multitude of factors (e.g., teacher attention, teaching 
materials, motivation, home background, student back- 
ground knowledge) could in the course of time lead to sig- 
nificant and totally unpredictable differences in outcomes. 
The butterfly effect of chaotic phenomena constitutes a par- 
ticularly vexing curse for psychometricians because no mat- 
ter how reliable and valid a test may be, identical scores on 
a pretest will inevitably lead to unpredictable differences on 
a posttest of later achievement. 
Arguments From an Indeterministic Perspective 
Though the above two arguments for the unpredictability 
of human behavior are consistent with a completely deter- 
ministic universe, there are also arguments for the view that 
human behavior is by its nature indeterministic and 
therefore unpredictable. Three of these arguments are now 
considered. 
Learning and development as evolutionary processes. One of 
the enduring puzzles in our attempt to understand human 
learning and cognitive development is what Bereiter (1985) 
has called "the learning paradox." This paradox involves 
attempting to understand how it is possible for individuals 
to acquire more complex concepts and abilities based only 
on the simpler ones already acquired. The logical difficulties 
of trying to explain how conceptual development can oc- 
cur at all has led some psychologists and linguists such as 
APRIL 1989 
19 

Fodor (1979) and Chomsky (1980) to the radically nativist 
conclusion that all mental concepts must be determined 
innately. 
There is, however, a surprisingly simple nonnativist solu- 
tion to the learning paradox, a solution at which both 
Charles Darwin in 1838 and Alfred Russell Wallace 20 years 
later arrived independently in their attempts to understand 
the origin of new species of living organisms. The process 
of biological evolution they described involving superfecun- 
dity, random variation, and selection remains to this day 
the only widely accepted natural explanation for the origin 
and diversity of life on our planet and provides as well a 
model for how more complex learning and concepts can 
emerge out of simpler ones. 
Both anthropologist William Bateson (1979) and philos- 
opher Karl Popper (1979) have made strong arguments for 
an evolutionary view of learning that involves both chance 
responses (creative hypothesis generation) to novel stimuli 
and selection (hypothesis testing) to weed out unproduc- 
tive responses and retain useful ones. Popper (1979) has 
described "the growth of our knowledge [as] ... the result 
of a process closely resembling what Darwin called 'natural 
selection'; that is, the natural selection of hypotheses" con- 
stituting "a competitive struggle which eliminates those 
hypotheses which are unfit" (p. 261). 
Monod (1971), winner of a Nobel prize for his work in 
molecular biology, provides a particularly colorful account 
of the essential role of chance in biological evolution. 
The same source of fortuitous perturbations, of "noise," 
which in a nonliving (i.e., nonreplicative) system would 
lead little by little to the disintegration of all structure, 
is the progenitor of evolution in the biosphere and ac- 
counts for its unrestricted 
liberty of creation [italics added], 
thanks to the replicative structure of DNA: that registry 
of chance, that tone-deaf conservatory where the noise 
is preserved along with the music. (pp. 116-117) 
Although there is as yet not clear evidence of the actual 
biological or neurological mechanisms which might underlie 
evolutionary cognitive learning, we do now have quite de- 
tailed knowledge of the evolutionary nature of the biological 
learning involved in the mammalian body's immune 
response, which produces antibodies to fight against harm- 
ful foreign substances (antigens) invading the body. Molec- 
ular biology has discovered that the immune response is 
dependent on the random generation of antibodies with 
those found effective in identifying an antigen consequently 
selected for mass production and remembered for the next 
time the same or similar antigen is encountered (see Ada 
& Nossal, 1987; Kindt & Capra, 1984; Talmage, 1986; Tone- 
gawa, 1983, 1985; Yancopoulos & Alt, 1986). The now wide- 
ly accepted clonal-selection theory of the immune system 
explains the random generation of antibodies as dependent 
on two different processes: (a) the random recombination 
(i.e., 
shuffling) of genes for the initial diversity of antibodies, and 
(b) the consequent random mutation of selected antibodies 
to provide a "fine tuning" to make the antibodies even more 
effective in identifying a given antigen (Tonegawa, 1985, p. 
109). It is remarkable to note that these two random pro- 
cesses are in fact exactly the same processes found in sex- 
ually reproducing organisms to provide the random vari- 
ability in offspring required for biological evolution to take 
place. Thus we see that the evolutionary process of random 
variation (attributable to both sexual genetic recombination 
and genetic mutation) and natural selection, which over the 
time span of millions of years resulted in the emergence of 
the human species, remains as an essential process in the 
day-to-day survival of the human body in its incessant fight 
against microscopic foreign invaders. Although the struc- 
ture and purpose of the immune system may seem at first 
consideration to be distinctly different from that of the ner- 
vous system, physiologists have in fact noted striking 
similarities between the two (e.g., Cunningham, 1981; Jerne, 
1975; Kindt & Capra, 1984, p. 1), and a number of neuro- 
scientists and psychologists have begun to formulate specific 
models of learning that incorporate the random variation 
and selection of evolutionary processes (e.g., Changeux & 
Patte, 1984; Edelman, 1978, 1981; Edelman & Finkel, 1984; 
Hinton & Sejnowski, 1986; Smolensky, 1986; Waner & 
Hastings, 1987). 
Whereas a conceptualization of learning as an evolu- 
tionary process provides a solution to the learning paradox 
and thus offers an alternative to Chomsky's and Fodor's 
radically nativist views of human development, its de- 
pendence on chance as a generator of hypotheses leads 
directly to the conclusion that human cognitive development 
and behavior, insofar as it is based on creative learning, is 
by its very nature indeterministic and consequently un- 
predictable. If biological evolution is indeterministic, so then 
must be creative human learning if in fact such learning is 
based on similar evolutionary processes. 
According to such an evolutionary perspective, even if all 
the conditions of Earth from its initial formation to the pre- 
sent day could be exactly replicated somewhere else in the 
universe, it is extremely unlikely that any of the species that 
have existed on Earth would ever evolve again, because 
evolution is dependent on random processes. Similarly, an 
evolutionary perspective on learning suggests that even if 
a previously found "effective" learning environment could 
be replicated exactly, it would be very unlikely to lead to 
the same learning outcomes, even in an identical physical en- 
vironment using genetic clones of the original teacher and students. 
This realization evidently poses severe difficulties for the 
generalizability and applicability of the findings of "scien- 
tific" educational research. 
An evolutionary perspective on education that sees learn- 
ing and development as processes similar to those of bio- 
logical evolution and the mammalian immune response sug- 
gests that we cannot develop theory that would allow us 
to predict or deduce the educational outcomes of particular 
educational experiences. Rather, we can at best develop 
educational theory that is compatible with the educational 
outcomes observed. This perspective sees educational 
research as primarily a descriptive science that, even if suc- 
cessful in interpreting and explaining, can never provide 
a basis for the prediction of an individual's behavior or for 
the prescription of teaching practices. 
Consciousness 
and free will. An issue of continuing interest 
in philosophy and psychology has been the existence and 
role of consciousness and free will in human behavior. 
Although the peculiarly American behavioristic psychology 
of John B. Watson and B. F. Skinner denied the existence 
of both human consciousness and free will, there are to- 
day many good arguments for their existence and their cen- 
tral importance in understanding human behavior. 
Among these arguments is Popper's (1979) conceptualiza- 
- 20 
EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER 

tion of human consciousness and its role in regulating 
behavior. Popper sees human consciousness as a type of 
higher flexible "plastic" behavioral control (as opposed to 
a rigid "cast iron" control) that evolved in the course of 
biological evolution and that interacts with the physical 
states of the individual. According to Popper, "conscious- 
ness . . . is ... produced by physical states; yet it controls 
them to a considerable extent" in the same way that "a legal 
or social system is produced by us, yet controls us, and is 
in no reasonable sense 'identical' to or 'parallel' with us, 
but interacts with us, so states of consciousness (the 'mind') 
control the body, and interact with it" (p. 251). The essen- 
tial indeterminate nature of Popper's conception of con- 
sciousness is revealed by his description of it as "a system 
of clouds controlled by clouds" (p. 245). 
Attempting to take human consciousness into account to 
predict behavior raises a number of difficulties. To use an 
example similar to one given by Popper (1964, p. 13), im- 
agine that it were somehow possible to predict the course 
of world history over the period of a year and that this 
"social calendar" were then made widely known. If this 
occurred, the knowledge of what was predicted would likely 
influence the accuracy of the predictions. Who would want 
to fly on Helvetia Airlines flight 31 from Chicago to Geneva 
on January 13 if it were known in advance that all 267 people 
on this flight would be lost off the coast of Greenland? What 
would prevent the price of gold from soaring as investors 
scurried to buy the yellow metal following the prediction 
that its price would soon increase dramatically? Making 
predictions known can influence their accuracy in either of 
two ways: as in the first example, by warning people so that 
the prediction is not fulfilled, and as in the second, by mak- 
ing what is essentially a self-fulfilling prophecy. Further- 
more, attempting to take account of individuals' reactions 
to predictions in the predictions would lead to an infinite 
regress if the new predictions were also made public, for 
then individuals' behavior would be influenced by the new 
predictions that took their initial reactions into account, and 
so on and so forth. 
MacKay (1967) uses a related argument to argue for the 
existence of free will. MacKay asserts that even if the uni- 
verse is a deterministic clockwork, it nonetheless can be 
demonstrated logically that humans by their very nature 
possess a free will that transcends this determinism. To ap- 
preciate the main points of MacKay's argument as sum- 
marized by Gazzaniga (1985, pp. 142-144), imagine that a 
brain scientist tells me that after a detailed study of the brain 
of my wife, he has a complete understanding of its struc- 
ture and activity and can therefore predict that she will con- 
sume a bowl of oatmeal at 7:30 a.m. If we then observe my 
wife engaging in the predicted behavior at the predicted 
time, the brain scientist may well boast: "There, I have 
demonstrated that I can predict your wife's behavior ac- 
curately from my knowledge of her brain's structure and 
processes. She may believe that she is acting according to 
her own free will, but in fact her behavior is completely 
determined and therefore, in principle, completely predic- 
table." 
The trouble with the brain scientist's prediction, however, 
is that it would not necessarily hold true if my wife were made 
aware of the prediction since she could then easily have eggs 
for breakfast to prove the prediction wrong. If the brain 
scientist then tried to take my wife's knowledge of his 
prediction into account, he would only be demonstrating 
that he could not make a valid prediction of my wife's behavior 
that wag independent of my wife's knowledge of and belief in his 
prediction. In other words, the brain scientist 
cannot produce a complete specification that will be equal- 
ly accurate whether or not it is believed by my wife, and 
so inevitable for her. Since such a prediction cannot be 
considered 'universally true,' there is a 'logical indeterm- 
inacy' about the future states of people's brains; and it 
is this fact that allows for the concept of free will. (Gaz- 
zaniga, 1985, p. 143-144) 
From both MacKay's and Popper's perspectives, it would 
appear that the accurate prediction of complex and creative 
human behavior must take into account the interacting and 
regulatory nature of human consciousness. Yet attempting 
to account for the role of consciousness in behavior poses 
seemingly insurmountable difficulties for the behavioral 
scientist because, in addition to the logical problem of in- 
determinacy discussed by MacKay, an individual's con- 
sciousness is not and cannot be made known to the re- 
searcher. And yet to attempt to predict complex and creative 
human behavior of the type that takes place-in all educa- 
tional settings without taking consciousness into account 
would appear to be as futile as a deaf physicist's attemp- 
ting to recreate Mozart's symphonies by studying Mozart's 
body and his environment "as physical systems, and pre- 
dicting where the pen would put down black marks on lin- 
ed paper" (Popper, 1979, p. 254). 
In summary, there appear to be good reasons for the belief 
in the existence of both human consciousness and free will 
and their influence on human behavior. Even if the above 
arguments are not accepted, however, there is a final line 
of reasoning that would seem to establish clearly the un- 
predictability of complex human behavior as regulated by 
consciousness. As Popper (1964) has observed, human be- 
havior via consciousness is influenced by scientific knowl- 
edge, a claim that can be accepted easily by considering the 
influence of Pasteur's discovery of disease-causing microbes 
on medical practices or the effect of the manufacture of 
nuclear weapons on the behavior of world leaders. Yet, as 
Popper has noted, "we cannot predict, by rational or scien- 
tific methods, the future growth of our scientific knowledge. 
. . We cannot, therefore, predict the future course of 
human history" (pp. vi-vii). Adding this argument to others 
already made should make it clear that there are severe 
logical difficulties with the view that human behavior is 
deterministic and predictable. 
Quantum mechanics. The development of quantum 
mechanics during the first half of this century was the first 
major revolution in scientific thought to lead physics to 
discard Newton's deterministic, predictable, clockwork 
universe. Although it is clearly beyond the scope of this 
essay to provide a detailed discussion of quantum mechan- 
ics, an essential characteristic of quantum mechanics that 
has important implications for the current argument will be 
considered, that is, the randomness and indeterminacy of 
subatomic phenomena. 
Herbert (1985) gives an easily understood example of 
quantum randomness that involves shooting individual elec- 
trons from an electron gun through a tiny aperture onto a 
phosphor screen. As each electron strikes the screen, a flash 
of light indicating the location of the collision appears on 
APRIL 1989 
21 - 

the screen. What is of particular interest in this example is 
that even if each electron is fired from the gun with exactly 
the same measurable orientation, energy, and velocity, each 
electron will strike the screen at a different location. Increas- 
ing the rate at which the electrons are fired will produce 
what is known as an Airy pattern, a target-shaped con- 
figuration whose bright bands indicate regions struck by 
many electrons and whose darker bands indicate less pop- 
ular areas of the screen. What is significant in this example 
is that although the relevant variables describing each elec- 
tron as it is fired are known and identical, each electron 
strikes the screen in a different, unpredictable location. 
There is nonetheless some "striking" order to this ran- 
domness because, whereas the exact location that a given 
electron will land is unknown, the probability of striking a 
given area is known and can be reliably replicated by dif- 
ferent researchers in different laboratories. As Herbert ex- 
plains, "the orthodox ontology explains the fact that un- 
measured electrons are identical in being but different in be- 
havior by appealing to quantum randomness. The essence 
of quantum randomness is simply this: identical physical 
situations give rise to different outcomes" (p. 118; emphasis 
in original). 
It is worthwhile to pause here briefly to compare the prob- 
abilistic nature of quantum physical phenomena with what 
Gage considers to be the probabilistic nature of educational 
research findings. Gage (1982) discounts the current pes- 
simism concerning the value of "scientific" educational 
research as the result of "a failure to accept the value of the 
probabilistic findings that educational research has yield- 
ed" (p. 11). By "probabilistic findings," Gage seems to im- 
ply that, as in shooting electrons at a phosphor screen, we 
may not be able to direct all students to a certain target 
successfully nor predict which ones will reach it using a 
given teaching method, but we may nonetheless be assured 
that a higher proportion of students will be successful us- 
ing a teaching method shown by research to be more effec- 
tive than another. 
Though there may well be some truth in Gage's conten- 
tion that we may be more successful in making probabilistic 
rather than absolute predictions, it is important to realize 
that there is a distinction between "the probabilistic findings 
of educational research has yielded" and the probabilistic 
findings of quantum mechanics. The probabilistic random- 
ness of quantum phenomena forms an integral part of the 
phenomena themselves and thus may be considered a type 
of "objective probability" in that the observed probability 
distributions are readily replicable and no further refinement 
of the study's design or measuring instruments can elim- 
inate the observed randomness of the phenomenon under 
study. In contrast, "the probabilistic nature of educational 
research findings" is due, at least in a large part, to error-- 
error having many sources, including insufficient internal 
validity (e.g., failure to control all relevant variables), defi- 
cient external validity (e.g., failure to use a representative 
random sample), and measurement error (e.g., imperfect 
unreliability and/or invalidity of the measuring instruments). 
If the probabilistic findings of educational research as 
described by Gage were not at least partly the result of such 
sources of error, they should be replicable in the same way 
that the Airy pattern is replicable in physics. Because the 
only way we can discover the objective probability that may 
underlie behavior in educational contexts is first largely to 
eliminate error and because the pragmatic difficulties of 
eliminating all sources of error are considerable (e.g., those 
due to individual differences, unrepresentative samples, 
measurement error, uncontrolled variables and their interac- 
tions), it may not be prudent to put much confidence in the 
currently available "probabilistic findings of educational 
research," findings whose probabilistic character is due at 
least in a large part to error but that could possibly also en- 
compass a share of objective probability. 
On the other hand, the finding that all physical events 
are at their finest level unpredictable seems hardly consis- 
tent with the great scientific advances of this century that 
have enabled us to better predict and control our physical 
environment. The reason for this apparent contradiction is 
that at the size scale of nuclear power plants, rocket engines, 
and even the relatively macro level of the tiny integrated 
circuits etched on computer chips, quantum effects of ob- 
jective probability are negligible. At the macro level, we are 
dealing with large agglomerations of particles and atoms 
whose quantum effects in a sense cancel each other out. For 
example, in spite of the solid outer appearance of a marble 
statue, it is actually composed of rapidly and randomly mov- 
ing clouds of subatomic particles. Although these clouds of 
particles move randomly, their movements are effectively 
neutralized, because for every several trillion or so particles 
moving at a given instant in a given direction, a comparable 
number move in the opposite direction and so the statue 
appears immobile. Nonetheless, it is in principle possible 
that a majority of the particles in the statue's arm could 
move in the same direction at the same time so that the 
statue appears to wave, although the probability of such an 
event is so minuscule that it would rightly be considered 
a miracle. Therefore, though quantum randomness reigns 
at the subatomic level, it is not usually observed in the macro 
world of our everyday existence. 
It is, however, of interest to observe that as the com- 
ponents of computers and other sophisticated electronic 
equipment become ever smaller, the quantum randomness 
of individual electrons and other subatomic particles (e.g., 
gamma radiation from outer space) may begin to manifest 
itself in the functioning of these components. These com- 
ponents will then in a sense amplify these quantum events 
into events of the macro world that will then be observed 
as computer programs that fail and electronically guided 
laser weapons that strike the wrong target. In like manner, 
it has been proposed that quantum effects could have an 
influence on human behavior. Popper (1979, pp. 227-228) 
describes the notion of a "quantum switch" by which un- 
predictable quantum phenomena in the human body may 
be amplified to the macro level, where they manifest them- 
selves in our behavioral decisions. Although there is no 
known evidence for such a quantum switch, so little is known 
about the inner workings of the human brain that such a 
mechanism cannot be ruled out. If, as argued above, com- 
plex forms of learning are dependent on the randomness 
of evolutionary variation, there is a certain appeal in 
speculating that the irreducible, objective probability of 
quantum phenomena provides the seeds of such variation. 
Though presently we can only speculate about the role 
of quantum randomness in cognitive processes, it is known 
that quantum phenomena do play an important role in bio- 
logical evolution. Radiation by subatomic particles results 
in genetic mutations, which serve as an important source 
22 
EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER - 

of natural variation, which is the very fuel of biological 
evolution. If the tiny and usually imperceptible quantum 
effects of such radiation are seen as responsible for the great 
complexity and variety of the biosphere (including the dif- 
ference noted by Popper between an amoeba and Albert 
Einstein), then it would seem to be no great conceptual leap 
to suppose that similar random events could have similar 
observable influences on the learning and behavior of 
human beings. 
The essential randomness of subatomic phenomena is not 
the only characteristic of quantum mechanics that has im- 
plications for behavioral, social, and educational research. 
Three particularly intriguing additional aspects of quantum 
mechanics are (a) that the simple observation (measurement) 
of a particle changes the particle, (b) that an entity can exist 
in two apparently contradictory states simultaneously (as 
in the well-known wave-particle duality of light energy), and 
(c) Bell's Theorem, which states that all reality is nonlocal, 
that is, that everything in the universe is connected to and 
influences everything else in the universe at a speed faster 
than that of light. Although these additional aspects of quan- 
tum mechanics cannot be discussed further here (see Her- 
bert, 1985, for a nontechnical presentation of these and other 
aspects of quantum physics), it should be clear that the 
universe of physical phenomena discovered by quantum 
mechanics has very little in common with the mechanistic, 
deterministic universe of classical Newtonian physics or 
"scientific" educational research. 
Albert Einstein and Niels Bohr, the two giants of modern 
physics, never resolved their continuing debate over the 
fundamental nature of matter and its behavior. In spite of 
the fact that Einstein's own work was instrumental in the 
birth of quantum mechanics, his view of the universe re- 
mained deterministic, and he was absolutely steadfast in 
his conviction that the randomness observed in quantum 
phenomena were due to "hidden variables," which, if dis- 
covered and understood, would in principle allow for per- 
fect prediction of all physical phenomena. Einstein's strong 
belief in a deterministic universe and his aversion to a prob- 
abilistic one is well reflected in his often-quoted assertion 
that God does not play dice. In contrast, Bohr, the leading 
figure of the Copenhagen School of quantum mechanics, 
maintained that the uncertainties and probabilities observed 
in quantum phenomena are intrinsic to the phenomena 
themselves and not the result of incomplete knowledge. 
Now, more than half a century after the discovery of quan- 
tum phenomena in physics, it appears quite clear that Bohr 
was right and Einstein was wrong. It would thus appear 
wise for educational researchers (especially those engaged 
in the "scientific" pursuit to discover all the "hidden 
variables" that will allow the prediction and control of 
educational outcomes) to take a less from modern physics 
and recognize that the behavior of nature's most complex 
known beings should not be expected to be any less com- 
plex or more predictable than that of its most elementary 
particles. 
Implications for Educational Research 
Five separate arguments have been made for the unpredic- 
tability and indeterminism of human behavior. Because 
mainstream "scientific" research continues to be based on 
the conviction that human behavior is in principle deter- 
minate and predictable, the validity of even one of these 
arguments has important implications for educational 
research. 
First, an acceptance of the unpredictability of human be- 
havior paints a decidedly pessimistic picture for researchers 
using "scientific" methods of educational research in an at- 
tempt to predict and control human behavior in educational 
contexts. At the same time, the essential unpredictability 
of human behavior explains why educational research has 
neither experienced the advances nor enjoyed the consen- 
sus that research in the physical sciences has enjoyed. Even 
Phillips, cited above arguing for certain similarities between 
educational and physical science research, has stated that 
"social scientists have not been able to discover generaliza- 
tions that are reliable enough, and about which there is 
enough professional consensus, to form the basis for social 
policy" and that while "the situation may suddenly turn 
around ... there seems to be no good reason to expect this 
to happen" (1980, p. 17). Indeed, the arguments made here 
provide good reasons why we should not expect such a 
turnaround. 
If "scientific" educational research is thus indeed doomed 
to failure, the question naturally arises as to what kind of 
educational research can and should take its place. This is 
obviously a very difficult question to answer, and space 
limitations do not permit a complete attempt here. One pos- 
sible response would involve a change from the orthodox 
"scientific" research perspective that attempts to predict and 
control to one that attempts "only" to describe, appreciate, 
interpret, and explain the social and individual behaviors 
as well as the cognitive processes relevant to understanding 
educational phenomena. Educational research from such a 
perspective would be essentially descriptive, with useful 
units of study varying from the macro level of community, 
school, and classroom to the more micro level of individual 
behaviors, feelings, and cognitive processes. 
At the macro level, such research could involve the de- 
scriptive and interpretive study of educational contexts of 
both the present and past in cultures both familiar and 
foreign involving phenomena both common and exception- 
al. Detailed descriptive studies of educational policies, prac- 
tices, behaviors, feelings, and outcomes is of interest and 
value in that it leads to an appreciation of the complexity 
of education and suggests what is possible and what may 
not be. Most important, it provides ideas for innovations, 
a crucial source of variation for education to continue to 
grow and evolve creatively. We must, however, always 
guard against the temptation to make hard and fast predic- 
tions of human behavior and devise "cookbook" solutions 
to problems based on our understanding because, as argued 
here, it is a serious error to believe that one can predict the 
future based on what has happened in the past (see also 
Popper, 1964). Though such research might (indeed, should) 
lead to the implementation and dissemination of innovative 
educational practices, it must be realized that regardless of 
the extent of prior research, accurate prediction of outcomes 
is not possible, and so continuous monitoring and fine- 
tuning is essential to any educational undertaking. 
At the micro level, descriptive studies could be conducted 
to improve understanding of the social and cognitive de- 
velopment and problem-solving processes of individual stu- 
dents, teachers, administrators, and policy makers. Much 
recent research in child development evolving out of the 
Piagetian perspective, which focuses on individual children, 
APRIL 1989 
23 - 

is compatible with this perspective because it provides 
qualitative descriptions of cognitive functioning and de- 
velopment, which make possible an appreciation of the 
mental processes and problem-solving strategies used by 
children in educational settings. This approach contrasts 
sharply with "scientific" educational and psychological 
research which, for example, uses unidimensional numbers 
derived from quantitative measures of intelligence and home 
background to make linear predictions concerning similar 
numbers obtained from standardized tests of educational 
achievement. Again, however, we must guard against the 
temptation to consider any research as providing knowledge 
of universals of behavior or psychological development that 
would enable us to make specific predictions because the 
complicating factors of individual differences, chaos, the 
evolutionary nature of learning and development, the role 
of consciousness and free will in human behavior, and the 
implications of quantum mechanics all pose grave difficulties 
for the accuracy of any such predictions. Though such re- 
search may provide important information about the possi- 
ble, it tells little if anything about what is necessary or 
inevitable. 
Returning to the macro level, such a descriptive, non- 
predictive approach to educational research is quite consis- 
tent with the case study approach advocated by Stake (1978), 
among others, for improving our understanding of educa- 
tion. Stake has written that "one of the more effective means 
of adding to understanding for all readers will be by ap- 
proximating through the words and illustrations of our 
reports, the natural experience acquired in ordinary personal 
involvement" (p. 5). Stake also contrasts the expansionist 
nature of the case study method with the reductionist char- 
acter of orthodox educational research in stating that "theory 
building is the search for essences, pervasive and determin- 
ing ingredients, and the makings of laws. The case study, 
however, proliferates rather than narrows. One is left with 
more to pay attention to rather than less" (p. 7). 
Concerning the micro level of individual cognitive pro- 
cesses, Gruber (1985) feels that "probably the most general 
reason for studying the case is the need to make models 
of complex processes. Averaging across subjects blurs our 
view of exactly that which we want to study" (p. 170). It 
should not be surprising that Gruber, author of a work of 
major importance on the life and creative thought of Charles 
Darwin (1974), believes that behavioral research should at- 
tempt to capture and interpret the complexity of behavior and 
suggests that "rather than concentrating so much effort on 
looking for general laws of human functioning, look for laws 
of the individual" (1985, p. 172). 
This view of educational research is one that takes as its 
primary goal and responsibility the dissemination of descrip- 
tive educational findings to other researchers, teachers, ad- 
ministrators, and policy makers in a form that is meaningful 
and useful. At the macro level, it provides information about 
how things could be otherwise by providing vicarious ex- 
periences from outside one's limited personal experiences 
to serve as sources of variation and conjecture to fuel the 
evolution of educational practice and policy. Such research 
at the more micro level may provide insights into the per- 
spective of the student as he or she faces the various 
cognitive and social tasks presented in educational contexts. 
Thus the ultimate, achievable goal of educational research 
may include (a) a realization of the limitations imposed by 
the inherent unpredictability of human behavior; (b) the 
dissemination of this awareness to other educational re- 
searchers, teachers, policy makers, administrators, students, 
and parents; (c) an understanding of learning as an essen- 
tially unpredictable, evolutionary process; (d) an apprecia- 
tion of what has been and thus what may likely still be 
achievable in educational contexts; and (e) a better under- 
standing of the student's (and perhaps also the teacher's, 
administrator's, policy maker's, and parent's) perspective 
on the tasks required of him or her in educational settings. 
Although such an approach to educational research has 
little in common with the obsolete classical, clockwork 
physics of Newton, it does have much in common with 
another quite successful field of inquiry into the life sciences, 
i.e., evolutionary biology. Although it makes no hard and 
fast predictions about the future viability, morphology, or 
behavior of its objects of study, evolutionary biology has 
nevertheless provided a deep understanding of the diver- 
sity of life on our planet, the origin of its species, and the 
dynamics by which living organisms vary, modify their en- 
vironment, and adapt to it. It should therefore be of at least 
some comfort to educational researchers to realize that Dar- 
win's original insights resulted from his extensive descrip- 
tive and interpretive study of organisms, their diversity, and 
their environments and that the impact of his insights on 
science was due largely to his extensive descriptive and in- 
terpretive documentation of his research. 
To end on another positive note, it will observed that 
although this essay has made arguments for what some may 
consider to be a quite melancholic view of educational 
research, the factors underlying the unpredictability and in- 
determinacy of human behavior are the very same factors 
that provide humankind with unlimited potential for con- 
tinued cultural evolution and personal development. 
Viewed from this perspective, the unpredictability of human 
behavior and the problems it imposes on "scientific" educa- 
tional researchers seem a very small price to pay for the in- 
herent freedom and unlimited potential of our species. 
References 
Ada, G. L., & Nossal, G. (1987, August). The clonal-selection theory. 
Scientific American, 257(2), 50-57. 
Bateson, G. (1979). Mind and nature. New York: Dutton. 
Bereiter, C. (1985). Toward a solution of the learning paradox. Review 
of Educational 
Research, 55, 201-226. 
Changeux, J. P., Heidmann, T. & Patte, P. (1984). Learning by selec- 
tion. In P. Marler & H. S. Terrace (Eds.), The biology of learning (pp. 
115-133). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
Chomsky, N. (1980). The linguistic approach. In M. Piatelli-Palmarini 
(Ed.), Language 
and learning: The debate between 
Jean Piaget and Noam 
Chomsky 
(pp. 109-117). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Cronbach, L. J. (1975). Beyond the two disciplines of scientific 
psychology. The American Psychologist, 
30(2), 116-126. 
Cronbach, L. J. (1982). Prudent aspirations for social inquiry. In William 
Kruskal (Ed.), The social sciences: Their nature and uses. Chicago: 
Chicago University Press. 
Cronbach, L. J., & Snow, R. E. (1977). Aptitudes 
and instructional 
methods. 
New York: Irvington. 
Crutchfield, J. P., Farmer, J. D., Packard, N. H., & Shaw, R. S. (1986, 
December). Chaos. Scientific American, 225, 46-57. 
Cunningham, A. J. (1981). Some similarities in the way the immune 
system and nervous system work. In C.M. Steinberg & I. Lefkowits 
(Eds.), The immune system (pp. 43-50). Basel: Karger. 
Edelman, G. (1978). The mindful brain: Cortical 
organization 
and the group- 
selective theory of higher brain functions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Edelman, G. (1981). Group selection as the basis for higher brain func- 
tion. In F. O. Schmitt, F. G. Worden, G. Edelman, & S. G. Den- 
24 
EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER 

nis (Eds.), The organization of the cerebral cortex (pp. 535-564). Cam- 
bridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Edelman, G., & Finkel, L. (1984). Neuronal group selection in the 
cerebral cortex. In G. Edelman, W. E. Gall, & W. M. Cowan (Eds.), 
Dynamic aspects of neocortical 
function (pp. 653-695). New York: Wiley. 
Fodor, J. (1979). The language of thought. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 
Gage, N. L. (1982). The future of educational research. Educational Re- 
searcher, 11(8), 11-12. 
Gazzaniga, M. S. (1985). The social brain: Discovering the networks of the 
mind. New York: Basic Books. 
Gleick, J. (1987). Chaos: Making a new science. New York: Viking. 
Gruber, H. E. (1974). Darwin on man: A psychological study of scientific 
creativity. London: Wildwood House. 
Gruber, H. E. (1985). From epistemic subject to unique creative per- 
son at work. Archives de Psychologie, 53, 167-185. 
Herbert, N. (1985). Quantum reality: Beyond the new physics. Garden City, 
NY: Anchor Press/Doubleday. 
Hinton, G. E., & Sejnowski, T. J. (1986). Learning and relearning in 
Boltzmann machines. In D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland, & The 
PDP Research Group, Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in 
the microstructure of cognition: Vol. 1, Foundations (pp. 282-317). Cam- 
bridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Jerne, N. K. (1975). Structural analogies between the immune system 
and the nervous system. In I. R. Miller (Ed.), Stability and origin of 
biological information (pp. 201-204). New York: Wiley. 
Kindt, T. J., & Capra, J. D. (1984). The antibody enigma. New York: 
Plenum. 
Lorenz, E. N. (1963). Deterministic nonperiodic flow. Journal of the At- 
mospheric Sciences, 20, 130-141. 
Lorenz, E. N. (1979, December 29). Predictability: Does the flap of a but- 
terfly's wings in Brazil set off a tornado in Texas? Paper presented at 
the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advance- 
ment of Science, Washington, DC. 
MacKay, D. M. (1967). Freedom of action in a deterministic universe. Cam- 
bridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
Monod, J. (1971). Chance and necessity: An essay on the natural philosophy 
of modem biology. New York: Knopf. 
Phillips, D. C. (1980). What do the researcher and the practitioner have 
to offer each other? Educational Researcher, 9(11), 17-24. 
Phillips, D. C. (1987). Philosophy, science and social inquiry. Elmsford, NY: 
Pergamon. 
Popper, K. R. (1964). The poverty of historicism. New York: Harper & Row. 
Popper, K. R. (1979). Objective knowledge: An evolutionary approach (rev. 
ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Sagan, C. (1977). The dragons of Eden: Speculations on the evolution of human 
intelligence. New York: Random House. 
Schaffer, W. S. (1984). Stretching and folding in lynx fur returns: 
Evidence for a strange attractor in nature. The American Naturalist, 
124, 798-820. 
Schaffer, W. M., & Kot, M. (1985). Nearly one-dimensional dynamics 
in an epidemic. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 112, 403-427. 
Skarda, C. A., & Freeman, W. J. (1987). How the brains make chaos 
in order to make sense of the world. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 
10, 161-173. 
Smolensky, P. (1986). Information processing in dynamical systems: 
Foundations of harmony theory. In D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. 
McClelland, & The PDP Research Group. Parallel distributed process- 
ing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition: Vol. 1, Foundations 
(pp. 194-281). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Snow, R. E. (1977). Individual differences and instructional theory. 
Educational Researcher, 6(10), 11-15. 
Stake, R. E. (1978). The case study method in social inquiry. Educational 
Researcher, 7(2), 5-8. 
Talmage, D. W. (1986). The acceptance and rejection of immunological 
concepts. Annual Review of Immunology, 4, 1-11. 
Tonegawa, S. (1983). Somatic generation of antibody diversity. Nature, 
302, 575-581. 
Tonegawa, S. (1985, October). The molecules of the immune system. 
Scientific American, 253(4), 122-131. 
Waner, S., & Hastings, H. M. (1987). Evolutionary learning of com- 
plex modes of information processing. In M. Kochen & Harold M. 
Hastings (Eds.), Advances in cognitive science (AAAS Selected Sym- 
posia Series). Boulder, CO: Westview. 
Yancopoulos, G. D., & Alt, F. W. (1986). Regulation of the assembly 
and expression of variable-region genes. Annual Review of Immunology, 
4, 339-368. 
WJ-R 
THE 
WOODCOCK 
JOHNSON 
PSYCHO-EDUCATIONAL 
BATTERY 
HAS BEEN REVISED 
! 
N Extensive 
New Norms 
N Ages 2 to Adult 
0 Expanded 
Cognitive 
Tests Measuring 
7 Factors 
0 Alternate 
Achievement 
Forms Available 
N Innovative 
New Tests to Evaluate 
Written 
Language 
N Time-Saving 
Scoring and Administration 
Options 
WaR 
"Excellence by Design" 
Available this Spring!! Call or write for more information. 
",," D LM 
Lt Teachin 
1-800-527-4747 
(In Texas 1-800-442-4711) 
esources 
One DLM 
Park, Allen, 
TX 75002 
SAPRIL 1989 
25 

