8
Ó Î

Ï Ò
1
9
MyLoki – a daemon for digital dazzle
This project is an absurdist thought experiment exploring 
how it might be possible to devise ‘autonomous agents’ 
(daemons) that synthesise and propagate additional data – 
using neural networks and employing techniques such as 
‘generative adversarial networks’ – to mask our data 
traces and transactions across systems. In effect creating a 
‘data dissensus’ in the accuracy of our individual ‘shadow 
profles’, to undermine their statistical value through 
massive duplication. Invoking the generation of duplicitous 
activities that resemble our actions but, in effect, create 
multiplicities of possible identities. To overwhelm the 
‘algorithms of oppression’ with too many statistically 

1
2
3
4
5
6
2,4,6,8,10,12
made with www.bookleteer.com from proboscis
14
By proposing something that is as lateral and excessive a 
conceit for resolving the conundrum of privacy and 
personal data as the Judgement of Solomon was for 
determining the maternity of a disputed child, I hope to 
explore things which might indeed be truly unthinkable 
in our current situation. 
If we can think beyond the bounds of reason and the 
horizon of the probable, what uncommon insights could 
emerge that we cannot fathom now?
Giles Lane
London, December 2018-January 2020
Originally developed with support from the Open Data Institute 
for the “Data as Culturee research theme, Copy That? Surplus Data in
an Age of Repetitive Duplication.
images from The Thomas Crowne Affair (1999); US National Archives 
Catalog; New York Tribune, and Mori Yuzan’s Hamonshū (1903) via 
the Internet Archive.
3
This quantifcation and measurement of each interaction 
– the inferences that are drawn, the biases that result 
and the effects which ensue – is propelling us towards an 
ever more normative society. A social and cultural entropy.
Each individual is becoming ever more tightly defned, 
less fuid. We are being reduced to a singular concept 
of identity, one that assumes repetition is truth, and that 
predictability is a desirable quality.
But, of course, the history of humanity is also that of 
diversity, divergence and struggle: especially for those 
upon whom power is exercised by those who wield it. 
There are many ways of enforcing conformity through 
such means as religions and regimes, conventions and 
traditions. These have the habit of making people behave 
in a predictable and controllable manner – consumerism 
and the digital society is merely another manifestation 
of this. The inducements offered in our consumer society 
to accept socially normative concepts of identity are like 
a feedback mechanism that reinforces itself and 
entrenches asymmetries of power. In the same way, 
it discriminates against those for whom fuidity of identity 
is a necessity – people who are often the most vulnerable 
in society: anyone who diverges from the norm, whether 
by virtue of age, ethnicity, gender, sexuality or status – 
for instance, refugees.
2
Daemons of the Shadow World
It is my frm belief that my role as an artist is to imagine 
the unthinkable – to perceive beyond the horizon of the 
probable and to stretch one’s imagination beyond the 
limits of the normative everyday. 
By opening up such vistas it becomes possible to 
anticipate impacts and consequences of actions and 
decisions – acquiring uncommon insights into potential 
futures we may come to inhabit.
Daemons of the Shadow World is a proposal for an artwork 
that recasts privacy and the role of individual or personal 
data; that rethinks how data subjects are commodifed; 
that explores what it could be like to unbalance how 
power is expressed and exercised through data analysis 
and use.
Almost every aspect of modern life is now measured, 
sensed, datafed, transmitted, analysed and transacted. 
Those transactions bloom like fower banks to encompass
not just each individual’s data profle and traces, but 
everything and everyone they are connected to. 
Daemons of the Shadow World
Giles Lane
2020-01-13 & © Giles Lane
Published by Giles Lane
Originally developed with support from the Open Data Institute for the
“Data as Culture” research theme, Copy That?
https://bkltr.it/35LRxG
x

12
Are they not the type of gods we might want to align 
ourselves with against the patrician, all seeing, all knowing 
Olympian Algorithmic gods of our datafed society? 
Or perhaps like a kind of Orphic mystery wherein the 
exuberance of multiple data selves being propagated into 
the shadow digital world allows us a moment of escape 
from being subjectifed and commodifed ad nauseam?
To acquire the opportunity, once again, to lose ourselves 
in the anonymity of the press of numbers. A pinch of 
freedom from the eveyday atomisation we experience 
through constant personalisation, behaviour tracking, and 
the inferences that drive our ‘choices’, already determined 
through pre-set automated decision-making algorithms.
5
Indeed different societies and cultures across the world 
have markedly different attitudes to ‘privacy’ – as evinced 
by China’s state-sponsored social credit system (itself 
perhaps less different from Western commercial data 
capture, monetisations and behavioural nudges than we 
might suppose). To suppose that either privacy or identity 
are stable concepts in all contexts and situations may be 
part of the problem, a refection of our own hegemonistic 
cultural values in the West. 
Privacy, as commonly defned in Western industrial 
societies, is itself a relatively modern concept – most likely
emerging in Europe in the context of the reformation and 
counter-reformation period. Its roots are bound together 
with the rise of mercantilism and the equally modern 
concept of the individual. It found early articulation in 
the shifts in domestic architecture from the 1500s on – 
the creation of private spaces (such as rooms) in shared 
households, especially where there was a need to worship
in secret as religious conformity began to fracture 
between Protestantism and Catholicism. It also found 
articulation in the commonplace books where a newly 
literate populace began to record their internal, private 
thoughts, interests and refections. This individual 
subjectivity reached a moment of critical mass in 
Descartes’ formulation of the self as a discrete entity 
separate from all else. 
13
A Conceptual Projection
The above is patently an absurd idea. What I am proposing 
is unlikely to built (from a technical standpoint) and could 
possibly present unknown dangers if released online 
(from an ethical perspective). 
Therefore this thought experiment requires making a kind
of performative conceptual prototype to demonstrate the
paradox at its heart. This might take the form of a set of 
‘blueprints’ for the conditions under which a MyLoki 
daemon might be activated and operate; or a fow chart 
diagram of the actions and possible consequences for 
what could happen when an individual’s data become 
pluralities; not just duplicitous but multiplicitous.
Such a set of blueprints or diagrams could then form 
the focal point of a deliberative forum assembled from 
people with diverse knowledges and skills, across a 
range of disciplines and sectors. This group would be 
charged with exploring the ramifcations of – and 
speculating on just what theoretical frameworks could 
emerge from – such an unreasonable, improbable and 
irrational set of possibilities.
4
Data profling clearly is having normative effects, 
reinforcing and entrenching privileges for those who 
are already best served by society and the status quo. 
What about those for whom no singular identity is 
possible or desirable? Those whose identities are fuid, 
in construction or even in deconstruction. Those who 
are economically disadvantaged and whose choices are 
forever circumscribed by poverty and denied access to 
credit. These are the people most at risk of being 
excluded, segregated and even criminalised by the impacts 
of data profling. The subtleties, quirks and nuances that 
allow us to defy defnition are all too easily captured, 
measured and sorted into data points which can then be 
exploited against our own beneft.
Any transparency in data traffc goes only one way. 
We do not see how the data we share with the big 
systems (such as search engines, social media platforms or
online shopping portals) is used by those who acquire it. 
Neither how the ‘nudge’ systems – increasingly adopted 
by governments and public agencies – use our data to 
infuence our choices and life options. Nor do we have any
real understanding of how the scope and scale of the total
digital surveillance by the Five Eyes network of intelligence 
agencies is used, despite the hints and indications revealed 
by whistleblowers like Edward Snowden.

10
similar variables which confound their ability to accurately 
‘predict’ and shape our behaviours.
Instead of referring to “Artifcial Intelligencee and 
anthropomorphising it with qualities it is far from having, 
let’s call such software “Models for Partial Statistical 
Probabilitye. How could we devise and use such 
programmes to act as software agents – daemons – for 
each of us, to dazzle the data harvesters with a blizzard 
of statistically probable profles, endlessly generated to 
camoufage the data traces of our actions and behaviours 
in the digital world? Whereby each would become a portal
to an infnite number of selves, all bifurcating in myriad 
ways – perhaps by just a hair’s breadth – each one 
polluting the value of our data trail by injecting just 
enough uncertainty to render the value of the data as 
junk for the proflers, marketers and manipulators.  
To détourne the techniques of oppression against the 
oppressors, reverse the fow of digital ‘spam’ from the 
individual back towards those who seek to manipulate us.
Each daemon would be a personal Trickster, like the Norse
god Loki, working on each our behalves to frustrate the 
will of the corporates, the political parties, the special 
interest groups, agencies and governments that seek to 
use personal data to commodify us and proft by our, 
often unwitting, collusion in their narrative.
7
It should, however, be no surprise that now, in an age 
of near total surveillance, privacy is on the verge of a 
complete reconfguration. It is, coincidentally, happening 
alongside the realisation that western industrial capitalism 
is also facing its own zero-sum game in which not just 
humanity, but all life teeters on an edge. Unbridled 
consumption of fnite resources, leading to rampant 
ecocide and mass extinction, presents a distinct trajectory
that humans, our cultures, societies and civilisations, 
cannot sidestep.
To safeguard individuals and their personal data, privacy 
has for sometime been proposed as a human right that 
should be inalienable. But what if an alternative, perhaps 
even complementary, strategy could be to turn the tools 
of data analysis against those who seek to defne us and 
measure us as singular commodities by synthesising a 
plurality, a multiplicity of identities – camoufage of a kind? 
What if privacy is re-thought as a condition not a 
commodity – a dynamic sequence of states that we fow 
through rather than a static position to cling on? 
How do, and have, other cultures navigated the duality of 
individuals within communities and shared spaces? 
What might we learn from cultures which do not privilege
the sense of individuality as ours does?
11
What could the features of such daemons be? 
What limitations might need to be placed on their use? 
How might we need to re-think our entire digital 
economy – not to see data as a commodity, but as 
condition?
I invoke Loki and the fgure of the Trickster, precisely 
because they are ambiguous – causing mayhem but 
bringing luck and fortune. Sometimes misfortune. 
Always uncertain. 
6

