

DARWIN’S UNFINISHED SYMPHONY

DARWIN’S UNFINISHED
SYMPHONY
HOW CULTURE MADE THE HUMAN MIND
KEVIN N. LALAND
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS
Princeton & Oxford

Copyright © 2017 by Princeton University Press Published by Princeton University Press,
41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey
08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press,
6 Oxford Street, Woodstock, Oxfordshire
OX20 1TR
press.princeton.edu
Jacket design by Michael Boland for thebolanddesignco.com.
Images courtesy of iStock
All Rights Reserved
ISBN 978-0-691-15118-2
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016944396
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available This book has been composed in
Adobe Text Pro and Trade Gothic LT Std Printed on acid-free paper. ∞
Printed in the United States of America 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

This book is dedicated to Henry Plotkin,
who started me off on this journey.

CONTENTS
Foreword
ix
PART I: FOUNDATIONS OF CULTURE
1
Darwin’s Unfinished Symphony
1
2
Ubiquitous Copying
31
3
Why Copy?
50
4
A Tale of Two Fishes
77
5
The Roots of Creativity
99
PART II: THE EVOLUTION OF THE MIND
6
The Evolution of Intelligence
123
7
High Fidelity
150
8
Why We Alone Have Language
175
9
Gene-Culture Coevolution
208
10
The Dawn of Civilization
234
11
Foundations of Cooperation
264

12
The Arts
283
Epilogue: Awe Without Wonder
315
Notes
323
References
385
Index
443

FOREWORD
This book is the product of a collective endeavor. Although I am the sole
author, I set out to portray the efforts of a team of researchers—the
members of my research laboratory and other collaborators—who, over
a period of 30 years, have shared the scientific challenge of trying to
understand the evolution of culture. I hope to provide a compelling
scientific account for the evolutionary origins of the human mind, our
intelligence, language, and culture; and for our species’ extraordinary
technological and artistic achievements. More than that, however, this
book sets out to capture something of the scientific process—to lay bare,
in an honest way, our struggles, false starts, moments of insight and
inspiration, and our triumphs and failures in a scientific journey of
discovery. I present our story; that is, I introduce the members of the
Laland lab, past and present, and depict our efforts to understand the
tremendously exciting puzzle that comprises the evolutionary origins of
human culture. I am no novelist and, although this book is written in a
style designed to be accessible, it inevitably cannot possess the pace,
thrills, or drama of fiction. I hope, nonetheless, that a little something of
a detective story comes across, and that the reader experiences a
modicum of excitement as they read how our experimental and
theoretical findings provided the clues that fueled our investigation.
My first note of thanks must, of course, go to the researchers whose
work is described in these pages. I have been privileged to work with
some extraordinarily gifted individuals, and have constantly benefitted
from the hard work, good ideas, clever experimentation, and ingenious
theoretical work of countless undergraduates, Master’s students, PhD
students and postdoctoral researchers, as well as numerous collaborators
both in my own and other institutions. These include Nicola Atton,
Patrick Bateson, Neeltje Boogert, Robert Boyd, Culum Brown, Gillian

Brown, Hannah Capon, Laura Chouinard-Thuly, Nicky Clayton, Becky
Coe, Isabelle Coolen, Alice Cowie, Daniel Cownden, Lucy Crooks,
Catharine Cross, Lewis Dean, Magnus Enquist, Kimmo Eriksson, Cara
Evans, Marcus Feldman, Laurel Fogarty, Jeff Galef, Stephano Ghirlanda,
Paul Hart, Will Hoppitt, Ronan Kearney, Jeremy Kendal, Rachel Kendal,
Jochen Kumm, Rob Lachlan, Hannah Lewis, Tim Lillicrap, Tom
MacDonald, Anna Markula, Alex Mesoudi, Tom Morgan, Sean Myles,
Ana Navarrete, Mike O’Brien, John Odling-Smee, Tom Pike, Henry
Plotkin, Simon Reader, Luke Rendell, Steven Shapiro, Jonas Sjostrand,
Ed Stanley, Sally Street, Pontus Strimling, Will Swaney, Bernard Thierry,
Alex Thornton, Ignacio de la Torre, Natalie Uomini, Yfke van Bergen,
Jack van Horn, Ashley Ward, Mike Webster, Andrew Whalen, Andrew
Whiten, Clive Wilkins, and Kerry Williams. To the extent that we have
contributed to a scientific understanding of the topics discussed, this
book is their achievement every bit as much as mine.
Many people too have helped with the writing of the book. I would
like to thank those who read the entire manuscript, one or more
chapters, and/or provided helpful feedback or insights: Rob Boyd,
Charlotte Brand, Alexis Breen, Gillian Brown, Nicky Clayton, Michael
Corr, Daniel Cownden, Rachel Dale, Lewis Dean, Nathan Emery,
Tecumseh Fitch, Ellen Garland, Tim Hubbard, Hilton Japyassú, Nicholas
Jones, Murillo Pagnotta, Simon Kirby, Claire Laland, Sheina Lew-Levy,
Elena Miu, Keelin Murray, Ana Navarrete, John Odling-Smee, James
Ounsley, Luke Rendell, Peter Richerson, Christopher Ritter, Christian
Rutz, Joseph Stubbersfield, Wataru Toyokawa, Camille Troisi, Stuart
Watson, Andrew Whalen, and two anonymous external referees.
Through their help, this book has been greatly improved, becoming both
more scientifically accurate and more accessible to the general reader.
Katherine Meacham also merits a special note of thanks for
administrative support in numerous guises, from formatting, to editing
notes, to compiling references, all of which were always conducted with
extraordinary efficiency and attention to detail.
The idea of my writing this book was first devised as a graduate
student at University College London, nearly thirty years ago. I was
inspired on reading John Bonner’s wonderful monograph The Evolution
of Culture in Animals (1980, Princeton University Press). I loved the
grand sweep and vision of Bonner’s book, and was enraptured by the

sheer scale of the question it addressed. However, an equally
inspirational conversation with University of McMaster psychologist Jeff
Galef, doyenne of the field of animal social learning, helped me to set
Bonner’s contribution within the broader framework of the field that had
Galef led so impressively for decades. With Jeff’s help, I was able to
recognize that, for all its merits, Bonner’s book did not provide a
thorough explanatory account of how human culture could have evolved
from the social learning and tradition observed in other animals. That
conversation with Jeff also brought home how a great deal of scientific
work would be required before the mysteries underlying the evolution of
culture could be unraveled. Bonner’s visionary conception and Galef’s
demand for explanatory rigor combined to hatch the idea in my mind
that perhaps one day I might rise to this particular challenge.
I would also like to thank Alison Kalett at Princeton University Press
for commissioning this book, and pushing me to write it at least ten
years before I felt I was ready, and also Betsy Blumenthal, Jenny
Wolkowicki and Sheila Dean for help with the production. I am grateful
to all at PUP for support, encouragement, and patience throughout a
writing process that proved extremely protracted.
Much of this book was written while I was on sabbatical, based in
Nicky Clayton’s laboratory in the Department of Experimental
Psychology, at the University of Cambridge in the United Kingdom. I am
indebted to Nicky and the members of her Comparative Cognition
Laboratory for making me feel at home and providing an environment,
both tranquil and stimulating, that was conducive to productive writing.
The final chapters of the book particularly benefitted from these
exchanges. I am also very grateful to Gillian Brown, Sean Earnshaw,
Julia Kunz, Ros Odling-Smee, Susan Perry, Irena Schulz, Caroline
Schuppli, and Carel van Schaik for kindly providing images.
I would like to thank the BBSRC, NERC, The Royal Society, EU
Framework 6 and 7 programs, Human Frontier Science Programme,
European Research Council, and John Templeton Foundation for
financial support for my research. I am particularly indebted to Paul
Wason, Kevin Arnold and Heather Micklewright at the John Templeton
Foundation who have supported my investigations over many years.
Finally, and most of all, I would like to thank my thesis advisor,
Henry Plotkin, to whom I owe so much. Henry taught me the ropes of

the academic business with unfailing patience, generosity, and
enthusiasm. He trained me in how to design experiments, how to think
critically, how to balance theory and empirical work, and where
attention to detail is important. Our regular, Friday morning discussions
were a highlight of my PhD years, and I consider myself hugely
privileged to have shared so much of his time.
KEVIN LALAND
March 2016
St Andrews, United Kingdom

PART I
FOUNDATIONS OF CULTURE

CHAPTER 1
DARWIN’S UNFINISHED SYMPHONY
It is interesting to contemplate an entangled bank, clothed with
many plants of many kinds, with birds singing on the bushes,
with various insects flitting about, and with worms crawling
through the damp earth, and to reflect that these elaborately
constructed forms, so different from each other, and so
dependent upon each other in so complex a manner, have all
been produced by laws acting around us.… Thus from the war
of nature, from famine and death, the most exalted object
which we are capable of conceiving, namely, the production of
the higher animals, directly follows.
—CHARLES DARWIN, ON THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES
As he looked out on the English countryside from his study at Down
House, Charles Darwin could reflect with satisfaction that he had gained
a compelling understanding of the processes through which the complex
fabric of the natural world had come into existence. In the final, perhaps
the most famous, and certainly the most evocative, passage of The Origin
of Species, Darwin contemplated an entangled bank, replete with plants,
birds, insects, and worms, all functioning with intricate coherence. The
tremendous legacy of Darwin is that so much of that interwoven majesty
can now be explained through the process of evolution by natural
selection.
I look out of my window and see the skyline of St Andrews, a small
town in southeastern Scotland. I see bushes, trees, and birds too, but the
view is dominated by stone buildings, roofs, chimneys, and a church
steeple. I see telegraph poles and electricity pylons. I look south, and in
the distance is a school, and just to the west, a hospital fed by roads

dotted with busy commuters. I wonder, can evolutionary biology explain
the existence of chimneys, cars, and electricity in as convincing a fashion
as it does the natural world? Can it describe the origin of prayer books
and church choirs, as it does the origin of species? Is there an
evolutionary explanation for the computer on which I type, for the
satellites in the sky, or for the scientific concept of gravity?
At first sight, such questions may not appear particularly troubling.
Clearly human beings have evolved, and we happen to be unusually
intelligent primates that are good at science and technology. Darwin
claimed, “the most exalted higher animals” had emerged “from the war
of nature,”1 and our own species is surely as high and exalted as species
come. Isn’t it apparent that our intelligence, our culture, and our
language are what has allowed us to dominate and transform the planet
so dramatically?
With a little more thought, however, this type of explanation
unravels with disturbing rapidity, in the process generating a barrage of
even more challenging questions. If intelligence, language, or the ability
to construct elaborate artifacts evolved in humans because they enhance
the ability to survive and reproduce, then why didn’t other species
acquire these capabilities? Why haven’t other apes, our closest relatives,
who are genetically similar to us, built rockets and space stations and
put themselves on the moon? Animals have traditions for eating specific
foods, or singing the local song, which researchers call “animal
cultures,” but these possess no laws, morals, or institutions, and are not
imbued with symbolism, like human culture. Nor do animal tool-using
traditions constantly ratchet up in complexity and diversity over time as
our technology does. There seems a world of difference between a male
chaffinch’s song and Giacomo Puccini’s arias, between fishing for ants by
chimpanzees and haute cuisine restaurants, or between the ability of
animals to count to three and Isaac Newton’s derivation of calculus. A
gap, an ostensibly unbridgeable gap, exists between the cognitive
capabilities and achievements of humanity and those of other animals.
This book explores the origins of the entangled bank of human
culture, and the animal roots of the human mind. It presents an account
of the most challenging and mysterious aspect of the human story, an
explanation for how evolutionary processes resulted in a species so
entirely different from all others. It relates how our ancestors made the

journey from apes scavenging a living on ants, tubers, and nuts, to
modern humans able compose symphonies, recite poetry, perform ballet,
and design particle accelerators. Yet Rachmaninoff’s piano concertos did
not evolve by the laws of natural selection, and space stations didn’t
emerge through the “famine and death” of the Darwinian struggle. The
men and women who design and build computers and iPhones have no
more children than those in other professions.
So, what laws account for the relentless progress and diversification
of technology, or the changing fashions of the arts? Explanations based
on cultural evolution,2 whereby competition between cultural traits
generates changes in behavior and technology,3 can only begin to be
considered satisfactory with clarification of how minds capable of
generating complex culture evolved in the first place. Yet, as later
chapters in this book reveal, our species’ most cherished intellectual
faculties were themselves fashioned in a whirlpool of coevolutionary
feedbacks in which culture played a vital role. Indeed, my central
argument is that no single prime mover is responsible for the evolution
of the human mind. Instead, I highlight the significance of accelerating
cycles of evolutionary feedback, whereby an interwoven complex of
cultural processes to reinforce each other in an irresistible runaway
dynamic that engineered the mind’s breathtaking computational power.
Comprehending the distinguishing features of humanity through
comparison with similar characteristics in other animals is another
central theme in this book, and a distinctive feature of my research
group’s approach to investigating human cognition and culture. Such
comparisons not only help to put our species’ achievements in
perspective, but help us to reconstruct the evolutionary pathways to
humanity’s spectacular achievements. We not only seek a scientific
explanation for the origins of technology, science, language, and the
arts, but endeavor to trace the roots of these phenomena right back to
the realm of animal behavior.
Consider, for illustration, the school that I see from my window. How
could it have come into existence? To most people the answer to this
question is trivial; that is, workers from a building company contracted
by the Fife Council built it. Yet to an evolutionary biologist the
construction represents an enormous challenge. The immediate
mechanical explanation is not the problem; rather, the dilemma is to

understand how humans are even capable of such undertakings. With a
little training, the same people could build a shopping mall, bridge,
canal, or dock, but no bird ever built anything other than a nest or
bower, and no termite worker deviated from constructing a mound.
When one starts to reflect, the scale of cooperation necessary to build
a school is astounding. Imagine all of the workers who had to coordinate
their actions in the right place at the right time to ensure that
foundations are safely laid, windows and doors are put in place, piping
and electricity wires are suitably positioned, and woodwork is painted.
Imagine the companies with whom the contractor had to engineer
transactions, buy the building materials, arrange for delivery, purchase
or loan the tools, subcontract jobs, and organize finances. Think of the
businesses that had to make the tools, nuts, bolts, screws, washers, paint,
and windowpanes. Imagine the people who designed the tools; smelted
the iron; logged the trees; and made the paper, ink, and plastic. So it
goes on, endlessly, in a voracious multidimensional expansion. All of
those interactions, that endless web of exchanges, transactions, and
cooperative endeavors—the vast majority carried out by unrelated
individuals on the basis of promises of future remuneration—had to
function for the school to be built. Not only did these cooperative
transactions work, but they repeatedly operate with seamless efficiency
day in and day out, as new schools, hospitals, shopping malls, and
leisure centers are put together all across the country and around the
world. Such procedures are so commonplace that we now entirely take it
for granted that the school will be built, and even complain if
completion is a little late.
I earn my living in part by studying animals, and I am captivated
with the complexity of their social behavior. Chimpanzees, dolphins,
elephants, crows, and countless other animals, exhibit rich and
sophisticated cognition that reveals an often impressive level of
intelligence that through the process of natural selection has become
suited to the worlds they each inhabit. Yet if we ever wanted a lesson in
what an achievement of creativity, cooperation, and communication the
construction of a building is, we only have to give a group of animals the
materials, tools, and equipment to build such a structure, and then see
what happens. I would imagine the chimpanzees might grasp pipes or
stones to throw or wave about in dominance displays. The dolphins

might plausibly play with materials that floated. Corvids or parrots
would perhaps pick out some novel items with which to decorate their
nests. I do not wish to disparage the abilities of other animals, whose
achievements are striking in their own domains. Yet science has accrued
a strong understanding of the evolution of animal behavior, while the
origins of human cognition and the complexities of our society,
technology, and culture remain poorly understood. For most of us in the
industrialized world, every aspect of our lives is utterly reliant on
thousands of cooperative interactions with millions of individuals from
hundreds of countries, the vast majority of whom we never see, don’t
know, and indeed never knew existed. Just how exceptional such
intricate coordination is remains hard to appreciate; nothing remotely
like it is found in any of the other 5–40 million species on the planet.4
The inner workings of the school and the activities of children and
staff are just as astonishing to an evolutionary biologist like myself.
There is no compelling evidence that other apes will go out of their way
to teach their friends or relatives anything at all, let alone build
elaborate institutions that dispense vast amounts of knowledge, skills,
and values to hordes of children with factory-like efficiency. Teaching,
by which I mean actively setting out to educate another individual, is
rare in nature.5 Nonhuman animals assist one another in alternative
ways, such as provisioning with food or collaborating in an alliance, but
they mostly aid their offspring or close relatives, who share their genes
and hence also possess their tendency to help.6 Yet in our species,
dedicated teachers devote vast amounts of time and effort with children
entirely unrelated to them, helping them to acquire knowledge, in spite
of the fact that this does not inherently increase a teacher’s evolutionary
fitness. Pointing out that teachers are paid, which might be regarded as a
form of trade (i.e., goods for work), only trivializes this mystery. The
pound coin or dollar bill have no intrinsic value, the money in our bank
account has a largely virtual existence, and the banking system is an
unfathomably complex institution. Explaining how money or financial
markets came into existence is no easier than explaining why
schoolteachers will coach unrelated pupils.
As I gaze at the school, I imagine the children sitting at their desks,
all dressed in the same uniform, and all (or, at least, many) sitting
calmly and listening to their teacher’s instruction. But why do they

listen? Why bother absorb facts about events in antiquity, or labor to
compute the angle of an abstract shape? Other animals only learn what
is of immediate use to them. Capuchin monkeys don’t instruct juveniles
in how their ancestors cracked nuts hundreds of years ago, and no
songbird educates the young about what is sung in the wood across the
road.
Just as curious to a biologist is the fact that the pupils all dress the
same. Some of these children will come from less fortunate backgrounds.
Their parents cannot easily afford to spend money on special clothes for
school. When they finish their education many of these young people
will exchange school attire for another uniform (probably equally
uncomfortable), perhaps comprising a suit, or the white and blue attire
of doctors and nurses in the hospital down the road. Even the students at
my university, replete with liberal, radical, and freethinking values often
dress the same, in jeans, Tshirts, sweatshirts, and sneakers. Where did
these proclivities come from? Other animals don’t have fashions or
norms.
Darwin provided a compelling explanation for the protracted history
of the biological world, but only hinted about origins of the cultural
realm. When discussing evolution of the “intellectual faculties,” he
confessed: “Undoubtedly it would have been very interesting to have
traced the development of each separate faculty from the state in which
it exists in the lower animals to that in which it exists in man; but
neither my ability nor knowledge permit the attempt.”7 With the benefit
of hindsight, we should not be surprised if Darwin struggled to
understand the origins of humanity’s intellectual achievements; it is a
monumental challenge. A satisfactory explanation demands insight into
the evolutionary origins of some of our most striking attributes—our
intelligence, language, cooperation, teaching, and morality—yet most of
these features are not just distinctive, they are unique to our species.
That makes it harder to glean clues to the distant history of our minds
through comparison with other species.
At the heart of this challenge lies the undeniable fact that we humans
are an amazingly successful species. Our range is unprecedented; we
have colonized virtually every terrestrial habitat on Earth, from
steaming rainforests to frozen tundra, in numbers that far exceed what
would be typical for another mammal of our size.8 We exhibit behavioral

diversity that is unparalleled in the animal kingdom,9 but (unlike most
other animals) this variation is not explained by underlying genetic
diversity, which is in fact atypically low.10 We have resolved countless
ecological, social, and technological challenges, from splitting the atom,
to irrigating the deserts, to sequencing genomes. Humanity so dominates
the planet that, through a combination of habitat destruction and
competition, we are driving countless other species to extinction. With
rare exceptions, the species comparably prosperous to humans are solely
our domesticates, such as cattle or dogs; our commensals, such as mice,
rats, and house flies; and our parasites, such as lice, ticks, and worms,
which thrive at our expense. When one considers that the life history,
social life, sexual behavior, and foraging patterns of humans have also
diverged sharply from those of other apes,11 there are grounds for
claiming that human evolution exhibits unusual and striking features
that go beyond our self-obsession and demand explanation.12
As the pages of this book demonstrate, our species’ extraordinary
accomplishments can be attributed to our uniquely potent capability for
culture. By “culture” I mean the extensive accumulation of shared,
learned knowledge, and iterative improvements in technology over
time.13 Humanity’s success is sometimes accredited to our cleverness,14
but culture is actually what makes us smart.15 Intelligence is not
irrelevant of course, but what singles out our species is an ability to pool
our insights and knowledge, and build on each other’s solutions. New
technology has little to do with a lone inventor figuring out a problem
on their own; virtually all innovation is a reworking or refinement of
existing technology.16 The simplest artifacts provide the test cases with
which to evaluate this claim, because clearly no single person could
invent, say, a space station.
Consider the example of the paper clip. You might be forgiven for
assuming that what is, in essence, just a bent piece of wire was devised
in its current form by a single imaginative individual. Yet that could not
be further from the truth.17 Paper was originally developed in first-
century China, but only by the Middle Ages was sufficient paper
produced and used in Europe to create the demand for a means to bind
sheets of paper together temporarily. The initial solution was to use pins
as fasteners, but these rusted and left unsightly holes, such that the
pinned corners of documents sometimes became ragged. By the middle

of the nineteenth century, bulky spring devices (resembling those on
clipboards today) and small metal clasps were in use, and in the decades
that followed a great variety of fasteners came into existence, with fierce
competition governing their use. The first patent for a bent wire paper
clip was awarded in 1867.18 However, the mass production of cheap
paper fasteners had to wait for the invention of a wire with the
appropriate malleability, and a machine capable of bending it, both of
which were developed in the late nineteenth century. Even then, the
earliest paper clips were suboptimal in form—for instance, these
included a rectangular-shaped wire with one overlapping side, rather
than the circular “loop within a loop” design dominant today. A variety
of shapes were experimented with for several decades of the twentieth
century before manufacturers finally converged on the now standard
paper clip design, known as the “Gem.” What appears at first sight to be
the simplest of artifacts was in fact fashioned through centuries of
reworking and refinement.19 Even today, in spite of the Gem’s success,
novel paper clip designs continue to emerge, with a wide range of
cheaper plastic forms manufactured over the last few decades.
The history of the paper clip is broadly representative of how
technology changes and complexifies, and such transformations occur in
other areas too. Humanity’s rich and diverse culture is manifest in
extraordinarily complex knowledge, artifacts, and institutions. These
multifaceted, composite aspects of culture are rarely produced in a single
step, but are generated by repeated, incremental refinements of existing
forms in a process known as “cumulative culture.”20 Our language,
cooperativeness, and ultrasociality, just like our intelligence, are
frequently lauded as setting us apart from other animals. But, as we shall
see, these features are themselves more likely products of our
exceptional cultural capabilities.21
I have dedicated my scientific career to investigating the
evolutionary origins of human culture. In my research laboratory we do
this both through experimental investigations of animal behavior, and
through the use of mathematical evolutionary models that allow us to
answer questions not amenable to experimentation. We are part of a
wider community of researchers who have established that many
animals, including mammals, birds, fishes, and even insects, acquire
knowledge and skills from others of their species.22 Through copying,23

animals learn what to eat, where to find it, how to process it, what a
predator looks like, how to escape that predator, and more. There are
thousands of reports of novel behaviors spreading through natural
populations in this way, in animals ranging from fruit flies and
bumblebees, to rhesus macaques and killer whales. These behavioral
diffusions occur too rapidly to be attributed to the spread of favorable
genes through natural selection, and are unquestionably underpinned by
learning. The behavioral repertoires of some species vary between and
within regions, in a manner that is not easily explained by ecological or
genetic variation, and is often described as “cultural.”24 Some animals
appear to have an unusually broad cultural repertoire, with multiple and
diverse traditions, and distinctive behavioral profiles in each
community.25 Rich repertoires are observed in some whales and birds,26
but outside of humans, animal traditions reach their zenith in the
primates, where various socially transmitted behavior patterns, including
tool use and social conventions, have been recorded for several species,
notably 
chimpanzees, 
orangutans, 
and 
capuchin 
monkeys.27
Experimental studies of other apes in captivity provide strong evidence
for imitation,28 tool use, and other aspects of complex cognition;29 at
least these are complex relative to other animals. Yet, in spite of this, the
traditions of even apes or dolphins just don’t seem to ratchet up in
complexity like human technology does, and the very notion of
cumulative culture in animals remains controversial.30 Perhaps the most
credible candidate was proposed by the Swiss primatologist Christophe
Boesch, who has argued that the use of hammerstones to crack open nuts
by chimpanzees has been refined and improved over time.31 Some
chimpanzees have begun to deploy a second stone as an anvil on which
to place the nuts that they smash, and a couple of individuals have even
been seen to insert another stabilizing stone to wedge the anvil securely.
While Boesch’s claim is plausible, and would meet some definitions of
cumulative culture if confirmed, it remains uncorroborated. Even the
most complex variant of nut cracking could plausibly have been
invented by a single individual, which means this tool use need not
imply any building on the shoulders of chimpanzee predecessors.32 The
same issue arises for all chimpanzee behaviors that have excited claims
of cumulative culture;33 there is no direct evidence that any of the more
elaborate variants have developed from simpler ones. Circumstantial

evidence for cumulative culture in other species is equally contentious—
notably in New Caledonian crows,34 a bird renowned for manufacturing
complex foraging tools from twigs and leaves.35 Novel learned behavior
frequently spreads through animal populations, but is rarely, if ever,
refined to generate a superior solution.
In striking contrast, the invention, refinement, and propagation of
innovations by humans is extremely well documented.36 The most
obvious illustration comes from the archaeological record;37 this can be
traced back 3.4 million years to the use of flake tools by a group of
African hominins known as australopithecines, who may have been early
human ancestors.38 The technology, known as Oldowan because it was
first discovered at the Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania, consisted of basic
stone flakes struck off a core with a hammerstone that were used to
carve up carcasses and extract meat and bone marrow.39 By 1.8 million
years ago, a new stone tool technology arose, known as Acheulian, and
associated with other hominins, Homo erectus and H. ergaster. Acheulian
technology consisted of hand axes that were more systematically
designed and particularly well suited to the butchery of large animals.40
Acheulian technologies, together with the appearance of hominins
outside Africa and evidence for systematic hunting and the use of fire,
leave no doubt that by at least this juncture in our history, our ancestors
benefitted from cumulative cultural knowledge.41 By around 300,000
years ago, hominins were combining wooden spears with flint flakes,42
building dwellings with fire hearths,43 and producing fire-hardened
spears for big game hunting.44 By 200,000 years ago, Neanderthals and
early Homo sapiens were manufacturing an entire tool kit from the same
stone.45 African sites dated to 65–90 thousand years ago provide
evidence of abstract art, blade tools, barbed bone harpoon points,46 and
composite tools, such as hafting implements and awls used to sew
clothing.47 Between 35 and 45 thousand years ago, perhaps earlier,48 a
plethora of new tools appear, comprising blades, chisels, scrapers,
points, knives, drills, borers, throwing sticks, and needles.49 This period
also introduced tools made from antler, ivory, and bone; raw materials
transported over long distances; construction of elaborate shelters;
creation of art and ornaments; and ritualized burials.50 Technological
complexity escalated further with the advent of agriculture, which was
swiftly followed by the wheel, the plow, irrigation systems, domesticated

animals, city-states, and countless other innovations.51 With the
industrial revolution, the pace of change accelerated again.52 Human
culture continues relentlessly to grow in intricacy and diversity,
culminating in the mind-boggling technological complexity of today’s
innovation society.
Whether or not chimpanzees, orangutans, or New Caledonian crows
have managed some crude advancements over their basic tool-using
habits, the scale of difference when compared with the monumental
advances of humanity is breathtaking. In some limited respects, animal
traditions resemble aspects of human culture and cognition,53 yet the
fact remains that humans alone have devised vaccines, written novels,
danced in Swan Lake, and composed moonlight sonatas, while the most
culturally accomplished nonhuman animals remain in the rain forest
cracking nuts and fishing for ants and honey.
Tempting though it may be to view “culture” as the faculty that sets
humans apart from the rest of nature, the human cultural capability
obviously must itself have evolved. Herein lies a major challenge facing
the sciences and humanities; namely, to work out how the extraordinary
and unique human capacity for culture evolved from ancient roots in
animal behavior and cognition. Understanding the rise of culture has
proven a remarkably stubborn puzzle,54 largely because many other
evolutionary conundrums must be addressed in the process. We must
first understand why animals copy each other at all, and we must isolate
the rules that guide their use of social information. We then need to
identify the critical conditions that favored cumulative culture, and the
cognitive prerequisites for its expression. The circumstances leading to
the evolution of the abilities to innovate, teach, cooperate, and conform
must all be established. Also critical is knowing how and why humans
invented language, and how that led to complex forms of cooperation.
Finally, and crucially, we need to comprehend how all of these processes
and capabilities fed back on each other to shape our bodies and minds.
Only then can researchers begin to understand how human beings
uniquely came to possess the remarkable suite of cognitive skills that has
allowed our species to flourish. These are the issues with which my
research group has wrestled for many years, and our studies and those of
others in our field, are beginning to provide answers.
Some 
readers 
might 
be 
surprised 
by 
the 
suggestion 
that

understanding the evolution of the human mind and culture has proven
a major challenge. After all, Darwin wrote at great length about human
evolution, and that was 150 years ago; unquestionably, extensive
progress has been made in the intervening period.55 In fact, in The Origin
of Species Darwin did not mention human evolution at all, except to say
in the final pages that “light will be thrown on the origin of man and his
history.”56 Darwin took a long time, well over a decade, to elaborate on
this enigmatic statement, but he eventually brought forth two huge
books on the topic: The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex
(1871) and The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals (1872).
Strikingly, in these books, Darwin says rather little about human
anatomy, but instead concentrates on the question of the evolution of
“the mental powers of Man.” This focus is highly significant. To
Victorian readers, as to us, there seemed to be a far greater divide
between the mental abilities of human beings and other animals than
between their bodies. Darwin recognized that understanding the
evolution of cognition was the greater challenge if he was to convince
his readers that humans had evolved. The origin of mind was the key
terrain over which the battle regarding human evolution was to be
fought.
The account given in The Descent of Man is typical of Darwinian
reasoning. Darwin maintained that there was variation in mental
capacity and that being intellectually gifted was advantageous in the
struggle to survive and reproduce:
To avoid enemies, or to attack them with success, to capture wild
animals, and to invent and fashion weapons, requires the aid of the
higher mental faculties, namely, observation, reason, invention, or
imagination.57
Darwin attempted to counter the widespread belief, brought to
prominence through the writings of French philosopher René Descartes,
that animals were merely machines driven by instinct, while humanity
alone was capable of reason and advanced mental processing.58 Instead,
Darwin sought to demonstrate both that animals possessed more
elevated cognition than hitherto conceived and that human beings
possessed instinctive tendencies. Through extensive use of examples,

such as rats learning to avoid traps and apes using tools, Darwin
documented how many animals exhibit signs of intelligence, and how
even simple animals are capable of learning and memory. Much of his
analysis reads a little anthropomorphically today; he claimed that the
songs of birds demonstrate an appreciation of beauty, that their behavior
near a nest revealed some concept of personal property, and even that
his dog showed the rudiments of spirituality. Yet the data Darwin
presented were a serious challenge to the established, stark, Cartesian
human-versus-animal mental divide.
Darwin also documented the evidence that human beings possess
behavioral characteristics in common with other animals, cataloguing an
amazing array of shared facial expressions.59 For instance, he noted that
monkeys, like human beings, have “an instinctive dread of serpents” and
will respond to snakes with the same screams and the same fearful faces
as many of us do. Through these efforts, Darwin established a scientific
tradition that perpetuates to this day and that seeks to demonstrate that
the differences in mental ability between human beings and other
animals were not as great as formerly believed.
What is of relevance here is that Darwin’s approach to explaining the
evolution of the human mind is, in essence, identical to his strategy for
accounting for the evolution of the human body. He sought to shrink the
apparently chasmic gap between the intellectual abilities of human
beings and other animals by showing that for any given character,
humans are sufficiently animallike, or animals sufficiently humanlike,
that it is possible a chain of intermediary forms could have been forged
by natural selection. The data he presented did not demonstrate such
chains; nor were they intended to. Darwin merely set out to illustrate
that the construction of such a case for continuity of mind was, in
principle, highly plausible.
Darwin’s stance contrasted decidedly with that of his contemporary
Alfred Wallace, who had struck upon the idea of evolution by natural
selection around the same time. Wallace concluded that the complex
language, intellect, and the music, art, and morals of human beings
could not be explained solely by natural selection and must have
resulted from the intervention of a divine creator.60 History has perhaps
judged Wallace harshly, with the fact that he despaired of a scientific
explanation for the origins of mind leading some to interpret his position

as indicative of some weakness of character, in comparison to Darwin’s
courageous stance.61 Any such conclusion would be unjust. Wallace’s
evaluation of the evidence was primarily an honest reflection of the state
of knowledge at the time. The explanations that Darwin offered to
account for the evolution of mind were, as he conceded, “imperfect and
fragmentary.”62 Darwin’s position was based on the firm belief that in
the future science would provide more concrete evidence to bridge the
mental divide; a stance now being vindicated.
Comprehending the evolution of the human mind is Darwin’s
unfinished symphony. Unlike the unfinished compositions of Beethoven
or Schubert, which had to be assembled into popular masterpieces using
solely those fragmentary sketches left by the original composers,
Darwin’s intellectual descendants have taken up the challenge of
completing his work. In the intervening decades great progress has been
made, and rudimentary answers to the conundrum of the evolution of
our mental abilities have started to emerge. However, it is only in the
last few years that a truly compelling account has begun to crystallize.
Darwin thought that competition, for food or mates, drove the evolution
of intelligence and, in its broad thrust, this assertion is supported.63
However, what was not recognized until recently was the central role
played by culture in the origins of mind.
Darwin and his intellectual descendants have unearthed findings that
have substantially shrunk the recognized differences between human
and animal cognition relative to the strict dichotomy that was accepted
in the Victorian era. We now know that humans share many cognitive
skills with their nearest primate relatives.64 A long list of strong claims of
human uniqueness—humans are the only species to use tools, to teach,
to imitate, to use signals to communicate meanings, to possess memories
of past events and anticipate the future—have been eroded by science as
careful research into animal cognition has revealed unanticipated
richness and complexity in the animal kingdom.65 Yet the distinctiveness
of human mental ability relative to that of other animals remains
striking, and the research field of comparative cognition has matured to
the point where we can now be confident that this gap is unlikely to be
eroded away completely.66 A hundred years of intensive research has
established beyond reasonable doubt what most human beings have
intuited all along; the gap is real. In a number of key dimensions,

particularly the social realm, human cognition vastly outstrips that of
even the cleverest nonhuman primates.
I suspect that in the past, many animal behaviorists have been loath
to admit this for fear that it would reinforce the position of those who
denied human evolution altogether. A “good evolutionist” emphasized
continuity in the intellectual attainments of humans and other primates.
Dwelling on our mental superiority was portrayed as anthropocentric,
and was often tainted with a suspicion that those who would set humans
apart from the rest of nature must have some personal agenda. Humans
might be unique, but then, it was argued, so are all species. At the same
time the media has been rife with “talking” apes and Machiavellian
monkeys, giving the impression that other primates were as cunning and
manipulative as the most devious and sinister humans, with untapped
potential for sophisticated communication, and possessing rich
intellectual and even moral lives.67 Political and conservationist agendas
fed into this doctrine, leading to the assertion that other apes were so
similar to us that they merit special protection or human rights, and it
has even been suggested they actually are people.68 Reinforcing this
perspective is a long-standing and highly successful genre of popular
science books that challenged readers to contemplate their animal
selves. We have been vividly portrayed as “naked apes” adapted to a
small-group forest existence, and then thrust suddenly into a modern
world with which we are ill equipped to cope.69 We (at least, the males
among us) have been designated “man the hunter,” shaped by natural
selection for a life of brutal aggression.70 Other tomes depict us as so
laden with baggage from our animal heritage that we will be driven to
destruction.71 The authors of such books were often authoritative
scientists, who explicitly drew on knowledge of animal behavior and
evolutionary biology to justify their assertions.
In my view, too much has been made of superficial similarities
between the behavior of humans and other animals, whether by inflating
the intellectual credentials of other animals or by exaggerating
humanity’s bestial nature. Humans may be closely related to
chimpanzees, but we are not chimpanzees, and nor are chimpanzees
people. Any agenda to “prove” human evolution by demonstrating
continuity of our mental abilities with those of other living animals is no
longer required; it has become anachronistic. We now know for certain

what Darwin could only suspect: several extinct hominin species existed
over the intervening five to seven million years since humans and
chimpanzees shared a common ancestor. Archaeological remains leave
little doubt that these hominins possessed intellectual abilities
intermediate to that of humans and chimpanzees.72 The gap between
apes and humans is real, but this is not a problem for Darwinism,
because our extinct ancestors bridge the cognitive divide.
Nonetheless, demonstrating the authenticity of the mental ability gap
between humans and other living primates is a necessary platform for
this book. That is because, ostensibly, we humans live in complex
societies organized around linguistically coded rules, morals, norms, and
social institutions, with a massive reliance on technology, while our
closest primate relatives do not. Were these differences illusory, either
because human cognition is dominated by bestial tendencies that can be
explained in the same manner as that of other animals, or because other
animals possess hidden powers of reasoning and social complexity, the
problem of explaining the origins of mind would melt away in the
manner that evolutionists have anticipated, and perhaps hoped, for a
century. However, the differences, as we shall see, are not illusory, and
the challenge does not melt away.
Consider the genetic evidence. Perhaps the most misunderstood
statistic in science is that humans and chimpanzees are 98.5% similar
genetically. To many people, this statistic implies that chimpanzees are
98.5% human, or that 98.5% of chimpanzee genes work in the same way
as ours, or that the differences between humans and chimpanzees are
attributable to the 1.5% of genetic differences. All such inferences are
wildly inaccurate. The 98.5% figure relates to similarity in the DNA
sequence level across the entire genomes. Human and chimpanzee
genomes comprise a long series of DNA base pairs, with tens of
thousands, even millions, of base pairs in each protein-coding gene.
Humans have something in the region of 20,000 protein-coding genes,
although these make up only a small portion of our genome. The 1.5%
represents about 35 million nucleotide differences between the two
species. Most of these do not affect the gene’s function at all, but some
have big effects. Even a single change can affect how a gene operates,
which means that a human and chimpanzee gene could be virtually
identical and yet function differently. Many of the affected genes code

for transcription factors (proteins that bind to DNA sequences and
thereby regulate the transcription of other genes), thereby allowing the
small sequence differences between the species to be amplified.73
Further genetic differences between humans and chimpanzees result
from insertions and deletions of genetic material,74 differences in the
promoters and enhancers that switch genes on and off,75 and between-
species variation in the number of copies of each gene. Copy number
variation has arisen through both gene loss and the duplication of genes
(typically in the hominin lineage); the latter can be adaptive in cases
where more gene product is required.76 One study found that 6.4% of all
human genes do not have a matching copy number in chimpanzees.77 In
addition, genes can be read in a variety of different ways to produce
multiple diverse products, as different regions of the gene (exons) are
spliced together. This “alternative splicing” is not a rare phenomenon.
More than 90% of human genes exhibit alternative splicing, and 6–8% of
genes shared by humans and chimpanzees show pronounced differences
in how they are spliced.78
More important than differences between genes, however, are
between-species differences in how the genes are used. Genes might be
thought of as children’s building bricks—broadly similar blocks that are
assembled in different species in dissimilar ways. Human and
chimpanzee genes could be exactly identical and still work differently
because they can be turned on and off to different degrees, in different
places, or at different times. Allan Wilson and Mary-Claire King, the
pioneering Berkeley scientists who first drew attention to the striking
genetic similarity between humans and chimpanzees, speculated that the
differences between the two species have less to do with genetic
sequence differences and much more to do with when and how those
genes are switched on and off.79 The intervening years have confirmed
this supposition.80 The Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE), a
massive research project launched by the US National Human Genome
Research Institute in 2003 to identify all functional elements in the
human genome, recently found around eight million binding sites, and
variation in these largely regulatory elements is thought to be
responsible for many species differences.81
An instructive comparison here is between the English and German
languages. In terms of their written symbolic form (i.e., the letters used),

these two Indo-European languages are identical, although only German
speakers make use of the umlaut, recognizable as two dots over a vowel,
which changes its pronunciation.82 Yet it would clearly be ridiculous to
claim that all differences between the two languages are attributable to
the umlaut, or that to master German, an English speaker merely has to
master the rules of umlaut usage. The differences between the two
languages relate far more to how the letters are used, to how they are
combined into words and sentences, than to differences in the
phonological elements. So it is with genes. Among the key empirical
insights to emerge recently from the field of evolutionary developmental
biology (or “evo-devo”) is the finding that evolution typically proceeds
through changes in the gene regulatory machinery—through “teaching
old genes new tricks.”83 Such changes include the timing of protein
production, the region of the body in which the gene is expressed, the
amount of protein produced, and the form of the gene product. The
differences between human and chimpanzees relate far more to how all
our genes are switched on and off than they do to the small differences
in the sequences.
Among the sample of genes that do differ between humans and
chimpanzees, a disproportionately high number are expressed in the
brain and nervous system.84 Genes expressed in the brain have been
subject to strong positive selection in the hominin lineage, with over
90% of such genes upregulating their activity relative to chimpanzees.85
Such differences are likely to have a big impact on brain function. Unlike
many other tissues, gene expression patterns in the brains of
chimpanzees have been found to be far more similar to those of
macaques than to humans.86 In terms of their anatomy and physiology,
chimpanzee brains resemble those of monkeys far more than those of
humans.87 Human brains are more than three times the size of
chimpanzee brains and have been structurally reorganized in
comparison; for instance, the former have proportionally larger
neocortices and more direct connections from the neocortex to other
brain regions.88
What this means is that humans and chimpanzees are not so
biologically similar that we should assume they ought to be behaviorally
or cognitively alike. Chimpanzees might be our closest relatives, but this
is only because all other members of our genus—Homo habilis, Homo

erectus, Homo neanderthalensis, and more89—as well as all the
Australopithecines, and all other hominins (Paranthropus, Ardipithecus,
Sahelanthropus, 
Kenyanthropus) 
are 
extinct. 
Had 
they 
endured,
chimpanzees would surely have a lower status in the minds of humans,
and less might have been expected of them.
Let us put aside any preconceived notions and consider what exactly
is special about the mental capabilities of humans. Careful experimental
analyses of the cognitive capabilities of humans and other animals over
the last hundred years have allowed researchers to characterize the truly
unique aspects of our cognition. This is no trivial matter, because history
is littered with claims along the lines of “humans uniquely do X, or
possess Y” that have subsequently fallen by the wayside when
established in another species. Comparisons of humans with other apes
have also isolated features that the former share with other animals.
Indeed, examining shared traits has proven as insightful as investigating
human uniqueness, because such comparisons help us to reconstruct the
past; this allows inferences to be made about the attributes of species
ancestral to humans so that the evolutionary history of traits seen in
modern humans can be understood. Nonetheless, some striking
differences remain.
Consider, for example, research into human cooperation, which in
recent years has been subject to intense investigation through the use of
economic games. One is called the “ultimatum game,” where two players
must decide how to split a sum of money. The first player proposes how
to divide the sum between them, and the second can either accept or
reject this proposal. If the second player accepts, the money is split
according to the proposal, but if the second player rejects, neither player
receives anything. The most interesting feature of the ultimatum game is
that it is never really rational for the second player to reject, since any
offer is better than nothing. Hence, we might expect the first player to
offer the absolute minimum and then keep the bulk of the sum.
However, that is not what humans typically do. Humans frequently
make far more generous offers (the most common offer is 50%, a “fair”
division), and are much more prone to reject offers (those less than 20%
are typically rejected) than would be expected if behaving entirely
rationally. Moreover, the magnitude of offers and rates of rejection vary
from one society to the next in a manner consistent with a society’s

cultural norms. For instance, particularly generous offers may be
observed in a culture of extensive gift giving.90 Humans seem
predisposed to cooperate, and expect the same of others. Our behavior is
often motivated by a sense of fairness and consideration of others’
perspectives, and frequently adheres to the conventions of society. We
even feel a compulsion to be fair to absolute strangers, irrespective of
whether they are likely to be seen again. These conclusions are echoed
in literally thousands of experimental findings, set across a very wide
range of contexts and spanning broad scales of interaction.91
What happens when chimpanzees are asked to partake in such
games? Psychologists Keith Jensen, Josep Call, and Michael Tomasello
presented a simplified version of the ultimatum game to chimpanzees.
The clever experimental setup allowed the “proposer” chimpanzee to
choose between two options, one that shared a food reward equally with
another chimpanzee, and another that gave the proposer a greater
proportion. They found that chimpanzees tended to select the option
that maximized their own returns with little regard to whether or not
this was fair to others.92 Compared to humans, the chimpanzees might
appear to have behaved in a selfish manner, but their behavior, rather
than ours, is the rational response. Studies like these, and there are
many, support the argument that hominins may have been subject to
selection promoting both consideration of others and sensitivity to local
norms of fairness.93 This is not to suggest that other apes never
cooperate; chimpanzees, much like most other primates, cooperate in
restricted domains.94 However, extensive experimental data has
established that other apes do not cooperate as extensively as humans
do.
Many prominent primatologists believe that cooperation is at least
partly constrained in other primates by a lack of understanding of the
perspective of other individuals with whom they are required to
cooperate.95 Research into this topic was initiated in a classic study by
comparative psychologists David Premack and Guy Woodruff, who
asked, “Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind?” They questioned
whether chimpanzees, like adult humans, understand that other
individuals may have false beliefs, intentions, and goals.96 Their study
triggered a spate of experimental investigations comparing the
performance of chimpanzees and young children. In the main, the data

led many researchers to answer Premack and Woodruff’s question in the
negative. More recent studies, however, suggest that chimpanzees may
have some precursors of a theory of mind.97 For instance, there is
evidence that chimpanzees can infer a human experimenter’s intentions;
they react very differently when a person refrains from giving food
because they are unwilling to do so compared with when they are
unable to do so, or when doing something on purpose rather than by
accident.98 Other studies suggest that chimpanzees can understand the
goals, perception, and knowledge of others to a limited degree.
However, these conclusions remain contested,99 and crucially, such
studies provide no evidence that chimpanzees understand that others
may possess false beliefs.100 In contrast, children typically understand
that others can have false beliefs by the age of four years, and possibly
much earlier,101 which implies that this capability evolved in the
hominin lineage. Moreover, humans readily comprehend many orders of
belief and understanding; for instance, you could understand that I could
claim my wife believes that her daughter thinks her mother’s hair looks
best short, whereas in fact my daughter is only saying that to make her
mother happy. Such beliefs about beliefs about beliefs are a natural and
common aspect of human cognition, and our species can comprehend up
to six orders. Other apes struggle with first-order intentionality.102
A reader unfamiliar with research in comparative psychology might
reasonably wonder why the field should contrast the performance of
chimpanzees of all ages with that of human children in laboratory tests
of cognition.103 Ostensibly, the fairer comparison would be of the two
species at the same age. The general rationale for comparing
chimpanzees to children (often at nursery school age) rather than to
adult humans is that adults have been greatly enculturated by human
society; the use of children thus represents an attempt to tease out the
inherent differences between the two species prior to culture becoming
too great a confounding factor. However, whether this argument holds
water is contentious; after all, even four-or five-year-old children will
have been hugely encultured. A more pragmatic rationale for the
comparison may be closer to the truth; that is, with most cognitive tasks,
there would be little point in comparing adult humans with adult
chimpanzees, because the former would far outstrip the latter. Even
human toddlers outperform the adults of other ape species in tests of

mental ability. For instance, developmental psychologist Esther
Herrmann and her colleagues gave a battery of cognitive tests to two-
and-a-half-year-old children, as well as to chimpanzees and orangutans
ranging from 3 to 21 years of age. These researchers found that, even at
such a young age, the children already had comparable cognitive skills
to adult chimpanzees and orangutans for dealing with the physical world
(e.g., spatial memory, object rotation, tool use), and had far more
sophisticated cognitive skills than both adult chimpanzees and
orangutans for dealing with the social realm (e.g., social learning,
producing communicative gestures, understanding intentions); they
typically performed twice as well as (nonhuman) apes in the tasks.104
While other experiments have established that chimpanzees do show
impressive proficiency in social learning and social cognition,105 those
studies that directly compare species nonetheless consistently reveal
strong differences between humans and other apes.106 The hypothesis
that social intelligence, in particular, blossomed among our hominin
ancestors is now widely accepted.107
Communication is perhaps the most obvious respect in which there
appears to be a major, qualitative difference between the mental abilities
of humans and other primates. Animal communication comprises various
classes of signals concerning survival (e.g., predator alarm calls),
courtship and mating (such as the red sexual swellings of some
monkeys), and other social signals (for instance, dominance displays).108
Such signals each have very specific meanings, and typically relate to the
animal’s immediate circumstances. In contrast, language allows us to
exchange ideas about matters distant in space and time (I could tell you
about my upbringing in the English Midlands, or you could inform me of
the new coffee shop in the next town). With rare exceptions, such as the
honeybee waggle dance through which bees transmit abstract
information about the location of nectar-rich flowers, animals do not
communicate about phenomena that are not immediately present.
Chimpanzees do not tell each other about the termite mound they found
yesterday, and gorillas do not discuss the nettle patch on the other side
of the forest. Some primate vocalizations do appear to symbolize objects
in the world: famously, vervet monkeys, which range throughout
southern Africa, are thought to possess three distinct calls that are labels
for avian, mammalian, and snake predators,109 and similar claims have

been made for several other primates. However, primate vocalizations
largely consist of single, unrelated signals that are rarely put together to
transmit more complex messages, and any atypical composite messages
are highly restricted. For instance, some monkeys simultaneously inform
others of both the existence of a predator and of its location.110 In
contrast, human language is entirely open-ended, allowing humans to
produce an infinite set of utterances and to create entirely new sentences
through their mastery of symbols.
A romance exists around the notion that animals, such as
chimpanzees or dolphins, might covertly harbor complex natural
communication systems as yet unfathomed by humans. Many of us quite
like the idea that “arrogant” scientists have prematurely assumed that
other animals don’t talk to each other when they failed to decode the
cryptic complex of calls and whistles. Sadly, all the evidence suggests
that this is just fantasy. Animal communication has been subject to
intense scientific investigation for over a century, and few hints of any
such complexity have arisen. To the contrary, it has proven remarkably
difficult to provide compelling evidence that the signals of chimpanzees
or 
dolphins 
possess 
a 
referential 
quality.111 
Chimpanzees 
are
unquestionably smart in many respects, but their communication is not
unambiguously richer, and may even be less language-like, than that of
many other animals.112 This means that communication systems cannot
be arrayed on a continuum of similar forms, with human language at
one end of the spectrum, closely aligned to some highly complex animal
protolanguage, and passing through less and less sophisticated animal
communication systems to end up with, say, simple olfactory messages
at the other end. Rather, language appears qualitatively different. Even if
the gulf between human language and the others were ignored, and
animal communication systems were aligned on a continuum from
simple to complex, current evidence implies that those species most
closely related to humans are not the ones with the most complex
natural communication systems.113
Perhaps apes are capable of more complex communication than they
exhibit in their natural environments. A simple continuity argument
might yet be resurrected if apes could be trained to talk, and several
high-profile studies have pursued this dream.114 Other apes, of course,
are not anatomically suited to complex vocalization; their vocal control

and physiology aren’t capable of speech production. This much was
established in the 1940s by American psychologists Keith and Cathy
Hayes, who raised a young female chimpanzee called Viki from birth in
their own home, endeavoring to treat her identically to their own
children. Viki learned to produce just four words—“mama,” “papa,”
“cup,” and “up”—and by all accounts, the pronunciation was not
compelling. If that sounds like a disappointment, it was at least more
successful than the only previous attempt. This was made by Winthrop
and Luella Kellogg, another husband and wife team of psychologists,
who reared a female chimpanzee called Gua with their son Donald; Gua
was seven months old when they started and Donald was close in age.
The Kelloggs were forced to abandon the exercise after a couple of years,
when Gua hadn’t learned a single word, but Donald had started to
imitate chimpanzee sounds! Real progress had to wait until the 1960s,
when a third couple, Allen and Beatrice Gardner, tried again, but this
time with the ingenious idea of teaching American Sign Language to
Washoe, their young chimpanzee. Washoe is reported to have learned
over 300 signed words, many through imitation, and to even to have
passed on some of these to a younger chimpanzee called Loulis. Washoe
also spontaneously combined signs; for instance, on seeing a swan,
Washoe signed “water” and “bird,” to much acclaim. The investigation
generated considerable excitement and triggered a series of studies of
“talking apes,” including Nim Chimpsky, Koko the gorilla, and Kanzi the
bonobo who were all taught signs or to use a symbolic lexicon.
Yet the vaulted claims that apes had produced language do not stand
up to close scrutiny, a point on which virtually all linguists concur.115
The animals had successfully learned the meanings of signs, and were
able to produce simple two-or three-word combinations, but they
showed no hint of having mastered grammatical structure or syntax.
Human languages differ from animal communication systems in the use
of grammatical and semantic categories, such as nouns, adjectives, and
conjunctions, combined with verbs in present, past, and future tenses, in
order to express exceedingly complex meanings. Washoe, Koko, and
Kanzi may have comprehended the meaning of a large numbers of words
and symbols (although none was able to learn as many different words
as a typical three-year-old child) but more to the point, none of them
acquired anything resembling the complex grammar of human language.

Even enthusiastic devotees of the complexity of ape communication have
acknowledged the contrast.116 A world of difference separates a
chimpanzee communication and a Shakespearean comedy.
Equally romantic is the notion that science has not yet gauged the
full depth of the moral lives of animals, a premise that sells an awful lot
of popular science books and flushes the coffers of Hollywood
moviemakers. Television shows and storybooks are full of animals, from
Lassie, to Flipper, to Champion the Wonder Horse, who can grasp
complex situations, often more effectively than humans, and who exhibit
humanlike moral emotions such as sympathy or guilt. Once again, the
scientific evidence is disappointingly dull; many popular books claim
that animals understand the difference between right and wrong, but
precious few scientific papers demonstrate this. Instead, claims of animal
morality are heavily reliant on anecdotal reports, including stories of
apes (but also dolphins, elephants, and monkeys) behaving as if they
possess sympathy or compassion for another animal; for instance, these
animals appear to console sick or dying individuals or “reconcile” after a
fight.117 However, such reports require careful interpretation.
Animals unquestionably lead rich emotional lives; strong scientific
evidence demonstrates that many form attachments, experience distress,
and respond to the emotional state of others.118 Yet, that is not the same
as possessing morals. Animals sometimes behave as if they can tell right
from wrong, but there are usually alternative ways of interpreting such
examples. The animals might be following simple rules without much
reflection or care for others. For instance, grooming the victims of
aggression might be beneficial if this provides a prime opportunity to
forge new alliances. Primates may reconcile to obtain short-term
objectives, such as access to desirable resources or to preserve valuable
relationships damaged by conflict.119 Rather than feeling guilt after being
reprimanded, your dog may simply have learned that giving you “the
eyes” will lead to more rapid forgiveness on your part. Instead of feeling
sympathy for another individual that screams, an observing animal may
respond emotionally out of fear for itself, a phenomenon known as
emotional contagion.120 Some writers have interpreted reconciliation
after fights in monkeys as indicating that the protagonists feel “guilt” or
“forgiveness,” arguing on evolutionary grounds that it is parsimonious to
assume that our close relatives experience the same emotions and

cognition as ourselves.121 However, this reasoning appears more
questionable when we learn that fish behave in the same way.122 Are we
to assume that they also have a sense of forgiveness? Another concern is
that for every anecdote suggesting particular animals possess moral
tendencies, there are typically many more from the same species
showing selfish and exploitative behavior.123 The scientific literature is
rife with reports of animals behaving indifferently to the distress of
others, or taking advantage of the weak. Expressions of “moral”
tendencies are, at best, rare events in other species.
Human beings are very much a part of the animal kingdom, and well
over a century of careful research by scientists in several fields has
established many continuities between our behavior and that of other
animals. Yet despite this, important differences between the cognitive
capabilities and achievements of humans and those of our closest animal
relatives have been experimentally ratified. This divergence demands an
evolutionary explanation. One-hundred-and-fifty years ago, Charles
Darwin penned the first credible accounts of human evolution but
inevitably, with fossil data scarce, the arguments brought to bear were
designed more to illustrate the kinds of processes through which humans
might have evolved, rather than to relate the actual story of our origin.
In the intervening time, the unearthing of literally thousands of hominin
fossils by paleontologists has allowed a detailed history of our
evolutionary ancestry to be scripted.124 Yet that history is largely written
of teeth and bones, supplemented by clever inferences about diet and life
history, together with stone tools and archaeological remains.
Knowledge of the history of the human mind remains rare, speculative,
and circumstantial.
Darwin recognized that a truly compelling account of human
evolution would have to account for human mental abilities, including
our culture, language, and morality, and in spite of extensive and
productive scientific research for over a century, this remains a
monumental challenge. The sheer magnitude of this task has not always
been universally recognized. In the struggle to establish, and then to not
undermine, the case for human evolution, the scientific community has
perhaps been reticent to acknowledge that humans are cognitively very
different from other apes. I confess that this is the mindset with which I
began my scientific career. As data from comparative cognition

experiments accumulated, however, and the striking differences between
the mental abilities of humans and other apes began to crystallize,
evolutionary biologists like myself have been forced to accept that
something unusual must have happened in the hominin lineage to
humanity. That supposition is reinforced by anatomical data, showing a
near quadrupling in hominin brain size in the last three million years,125
by genetic data showing massive upregulation of gene expression in the
human brain,126 and by archaeological data showing hyperexponential
increases in the complexity and diversity of our technology and
knowledge base.127 Not all of the respects in which human beings excel
are so flattering; we also exhibit unprecedented capabilities for war,
crime, destruction, and habitat degradation. Yet these negative attributes
also serve to highlight the distinctiveness of our evolutionary journey.
How is it all to be understood?
This book sets out to explain the evolution of the extraordinary
human capacity for culture, and in the process aims to provide answers
to the conundrum of the human mind’s emergence. An account is given
of how the most singular and definitively human capabilities
intermingled to forge a collective existence in our species. The
explanation given for the origins of mind and culture cannot be the
whole story—far from it, since indubitably many diverse and complex
selection pressures must have acted on an organ as complex as the
human brain and a cognitive capability that is so multidimensional. The
story told is far from conjecture, however; it is supported all the way by
scientific findings.
Yet this book is not just about the evolution of culture; it is a
description of the scientific program of research dedicated to its
unraveling. It synthesizes my work, and that of my students, assistants,
and collaborators, who as a team have pursued this topic for over 25
years. It depicts how modern research proceeds, including how scientific
questions are addressed, how serendipitous findings are capitalized on,
how researchers can be led in new directions by data, and how different
scientific methodologies (experiments, observations, statistical analyses,
and mathematical models) are interwoven to construct a deeper
understanding of a problem. I set out to depict, in an honest way, our
struggles, false starts, and moments of insight and despair. In a very real
sense, this book is a detective story, describing how one puzzle led to the

next, how we followed the trail of clues, and how gradually our efforts
were rewarded with a climax as rich and convoluted as in any whodunit
mystery. The “answer” that gradually becomes clear as the book
progresses, may perhaps be regarded as a new theory of the evolution of
mind and intelligence.
Our story begins with the seemingly prosaic observation that
countless animals, from tiny fruit flies to gigantic whales, learn life skills
and acquire valuable knowledge by copying other individuals. Perhaps
surprisingly, an understanding of why they should do so—that is, why
copying should be so widespread in nature—had eluded science until
quite recently. Indeed, the puzzle was sufficiently challenging that we
were forced to organize a scientific competition to address it. The
competition solved the conundrum by conclusively demonstrating that
copying pays because other individuals prefilter behavior, thereby
making adaptive solutions available for others to copy. Running the
competition taught us a vital lesson: natural selection will relentlessly
favor more and more efficient and accurate means of copying.
Once we understood why animals copy each other, we began to
appreciate the clever manner in which they did so. Animal copying was
far from mindlessly or universally applied; social learning is highly
strategic. Animals follow clever rules, such as “copy only when learning
through trial and error would be costly,” or “copy the behavior of the
majority,” which have proven to be highly efficient methods of
exploiting the available information. What is more, we began to find
that we could predict patterns of copying behavior using evolutionary
principles. Subsequently, our experimental and theoretical analyses
started to reveal how selection for more efficient and accurate copying
had seemingly led some primates to rely more on socially transmitted
information. This process supported traditions and cultures comprising
databanks of valuable knowledge that conferred on populations the
adaptive plasticity to respond flexibly to challenges and create new
opportunities for themselves. This heavy reliance on social learning had
other, less obvious, consequences as well, including a transformation in
how natural selection acted on the evolving primate brain, and its
consequent impact on primate cognition. In certain primate lineages,
social learning capabilities coevolved with enhanced innovativeness and
complex tool use to promote survival. The same feedback mechanisms

may have operated in other lineages too, including some birds and
whales, but with constraints that did not apply in the primates. The
result was a runaway process, in which different components of
cognition fed back to reinforce and promote each other, leading to
extraordinary growth in brain size in some primate lineages, and to the
evolution of high intelligence.
One key insight was that, under stringent conditions identified by
mathematical models, this runaway process favored teaching, which is
defined here as costly behavior designed to enhance learning in others.
This high-fidelity information transmission allowed hominin culture to
diversify and accumulate complexity. Experimental studies and other
data suggested that selection for more efficient teaching may have been
the critical factor that accounts for why our ancestors evolved language.
In turn, the appearance of widespread teaching combined with language
was key to the appearance to extensive large-scale human cooperation.
As our investigation proceeded, further lines of evidence supported our
account, and a picture of what had happened in our lineage began to
emerge. Human genetic data, for instance, testified to an unprecedented
interaction between cultural and genetic processes in human evolution,
fueling a relentless acceleration in the computational power of our
brains. The data suggested that the same autocatalytic process has
continued right up to the present, with accelerating cultural change
driving technological progress and diversification in the arts, leading
directly to today’s human population explosion and the resultant
planetary-scale changes.
What surprised us most about our investigations, however, was that
only when we finally felt that we were closing in on a reasonable
understanding of the evolutionary origins of the human capability for
culture, did it dawn on us that we had stumbled upon so much more. We
had inadvertently assembled insights into the birth of intelligence,
cooperation, and technology. We had a novel account of the origins of
complex society, and a new theory of why humans, and humans alone,
possess language. We could explain why our species practices 10,000 or
so different religions,128 and could account for a technological explosion
that has generated tens of millions of patents.129 We could also elucidate
how humans can paint sunsets, play football, dance the jitterbug, and
solve differential equations.

Something remarkable happened in the lineage leading to humanity.
Such a dramatic and distinctive enhancement in mental ability cannot be
observed in the ancestry of any other living animal. Humans are more
than just souped-up apes; our history embraces a different kind of
evolutionary dynamic. All species are unique, but we are uniquely
unique. To account for the rise of our species, we must recognize what is
genuinely special about us, and explain it using evolutionary principles.
Doing so requires analysis of the evolution of culture, because it turns
out that culture is far more than just another component, or an
outgrowth, of human mental abilities. Human culture is not just a
magnificent end product of the evolutionary process, an entity that, like
the peacock’s tail or the orchid’s bloom, is a spectacular outcome of
Darwinian laws. For humans, culture is a big part of the explanatory
process too. The evolution of the truly extraordinary characteristics of
our species—our intelligence, language, cooperation, and technology—
have proven difficult to comprehend because, unlike most other evolved
characters, they are not adaptive responses to extrinsic conditions.
Rather, humans are creatures of their own making. The learned and
socially transmitted activities of our ancestors, far more than climate,
predators, or disease, created the conditions under which our
intelligence evolved. Human minds are not just built for culture; they are
built by culture. In order to understand the evolution of cognition, we
must first comprehend the evolution of culture, because for our
ancestors and perhaps our ancestors alone, culture transformed the
evolutionary process.

CHAPTER 2
UBIQUITOUS COPYING
It is impossible to catch many [animals] in the same place and
in the same kind of trap, or to destroy them by the same kind of
poison; yet it is improbable that all should have partaken of the
poison, and impossible that all should have been caught in the
trap. They must learn caution by seeing their brethren caught
or poisoned.
—DARWIN, DESCENT OF MAN
The brown rat does not, as its Latin name (Rattus norvegicus)
misleadingly implies, originate in Norway, but rather in China, from
which it has spread to all continents apart from Antarctica over the last
few hundred years. It has been described as one of “the most successful
nonhuman mammals on the planet.”1 Its range and versatility are
remarkable; colonies of rats scavenge a living on human garbage in
Alaska, subsist on beetles and ground-nesting birds in South Georgia,
and flourish in almost all farms and cities in between.2
The rats’ success in part reflects a long history of dependence on
humanity, a relationship in which we have proven an unwelcoming and
brutal partner. Yet, in spite of centuries of traps, poisons and
fumigations, no pied piper has ever managed to eradicate this most
perseverant of pests. The reason, as Darwin intuited, is that rats
cunningly avoid all agents of extermination; and they do so through
copying.
In Darwin’s day, the presiding belief was that children and monkeys
imitated, but that the behavior of most animals was controlled by
instincts.3 The adage “monkey see, monkey do” and the phrase “to ape”
betray the widespread belief that primates, and perhaps primates alone,
copy each other’s behavior. As with so many scientific issues, Darwin

was ahead of his time in recognizing that copying is ubiquitous in
nature. Today, extensive and incontrovertible experimental evidence for
social learning exists in a very wide variety of animals.4
Darwin suspected that a long history of trapping mammalian pests
would select for their “sagacity, caution and cunning,”5 and certainly
rats possess these qualities. Decades of control attempts failed in part
because rats react to any change in their habitat with extreme
apprehension.6 For several years I studied rat behavior. I observed how
any novel food or new object is slowly and stealthily stalked, the body
crouched so low that the belly is almost on the floor, with the rat ready
to turn tail at the slightest provocation. If nothing bad happens the
curious rat will eventually take some food, but feeding will be highly
sporadic at first, with only very small amounts of any new food taken.
Up until the middle of last century, the poisons that humans used
required rats to eat substantial amounts to be lethal, and the modest
amounts of bait ingested frequently just left the rats ill; this would
inadvertently train them to avoid the new food source. Despite the
occasional initial success in reducing pest numbers, after a short period
of trying a new poison, rates of bait acceptance would become
increasingly poor, and colonies would rapidly return to their initial sizes.
In the 1950s, the advent of Warfarin, a slow acting poison, proved a
successful innovation in the battle to control rats, because the pests felt
unwell sufficiently long after consuming the food to not develop bait
shyness. Warfarin-type poisons were used against rats and other rodents
all over the world, but always with only partial success, eventually
giving the population of survivors time to evolve a genetic resistance.
Frustration that rats should remain so stubbornly difficult to
eradicate eventually became the impetus for detailed research into rat
behavior in the middle of the last century. Fritz Steininger, a German
applied ecologist who spent many years studying ways to improve
methods of rodent control, was the first scientist to provide data that
supported Darwin’s belief that rats learn socially to avoid poisons.7
Decades of observation and experiment led Steiniger to the view that
inexperienced rats were dissuaded by experienced individuals from
ingesting potential foods by individuals that had learned the bait was
toxic. This was an important insight, although Steiniger’s interpretation
was not correct in the details. In fact, the information transmission

mechanisms turn out to be multiple, diverse, and subtle. Decades later, a
Canadian psychologist called Jeff Galef—the world’s foremost authority
on animal social learning—finally got to the bottom of this puzzle.
With a beautifully designed series of experiments conducted over
more than 30 years, Galef and his students painstakingly revealed the
multiplicity of means by which the feeding patterns of adult rats
influence the food choices of other rats, particularly the young. Galef
discovered that rats do not actively avoid consuming foods that make
others sick, but do acquire strong preferences for eating foods that
healthy rats have eaten. These mechanisms are so effective that they
support colony-wide dietary traditions that efficiently exploit safe,
palatable, and nutritious foods, while leaving toxic foods largely
untouched.
Remarkably, the transmission mechanisms begin to operate even
before birth. A rat fetus exposed to a flavor while still in its mother’s
womb will, after birth, exhibit a preference for food with that flavor.
Feeding garlic to a pregnant rat enhances the postnatal preference of her
young for the odor of garlic in food.8 The flavors of eaten foods also find
their way into the milk of lactating mothers, and suckling rat pups’
exposure to such flavors is sufficient to culture a subsequent preference
for the same food.9 Later, when rat pups take their first solid meals, they
eat exclusively at food sites where an adult is present,10 primarily
because they follow the adults to these sites and thereby learn cues
associated with food.11 Even when removed from the social group and
presented with foods in isolation, youngsters will eat only those foods
that they have seen adults eat.12
Rats do not even need to be physically present to shape the dietary
decisions of the young. When leaving a feeding site, they deposit scent
trails that direct young rats seeking food to locations where food was
ingested.13 Moreover, feeding adults deposit residual cues in the form of
urine marks and feces, both in the vicinity of a food source and on foods
they are eating.14 As a graduate student at University College London, I
investigated the role that these cues played in transmitting dietary
preferences. I found that rats leave a rich concentration of marks and
feces in the vicinity of food sites,15 cues that effectively contain the
message that “this food is safe to eat.” If I disrupted the cues in any way,
either by cleaning off the urine marks but leaving the feces, or by

removing the feces but not the urine marks, or even by replacing the
food with a different food, the “message” immediately lost its potency,
and other rats no longer preferred that site. Rats seemed attuned to copy
each other faithfully—unless they encountered anything suspicious, in
which instance they would rapidly switch into a cautious mode.
I also found that I could establish experimental traditions for feeding
on particular foods among groups of rats that never met.16 I would place
a bowl containing a flavored food on one side of a clean enclosure and
allow rats to feed there for a few days. Over this period, the rats would
mark the food site. Then I would remove the rats, and place an identical
bowl containing a differently flavored but equally nutritious food on the
other side of the enclosure. Thereafter, every day I would place a new
rat in the enclosure, monitor its feeding and marking behavior, and then
remove it. I found that the rats would maintain traditions, lasting several
days, for eating the foods at the original, marked food bowls—traditions
that were upheld over several iterations of replacing the inhabitants. The
olfactory cues laid by the original rats lost their potency within 48
hours, which means that for the traditions to be maintained for days,
rats must not only choose to feed at marked sites but also reinforce the
markings of other rats.
Yet none of the aforementioned processes are thought to be the
primary means by which rats transmit dietary preferences. After a rat
feeds, other rats will attend to food-related odor cues on its breath, as
well as the scent of food on its fur and whiskers, allowing them to
identify the foods that others have eaten.17 The effects of exposure to a
recently fed rat on the food choices of its fellows can be surprisingly
powerful, and sufficient to override prior preferences and aversions
completely.18 In combination with the other mechanisms for the
transmission of dietary preferences, such as scent marks that stabilize
transmission,19 these cues can generate colony-specific traditions for
eating particular foods.20 In this manner, colonies of rats are able to
track changes in the palatability and toxicity of diverse and changing
foodstuffs efficiently, a critical adaptation for an opportunistic,
scavenging omnivore that must subsist on a diverse and constantly
changing diet in a dangerous and unpredictable world.
This chapter provides a brief overview of the evidence for social
learning in animals. My objective is to demonstrate the ubiquity of

copying in nature. Learning from others is an extremely prevalent trick
that animals rely on to acquire the skills and knowledge necessary to
earn a living in a tough and unforgiving world. All kinds of creatures,
from elephants and whales to ants and wood crickets, exploit the
wisdom others have accrued. That wisdom, whether it relates to foods,
predators, or mates, is absolutely vital to the animal’s survival. Later in
this book I will show that the diverse roles that social learning plays in
the lives of many social animals provides the foundations from which
complex cognition evolved.
The ability shown by rats to exploit diet cues on the breath of others
is found in several rodent species, as well as dogs and bats.21 Other
animals possess analogous mechanisms. For instance, fish are famously
slimy because they produce a mucus secretion that coats their body; it
helps them to swim efficiently by reducing drag and protects them from
external parasites, which get washed off. My postgraduate student Nicola
Atton found that the slime of some fish has evolved an additional
quality. The fish secrete food cues in their mucus, as well as in their
urine, to which other fish attend. If a recently fed fish emits chemical
cues of stress at the same time as these food cues, other fish seemingly
draw the inference that the new food is one to be avoided. Conversely,
when there are no such stress chemicals in the water, the mucus cues are
acted upon and observing fish rapidly develop a preference for the newly
consumed diet.22 Bumblebees possess a similar mechanism; when
successful foragers bring home nectar to the nest, they deposit the
scented solution in honeypots, where other colony members sample it
and thereby acquire a preference for the floral scent.23 Eating what
others eat is a highly adaptive strategy, provided effective mechanisms
are in place to prevent “bad” information from spreading.
The pervasiveness of animal social learning is a recent revelation that
has surprised the scientific community.24 Thirty years ago, when I first
started studying animal social learning and tradition, there was a strong
belief among researchers that social learning was predominantly found
in large-brained animals. We were, of course, all aware of cases such as
the spread of milk-bottle opening in birds, where a dozen or so species,
including great tits and blue tits, starting pecking open the foil caps of
milk bottles delivered by milkmen to European doorsteps, to drink the
cream.25 Also well established was the finding that many songbirds learn

their songs from adult tutors, and that such learning could generate
vocal dialects in different geographical locations.26 Regional variation in
the songs of several birds had been documented, notably in white-
crowned sparrows and chaffinches, and this was often referred to as
“cultural” variation.27 However, milk-bottle opening and bird song were
widely regarded as specialized mechanisms that did not imply the
species concerned were capable of learning additional behavioral habits
from others. Researchers tended to assume that natural selection had
fashioned dedicated mechanisms in these animals that allowed them to
acquire particular kinds of information socially, rather than resulting in
a general copying competence. Likewise, the famous waggle dance of the
honeybees,28 which transmitted information about the location of food
sources, was regarded as a specialized adaptation, tailored to a narrow
species-specific context; it was thought to be a trait analogous, rather
than homologous, to human culture.
If there was a paradigmatic exemplar of animal social learning it was
sweet-potato washing in Japanese macaques. In 1953 a young female
Japanese macaque called Imo, whose troop lived on the small Islet of
Koshima in Japan, began washing sweet potatoes in a freshwater stream
before eating them.29 Imo’s troop had been provisioned with this novel
food on the beach by Japanese primatologists. Seemingly, the food
washing functioned to remove dirt and sand grains prior to eating, and
that a monkey should exhibit such hygienic behavior appeared
remarkably civilized and humanlike, and excited considerable attention.
The habit spread, and soon other monkeys in the troop were washing
the provisioned food, either in the stream or in the sea. When, three
years after her first invention, Imo devised a second novel foraging
behavior, that of separating wheat from sand by throwing mixed
handfuls into water and scooping out the floating grains,30 she was
destined to become something of a celebrity. Renowned Harvard
biologist Edward Wilson characterized Imo as “a monkey genius,”31
while Jane Goodall, an eminent authority on chimpanzee behavior,
described her as “gifted.”32 Whether such plaudits are justified is an issue
taken up in a later chapter. What is not in doubt, however, is that Imo’s
inventions spread through the troop. What is more, this was no fluke;
macaques exhibit many behavioral traditions.33
In the 1970s and 1980s, primatologist Bill McGrew compiled

evidence 
for 
diverse 
behavioral 
traditions 
among 
chimpanzee
populations in Africa.34 Evidence began to emerge for traditional
behavior in several other apes and monkeys too, and the impression that
social learning was a distinctive characteristic of primates became highly
prevalent.35 As we humans are both cerebral and highly reliant on social
learning, researchers, perhaps naturally, linked these attributes and
began to assume that effective copying would be restricted to those
species most closely related to ourselves. This intuition proved to be
entirely fallacious.
Certainly, social learning is widespread in monkeys and apes. The
most celebrated example concerns the distinctive tool-using traditions of
chimpanzees throughout Africa, which were brought to prominence
through a landmark article in the journal Nature by developmental
psychologist Andrew Whiten and his colleagues.36 Some chimpanzee
populations use stalks to probe for termites, others fish for ants or honey
in the same manner, and still others crack open nuts with stone
hammers. Each region has chimpanzees with their own repertoire of
habits,37 and each repertoire extends far beyond the foraging domain.
Less well known are learned traditions for grooming with particular
postures, dancing in the rain, and using plants as medicines.38
Developmental data provide evidence that these behavior patterns are
acquired through social learning.39 For instance, chimpanzees at Gombe
National Park in Tanzania will insert stalks and other probes into termite
mounds to extract the termites. Primatologist Elizabeth Lonsdorf found
that the amount of time mothers spend termite fishing correlates
strongly with the number of aspects of this fishing that young
chimpanzees acquired.40 Revealingly, young females spent lots of time
watching their mothers, and thereby acquired the same technique, while
sons spent far less time watching, and their foraging technique did not
correlate with their mothers’.41
Orangutans,42 another close relative of humans, also share distinctive
group-specific traditions for feeding, nesting, and communicating.43 Like
chimpanzees, many orangutan cultural behaviors involve foraging with
tools, such as using leaves to handle spiny fruits or scooping water out of
a crevice in a tree. Others relate to building behavior, such as
manufacturing an umbrellalike cover for protection from the elements,
and communication signals such as the “kiss-squeak”; for the latter,

orangutans use their hands as a sound box to make their calls sound
deeper, thereby making themselves sound bigger in order to ward off
predators. The function of some orangutan habits remains a puzzle. For
instance, at least three populations have the curious habit of blowing
raspberries as they go to sleep.44 Other orangutan traditions are
remarkably evocative of human behavior. That orangutans might make
“cups” for drinking rainwater from leaves, or “beds” to sleep in, is
perhaps not too much of a surprise. However, two populations of Borneo
orangutans have been observed to make themselves a bundle of leaves
which they cuddle at bedtime like a doll.45
Equally striking are the bizarre social conventions found in Costa
Rica’s capuchin monkeys, brought to prominence through many years of
careful study by UCLA primatologist Susan Perry and her coworkers.46
These researchers found that specific monkey populations possess some
quite extraordinary regional habits, including sniffing each other’s
hands, sucking of each other’s body parts, and placing fingers in the
mouths and eyes of other monkeys.47 For instance, in one group found in
the Lomas Barbudal reserve, pairs of monkeys commonly insert their
fingers in each other’s nostrils simultaneously and remain in this pose for
several minutes, sometimes swaying in a trance-like state. In two other
groups (Cuajiniquil and Station Troop), hand sniffing is combined with
finger-sucking behavior, while monkeys at Pelon engage in eyeball
poking, where a finger is inserted between the other monkey’s eyelid
and eyeball up to the knuckle (figure 1). The monkeys are thought to use
these group-or clique-specific social conventions to test the quality of
their social relationships. Likewise, while the Japanese macaques’ food-
washing habits make functional sense, the tradition, observed in some
populations of this species, to bang together rocks for hours on end
remains a complete mystery.48 Perhaps it is the precursor of some
musical tendency, perhaps it is a social signal, or perhaps it is a
dysfunctional byproduct of boredom, or excess time.
Yet while the prevalence and diversity of their traditions leave no
doubt that social learning is vital to many primate species, they do not
preclude the possibility that copying is equally central to other animals.
As ever, Darwin was more perceptive than most. In an 1841 letter he
wrote to a periodical called The Gardeners’ Chronicle, Darwin noted that
some honeybees had adopted the bumblebee’s habit of cutting holes in

flowers to rob them of nectar, and speculated that this trick had been
acquired through interspecific copying. He wrote:
Should this be verified, it will, I think, be a very instructive case of
acquired knowledge in insects. We should be astonished did one genus
of monkeys adopt from another a particular manner of opening hard-
shelled fruit; how much more so ought we to be in a tribe of insects so
pre-eminent for their instinctive faculties.49
FIGURE 1. White-faced capuchins in Costa Rica possess extraordinary social conventions, which
vary from one population to the next. Here two adult females (Rumor and Sedonia) from the
Pelon group demonstrate the curious local traditions of hand sniffing and eyeball poking. Rumor,
a serial innovator, is thought to have invented eyeball poking. By permission of Susan Perry.
Whether Darwin was right about honeybees copying bumblebees is
difficult now to determine,50 but we do now know that the bumblebee’s
habit of nectar robbing, no less than the monkey’s use of tools to crack
open nuts, is a socially transmitted tradition.
Not just knowledge of what to eat, but where to find food and how to

process it, are often socially transmitted among animals. Countless
species, from very diverse taxonomic groups, acquire relevant foraging
knowledge through interaction with, or observation of, other animals.
One of the most compelling studies was carried out by Norwegian Tore
Slagsvold and Canadian Karen Wiebe, a team of animal behaviorists who
studied social learning in the wild by moving eggs of blue tits to nests of
great tits,51 and vice versa (this experimental procedure is known as
“cross-fostering”).52 These birds live close to one another and forage in
mixed-species flocks, but have quite distinct feeding niches, which until
recently had been assumed to be the result of evolved, unlearned
preferences. Blue tits feed mainly from twigs high in trees, eating buds,
grubs, and moths; whereas great tits feed mostly on the ground or on the
trunks and thicker branches of trees, consuming larger invertebrate food
items. Like many animals, these birds forage together in mixed-species
groups because large numbers provide a more effective defense against
predators compared to small aggregations, and gathering with these
particular flock mates has the additional advantage of not having to
compete for food.
Slagsvold and Wiebe were able to quantify the consequences of being
reared by foster parents from a different species in an environment
otherwise natural to the birds. The cross-fostering approach dramatically
demonstrated an effect of early learning on a large number of
behaviors.53 Blue tits reared by great tits adopted great tit foraging
habits, and vice versa. The height at which the birds foraged in trees, as
well as their type and size of prey, shifted in the direction of the foster
species as a result of this social learning experience. The great tits
sometimes even tried to forage hanging upside down like their blue tit
foster parents, even though they kept falling off! The birds’ nest-site
choices exhibited a similar shift toward the foster parents’ inclinations,54
as did mating preferences,55 song variants,56 and alarm calls.57 The birds
learned an enormous part of their species-typical behavioral repertoire
socially.
Countless other studies provide evidence that diverse behavior
patterns are learned socially. Dolphins possess traditions for foraging
using sponges as probing tools to flush out fish hiding on the sea
bottom.58 Killer whales have seal-hunting traditions, including the
method of knocking seals off ice floes by charging toward them in

unison and creating a giant wave.59 Archerfish, who dramatically shoot
down flying insect prey by spitting droplets of water at them, can learn
this habit through observing others.60 Animals as distinct as meerkats
and honeybees share population-specific bedtime habits, some groups
being early and others being late risers—such traditions cannot be
explained by ecological differences.61 Even chickens can acquire
bloodthirsty cannibalistic habits through social learning.62 This
experimental study found that watching other birds feed on blood
sufficed to elicit cannibalistic tendencies. Cannibalism is widespread in
the animal kingdom, both in wild populations and in factory-farmed
poultry; it is a serious welfare problem in the latter, and understanding
its causes has major economic ramifications.63
The ubiquitous influence of social learning in nature is beautifully
illustrated by the example of mate-choice copying, where an animal’s
choice of partner is shaped by the mating decisions of other, same-sex
individuals. This form of copying is extremely widespread, with
examples known among insects,64 fishes,65 birds,66 and mammals,67
including humans.68 The fact that animals do not require a big brain to
copy could not be more clearly demonstrated than by the tendency of
tiny female fruit flies to select male flies that other females have chosen
as mates.69
Nor is mate-choice copying restricted to cases where individuals
directly observe the courtship or mating of others; just like the little
messages left by rats with their excretory deposits, indirect cues of
mating choices can have the same effect. In many fish species, males
build nests and females select among these nests to decide where to lay
their eggs. Usually this decision is based on the female’s assessment of
the male’s quality, but in some species her choice depends more on the
characteristics of the male’s nest. In some species, females nest choice
has been shown to be influenced by the number of eggs already within,
with popular nests becoming increasingly successful.70 Seemingly, female
fish interpret the presence of a large haul of eggs as an indication that
many females have chosen the nest’s owner as a mate, and infer that he
must be a high-caliber male. Getting a threshold number of eggs in one’s
nest is so vital to attracting females that in some species males have
actually been observed to steal eggs from other nests to increase their
future success.71 Evolutionary biologists tend to assume that male

animals will do what they can to avoid being “cuckolded” and raising
another male’s offspring. However, here male fish embrace such
cuckolding as a means to manipulate females and enhance their own
reproductive success.
Perhaps the best-studied example of mate-choice copying is in the
guppy,72 a small South American tropical fish popular with aquarium
enthusiasts. Biologist Lee Dugatkin at the University of Louisville
conducted a series of experiments in which two male guppies were
placed behind transparent partitions at either end of an aquarium, with
a “demonstrator” female fish near one of the males, giving the
impression that she had chosen him as a mate.73 A focal female was then
placed into the middle of the tank and allowed to observe the males.
Subsequently, the demonstrator female was removed, and the focal
female freed to swim throughout the aquarium, which allowed the two
males to court her. The experiment found that focal females spent a
significantly greater amount of time in the vicinity of the male that had
been near the female; that is, her mate-choice decision had seemingly
been influenced by the apparent choice of the demonstrator fish. As with
the rats picking up cues on the breath of other rats, this mate-choice
copying effect was strong enough to reverse prior preferences.74 Males
hitherto regarded as unappealing suddenly became of interest to a
female, once other females appeared to choose them.
Another small tropical fish, the Atlantic molly,75 also exhibits mate-
choice copying.76 However, here males also engage in copying behavior,
preferring females that other males have selected as mates. Interestingly,
this has led to natural selection favoring deceptive behavior in these fish
as a male strategy to reduce the competition. When their courtship is
being watched by rivals, male mollies switch to courting the lesser
preferred of two females to mislead the observer into pursuing the less
attractive quarry!77 Remarkably, humans aside, the male Atlantic molly’s
behavior is the only known example of deliberate deception to hinder
social learning in the animal kingdom. In principle, one of the major
problems with a copying strategy is that it may not be in the copied
individual’s interests to ensure that the copier receives accurate
information. Why, in spite of this, animal social learning should remain
largely honest is an issue to which we will return in later chapters.
Social learning proves important in domains other than foraging and

mate choice. Previously mentioned is the extensive experimental
evidence that many male songbirds learn their songs from their fathers,
or more commonly, from neighboring adult males, with this learning
frequently generating local song variant traditions known as dialects.78
Recent studies demonstrate the existence of vocal traditions in many
mammals as well, particularly in whales and dolphins.79 Much of this
research has focused on bottlenose dolphins,80 killer whales,81 and
humpback whales.82 For instance, all males in a humpback whale
population share a song that changes gradually through the singing
season, an alteration much too rapid to be explained by changes in
genes.83 Rather, humpback whales appear to acquire their songs through
social learning, with continuously introduced changes then dispersed
from whale to whale throughout the ocean. However, the songs that are
sung by humpbacks in the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Oceans are quite
distinct. Occasionally these tunes are seen to undergo a revolution.
Strikingly, in 1996 in the Pacific Ocean just off the east coast of
Australia, two humpback whales were first heard singing a novel song
that differed substantially from the dominant song of the other eighty
humpback whales in the vicinity. A year later, other whales were singing
the new song, and by 1998, only two years after its introduction, all
recorded whales in the Pacific were singing the new tune.84 The novel
variant resembled the song sung by Indian Ocean whales, on the other
side of Australia, leading to the hypothesis that a small number of
humpbacks had swum from one ocean to the other, bringing their catchy
song along with them. More recent work suggests that such song
revolutions may occur on a regular basis, and intriguingly always spread
in the same direction, like cultural ripples extending eastward through
populations in the western and central South Pacific.85
For many animals, important locations such as profitable food
patches, areas safe from predation, resting sites, suitable areas to find
mates and reproduce, as well as safe routes between these locations,
must be learned. Fishes provide some of the best evidence for this form
of social learning.86 Many fish species exhibit learned traditions for
reusing mating sites, schooling sites, resting sites, feeding sites, and
pathways through their natural environments, repeatedly returning to
the same locations for each activity on a regular daily, seasonal, or
annual basis.87 For instance, socially learned mating site traditions have

been found to be present in bluehead wrasse,88 whose mating-site
locations in the Caribbean coral reefs remain in place over many
generations. In theory, such traditions need not be indicative of social
learning—genetic differences, or variation in the local ecology, could
underlie any behavioral differences between populations. To investigate
the role that learning played, evolutionary ecologist Robert Warner,
from the University of California at Santa Barbara, removed entire
populations of the wrasse and replaced them with other transplanted
wrasse populations. Warner reasoned that if it was features of the
environment or ecology that determined mating sites, then the new
populations would adopt the same sites as had the old ones. Conversely,
if these were learned traditions then there would be no reason to expect
the new populations to adopt the same mating sites as the previous
inhabitants.
Warner found that the wrasses established entirely new mating sites,
which remained constant over the 12-year period of the study.89
However, in a later study, when Warner replaced newly established
populations after just one month, he found that the introduced fish used
the same sites as their immediate predecessors.90 Apparently, the fish
initially choose mating sites and pathways based on their assessment of
the optimal use of resources in the environment, and then these
behavioral 
patterns 
become 
established 
as 
learned 
traditions.
Subsequently, when aspects of the environment changed, the tradition
was preserved, and the behavior of the fish was different than that
expected from considerations of ecology alone. This phenomenon is
known as “cultural inertia,”91 named after cases such as the Viking
settlement in Greenland, which collapsed because the settlers failed to
adjust their culture to the new environmental conditions.92 High levels of
intermixing observed during the early life of the wrasse suggest that reef
populations are not subject to significant genetic differentiation;
combined with the observed traditionality, this research provides
compelling evidence of cultural variation.
Field studies on learned migratory traditions like these in fish were
the inspiration for some experiments that my students and I carried out
in the laboratory. We wanted to evaluate the hypothesis that fish could
acquire knowledge of the location of important resources simply by
following knowledgeable individuals. Kerry Williams, an undergraduate

student at the University of Cambridge, carried out a small-scale version
of the fish migration studies to investigate the underlying mechanisms.93
Over repeated trials, Kerry trained demonstrator guppies to take one of
two alternative routes to a food source in laboratory aquaria. Then she
introduced untrained fish into the populations, who tended to shoal with
their demonstrators, and thereby take the same route to food. After five
days of trials, the subjects were tested alone, and showed a significant
preference for taking the same route as their demonstrators, despite the
presence of an alternative route of equal distance and complexity. Kerry
had shown that simply by shoaling with experienced individuals, fish
could learn a route to food. Moreover, the more demonstrator fish that
were swimming the route, the more effectively the experimental subjects
learned. Multiple demonstrators reinforced each other’s behavior to
enhance their reliability and provide a very strong, clear indication of
which route to take.94
We went on to conduct experiments using a transmission chain
design, where small shoals were trained to take one of two routes, and
these trained “founders” were then gradually replaced by naive
individuals to see if the route preferences were retained in spite of the
turnover in shoal composition.95 Sure enough, several days after the
original founders had been removed, the route preferences were still
being maintained in the groups. Even when one route was substantially
longer and more energetically costly than the alternative, it was still
being widely used by individuals whose founders had been trained to
swim that way.
Later, at the University of St Andrews, we demonstrated that not just
routes, but also foraging techniques, could be maintained as traditions in
laboratory populations.96 We trained demonstrator fish to feed by
swimming directly up into narrow vertical tubes that were closed at the
top—a challenge that required them to swim in a manner not normally
observed in these fish. In spite of its simplicity, this was a foraging task
that the fish could not solve by themselves without training. While
trained individuals reliably fed from these tubes, no naive fish presented
with a vertical tube ever learned to feed from it on its own. However,
when placed in groups with experienced demonstrators, untrained fish
rapidly learned to feed from the vertical tubes, and traditions could be
established that maintained this novel foraging behavior through social

learning.
The laboratory traditions established by these experiments lasted
days or weeks rather than years, but nonetheless suggest plausible
mechanisms underlying the more stable traditions witnessed in natural
populations.97 Our experiments have established that fish prefer to join
large shoals compared with small shoals,98 and exhibit a tendency to
adopt the majority behavior.99 Simple processes like shoaling, copying
the behavior of others when uncertain, and disproportionately attending
to the behavior of groups collectively generate traditions that can
become extremely stable, even to the point of preserving arbitrary and
even maladaptive behavior.100 It is these simple mechanisms that
generate the cultural inertia observed in wild populations. Evolutionary
biologists tend to expect that animals will match their behavior
optimally to the environment, and often that appears to be the case.
However, field experiments, like Robert Warner’s wrasse study, show
how the mating and schooling sites of natural populations cannot always
be predicted from features of the environment, while controlled
laboratory experiments help to unravel why.101
Similar processes may underpin the long-distance annual migrations
exhibited by birds. A recent study by ecologist Thomas Mueller of the
University of Maryland provides compelling evidence that, among
migrating whooping cranes, more experienced birds transmit route
knowledge to less experienced individuals.102 Mueller and his colleagues
devised an innovative training regime for a reintroduced population of
migratory whooping cranes using ultralight aircraft. Captive-bred birds
were trained to follow the aircraft on their first lifetime migration. For
subsequent migrations, in which birds flew individually or in groups, the
researchers found a dominant influence of social learning on migratory
performance. The data strongly imply that younger birds typically learn
aspects of the route by flying with more experienced birds. The same
pattern is even observed in insects. For instance, when they are novice
foragers, honeybees are more likely to follow the instructions encoded in
dances for locating food sites rather than to search independently, while
experienced foragers typically only follow dances if their previous trip
was unsuccessful.103
This brief overview of the extent of social learning in nature would
be incomplete without mention of one last domain in which it proves

critical—recognizing and escaping predators. Avoiding being eaten is
obviously a major priority for any animal, but gaining accurate
knowledge of predators is not easy. While many species possess evolved
antipredator mechanisms, overreliance on preestablished predator-
evasion strategies would be disastrous if any novel predator with a new
tactic appeared on the scene. A changing world requires animals to
update their antipredator behavior continuously through learning. Yet
this is a domain in which learning through trial and error is extremely
difficult, because with the very first error an animal will likely end up
inside the predator’s stomach. No surprise, then, that the social
transmission of fears and antipredator behavior should be one of the
most prevalent forms of copying in nature.
Rhesus monkeys,104 which live in the grasslands and forests of Asia,
are vulnerable to a number of predators, including big cats, dogs,
raptors, and particularly snakes. However, rhesus monkeys reared in
captivity exhibit no fear of snakes, which shows the antipredator
behavior found in natural populations is learned. In fact, youngsters only
learn that snakes are a threat when they see more experienced monkeys
responding fearfully to the snake with screams, facial expressions of
terror, and desperate attempts to escape. Careful experiments have
allowed researchers to establish that this observational experience allows
young macaques to learn the identity of predators by developing an
association between the snake stimulus and the fearful response of other
monkeys, which triggers an emotional response in them.105 The
experimenters showed monkeys either live presentations, or video
footage, of other monkeys reacting fearfully to snakes or, through clever
experimental manipulations, to objects that do not normally induce fear
—such as flowers—and subsequently tested their response to the same
stimuli.106 When ecologically relevant objects such as snakes were used,
the resulting fear learning in the observer was rapid and strong.107 A
single social encounter with a fearful monkey combined with a snake
produced a robust fear response in the observer that lasted several
months.108 However, no such conditioning occurred with fear-irrelevant
stimuli. Findings such as these strongly imply that the observational
fear-learning mechanism has been tailored by natural selection to be
biased toward the recognition of genuine threats. An advantage of
learning about predators in this manner is that it potentially allows

monkeys to acquire a fear of any kind of snake, irrespective of its color
or size, and to do so very rapidly, but not to acquire superstitious fears
of safe objects in their environment, such as flowers.
The specificity of the monkey’s fear learning stands in contrast with
the findings of a similar study of predator learning in European
blackbirds.109 These birds often aggregate to drive off threats, swooping
down to harass owls, hawks, and other predators. Young birds learn to
recognize danger in part through witnessing this mobbing behavior.
Through clever experimental manipulations, Ernst Curio and his
colleagues from Ruhr University Bochum in Germany, were able to trick
young blackbirds into thinking the adults were mobbing a stuffed owl, a
harmless friarbird, and even a plastic bottle; afterward, the young birds
would mob all of these stimuli, seemingly convinced that they were
dangerous.110 Apparently, in these birds, unlike the monkeys, natural
selection has not yet effectively fine-tuned the selectivity of their fear
learning.
Given the clear adaptive value of acquiring fears through the
comparative safety of observing others, it should come as no surprise
that many animals, including insects, fishes, birds, mice, cats, cows, and
primates, all do so.111 Researchers are currently exploiting this
observational learning capability to enhance conservation and restocking
efforts.112 For instance, Culum Brown, an Australian biologist who spent
a period as a postdoctoral researcher in my laboratory at Cambridge,
discovered that showing young salmon “video nasties” of other salmon
being eaten by a pike was sufficient to train them to avoid large
predators, a crucial life skill for a young fish. He was also able to “teach”
salmon fry to consume appropriate novel foods by watching more
experienced fish.113 Subsequently, some Queensland hatcheries exploited
our social learning protocols as part of their efforts to enhance the
returns of salmon and other fish introduced into rivers for restocking.
Hatchery fish are typically reared in huge vats in unnaturally high
densities and fed pellet food, and when released in their millions must
rapidly learn to recognize foods and predators, or die. Historically,
survival rates have been only a few percent. Just a little prerelease
training can make a big difference to both survival rates and hatchery
returns.
This brief tour of the prevalence of copying in nature only scratches

the surface of the myriad of different ways in which animals exploit
information provided by others. The animal behavior research literature
is replete with social learning experiments, reports of novel behavior
spreading through animal populations, and traditional differences
between populations, which number into the thousands. I have
presented examples from some of the better-studied functional domains
in some of the most intensively researched animal systems. However,
social learning is so useful that it crops up in contexts that are far less
intuitive, including some instances in which science has yet to
understand the function of the transmitted behavior. Far from being
restricted to clever, large-brained, or cognitively sophisticated animals,
or to those closely related to ourselves, copying is everywhere in nature,
at least among animals complex enough to be capable of associative
learning. Animals regularly invent new solutions to problems, and these
innovations often spread through the population, sometimes generating
behavioral differences akin to “cultures.” Darwin was correct in his
belief that animal behavior is not completely controlled by “instincts”
and “innate tendencies,”114 but is also influenced by learned and socially
transmitted wisdom. The prevalence of copying, and the success that it
brings animals as different as bees, rats, and orangutans testifies to its
utility.
We humans also exhibit extensive social learning. Like the monkeys,
children can acquire a strong and persistent aversive response to a fear-
relevant object—including a toy snake—after seeing it paired with their
mothers’ fear expressions.115 Children with animal phobias or extreme
fears toward certain situations, such as darkness, often report having
observed parents fearful in the same or similar situations.116 While such
phobias may appear problematical, they are the outcome of a highly
adaptive process. As a general strategy, it makes perfect sense for us to
become fearful of anything that elicits fear in other humans. Copying
others is a highly adaptive strategy and one in which, as further chapters
will document, humanity has become particularly adept.
The research described in this chapter raises a rather obvious, but no
less fascinating, question: What is so good about copying that it should
be so widespread in nature? This seemingly innocent question is packed
with hidden complexity. At first sight, the answer seems obvious—
copying allows animals rapidly to acquire valuable knowledge and skills.

However, evolutionary biologists have struggled with this answer for
decades, because mathematical models show that intuition is not quite
correct. The theory implied that copying was often as likely to lead to
the transmission of inappropriate or outdated ideas as good ones, and
hence would not guarantee success. Such analyses suggested that asocial
learning was what allowed populations to track their changing
environments. Why it should pay to copy others escalated into a major
scientific conundrum known as “Rogers’ paradox,” after the University of
Utah anthropologist Alan Rogers, who first drew attention to it.117 Only
in the last few years has the answer finally become clear. An
international competition finally solved the problem, and that
competition and the insights that it gleaned are the topic of the next
chapter.

CHAPTER 3
WHY COPY?
The proudest moment of my academic career was when a photograph of
my three-year-old son appeared in the pages of Science. The picture,
which showed me mowing the lawn with a small boy joyfully pushing a
toy mower in my wake, was featured in a commentary accompanying a
scientific article of mine in the same edition (figure 2).1 Our article was
about copying—it presented findings that explained both why copying is
so widespread in nature, and why we humans happen to be so good at it
—leaving the picture wonderfully apt. Rarely does parental pride and
academic achievement coincide so perfectly.
You might be forgiven for thinking that I had staged a photo shoot
for the magazine’s pages, but in fact the photograph had been taken
years earlier, in the garden of our previous home, where that toy lawn
mower had been pushed up and down on hundreds of occasions. Every
time I mowed the lawn my son would rush out and grab his mower to
accompany me. For years he did this, and didn’t completely stop until he
was around ten. On rational grounds, it is hard to understand why
imitating a father in this way should have brought so much pleasure, but
it did.
Readers who are parents will likely recall similar imitative tendencies
among their own offspring. Young children very commonly go through a
phase when they copy a person with whom they identify, or to whom
they are emotionally attached. Between the ages of two and four my son
seemed constantly to be copying everything I did. I remember a little toy
shaving kit, with plastic razor and fake shaving cream, gleefully opened
by a jubilant toddler each time I shaved. With the arrival of his little
sister, the imitator became the imitated. Our young daughter latched on
to her big brother, following him everywhere and copying what he said
and did. On one occasion my son decided to try to turn off the light

switch by hitting it, hurting his hand in the process. In spite of his yelp
of pain and tears, his sister immediately tried the same trick.
FIGURE 2. Like father, like son. The author’s lawn-mowing behavior was enthusiastically copied
for many years. The tendency for imitation among infants is not only critical to child
development, but may have played a pivotal role in the evolution of the human mind. By
permission of Gillian Brown.
The phenomenon of children being so imitative has been the focus of
intense scientific research by developmental psychologists for decades.2
Classic experiments by Stanford psychologist Albert Bandura in the
1960s established that young children could acquire violent behavior
after watching adults behave aggressively toward an inflatable “Bobo

doll.”3 Bandura’s experiments are widely credited with changing the face
of modern psychology; they demonstrated how human beings frequently
learn through observation, rather than through direct reward or
punishment. Obviously, children do not just acquire aggressive
tendencies through social learning, but also pick up useful skills and
knowledge in this manner. However, the fact that imitation waxes and
wanes at an early age and peaks around age four, but never completely
disappears, suggests that childhood imitation also serves a social
function—to cement relationships.4
Imitation is far from the only form of social learning in which
humans engage. Much information is acquired through direct
instruction, or through subtler motivational or attentional processes, but
imitation is unquestionably an important form of human social learning.
Even where, as in the above examples, social learning appears irrational
and slavish, the copying is still discriminating. Children do not copy
everything that they see and hear, but imitate strategically, according to
a set of rules. Those rules might sometimes appear curious or even
bizarre, but social learning researchers have made sense of them with
the use of principles derived from evolutionary theory.
Most human beings—even those with no particular scholastic bent—
exhibit an insatiable thirst for knowledge. From the moment we are born
to the day we die, we drink up a virtual ocean of cultural information.
So much knowledge is acquired from others that it is easy to forget we
are actually highly selective about how and what we learn. Even leaving
formal education to one side, our formative years entail a constant
uptake of knowledge and skills as we learn from parents and other
important people in our world how to walk, talk, and play, what is good
behavior and what is bad, how to throw a ball, how to cook, clean,
drive, shop, pray, and what to think about money, religion, politics,
drugs, and countless other matters. Yet, even though human children
may be especially prepared by their evolutionary past to absorb what
others tell them, and despite the fact that we are more culturally
dependent than any other species on earth,5 we remain highly
discriminating about what we copy.
If our social learning was genuinely mindless, then each time we
went to a musical we would burst out singing. Were we really
indiscriminating about our imitation, then every time we saw a violent

movie we would turn into vicious fiends. Of course, the possibility that
television, cinema, and computer-game violence might cause aggression
is a serious and legitimate concern. Numerous studies have found a
correlation between violent video-game play and aggressive behavior.6
However, such findings are not straightforward to interpret because even
if elevated levels of violence were detected in Grand Theft Auto game
addicts, it is difficult to rule out the possibility that people with a violent
disposition are drawn to such video games, rather than made violent by
them. What is clear from such studies is that if causal effects of media
violence on aggression do exist, their influence is relatively subtle.
Media violence may have a terrifying influence on a tiny minority of
susceptible viewers, or perhaps exert a weaker, or shorter-lasting, effect
on a broader subset of users; however, clearly a majority of people are
able to watch movies such as Rambo or Natural Born Killers without
themselves becoming murderers. Copycat crimes do occur, but many of
the people who mimic crimes seen in the media have mental-health
problems or histories of violence.
Copycat suicides also occur, and the possibility is sufficiently real
that as a means of prevention, it is customary in many countries for the
police and media to discourage detail in reporting. On rare occasions,
spates of suicide mimics have spread contagiously through a school or
local community, or—following a celebrity suicide—created a blip in
national statistics. Marilyn Monroe‘s death, for instance, which resulted
from an overdose of barbiturates, was followed by an increase of 200
more suicides than average for that August month.7 However
individually tragic, such cases remain exceptional; many hundreds of
millions of people learned of Marilyn Monroe’s death without following
suit.
Relevant here are experimental studies of childhood social learning
that report a tendency for humans to engage in what has been dubbed
“overimitation,” whereby when learning to perform a task, children, but
not chimpanzees, will copy “irrelevant” actions performed by the
demonstrator.8 A small industry of studies has built up around this basic
finding. However, the characterization of such copying as “unselective,”9
or “inefficient,”10 is highly misleading, as this tendency almost certainly
has a social function,11 with any appearance of blanket copying a likely
artifact of the impoverished experimental setup. More recent

experimental investigations have established that where children see
multiple demonstrations with some individuals, but not others,
performing the irrelevant actions, the children rapidly infer that the
irrelevant actions are unecessary; rates of overimitation then plummet.12
Likewise, when children take part in transmission chain studies in which
the solution to a puzzle box task is passed along a chain, any irrelevant
actions initially introduced by the demonstrators are rapidly dropped
and the transmitted knowledge converges on necessary actions.13 Human
beings copy; they copy a great deal. But they do not copy slavishly.
Slavish copying would not be adaptive.
Copying, or social learning is, of course, not the only means through
which humans acquire new knowledge—we, and other animals too, can
learn through our own efforts, such as through trial and error, which is
called asocial learning. Several theoretical analyses using evolutionary
models have concluded that some mixture of social and asocial learning
is usually necessary for animals to thrive in a variable and changing
environment.14 An intuitive way to see this is by analogy. Wherever
some animals are able to find or produce food, other animals will
typically come along and try to steal it from them. At least for larger or
dominant individuals, scrounging food produced by others is easier than
producing it for themselves. As a result, a group of animals—say, a flock
of starlings or finches that forage together—typically comprises a
balance of food producers and food scroungers.15 In such groups,
producers and scroungers typically receive roughly equivalent amounts
of food.16 This is no coincidence. Animals will switch strategy, from
scrounging to producing, or vice versa, if the alternative strategy proves
more productive. If there are many food producers, it is easy and cheap
to scrounge, but when producers are rare, such that scrounging is not
profitable, then individuals are forced to find their own food. The net
result is a frequency-dependent balance comprising a mix of producers
and scroungers.
The same reasoning applies to learning. Some individuals solve novel
tasks through trial and error, interacting directly with the environment
rather than observing others, and in the process they produce the
knowledge of how to solve the problem. For instance, they might have to
carry out a protracted search to find water or shelter, risk consuming
potentially hazardous substances in order to identify novel foods, or

learn the identity of predators by narrowly escaping being eaten. Such
individuals, known as “asocial learners,” thereby incur significant costs
through their learning.
Asocial learning may be costly but, in contrast to the alternative
strategy of social learning, it garners accurate, reliable, and up-to-date
information. Social learning, on the other hand, is information scrounging.
Through observation, individuals obtain information cheaply from
others—concerning, for instance, where to find shelter or how to escape
predators. However, social learners are vulnerable to acquiring outdated
information or knowledge that is more germane to the individual that
they have copied than to themselves, particularly in a changing or
spatially variable environment. To get reliable information, individuals
need to copy those individuals who have directly interacted with the
environment, including, for instance, asocial learners.17 Consequently,
theoretical studies predict a mixture of social and asocial learning in the
population. In the same way that the foraging returns to producers and
scroungers are expected to be equivalent, mathematical models predict
that the population will reach an equilibrium at which the payoff to
asocial and social learning strategies will be equal. The logic is identical
—if any strategy were more profitable, individuals would switch. In the
language of evolutionary biology, at equilibrium the two strategies of
asocial and social learning are expected to have equal fitness—that is, to
have an equivalent effect on the chances of an individual surviving and
reproducing.18
Anthropologist Alan Rogers first pointed out the “paradox” inherent
in the observation that the fitness of social learners at this equilibrium
would be no greater than that of asocial learners; he made this
conclusion with the help of a mathematical analysis, as mentioned in the
preceding chapter.19 At one level, the finding makes perfect sense. When
social learning is rare, its payoff exceeds that of asocial learning, since
reliable information generated by the prevalent asocial learners is
common in the population. As they possess higher fitness, the proportion
of social learners initially increases through natural selection. However,
as the frequency of social learners rises, there are fewer asocial learners
producing reliable information, and the former become more likely to
pick up misinformation; then the payoff to social learning starts to
decline. At the extreme, if there were no asocial learners present,

everyone would be copying everyone else, but nobody would directly
interact with the environment to determine the best behavior. Then, if
the environment changed—for example, if a new predator appeared on
the scene—the results could be disastrous, because no one would have
learned to identify or evade the novel threat. Under such circumstances,
the fitness of asocial learning exceeds that of social learning, and asocial
learners start to become more prevalent. Accordingly, the population is
expected to evolve to reach a balance of social and asocial learning,
which is known as a mixed evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS),20 where
by definition, the fitness of social learning equals that of asocial
learning.21
As noted earlier, this finding is known as “Rogers’ paradox,”22 so
called because it ostensibly conflicts with the commonly held assertion
that culture enhances biological fitness. Ultimately, fitness in
evolutionary terms comes down to how many descendants one leaves.
Characters with high fitness are those that help organisms to survive and
reproduce, and thereby leave lots of descendants. Human culture
appears to confer high fitness since the spread of technological
innovations has repeatedly led to increases in population size, which
implies more individuals survive and reproduce. Indeed, the main reason
why human culture is thought to be instrumental in our species’ success
is that it is associated with population growth. The world’s population,
which was around a million just 10 thousand years ago, now exceeds 7
billion.23 With the agricultural and industrial revolutions, birth rates and
life expectancy have increased dramatically.24 These data imply that the
spread of advances in technology can increase the average number of
surviving offspring. Against this backdrop, Rogers’ result seems
paradoxical, as it appears to challenge the observation that social
learning underlies our species’ success.
Mathematical models are useful to scientists because they allow us to
play out “what if?” scenarios. For instance, we can’t re-run the tape of
human evolution, but we can use mathematical models to explore how
our ancestors would have evolved if they had certain properties, or were
exposed to particular forms of natural selection. The models provide
answers to such questions. When theory and data don’t coincide it does
not mean that the modeling exercise has failed; to the contrary, such
instances can be highly informative. Rogers’ model assumed that social

learners copied indiscriminately. His findings clearly demonstrated that
unselective copying does not increase absolute fitness over and above
what can be achieved through asocial learning. This leads us to an
important insight: if social learning does truly underlie the human
success story, then our copying cannot be indiscriminate.25
In other words, it pays to copy strategically, but not mindlessly. The
models, like the common sense observations with which this chapter
began, imply that individuals must be selective with respect to when
they rely on social learning and from whom they learn, if their learning
is to be adaptive.26 Through the operation of natural selection over time,
a tendency on the part of humans and other animals to utilize specific
decision-making rules should have evolved;27 we call these rules social
learning strategies,28 and they specify the circumstances under which
individuals should exploit information from others (and equally, when
they should not).
One such rule is that animals should copy when asocial learning is
costly. This rule specifies that when animals can solve problems easily
and cheaply on their own through trial and error, they should do so.
However, when individuals are confronted with a particularly
challenging task that would require a lot of energy or risk to resolve—
perhaps a complicated food-processing task that requires multiple steps
—then they should look to what others are doing, and emulate that.
Another strategy is that animals should copy when uncertain. This is
the suggestion that when individuals are in familiar territory, when they
understand the problem and know ways to resolve it, they should rely on
their own experience. Conversely, when they are thrust into a new
situation—a new environment, for instance, or when confronted with a
novel predator—and they are uncertain of the optimal way to behave,
then they should copy what others are doing.
A third rule is to copy if dissatisfied; that is, when the current behavior
reaps rich dividends, stick with it. But if the behavior leads to poor
returns, imitate what others are doing in the hope of increasing payoffs.
These are all examples of what are known as “when strategies,” because
they dictate when individuals should utilize social information.29
There are also “who strategies” that specify from whom individuals
should acquire their knowledge.30 For instance, individuals could copy
the majority behavior, copy the most prestigious individual, or copy the

individual exhibiting the most successful behavior. All of these rules
have been subject to empirical and theoretical investigation, and all
command some support.31
The trouble is, researchers can easily dream up a very large number
of ostensibly plausible social learning strategies. Individuals could be
biased toward copying kin, familiar individuals, or dominants; they
could prioritize learning from older, more experienced, or more
successful animals; they could watch trends, monitor payoffs to others,
or seek out rapidly spreading variants; or they could copy in a state-
dependent way—for instance, imitating others when pregnant, sick, or
young. Moreover, they can combine these options into convoluted
conditional strategies, such as copy when uncertain and the demonstrators
are all behaving in a consistent way, or copy the dominant when dissatisfied
with current payoffs.32
Such reflections immediately raise the question of which is the best
social learning strategy—or perhaps, more realistically, which strategy is
optimal in a given circumstance. The traditional means to address such
questions is to build mathematical models using, for instance, the
methods of evolutionary game theory or population genetics, which
compute the strategy that has the highest fitness or is expected to be
evolutionarily stable. The reasoning here is that natural selection, acting
over millennia, will have resulted in animal minds that favor the use of
optimal decision-making rules. Working out through mathematics what
strategy is optimal thus leads to a clear prediction regarding what will
be found in nature. This approach is widely used in evolutionary
disciplines, such as evolutionary biology and behavioral ecology, and is
generally very effective. However, it has enjoyed only limited success
when applied to the problem of determining the optimal social learning
strategy.33 That is because such methods allow the relative merits of only
a small number of strategies to be analyzed simultaneously. There are so
many possible social learning strategies that the hypothetical strategy
space is huge. Furthermore, the approach is obviously constrained to
those strategies that the mathematically minded researcher chooses to
analyze. In principle, far superior social learning strategies that nobody
has yet considered could be implemented in the real world.
This problem troubled me for a long time. Members of my laboratory
had carried out experiments that strongly implied animals were copying

strategically. Our findings hinted at the strategies the animals might be
using, although rarely in a truly definitive way. We had also developed
mathematical models to investigate which strategy ought to be
implemented, but we were always haunted by the possibility that what
we thought was the best strategy could actually be superseded by any
number of unconsidered options. How, when we had focused on just two
or three of the most prominent strategies, could we have confidence that
we had found the optimal one, when there were so many alternative
possibilities?
There was another problem too, which also worried me. The data
that we had generated seemed to imply that conditional social learning
strategies—for instance, those that took account of the animal’s state,
the payoff to the copied individual, or the number of individuals
performing each option—would yield higher payoffs than fixed,
inflexible copying strategies. However, this suggested that if and when
we ever found the “optimal” social learning strategy,34 it might require
individuals to engage in quite complex calculations to decide whether to
utilize social information. Were animals really clever enough to make
such computations? I could believe it of chimpanzees, or Japanese
macaques, but studies had shown that fruit flies and wood crickets copy
each other. Was it feasible that even invertebrates were computing
payoffs to others and monitoring frequency dependence? We knew that
if social learning was to be adaptive then it must be used selectively, and
there was every reason to believe that natural selection would refine
animal decision-making to be highly efficient. But that seemed to imply
the copier ought to be smart, and social learning was being reported in
animals that were not renowned for their intelligence. It was all a bit of
a riddle.
What we really needed to make headway was a means to compare
the relative merits of reliance on a very large number of social learning
strategies, including strategies that we hadn’t even dreamed of, all at the
same time. I wrestled with this conundrum for a long time before a
solution arose. Ironically, the answer had been in front of our noses all
along—we just had to copy it.
It struck me one day that the challenge confronting researchers in the
field of social learning was similar to that faced by another group of
researchers in the 1970s investigating the evolution of cooperation. We

wanted to know what was the best way to copy, whereas those
researchers had wanted to know what behavioral strategies were most
likely to lead to cooperation. An economist named Robert Axelrod, who
was professor of political science and public policy at the University of
Michigan, famously made great progress with the cooperation problem
by organizing a tournament (in fact, two tournaments) based on a game
known as the “prisoner’s dilemma.” The game is a useful model for many
real-world situations that involve cooperation.
The prisoner’s dilemma game can be described as follows. Imagine
two criminals are captured by the police and held in solitary
confinement on the same charge. The police don’t have enough evidence
to convict the criminals unless they incriminate each other by testifying
that the other is guilty. The criminals could cooperate with each other
and remain silent, in which case they would both get away with a minor
sentence. Or they could defect, and testify that the other is guilty.
However, if both defect they both get heavy sentences. If one of them
defects, the defector gets off free but the other criminal gets a heavy
sentence. The game is set up in such a way that betraying a partner
offers a greater reward than cooperating. This means that purely
rational, self-interested prisoners would betray their associates, leading
to the two criminals incriminating each other. The game is called the
prisoner’s dilemma because if the two prisoners could both cooperate
they would both be better off than if they both defected, yet each has an
incentive to defect and blame the other for the crime.
Where two players play the prisoner’s dilemma more than once in
succession and they remember the previous actions of their opponent
and adjust their strategy accordingly, the game is called the “iterated
prisoner’s dilemma.” Axelrod invited academic colleagues from all over
the world to devise cooperative strategies and compete in an iterated
prisoner’s dilemma tournament.35 The entered strategies, which varied
widely in their complexity, initial cooperativeness, capacity to forgive
past defection, and so forth, were played off against each other to
determine their effectiveness. The winning strategy, called TIT-FOR-TAT,
was entered by Anatol Rapoport, a psychologist at the University of
Toronto in Canada. Individuals playing TIT-FOR-TAT cooperate on the
first round of the game, and after that copy what the opponent did on
the previous move. Axelrod’s study is widely regarded as one of the most

innovative pieces of behavioral research of the twentieth century, and
proved a real boost for cooperation research, which grew into a major
field of evolutionary biology and in no small part as a result of attention
generated by the tournaments.
Thus inspired, I wondered whether we might be able to provide a
similar impetus to our field of research by organizing a tournament to
work out the best way to learn. We could arrange a competition based
on a game of our own devising; it would be free to enter, open to
everyone, and we would invite people to send in their ideas on how to
copy optimally. We could then investigate how effective each of these
ideas were by pitting them against each other in computer simulations
and comparing their relative performance. If we attracted many entrants,
then a rich vein of new ideas about how best to copy would be
generated. We could even offer prize money to stimulate interest.
Whether anything useful would come out of the exercise was hard to
predict. We certainly hoped that the competition would lead to some
truly general insights into why it paid to copy, and how best to do so,
but this was far from guaranteed. Given the huge amount of work
required, such a competition would be an enormous gamble.
Fortunately, the tournament we organized was to prove a major success,
not only solving the conundrum of why copying is widespread in nature,
but also generating key insights into the mechanisms through which
cultural processes drove the evolution of human cognition.
I managed to secure funding to carry out this project through a grant
from the European Union to myself and colleagues from Sweden and
Italy. The project was a component of a larger research program
investigating cultural evolution called “cultaptation.”36 The wider
program of research combined a variety of empirical and theoretical
approaches to studying social learning and evolution; my role included
overseeing the tournament. The funding allowed me to recruit a
postdoctoral researcher, who would do the bulk of the work in
organizing the competition and analyzing the entries. I took on Luke
Rendell who had a rare background combining social learning research
in whales with expertise in computational biology, and this proved to be
an excellent decision because Luke was superb in the role.
The most challenging initial decision was to devise the tournament
game. Here Axelrod had a major advantage over us, since the prisoner’s

dilemma was already a well-established vehicle for exploring
cooperation; it was a familiar game that everyone knew. However, no
equivalent, established social learning game existed. In making plans, it
became rapidly clear to Luke and me that the whole exercise hung
critically on us getting this game right. The more that we thought about
it, the more it became apparent that it would be very easy for us to
“screw up.” That is, it would be all too easy to come up with a boring
game that no one wanted to enter, or a potentially worthless game with
no meaningful resemblance to any real life problem, or, perhaps most
embarrassing of all, a trivial game for which a rush of entrants would
find the solution.
To guard against these concerns, we decided to recruit a committee
of expert advisers from the fields of social learning, cultural evolution,
and game theory, who could help us to set up the tournament in the
most sensible and productive manner. These advisors were Robert Boyd
at UCLA, Magnus Enquist and Kimmo Eriksson at Stockholm University,
and Marcus Feldman at Stanford. They are among the world’s leading
authorities on cultural evolution and game theory. We also benefitted
from additional help and advice from Robert Axelrod, Laurel Fogarty at
St Andrews, and Stefano Ghirlanda from Bologna University. We were
thrilled to have recruited such an authoritative team.
Over the next 18 months we discussed the structure of the
tournament intensively, trying out various options with computer
simulations and competitions among ourselves. The game went through
three separate iterations, with us twice forced to abandon a design after
problems were recognized, even though we had poured a great deal of
work into it. The second time this happened, when Kimmo and Magnus
pointed out some deficiencies in our planned tournament structure, Luke
and I were devastated. Fortunately, this led to us devising a new
framework, with a neat simplicity to its design.
The framework on which we eventually settled is known as a “multi-
armed bandit.” You will probably be familiar with a “one-armed bandit,”
which is the slot or “fruit” machine found in gambling arcades that is
operated by pulling a lever (or “arm”) on the side. The gambler puts
money in the slot, pulls the lever, and (with a certain probability that
ensures the owner makes a healthy profit) may get a cash payoff. Now
imagine a fruit machine with a hundred separate levers, each with a

different probability of giving a payout. Given sufficient practice, a
committed player could work out which levers give good or poor
returns. That challenge of working out which levers to pull is analogous
to our game.
We imagined a hypothetical population of organisms—let’s call them
agents—that had to survive in a novel, challenging, and changing world.
For instance, the agents could be castaways on a tropical island, forced
to survive and find food through their own devices. Agents could hunt
rabbits, fish in rivers, dig for tubers, gather fruit, sow crops, and so forth.
We contrived a hundred such alternative behavior patterns that agents
could perform, each with its own characteristic payoff. In our simulated
world, a small number of these behavior patterns had very high payoffs,
but a much larger number of behavior patterns gave poor returns.37
Hence, like the gambler at the multi-armed slot machine, successful
agents needed to identify which of the behavior patterns were really
profitable, and to perform these extensively. In evolutionary terms, the
greater the payoffs they accumulated throughout their lives, the fitter
the agents became.
Whether it pays to, say, grow barley, or hunt buffalo, varies from one
time to the next, depending on the weather, season, or fluctuations in
prey availability. So it was in our game, with the simulated environment
changing regularly and leading to changes in the payoffs associated with
each behavior. This framework, known as a “restless” bandit, has the
advantage of proving extremely difficult, perhaps impossible, to
optimize analytically,38 which meant we could be confident that our
tournament would prove a tough challenge for the entrants. We also
simulated evolution by choosing agents at random to die, and replacing
them with the descendants of those other agents who had accrued
elevated fitness through performing high-payoff behaviors. An agent’s
offspring inherited their parent’s social learning strategy, and as a result,
effective strategies would increase in frequency within the population
through natural selection.
The tournament was structured into a number of rounds, and in each
round each agent must perform one of three possible moves. These
moves were INNOVATE, OBSERVE, or EXPLOIT. INNOVATE represented
asocial learning. Playing INNOVATE led the agent to learn a new
behavior,39 as well as the payoff to that behavior, without error. Agents

had to learn new behaviors because they were born with no behavior in
their repertoire and therefore needed to build up a range of actions in
order to find one with high returns. The second move, OBSERVE,
represented any form of social learning. Playing OBSERVE allowed
agents to copy the behavior performed by one or more agents who were
selected at random from those performing a behavior in the previous
round, and again learn the payoff or payoffs associated with those
behavior patterns. However, learning through observation incurred two
kinds of error; observing agents might misjudge the behavior being
performed (i.e., get the wrong behavior), or they might incorrectly
estimate the payoff to the demonstrator’s behavior. Unlike INNOVATE,
OBSERVE did not guarantee that a new behavior would be added to the
agent’s repertoire. If the observed agent was performing a behavior that
the observer already knew, then nothing would be learned, and playing
OBSERVE would be unproductive on that round. The probabilities of
errors in social learning, the number of agents observed, the rate of
environmental change, and a number of other factors, were parameters
that we varied systematically in the tournament. Finally, the third move
was called EXPLOIT, which represented the performance of a behavior
from the agent’s repertoire, equivalent to pulling one of the levers and
getting the cash. Obviously agents could only EXPLOIT behavior patterns
that they had previously learned. We also assumed that agents would
remember behavior learned in previous rounds, and the payoff received.
The game would thus require entrants to achieve a good balance
between exploring and exploiting.40 Agents needed to learn through
INNOVATE or OBSERVE to build up a repertoire of high-payoff
behavior, but they could only actually obtain a payoff, and hence accrue
any kind of fitness, by playing EXPLOIT. People entering our tournament
were required to specify a set of rules detailing how the agents under
their control—that is, deploying their strategy—would utilize the three
possible moves.41 The winning strategy would be the one that combined
INNOVATE, OBSERVE, and EXPLOIT most effectively. By systematically
varying 
the 
conditions—for 
instance, 
sometimes 
causing 
the
environment to change rapidly and other times more slowly, or
manipulating the error rates associated with OBSERVE—we would be
able to determine when it was beneficial to copy others and when to
learn for oneself.

The tournament was to be evaluated in two phases. The first phase
would be a round robin, as in Axelrod’s tournaments, with each strategy
repeatedly played off against each of the others.42 The top 10 best-
performing strategies across all these pair-wise matches would then
progress to a second phase, called the “melee,” in which all 10 strategies
compete simultaneously over a far broader range of simulation
conditions than in the pair-wise contests. The strategy with the highest
average frequency over all melee contests would be the winner.
Once we had settled on the rules, we advertised the tournament
widely with posters, conference talks, e-mail lists, websites, and by
targeting the research groups of potential participants. To maximize
interest we offered a prize of €10,000 (about 13,650 USD) to the person
or persons who entered the winning strategy.43 Our biggest fear was that
nobody would participate, and there were many sleepless nights when
Luke and I worried that our efforts would be ignored. In the end, such
fears proved unfounded—the response was fantastic.
Our tournament attracted an incredible 104 entries (significantly
more than either of Axelrod’s tournaments), stemming from 15 academic
disciplines 
(including 
biology, 
computer 
science, 
engineering,
mathematics, psychology, and statistics),44 and with entries from no less
than 16 different countries (Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Finland, 
France, 
Japan, 
Netherlands, 
Portugal, 
Spain, 
Sweden,
Switzerland, United Kingdom, and United States). The tournament had
turned 
out 
to 
be 
a 
genuinely 
multidisciplinary, 
international
competition.
Most, but not all, of the entries were from academic researchers,
particularly university professors, postdoctoral researchers, and graduate
students. However, we did get a small number of entries from interested
members of the general public, and even had a few submissions from
school children. Indeed, one of the best-performing strategies came from
Ralph Barton and Joshua Brolin, two pupils from Winchester College, an
independent, secondary school in the United Kingdom; these students’
entry was placed ninth in the first phase, an incredible achievement. I
found it tremendously gratifying to see how two bright young people
were excited by this competition and, through their own good ideas,
hard work, and initiative, had come up with a strategy that had
outcompeted those submitted by professors of statistics and professional

mathematicians. In recognition of this accomplishment, we awarded
Ralph and Joshua a bonus prize of £1,000.
Judging from the caliber and complexity of the entries, people had
taken the competition seriously. Frequently groups of individuals had
entered in teams. Often entrants had written their own computer
programs to try out ideas, sometimes conducting simulations that
mimicked our multi-armed bandit game. People even ran preliminary
minitournaments of their own devising to determine what strategies
worked best. Some of the entries were enormously complex, with all
kinds of features, ranging from neural networks to genetic algorithms.
Luke and I could barely believe the work that some participants had put
into their entries. This must be among the most cost-effective forms of
science ever conducted. For a fee of just €10,000, we had effectively
employed hundreds of research assistants from around the world; these
were tremendously bright and inventive people, who poured weeks,
often months, of their time into solving the puzzle of how best to learn.
The next stage was to analyze the entries and try to understand
which strategies had done well, and why. In principle, scores in the first
(round robin) phase of the tournament could range from 0 (if a strategy
lost every single pair-wise encounter) to 1 (if it won all of them). We
found that the actual scores ranged from 0.02 to 0.89, indicating
considerable variation in strategy effectiveness. This spread in
performance was a considerable relief to us. It implied that we hadn’t
made the tournament so difficult that all entered strategies had
performed poorly (known as a “floor effect”), nor had we made the task
so easy that a multitude of strategies did equally well (a “ceiling effect”).
The observed variation in performance was a modest indication that we
had designed the tournament structure appropriately. More importantly,
the variation would allow us to conduct a statistical analysis to
determine which characteristics were associated with success. Strategies
could be classified according to, for instance, whether they were
deployed in a fixed or flexible manner, how much copying they did,
whether they monitored the rate of environmental change and adjusted
behavior to it, and so forth. We could then carry out statistical analyses
to determine which of these properties made a strategy successful.
The first finding that jumped out at us was that it is possible to learn
too much! In the tournament, investing lots of time in learning was not

at all effective. In fact, we found a strong negative correlation between
the proportion of a strategy’s moves that were INNOVATE or OBSERVE,
as opposed to EXPLOIT, and how well the strategy performed. Successful
strategies spent only a small fraction of their time (5–10%) learning, and
the bulk of their time caching in on what they had learned, through
playing EXPLOIT. Only through playing EXPLOIT can a strategy directly
accrue fitness. Hence, every time a strategy chooses to learn new
behavior, be it through playing INNOVATE or OBSERVE, there is a cost
corresponding to the payoff that would have been received had EXPLOIT
been played instead. This implied that the way to get on in life was to do
a very quick bit of learning and then EXPLOIT, EXPLOIT, EXPLOIT until
you die. That is a sobering lesson for someone like myself who has spent
his whole life in school or university.
On the other hand, we also established that when strategies did
deploy a learning move, the best means to do so was through copying.
We observed a strong positive correlation between the proportion of a
strategy’s moves that were OBSERVE, as opposed to INNOVATE, and
how well that strategy performed in the tournament. The most successful
strategies did not play learning moves often, but almost always played
OBSERVE when they did. This seemingly straightforward relationship
between copying and success, however, belied a degree of complexity
that emerged only on closer inspection. Among the top-performing
strategies that progressed to the melee, by and large, the more the
strategy learned through OBSERVE rather than INNOVATE, the better it
did. However, among the poorer performing strategies we actually
witnessed the reverse relationship—the more they copied the worse they
did. That told us something very interesting—copying was not
universally beneficial. Copying only paid if it was done efficiently.
Poorly performing strategies had incurred a cost for copying, having
missed the opportunity to cash in through playing EXPLOIT, but their
playing OBSERVE had failed to bring new behavior into the agent’s
repertoire. Indeed, there turned out to be a huge cost to social learning,
because playing OBSERVE failed to introduce new behavior into an
agent’s repertoire in 53% of OBSERVE moves in the first tournament
phase. This was principally because agents observed behaviors that they
already knew. In contrast, playing INNOVATE always returned a new
behavior. The tournament confirms the intuitions with which this

chapter began—copying badly is not a recipe for success. If copying is
going to pay, if it is to increase individual fitness, it must be done
efficiently.
Next, we set out to isolate the properties of the best-performing
strategies that allowed them to excel. We discovered that the timing of
their learning was a critical factor. Successful strategies timed bouts of
learning to coincide with when the environment changed. Recall that
successful strategies played EXPLOIT on most rounds, repeatedly
performing the behavior in their repertoire with the highest payoff.
However, when the environment changed, the payoff to that behavior
would alter, typically for the worse. Behavior patterns that hitherto were
yielding dividends would no longer do so. That was the time to play
OBSERVE, because this would likely pick up a higher-payoff behavior.
After all, agents with behavior in their repertoire that was suited to the
new conditions would continue to EXPLOIT, and hence these high-payoff
behaviors would be available to copy. Conversely, other agents whose
returns had just plummeted would commonly switch to learning, and
hence poorer-return behaviors would not be available to copy. In timing
their learning in this manner, successful strategies were thus more likely
to acquire behavior suited to the new conditions.
In contrast, poorly performing strategies not only chose to learn too
much, but learned at the wrong times. Copying in the absence of
environmental change would frequently return a behavior that was
already in the agent’s repertoire. If a strategy attempted to learn at the
wrong time, it would be better off playing INNOVATE, as that
guaranteed a return of new behavior. The result is a negative
relationship between copying and fitness among less successful
submissions.
The winning strategy, called DISCOUNTMACHINE, was submitted by
two graduate students from Queens University in Ontario,45 Dan
Cownden and Tim Lillicrap. Dan is a mathematician and Tim a
computational neuroscientist; together they were a formidable team.
Dan and Tim had worked for months on their strategy, pouring huge
amounts of effort into devising the optimal submission. Their triumph
was both well deserving and convincing. DISCOUNTMACHINE was the
top-performing strategy in both the round robin, where it won 89% of its
contests, and the melee.46 Tim and Dan called their strategy

DISCOUNTMACHINE because it discounted what it learned according to
its age, placing more weight on recently acquired rather than older
information.47
The best performing strategies capped the amount of learning
undertaken 
to 
ensure 
that 
high 
payoffs 
were 
maintained.
DISCOUNTMACHINE stood out by spreading learning more evenly across
the agent’s life-span than any other strategies. Its success was partly due
to the fact that it was able to spend less time learning and more time
playing EXPLOIT than any other strategy, which in turn was because it
was 
able 
to 
learn 
more 
efficiently 
than 
competitors.
DISCOUNTMACHINE did this by estimating expected future payoffs from
either learning, through playing OBSERVE, or by playing EXPLOIT.48 In
other words, the top strategy engaged in a form of mental time travel.
DISCOUNTMACHINE looked back into the past, and forward into the
future, and used the information gathered to work out which move
would be optimal on each round.
Strikingly, 
both 
DISCOUNTMACHINE 
and 
the 
runner-up,
INTERGENERATION, relied almost exclusively on OBSERVE as their
means to learn, and at least 50% of the learning of all of the second-
phase strategies was OBSERVE. We wondered to what extent
DISCOUNTMACHINE’s success in the tournament could be attributed to
its copying, and Luke came up with an ingenious idea to explore this. He
edited DISCOUNTMACHINE’s computer code to produce a mutant
version of the strategy that was identical in every respect to the original,
except that every time it would have played OBSERVE it played
INNOVATE instead. We then re-ran the entire melee phase of the
tournament using the other nine top strategies in their original form plus
the mutant version of DISCOUNTMACHINE. We reasoned that if
DISCOUNTMACHINE’s success was at all attributable to its reliance on
copying then it would do less well in the re-run melee than the original;
conversely, if DISCOUNTMACHINE’s success was more to do with its
other features, then it might still thrive. To our amazement,
DISCOUNTMACHINE’s performance plummeted. The INNOVATE-only
mutant of DISCOUNTMACHINE didn’t just do badly, it came last! Clearly
the success of the winning strategy was to no small degree attributable
to its reliance on social learning.
Luke and I realized that we now had two versions of

DISCOUNTMACHINE, one that relied almost exclusively on social
learning and the other dependent on asocial learning, and that we could
play these against each other in a broad range of simulation conditions
as a means of exploring the relative merits of the two forms of learning.
Similar analyses along these lines had been carried out before, but
without using such a smart algorithm, nor in such a rich simulation
environment; this led us to believe that there would be more realism to
our analyses than to previous studies. We were completely unprepared
for the findings of this analysis, which astonished us: copying beat
asocial learning hands down over virtually all plausible conditions. For
instance, when we manipulated rates of environmental change, we found
that the payoffs to each behavior would need to change with a greater
than 50% probability in each round before the INNOVATE-only version
of DISCOUNTMACHINE could gain a foothold. In other words, learning
by oneself is only more effective than learning from others in extreme
environments that change at extraordinarily high rates—rates so high
that such conditions are probably rare in nature.
Our findings went against much of our previous knowledge and many
of our intuitions. For instance, a widely held view among psychologists
was that copying pays because it allows individuals to examine the
behavior of a large number of individuals simultaneously.49 Rapidly
sampling multiple individuals’ behavior allows the learner to implement
strategies like conforming to the majority, which is thought to underlie a
great deal of human learning.50 Yet we found we could reduce the
number of individuals copied when an individual plays OBSERVE to just
one, and it still paid to copy; that is, the original DISCOUNTMACHINE
dominated its asocial cousin, and more generally, “copy-happy”
strategies still won out in the melee.
Within economics, social learning is widely thought to be
advantageous because individuals can monitor payoffs to others and
thereby adopt high-payoff behavior. Yet we found in simulations that we
could ramp up the error rate associated with the estimate of the payoff
for the observed behavior to the point where there was so much noise
that the copying agent received no reliable information about payoffs at
all, and yet the strategies most reliant on OBSERVE still won out.
In addition, many social learning researchers, myself included, had
thought that a major disadvantage of social learning was that it

inevitably generates errors in copying, such that individuals pick up the
wrong behavior or fail to pick up any behavior at all. However, we
found that the error rates could be extraordinarily high—50%, 60%,
70% of the time playing OBSERVE would fail to bring new, higher-
payoff behaviors into the agent’s repertoire. And yet, astonishingly, it
still paid to copy.
Why is copying so robust? What is it that makes social learning so
advantageous compared to asocial learning over such a broad range of
conditions? Here the tournament yielded a major insight: copying pays
because other individuals filter behavior, making adaptive information
available to copy. Entrants to our tournament specified in their strategies
that agents should first build up a repertoire of behavior, and then
perform the learned behavior associated with the highest payoff.
However, this meant that when individuals played EXPLOIT, they were
not performing a randomly chosen behavior, but rather a select, tried-
and-tested, high-payoff behavior. Accordingly, agents that played
OBSERVE drew from this pool of high-payoff options, since that was
what was performed. Playing OBSERVE was far more likely to pick up a
behavior with a very high return than playing INNOVATE, because the
latter acquires behavior at random and most of that behavior confers a
low return. When we ran test simulations in which agents playing
EXPLOIT drew from their repertoire at random, rather than performing
the best behavior pattern that they possessed, the innovate-only version
of 
DISCOUNTMACHINE 
dominated 
the 
original. 
The 
selective
performance of behavior by the copied individual is what makes social
learning so profitable to the copier.
That is why copying pays. That is why we see copying not just in
animals with large brains, such as humans, chimpanzees, and Japanese
macaques, but also in fruit flies and wood crickets. An animal does not
need to be smart to benefit from copying, because a lot of the smart
decision making has already been done for it by the copied individuals
who have already prefiltered their behavior. We in the field of social
learning had been so focused on what the observing individual would
need to do to ensure it acquired adaptive information that we had
neglected to consider how the observed individual makes the copier’s job
so much easier. Even relatively simple copying rules would be more
likely to lead to high-payoff behavior than trial-and-error learning under

many circumstances. That explains why copying is widespread in nature.
There were other ways in which our tournament challenged existing
theory. Earlier analyses, such as Rogers’ model, predicted that evolution
would lead to a stable equilibrium where both social and asocial
learning persisted in the population.51 However, when we allowed the
two versions of DISCOUNTMACHINE to compete, the original completely
outcompeted the asocial learning variant under most conditions. In
earlier analyses, social learners had been modeled as inflexible agents
that continued to perform the same behavior even when the
environment changed. This assumption had a double impact on the
perceived fitness of social learning, because when those individuals were
copied by fellow social learners, the latter also acquired the suboptimal
behavior. Conversely, agents in our tournament possessed a repertoire of
behaviors that they exploited flexibly. Following environmental change,
successful strategies like DISCOUNTMACHINE would not just stick with
outdated behavior, but switch to the behavior in their repertoire with
the next highest payoff. In turn, when agents played EXPLOIT, other
copying agents playing OBSERVE also acquired a behavior with a
reasonable return. Unlike in Rogers’ model, social learners were not
stuck in a frequency-dependent relationship with asocial learners, reliant
on the latter to track environmental change. Provided there was a small
amount of copy error, playing OBSERVE would generate enough
behavioral diversity to allow social learners to respond adaptively to
environmental change.
Earlier theoretical work had suggested that reliance on social
learning would not necessarily raise the average fitness of individuals in
a population,52 and may even depress it,53 thereby leading to Rogers’
paradox. The tournament revealed how we could resolve the apparent
conflict between such findings and our species’ demographic success:
simple, poorly implemented, and inflexible social learning does not
increment biological fitness, but smart, sophisticated, and flexible social
learning does.
Strategies that did well in competition with other strategies were not,
however, those that maximized the returns to agents. Rather, we found a
strong inverse relationship between the mean fitness of individuals in
populations 
containing 
only 
one 
strategy, 
and 
that 
strategy’s
performance in the tournament.54 This finding illustrates the parasitic

effect of strategies that rely heavily on OBSERVE (some of the best
performers, 
including 
DISCOUNTMACHINE, 
INTERGENERATION,
WEPREYCLAN, and DYNAMICASPIRATIONLEVEL, ranked 1, 2, 4, and 6,
all played OBSERVE on at least 95% of learning moves). Strategies using
a mixture of social and asocial learning are vulnerable to being
outcompeted by those using social learning alone, which may result in a
population with lower average returns. These findings are evocative of
an established rule in ecology; this specifies that, among competitors for
a resource, the dominant competitor will be the species that can persist
at the lowest resource level.55 An equivalent rule may apply when
alternative social learning strategies compete: the strategy that
eventually dominates will be the one that can persist with the lowest
frequency of asocial learning.56
Some population-level consequences of the strategic reliance on
copying observed in the tournament are equally surprising. Consider the
diversity of the population—that is, the number of behavior patterns
known about across the entire population (i.e., those held in all agents’
repertoires combined). If we align strategies according to the extent to
which they rely on OBSERVE as opposed to INNOVATE when they learn,
a positive correlation is found between the proportion of copying and
the amount of behavioral diversity. This is an extraordinarily
counterintuitive finding. After all, when an agent plays OBSERVE it does
not increase the number of different behavior patterns in the population
at all—the agent just adds a behavior that already existed in the
population to its own repertoire. In contrast, playing INNOVATE
guarantees a new behavior for the agent, and accordingly will frequently
introduce new behavioral variants into the population. Why should
increasing reliance on social learning lead to greater behavioral
diversity?
Copying does not typically introduce new variants, except in those
rare circumstances when copy error adds a new behavior. However,
what copying does do is reduce the rate at which behavioral variants are
lost. That is because social learning generates multiple copies of a piece
of knowledge or behavior, retained across the repertoires of several
individuals, so that when an individual dies its knowledge need not die
with it. Here, the positive effect of copying on reducing the rate at which
behavioral variants are lost typically exceeds the negative effect of

reducing the rate at which new behavior is introduced, leading to a net
increase in diversity across the population with an increasing reliance on
OBSERVE over INNOVATE. Indeed, above certain levels of copying the
population’s knowledge base becomes completely saturated, and
knowledge of all possible behaviors is retained.
It does not follow, however, that as the rate of copying goes up, the
number of behaviors actually performed increases—to the contrary.
Increasing reliance on social as opposed to asocial learning leads to
fewer behavior patterns being exhibited, because the population starts to
converge on a small number of high-payoff variants. At the extreme,
when all agents learn through copying, then the population appears to
exhibit behavior highly evocative of conformity. Everyone does what the
majority are doing.
Now consider the longevity of knowledge in the population—that is,
how long a behavior persists within the population once it has been
introduced. High levels of reliance on social learning automatically
generate extreme durability of cultural knowledge. Populations appear
to pass through a threshold level of reliance on social learning, above
which cultural knowledge becomes extremely stable and persists
virtually indefinitely. The persistence of behavior patterns for many
thousands of rounds witnessed in the tournament is equivalent to human
beings retaining insights first gained by the ancient Greeks or
Egyptians.57 At the same time, with increasing social learning the
behavior patterns actually performed change with greater rapidity,
generating fads, fashions, and rapid turnover in cultural traditions.58
The social learning strategies tournament was a huge success.59 It
made sense of several conundrums concerning copying. The tournament
established that there are genuine fitness benefits to copying provided it
is done efficiently—that is, strategically and with high fidelity.60 This
finding, combined with the observation that the winning strategy was
the one that learned with greatest efficiency, implies that natural
selection should favor the implementation of optimally strategic copying
rules, a central thesis of this book.
Copying, even “blind” copying, offers advantages over trial-and-error
learning, because copiers benefit from the adaptive prefiltering of
behavior by the individuals that are copied. This insight helps us to
understand why social learning is so widespread in nature, even in

animals that we do not think of as smart. Bumblebees, fruit flies, and
wood crickets benefit from copying others because finding rich sources
of pollen, fertile females, and means of escaping predators through trial
and error when there are so many possible flower patches, female flies,
and dangerous predators around is a hard problem. Social learning
confers a rapid and effective shortcut to high-payoff behavior much of
the time. At the other extreme of cognitive sophistication, the same
insight could help explain the extreme reliance of children on imitation,
leading them faithfully to copy even superfluous actions in a
demonstrated task.61 When children copy adults, they are inadvertently
taking advantage of decades of information filtering. Trusting the adult
is a highly efficient rule of thumb.
Yet, the tournament also teaches us that if individuals are able to
copy in a “savvy” fashion—for instance, if they can be selective about
when, and how frequently, they copy—there are real fitness dividends.
Successful strategies were able to time copying for when payoffs drop,
evaluate current information based on its age, judge how valuable
information would be in the future, and use all this knowledge to
maximize copying efficiency. Empirical evidence suggests that some
animals are able to discount information based on the time since it was
acquired.62 The tournament’s winning strategy also possessed the ability
to project current conditions into the future, a rare attribute in
nonhumans.63 Few animals would be capable of implementing a strategy
as sophisticated as DISCOUNTMACHINE, but there can be little doubt
that humans can. This cognitive ability could be one factor behind the
gulf between human culture and any nonhuman counterpart. The
tournament hints that the adaptive use of social learning could be linked
to the cognitive abilities underlying mental time travel, a theme picked
up in later chapters.
Moreover, if efficient copying is adaptive, such that natural selection
should favor greater and greater reliance on social as opposed to asocial
learning, then the tournament also establishes that a number of
characteristics strongly evocative of human culture will follow
automatically. With increasing copying inevitably comes greater
behavioral diversity; the retention of cultural knowledge for long periods
of time; conformity; and rapid turnover in behavior such as fads,
fashions, and changes in technology. Provided copying errors or

innovation 
introduce 
new 
behavioral 
variants, 
copying 
can
simultaneously increase the knowledge base of a population and reduce
the range of exploited behavior to a core of high-performance variants.
Similar reasoning accounts for the observation that copying can lead to
knowledge being retained over long periods of time, yet trigger rapid
turnover in behavior. Low-level performance of suboptimal behavior is
sufficient to retain large amounts of cultural knowledge in social
learning populations, over long periods. A high level of copying
increases the retention of cultural knowledge by several orders of
magnitude.
These observations suggest that social learning confers an adaptive
plasticity on cultural populations; it allows them to respond to changing
environments rapidly, drawing on a deep knowledge base. In biological
evolution, the rate of change is positively related to genetic diversity,64
and formal analyses suggest a similar relationship between the rate of
cultural evolution and the amount of cultural variation.65 Accordingly,
we might envisage that populations heavily reliant on culture would
rapidly diverge behaviorally, exploiting the rich levels of variation
retained. The social learning strategies tournament teaches us that the
ecological and demographic success of our species, our capacity for rapid
change in behavior, our cultural diversity, our expansive knowledge
base, and the sheer volume of cultural knowledge we exhibit, may all be
direct products of the heavy, but smart, reliance of our species on social
learning.

CHAPTER 4
A TALE OF TWO FISHES
For most researchers seeking to understand the evolutionary roots of
culture, the obvious animals to compare to humans are monkeys and
apes, but I myself have learned more about this topic through studying
fishes. Such a claim, no doubt, would sound extraordinary to anyone
who wrongly believed that fish are dim, instinct-driven creatures with
three-second memories, a stereotype that Hollywood and the media
ceaselessly perpetuate, indifferent to the scientific evidence. Yet, as
described in chapter 2, extensive experimental data now show that social
learning and tradition play important roles in the behavioral
development of countless fishes, most of which are highly social animals.
Fish behavior is far from rigidly controlled by a “genetic program,”1 but
rather is constantly and flexibly adjusted to exploit information and
resources in the environment, including information provided by other
fish.
Even given the knowledge that fishes are both competent at, and
widely reliant on, copying, most anthropologists would surely balk at the
suggestion that we can learn about culture through studying them. Yet,
fishes have proven a terrific model system for investigating social
learning processes because they offer major practical advantages over
many other vertebrates, thereby leading to valuable insights. The key
factor here is that animal traditions and the diffusion of new innovations
are group-level phenomena, and if they are to be studied reliably,
scientists require not just replicate experimental animals, but replicate
populations of experimental animals. Leaving aside the nontrivial ethical
considerations, it would be financially ruinous and a bureaucratic
nightmare, for a researcher like myself to set up large numbers of
populations of chimpanzees or Japanese macaques for behavioral
experimentation. However, it is extremely straightforward and cheap to
set up large numbers of populations of small fishes in the laboratory and

investigate their behavior. Fish experimentalists enjoy the twin luxuries
of the multiple conditions that good experimental design frequently
demands and the healthy sample size that confers statistical power; both
bring experimental rigor to any social learning investigation.2 For
researchers interested in animal culture, working with fishes makes a lot
of sense.
Prior to the social learning strategies tournament, the idea that
animal copying might be strategic had been intimated to me by a
marvellously instructive series of experiments that we had conducted on
sticklebacks. The sticklebacks are a family of sixteen species of fishes
that are extremely common in the rivers, streams, and coastal ocean
zones of the temperate Northern Hemisphere;3 they are closely related to
pipefish and seahorses. The distinctive features of sticklebacks are their
spines and the absence of scales, which are replaced with bony armour
plates. Chances are, if you live in Europe, North America, or Japan,
there are sticklebacks in your local lakes, rivers, and streams. These fish
are easily caught with a simple dip net, and thrive in the laboratory,
where they make highly effective subjects in animal behavior studies.
Partly for this reason, sticklebacks have long been a favorite
experimental system for many ethologists and evolutionary biologists,
including myself. For over two decades, my research group has
investigated social learning and tradition in over thirty different species
of animals, including rats, chickens, starlings, budgerigars, lemurs,
capuchin monkeys, and chimpanzees,4 yet the insights into these topics
that we have gleaned through studying sticklebacks and other small
fishes are among the most valuable.5
This chapter describes a protracted program of experimental research
conducted over 20 years that set out to comprehend a fascinating
difference in the social learning of two closely related species of
sticklebacks. I present it in detail because it illustrates how a dedicated
line of research using a flexible model system can provide valuable
insights into more general issues related to the evolution of culture. The
investigation also demonstrates how the science in this field is done.6
Scientific questions in this domain are rarely answered with a single
experiment, but often require an extensive series of studies, each
chipping away at the problem. Beginning as a curious anomaly,
prolonged experimentation on the question developed into a wonderful

glimpse at the bigger picture of how social learning evolves. Later in the
book, I will show how what was learned through studying fishes proved
to be highly relevant to making sense of the evolution of primate
cognition.
This particular line of investigation was initiated by Isabelle Coolen,
a French behavioral ecologist who came to work with me at Cambridge
in the late 1990s. Isabelle had just completed her PhD on the topic of
“public-information use” in birds. The term public-information use has a
more specific meaning than it prima facie implies. It is defined as the
capability of an animal to assess the quality of a resource, such as the
richness of a food patch, through vicariously monitoring the success and
failure of others.7 Public-information use is thus a form of social learning
that allows individuals to collect information from a distance through
observation, without incurring the costs associated with personal
exploration and sampling, such as increased exposure to predators or the
energy spent traveling between food patches to make comparisons. At
the time, many researchers thought that public-information use required
some high degree of intelligence, or sophisticated cognition. In
questioning this suggestion, Isabelle began to wonder whether fish might
be capable of public-information use. We resolved to explore the issue
using threespine sticklebacks.8
Isabelle set out to collect threespines from local streams to be
brought into the laboratory for testing. However, having been trained by
working with birds, Isabelle was not particularly familiar with the subtle
morphological differences between threespine sticklebacks and another
fish that often shoals with them, the closely related ninespine
stickleback.9 Isabelle inadvertently collected both species, and as she had
sufficient numbers, we decided we might as well test both—a beautiful
illustration of how serendipity can play an important role in science.
Had a trained fish researcher done the collecting we would probably
have only tested the threespines, found little of interest, and dropped the
investigation. As it was, Isabelle tested two species, and the differences
in their behavior that her experiments revealed proved to be so
absorbing that they initiated decades of fruitful research.
Isabelle’s testing apparatus was quite simple—it was a standard 90
cm long aquarium tank, divided into three equal-sized (30 cm2) sections
by transparent partitions. At each end of the tank Isabelle positioned an

artificial feeder, which simulated a natural food patch, and delivered
food in the form of bloodworms to a tube that opened up at the bottom
of the tank. She placed “observer” fish—our experimental subjects—one
at a time in the central compartment from where, through the
transparent partitions, they could observe two groups of three
“demonstrator” fish being fed through the artificial feeders.
Isabelle delivered food to one feeder, which simulated a rich food
patch, at three times the rate that it was delivered to the other feeder,
called the poor patch. Suitably positioned transparent and opaque
barriers meant that the demonstrators, but not the experimental subjects,
could see the food as it fell down the feeder tubes to reach the base. The
demonstrators would follow the worms as they sank, excitedly pecking
at them, and eventually pull them out of the bottom of the tube to eat.
Thus the observers could see two groups of three fish, both feeding at a
food patch at an end of the tank, with one group feeding more rapidly
than the other. After an observation period of 10 minutes, all the
demonstrators and remaining food items were removed from the tank,
and the observer was released.
Isabelle reasoned that if the sticklebacks were capable of public-
information use, they would be able to distinguish between the rich and
the poor patch based solely on the reactions of the demonstrators to the
food. If so, on their release, the fish should tend to swim to the end of
the tank formerly housing the rich patch, and would spend more time at
that end of the tank than the alternative. Sure enough, Isabelle found
that the ninespine sticklebacks predominantly swam to the rich-patch
end of the tank, and spent more time at that end. The threespine
sticklebacks, in contrast, exhibited no evident patch preferences, and
seemingly swam to each end of the tank at random.
Isabelle’s experiment hinted that the ninespine sticklebacks might be
capable of public-information use since they were able to use the
behavior of the demonstrators to establish which of the two food patches
was the more profitable. The study also implied that threespines did not
possess this capability. However, drawing these conclusions at that stage
would have been premature, because there were a number of alternative
explanations that first needed to be ruled out.
In her experiment, Isabelle had used fish of the same species as the
subjects to act as demonstrators—that is, ninespine demonstrators for

ninespines and threespine demonstrators for threespines. Perhaps the
threespine demonstrators were not as effective at transmitting
information about patch quality as the ninespine demonstrators, and a
disparity in demonstration quality rather than in public-information use
accounted for the species’ difference. Isabelle repeated her first
experiment, this time with heterospecific demonstrators: ninespine
demonstrators for threespines and threespine demonstrators for
ninespines. Yet this manipulation did not change the results; ninespine
subjects swam disproportionately to the end that formerly housed the
rich patch, while threespines swam to the former locations of rich and
poor patches with apparent indifference.
We also wondered whether differences in the perceptual abilities of
the two species might account for the findings. Maybe the threespine
subjects could not see to the ends of the tank with sufficient acuity to
discern that the demonstrators were feeding. Isabelle replicated the
experiment a third time, on this occasion with food delivered at one end
of the tank but not the other. If the threespines could not even
discriminate between feeding and nonfeeding fish at that distance, then
clearly they would not be able to make the subtler distinction between
fish feeding at different rates. However, that was not the explanation
either, since on this occasion the threespines, like the ninespines, swam
to the end that formerly housed the feeding fish.
Another alternative explanation that we needed to rule out was that,
even though we had removed all the food for the test, there might be
residual olfactory cues left in the tank—a stronger smell of bloodworm
in the region of the rich patch, for instance—to which the ninespines
were more sensitive. This led Isabelle to conduct one of my favorite
experiments, memorable for its oddness, and to my knowledge the only
observational learning study ever conducted in which the observer could
not actually see the demonstrators! Isabelle replicated the study a fourth
time, this time with opaque partitions separating the demonstrators and
observers; the partitions could not be seen through at all. Perhaps not
surprisingly, the test revealed that neither species favored the rich
patch.10 Hence, there was no evidence for any perceptual differences
between the species based on sight or smell, and clearly visual cues were
critical to this form of learning. We began to believe that what we had
discovered might genuinely be an adaptive specialization in social

learning, with ninespines capable of exploiting public information, while
their close relatives, the threespines, were not.
Yet before we could make authoritative claims about the cognitive
abilities of these two species of fish we needed to test populations
collected from different sites. We had to be confident that the observed
disparity in the behavior of these fishes was found consistently across
their entire range; or else we had to determine what factors accounted
for the variation in performance. Gradually, over the following 15 years,
we began to determine the robustness of this species difference. Through
the work of Mike Webster, a postdoctoral researcher in my laboratory at
St Andrews, who first tested ninespines and threespines collected from
various locations around Britain and then went on to experiment with
fish from around the world, we established that the species difference
was extremely reliable and globally manifest.
Whether we tested sticklebacks from Cambridge, Scotland, the Baltic,
Canada, or Japan, we invariably found the same pattern: ninespines
were always capable of public-information use, but there was never a
hint that threespines had the same capability. Mike tested freshwater
populations, marine populations, armored fish, and spineless forms. He
examined fish from high-predation sites, and fish from sites where
predators were rare. None of this variation changed the results. Mike
reared ninespines from eggs in captivity, but when he later tested them
as adults he found no differences between lab-reared and wild-caught
adults. Studies that manipulated the rearing conditions of the fishes also
had little impact on their public-information use. This form of learning
was seemingly little affected by manipulations of rearing density or
environment complexity. Nor did any other factor, be it morphological,
ecological, social, or developmental, explain variation in public-
information use—the capability was simply always present in one
species and not the other. All the evidence suggested that public-
information use was indeed an unlearned, species-typical capability of
ninespine sticklebacks.
I became intrigued with this case study and grew increasingly
convinced that we had discovered an adaptive specialization in social
learning. Such adaptive specializations were not unheard of (recall, for
instance, the rhesus monkey’s fear of snakes described in chapter 2), but
such a specialization in stickleback social learning would be

tremendously exciting because it would be so amenable to investigation.
We could study the development of this capability in the laboratory, we
could test other stickleback species to determine the trait’s evolutionary
history, we could carry out experiments to ascertain the function of
public-information use, and we could investigate the underlying
mechanisms at genetic, neural, endocrine, and behavioral levels.
Isabelle’s discovery seemed a “gift from the gods.”
Before we could run with this ambitious program of research,
however, we needed first to establish the specificity of our findings. Did
ninespines and threespines really differ in a precise intellectual domain,
or were our findings a manifestation of a more general difference in
their cognition? At the extreme, perhaps ninespines were better than
threespines at all forms of learning. Mike presented both stickleback
species with a battery of learning tests. He tested their ability to learn
the navigation of a T-maze, where food was found solely in one arm. He
tested the fish in a color discrimination task, where they were required
to learn that a particular color was associated with food. He also tested
their ability to learn the location of resources through attending to the
behavior of others (known as “local enhancement”) as well their social
foraging tendencies. In all of these tests, Mike found no significant
differences in the two sticklebacks’ performance. PhD student Nicola
Atton tested the fishes’ ability to utilize public information in a different
context—rather than gleaning information about the quality of food
patches, the observers potentially acquired knowledge about the worth
of alternative rocky shelters, which would confer variable protection
from predators. However, Nicola found no differences between the
species in this case, with neither showing evidence of public-information
use. Moreover, we had learned from published studies carried out by
researchers in other laboratories that threespine sticklebacks were
perfectly capable of other forms of social learning—to find food, identify
kin, and learn about predators11—yet they were not capable of public-
information use.
Collectively, these findings are genuinely intriguing. Here we have
two very closely related species of fish, often collected from exactly the
same rivers and streams, shoaling together throughout a broad region of
their ranges, leading very similar lives, eating very similar foods, and
comparable in their cognition in every other measured respect. Except

the ninespine stickleback possesses a highly specific form of social
learning—the capability for public-information use—that the other lacks.
How can this be explained?
Strangely, the answer to this conundrum derives not from
evolutionary biology, nor behavioral ecology, nor even comparative
psychology, but from anthropology. The puzzle in this tale of two fishes
is resolved by the work of biological anthropologists Robert Boyd and
Peter Richerson, theoreticians and leading authorities in the field of
cultural evolution. Boyd and Richerson,12 following a theoretical analysis
conducted with humans very much in mind, proposed a hypothesis that
they called their “costly information hypothesis.” This hypothesis is rich
and multifaceted, but can be simplified here as the idea that humans
should copy when asocial learning is costly. The hypothesis is relevant to
our sticklebacks because the costs of learning asocially, through trial and
error, differ between the two species due to differences in their
morphology, specifically their physical defenses.
Threespine sticklebacks, as their name implies, typically have three
large dorsal spines on their backs, as well some heavy-duty armor in the
form of tough lateral plates that protect them against predators, usually
birds or larger fishes (figure 3a). Remarkably, these morphological
defenses are so effective that there are several reports of threespine
sticklebacks actually surviving being eaten! Their spines get stuck in the
throats of predators, who cough them up, and then the stickleback
swims away, apparently unharmed. Such effective defenses mean that
threespine sticklebacks can explore their environments in comparative
safety, allowing them to sample alternative food patches directly, and to
work out for themselves which is the richest food patch around. These
fish don’t need to copy in this case, because learning for themselves is
not particularly costly.
Ninespine sticklebacks, on the other hand, have approximately nine
spines on their backs,13 but these are small and provide comparatively
little protection. This species also typically has fewer, and thinner,
lateral plates than the threespines (figure 3b). This leaves ninespines
significantly more vulnerable to predators than their cousins. Indeed,
studies have shown that predatory fishes display a preference for
consuming ninespines over threespines.14 Because they are more
vulnerable to predation, ninespines typically respond by hiding when a

threat appears. Isabelle noticed when she was collecting her fish that the
ninespines were much more likely than the threespines to be hiding in
reeds and weeds. In contrast, the superior defenses of threespines mean
that they are more likely to withstand the higher predation risk
associated with foraging in open water, and therefore benefit more from
maximizing their opportunities to feed.


FIGURE 3. The threespine stickleback (a) has large spines and extensive protective plating,
which the closely related ninespine stickleback (b) lacks. These morphological differences have
evidently influenced how natural selection has fine-tuned the two species’ social learning. By
permission of Sean Earnshaw.
For the ninespines, exploring the environment for themselves and
sampling food patches through trial and error is sufficiently risky to
incur real fitness costs, and the costly information hypothesis predicts
that those costs should tip the balance in favor of reliance on social
learning. Plausibly, natural selection has shaped the ninespines’ ability
to extract valuable foraging information through observation from a safe
vantage point, leaving them able to swim to the richest patch when the
coast is clear. If that hypothesis is correct, public-information use is
indeed an adaptive specialization in social learning. Sure enough, when
Isabelle repeated the experiment with cover in the enclosure, the
ninespines, but not the threespines, spent a disproportionate amount of
time hiding during the observation phase; but we saw their little heads
poking out, as they carefully tracked the behavior of the demonstrators.
You might be wondering why the ninespines need to collect
information on the payoffs to other fishes. Why do they have to monitor
how often the other fish are feeding? Surely there is an easier way to
solve this problem. The ninespines could simply swim to the patch
visited by the most fish, which would surely be the most profitable one.
There are at least two problems with such reasoning. First, a food patch
may have had a lot of visitors in the recent past, but those animals will
have eaten some of the food and reduced its profitability. Second,
shoaling fishes, like any animal that aggregates for safety, do not move
or make foraging patch decisions entirely independently of each other. A
shoal of fishes could come across a food patch by chance and attract
other fishes to that patch over an alternative location that might be more
profitable. Basing decisions solely on the numbers of other individuals
performing behavioral alternatives can lead animals to get locked into
“information cascades,”15 which at the extreme can be maladaptive.16
For these reasons, raw numbers of fish can provide clues about the
quality of a food patch, but such clues may be misleading.
Another set of experiments carried out by Isabelle shows this very
neatly.17 Isabelle replicated her original experiment, but this time
manipulated the numbers of fish at each end of the tank, with six fish at

one patch and two at the other. She found that if, during the observation
phase of the experiment, the subjects did not see the demonstrators
feeding (which meant the ninespine subjects were forced to base their
patch-choice decision exclusively on the numbers of fish at the patches),
then, after removal of the demonstrators, the subjects did indeed swim
to the end that had contained the most fish. The presence of a
companion shoal adjacent to the central compartment lent confidence to
our conclusion that this was a foraging, rather than merely a shoaling
decision, since the subjects effectively had to swim away from the safety
of the shoal to choose a food patch.18 However, when Isabelle traded off
demonstrator numbers and patch quality, such that the ninespine
subjects witnessed six fish feeding at a low rate at one patch, and at the
same time two fish feeding at a high rate at an alternative, richer patch,
the subjects later swam to the richer patch. This shows that ninespines
will use the social cues provided by the numbers of fish at a patch when
that is the only information to go on, but will preferentially utilize
public information when that conflicts with the social cues. That is why
extracting public information is beneficial; it is more reliable than social
cues, and consequently helps animals guard against the acquisition and
spread of misleading information.
The experimental procedure that Isabelle devised for investigating
public-information use in sticklebacks has proven extremely flexible. It
has allowed us to conduct many variations of the basic experiment,
including manipulating the ratio of food delivered by each feeder in
order to simulate rich and poor feeding patches; changing the number,
characteristics, or species of the demonstrators; or providing the
observer with different forms of prior experience about one or both of
the patches. We have thus been able to explore the manner in which
animals weigh different sources of information when they conflict. Such
studies reveal that sticklebacks are capable of adaptive trade-offs in their
reliance on social and asocial sources of information, mixing their prior
knowledge of patch quality with the information gleaned from
observation of others in a surprisingly sophisticated way.
Yfke van Bergen, a PhD student at the University of Cambridge,
investigated these trade-offs in reliance on social and asocial
information. In her experiment, Yfke first gave ninespines the
opportunity to learn through direct foraging over repeated trials that one

of the food patches, on average, yielded a larger number of prey items
than the alternative. She was able to manipulate the reliability of this
personal training regime by varying the number of training trials on
which the patch that was richest over all trials was the richest on that
particular trial. For instance, a training regime in which feeder A
delivered more food than feeder B on 17 out of 18 trials, would lend
more confidence that A was the richer patch than an alternative regime
where A delivered more food than B on only 12 out of 18 trials.
Yfke then followed this personal training with the same procedures
as Isabelle’s original experiment, allowing the fish to observe three
demonstrators feeding at a rich patch and three at a poor patch,
followed by a test of patch preference. However, there was a twist; Yfke
switched the patch qualities, such that what had been the lower-yielding
patch according to the subjects’ personal training became the richer
patch in the public demonstration, and vice versa.19 This design meant
that asocial and social information were conflicting, and it allowed us to
explore under what circumstances individuals will utilize information
provided by others and when they will rely on their own prior
knowledge.
We found that those fish that had received reliable and unambiguous
private training almost completely ignored public information and when
tested chose the patch they had previously experienced to be more
productive, rather than the patch that was indicated to be the richer by
the demonstrators. However, other fish that had experienced unreliable,
noisy private training were more inclined to copy other fish, and to base
their patch choice on what the demonstrators had indicated. The rate of
copying increased with the degree of noisiness of the training; the more
unreliable the ninespines’ personal experience, the more they were
inclined to copy.
In a second experiment, Yfke again subjected the fish to a personal
training regime in which one patch was richer than the other, but then
manipulated the time period before they received their conflicting public
information and test, which in different conditions was one, three, five,
or seven days. She found that the fish would base their patch choice on
private information if only one day had elapsed since their training, but
as their private information got more and more out of date, they
increasingly copied the demonstrators. When seven days had elapsed

since they last updated their private information, the fish switched
completely to using public information, and copied at the same rate as
individuals that had not previously sampled the patches.20
Our stickleback studies were teaching us about the strategic manner
in which animals use social information. Isabelle’s experiments had
implied that the sticklebacks utilized a “copy when asocial learning
would be costly” rule, according to the predictions of Boyd and
Richerson’s costly information hypothesis. Yfke’s studies showed that the
ninespines’ copying was implemented even more subtly, with the fish
restricting their use of social information to when past experience had
left them uncertain as to the best option. What became manifestly clear
was that these fish were not always, or unpredictably, using public
information, but rather were switching between reliance on different
sources of information in an extremely shrewd way.
Subsequently, we were to learn that these fish were not just copying
efficiently, but optimally.21 Jeremy Kendal, another postdoctoral
researcher, now at Durham University, carried out an experiment that
found ninespines apply an impressive “hill-climbing” strategy when they
exploit public information.22 We found that fish with prior experience of
finding food at one patch would switch preferences when the prey
capture rate of other fish suggested the yield of the alternative patch was
greater than at their previously preferred site. Such a strategy allows
individuals steadily to increase their foraging efficiency by gradually
homing in on the most profitable foods or foraging locations exploited
across the population, which is what lends this strategy its “hill-
climbing” quality. Later, further experiments showed that the probability
of a fish selecting a demonstrated prey patch depended solely upon the
returns of the foraging demonstrators.23 The degree of copying exhibited
by the observing fish increased with the absolute rate of feeding by the
fish they were watching. What is particularly interesting about this
finding is the ninespines’ behavior is precisely that predicted by a
sophisticated evolutionary game theory analysis conducted by an
economist in order to understand human behavior.24 In other words, two
species as different as humans and ninespine sticklebacks exhibit the
same optimal payoff-based learning rule when they copy.25 The use of
this strategy by ninespines as they colonized new regions, for instance,
would allow them gradually over time to increase the efficiency with

which they exploit diverse prey items in their natural environments. We
were excited by this finding. It suggested to us that through the use of a
relatively simple rule (copying others in proportion to their payoff), our
fish could achieve the surprisingly complex outcome of cumulative
knowledge gain. While this obviously falls short of human cumulative
culture,26 the rule nonetheless possessed a “ratcheting” quality that, to
my knowledge, had never previously been demonstrated in animals.
Ninespine and threespine sticklebacks are two closely related fishes
that, because of small morphological differences, find themselves on
opposite sides of a cost-benefit analysis specified by the costly
information hypothesis. For ninespines, but not threespines, this specific
form of social learning was sufficiently beneficial to evolve through
natural selection. One might anticipate that the cost-to-benefit ratio of
public-information use could also be changed by the personal
circumstances of individual fish. Consider, for instance, the impact on
female ninespines of being in reproductive condition. Pregnant females
swollen with eggs would be more conspicuous and more attractive to
predators than nonreproductive fish. They would also be slower to
respond to predators than other females because their large bellies drag
in the water. These changes in female condition effectively ratchet up
even further the costs of learning through trial and error, and ought to
make reproductive females even more reliant on social information than
nonreproductive fish. Conversely, males in reproductive state are
required to compete intensively with other males for females and
territories, and need to invest heavily in paternal care; they are tied to
the nest while they look after the eggs and fry, and during that time are
usually unable to feed. Such circumstances favor males who take risks
and seek out higher rewards through direct sampling of foraging sites,
since replete energy reserves at the onset of courtship potentially yield a
fitness bonanza. Being in reproductive condition ought to shift the
balance toward male sticklebacks being less reliant on public
information than other males.
These predictions were confirmed experimentally.27 Mike Webster
found that pregnant females relied almost exclusively on public
information, 
copying 
to 
a 
significantly 
greater 
extent 
than
nonreproductives, making fewer switches between patches, and spending
more time in the cover of refuge than other fish. Their condition had led

them to become more risk-averse, which favored heavy reliance on
social learning. Reproductive males, on the other hand, exhibited no
evidence of public-information use at all. These males exhibited the
shortest patch selection times, the highest switching rates, and the least
time in cover of all the fish that we tested. They also shoaled very little,
and we suspected the same physiological changes that had led
reproductive males to cease shoaling had also reduced their attention to
the behavior of foraging conspecifics, and the loss of public-information
use. A reduced shoaling tendency and a reduced tendency to spend time
in or near cover are both highly risky, since individuals moving alone or
in the open are known to be more vulnerable to predation.28 Evidence
from other animals suggests that heightened levels of circulating
testosterone associated with the onset of the reproductive phase can
reduce the sensitivity of males to risk.29
One finding that was of particular interest to us was that
reproductive males were actually quicker than nonreproductive fish to
solve a solitary foraging task. This meant that the transformation in the
male sticklebacks’ behavior with reproductive state could not simply be
attributed to the effects of testosterone surging through their tissues and
disrupting their learning. Rather, reproductive males appeared to be
pursuing an alternative adaptive strategy that functions to maximize
food intake prior to parental care through increased reliance on private
sampling. Taking chances to gain a food windfall would be adaptive if it
gives male sticklebacks a competitive edge in access to females, or in
looking after the eggs and fry.30 A transformation in the costs of asocial
learning dependent on reproductive state explains this switch in foraging
strategy.31 In fact, ninespine reproductive males behave very much like
threespines, raising the intriguing possibility that this difference between
the two species might be mediated by a shift in hormone levels.
Ninespines and threespines are, of course, not the only species of
sticklebacks—nor are they very closely related. The ninespine’s sister
species is the brook stickleback,32 a species that very much resembles the
ninespine but typically has five or six spines and lacks lateral bony
plates. Given its physical similarity and close relatedness to the
ninespine, we might expect that the brook stickleback would exploit
public information too. Also more closely related to ninespines than
threespines are the fourspine sticklebacks and the fifteenspine

sticklebacks.33 We were interested to know whether these species were
capable of public-information use as well, since that would allow us to
map the evolution of this social learning capability onto the stickleback
family tree. For several years, Mike Webster has been traveling the globe
collecting different species of sticklebacks, and testing them for public-
information use. He has tested fish from over 50 populations of 5
separate genera and 8 species. Of these, it is only populations of
ninespines and their closest relatives, the brook sticklebacks, that exhibit
public-information use, while populations of three other genera
seemingly do not. This implies that the public-information-use capability
evolved among the ancestors of ninespine and brook sticklebacks after
their divergence from the fourspine and fifteenspine sticklebacks, which
would be around 10 million years ago.
This finding is a good illustration of a general pattern concerning the
evolution of intelligence; that is, the mental abilities of animals are not
best explained by how closely related animals are to humans. Different
aspects of intelligence have evolved multiple times in diverse taxa
through convergent selection.34 Public-information use has evolved
independently in animal groups that are not closely related, including
humans, some birds, and a few fishes. These groups have in common
little more than the cost-benefit balance that favors this form of learning.
Later chapters will present further evidence that those cognitive
capabilities that might be considered the rudimentary foundations of
culture have similarly evolved through convergent selection in distinct
primate lineages.
Let me sum up what we have learned through our studies of public-
information use in sticklebacks. We have identified an adaptive
specialization in social learning, with ninespine, but not threespine,
sticklebacks capable of utilizing information about the richness of a food
patch by monitoring the success or failure of other feeding fish. This
species difference is found among sticklebacks from all around the
world, and is unaffected by rearing conditions or any other tested
experiential factor. The capability would appear to be highly specific;
ninespines can extract public information about the quality of food
patches, but not shelters. No other differences in the learning capabilities
of the two species have been found. Ninespines have weak
morphological defenses, as do the brook sticklebacks, which are the only

other stickleback to use public information. This implies that public-
information use is of benefit where it allows animals to acquire
information concerning the quality of food patches safely, cheaply, and
reliably. Among such species, our stickleback experiments suggest the
use of public information has evolved to be highly strategic, and allows
the fish to exploit resources in their environment with near optimal
efficiency. The species’ copying can nonetheless be predicted by
evolutionary models, and is consistent with a number of distinct but
complementary social learning strategies. Conversely, threespine
sticklebacks, which are physically more robust, can sample patches
directly at low cost and therefore have little need for public-information
use. Indeed, to wait under cover while others feed would only mean that
threespines miss out on feeding opportunities. This partly explains why
these two fish are often found in the same stream and rivers together.
Ninespines and threespines enjoy a mutualistic relationship, where each
benefits from the others’ presence. The opportunity to acquire public
information from the threespines probably at least partly underlies the
ninespines’ preference for mixed-species shoaling. The threespines, in
return, enjoy the safety that greater numbers bring, particularly since
many predators preferentially target the ninespines as food.
Several valuable lessons about social learning emerged from this
program of research. First and foremost, we learned that animals exploit
information provided by others in a decidedly strategic manner.
Ninespines do not copy at every available opportunity, but instead are
highly selective. For instance, they tend to utilize social information
when they have no relevant prior experience to rely on, or when the
knowledge gained by that experience is unreliable, as when it is out of
date. We also saw that ninespines were able to combine these two
sources of information effectively, to maximize foraging returns and
minimize risk. Prior to the findings of the tournament, this was an
important and striking lesson. Once we had been alerted to the strategic
nature of stickleback copying, we noticed that other animals copied very
selectively too. My research group has studied the behavior of a lot of
different animals, and in every species that we have worked with,
without exception, the social learning observed is highly strategic. Social
learning researchers around the world have overwhelmingly reached the
same conclusion.

Subsequently, I coined the phrase “social learning strategy” in a
deliberate attempt to equate the animal copying rules that were
emerging from experimental studies with those strategies that were
subject to analyses using evolutionary game theory.35 The idea that
humans, at least, might be copying strategically already existed in the
anthropological literature,36 and was supported by important theoretical
findings.37 However, there were clear opportunities to develop this
theoretical foundation further, and because the concept of a social
learning strategy had an intuitive appeal that resonated with the
biological community, it became a growth area of social learning
research.
One reason why the strategies approach proved productive is that it
provided rich possibilities for integrating empirical and theoretical
findings. Predictions from mathematical evolutionary models concerning
the application of specific strategies could be tested with animal social
learning experiments. These in turn provided data with which to ground
theory and thereby ensure assumptions were sound. In our case, we were
able to show that the pattern of copying exhibited by our sticklebacks fit
with hypotheses derived from evolutionary theory, such as copy when
asocial learning is costly,38 copy when uncertain,39 and conform to the
majority behavior.40 In this manner, the strategies approach helped to
draw the field of social learning more closely into a general evolutionary
framework.
The last decade has witnessed a rush of studies in this domain,
leaving little doubt among researchers in the field that animal social
learning is broadly, perhaps universally, strategic.41 Honeybees were
shown to follow the waggle dances of other bees more frequently when
their own foraging had been unsuccessful.42 The probability that
minnows would copy the feeding sites of others was found to increase
with predation risk.43 Whether redwing blackbirds acquire a food
preference through social learning hung critically on whether the
demonstrator birds are sick or well.44 Chimpanzees were more likely to
copy a dominant over a subordinate animal.45 And so forth. Strategic
copying became the rule rather than the exception. It was
experimentally demonstrated across a broad range of animals, including
those in natural populations, where strategic copying was often found to
increase biological fitness.46

Humans were no exception to this pattern. For instance, Tom
Morgan, one of my PhD students at St Andrews, presented adult human
subjects with a battery of experimental tasks. The experiments found
conditional or strong support for the use of nine separate social learning
strategies predicted by the cultural evolution literature, including
conformity, payoff-based copying, copying when asocial learning is
costly, and copying when uncertain.47 These various influences operated
simultaneously and interacted to produce behavior leading to effective
decision making and higher payoffs.48 In fact, the very term “copying”
betrays the strategic quality of human social learning. Throughout this
book I am using this term in a very general manner to refer to any form
of social learning, but when “copying” is used in normal speech it often
has a negative connotation. We think of the naughty schoolchild who
copies during an exam. In fact, this imagery brings home the strategic
nature of social learning beautifully. Nobody cheats in exams when they
already know the answer! Cheating reprobates are violating norms
because the examination is designed to establish what they alone know.
However, the strategy to copy when uncertain is a smart rule that has
served humans well throughout history.
Our success at confirming theoretical predictions brought with it
fresh challenges. Over a few short years my laboratory generated
experimental evidence that ninespine sticklebacks deployed no fewer
than six separate social learning strategies. While not all tested strategies
were confirmed,49 the diversity of supported rules nonetheless suggested
that strategic copying was far more complicated than first envisaged. For
instance, any research agenda dedicated to working out the strategy
implemented by a species of animal could no longer be tenable. Rather,
animals typically use many social learning strategies, switching between
them according to the circumstances, in order to exploit the available
internal and external cues in a flexible and adaptive manner. This leaves
the job of the social learning researcher even more challenging. It is not
sufficient to work out which learning rule is being used; we must also
work out the rules that specify which rule should be used. Currently,
researchers are starting to envisage meta-strategies that dictate social
learning strategy use in a context-specific manner,50 or to think of
strategies as biases that influence reliance on social information.51
Our stickleback experiments themselves provide clues as to how

alternative strategies might be integrated. Fish rely on up-to-date and
unambiguous personal information when available, but use social
information when they lack relevant experience or where their
knowledge is outdated or unclear.52 Information about the payoffs to
demonstrators is preferentially exploited in decision making,53 but when
such information is missing, the fish switch to the next most reliable
source of information, which takes account of the numbers of individuals
utilizing each option.54 That information is, in turn, implemented
through a conformist learning strategy,55 which again has been shown to
be highly adaptive.56 Such observations suggest that animals may make
judgments concerning learning strategies through mental processes that
resemble hierarchically organized decision trees.57
A second challenge that arises with the identification of social
learning strategies is to comprehend the mechanisms that allow animals
to copy strategically. For instance, are the observed tendencies to
conform to the majority or to copy the highest payoff behavior,
biological adaptations that have evolved specifically to enhance the
social learning performance of animals? Or have the animals learned
through prior experience that attending to the majority, or to the payoffs
to others, is a productive heuristic?58 The strategies perspective has little
to say on this matter, being inherently mechanism neutral,59 and hence
equally consistent with either possibility. However, studying the
mechanisms that support social learning is no less important to a
behavioral scientist than studying the functional rules that underlie the
decision making of animals. Here again, our stickleback experiments
prove instructive. In further experiments, Mike Webster analyzed the
behavior of the demonstrator fish and identified their feeding strikes
(where the fish suddenly dart toward and peck at the food) as the
specific cue on which the observing ninespines focus while learning. The
analysis suggests that that the capability for public-information use in
ninespine sticklebacks is underpinned by a tendency to attend to, and
quantify, the feeding strikes of other fishes. These findings, combined
with the absence of evidence for general enhancements in the learning of
ninespines compared to threespines, suggest that natural selection has
enhanced the ninespines’ public-information use by fine-tuning the
perceptual, 
motivational, 
and 
information-processing 
capabilities
associated with this form of social learning, rather than by directly

enhancing their learning capabilities. This is consistent with the view
that while what an animal learns may be ecologically specialized and
may therefore vary among species, how animals learn (at least, at the
level of the underlying associative processes) appears to be broadly
similar across diverse taxa.60
Our stickleback experiments also reveal that animals often possess
some impressively sophisticated social learning capabilities. Who would
have imagined that a tiny freshwater fish would be found to share with
humans the ability to utilize an optimally efficient hill-climbing learning
rule, or to exhibit conformist transmission? However, much is made of
the parallels between animal and human cognitive competences, and an
honest comparative perspective demands that the differences be given
equivalent attention. Our ninespine sticklebacks, proficient in acquiring
knowledge about patch quality through observation, failed to learn that
one shelter is better than another through use of public information.
That inflexibility stands in contrast to humans who, no doubt, could
assess the quality of a food patch by monitoring the returns to others,
but equally could generalize across contexts to extract public
information about mates, shelters, or any other resource. Nor could
threespine sticklebacks solve the public-information use task, in spite of
their being competent at other forms of social learning.
The following, I suggest, is a general pattern. Animals typically
possess specific social learning competences, tailored by natural
selection to address particular adaptive challenges relevant to the species
in its natural environment, and which do not operate, or operate far less
effectively, outside of the domains in which they have been selected to
work. Macaques can acquire a fear of snakes, and any snakelike object,
through associating the object’s characteristics with the fear responses of
other monkeys, but they seemingly can’t acquire fears of other objects
that way.61 Young male songbirds appear predisposed to acquire the
songs of their own species, but rarely those of others, implying evolved
predispositions to pick up some sounds more readily than others.62 More
generally, most animals are social learning specialists; their capabilities
are specialized solutions that have evolved in distinct lineages to fulfill
specific functions, and which are operational in a comparatively narrow
domain. Humans, in contrast, are social learning generalists; our copying
is certainly applied strategically, but is seldom greatly constrained by

our competences. We are not only capable of learning about foods,
mates, and predators socially, but also about algebra, ballet steps, and
car mechanics; these are phenomena that did not appear in our
evolutionary past and were not part of the adaptive challenge that our
minds were selected to overcome.
The same pattern applies to other aspects of cognition relevant to the
evolution of culture. Honeybees can use their waggle dances to transmit
information about food sources and nest sites, but unlike human
language, the dances cannot communicate other forms of knowledge.63
Meerkat helpers will actively teach pups how to process prey items but,
in contrast to human teaching, show no signs of teaching youngsters
other forms of wisdom.64 The manufacture and use of tools by New
Caledonian crows allows them to grub for food items hidden deep in
crevices,65 but, again unlike humans, the crows rarely use tools in other
ways. In each instance, the cognitive capabilities of animals are found to
be specific to particular taxa that share the same ecological challenges
and, in marked contrast to humans, their functionality is largely
restricted to domains in which they evolved.
The social learning strategies tournament taught us that there are
benefits to copying strategically, and this chapter confirms that strategic
copying is what animals do. The tournament suggested that natural
selection will have favored learning rules that increased the efficiency of
copying, and sure enough, we found that our fish learned with optimal
efficiency. Of course, to deploy these functional rules, animals must
possess the relevant perceptual and cognitive competences. Selection
cannot favor a disproportionate tendency to copy the majority behavior
in animals that cannot discern what the majority behavior is; nor can it
favor payoff-based copying in species incapable of computing the returns
to others. An animal cannot copy over long distances if it cannot see
over long distances; nor can it imitate the fine motor patterns of other
animals if they will not let it close enough to watch.66 Such
considerations allow us to imagine how natural selection favoring more
accurate and more efficient copying could plausibly have spillover
effects in shaping the cognitive, perceptual, and social characteristics of
animals. Selection for more effective copying would have knock-on
consequences for the evolution of brain and cognition. Evidence suggests
that something along these lines happened in the primate lineage

leading to humans, causing our ancestors to evolve a more general
capability to copy others, with major ramifications for the evolution of
mind. Our investigations of how that happened are described in the next
two chapters.

CHAPTER 5
THE ROOTS OF CREATIVITY
In 1921, in a small village on the south coast of England close to
Southampton, a blue tit was first observed to peck open the foil top of a
milk bottle delivered to the doorstep of one of the houses, and to drink
the high-energy cream.1 Whether it was truly the very first bird to steal
the cream from bottles of milk is open to doubt. More likely, the bird
spotted had copied a sneaky individual that stole in unobserved to
plunder a free breakfast. Nonetheless, in a nation of bird watchers like
Britain, no avian burglar could hope to get away with this pilfering for
long without detection. Amateur ornithologists, followed by professional
ethologists, noted the repeated appearance of the behavior as it spread
to nearby locations. Soon dozens of other species of birds had picked up
the habit. The British public was enthralled. Bird lovers ate their toast
and boiled eggs glued to their windows, eager for a glimpse of the
feathered bandits. Over the next thirty years, milk-bottle top opening
was observed by an army of “twitchers” who, with characteristic
obsession, carefully monitored the diffusion of this charming habit
through dozens of towns and villages as it spread across the United
Kingdom, and even into mainland Europe.2
This episode is perhaps the best-known example of a novel learned
behavior spreading through an animal population. Subsequently, animal
behaviorists carried out experimental tests of milk-bottle opening on
captive birds,3 and used mathematical and statistical models to analyze
the diffusion of this habit.4 The studies established that many individual
birds were capable of solving the puzzle of how to peck open the foil
caps, even without the opportunity to copy others. Bottle-top opening
would seem to be quite an intuitive behavior for a bird. Researchers also
found that the behavior spread easily because birds could not only pick
up the habit through copying, but also through simply being exposed to
the milk bottles that other birds had opened; this seemingly sufficed to

put the idea in their heads. Apparently, this particular habit spread
through a combination of multiple independent inventions at sites where
milk bottles were introduced, followed by social transmission from bird
to bird.5
Milk-bottle opening is an example of an animal innovation, defined as
the devising of a novel solution to a problem, or a new way of exploiting
the environment. The habit appears special only by virtue of its
familiarity. In reality, many thousands of innovations have been devised
by a broad variety of animals. Birds and mammals are known to
incorporate new items or novel techniques into their foraging
repertoires; whales, dolphins and birds introduce novel vocal elements
into their songs; apes and monkeys concoct novel deceptive acts;
primates and birds invent new tools; and countless other animals create
novel courtship displays and social behavior.6
Animal innovations are highly diverse. They range from the
ingenious (the orangutans that devised clever means of extracting palm
hearts from trees with vicious defenses such as sharp spines and knife-
edged petioles7), to the morbid (the herring gull that invented the habit
of catching rabbits and killing them by dropping them onto rocks from
height, or through drowning them in the sea8), to the enchanting (the
group of Japanese macaques who started rolling snow balls and playing
with them [figure 4]9), to the plain disgusting (the rook that made a
habit of eating pieces of frozen human vomit10).
My favorite example concerns a young chimpanzee called Mike. He
was observed by primatologist Jane Goodall to shoot up the social
rankings and become alpha male in record time by devising a thoroughly
intimidating and noisy dominance display that involved banging two
empty kerosene cans together.11 Astonishingly, Mike achieved this
without having a single fight. Also impressive are a group of ring-tailed
lemurs, who were able to drink from an out-of-reach pool by dipping
their furry tails in it while clinging from an overhanging branch and
then squeezing water off their fur into their mouths.12 A population of
baboons independently invented the same habit.13 What is more, those of
us who were told off as kids for dunking our cookies in our coffee might
be captivated by a population of Trinidadian birds called Carib grackles
that have started dunking their food too.14
My laboratory has been investigating animal creativity and invention

for two decades, and this chapter summarizes some of our findings. Our
experiments convinced us that animals do exhibit behavior that can
sensibly be termed “innovation,” even if the consanguinity of
nonhuman-animal and human innovation is a matter of debate.15 Our
investigations, and those of other animal innovation researchers, provide
compelling evidence that humans do not have a monopoly on creativity.
Many animals invent new behavior patterns, modify existing behavior to
a novel context, or respond to social and ecological stresses in an
appropriate and novel manner.16 Of course, a vast difference exists
between dipping food and inventing a microwave cooker, while banging
cans together to send a message is a long way from developing e-mail.
Why it should be that humans alone are capable of such truly
spectacular innovation is the focus of this book. Undeniably, there is
something distinctively creative about our species, and the issue of how
this arose is addressed in later chapters. Nonetheless, I maintain that the
study of animal innovation is pivotal to understanding human cognitive
evolution. As we shall see, research in this field has generated some
highly suggestive data that provide important clues with which to
reconstruct aspects of the human story, particularly those related to the
evolution of our enlarged brain. The innovation of other animals might
not be impressive when juxtaposed against human achievements, but its
study is central to comprehending the roots of human culture.

FIGURE 4. Japanese macaques appear to enjoy playing with snow. The monkeys frequently roll
snowballs and sometimes youngsters even engage in snowball fights. By permission of Zoonar.
In recent years, researchers have demonstrated that animal
innovation can be studied rigorously and systematically, that innovation

can be distinguished from related processes such as exploration and
learning, and that innovation plays important roles in the natural
behavior of animals. Indeed, the ability to innovate can be critical to the
survival of animals in changed circumstances.17 For instance, innovative
species of birds have been found to be significantly more likely than
other birds to survive and establish themselves when introduced into
new locations by humans.18 In this age of human habitat destruction, a
capacity for innovation is likely to be of critical importance to
endangered species forced to adjust to impoverished environments.19
Evidence is mounting that innovation plays important roles in animal
ecology (e.g., where it facilitates the ability of the animal to expand its
range) and evolution (e.g., where it can generate divergence between
populations and is an important source of behavioral variation).20
In truth, many animals are enormously inventive, but the extent of
animal innovation remained hidden until recently for a simple and
obvious reason: one cannot recognize a behavior as novel until one has a
good understanding of the “normal” behavior of the species. Only after
capuchin monkeys had been studied in the wild for many years, could
the first recorded use of a club to attack a snake with confidence be
regarded as an innovation.21 Likewise, only after decades of painstaking
observation by chimpanzee primatologists could an extraordinary
courtship display, which involved an adolescent male called Shadow
flipping his upper lip over his nostrils to impress the females,22 be
recognized as genuinely novel. The adult females he sought to woo were
dominant to him and responded aggressively to conventional courtship
moves, but with his new display Shadow was able to convey his sexual
interest devoid of aggressive overtones.
What was long established, at least in a subset of intensively studied
species such as rats, cats, dogs, and pigeons, was that creativity is a
natural aspect of the learning process. In the late nineteenth century, a
prominent American psychologist, Edward Thorndike at Columbia
University, conducted classic experiments on the problem-solving
abilities of animals; these experiments led to the development of one of
the most celebrated laws of animal learning, known as the “law of
effect.”23 In one famous study, Thorndike confined cats to small boxes
from which they could break out through mastery of an escape
mechanism, such as pressing a button or pulling a string. The cats

disliked confinement and responded by biting at the bars, thrusting their
paws through openings, clawing at all in reach, flailing around wildly
and incessantly, and generally trying all kinds of actions to escape.
Eventually, the cat hit on something that worked, and got out.
Thorndike repeated the confinement and noted how, over several trials,
all the other unsuccessful actions gradually dropped out of the animal’s
performance, while the successful act was, as he termed it, “stamped in”
by the experience. After many trials, when put in the box, the cat would
immediately activate the escape mechanism in a calm and definite way.
Thorndike’s experiment is renowned for establishing that animals
learn by repeating actions that are followed by a positive consequence,
while eliminating those followed by a negative outcome. However, the
experiment also showed that this learning process frequently begins with
the spontaneous generation of novel behavior,24 which gradually
becomes refined through experience to retain successful elements. A
similar conclusion was reached by perhaps the greatest of all learning
theorists, Burrhus Fredrick Skinner, the eminent Harvard psychologist
who gave his name to the “Skinner box” in which much animal learning
is now studied. Skinner emphasized how animals are naturally active,
continuously 
emitting 
behavior, 
and 
that, 
depending 
on 
the
circumstances and the animal’s motivation, novel behavior would
commonly be generated.
Not all animals are equally adept at innovation, however. As far back
as 1912, the Bristol psychologist Conwy Lloyd Morgan speculated that
behavior may be composed of a repetitive component that has occurred
many times previously and a smaller component of novel behavior that
is a creative departure from routine, and was prominent in so-called
“higher organisms.”25 Nonetheless, research into the rules of animal
learning strongly implies that the generation of novel behavior is a
regular aspect of the way in which animals learn. Animal behavior
studies in the modern era have confirmed these early learning theorists’
conclusions. As we shall see, innovation is indeed widespread, and
species do differ in their tendency to innovate.26
Animal behaviorists were nonetheless surprisingly slow to take up
the challenge of studying innovation. After all, when a novel learned
behavior spreads through an animal population as individuals learn from
one another, typically a single individual will have initiated the process.

Such diffusion requires two processes: the initial inception of the
behavioral variant, which is innovation, and the spread of the novel habit
between individuals, known as social learning. However, while many
scientific books, conferences, and papers have been dedicated to animal
social learning,27 in comparison, the subject of animal innovation
received scant attention right up until the twenty-first century. Although
related topics, such as neophilia, exploration, and insight learning in
animals have benefited from established traditions of research, and
while innovation in humans has been subject to considerable
investigation, animal innovation was largely neglected.
One exception was an important paper authored by primatologist
luminaries Hans Kummer and Jane Goodall in 1985.28 Kummer and
Goodall surveyed the scientific literature on primate behavior, noting
that there were extensive reports of primate innovation, although “of the
many such behaviours observed, only a few will be passed on to other
individuals, and seldom will they spread through the whole troop.”29
Several of these innovations derived from the ability of monkeys and
apes to profit from accidental events, while others resulted from the
ability to use existing behavior patterns for new purposes. Kummer and
Goodall described how innovation was sometimes stimulated by an
excess of resources—as occurred, for instance, when the animals were
provisioned or held in captivity. In one case, a study compared the
behavior of hamadryas baboons in Zurich zoo with a wild population in
Ethiopia.30 While all the motor and vocal signals seen in the wild were
also observed in the zoo colony, 9 of 68 communicative signals seen in
the zoo population were not found in the wild. This suggested that some
zoo colony signals were innovations, which were typically elaborations
on existing signals. More commonly, innovation was prompted by
conditions creating a need, such as a period of drought or a social
challenge. Later studies were to suggest that there is some truth to the
old adage “necessity is mother of invention.”31
What was particularly significant about Kummer and Goodall’s
article, however, was that it offered a suggestion for how animal
innovation could be studied experimentally. At the time, many
behavioral researchers felt that innovation was too rare to be easily
investigated with experiments. How could researchers investigate a
behavior that might only happen a few times a year? Kummer and

Goodall 
offered 
a 
simple, 
pragmatic 
solution: 
“Systematic
experimentation (such as the introduction of a variety of carefully
designed ecological and technical ‘problems’) both in free-living and
captive groups would provide a new way of studying the phenomena of
innovative behaviors and their transmission through and between social
groups.”32 This was to prove an important suggestion. In the last two
decades, Kummer and Goodall’s approach has been widely implemented
in animal studies. Innovation can be induced in captive and natural
populations of animals by presenting them with novel challenges, such
as foraging puzzle boxes (ideally under controlled conditions), and by
exploring the influencing factors, such as the innovator’s age or the
ecological context.
When my research group began studying animal innovation in the
1990s, Kummer and Goodall’s article was far from the only treatment of
animal innovation. Nonetheless, the scientific literature on this topic was
scant. No satisfactory definition of animal innovation existed, and the
few articles that had been published were mutually contradictory. As a
step toward resolving these issues, I organized a symposium on the topic
at the 2001 International Ethology Congress meeting, and invited the
participants to contribute chapters to the book Animal Innovation,33
which was published two years later. In the introductory chapter, my
coeditor Simon Reader and I discussed some difficult issues concerning
how animal innovation should be defined.34 These are challenging, but
here I skip the complications.35 For our purposes, an animal innovation
can simply be regarded as a new or modified learned behavior or
manufactured resource not previously found in the population.
When prompted to name a human innovation, we might think of the
invention of penicillin by Alexander Fleming, or the construction of the
World Wide Web by Tim Berners-Lee. The animal equivalents are
perhaps less dramatic. An example might be the invention of
automobile-mediated nut cracking by Japanese carrion crows, who place
walnuts in front of the wheels of cars at traffic lights and return to
retrieve the nuts when the lights turn red.36 Another cute example is the
devising of novel nest decorations by starlings—birds famously fond of
shiny objects—who raided a car-wash coin machine in Fredericksburg,
Virginia, and made off with, quite literally, thousands of dollars in
quarters.37 What these innovations have in common is that they

represent a newly introduced behavior or product.38 As the milk-bottle
opening example illustrates, animal innovations can subsequently spread
by social learning, but the introduction of a novel behavior into a
population through copying is not in itself innovation.39 Nor, as Simon
and I were keen to stress, should every quirky, random, or idiosyncratic
behavior qualify as an animal innovation. What scientists call
innovations must be both entirely novel and learned behaviors, and
researchers only know that they are learned if they are produced
repeatedly in a specific, functional manner.40 Some researchers argued
for a narrower use of the term—for instance, restricting innovation to
cognitively demanding tasks. However, we felt that given the primitive
state of knowledge on the topic, an inclusive definition would better
benefit the field since an over-exacting definition risked hindering the
collection of raw data, and amassing data is the most important goal of a
young science. The subsequent growth of the field and widespread use of
our definition arguably justify our stance.41
An initial question for animal innovation researchers to address was
whether it was even appropriate to think of particular animals as
“innovative.” Perhaps animal innovations were simply induced by
circumstances, and what we were calling innovators were simply those
animals that happened to be subjected to changed or stressful
environmental conditions, such as droughts or provisioned food.
Conversely, if innovativeness was genuinely a property of individual
animals, we needed to establish whether all individuals engaged in it, or
if were there particular classes of individual or personality types who
carried out most of the innovation.
Rachel Kendal,42 a PhD student at the University of Cambridge, set
out to address some of these questions with an investigation of
innovation in zoo populations of callitrichid monkeys (marmosets,
tamarins, and lion tamarins). The prevailing assumption in the primate
behavior literature had been that young or juvenile primates were more
innovative than adult individuals. However, the data underlying this
assumption were not particularly strong. Researchers had perhaps been
overly influenced by one or two prominent animal innovators, such as
Imo, the famous juvenile macaque who devised sweet potato washing.
The putative innovative tendency of the young was thought to be a side
effect of juvenile animals’ increased rates of exploration and play. This is

plausible. Indeed, a compelling case can be made that play functions to
generate creativity and stimulate innovation. Play may be an adaptation
to get out of the rut and discover better solutions to life’s challenges.43
However, within callitrichids contradictory evidence for age differences
in response to novel objects, foods, and foraging tasks had been found.
To shed some light on these issues, Rachel adopted Kummer and
Goodall’s recommendation, presenting novel foraging challenges, in the
form of simple puzzle boxes that could be opened to retrieve highly
desired foods; she offered these to family groups of callitrichid monkeys
in zoos around the United Kingdom. Rachel set out to examine whether
the age of the monkeys affected their responsiveness to novelty
(neophilia), exploration, and innovation. The puzzle box tasks were
given, over repeated trials, to more than 100 callitrichid monkeys in 26
zoo populations. The tasks required the monkeys to access food by, for
instance, pushing open flap doors, reaching into holes, or lifting off the
lids of the boxes. Rachel recorded the first individual to approach,
contact, and solve each task, in each population, as well as a variety of
other variables relevant to the spread of the solution.44
The study did indeed reveal systematic age differences in callitrichid
innovation, but with older rather than younger monkeys significantly
more likely to be the first to solve the tasks. While younger monkeys
were among the first to explore and contact the tasks, adults were
typically the ones who solved them first. Older individuals appeared
better able to turn their manipulations of the apparatus into successful
extraction of the food.45
When innovations spread through animal populations, the temptation
is to assume that the animals must be learning from each other, and
most times they are. However, researchers cannot just assume social
transmission, because in theory, if the innovation was simple to master,
each adopter could have learned it independently. Indeed, in the years
that I have studied social transmission, I have come across several
examples of novel behavior patterns diffusing through animal
populations, which to all intents and purposes resembled socially
transmitted behaviors; yet subsequent analysis revealed the animals each
learned the task independently.46 Distinguishing social from asocial
learning is even more of a problem in natural animal populations, where
the history of the animals concerned is rarely known. Major

controversies revolve around this issue. For instance, the claim that
animals such as chimpanzees or dolphins possess “culture” has been
viewed as seriously undermined by the absence of clear evidence that
habits such as nut cracking, foraging for termites, and sponging are
socially learned.47
For this reason, my laboratory has dedicated much effort to devising
new mathematical and statistical methods that allow the diffusion of
innovations through social learning to be detected in natural populations
of animals. The “option bias” method is one such tool.48 The method
works on a simple principle; that is, if there are more than one means of
solving a task (that it, multiple “options”), then social transmission will
generate “biases” in the pattern of option use, since individuals will copy
each other’s methods. Were researchers to come across a population of
monkeys that were all solving a problem one way, when there was an
equally easy alternative method available, they might infer from this
bias in the option choices that the monkeys had copied the method from
each other. In practice, researchers require statistical methods for
working out how likely it is that a given level of skew in the options
deployed could have arisen through chance or entirely through asocial
learning. If the observed option bias is sufficiently large, then the
alternative hypothesis, that the animals are each learning independently,
can be rejected, and social transmission can be safely inferred. In the
case of Rachel’s monkeys, we were able to conclude that some of the
puzzle box solutions devised by innovators had indeed subsequently
spread through social learning.
All matters considered, Rachel’s experiment suggested that the older
monkeys’ greater experience and physical competence had allowed them
to innovate and solve novel problems more effectively than the
youngsters, but that the young often acquired those same new foraging
habits through social learning.49 The greater life experience of adults
seemingly enabled them to outperform younger individuals, although
other developmental factors, such as improvements in manipulative
skills, increased strength, and maturity with age may also have been
important. There would appear to be a developmental watershed (at
about four years, in the case of callitrichid monkeys), when prior
manipulative experience generates sufficient competence in extractive
foraging for individual callitrichids to begin to translate their

manipulations into successful and efficient retrieval of the food without
the help of others. In these monkeys, at least, innovation appears to
require a certain amount of prior knowledge and skill.50
Age was not the only source of variation in innovative performance.
The experiment also revealed consistent differences between species in
their problem-solving capability. Rachel found faster responses, greater
levels of success, more manipulation of the puzzle boxes, and greater
attentiveness to both the task and the successes of others in lion
tamarins, than in both tamarins and marmosets.51 These findings fit with
a previous study that had found species dependent on manipulative and
explorative foraging tend to be less neophobic and more innovative than
other species.52 Extractive foraging is the act of locating and processing
foods embedded in a substrate or casing, such as underground roots and
insects, or hard shells of nuts, and fruits.53 Lion tamarins are extensive
extractive foragers, who use their claws to dig under the bark of trees to
search for a variety of insects and other prey.54 Marmosets are also
extractive foragers, but are more specialized than the lion tamarins
because they gain a large proportion of their nutrition from tree sap,55
while all of the tamarin species that Rachel studied have been described
as nonextractive foragers.56 Hence, Rachel’s experimental results of
increasing innovation from tamarins to marmosets to lion tamarins fit
the hypothesis that extractive foraging may have promoted the evolution
of intelligence, in the form of an ability to respond flexibly to foraging
challenges.57
Further insights into the factors that influence the invention and
spread of animal innovations came from studies of birds. Neeltje
Boogert, a Master’s student at the University of St Andrews, investigated
to what extent the pattern of spread of innovations in captive groups of
starlings could be predicted by prior knowledge of a variety of individual
and social-group variables,58 such as association patterns (who spends
time with whom), social-rank orders (who is dominant to whom),
measures of neophobia (e.g., who is quick to explore a new area or
object), and asocial learning performance.59 Again adopting Kummer and
Goodall’s recommendation, small groups of starlings were presented
with a series of novel extractive foraging tasks, and Neeltje recorded the
time that it took for each bird to contact and solve each, as well as the
orders of contacting and solving. We then explored which variables best

explained the observed behavior.
Neeltje 
found, 
perhaps 
surprisingly, 
that 
asocial 
learning
performance, recorded where each individual had been tested in
isolation, predicted which birds would be the first solvers of the novel
foraging tasks in the social group. In other words, one can foresee how
innovative a starling will be on the basis of its previously measured
learning performance. That innovative individuals should turn out to be
good learners is of course very intuitive, but the results need not have
panned out this way. We would not have been surprised if, say,
dominant birds had monopolized the tasks, or if neophobia had proven a
better predictor than learning ability, because timid individuals had
failed to engage with the puzzle box. Often, intuitive predictions are not
confirmed. For instance, Neeltje’s initial findings suggested that
association patterns did not predict the spread of solving, implying that
birds were no more likely to learn from close associates than birds with
whom they spent little time. This result had surprised us, particularly as
other data suggested that some copying was taking place.60 We came to
the conclusion that perhaps the birds had not learned from their closest
associates, because the relatively small size of the enclosures in the
captive environment meant that each bird could readily see all group
mates at virtually all times, leaving individuals able to learn from each
other effectively. Innovations may be more likely to spread along
networks of association in larger groups living in more naturalistic
environments, a prediction that has since been confirmed in populations
of wild birds.61 However, when we developed a more powerful statistical
tool for detecting social transmission through animal networks, called
network-based diffusion analysis,62 and analyzed Neeltje’s starling data
again, we subsequently found evidence that the birds did learn from
close associates after all. The same tools have subsequently been
implemented to demonstrate network-based diffusion in birds, whales,
sticklebacks, and primates.63
In my experience, many more people will accept the idea that
primates and birds can innovate than are willing to entertain the
suggestion that fishes have such a problem-solving capability. However,
as we have seen, fishes are good learners and are convenient model
systems for studying many aspects of social behavior. Moreover, forms of
experiment can be conducted with fishes that would be practically

impossible in more cerebral taxa, such as primates. This applies to the
experimental investigation of innovation. That is because if the
innovator is designated as the first individual in a population to solve a
problem, a researcher would have to study large numbers of populations
to start to see consistent patterns in innovation. Imagine that a
researcher gives a novel foraging task to a population of baboons that a
two-year-old, subdominant male solves first. What conclusion could be
drawn? The researcher could not legitimately infer that innovators are
typically male, young, and subdominant, since those characteristics
might not be responsible for this particular innovator’s success. The
same task would have to be given to a large number of other baboon
populations in order to start to see genuine patterns in the innovation
that ensues. Were the researcher to find, say, that subdominant baboons
consistently solved the task first, he or she would have grounds for
concluding that there might be a genuine relationship between social
rank and innovation, but that, perhaps, other factors prove not to be
causally relevant. The trouble is no professional animal behaviorist has
the resources to establish and study sufficiently numerous captive
populations of baboons, so that kind of experiment simply could not be
conducted with that particular species, or for that matter, any other
primate. In contrast, establishing multiple populations of small aquarium
fish is highly feasible, and that is where fishes come into their own.
Together with another of my PhD students at Cambridge University
Simon Reader, now at McGill University, I established many populations
of guppies,64 a small tropical fish, in laboratory aquaria and presented
them with novel maze tasks that could be negotiated to find hidden
food. The mazes were composed of one or more partitions with small
holes or compartments through which the fish had to swim to find the
food source.65 We designated the “innovator” as the first individual in
each population to solve the maze and eat the food.66 Sixty-nine such
populations were established, each comprised of around 16 fish that
were carefully chosen so as to vary in their sex, hunger level, and body
size. The experiments were designed to ascertain whether any of these
characteristics would consistently be found among the innovators.
We did indeed find consistent patterns. Innovators were significantly
more likely to be females than males, more likely to be food deprived
than not, and typically smaller rather than larger fish.67 These patterns

were not artifacts of differences among the fish in activity or swimming
speed; innovators were neither the most active fish (since males are
more active than females) nor those with the fastest swimming speed
(since large fish can swim faster than small fish).68 Rather, the observed
patterns are best explained by differences among fish in their
motivational state. The first individuals to solve the mazes are those
driven to find novel foraging solutions by hunger, or by the metabolic
costs of growth, or pregnancy. Small fish have higher metabolic costs
associated with more rapid growth, and so need to acquire food at
elevated rates relative to larger fish.69 Guppies are live-bearing fish, and
adult females spend much of their time pregnant, which exerts
significant demands on their energy intake. Other experiments of ours
have established that this sex difference in foraging performance
disappears when sexually immature fish are tested.70 Motivation, rather
than cleverness or ability, is what explains patterns of innovation here.
Fishes are typically reluctant to swim into unfamiliar holes and through
dark compartments, since predators might be lurking behind them. The
hungrier an individual, the more likely it will be to take risks and try out
new solutions to find food.
To investigate further how motivational state affects innovation, we
conducted an experiment, again using guppies, that explored the
relationship between past foraging success and foraging innovation.71
For two weeks, each day when the fish were fed, we would deliver food
items one at a time and thus allow certain individuals to monopolize the
food, thereby generating substantial variation between fish in foraging
success.72 We kept a precise record of the amount of food that each
individual consumed over the two weeks and also weighed each fish
before and after the experiment. Then we exposed each of the
populations to three novel maze tasks, and recorded the time it took for
each fish to complete each maze. Our prediction was that poor
competitors (fish that had gained the least weight and obtained the
fewest food items) would be more likely to innovate than the good
competitors when presented with the novel foraging tasks. That was
exactly what was found among male fish, where the time to complete
the foraging tasks correlated positively with both weight gain and the
number of food items consumed; however, no such correlation was
observed in females. In spite of this, the females performed well. Female

guppies appeared much more motivated to solve the foraging tasks than
the males, irrespective of their past foraging success.
Evolutionary theory sheds light on these findings. Among many
animals, females invest more in their offspring’s development than
males. Such differential parental investment often leaves males with
comparatively little to lose from mating promiscuously and thereby
having as many offspring as possible, but inclines females to be more
cautious and choosy. This sex difference is known as “Bateman’s
Principle,” after discover Angus Bateman.73 In fact, the situation is a
little more complicated, and a variety of factors are now known to
influence the promiscuity and choosiness of the sexes,74 particularly in
humans.75 Nonetheless, in many animals, a female’s reproductive success
is primarily limited by access to food resources, whereas a male’s
reproductive success is dependent on the number of mates that he can
find.76 This is particularly true in guppies, since females give birth to live
young and pour a vast amount of energy and resources into their
offspring’s development. As a result, finding high-quality food has a
much bigger impact on females’ fitness than males’.77 The more that
female guppies eat, the more eggs are made, and the more offspring
born.78 Mating is rarely a priority for female guppies, as they can store
sperm from previous matings for weeks. Most of the time they need food
more than they need mates. That is why, irrespective of how well
stocked their energy reserves are, female guppies always performed well
in the problem solving task. They were constantly motivated to find
food. Male guppies, on the other hand, spend vast amounts of their time
pursuing females, displaying to them, trying to seduce them to mate,
and, if they fail to impress, trying a sneaky mating attempt anyway. One
study reported that in the laboratory,79 on average, a male guppy
displays to females seven times every five minutes, while observations in
the wild have established that females receive a sneaky mating attempt
every minute.80 The male guppy that seeks out only sufficient food to
keep it going while it chases females is the one that leaves the most
descendants. Well-fed males have more important priorities than solving
a foraging task, which is why the trade-off between foraging success and
problem-solving performance arose in our experiment.
The aforementioned experiments, and many others like them, are the
bread and butter of animal innovation research, and it was important

that they were conducted to gain a basic understanding of the
phenomena. However, in my judgment, current interest in animal
innovation derives less from experimental investigations of animal
problem solving and more from stimulating theoretical findings.
Valuable though such experiments are, the investigation of animal
innovation really took off with a major survey of over 2,000 examples of
foraging innovations in birds81—the most complete survey of animal
innovation ever conducted. This study was conducted by Louis Lefebvre,
a biologist at McGill University in Canada, renowned for his creative
research. Lefebvre noted that many scientific journals publishing articles
on bird behavior carried “short notes” that reported when a species of
bird was observed to do something unusual or novel. Seeing an exciting
opportunity, Lefebvre led a team of researchers that compiled these
reports, using keywords such as “novel” or “never seen before” to
classify behavior patterns as innovations. They went on to investigate
whether the size of the bird’s brain predicted how innovative it would
be.
There was a reason to anticipate such a relationship. Allan Wilson, a
biochemist at UC Berkeley, about whom I will have more to say in the
next chapter, had earlier proposed a “cultural drive hypothesis.”82
Wilson argued that the spread of behavioral innovations through cultural
transmission led animals to exploit the environment in new ways, and
thereby increased the rate of genetic evolution.83 He suggested that the
ability to devise novel solutions to life’s challenges and to copy the good
ideas of other animals would give individuals an advantage in the
struggle to survive and reproduce. Assuming these abilities have some
substrate in brain tissue, selection for innovativeness and social learning
capability would favor larger and larger brains, which in turn would
further enhance their innovation and social learning. Wilson speculated
that this cultural drive had culminated in humans as the most innovative
and culturally dependent species, with extremely large brains. If correct,
cultural drive had played a central role in the evolution of the human
brain.
Lefebvre and colleagues did indeed find the predicted relationship.84
The rate at which different bird species engaged in innovation correlated
positively with measures of brain size. Those species with the most
reports of innovation tended to be the birds with the largest brains,

while small-brained birds rarely innovated. Although such correlational
studies are vulnerable to reporting biases,85 Lefebvre and colleagues had
devised statistical methods for evaluating and counteracting them. This
work, and subsequent analyses, provided reasonable grounds to be
confident that the innovation data represented a valuable, robust, and
naturalistic measure of an aspect of behavioral flexibility.86
The pioneering work of Lefebvre’s team inspired further analyses of
the relations between innovation, ecology, and cognition in birds and
primates. To test the idea that innovations might facilitate survival in
novel circumstances, biologists Daniel Sol and colleagues took advantage
of a series of natural experiments where humans had introduced bird
species into new habitats; the first study was focused on New Zealand,
but subsequently the same researchers went on to conduct a global
analysis.87 Innovative bird species were found to be more likely than
noninnovative species to survive and establish themselves when
introduced into new locations.88 The study demonstrated that being
innovative could aid survival, particularly in changed conditions.
Another fascinating analysis revealed that migratory species of birds are
less innovative than nonmigrants, and that the latter innovate most in
the harsher winter months.89 This implied that migratory birds were
forced to travel because of an inability to adjust behaviorally to the
tough winter months. Later studies showed that innovative species of
birds were more likely to give rise to new species than less innovative
birds.90
I remember reading Lefebvre’s papers with considerable excitement.
To me, his studies were a conceptual breakthrough. The findings not
only implied that brain volume might prove a useful indicator of how
innovative an animal was, but also provided the first compelling
evidence that increased innovativeness might give animals an advantage
in the struggle to survive and reproduce. Natural selection may have
favored innovativeness as part of a survival strategy based on flexibility
—that is, the flexibility to cope with unpredictable or changing
environments and to alter behavior to outcompete others. Perhaps
selection for innovativeness could be driving brain enlargement over
evolutionary time.
Lefebvre’s 
analysis 
also 
provided 
researchers 
with 
a 
new
methodology. The experimental studies that we and others had carried

out were starting to show patterns in innovative behavior, but inevitably
such experiments can only investigate the behavior of a small number of
species. How general these conclusions were was not clear. Our data
suggested, for instance, that most innovation is carried out by adults
rather than younger individuals, or that sex differences in innovation
could be predicted using knowledge of parental investment patterns.
However, Lefebvre had provided researchers with the means to test such
hypotheses in a truly general way, across tens, even hundreds, of species.
Inspired by Lefebvre and his coauthors, Simon Reader and I took up
the challenge of applying their methodology to primates. Unfortunately,
primatologists did not have the same tradition as ornithologists of
publishing innovations as independent short notes. Simon was forced to
work systematically through literally thousands of scientific articles
published in prominent primate behavior journals in order to collate
examples of primate innovations. While doing so, he also collected data
on rates of social learning. It was a Herculean effort on Simon’s part to
pull this data together and required years of effort, but he persevered.
Eventually, he built up an extensive database of over 500 examples of
innovations in primates, with a similar number of examples of social
learning, all spanning 42 species.91
With eager anticipation, we conducted statistical analyses looking for
patterns in the primate data.92 The results were encouraging. A higher
incidence of innovation in adult than in nonadult primates was reported
across the entire database, just as our callitrichid monkey experiments
had revealed. Consistent with our hypothesis that necessity was the
mother of much animal innovation (derived from our fish experiments),
across all primates Simon found more reported incidences of innovation
in low-status individuals and fewer reports of innovation in high-status
individuals than expected in either, given their numbers in the
populations. Dominant animals typically have privileged access to
resources, such as foods or mates, and hence, unlike subordinates,
probably do not need to innovate to get what they want. Subordinate
primates, on the other hand, were forced to get creative to survive; they
did this by devising new foraging techniques, exploiting novel foods, and
coming up with innovative means to secure matings. Often this required
subordinates, more than dominants, to form strategic alliances.93 We also
found greater innovation in male primates and fewer reports of female

innovation than expected, given their numbers in the population.94 This
sex difference was particularly strong in relation to sexual behavior and
aggression. The latter finding can be explained in a similar manner to
the sex difference in guppy innovation, except that in the case of the
primates it is the males for whom the marginal benefits are greater,
because the innovations allow them to access mates. In addition, Simon
found that approximately half of the instances of innovation that had
taken place among primates had followed some sort of ecological
challenge, such as a period of food shortage, a dry season, or habitat
degradation. Once again, this pattern fits with the necessity hypothesis.
The primate database was lending confidence to the conclusions of our
experiments.
However, the relationship between primate innovation rate and brain
size was what I was most impatient to test. Compelling though it was,
Lefebvre’s study whetted the appetite for more. Only if the same
relationship that Lefebvre had found in birds held in primates could
Wilson’s cultural drive really be central to human evolution. We also
needed to establish whether rates of social learning covaried with rates
of innovation and brain size, as Wilson predicted. Comparative statistical
analyses are rarely straightforward to conduct. Sophisticated statistical
methods need to be used to control for the fact that species are often
closely related, and hence cannot be assumed to be independent data
points in analyses. In our study there were other complications too.
Some primate species might possess more reports of innovations simply
because they had been studied more than other species. Clearly there are
many more researchers studying, say, common chimpanzees than little-
known species of nocturnal prosimians, such as aye-ayes or bushbabies.95
We needed to correct our data for this “research effort.” In addition,
little consensus existed in the literature as to the most appropriate
measure of brain size. Should we look at the absolute size of the brain,
or focus on how large the brain is relative to body size? Should we focus
on the whole brain, or just those regions thought to be important to
innovation, such as the neocortex? Which potential biases needed to be
controlled for? Simon and I ended up doing the analyses a number of
different ways to ensure that our findings were robust.
Yet, irrespective of the details of the analysis, the results were
extremely clear. We found that innovation rate correlated positively with

a variety of measures of relative and absolute brain size, controlling for
the phylogenetic relatedness of species, research effort, and other biases.
Likewise, the reported incidence of social learning also covaried strongly
with brain size measures.96 What is more, the incidence of innovation
and social learning were tightly correlated. Big-brained species of
primates invented more new behavior, and copied more, than small-
brained species, precisely as Wilson had anticipated.97
These were significant findings. Despite extensive scientific interest
in the evolution of intelligence spanning several decades, the intuitively
appealing notion that brain volume and intelligence are linked had
remained surprisingly untested. Certainly, important work on the
relationships between neural volume and either cognitive capacity or
behavioral complexity had been conducted previously, but these studies
had tended to concentrate on rather specialized behavioral domains or
brain regions, such as birdsong repertoire size and brain nuclei related to
song,98 or spatial abilities such as food storing in birds and the size of the
hippocampus, which is thought to be the brain region in which spatial
information is stored.99 The only notable exception were the avian
studies of Lefebvre and his colleagues, as described above. To our
knowledge, despite ample evidence for links between neural measures
and various aspects of behavior and life history in mammals,100 no
direct, unequivocal support for a link between brain size and general
behavioral flexibility had hitherto been found. Yet here we had
ecologically relevant measures of cognitive ability, the reported
incidence of behavioral innovation, and social learning,101 and found
that brain size and cognitive capacity were indeed correlated.
What excited me more, however, was that Simon’s analysis had
provided emphatic support for one key aspect of the cultural drive
hypothesis. The fact that brain size and innovation rate were linked in
both birds and primates,102 combined with our finding that rates of social
learning and innovation covaried across primate species, really lent
confidence to Wilson’s explanation.103 An account of human cognitive
evolution was starting to emerge through the fog. Perhaps selection
favoring innovation and social learning had driven primate brain
evolution, and in the process selected for other cognitively demanding
capabilities (such as tool use or extractive foraging techniques) in a
runaway process that had climaxed in the human condition. Our

experiments had revealed differences in innovativeness and social
learning capability among individuals in fish, bird, and primate
populations, so I was confident that there would be variation on which
natural selection could act. We had also found differences among
species, such as the superior performance of lion tamarins compared to
tamarins and marmosets, which were consistent with the argument that
species faced with challenging ecological circumstances would evolve
enhanced problem-solving capabilities.
Cultural drive was an intriguing idea, but there were at least two
problems that would need to be addressed before this explanation would
really hold water. The first was highlighted by the increasing number of
experimental reports of copying in invertebrates.104 If fruit flies or
damselfly larvae are capable of social learning with miniature brains,105
why should primates need huge brains in order to copy? The same issue
arose with respect to innovation, which we were finding in small fishes.
An explanation was required for why selection might favor larger
primate brains to support their innovation and social learning, when
innovation and copying did not themselves inherently require extensive
brain circuitry. The second problem was a long-standing bugbear of
comparative phylogenetic analyses of brain evolution: many factors
covary with brain size, so how could we be confident that any one
relationship was causal? We were interested in the possibility that
innovation and social learning were the critical factors that had favored
primate brain evolution. However, another variable, such as selection to
cope with the challenges of complex societies,106 might have been
responsible for the evolution of large brains in primates, and this
enhanced computational power may only incidentally have been
expressed in greater amounts of problem solving and social learning to
generate the patterns we had found. To address these concerns and
confirm the cultural drive hypothesis we would need to do a lot more
work on primate brain evolution.

PART II
THE EVOLUTION OF THE MIND

CHAPTER 6
THE EVOLUTION OF INTELLIGENCE
The greatest disappointment of my academic career was that I never got
to work with Allan Wilson. Wilson was a brilliant and visionary New
Zealander, based at UC Berkeley, a leader in the field of molecular
evolution. He was a pioneer of the method that used the similarity of
different species’ molecules to gauge the degree of relatedness between
species, and thereby estimate the time since they shared a common
ancestor. Wilson is most famous as the architect of the mitochondrial
Eve hypothesis, which traced the mitochondrial DNA of all
contemporary humans to a woman who lived in Africa around 200,000
years ago;1 this laid the foundations of the now widely accepted “Out of
Africa” model of human evolution.2 However, Wilson was an
extraordinarily creative and broad-minded scientist, and another idea of
his called “cultural drive,” had interested me in working with him. I had
won a postdoctoral fellowship to join his lab in September 1991.3
Tragically, just a month before I arrived, Wilson died of leukemia. He
was only 56.
A few years earlier, Wilson had noticed an intriguing relationship
between the rate at which animals evolve and their brain size.4 Focusing
on the lineage leading from early amphibians to human beings, Wilson
plotted the relationship between an animal’s brain size and the time
since it had shared an ancestor with humans. He found that the animal
brain had grown in relative size 100-fold in the last 400 million years.
What is more, that expansion had accelerated over time; this suggested
to Wilson that some sort of feedback mechanism must be involved. He
resolved that the mammalian brain had driven its own evolution, and
proposed a three-step hypothesis for how this might have occurred.5
First, a new advantageous habit arises in an individual (i.e., an
innovation occurs). Second, the new habit spreads through the
population by way of social learning, with those individuals best

equipped to copy others at an advantage as they are more likely to
acquire the beneficial trait. Third, selection favors those individuals
bearing “brain mutations” that endow an enhanced innovation or social
learning capability. Wilson explained:
Among the many kinds of mutations that could improve the brain’s
ability to innovate and catch on [i.e., copy], some will produce more
neurons or dendrites and thus raise the relative size of the brain. The
model enables one to understand in principle how the brain’s relative
size could go up exponentially with time.6
With each spread of a new habit through the population, Wilson argued,
natural selection would favor improvements in a species’ capacity to
copy the discoveries made by others, resulting in bigger brains. New
habits would also generate selection for changes to the animal’s anatomy
better suited to the behavior, leading to the fixation of novel mutations.
Each increment in brain size, Wilson envisaged, would enhance the
species’ ability to generate and propagate new habits, making the spread
of further innovations and the fixation of additional mutations even
more likely. This runaway process, he believed, had driven brain
evolution in a multitude of animals, particularly primates, but had
climaxed in humanity—the brainiest, most creative, and most culturally
reliant species of all.
Wilson anticipated that by constantly inventing and propagating
innovations, large-brained species would frequently subject themselves
to new selection regimes. These in turn would result in elevated rates of
fixation of genetic mutations, expressed in the animal’s body and brain.
Thus, the cultural drive hypothesis led Wilson to expect a correlation
between relative size of an animal’s brain (weight of the brain measured
relative to weight of the body7) and rate of anatomical evolution. This
prediction was confirmed.8 Rates of evolutionary change in body plan
are found to correlate strongly with relative brain size in vertebrates.
While rates of evolution of the molecules that make up animals’ bodies
depend largely on the mutation rate (which is independent of brain
size), rates of anatomical evolution in animals also depend on the
proportion of mutations that become fixed. In turn, this fixation rate,
Wilson believed, hung on the rate at which new habits spread. He

concluded:
Organismal evolution in the vertebrates may provide an example of
an autocatalytic process mediated by the brain: the bigger the brain,
the greater the power of the species to evolve biologically.9
In contemporary terms, their enhanced capacity for innovation and
social learning confers on large-brained species a prodigious capacity for
“niche construction,”10 the ability of organisms to modify local
environments and thereby affect the natural selection that ensues.
Cultural drive was a captivating idea, but was it correct? Many
researchers were skeptical, and some evolutionary biologists contested
the claim that evolutionary rates had accelerated in large-brained
mammals.11 In addition, there were several gaps in Wilson’s argument
when first proposed. For one, the critical relationship between brain size
and social learning had been inferred rather than demonstrated, as based
on a rather casual reading of the scientific literature. Wilson had merely
noted that reports of social learning were more common in songbirds
and primates than in smaller-brained vertebrates, such as amphibians
and reptiles. For another, it was not known if animals generated the
substantial amounts of innovation required for Wilson’s argument to be
credible, and if rates of innovation and social learning went hand in
hand in all animals. A third concern was that the association between
brain size and intelligence remained contentious. Intelligence is defined
in many different ways, but in broad terms it refers the ability of an
animal to solve problems, comprehend complex ideas, and learn
quickly.12 While it was widely believed that intelligence required a big
brain, the mental abilities of only a small number of species had been
comprehensively investigated. Conceivably, researchers had been biased
to expect animals that are closely related to humans to be smart. These
concerns could not be nonchalantly dismissed. While it was a minority
position, prominent researchers had argued that, humans aside, all
vertebrates are equally intelligent.13
Studies of animal innovation changed all that. First in birds,14 then in
primates,15 the relationship between innovation and brain size was
shown to be compelling, while experimental investigations demonstrated
prevalent innovation in many animals.16 By the time Simon Reader and I

found that large-brained primates also engaged in more social learning
than small-brained primates, that rates of social learning and innovation
covaried across primate species, and that ecologically relevant measures
of cognitive ability in primates were predicted by brain size, cultural
drive was starting to look like a plausible hypothesis.
Nonetheless, the hypothesis would have to be fleshed out in greater
detail and further nontrivial issues addressed before cultural drive could
be regarded as comprehensively supported. First, the question remained
of exactly how social learning could drive brain evolution when some
animals managed to copy with tiny brains. Greater specification of the
feedback mechanism by which cultural processes fostered the evolution
of cognition was required if the argument was to be compelling. Second,
many variables (e.g., diet, social complexity, latitude) had been shown
to be associated with brain size in primates. In order to evaluate the
hypothesis that cultural processes had played a particularly central role
in the evolution of the human mind, we needed to establish whether
social learning was a genuine cause of brain evolution. That required
ruling out alternative explanations; plausibly, large brains had evolved
for some other reason, and the greater computational power that big
brains bestowed had been expressed in elevated rates of social learning
and innovation. Third, talk of increases in “brain size” is rather
simplistic. The brain is a complex organ with extensive substructure, and
with particular features and circuitry known to be important to specific
biological functions. We needed to establish how the brain had changed
over evolutionary time, and whether the observed changes in size and
structure were consistent with what the cultural drive hypothesis
predicted. Had those brain regions associated with innovation and social
learning in humans not increased in size over the last few million years,
then cultural drive would appear a far less compelling explanation for
the human condition. In this chapter, each of these issues are addressed
in turn.
Consider first the challenge posed by invertebrate copying. Wilson
probably never imagined that social learning would be demonstrated in
animals like fruit flies and wood crickets. Human brains range between
1.25 kg and 1.5 kg, and contain an estimated 85 billion nerve cells. A
honeybee’s brain, on the other hand, weighs only 1 milligram and
contains fewer than a million nerve cells.17 If honeybees can copy with a

brain the size of a pinhead, it becomes hard to envisage why natural
selection for greater amounts of copying should favor bigger and bigger
vertebrate brains.
This conundrum was another issue that, for me at least, was clarified
by the social learning strategies tournament.18 When the performances of
the submitted entries were compared, the best performing strategies
were found to be those most heavily reliant on social learning. By and
large, the more that top strategies relied on social as opposed to asocial
learning, the better they performed. However, the opposite relationship
was found among poorer performers: the more copying, the worse their
performance. These findings had demonstrated that it was not copying
per se that was adaptive, but rather efficient copying. Put another way,
copying only pays if it is done well. The winner of the social learning
strategies tournament was the entry that copied with the greatest
efficiency, carefully computing the optimal time to learn, weighting
recently acquired information more heavily than older information, and
making projections into the future about the likely utility of investing in
further copying.
The tournament teaches us how to interpret correctly the relationship
between the incidence of social learning and brain size found in
primates. That relationship is unlikely to reflect selection for more and
more social learning, since social learning is not inherently beneficial.
What is more, animals do not require a big brain merely to engage in
social learning, as studies of bees, ants, and flies compellingly
demonstrate. Rather, if social learning is partly responsible for the
evolution of larger brain size in primates, it is because natural selection
has favored more and more efficient social learning. For Wilson’s
hypothesis to be correct, the key driver would have to be selection for
more strategic, accurate, and cost-effective forms of copying, as well as
for other cognitive, social, and life-history variables that enhance the
efficiency of knowledge transfer between individuals, rather than
selection for more copying. The greater amounts of copying exhibited by
large-brained compared to small-brained primates were, almost
certainly, just incidental outcomes of the former’s greater proficiency at
social learning. Copying ability, rather than copying frequency, was the
causally relevant variable.
In the tournament, when agents copied the behavior of other agents,

copy error occasionally arose. Such error typically led to poorer returns
to the copier, as performed actions were usually high-payoff behavior,
while error returned a randomly selected behavior. This finding makes
intuitive sense. Individuals in the real world tend to perform those
behavior patterns that have reaped dividends in the past, and accurate
copying is more likely to lead others to acquire such behavior than
inaccurate copying. In the tournament, the rate at which copying errors
occurred was set by the organizers. All strategies that relied on social
learning (i.e., that played the move OBSERVE) suffered lower payoffs if
the error rate went up, and benefitted from higher returns when the rate
declined. In reality, the rate of copy error depends not solely on the
environmental context but also on the characteristics of the copier—for
instance, on how good their perceptual systems are, how well they
comprehend what the demonstrator is trying to do, and how accurately
they can reproduce the demonstrator’s behavior. Undoubtedly, were
such individual differences in copying accuracy incorporated into the
tournament, selection would have favored accurate (i.e., high fidelity)
copying.
Drawing on these insights, let us reconsider Wilson’s hypothesis, and
see if we can spell out the putative feedback mechanism of cultural drive
in a little more detail (see figure 5).
The tournament teaches us that natural selection will tend to favor
those individuals who exhibit more efficient, more strategic, and higher-
fidelity (i.e., more accurate) copying over others who either display less
efficient or exact copying, or are reliant on asocial learning. As a
consequence, functional capabilities and associated structures in the
brain are expected to evolve to the extent that they enhance copying
efficiency and fidelity, or alternatively, favor innovation. In turn, the
evolution of such brain structures would plausibly result in growth in
overall brain size, as well as an enhanced capacity for innovation and
social learning, generating the feedback that Wilson envisaged. The
question arises as to precisely which functional capabilities of the brain
would enhance innovation and social learning.
Obvious candidates are enhanced perceptual systems. Selection for
more accurate copying might be expected to favor greater visual acuity
if, for instance, that enabled observing individuals to imitate fine motor
actions such as food-processing techniques or tool manufacture with

greater precision, or if enhanced perceptual abilities allowed individuals
to copy over greater distances. Invertebrates such as bees are certainly
capable of social learning, but they typically need to be close by to copy
one another because their visual range is limited. Copying from distance
would bring a host of benefits, including greater choice of
demonstrators, the vantage of safety, and being able to copy competitors
and rivals who would not tolerate closer inspection. The ability to see,
but also hear, with high resolution and over greater distances would
likely not only enhance the precision with which copying occurred, but
also open up new opportunities to learn from others. Hence, we might
anticipate expansion of those regions of the primate brain associated
with processing visual and auditory inputs, such as the visual and
auditory cortex.
FIGURE 5. The cultural drive hypothesis. Selection for more efficient and more accurate social
learning affects the primate brain and behavior. It favors a raft of cognitive capabilities, leads to
increases in brain size, and feeds back to further enhance the efficiency and fidelity of social
learning.
Copying, however, also requires integration across different
perceptual systems, and mapping of sensory inputs to behavioral
outputs. Imitation has long been of interest to psychologists and

cognitive neuroscientists because of the enduring challenge of explaining
what is known as “the correspondence problem,” which is the challenge
of understanding how the brain converts the perception of an observed
act into a replica that is an enacted bodily movement.19 To copy a
fishing technique, for instance, the observer’s brain must convert a
stream of visual information about how others move their hands and
arms into corresponding outputs specifying how the observer must also
move its muscles and joints. The nature of this challenge is most
apparent for what are known as “perceptually opaque” actions, such as
copying facial expressions, where we cannot see the part of our own
body that was moved. For this reason, selection for copying proficiency
might plausibly favor the evolutionary expansion of circuitry linking the
visual and auditory cortex to somatosensory and motor cortex regions of
the brain.
A long-standing tradition in cognitive psychology has emphasized
how, in order to imitate effectively, individuals must comprehend the
goals and activities of the individual they copy.20 Comprehension
requires the ability to consider alternative interpretations or viewpoints
of external objects and to construct alternative scenarios of how to
interact with them; that includes considering the standpoint of other
individuals. The ability to attribute mental states such as beliefs, desires,
and knowledge to others, and to recognize that these may be different
from one’s own beliefs, desires, and knowledge, is known as “theory of
mind.” Effective copying might plausibly favor the evolution of a theory
of mind and enhanced abilities for perspective-taking, with their
associated neural underpinnings. Such abilities would allow the observer
to comprehend the goals and procedures of the demonstrator more
effectively, as well as allowing “teachers” to understand the state of
mind and ability of their “pupils.”
Animals 
cannot 
bias 
their 
copying 
toward 
high-performing
individuals if they are unable to compute the payoff to others. Nor can
they conform to the majority unless they can compute which behavior is
in the majority.21 Given the benefits of strategic copying, selection for
the computational capabilities necessary to implement strategies should
follow. Strategic copying should lead to the evolution of a focus on, or
sensitivity to, the payoffs of others’ behavior, the frequency of behavior
within a sample, the consistency among demonstrators, and so forth, as

well as the computational capabilities to process this information in
efficient algorithms. For example, from an evolutionary perspective, the
observation that six individuals have independently performed the same
behavior is of greater relevance than that one individual has performed
the same behavior six times, because the former gives far more of an
indication about the prevalence of the behavior in the population.22
Consequently, selection should favor attention to, and computation of,
the frequency of individuals performing each behavior, rather than the
frequency with which each behavior is performed.23 More generally, the
implementation of strategic copying demands efficient decision making,
which is comprised of the integration of social and asocial streams of
information into effective “rules of thumb,” followed by computation of
the most beneficial response. We have grounds to expect, then, that
selection for efficient social learning will enhance the power and potency
of all forms of learning, including asocial learning capabilities.
The social learning strategies tournament also leads to the
expectation that effective social learners will possess a capability for
“mental time travel.” Like the winning strategy, DISCOUNTMACHINE,
the optimal copier would be able to look back into the past and draw on
historically effective solutions, taking account of whether each solution
is relevant and biasing judgments toward more recent options. Equally,
the optimal copier would be able to project forward into the future and
conduct mental simulations of the likely consequences of adopting the
behavior of others, including the payoffs yielded and risks incurred.
Cultural drive, then, should favor the expansion of those (“executive”)
brain regions and circuits associated with computation, decision making,
working and long-term memory, and mental simulation. In humans,
these attributes are associated with the anterior part of the brain, known
as the frontal and temporal lobes, and especially the prefrontal cortex.
Wilson’s hypothesis also places emphasis on the capacity for
innovation. An enhanced social learning capability would be virtually
useless if no new behaviors were invented and there were no skills
available to copy. The set of brain regions necessary for computation,
memory, and simulation are also implicated in creativity and innovation
—notably, the frontal lobe, and specifically, the prefrontal cortex.
Outside of the brain, selection for social learning might be expected
to influence other aspects of social behavior and life history too. A heavy

reliance on social learning should increase sociality, since the bigger the
group and the more time spent in the company of others, the greater the
opportunities for effective copying. Such selection for sociality should
also favor a particular interest in, and sensitivity to, social cues, and also
a social tolerance, particularly among kin.24 The learning of a complex
skill through imitation often benefits from the opportunity to spend long
periods of time physically close to proficient individuals. Leading
primatologist Carel van Schaik has argued compellingly that tolerance of
other individuals is critical to the social transmission of tool use (figure
6).25 Animals are thought to gain an evolutionary advantage from
allowing relatives, particularly youngsters, to spend time in their
company,26 providing them with the opportunity to copy their skills and
knowledge, as well as to scrounge scraps of food and play with
abandoned tools.27 These discarded elements are known to facilitate
social learning in primates.
FIGURE 6. Getting up close is critical to acquiring new foraging skills. At Suaq Balimbing in
Sumatra, an infant orangutan (Lois) studies his mother’s (Lisa) feeding behavior. By permission
of Julia Kunz.

In restricted circumstances, discussed in the next chapter, individuals
benefit from actively investing in the learning of their relatives, and
therefore engage in teaching behavior. More commonly, a little social
tolerance on the part of relatives will suffice to allow youngsters the
opportunity to pick up the requisite skills. Studies of chimpanzees have
established that learning complex tool-using behavior, such as nut
cracking and fishing for termites, can take many years.28 Young
chimpanzees remain with their mothers until the age of around seven,
probably because this allows them time to acquire complex foraging and
social skills. A disproportionate amount of primate social learning
involves infants and juveniles learning from their mothers,29 which leads
to the prediction that selection for social learning efficiency would favor
longer periods of juvenile dependency. Moreover, the selection for
innovation and social learning anticipated by Wilson could plausibly
lead to longer lifespans for several reasons. Behavioral innovation occurs
disproportionately in adults and appears to be heavily reliant on relevant
prior experience.30 Learning complex skills takes time,31 and older
individuals benefit from passing on their hard-earned knowledge to their
descendants.32 Greater longevity, in turn, provides further opportunities
for animals to “cash in” on this knowledge.33
Finally, any enhanced capability for social learning must be
expressed in some concrete way in the real world. As we saw in chapter
2, primates acquire diverse forms of knowledge through observation,
including what to fear, what calls to make, and a variety of social
conventions; however, foraging information is the most frequent form of
socially transmitted knowledge. From the use of extractive foraging
methods like digging out grubs from bark, to sophisticated tool-using
techniques such as nut cracking or fishing for termites with sticks,
monkeys and apes acquire all kinds of foraging skills and knowledge
through copying. If social learning is what allows primates to pick up
difficult-to-learn but productive food-procurement methods, species
proficient in social learning should show elevated levels of extractive
foraging and tool use, and should possess a richer, as well as a more
diverse diet.
In summary, with the recognition that Wilson’s hypothesis should
operate through the natural selection of variation in social learning
proficiency rather than social learning incidence, and drawing on the

published literature on animal innovation and strategic copying, a
credible feedback mechanism for cultural drive emerges. That
mechanism allows specification of an extensive repertoire of functional
capabilities in the primate brain,34 as well as other structural, social, and
life history characteristics—including longer lifespans, richer diets, and
enhanced capacities for tool use—that are expected to evolve as a
consequence of natural selection favoring innovativeness and efficient
social learning. Larger brains are probably an incidental outcome of this
process, since each of the functional capabilities will surely require the
elaboration of one or more existing neutral structures or circuits. If
correct, the natural selection of variation in innovation and social
learning not only triggers the evolution of brain expansion, but feeds
back to enhance copying efficiency further, fueling brain growth in an
endlessly recurring and ever accelerating runaway process.
This reasoning leads to a key insight. If natural selection operating on
social learning capabilities really has driven the evolution of intelligence
in primates, then rates of social learning should not only covary with
brain size but should also correlate with a host of measures of cognitive
performance. Different measures of cognitive ability should cluster
together in primates, with social learning aptitude at the heart of them.
We set out to test this hypothesis.
At the same time, we wanted to address other controversies
concerning the primate mind. Whether social cognition and social
learning were adaptive specializations directly favored by natural
selection, or instead incidental outcomes of selection for some other
cognitive capability had been subject to debate.35 Another controversy
surrounded the question of whether or not primate cognition was
organized in a modular fashion as an assortment of largely independent
mental adaptations, with each designed to solve a specific problem;
many evolutionary psychologists thought this was the case for humans.36
The alternative possibility was that measures of primate cognition
covary as a single dimension, one that is evocative of general
intelligence. In addition, the comparability of the intelligence of humans
and other primates remained highly contentious.37 These debates would
be clarified by knowledge of the extent to which diverse measures of
social, ecological, and technical performance were correlated.38
Given that experimental studies have proven a productive vehicle for

investigating the psychological abilities of several primates,39 you might
think that such controversies could be addressed through experimental
investigation. Certainly, the little relevant experimental data that existed
were consistent with Wilson’s hypothesis.40 However, there are obvious
limitations to what can be achieved in this manner. Comparative
experiments of learning and cognition are challenging. Laboratory tasks
that are fair to all the studied species are notoriously difficult to design,
leading to the concern that the findings reflect arbitrary decisions, such
as the choice of task. These experiments are typically conducted in the
laboratory, raising questions about the extent to which they reflect the
behavior of animals in their natural environments. The real barrier for
us, however, was that experimental studies could not realistically
provide data on large numbers of species, or on a broad range of
cognitive 
capabilities.41 
Most 
primate 
comparative 
experiments
investigate just two species, with the biggest including perhaps four or
five, and these typically assess the animals on a single performance
measure. However, given that there are more than 200 species of
primates, realistically we needed to look at the cognitive abilities of 50
or 60 species, using multiple measures of cognitive ability, to get a
reasonable understanding of the evolution of primate intelligence.
Instead, we took the approach that Lefebvre and his colleagues had
devised in their pioneering investigations of bird innovation.42 We
compiled and analyzed data from the published scientific literature,
developing quantitative measures of the incidence of traits associated
with behavioral flexibility in natural primate populations.43 This
methodology circumvents the above problems with experimental studies,
and provides quantitative measures of performance for large numbers of
species across broad domains.
Simon and I recruited Yfke van Bergen, and with her help set out to
test Wilson’s hypothesis. We needed to pull together a diverse set of
measures of the cognitive abilities of primates that were applicable to a
large number of species. This would require a major effort. Simon and
Yfke went back to the journals and studiously compiled quantitative
measures of rates of tool use, extractive foraging, diet breadth, and diet
quality for over 100 primate species. We also drew on some existing
measures. For instance, in the great apes in particular, experimental
studies had suggested that deliberate deception sometimes occurred.44

“Tactical deception” refers to behavior sufficiently deceptive that other
individuals misinterpret what is happening, to the advantage of the
deceiver. Rates of tactical deception had been compiled for many
primate species,45 and had been shown to correlate with brain size.46
Highly 
deceitful 
primates 
were 
characterized 
as 
exhibiting
“Machiavellian 
intelligence,”47 
named 
after 
the 
scheming 
and
unscrupulous political manipulations that Niccolo Machiavelli described
in The Prince.
Various measures of primate group size were also available;48 while
not a direct evaluation of cognitive performance, these had long been
thought to covary with social intelligence in primates. Primates often
form alliances, and siblings and members of matrilines will frequently
aid each other in disputes. Stealing food from a little guy could be
disastrous if he is the son of the alpha female, so knowledge of social
relationships is vital. Brain size may constrain the information-
processing capability of a species to monitor a large number of such
social relationships.49 Primates living in large groups have to keep track
of many more relationships than those living in small groups, which is
thought to have created a need for bigger brains and greater
computational power. Group size measures are regarded as a useful
proxy of social complexity and, sure enough, they are typically good
predictors of brain size in primates.50 The issue for us was whether group
size, rates of tactical deception, diet breadth, and all of our other
measures would covary with social learning rates.
Eventually, we had eight separate measures that directly or indirectly
assayed the cognitive abilities of a broad array of different primates,
including the tendencies to (i) discover novel solutions to environmental
or social problems (“innovate”), (ii) learn skills and acquire information
from others (“social learning”), (iii) use tools, (iv) extract concealed or
embedded food (“extractive foraging”), and (v) deceive others (“tactical
deception”); these were five ecologically relevant measures of behavioral
flexibility, while (vi) the number of different categories of food (“diet
breadth”),51 (vii) percentage of fruit in the diet, and (viii) measures of
social group size, were thought to reflect the cognitive demands of
exploiting and locating foods, and tracking social relationships.52
We investigated the relations between these measures using
statistical methods. At one extreme, all could be found to correlate so

tightly that a single factor would explain differences in the intellectual
abilities of primates, while at the other extreme each of the measures
might be entirely independent. The latter finding might imply that
primate intelligence is organized into domain-specific modules that
reflect species-specific ecological and social demands. The approach that
we took, known as principal components analysis (PCA),53 determined
how many independent dimensions were required to describe the data.
Strikingly, the answer was just one.
We first considered 5 cognitive measures (innovation, social learning,
tool use, extractive foraging, and tactical deception54) in the 62 primate
species for which data on all measures were available. The analysis
revealed a single dominant component,55 which explained over 65% of
the variance in cognitive measures; all of the individual measures were
tightly associated with the component.56 In other words, 65% of the
differences between primates in their performance on our five measures
could be attributed to this single factor. All of our measures correlated
strongly with each other,57 with species that excelled in one of these
cognitive domains typically excelling in all of them. A similar analysis
that also incorporated diet breadth, percentage of fruit in diet, and group
size produced broadly equivalent results, again generating a major
component,58 while further analyses confirmed that these cognitive
abilities were not just correlated in the present, but had evolved
together.59
Our analyses had uncovered a distinct dimension of cognitive ability
in primates,60 something that is highly evocative of what in humans is
called “general intelligence.” Human intelligence has been defined as “a
very general mental ability that … involves the ability to reason, plan,
solve problems, think abstractly, comprehend complex ideas, learn
quickly and learn from experience.”61 The variables that went into our
analysis (i.e., measures of problem solving, learning, creativity, tool use,
deception) match the abilities emphasized in such definitions. The single
factor that captured the bulk of the variation in primate cognitive
abilities seemed appropriately characterized as “general intelligence,”
and hence we labeled it primate g.62 Each primate species was positioned
somewhere along this axis,63 and hence a species’ primate g score
represents a measure of its general intelligence. Species such as
chimpanzees that score high for tool use, innovation, social learning,

diet breadth, and so forth, possess high primate g scores, while species
like the South American bald-headed uakari,64 which have never been
seen to use tools or invent new behavior, receive low scores. More
generally, high performers on our measure are species frequently
reported to devise novel solutions, solve social and ecological problems,
learn quickly and from experience, construct and manipulate tools, and
learn from and deceive others; these are qualities attributed to
intelligent humans. On average, the apes get the highest scores and the
prosimians the lowest, which is what most primatologists would expect.
Our statistical measure, then, constitutes a simple way to rate species
according to their intelligence.65
Two sets of findings gave us confidence that this interpretation was
legitimate. If primate g scores really do reflect the cognitive ability of the
animal, then we would expect those scores to covary with brain size.
That is exactly what we found. Whether we focused on the absolute size
of the primate’s brain, brain size relative to body size, or other brain
measures,66 there are always strong associations of primate g with brain
volume.67 This pattern resembles that observed within humans, where
general intelligence, known simply as g, shows a modest correlation with
total brain and gray matter volumes.68 Such findings suggest the
“volumetric stance” among brain researchers is warranted, and that
brain volumes are genuinely related to functionally relevant cognitive
capacities.
Subsequently, we uncovered an even more compelling validation of
our measure: primate g scores correlated strongly with species’
performance in laboratory tests of cognition. A few years earlier,
neurobiologist Rob Deaner at Duke University, and his colleagues, had
published an impressive article that analyzed a large number of lab-
based comparative studies of primate cognition.69 Each study had
presented different experimental tasks, and the species investigated also
varied from one study to the next, making conventional comparisons
between investigations hard to interpret. However, within a given study,
species can be ranked according to their performance at the focal task.
These ranks can then be compiled using sophisticated statistical methods
to look for patterns across multiple experiments. In this manner, Deaner
and his colleagues were able to produce an overall ranking of the
performance of 24 primate genera in a large number of diverse tests of

learning and cognition.70 Again, the findings made sense. Deaner’s
measure placed orangutans and chimpanzees at the top, and marmosets
and talapoins at the bottom. What was particularly encouraging for us,
however, was that our primate g scores showed strong and significant
correlations with Deaner and colleagues’ ranked performance of
primates in laboratory tests,71 as well as with two other multispecies
tests of comparative intelligence.72 In other words, those species that
were designated “smart” by our statistical measure of primate
intelligence turned out to be precisely those species that had performed
well in laboratory-based experimental tests of learning and cognition.
These observations lent credence to our view that primate g was a
genuine measure of primate comparative intelligence.
As described previously, numerous hypotheses had been proposed
concerning the key drivers of primate brain evolution. As these had been
presented as alternative explanations, researchers had worried that
seemingly conflicting findings had not been reconciled.73 In suggesting
that selection may have favored general intelligence, rather than a single
specialized ability, our analysis helped to alleviate this disquiet. Our
primate g measure contained social (social learning, tactical deception),
technical (tool use, innovation), and ecological (extractive foraging, diet
breadth) components of intelligence, and hence supported a battery of
hypotheses regarding the factors driving brain evolution,74 but not the
hypotheses that any one was the sole cause of brain evolution. The social
intelligence hypothesis was the dominant view at the time, but our
findings implied that social complexity might not be the sole driver. For
instance, unlike primate g, group size did not predict the performance of
primates in laboratory tests of cognition.75 We began to believe that
there was more to the evolution of primate cognition than selection for
social intelligence alone.
We also examined the pattern of variation in primate g across the
primate family tree, to determine whether enhanced cognitive abilities
had evolved independently on multiple occasions, or whether “smart”
primates were simply those closely related to humans.76 The analysis
revealed four independent convergent evolutionary events favoring high
general intelligence across the primate lineages; these were in the
capuchins,77 baboons,78 macaques,79 and great apes.80 Strikingly, these
are precisely those primate groups that are renowned for their social

learning and tradition. This pattern of results is exactly what would be
expected if social learning really were a major driver of the evolution of
brain and cognition in primates. Those primates with high primate g
scores are those renowned for their complex cognition and rich cultural
behavior.81
The major predictions derived from Wilson’s cultural drive
hypothesis had been confirmed. The analyses implied that diverse
mental abilities, spanning multiple cognitive domains, had coevolved in
primates to generate a between-species version of general intelligence.
Seemingly, 
key 
cultural 
capabilities, 
notably 
social 
learning,
innovativeness, and tool use, form part of a highly correlated composite
of cognitive traits, with elements of cultural intelligence intimately
wrapped up with many domains of cognitive performance. Such findings
are inconsistent with the view, widespread within evolutionary
psychology, that cognitive abilities evolve independently as separate
modules,82 and the results strongly imply general intelligence. Indeed, a
recent study suggests that primate g is the principle dimension along
which primate intelligence evolves.83
Our study had addressed the first of three concerns outlined at the
beginning of this chapter by showing that social learning could plausibly
drive brain evolution and the evolution of intelligence. However, at this
juncture, two other concerns remained. First, social learning might well
have driven brain evolution, but our findings were equally consistent
with the suggestion that large primate brains had evolved for some other
reason and were only incidentally expressed in elevated rates of social
learning and innovation. Second, we needed to examine precisely how
the primate brain had changed over evolutionary time, and consider
whether the observed changes were consistent with the predictions of
cultural drive.
Brain size in primates ranges from just 3 g in fat-tailed dwarf
lemurs,84 to around 1.5 kg in humans. Both absolute and relative brain
sizes have increased in several primate lineages, including the apes,85
largely due to increases in the neocortex, which comprises up to 80% of
total brain volume.86 The neocortex is the region of the human brain
associated with problem solving, learning, planning, reasoning, and
language, so it is the first brain structure that comes to mind when
considering the neurobiological underpinnings of intelligence. The size

of the neocortex scales allometrically with whole-brain size across
primates,87 which means that the neocortex gets bigger at the rate
expected, given the size of the brain as a whole. However, that does not
mean that the neocortex is equally important to all primates, because the
correlation between neocortex and whole brain size is not one to one. To
the contrary, the neocortex makes up a larger proportion of the brain in
big-brained, compared to small-brained, primates.88 Neocortices are also
larger in absolute terms and are better connected to other brain regions
in big-brained primates relative to their smaller-brained cousins.89
Humans possess the biggest, proportionally largest, and best-connected
neocortex of all primates. Thus, whether measured in absolute terms,
relative to body size, or by comparing the relative size of the
neocortex,90 brain expansion is unquestionably one of the distinctive
features of human evolution.91 Yet, as we have seen, in spite of extensive
research, controversy persists regarding the evolutionary explanation for
this expansion, and its relationship to the evolution of cognition.
There were several reasons as to why the evolution of the brain and
intelligence had remained unresolved for so long. One major issue was
the poor quality of data on the primate brain. Researchers conducting
comparative statistical analyses had been overly reliant on a relatively
small number of primate species for which brain data had been
available.92 Typically, only a few brain specimens and often just a single
brain were measured for each species, with the specimens frequently of
unknown history. Often, for instance, whether the brain was from a male
or female primate was unknown, which for sexually dimorphic species
was a major source of error. Better data would be required if this
concern was to be addressed. A second issue was the absence of a clear
quantitative measure of cognitive performance applicable to multiple
primate species. Researchers had typically just assumed that whole brain
or neocortex size was a correlate of cognitive ability in primates, which
of course left the true relationship unexamined. Fortunately, our analysis
of primate intelligence had provided just such a measure, which meant
this concern could now be addressed for the first time. A third concern
was a historical overreliance on analyses in which a single variable,
ranging from diet to group size, was found to predict brain size; this led
researchers to make claims about the evolutionary significance of their
favored variable.93 Few analyses had considered multiple variables at the

same time to see which was the most powerful predictor. These concerns
meant that until very recently, lingering doubts remained over whether
enlarged brain size, intelligence, and reliance on culture had actually
coevolved in primates.
What was really required were appropriately controlled evolutionary
analyses that included all the potentially relevant variables, and that set
out to predict both variation in brain size and differences in cognitive
performance across primates, with the use of good quality data.
Motivated by these objectives, Ana Navarette and Sally Street,94 postdoc
and graduate student, respectively, at the University of St Andrews,
began to collect more brain data and carry out the evolutionary
analyses.95 We set out to provide a definitive understanding of the
evolution of enlarged brain size, cognitive abilities, and reliance on
culture in primates. Brains obtained from the Primate Brain Bank at the
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience were subject to magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI scans) at the Utrecht Neuroimaging Centre.96
Ana then used these scans to measure the size of various structures in
the brains, and thereby was able to supplement existing published
primate brain sources. By targeting our efforts both to increase the
number of species represented in the database and increase the number
of specimens per species, as well as using brains of known history, Ana’s
analyses substantially expanded the breadth and reliability of primate
brain data.
Then, using our newly expanded primate brain database, and our
recently validated measure of general cognitive ability (primate g), Sally
and Ana conducted analyses that included all of the relevant
socioecological, environmental, and life-history predictor variables to
explore which factors truly explained variation in absolute and relative
brain size and cognitive performance.97 What factor would turn out to be
the root cause of primate intelligence?98 The analyses put all of the
potential predictors into a statistical model, removing variables that
didn’t really help to explain the data and retaining variables that proved
useful, until the simplest model that provided a good explanation for the
data was left. When the results came in we were very excited.
Sally and Ana’s multivariate analyses found that some combination of
slow life history (e.g., long lifespan, extended period of juvenile
dependence) and large group size was the dominant predictor of all

brain size measures, as well as of cognitive performance.99 In best-fitting
models, diverse brain size measures (absolute brain size, relative brain
size, relative neocortex size, relative cerebellum size) and assays of
cognitive performance (primate g, social learning, innovativeness) always
significantly increased with both group size and some measure of life-
history length. Typically, life-history length was a stronger predictor of
brain size measures than social group size. Alongside measures of social
complexity, how long a species lived predicted how big its brain would
be and how smart it would be, more so than diet, latitude, or any other
variable. This fit with the expectation that cultural drive would generate
selection to extend both the adult lifespan and the length of the juvenile
period.
Our findings were evocative of an argument put forward by
University of New Mexico anthropologist Hillard Kaplan and colleagues
in 2000. These researchers had suggested that intelligence and longer
lifespans had evolved in humans because our intellectual abilities
allowed us to exploit highly nutritious but difficult-to-access foods, such
as animals that have to be hunted, or plant parts that are difficult to
extract (like palm fiber).100 Brains are energetically demanding organs,
but Kaplan argued that the energy and nutrients gleaned from embedded
foods could “pay” for brain growth. On this view, increased longevity is
favored because it allows more time later in life for individuals to cash
in on the energetic bonanza yielded by the complex foraging skills
acquired earlier.
We had not included humans in our analyses, so we could not assess
the Kaplan hypothesis directly. However, given that foraging behaviors
represented approximately half of recorded incidences of primate
innovation and social learning, our findings strongly implied that the
same argument was correct when extended to other large-brained, long-
lived, and intelligent primates. These most clearly included the great
apes, but also the capuchins, and perhaps macaques and baboons. As we
have seen, these primate groups are renowned for their social learning
and tradition, and the great apes and capuchins in particular are known
for tool use and extractive foraging.101 Extensive empirical evidence
shows that the ability of many primates to acquire nutrient rich foods,
such as nuts, termites, and honey, is critically dependent on social
learning, as it clearly is for humans.102 Extended periods of juvenile

dependence would potentially create extra opportunities for such
transgenerational knowledge transfer. Our findings fit neatly with
Wilson’s cultural drive hypothesis, in which selection for efficient social
learning and innovativeness allowed for energy gains in diet, which in
turn fueled brain growth and generated selection for extended
longevity.103
High levels of knowledge, skill, coordination, and strength are
required to exploit the high-quality dietary resources consumed by
humans and other apes. Complex tool using and extractive foraging
abilities require time to acquire, but in intelligent animals an extended
learning phase during which productivity is low, can be compensated for
by higher productivity during the adult period, provided there is an
intergenerational flow of both food and knowledge from old to young.
Mathematical analyses have established that because productivity
typically increases with age, the investment of time in acquiring skill
and knowledge leads to selection for lowered mortality rates and greater
longevity.104
The currently dominant view is that the primate brain expanded to
cope with the demands of a rich social life, including the aforementioned
Machiavellian skills required to deceive and manipulate others, and the
cognitive skills necessary to maintain alliances and track third-party
relationships. The most important data supporting this hypothesis is a
positive relationship between measures of group size and relative brain
size.105 In our analyses, group size remained as an important predictor of
relative brain size, but also proved a significant secondary predictor of
primate intelligence and social learning. However, group size was
neither the sole, nor the most important, predictor of brain size or
intelligence in our models. Combined with our earlier finding that social
group size does not predict the performance of primates in laboratory
tests of cognition,106 this reinforced our view that there was more to
primate brain evolution than selection for social intelligence.
The most parsimonious way to interpret these findings is to recognize
multiple waves of selection for both bigger brains and greater
intelligence in primates, with each operating at a different scale. Our
analyses agreed with pre-existing research in recognizing the
significance of natural selection for the social intelligence needed to
cope with the complexities of social life, which was probably widespread

across monkeys and apes.107 However, we elaborated on this story to
suggest that selection for social intelligence was followed by a later and
more restricted, but nonetheless critical, bout of natural selection
favoring cultural intelligence in a small number of large-brained, social
primates—most notably the great apes.108 In addition, our more recent
analyses had found elevated rates of social learning in primate species
with large social groups, which fit with the findings of theoretical
analyses showing that large, well-connected groups are critical to the
maintenance of cultural variation.109
Sally and Ana’s analyses also revealed associations between primate
intelligence and the relative size of two important structures in the
brain, the neocortex and the cerebellum. The neocortex is the “thinking”
part of the brain, and includes structures associated with both imitation
(e.g., parietal lobe, temporal lobe) and innovation (e.g., lateral
prefrontal cortex), which have indeed expanded during the course of
human evolution. The visual cortex also expanded, as has the circuitry
linking the visual, and auditory, cortex to somatosensory and motor
cortex regions of the brain,110 as we predicted. The cerebellum is thought
to play a key role in motor control, allowing precise movements of the
limbs, for instance, as required for extractive foraging and tool use.111
Big animals tend to have big brains. Some whales, for instance, have
brains more than six times the volume of the human brain, while three
human brains would fit inside a typical elephant brain. Such
comparisons, dubious though they are,112 have historically led
researchers to the view that the absolute size of the brain did not
indicate an animal’s intelligence. Larger animals may simply have bigger
brains because they have more cells to process and control; bigger limbs
to move may require larger nerves to move them. For this reason, studies
of animal intelligence have tended to focus on relative brain size.
Recent thinking, however, suggests that absolute size of the brain, or
of some key structures in it,113 may be more relevant to an understanding
of intelligence than hitherto thought.114 Georg Striedter, an authority on
brain evolution at UC Irvine, has shown that brains tend to change in
internal organization as they increase in size, with the emergence of
more subdivision and with larger regions becoming disproportionately
connected and influential.115 Consistent with this, projections from the
neocortex to the brain stem and spinal cord are known to have become

more extensive as hominins evolved,116 with an unprecedented level of
direct access to the motor neurons innervating the muscles of our jaws,
face, tongue, vocal chords, and hands. This change in brain anatomy was
predicted by psychologist Terrence Deacon at the UC Berkeley.117 Deacon
proposed a rule that specified if brain regions become disproportionately
large, then, as they evolve, they tend to “invade” and become connected
to regions that they did not innervate ancestrally. This increases the
ability of the enlarged area to influence other brain regions and makes it
more important to brain functioning. Deacon’s rule is based on two
fundamental principles of brain development. First, developing axons
(the long slender part of a nerve cell along which impulses are
conducted from the cell body to other cells) often compete with one
another to connect with target sites. Second, this competition is
generally won by those axons that participate in “firing” the target
cells.118 When a brain region evolves to become proportionally larger, its
axons are given a competitive advantage over those from other regions;
as the more axons a region can send to a target, the more likely
excitation of the target cells will occur, allowing the connections to
strengthen. These new connections might even “displace” older
connections, particularly if the source of these old connections has
decreased in proportional size.119 The two largest structures in the
human brain are the neocortex and the cerebellum, and the above
reasoning leads us to expect they would become increasingly embedded
in complex neural networks over which they would exert considerable
influence as the brain gets larger.
What all this means is that selection for a larger neocortex or
cerebellum automatically brings with it greater flexibility and dexterity,
with these two brain regions exerting greater control over our arms, legs,
face, and hands. Only a big neocortex would allow for the increased
manual dexterity that is characteristic of humans.120 To a large extent,
the computational power that allowed our ancestors to manufacture and
use tools brought with it the physical dexterity to move our hands very
precisely. Likewise, the cognitive ability to learn a language went some
way toward enhancing the flexible use of our mouth and tongue.121
The neocortex becomes an increasingly large proportion of the whole
brain as brain size increases, which probably means that selection for
enhanced neocortex functionality was brought about through selection

on the brain as a whole, rather than just increasing neocortex size.122
This fits with the finding that primate cognition evolves, to a
surprisingly large degree, through selection for greater or lesser general
intelligence.123 Likewise, the cerebellum is known to play an important
role in motor control, and to the extent that enlargement of the
cerebellum is indicative of functional gains in the precise bodily
movements necessary for tool use and extractive foraging, particularly
the execution of complex behavioral sequences, increases in this region
would be subject to positive selection. Again, neuroanatomical data
supports this argument,124 as does further comparative work conducted
by Ana that shows “technical innovations” (e.g., primate innovations
reliant on tool use) correlates more strongly and directly with brain size
measures than nontechnical innovations.125
One further finding is worthy of note. A previous study had found
that in mammals, the size of the adult brain is well predicted by
measures of maternal investment, such as the duration of gestation or
lactation.126 The study implied that the relationship between brain size
and longevity arose solely because in large-brained animals the lifespan
had been slowed to allow more time and resources to be ploughed into
offspring development, including growing a big brain. However, Sally
found that matters were different for primates. The associations of
maximum longevity with brain size measures remained when gestation
and lactation lengths were included as covariates in her analyses. Also of
interest is the observation that the relationship between longevity and
social learning, but not longevity and primate g, remains when measures
of parental investment are included in analyses. In primates, unlike in
mammals more generally, the relationship between brain size and
lifespan is potentially indicative of a cognitive, rather than solely
developmental, mechanism. By virtue of possessing a big brain, and
being able to use it to acquire all kinds of useful survival skills from
others, some clever primates had apparently been able to extend their
lifespans and live longer. In other words, in primates and primates alone,
cultural intelligence facilitates survival.
Sally and Ana’s findings excited us, because they seemed to make
sense of a tremendous amount of comparative, statistical, and
neuroanatomical data. They implied that in some primate lineages
characterized by large brains and complex social groups, a critical

threshold in reliance on socially learned behavior had been reached.
Once this threshold had been passed, mutually reinforcing selection for
increased brain size, diverse cognitive abilities, and further reliance on
social learning and innovation ensued, mediated by conferred increases
in longevity and diet quality. Large brains are certainly not a
prerequisite for social learning, but they may well support more
efficient, higher-fidelity forms of social learning, thereby allowing
copying over greater distances, high-precision imitation, cross-modal
integration of perceptual and motor information, the computational
power to implement sophisticated social learning strategies, and more.
Expansion of the neocortex and cerebellum likely enhanced learned
motor skills,127 and thus supported the ability to learn action sequences
requiring fine motor coordination, such as nut-cracking in chimpanzees
and nettle processing in gorillas.128 Such sequence learning and
coordinated action seems to be limited to only the largest-brained
primates.129 Consistent with this, those brain regions that have expanded
during the course of human evolution include regions associated with
social learning, imitation, innovation, and tool use.
We had focused on primates, but enlarged brain size, general
cognitive abilities, and reliance on culture may have coevolved in other
animals too, including some birds (e.g., corvids, parrots) and cetaceans
(e.g., whales and dolphins).130 Corvids such as rooks are renowned for
their complex social cognition but also their tool use, causal reasoning,
memory,131 perspective-taking, innovation, and cultural transmission.132
Like apes, they possess large brains for their body size; the same size, in
relative terms, as chimpanzees.133 The relative size of the forebrain in
corvids is significantly larger than in all other birds,134 with the
exception of parrots, who are equally famed for their complex social
cognition, innovation, tool use, and imitation.135 Humpback whales,
killer whales, and dolphins exhibit striking parallels to the patterns seen
in primates, and also possess the complex social cognition, tool use, and
innovation associated with unusually large brains and sophisticated
social learning.136 Indeed, it is hard to think of a “smart” animal that
isn’t a proficient social learner.
Current thinking in the study of animal cognition suggests that there
has been convergent evolution of intelligence in apes, corvids, and
cetaceans, and cultural drive is an outstanding candidate mechanism.

However, the process as envisaged by Allan Wilson would have been
autocatalytic,137 with selection for more efficient social learning feeding
back by favoring structures and capabilities that enhance cognitive
ability along with technical skills, and with these capabilities in turn
feeding back to impose further selection on brain and behavior. Here, I
suspect that birds and cetaceans will each have experienced a major
constraint not operating on primates, which may have hindered the
development of tool use and extractive foraging, and limited the extent
to which selection for technical intelligence could feed back on brain
evolution. Cetaceans require their flippers to swim efficiently, which
effectively confines tool use to what can be achieved with the rostrum,
or mouth. Whales and dolphins cannot grip an object with one limb and
manipulate it with another, preventing complex tool use and limiting
their foraging techniques. Likewise, the requirements of flight put an
upper ceiling on the evolution of large bodies and brains for most birds,
because large birds struggle to get off the ground. In principle, bigger
brains might have been possible in giant flightless birds, such as moas or
elephant birds,138 but their vestigial wings never evolved manipulative
capabilities and their feet were adapted to running, which again imposed
bounds on extractive foraging. Perhaps because of these constraints,
those birds most dexterous in their tool use would appear to show
limited behavioral flexibility.139 In contrast, for primates, the runaway
process would have been able to encompass selection for social,
technical, and cultural intelligence, all enhancing each other. Such a
mechanism could have operated across many groupings, particularly the
apes, but it has clearly reached its zenith in humans, who are extreme in
their encephalization, intelligence, tool use, and reliance on culture.140
Perhaps Wilson had been on the right track. I was starting to believe that
cultural drive might genuinely be a central plank of the explanation for
the evolution of the human mind.

CHAPTER 7
HIGH FIDELITY
One of the most engaging aspects of academic life is the sheer
relentlessness with which the finding of solutions to scientific challenges
generates further questions. That was the case here. If cultural drive has
operated on all the great apes and some monkeys too, then why haven’t
gorillas invented particle accelerators? Why haven’t capuchins put a
monkey on the moon, or devised a simian version of Facebook? For all
the insight engendered, cultural drive had not explained why humans
should be so much more accomplished than other primates. What was
the secret of our success?1
One answer to this question attributes our species’ attainments to
chance. If cultural drive, or for that matter, any other mechanism fueling
the evolution of intelligence has operated widely, not all species would
be equally affected. For whatever reason, perhaps sheer luck, the brain
size and intelligence of some species would be boosted more than others
and, given the autocatalytic nature of the process, the cognitive prowess
of one species could easily have “run away” from the others. Inevitably,
the smartest species would be the one to look back and ask: “Why us?”
This solution, however, appears unsatisfactory. Chance factors are hard
to rule out, but identification of a trait or combination of traits that were
uniquely possessed by our ancestors and gave them the edge is so much
more compelling.
Another answer attributes our species’ success to demographics. Once
population size reached a critical threshold, such that small bands of
hunter-gatherers were more likely to come into contact with each other
and exchange goods and knowledge, then cultural information was less
likely to be lost, and knowledge and skills could start to accumulate.2
Such arguments are convincing, and population size and connectedness
is undoubtedly an important part of the story. However, demographics
cannot be all that counts, because there are numerous animals that live

in large numbers, none of whom have invented vaccines or drafted
declarations of individual rights. Large social networks will only support
complex culture in animals capable of generating complex culture in the
first place.
The question remains as to what was different about the behavior,
morphology, or circumstances of our ancestors that allowed our
technology and culture to take off in such an extraordinary manner.
Here, mathematical modeling has proven extremely insightful, and this
chapter will describe three theoretical analyses that shed light on this
issue. The chapter ends with an account of an experimental investigation
in children, chimpanzees, and capuchin monkeys that reinforces the
theoretical findings.
Early clues as to how the human success story is to be understood
came from a mathematical analysis carried out by Magnus Enquist and
his colleagues at Stockholm University.3 Magnus was a theoretical
biologist by training, but had become very interested in cultural
evolution. He invited me to join a project that used mathematical models
to explore how many “cultural parents” were necessary for stable
cultural transmission.4 A great deal about Magnus’s findings surprised
and intrigued me,5 but one of the more prosaic findings had the most
lasting influence. Magnus’s team modeled how the fidelity of cultural
transmission (that is, the accuracy with which learned information
passes between individuals) affected the amount of time that a cultural
trait would remain in a population. A positive relationship is to be
expected, of course, because knowledge that is copied faithfully will
remain in a population for longer than knowledge that is reproduced
inaccurately. Ballet steps and musical scores have persisted for centuries
precisely because protracted effort, including meticulous instruction and
the drafting of written transcripts, has been put into ensuring accurate
information transmission. What I hadn’t anticipated, though it turned
out to be highly significant, was that the mathematical function relating
trait fidelity to longevity would be acceleratory, or exponential, in form
(figure 7).
The shape of the curve is significant, because it means that for a
given population size there is a threshold effect, whereby a small
increase in the fidelity of social learning will transform cultural traits
from being short lived to virtually immortal. That this could help to

explain the difference in the volume of culture observed in humans
compared to other animals was immediately apparent. The theoretical
findings supported a verbal argument that had been made previously by
psychologist Michael Tomasello at the Max Planck Institute for
Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig. Tomasello had proposed that our
species’ unique capabilities for language, teaching, and efficient
imitation had allowed us to transmit knowledge with a higher fidelity
than observed in other animals, and that this transmission fidelity
explained the existence of cumulative culture (what he termed
“ratcheting”) in humans, but not in other animals.6
FIGURE 7. The longevity of a cultural trait (how long it remains in the population) increases
exponentially with trait fidelity (how accurately knowledge and behavior are transmitted among
individuals). This means that a small increase in fidelity can sometimes lead to a big increase in
the amount and persistence of cultural knowledge. This relationship helps to explain why, with
such high-fidelity transmission mechanisms, humans possess so much reliably inherited cultural
knowledge. Based on figure 3c in Enquist et al. (2010).
I confess that initially I did not find Tomasello’s argument
particularly convincing, because it was not apparent to me why high
fidelity should necessarily favor ratcheting.7 After all, if everyone always
copied perfectly then there would be no cultural change at all. Magnus’s
analysis resolved this for me by demonstrating that high-fidelity
transmission would lead to cultural traits persisting for extremely long

periods. In the more vertical region of the curve, a small increase in the
fidelity of transmission made a big difference as to how long cultural
traits remained in the population. Longer persistence times, in turn,
created greater opportunities for improvements in technology to appear,
since a trait must first be present before it can be refined, or improved.
An additional consequence of having longer-lasting traits is that more
culture will be preserved. High-fidelity transmission mechanisms
potentially support vastly more cultural knowledge and behavior than
low-fidelity mechanisms.
Magnus’s analysis illustrated why Tomasello’s reasoning was sound.
The demonstration that the relationship between trait fidelity and
longevity was exponential in character generated an important insight
that allowed a great deal about the social learning and tradition of
animals to be understood. For instance, while social learning is
widespread in animals, including birds, fishes, and insects, the bulk of it
is based on low-fidelity mechanisms. Countless animals learn through
being drawn to visit objects or to interact with stimuli that they have
witnessed other animals encounter; this involves simple forms of social
learning known as “local enhancement” or “stimulus enhancement.”8
Sure enough, as Magnus’s theory predicts, most animals capable of social
learning either possess no traditions at all, or exhibit what are known as
“lightening traditions”9—low-persistence patterns of behavior that
appear and then disappear very rapidly.
A small number of animals are capable of more accurate or higher-
fidelity forms of social learning. For instance, experiments demonstrate
that chimpanzees can learn by replicating the motor patterns of others or
through reproducing the movements of objects that others have brought
about; these are known as “imitation” and “emulation.”10 It may be no
coincidence that chimpanzee foraging and tool-using traditions can last
for decades.11 Charles Darwin described the nut-cracking habit of
chimpanzees in The Descent of Man,12 which establishes that this
tradition has lasted for at least over a century. Moreover, with the
exception of humans, chimpanzees also possess the most documented
traditions of any animal, with 39 behaviors identified as habitual or
customary in some populations and absent in others.13 Finally, with our
teaching, language, writing, and imitation, humans possess the highest-
fidelity social transmission mechanisms and, sure enough, we possess

vast amounts of very long-lasting culture. Magnus’s analysis implied that
the greater volume of culture associated with our species compared to
others is a direct consequence of human-specific transmission
mechanisms that significantly enhance the fidelity of our social learning.
We speculated that the same theory could also account for human
culture’s uniquely cumulative character, as Tomasello anticipated. More
culture means greater opportunities for borrowing ideas from other
domains and combining them to make new technologies that potentially
fuel further innovation and refinement, thereby instigating cumulative
culture. We had found that steeper curves arose in large compared to
small populations, with cultural traits persisting longer in more populous
groups.14 Hence, a small increase in the fidelity of cultural transmission
could have made a large qualitative difference to the character of human
culture, and these differences would be magnified as human populations
grew in numbers.
As we have seen, claims have been made for cumulative culture in
animals such as chimpanzees and New Caledonian crows;15 however, the
evidence is limited, circumstantial, and contested.16 In contrast, humans
incontrovertibly possess complex technology that no single individual
could invent alone. Could this difference really come down to
transmission fidelity? The suggestion was far from new. In addition to
Tomasello, fellow psychologists including Jeff Galef, Cecilia Heyes, and
Andrew Whiten, and evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins had all put
forward related arguments.17 However, although humans unquestionably
possess both the cognitive abilities to engage in high-fidelity information
transmission and a massively complex, cumulative culture, until recently
there had been no formal theoretical investigation demonstrating how
and why these might be linked. This hypothetical relationship, while
plausible, needed to be proven.
Certainly, Magnus’s theoretical analysis had allowed us to put
forward a credible verbal argument that the increased existence times of
accurately transmitted cultural traits could result in more opportunity
for modifications or combinations to occur, and thus could lead to
cultural ratcheting. The suggestion that animals would not get the
opportunity to refine short-lived traits appeared plausible. Equally, the
arguments that the long-lasting culture exhibited by humans would
allow for refinement, and that the existence of many cultural traits

would create opportunities for cross-fertilization and combination, made
sense. However, it was one matter to speculate, and quite another to
establish through mathematical modeling that the argument was
rigorous.
Hannah Lewis, a postdoctoral researcher at the University of St
Andrews with a background in mathematics, took up this challenge.18
Hannah set out to explore the effects of high-fidelity cultural
transmission on cumulative culture by manipulating trait longevity in a
simulation model.19 By systematically changing the rate at which traits
are lost from the population, we could evaluate the hypothesis that
cognitive changes that resulted in higher-fidelity transmission would
lead to the kind of cumulative culture observed in humans.20
Clearly, processes other than trait loss must affect the emergence of
cumulative culture. These include the rate at which new traits are
invented from scratch (which we called “novel invention”),21 the rate at
which pre-existing traits are brought together into complex composites
(henceforth “combination”),22 and the rate at which established traits are
refined or improved (henceforth “modification”). Novel trait invention,
combination, and modification can all be regarded as different forms of
innovation. These processes had been considered separately in models
exploring the buildup of numbers of cultural traits,23 or of trait
complexity,24 but there had been little general consideration of how
these processes would affect cumulative culture. Moreover, how these
forms of innovation interact and which would prove the most important
had not been established.
Hannah’s approach was beautifully simple. She constructed a
mathematical model in which she manipulated the rates of novel
invention, combination, modification, and loss of cultural traits to
explore how these processes would affect the buildup of cumulative
culture.25 The model considered how traits were gained and lost across
the entire population.26 As a starting point, we assumed that there are a
fixed number of traits that could appear within a group through novel
inventions and that are independent of any other traits within the
culture. We called these novel inventions “cultural seed traits.”27 Then,
one of four possible events could occur. A new seed trait could be
acquired by the group through novel invention (which occurred with
probability ρ1). Alternatively, two of the cultural traits present in the

group could be combined to produce a new cultural trait (which
occurred with probability ρ2). A third possibility was that one of the
traits present in the group could be modified or refined in some way to
produce a new variant of the trait (which occurred with probability ρ3).
Finally, one of the traits present in the group could be lost (which
occurred with probability ρ4). Once an event had taken place, the
culture of the group was updated (augmented with a new trait, or a lost
trait removed) and the next event took place, with the process repeated,
typically for 5000 such events.28 The collection of traits in the
population could thus change over time, either through the stepwise
modification or loss of an existing trait, or through trait differentiation,
where a single trait might give rise to more than one new element.
Across multiple simulations, Hannah systematically varied the four rate
parameters (ρ1, ρ2, ρ3, and ρ4) to explore how each process affected the
buildup of cumulative culture.29
Hannah’s results comprehensively established an important role for
the fidelity of social transmission in the development of cumulative
culture. The trait loss rate (ρ4, the converse of fidelity) was by far the
most important factor affecting the buildup of cumulative culture.
Hannah’s model strongly implied that transmission fidelity is the key
factor affecting the appearance of ratcheting. If the fidelity of
transmission is too low (i.e., ρ4 is large, which means the loss rate is
high), then it doesn’t matter how much novel invention, combination, or
modification takes place—cumulative culture simply cannot get started.
Only when the trait loss rate is at, or less than, a threshold level of
transmission fidelity, can cumulative knowledge begin to accrue.30
Further small reductions in the loss rate, corresponding to increments in
the accuracy of transmission, lead to big jumps in the cumulative nature
of the culture (as represented by utility, complexity, and number of traits
and lineages).31 As the loss rate is decreased further, a threshold is
reached beyond which it seemingly becomes impossible for cumulative
culture not to develop, provided that some modest level of combination
or modification occurs. Across thousands of simulations with different
parameter values, trait fidelity (ρ4) explained more of the variance in the
buildup of cumulative culture than novel invention, modification, and
combination combined.32

Hannah’s findings strongly supported Tomasello’s argument that the
apparent absence of cumulative culture in other species resulted from
their reliance on low-fidelity copying mechanisms, such as local
enhancement, rather than the high-fidelity processes observed in
humans.33 For instance, teaching is rare among other animals,34 as are
instances of communication that enhance transmission fidelity (e.g.,
referential 
communication).35 
Imitation 
has 
been 
reported 
in
chimpanzees and some birds,36 but comparative studies show that
imitation is quicker, more accurate, and more complete in humans when
compared to other animals.37 If most other animals do indeed rely on
low-fidelity copying, then Hannah’s work established that these learning
mechanisms will not support cumulative culture.
Assuming high-fidelity transmission, the exact nature of the culture
that develops depends on the mix of novel invention, trait modification,
and trait combination, with different combinations leading to a stable,
slowly changing culture at one extreme, or a rich, diverse, exponentially
growing culture at the other. In terms of the creative processes, the rate
of trait combination has the greatest effect, and the rate of novel
invention has the least impact, on the buildup of cumulative culture. Our
findings thus support the argument that trait combination is the major
source of both human innovation and progress in cumulative culture.38
Novel invention actually turns out to be relatively unimportant, which
surprises many people. However, recent studies of human innovation
report that innovation or discovery is often the result of chance, trait
combination, and incremental refinement, rather than “genius.”39 Almost
all human innovation involves the reworking or development of pre-
existing technology.40 Indeed, scholars of the history of technology
criticize the “myth of the heroic inventor,”41 lore that in our terms would
attribute progress in cumulative culture to novel invention.42
Previously, the social learning strategies tournament had taught us
that high levels of reliance on social learning routinely generated
extreme longevity of cultural knowledge within the population. Now
Magnus’s and Hannah’s analyses had taught us that high-fidelity
transmission mechanisms automatically produced large amounts of long-
lasting and cumulative culture. Put together, these theoretical results
suggest that once our ancestors became heavily reliant on strategic and
accurate forms of copying, they would almost inevitably develop a

culture that very much resembled our own. We were starting to envision
how something as monumentally complex as human culture could have
begun to emerge.
One question that remained, however, was through which
mechanisms high-fidelity information transmission had been achieved by
our ancestors. One obvious answer is language, and an attempt to
unravel the mystery of how language evolved is presented in the next
chapter. However, a second outstanding candidate for a mechanism
underlying high-fidelity transmission in humans is teaching. Indeed,
teaching can be defined as behavior that functions to enhance the fidelity of
information transmission between tutor and pupil.43 My use of this term
refers not just to the teaching of skills, but also to the passing on of
knowledge. Both demonstrating to a pupil how to execute a food-
processing technique, and telling the pupil about the necessary
ingredients and where they can be found, I consider examples of
teaching. Unsurprisingly, then, in the light of Magnus’s and Hannah’s
findings, the attention of my research group turned to exploring the
conditions under which teaching evolved in animals.
The evolution of teaching is a challenging, enigmatic, and beguiling
topic in its own right. Alongside imitation, and leaving aside language,
teaching is thought to be the primary mechanism through which humans
pass acquired knowledge, skills, and technology among individuals and
across generations. Teaching is widespread in human societies, and may
well be a key human psychological adaptation.44 As we will see in later
chapters, teaching is the primary means through which individuals
acquire an understanding of the norms, laws, and institutions of a
society, and it is vital to many forms of human cooperation.45 Yet the
mystery remained as to why teaching should be either absent or
exceedingly rare in virtually all other animals when it is manifestly so
important to our own species.
Countless animals do acquire skills and knowledge from others, as we
saw in chapter 2, but the experienced individuals who “transmit” the
information generally do not actively facilitate learning in others.46
Typically, animals just go about their own business and, while they may
be copied by others, the demonstrators rarely go to the trouble of overtly
helping others to learn. In fact, the commonly used term “demonstrator”
is slightly misleading when applied to animal social learning because it

may falsely imply that the transmitter’s role is an active one.47
For many years it was thought that humans alone actively teach.
Early studies of animal teaching were hampered by an anthropocentric
viewpoint. The image of a teacher was of a traditional schoolteacher,
and definitions of teaching stressed the intention of the tutor to
educate.48 This stance effectively restricted teaching to our own species,
because such intentions are very difficult to infer in nonhumans.
Progress was made in 1992, when two animal behavior researchers Tim
Caro and Marc Hauser adopted a functional perspective.49 That is, they
characterized teaching as behavior that functions to teach, and has
evolved specifically for that purpose. The major benefit of this approach
was that observable criteria were used that could be applied to animals:
An individual actor A [the tutor] can be said to teach if it modifies its
behaviour only in the presence of a naive observer, B [the pupil], at
some cost or at least without obtaining an immediate benefit for
itself. A’s behaviour thereby encourages or punishes B’s behaviour, or
provides B with experience, or sets an example for B. As a result, B
acquires knowledge, or learns a skill earlier in life or more rapidly or
efficiently than it might otherwise do so, or would not learn at all.50
In the early 1990s, Caro and Hauser were able to point to just two
putative examples of animal teaching,51 in cheetahs and domestic cats,52
although taken alone, neither unequivocally met their criteria. Mother
cats with kittens and cheetahs with young cubs do not kill and eat their
prey as other cats do. Instead, mothers bring the prey back to their
offspring in dead, disabled, or intact form depending on the age of the
young, apparently so that the latter can practice hunting. In the years
that followed their initial work, refinements of Caro and Hauser’s
definition imposed additional criteria, such as feedback from pupil to
tutor, or teaching restricted to the transfer of skills, concepts, and rules.53
With such definitions, researchers have reported a small number of
reasonably compelling cases of animal teaching, but patently not in the
species that we had expected.
One interesting example is found in meerkats,54 a small carnivorous
species of mongoose that must survive in the harsh African desert
through coordination and teamwork. Meerkat pups are almost entirely

reliant on food provisioned by older group members, known as
“helpers,” which include both parents and other colony members.55 Yet
by three months of age, those same youngsters have become entirely
self-sufficient at feeding and can handle a variety of difficult and
dangerous prey, including lizards, spiders, and even scorpions with their
deadly stings. Recent work shows that the helpers facilitate this
transition to nutritional independence by gradually introducing pups to
live prey.56 Cambridge University researchers Alex Thornton and
Katherine McAuliffe set out to establish whether this process meets the
criteria of Caro and Hauser’s definition of teaching.57 This required them
to determine whether the transfer of live prey by helpers occurred solely
in the presence of the pups, at some cost to the adults, and led to the
youngsters learning about food.
Adult meerkats normally consume prey immediately, but when
young pups are present, they typically kill or disable mobile prey items
before carrying them to a begging pup. Scorpions are often disabled by
removing the sting, allowing pups to interact safely with the live prey.
As pups grow older, they are increasingly given intact prey, stings and
all. Thornton and McAuliffe established that whether or not helpers
modify prey through sting removal before provisioning hung critically
on the sound of the pups’ begging calls, which changes with age. These
researchers played recordings of the begging calls of old pups to groups
with young pups, which led adults to bring back live prey, while playing
the calls of young pups to groups with old pups caused an increase in the
proportion of dead prey provisioned. In spite of the adult meerkat being
fooled, the experimental manipulation demonstrates that the helpers
normally adjusted their behavior to the age, and hence, competence of
the pups. Indeed, the adults exhibited considerable sensitivity to the
performance of pups, nudging prey items if the pups ignored them,
retrieving escaped prey, and modifying the prey some more (for
instance, disabling further) if pups were struggling. This provisioning
strategy incurs costs, because considerable time is spent monitoring the
pups as they handle live prey, and there is a nontrivial risk that the pups
will lose the prey item. However, the strategy creates opportunities for
the pups to acquire hunting skills.
Thornton and McAuliffe were also able to provide experimental
evidence that the helpers’ behavior promoted skill acquisition. Pups that

were artificially given additional opportunities to handle live, stingless
scorpions subsequently outperformed siblings that had been given dead
scorpions, showing that the opportunity to practice on disabled but live
scorpions facilitates skill acquisition.58 Thornton and McAuliffe had
demonstrated that the meerkat helpers’ behavior meets all of Caro and
Hauser’s criteria, and was a genuine example of animal teaching. A clue
as to why helpers teach is found with the observation that pups very
rarely find mobile prey items themselves. Helpers can therefore actively
facilitate the pups’ acquisition of handling skills by giving them
otherwise unavailable opportunities to practice handling prey. In the
long term, adults benefit by reducing the costs of provisioning through
hastening the time to independence, as well as through increased pup
survival.59 It is advantageous for adult meerkats to teach youngsters to
feed themselves, because it saves the helpers time and effort in the long
run.
Another compelling example of animal teaching is found in those
ants that engage in “tandem running,”60 a behavior that involves
carefully guiding nest mates to new food sources or nest sites.61 In most
other ant species, individuals follow pheromone trails to food sources,62
but tandem running has the function of teaching nest mates the locations
of food. In tandem-running ants, knowledgeable individuals adjust their
behavior to ensure that followers learn the route. Biologists Nigel Franks
and Tom Richardson at Bristol University showed how, among tandem-
running pairs, the leader ants only run ahead a few steps toward the
food after being tapped by the antennae of a follower, which enables the
pair to remain in close contact.63 This slows the leader down
considerably, resulting in a fourfold increase in the time that it takes
leaders to reach the food. However, the followers find food substantially
sooner when tandem running than when searching alone and, more
importantly, learn the location of the food in the process. There is strong
evidence that tandem running has evolved specifically to facilitate
teaching. First, if knowledgeable ants merely need help to bring food
back to the nest, it is considerably more efficient for them to carry naive
ants directly to the food, as they sometimes do. Critically, however,
when this occurs, route learning does not take place, largely because the
ant is typically carried upside down and facing backward!64 Tandem
running might be slower than carrying, but it has the advantage that the

follower learns where to go.65
Using Caro and Hauser’s functional criteria, or derivatives of it,
animal behaviorists have now compiled evidence for teaching in a small
and rather curious assortment of species; these include meerkats, ants,
bees, and two species of birds called pied babblers and superb fairy
wrens; with suggestive, but not yet conclusive, evidence in cats,
cheetahs, and tamarin monkeys.66 The functional similarities between
teaching in, say, ants and humans should not obscure the fact that
mechanistically, cases of teaching in other animals are entirely different
from human teaching, and are reliant on entirely separate psychological
and neural processes.67 Indeed, current thinking suggests that instances
of teaching function to enhance the fidelity of information transmission
through adaptive refinements of those forms of social learning that are
already present in the animal.68 This thinking leads us to expect quite
distinct teaching mechanisms in different species. Also important to
recognize is the fact that animal teaching has not been subject to a great
deal of scientific attention, leaving the taxonomic distribution of this
character uncertain. Cases of animal teaching remain controversial, with
some researchers wishing to impose more stringent criteria before a
behavior is classed as teaching.69 Nonetheless, as examples of animal
teaching trickled in, we were struck by the observation that no
compelling evidence for teaching had been found in nonhuman apes,
dolphins, elephants, or other large-brained mammals celebrated for their
intelligence. Why this should be intrigued me.
Animal teaching studies left us pondering a series of challenging
questions. First, we wanted to comprehend why teaching was not more
widespread in animals when it seemed so beneficial. Second, we needed
to make sense of the curious taxonomic distribution associated with
teaching. If ants and bees were capable of teaching, why should
intelligent animals, such as chimpanzees, not teach? Third, in contrast to
humans, teaching in other animals appeared restricted to isolated traits,
which led us to wonder how and why a very general capability for
teaching evolved among our ancestors. One might imagine that these
issues would have been subject to widespread interest across multiple
academic disciplines, including evolutionary and behavioral biology,
psychology, and anthropology. Yet, although related topics, such as the
evolution of social learning,70 learned communication,71 and learned

cooperation,72 had been the focus of extensive research, until recently
there was no formal theory of the evolution of teaching.
One of the hottest research topics in evolutionary biology currently is
the evolution of cooperation. Any behavior that provides a benefit to
another individual (the “recipient”), and that was selected because of
this positive effect, is defined as cooperation.73 Many cases of
cooperation in nature involve the donor passing on physical resources
such as food or help to the recipient, but the same definition would
apply if the donor instead provides useful information. Hence, most
instances of teaching in humans, and all known cases of teaching in
other animals, meet definitions of cooperation, with the tutor’s behavior
being favored because it promotes the acquisition of fitness-enhancing
information in the pupil. In principle, individuals could be taught skills
or knowledge that damage their chances of surviving and reproducing
(to take class A drugs, for instance), but such cases are rare exceptions.
Teaching is generally a form of cooperation. Nonetheless, patterns of
teaching in nature are not currently well explained by theories of the
evolution of cooperation.74 Rather, certain unique features specific to
teaching mean that an understanding of its evolution requires a
specialized treatment. These include the fact that taught information can
be acquired through means other than teaching (e.g., through trial and
error, or through social learning), and that the dynamics of information
transfer differ considerably from the dynamics of the spread and
accumulation of physical resources. This meant that if we wanted to
understand the evolution of teaching, we would need to develop our
own theory.
Once again, we looked to mathematical modeling for help. Two
mathematically minded members of my research group, a PhD student
named Laurel Fogarty and a postdoctoral researcher called Pontus
Strimling, worked together closely to devise a model that would explore
under what circumstances teaching might be expected to evolve.75 I
found their analyses extremely insightful, helping to explain the bizarre
distribution of teaching behavior in nature, the absence of teaching in
many large-brained mammals, and the widespread use of teaching in
humans. Laurel and Pontus came up with a model in which the
evolutionary fitness of individuals hung critically on whether or not they
possessed a valuable piece of knowledge or skill, such as meerkats

knowing how to tackle a scorpion safely, or our ancestors knowing how
to manufacture a functional digging tool. In the hypothetical
mathematical world that Laurel and Pontus constructed, individuals that
possessed this knowledge would be more likely to survive and reproduce
than individuals without the skill. We assumed that young individuals
(henceforth “pupils”) could acquire this information in three possible
ways. The skill could be learned by (1) trial and error (that is, asocial
learning) with probability A; (2) copying another individual (social
learning) with probability S: or (3) being taught by a relative
(henceforth “tutor”), at some cost to the tutor, which occurred with
probability T. Only individuals with an evolved ability to teach would be
able to act as tutors. Laurel and Pontus then explored the circumstances
under which individuals carrying an initially rare genetic mutation that
conferred an ability to teach would have a fitness advantage over
nonteachers, such that teachers would on average leave more offspring;
in this way the mutation would increase in frequency until the
population was dominated by individuals capable of teaching. This
approach allowed us to explore the circumstances under which a
capacity for teaching would evolve through natural selection.
Some of Laurel and Pontus’s findings were very intuitive. As one
might anticipate, the more closely related the tutor and the pupil were,
the more likely teaching would be favored. The reasoning here, known
as “kin selection,” is that behaviors can spread—even if they reduce the
chances that the individual performing them survives and reproduces—
in circumstances where those behaviors provide benefits to the survival
and reproduction of close relatives (inclusive fitness).76 Laurel and
Pontus found that teaching would evolve where its costs were
outweighed by the inclusive fitness benefits that resulted from the tutor’s
relatives being more likely than other individuals to acquire the valuable
information. Obviously, that means that the probability of teaching
being favored decreases as the costs of teaching rise.
Other findings, however, were less obvious. Particularly instructive
was the relationship between the fitness difference of teachers and
nonteachers (Wd), and the probability that individuals could acquire the
skill through means other than teaching (i.e., through asocial or
inadvertent social learning, A + S). In the latter case, high values of A
+ S can be thought of as corresponding to easy-to-learn skills (i.e.,

behaviors that could readily be picked up through trial and error, or
through copying), while low values would represent difficult skills.
When these variables are plotted against each other graphically, the
resulting functions generate a characteristic n-shaped curve. Animal
teaching is more likely to evolve for tasks of intermediate difficulty than
for either easy or difficult skills.
Consider first the situation with skills that are easy to learn. Here
teaching is not favored by selection because there is no advantage to
adults investing in a costly means to ensure that their relatives (for
instance, their immediate offspring) acquire a skill that they are highly
likely to pick up anyway. This finding neatly explains why teaching is
not more common among smart animals. Chimpanzees, for example, are
very good at trial-and-error learning and particularly adept at social
learning, at least compared to other animals. The high probability with
which chimpanzee youngsters will pick up foraging skills such as nut
cracking or fishing for ants through a combination of trial and error and
copying, greatly reduces the probability that it would be worth adults
investing in the costs of teaching them how to do so. Going to a lot of
trouble to teach youngsters skills that they are going to learn without
your help is not economical. Hence, the youngsters being good at
learning actually raises the bar, and makes it more difficult for teaching
to evolve in that species. That is why no simple relationship exists
between the intellectual ability of the animal and the presence of
teaching.
Now consider the case of traits that are difficult to learn. Here too,
teaching is not favored by selection, but this time for a different reason.
Few individuals in the population have managed to acquire these traits,
precisely because they are difficult to learn, which means that most
teachers will not possess the requisite knowledge to instruct their pupils.
For other animals, at least, there is no advantage in their investing in a
costly means of information transmission if they don’t have useful skills
or knowledge to pass on. Thus, among nonhuman animals, tasks of
intermediate difficulty are most likely to be taught. If teaching is to be
favored, the skill taught should not be so simple that it is easy to be
picked up without teaching, but at the same time, not so difficult that
few individuals possess the skill and can pass it on. Highly valuable skills
with a big impact on survival are more likely to meet the restrictive

criteria under which teaching evolves than skills that don’t greatly
increase fitness. However, Laurel and Pontus found that there typically
needs to be a very substantial increment in fitness associated with the
skill if teaching is to pay; that is, the knowledge taught would really
have to make a difference to the pupil’s chances of surviving and
reproducing. There are relatively few traits that satisfy these constraints,
which explains why teaching is probably rare in nature.
Armed with these findings, we can now understand why teaching
should be found in such an odd assortment of animals. The incidence of
teaching only appeared puzzling because we had the wrong intuitions.
We had expected teaching to be exhibited by clever animals that are
good at social learning. In fact, with some caveats that we will come to,
smart animals rarely need to teach, because most of their skills can be
picked up through copying or trial and error. What cases of animal
teaching have in common are a high degree of relatedness between tutor
and pupil, factors that reduce the costs of teaching, and an otherwise
difficult-to-learn skill that confers a substantial fitness benefit. If, as it
would appear, animals rarely engage in teaching, it is because these
criteria are difficult to meet.
Yet the puzzle remained of how humans could teach so widely.
Humans don’t just teach the odd, isolated high-fitness skill to close
relatives, but impart all sorts of material and often to entirely unrelated
individuals—from tango dancing to calculus—much of which seems to
have no impact at all on the pupil’s survival. Laurel and Pontus had
identified the conditions under which teaching evolved, yet our own
species appeared to violate those rules.
Once again, we went back to the drawing board to reflect further on
the differences between animal and human teaching. We became
impressed by the fact that compared to other animal teaching, humans
were manifestly capable of imparting highly complex knowledge, be it
automobile mechanics, the use of computers, or advanced mathematics.
We knew this was because humans alone have undergone cumulative
cultural evolution, which has in essence reduced our reliance on
information acquired alone, through trial and error, and allowed the
amassing of knowledge and skills that are learned through social
guidance and direct instruction. Valuable information—concerning, for
instance, industrial practices or technological manufacture—had become

available for individuals to teach through the accumulated efforts of
many past individuals. We began to wonder whether cumulative culture
might be the critical factor that made the difference. Unlike other
animals, for whom tasks that are difficult to learn cannot be taught
because few individuals possess the relevant knowledge, humans are
able to teach very complex skills; we can do this because that knowledge
is widespread in the population, having gradually accrued over time.
This led us to the hypothesis that the generalized capacity for teaching
exhibited by humans might have coevolved with the cognitive traits that
underlay cumulative culture.
Laurel and Pontus responded by extending their model to allow for
cumulative knowledge gain. This was implemented by allowing
individuals that had acquired the first piece of information to gather
further knowledge that improves or refines it. This further knowledge
simultaneously made the acquired skill more beneficial but also more
difficult to learn.77 The results were resounding. Cumulative knowledge
gain did indeed make teaching more profitable, and as a consequence
more likely to evolve.78 The relative fitness of teachers compared to
nonteachers was virtually always higher in a cumulative setting
compared to a noncumulative setting.79 What is more, cumulative
culture favored teaching precisely for the reasons that we had
anticipated; difficult-to-learn information had been made available in
the population at a higher frequency through prior accumulation, and
this was then available to tutors to pass on to their pupils.80
The teaching conundrum had been solved. Teaching evolves where
the costs are outweighed by the inclusive fitness beneits that result from
the tutor’s relatives being more likely to acquire the valuable
information. Teaching is not favored when the pupil can easily acquire
the information on their own or through copying others. Nor is it
favored when imparting traits that are difficult to learn, as teachers
generally do not possess the information to pass on to their relatives.
These restrictions typically lead to few circumstances under which
teaching would be efficacious. Models that allow for cumulative cultural
knowledge gain, however, suggest that teaching evolved in humans
despite, rather than because of, our strong imitative capabilities, and
primarily because cumulative culture renders otherwise difficult-to-
acquire valuable information available to teach. The analyses suggest

that human teaching and cumulative culture evolved together, through
mutual reinforcement.
A small subset of nonhuman animals does appear to satisfy the
stringent conditions for the evolution of teaching, and our findings help
explain what this curious assortment has in common. The possibility of
high relatedness among female workers in the social insects may help to
explain why teaching is observed in some tandem-running ants and some
social bees,81 but comparatively rarely in vertebrates.82 There is
something else that many teaching species have in common, however;
this is cooperative breeding, a social system in which helpers provide
care for offspring produced by other group members that breed.83
Strikingly, the most compelling cases of animal teaching occur in
cooperatively breeding species, such as ants, bees, meerkats, and pied
babblers. Humans too have been characterized as cooperative breeders,
because children often receive care and resources from more distant
relatives, or nonrelatives.84 The significance of cooperative breeding here
is that helpers engage in costly,85 and prolonged,86 provisioning of the
young that they help rear. Plausibly, the alleviation of heavy
provisioning costs, as well as the sharing of teaching costs across
multiple tutors, significantly lowers the per capita cost to an individual
teacher; both help to render teaching economical.87 Teaching may be
favored only when the tutor’s costs are unusually low,88 and this is likely
to be more frequent in cooperative-breeding species because the costs of
teaching can be offset against those of provisioning.89 This finding is
relevant 
to 
understanding 
human 
teaching 
too. 
Humans 
are
characterized by a very long period of juvenile dependency, which
corresponds to a remarkably long period of time during which adult
humans must provision their offspring. This prolonged juvenile
dependency may well have contributed to the extensiveness of teaching
observed in our species, by providing an economic incentive for us to
teach our children how to fend for themselves.
The 
extent 
of 
animal 
teaching 
may, 
as 
yet, 
have 
been
underestimated, and new examples may be uncovered in the future.90
Nonetheless, the generality and pervasiveness of human teaching offers a
striking contrast to teaching in other animals. In part, this follows from
our capacity for cumulative culture, but there is a second factor, also
unique to our species, that may be important as well. The fidelity of

human teaching is likely to be unusually high relative to teaching in
other animals.91 There are a number of reasons for this—the most
obvious is our capacity for language. However, there is also teaching
through imitation, through manual shaping of the pupil’s body by the
tutor, and through passing on subtle clues. The latter is known as
pedagogical cueing, where factors like eye contact, joint reference, and
verbal cues (i.e., “watch this”) help pupils learn to direct their attention.
Moreover, humans have considerable powers of mental state attribution,
which allows tutors to adjust their teaching to the pupil’s state of
knowledge.92 All these abilities, which are examples of the kind of
cognitive traits that might plausibly have evolved through Wilson’s
cultural drive mechanism, combine to enhance the fidelity of human
information transmission.
Not all of the issues surrounding teaching have yet been clarified. In
modern human societies teaching is a profession in which individuals are
paid to provide guidance and instruction to nonrelatives, and Laurel and
Pontus’s model does not explain how such institutionalized teaching
arose. Nor have we yet discussed the origins of language, which I believe
is intimately tied to the evolution of teaching. These are topics we will
return to later in the book. Another complication are reports that
teaching is not common in some hunter-gatherer societies.93 However,
such claims refer to an absence of direct instruction, and neglect the
prevalence of more subtle forms of teaching, such as attention-grabbing
verbal cues, or the directing of the pupil’s gaze to relevant objects.94
Recent thinking within anthropology supports the argument that
teaching is widespread in humans,95 in spite of earlier claims to the
contrary, but that human teaching takes on a variety of forms from
direct verbal instruction to more subtle scaffolding and cueing. There is
no escaping the fact that every one of us has been taught valuable
knowledge, skills, and lessons throughout our childhood, and teaching is
core to knowledge transfer and personal development in virtually every
profession, from training accountants to coaching IT skills. All human
beings live in a world structured by laws, regulations, and complex
institutions, the vast majority of which would be impossible to
understand without teaching.
I end this chapter with a study that provides clear experimental
support for the link between high-fidelity transmission mechanisms and

cumulative culture. The experiment was carried out by Lewis Dean, a
graduate student at St Andrews.96 The study, which was published in the
journal Science,97 investigated the cognitive processes necessary for
cumulative cultural learning, as well as the proposed links between
teaching, language, and cumulative culture.
As noted previously, the evidence that other animals exhibit
cumulative culture is circumstantial and contested.98 A scientific debate
has ensued, in which researchers have discussed why the culture of
humans, but not the socially learned traditions of other animals,
frequently ratchets up in complexity and diversity. The debate has
spawned a large number of distinct hypotheses concerning the cognitive
capabilities, or social conditions, thought to be necessary for cumulative
culture to arise. These explanations include a hypothesized critical
dependency of cumulative culture on aspects of social cognition deemed
to be exclusive to, or substantially enhanced in, humans, including
teaching, language, imitation, and prosociality (i.e. helping others).99
However, other explanations stress features of social structure that
mitigate against the spread of superior solutions in animals other than
humans.100 These include scrounging, which can hinder social learning
and demotivate resource production;101 the tendency of dominant
individuals to monopolize resources, thereby preventing subordinates
from learning;102 and a lack of attention to low-status inventors.103 A
further hypothesis is that satisficing, or conservative behavior, is what
hinders ratcheting in nonhumans.104
As no extensive and rigorous experimental investigation of the
capacity for cumulative cultural learning had been conducted,105 we
decided to carry out such an investigation.106 We designed a puzzle box
specifically to test the ability of individuals to engage in cumulative
cultural learning. The puzzle box was a simulated foraging task that
could be solved at three stages of difficulty, with success at stage 2
building on stage 1, and success at stage 3 building on stage 2. Progress
at each stage accessed an ever more desirable reward. To solve the first
level, individuals merely had to slide a door to one side to reveal a
chute, through which low-grade rewards (a carrot for the nonhuman
primates, or small stickers for the human children) were delivered by the
experimenter. Stage 2 required a button to be pushed, allowing the door
to slide further to reveal a second chute, containing a higher-quality

reward (an apple, or a medium sized sticker). Stage 3 required the
turning of a dial, which allowed the door to slide further still, revealing
a third chute containing high-quality rewards (grapes, or a large sticker).
All stages could be completed through two parallel options, allowing us
to investigate cooperation, tolerance, and social learning within the task,
while presentation in social groups allowed solutions to each level to
spread among individuals.
We then presented appropriately scaled versions of the puzzle box
under a variety of conditions to small groups of children, chimpanzees,
and capuchin monkeys.107 More specifically, the participants were eight
groups of three-to four-year-old children from three nursery schools in
Scotland, eight mixed-age groups of chimpanzees at a research facility in
Texas,108 and two groups of capuchin monkeys at another facility in
Strasbourg, France.109 Our study had two objectives. First, we wanted to
establish whether children, chimpanzees, and capuchins were capable of
cumulative cultural learning (i.e., whether higher-level solutions would
arise and spread through the groups).110 Second, if they were not, we
wanted to understand why not; that is, we wanted to sort between the
alternative hypotheses for why humans seemingly alone possess a
cumulative cultural capability.
The results of Lewis’s experiments were very clear. After 30 hours of
presenting the task to each of 4 chimpanzee groups, only 1 of 33
individuals reached stage 3.111 A further experiment revealed that
performance was not greatly enhanced by the introduction of
chimpanzee demonstrators who had been pretrained to solve the task at
the highest level. The trained chimpanzees repeatedly demonstrated the
solution in a highly proficient manner, yet this solution did not spread to
others in their group. A similar pattern was observed in the capuchins,
where after 53 hours, no individual reached stage 3 and only 2
individuals reached stage 2. These findings stand in stark contrast to
what we witnessed in the human children. Despite a far shorter exposure
to the apparatus (only 2.5 hours), five of the eight groups had at least
two individuals who reached stage 3, with multiple solvers at stages 2 or
3 in all but 2 groups. The children, but not the chimpanzees or
capuchins, had provided us with clear evidence for cumulative cultural
learning.
What were the children doing differently from the other two species?

They were teaching each other how to solve the task. A total of 23
unambiguous instances of teaching by direct instruction (i.e., referencing
part of the puzzle box) were observed exclusively in the children; all of
these involved task-relevant communication (e.g., “push that button
there”) and approximately one-third involved gesture (i.e., pointing to
the relevant part of the puzzle box). Of course, we knew that teaching is
rare in animals, so perhaps these findings were not too surprising. For
this reason, we went on to consider teaching precursors, or subtle
processes similar to teaching, such as “scaffolding,”112 which might not
satisfy definitions of teaching but might nonetheless inadvertently aid
learning in the other primates. One such possibility was that
chimpanzees or capuchins might facilitate learning in others by allowing
infants to steal food the adults had extracted. A second was that they
might enlist the offspring’s interest in the task through food calls.
However, when we examined rates of provisioning, we saw no tolerated
theft in mother-infant pairs of capuchins, while among the chimpanzees,
the mothers were actually stealing extracted food from their offspring!
Moreover, our examination of food calling established that in both
nonhuman species there was no difference in the rate of recruitment of
others to the puzzle box before, versus immediately after, a call. In fact,
low rates of food calling were observed. In stark contrast, those children
who received verbal instruction strongly outperformed those who did
not.
We also compared the rate at which individuals from each species
performed a matching manipulation of the puzzle box to that observed
being performed by another individual departing the box. For instance,
had the last contact of the preceding individual at the box been to push
down the button on the left, we examined whether the observer that
followed also pushed that button. Matching could constitute copying the
actions of others (i.e., imitation) or making the same manipulanda move
in the same way (i.e., emulation). We found that children alone
performed more matching than nonmatching manipulations and that
they produced a significantly greater proportion of matching actions
than both chimpanzees and capuchins. Other analyses revealed evidence
for chimpanzee social learning at stage 1 but not at higher stages.
In addition, we witnessed striking evidence that the children were
helping each other solve the task. There were no fewer than 215

altruistic events when a child spontaneously gave a retrieved sticker to
another (half of all children exhibited such altruism), but not a single
instance of the voluntary donation of food in either the chimpanzees or
capuchins occurred. Such altruism likely signifies that the children, but
not the other two species, understood that their motivations and goals
were shared. There were other signs that the children approached the
task cooperatively. The proportion of occasions when two children
performed the task together was far greater than among chimpanzees or
capuchins, which indicated greater tolerance of others and collaboration
among children.
In contrast, there was little evidence that the capability for
cumulative culture was affected by either the social structure of the
species or aspects of nonsocial cognition.113 We found no support for the
five hypotheses that cumulative culture is absent in chimpanzees or
capuchins because in these animals (1) the social transmission of
superior solutions is hindered by scrounging, (2) dominant individuals
monopolize key resources, (3) there is a lack of attention to low-status
innovators, (4) these animals satisfice, or (5) there was an inability to
discriminate higher-quality from lower-quality rewards. Nor can the
results be easily dismissed as an artifact of captivity testing, because
wild chimpanzees and capuchins have been subjected to long-term
studies that reveal no unambiguous evidence for cumulative culture.114
Likewise, our animals could be described as “dysfunctional” because
they had performed effectively in previous studies demonstrating social
learning and tradition of noncumulative tasks.115 Rather, the children’s
use of teaching, imitation, and language explained the differences in
performance between species.
The link between high-fidelity transmission mechanisms and
cumulative cultural learning was cemented by our finding strong
positive and significant correlations between an individual child’s
performance at the puzzle box and how much teaching and verbal
instruction they received, how much imitation they engaged in, and how
much prosociality they benefited from. All children who successfully
solved stage 3 received at least one form of this social support, and 86%
received at least two. Conversely, children who did not benefit from
social support performed poorly.
These data not only provide clear and strong evidence for a

cumulative cultural capability in the children but also strongly link their
elevated performance to their social cognition. A package of social
cognitive capabilities that encompassed teaching, which was largely
carried out through verbal instruction, as well as imitation and
prosociality, was critical for elevated performance. The study implicates
this package of processes as important for cultural transmission to
ratchet. The children responded to the apparatus as a social exercise,
manipulating the box together, matching the actions of others,
facilitating learning in others through verbal instruction and gesture, and
engaging in repeated prosocial acts of spontaneous gifts of the rewards
that they themselves had retrieved. In contrast, the chimpanzees and
capuchins appeared to interact with the apparatus solely as a means to
procure resources for themselves in an entirely self-serving manner,
largely independent of the performance of others, and exhibited
restricted learning that appeared primarily asocial in character. Our
study provided strong support for the view that cumulative culture
requires psychological processes that are present in humans but are
absent or impoverished in chimpanzees and capuchins.116
Human cultural traditions accumulate refinements over time, thereby
producing both technology and other cultural achievements of
astonishing complexity and diversity unprecedented in the rest of nature.
Although numerous hypotheses had been proposed for this phenomenon,
the explanation had for many years remained elusive. Lewis’s
experiment provided a clear answer to this conundrum, again lending
strong support for the position advanced by Michael Tomasello,117 and
echoed here: the mindboggling complexity of human culture hangs
critically on our capacities for teaching, language, and imitation. What
our studies had added to Tomasello’s arguments was an account of how
and why these abilities had evolved.
The theoretical analyses and experiments described in this chapter
serve in combination to clarify how important accurate information
transmission is to the origins of culture. Humans alone possess
cumulative culture because humans alone possess sufficiently high-
fidelity information transmission mechanisms, including an unusually
accurate capacity for imitation, teaching, and language. It sounds
paradoxical that teaching should both explain the advent of human
cultural complexity and be the product of it, but that is exactly what we

should expect if a feedback mechanism, like Wilson’s cultural drive, is
operating. In fact, evolutionary feedback mechanisms help explain a lot
more about the human condition than I have touched on so far,
including that quintessentially human attribute, our language.

CHAPTER 8
WHY WE ALONE HAVE LANGUAGE
No longer mourn for me when I am dead
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
Give warning to the world that I am fled
From this vile world, with vilest worms to dwell.
Nay, if you read this line remember not
The hand that writ it; for I love you so,
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
If thinking on me then should make your woe.
O, if, I say, you look upon this verse,
When I perhaps compounded am with clay,
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse,
But let your love even with my life decay;
Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
And mock you with me after I am gone.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, SONNET 71
Powerful expressions of emotion and self-sacrifice, such as this
Shakespearian sonnet, move many of us. In a world in which people
frequently clamor to make their mark or leave a legacy, that someone
could love another so desperately that they would choose to be forgotten
rather than have their memory cause pain and suffering to their loved
one is very poignant. There is an anguished bellow of conflicted emotion
perfectly captured in Shakespeare’s words to which we relate. Yet the
sonnet encompasses far greater specificity of information transfer than
any anguished bellow ever emitted by an animal. No other primate
expresses heartfelt sentiments with such clarity. No other species
conveys after-death contemplations, or anticipated societal judgments.
“What a piece of work is a man,” indeed.

Shakespeare would certainly not have caste humanity as “infinite in
faculty” had our species not evolved language.1 Without language there
would be no sonnets, plays, theatre, literature, history and, of course, no
Bard of Avon. If the eminent Soviet psychologist Lev Vygotsky is correct,
and he surely is, without language there would also be precious little
complexity to human thought. Vygotsky argued compellingly that the
development of human reasoning is mediated by signs and symbols, and
hence is critically contingent on language.2 He established a connection
between speech and the development of mental concepts and cognitive
awareness that has remained prevalent within psychology to the present.
A similar view was championed by the great American linguist Noam
Chomsky, who emphasized that language is as much a system for
structuring our thinking about the world as it is a vehicle for
communication.3 When we think, we typically do so linguistically.
No account of the evolution of human cognition and culture would
be complete without an explanation for the origins of language. Yet, in
spite of its unquestioned importance, the reason why human language
evolved remains an enigma. Certainly, there are no shortage of
candidate explanations. Selective scenarios for the emergence of natural
language are bounteous.4 Language evolved to facilitate cooperative
hunting.5 Language evolved as a costly ornament that allows females to
assess male quality.6 Language evolved as a substitute for the grooming
exhibited by other primates when groups got too large.7 Language
evolved to promote pair bonding,8 to aid mother-child communication,9
to gossip about others,10 to expedite toolmaking,11 as a tool for thought,12
or to fulfill countless other functions or purposes.
The problem is that there are too many explanations for the
evolution of language. This is a domain rife with speculation and
teeming with plausible stories for the genesis of our most cherished
faculty, although most such stories are somewhat weakly supported. The
wealth of diverse historical narratives is enough to leave some
researchers deeply skeptical as to the value of such theorizing.13
Difficulties arise primarily because the origin of language was a singular
event, a unique adaptive response in an isolated lineage. Of course,
evolutionary biologists commonly study the emergence of unique traits,
such as the giraffe’s neck or the elephant’s trunk. In those instances,
however, there are other long-necked or long-nosed creatures that can

be used to shed light on the factors that favored the focal trait. In
contrast, there is nothing remotely like language in the animal kingdom.
People speak of “the language of the bees” and the “chatter of dolphins,”
but, in spite of intensive research, science has yet to reveal strong
similarities between the communication of humans and other animals.
That does not mean a comparative perspective is not useful. To the
contrary, through the study of animal communication a great deal has
been learned about the origins of language, including what exactly is
unique about human communication and how its neural underpinnings
and vocal apparatus have changed.14 However, the singularity of
language does leave its origins far more challenging to unearth.
When the natural communication systems of primates are examined,
for instance, no straightforward increase in complexity from monkeys to
apes to humans is observed. Many researchers characterize great ape
communication systems as more limited in range than those of
monkeys.15 For example, monkeys, but not other apes, have functionally
referential alarm calls,16 although whether monkey calls are truly
referential like human language remains contested.17 This particular ape-
monkey difference makes biological sense. Great apes are larger and
stronger than monkeys, and hence are less vulnerable to predation. Apes
almost certainly didn’t evolve referential alarm calls because they had
comparatively little to be alarmed about. Indeed, there is little that is
learned at all in the vocal communication of nonhuman apes.18 Apes do
possess gestures to initiate play, for instance, or when infants signal they
wish to be carried—many of these gestures have learned elements.19
However, apes seemingly do not use their gestures referentially, nor do
their gestures exhibit any symbolic or conventionalized features.20
Hence, the communication of our closest living relatives typically
consists of single, unrelated signals that cannot be used outside of highly
restricted, functional contexts; they are rarely joined together to make
more complex messages, and can only relay information about the here
and now.21
Admittedly, some apes were taught to use meaningful hand signs,
and much has been made of this. However, there is virtually unanimous
agreement among language experts that the strong claims—for instance,
that Washoe the chimpanzee or Koko the gorilla have learned full
grammatical language—are not supported by the data.22 What such

studies do demonstrate is that apes can be taught to learn the meaning
of a large number of signs, and to communicate using these; but any
assertion that a nonhuman ape has acquired the rules of grammatical
structure remains highly contentious.23 One can train a rat or a pigeon to
form an association between a cue and an action, and likewise there is
little in the ape sign language literature that cannot be explained by
simple rules of associative learning, and perhaps a little imitation.
Revealingly, all talking ape utterances are devastatingly egocentric in
character. Give an ape the means to talk through signing and it will say
things like, “Gimme food” or other expressions of the animal’s own
desires. For instance, the longest recorded utterance of Nim Chimpsky,
the chimpanzee taught sign language by Herbert Terrace of Columbia
University, was, “Give orange me give eat orange me eat orange give me
eat orange give me you.”24 Chimpanzees, bonobos, and gorillas seem to
make rather poor conversationalists. In contrast, just a few months after
uttering their first words, two-year-old children are producing a variety
of complex sentences, comprising verbs, nouns, prepositions (e.g., on, in,
by), and determiners (e.g., the, their, my) in the correct grammatical
relations and on a diverse range of topics. Even very young children are
able to communicate about the past and the future, as well as about
distant objects and locations.
The evolution of language seemingly required a major shift in
referential communication away from specific, isolated, unlearned
signals that concern concrete events in the present, to a general, flexible,
learned and socially transmitted, infinitely combinable, and functionally
unconstrained form of communication—the latter is entirely absent in
the animal world. Linguist Derek Bickerton summed up the paradox of
language evolution beautifully when he wrote, “Language must have
evolved out of some prior system, and yet there does not seem to be any
such system out of which it could have evolved.”25
To compound matters, human language exhibits a multitude of
distinct, contemporary uses that we all witness on a daily basis. There is
a limit to what an animal can do with a long neck or a prehensile trunk,
and this provides clues as to its original function. However, language can
be used to woo prospective mates, demonstrate dominance, coordinate
teams, reassure a child, teach a pupil, deceive a rival, lay down laws,
sing a song, and in numerous other ways. Once complex language

evolved, it would have been rapidly coopted for all kinds of uses utterly
unconnected to its original function. Distinguishing between a genuine
selective scenario and the subsequent exploitation of what is surely one
of human beings’ most flexible characteristics has proved extremely
difficult.
That does not mean that we can never know why language originally
evolved; there are, in fact, ways to impose discipline on the explanatory
accounts and sort between them. Criteria can be implemented that allow
researchers to judge the relative merits of alternative historical
narratives on the original function of language. However, to my
knowledge such criteria have never been fully compiled, and hence have
not yet been applied in unison. To explore how and why language
evolved we need to ask what caused our ancestors to take the first steps
away from the communication systems that other animals, particularly
other primates, possess.
The approach that I follow was pioneered by Szabolcs Szamado and
Eors Szathmary,26 and Derek Bickerton27—between them, they sketched
six criteria for determining the validity of competing language evolution
theories. To these I add one further criterion of my own.28 Seven
benchmarks are thus generated with which to evaluate alternative
explanations for the original adaptive advantage conferred by early
forms of language. Although individually most of the criteria are not
particularly constraining, this compilation of criteria is important
because when considered together, they comprise a tough standard
against which almost all of the proposed accounts fail. In fact, to my
knowledge, only one functional account of the origin of language meets
all of these criteria, an explanation that follows naturally and directly
from the line of argument presented in this book. Let us consider these
seven constraints in turn.
First, the theory must account for the honesty of early language.
Research into animal communication has established that for signals to
be honest and reliable, they will often need to be costly to produce;
otherwise they can easily be faked.29 Many forms of communication in
nature are thought to involve costly signaling between individuals. The
costs associated with producing signals act to ensure that signaling
remains accurate, and receivers are thought to respond to signals as long
as the information being transmitted is reliable on average.30 Cost-free

signaling that is accurate and honest can evolve, but primarily where no
conflicts of interest between the participants arise.31 Human beings are
thought to signal status through conspicuous shows of wealth or risky
activities such as hunting,32 but the production costs of speech or
gesturing themselves are comparatively trivial. Human language
constitutes a uniquely economical and flexible signaling device, allowing
humans to engage in “cheap talk” in an unprecedented range of
circumstances. However, if words are notoriously easy and cost free to
produce, why should anyone believe what others say, and what is the
incentive to learn thousands of words if one cannot be confident that
any convey an accurate message? This constraint implies that
researchers should favor theories that propose a context for the
evolution of early language in which there was either no conflict of
interest between the signaler and receiver, or one in which the reliability
of the signals could easily be assessed.33
Second, the theory should account for the cooperativeness of early
language. In many acts of linguistic communication, the transmitter
imparts information that benefits the receiver. As a consequence, the
receiver is then able to exploit this information alongside the
transmitter, perhaps even in direct competition with them, with little to
ensure that the receiver will reciprocate on a future occasion. This raises
the issue of what is in it for the transmitter. When considered alongside
the honesty criterion, the cooperativeness criterion becomes more
significant. Had language evolved to deceive or manipulate, then the
benefits of transmitting knowledge to others might be easier to envisage.
On the other hand, if early language was honest, and the transmitted
information benefited the receiver, then language was effectively a form
of cooperation. While the production costs of the signal may be modest,
the time costs and the competition generated may mean that the costs
are often not trivial for the transmitter. The successful theory must
explain why, at the time of the origins of language, an individual would
go out of its way to help another by passing on accurate information.
Third, the theory should explain how early languages could have been
adaptive from the outset. Bickerton frames this constraint in the form of a
“ten word test.” He suggests that there must have been a time when the
first protolanguage that was devised had ten words or signs,34 or fewer,
and hence a challenge for any account of language evolution is to

explain what could usefully be said with so few words. The exact
number of words is immaterial. The point is that language had to be
adaptive from the outset, otherwise it is hard to envisage how it would
have been favored by selection. Ideally, a successful theory would
demonstrate experimentally that a selection pressure is generated from
the beginning, and that it favored more and more complex forms of
communication.
Fourth, the concepts proposed by the theory should be grounded in
reality. Any successful account must be able to explain how the words
and symbols that were devised acquired meanings tied to the real world
(known as “the symbol grounding problem”).35 There has to have been
some parallel pathway by which early words could acquire their
meaning—for instance, through pointing, imitation, or some form of
representation. No symbol can function unless there is something that
links it to the entity in the real world that it represents. However, if an
individual can say “bird” and point to a bird, sketch a bird in the sand,
or imitate a bird at the same time, they can potentially transfer meaning
to the symbol. The third and fourth criteria collectively represent a
serious challenge for any theory of language origins. Szamado and
Szathmary point out that “most theories do not consider groundedness
and do not say anything about the possible first words,” while others
propose implausibly abstract first terms.36
Fifth, the theory should explain the generality of language. Language is
characterized by the range and power of generalization that it confers.
The topic of conversation is not linked to the observable present;
humans can transmit information about the past and the future, as well
as events or objects distant in space. Assuming that this capability to
generalize was favored by selection, a successful theory would specify an
exact context for these generalizations. According to Szamado and
Szathmary, the hypotheses that language originally evolved to replace
grooming; to facilitate group-, mate-, or parent-child bonding; or to
allow for song fail to meet this criterion.
Sixth, the theory should account for the uniqueness of human language. A
compelling theory of language evolution must not only explain why
language was acquired by humans, but also explain why the context that
favored language in humans either did not arise or did not favor the
evolution of language in any other species. Edinburgh linguist James

Hurford expressed this particularly clearly in stipulating: “for any set of
circumstances proposed as individually necessary and collectively
sufficient to explain the evolution of language, one has to show that this
combination of circumstances applies (or applied) to humans and to no
other species.”37 For Szamado and Szathmary, this criterion alone rules
out most proposed theories of language origins.38 Most contexts put forth
to explain language evolution (e.g., mate choice, pair bonding, parent-
offspring communication) can be found in other animals too, yet none
has evolved a communication system remotely like language.
Seventh, the theory should explain why communication needed to be
learned. Leaving aside the role of evolved structure in language
acquisition, human language is learned, and learned socially. Moreover,
relative to the communication systems of other species, human
languages change rapidly, primarily not through changes in gene
frequencies, but at an entirely different level—a cultural or linguistic
level.39 Charles Darwin, in The Descent of Man (1871), was the first
person to point out that languages evolve through a process of
differential “survival and preservation of certain favoured words” that
resembles 
natural 
selection. 
Given 
that 
nonhuman 
primate
communication is largely unlearned,40 and changes at rates little
different from other biologically evolved characters, the following
question arises: What was language needed for that required it to be
both socially learned and rapidly changing?
Mathematical theory sheds light on this issue.41 Theoretical analyses
suggest that cultural transmission is favored in changeable and variable
environments. Exposed to slowly changing conditions that vary little,
populations can evolve appropriate behavior through natural selection,
and learning is of little value. At the other extreme, in rapidly changing
or highly variable contexts asocial learning pays, provided the
environment retains some semblance of predictability (although some
theory suggests that social learning can be of benefit in changing
conditions too42). Social learning is generally favored at intermediate to
fast rates of change, because individuals can acquire relevant
information without bearing the costs of asocial learning, but with
greater flexibility than is the case with unlearned behavior. Within this
window 
of 
environmental 
variability, 
vertical 
transmission 
of
information (social learning from parents) is thought to be an adaptation

to slower rates of change than horizontal transmission (social learning
among unrelated individuals of the same cohort), with oblique
transmission (offspring learning from nonparent adults) somewhere in
between.
One implication of this body of theory is that if the calls of other apes
are largely unlearned, the content over which they communicate must
be relatively stable. Conversely, humans have socially learned
communication, which implies that the matters that we talk about must
change at a significantly faster rate, a rate that no evolved forms of
communication could track. This raises the question of what our
ancestors needed to talk about that was changing at such a rate that
biological evolution could not keep up. Moreover, why did this dynamic
feature of the environment not have an impact on the communication of
other species?
To my knowledge, there is no established hypothesis for the
evolution of language that meets all seven of these criteria. That is
encouraging because it implies that collectively these criteria constitute
a tough hurdle that any credible, selective scenario for the evolution of
language must overcome. Yet I believe a credible candidate explanation
does indeed exist, one that does pass these tests.43 The explanation
emerges naturally from the data and theoretical findings presented in the
preceding chapters. Let me rehearse the argument.
We have learned from experimental studies that copying is
widespread in nature, but that animals are highly strategic in their use of
information acquired from others. The social learning strategies
tournament explains this by demonstrating that there is a selective
advantage to copying, provided it is implemented with accuracy and
efficiency. This leads us to expect natural selection to have favored more
efficient and higher-fidelity forms of social learning, which may have
had an impact on brain evolution. Comparative data across primates
support this suggestion, with strong associations among social learning,
innovativeness, and brain size in primates, and with social learning
covarying with several traits thought to be indicative of intelligence, and
with performance in laboratory tests of cognition. The findings imply
that a “cultural drive” process may have operated in restricted primate
lineages. This, in turn, raises the question of why humans alone should
exhibit a culture that ratchets up in complexity. Theoretical studies

answer this question by showing that high-fidelity information
transmission is necessary for cumulative culture, but then pose the
supplementary question of how our ancestors achieved high-fidelity
transmission. The obvious answer is through teaching, by which I mean
not just explicit tutelage, but also a host of more subtle processes,
including the use of eye contact, joint reference (coordinating attention
between an object and another person), and utterances designed to help
pupils learn what they should pay attention to or to what a symbol
refers. Defined in this way, teaching is rare in nature, but universal in
human societies. Mathematical analyses reveal stringent conditions that
must be met for teaching to evolve, but show that cumulative culture
relaxes these conditions. This implies that teaching and cumulative
culture coevolved in our ancestors, creating for the first time in the
history of life on earth a species that taught their relatives across a broad
range of contexts.
A cumulative culture setting is not the only factor identified that
increases the likelihood teaching will evolve. Increments in the
probability of teaching also occur when the costs of teaching are low or
can be offset against the costs of provisioning, when teaching is highly
accurate and effective in transmission, and when there is a strong degree
of relatedness between tutor and pupil. Given that an animal is teaching,
adaptations that reduce the costs of instruction without diminishing
effectiveness, or that enhance effectiveness without increasing costs,
ought to be favored by selection. Should a character appear that
simultaneously increases the effectiveness and reduces the costs of
teaching, then we would predict it would be subject to strong positive
selection, but crucially, only in a population of teachers. The more
teaching contexts in which the character could be applied, the greater its
selective advantage.
Language is such a character. First, language is an incredibly cheap
way to teach. Telling someone where to find a food patch is far easier
than taking them there. Instructing a child that the red berries are
poisonous is much more straightforward than somehow getting this
across through other means. A simple “yes” or “no,” or “this way, not
that way,” will allow a tutor to provide helpful guidance for a pupil
acquiring a new skill at very low cost. Second, language is an
exceedingly accurate way to teach. A precision is brought to information

transfer by language that is virtually impossible to achieve through any
other means. This exactitude, combined with the efficiency with which
tutors can cue their pupils to relevant events as they occur and provide
instructive guidance when skills are being learned, means that teaching
through language greatly enhances knowledge transfer. Simple
utterances that carry messages like “pay attention,” “dig here,” “like
this,” “faster,” “this way,” provide invaluable clues, and help the learner
to focus on what actions need to be imitated or precisely where new
skills need to be applied. Once an individual is committed to teaching,
language is by far and away the most efficient means to do so. That is
why almost all teaching in human societies occurs through use of
language.44 In addition, language extends the range of phenomena that
can 
be 
taught, 
and 
allows 
conveying 
abstract 
concepts, 
the
understanding of which may significantly enhance the pupil’s
performance. Language enables instruction about the past and the
future, and about events or objects some distance away. Language opens
up new domains to teaching.
Over and above these considerations, the setting fits too. The
theoretical work described in the preceding chapter specifies that
teaching is far more likely to be advantageous among close relatives
than unrelated individuals, and two million years ago our ancestors were
living in small, kin-structured groups.45 Humans may have evolved as
cooperative breeders.46 Eminent anthropologist Sarah Hrdy at UC Davis
has presented evidence that women would have struggled to raise
children on their own in ancestral hunter-gatherer societies and were
heavily reliant on “allomothering” helpers.47 Relatives other than the
mother, such as the father, grandparents, and older siblings, would have
spent time with the infants, leaving mothers free time to gather food.
The unusually long period of juvenile dependence in our species helps
make the teaching of life skills to children economical, because the costs
of instruction can be offset against years of feeding and caring. The
faster children can be taught to fend for themselves, the lower the
burden of childcare.
The latest thinking on the evolution of early Homo suggests that
increases in brain size were coupled with increased toolmaking and
stone transport, dietary expansion, and greater developmental plasticity
(the flexible adjustment of development to environmental conditions).48

This means that there would be plenty to teach, because our hominin
ancestors subsisted on a broad omnivorous diet and were reliant on a
large number of extractive foraging and tool-using skills.49 This period in
human history was the dawn of cumulative culture, when our ancestors
first began manufacturing stone tools, using the flakes to butcher
carcasses for food and in a variety of other ways. In other words, it was
the beginning of the phase in which (according to our analysis of the
evolution of teaching) cumulative culture would help make teaching
widely adaptive. Here, then, is a setting in which teaching among close
relatives could be beneficial across a broad range of contexts.
Perhaps, then, language originally evolved to enhance the efficiency
and scope of this teaching. Natural selection may have favored early
language among our ancestors because it made their teaching so much
more economical and effective. As a hypothesis, it sounds plausible
enough, but as we have learned, there are too many prima facie plausible
accounts for the selective scenario that favored language. The key
question is whether the hypothesis meets the seven criteria outlined
above. Let’s consider them in turn.
To begin with, if language evolved to teach relatives,50 we would
indeed expect it to be honest. No new conflicts of interest between the
signaler and receiver arise in a teaching scenario. The whole function of
teaching is to ensure accurate knowledge transfer so that relatives can
acquire fitness-enhancing skills and information, such that the pupils’
increased rates of survival and reproduction increases the inclusive
fitness of the tutor. Deception or inaccuracy on the part of the tutor
would typically not provide such benefits. Hence, no problem arises in
meeting this first challenge. Conflicts between parents and offspring, or
close relatives, might well occur in other contexts, but provided early
communication was initially restricted to that which was taught, the
interests of both parties are broadly aligned. Of course, if parents wish to
see resources evenly distributed among their descendants, while
individual offspring want more than their fair share, disputes between
parents and offspring can occur.51 The same reasoning would apply to
teaching if overly demanding children sought to monopolize their
parents’ attention. However, some level of resolution to this conflict
must have evolved for teaching to be practiced, and the emergence of
language as a cheaper, more efficient means to instruct would not create

any further conflict. Plausibly, parents and offspring might differ in how
much instruction they would like to see imparted, but what teaching
does occur is expected to be honest, because inaccurate instruction is
simply wasting a parent’s time and effort. If early language evolved to
promote teaching, then language would be expected to be honest.
Likewise, the cooperativeness of early language is readily understood.
If language evolved for teaching, it emerged in a context that was
already collaborative. No difficulty arises in explaining why it benefits a
tutor to impart valuable information if by doing so he or she teaches life
skills to a relative in a manner that ultimately increases the tutor’s
inclusive fitness.
How language could have gotten started in a teaching context, and
how symbols acquired their meanings (the third and fourth criteria) are
also easy to envisage. Simple attention-grabbing commands would do
little to get most messages across, but they have been proven to help to
facilitate social learning. One of the challenges of imitation is that the
demonstrator’s behavior is a constant stream of actions, which means
that what should be copied is not always apparent to the naive observer;
nor is it often obvious where the relevant actions start and stop. Here, a
simple verbal cue (or even a nonverbal one) can be invaluable. This has
been demonstrated through developmental psychology experiments,
where extensive data now shows that adults cue the learning of babies
and young children with simple vocalizations. Such cues are known to
generate referential expectations in infants, triggering a tendency to
follow the gaze of adults as they orient; an example is a shift in the
adult’s gaze toward the particular object with which the adult interacts,
thereby facilitating joint attention.52 Infants will check the facial
expressions of adults responding to unfamiliar objects and use this to
guide their approach or avoidance behavior.53 The use of all such cues,
and the resulting gaze and joint attention, are thought to contribute to
the infant learning about both the properties of objects and how they
can be manipulated, as well as the meaning of words.54 At the same
time, pointing, other gestures, and movement can ground teaching
utterances to provide meaning to unfamiliar terms. A tutor can exclaim
“here” at the same time as pointing to where the stone must be hit. He
or she can mime digging with a stick while uttering the word “dig.”
Utterances equivalent to “no, this way” can be emitted while manually

shaping the pupil’s body movements. Experimental findings demonstrate
that this is not only plausible, but regularly happens when children learn
new skills.55 Hence, in the context of teaching, the grounding of
language in reality, its value when comprised of just a handful of words,
and its gradual expansion become possible to envision.
Then there is the requirement that the theory should provide an
explanation for language’s power of generalization. Here too there is a
natural link to the teaching context. Teaching through language, once
started, could be applied to all kinds of proficiencies that are difficult to
learn, including a variety of extractive foraging procedures, food-
processing methods, and hunting skills. Paleontologists’ investigations
provide insights into the diets of our ancestors; these include
examination of the tiny (“microwear”) scratches on fossilized hominin
teeth, as well as analysis of chemical traces left in fossil bones and teeth
(“stable isotope analysis”). Such studies suggest that the diet of Homo
habilis and later hominin species was highly versatile, with our ancestors
eating a broad range of foods including fruits, tougher material like
woody plants, and various animal tissues.56 The earliest bones marked by
the cuts and hammering of stone tools, which date back at least to 2.6
million years ago, are associated with the butchery of large animals, and
provide direct evidence of meat and marrow eating by species like
Australopithecus garhi, Australopithecus afarensis, and Homo habilis.
Around 1.9 million years ago, Homo erectus appears in the fossil record.
This was a species that created large cutting tools like hand axes and
cleavers, as well as campfires with hearths used for cooking food and
fending off large predators. The broadening of the hominin diet is
associated with increasing reliance on difficult-to-access but nutrient-
rich foodstuffs that required extraction from a substrate and some form
of processing. Often, this food processing required not just tool use but
prior technological manufacture. As a consequence, there would be more
and more difficult skills for individuals to acquire, and hence additional
opportunities for beneficial teaching. The teaching of foraging, hunting,
and scavenging methods; tool manufacture; food preparation and food-
processing skills; fire maintenance; and collective defense (some of
which required the coordinated actions of multiple individuals) would
particularly have benefitted from verbal instruction. There is a short step
between teaching coordinated foraging actions in the present, and

planning future coordinated foraging. In this way, a modest
protolanguage would be expected to become increasingly elaborate, and
to generalize in a number of dimensions.
The sixth criterion, that the theory should account for the uniqueness
of human language, is also readily met. No other animals, aside from
humans and perhaps their immediate hominin ancestors, evolved
language because humans alone were engaged in extensive teaching.
Only recent hominins participated in extensive teaching because they
alone possessed cumulative culture, a feature that our theoretical
analyses tell us promotes the evolution of teaching. Without cumulative
culture, other animals were faced with stringent conditions for the
evolution of teaching, conditions that barely, if ever, were met. In the
absence of widespread teaching, other animals could not have
experienced selection for traits like language that reduce teaching costs
or promote teaching efficiencies. Only in hominins did language,
teaching, and cumulative culture coevolve in a runaway, autocatalytic
process initiated by selection for strategic and high-fidelity social
learning.
All that remains is to explain why early language needed to be
learned. Here it is relevant to note that chimpanzees and orangutans
both have extensive tool-using repertoires, as well as behavioral
traditions that exhibit considerable interpopulation variation.57 The
richness of extant ape culture suggests that the apparent constancy of
Oldowan and Acheulian stone tool traditions is probably misleading.58
Members of our genus are likely to have constructed richer and more
geographically diverse cultural repertoires than contemporary apes,
including both stone and nonstone tool-using traditions; and local,
population-specific, 
learned, 
and 
socially 
transmitted 
foraging
repertoires. 
This 
viewpoint 
is 
strongly 
supported 
by 
recent
archaeological evidence.59
Also relevant is the observation that humans transmit large amounts
of learned knowledge across generations, far more than any other
animal.60 As preceding chapters describe, the traditions of other animals
are largely based on simple forms of social learning and rarely persist for
long.61 A comparative perspective thus implies that our genus has
evolved increasing reliance on information acquired from the previous
generation. Theoretical analyses of the evolution of culture, described

above, teach us that a shift toward increased transgenerational cultural
transmission is a sign of greater constancy in our ancestors’
environment. Yet paradoxically, there is no evidence to suggest that
environments have become more constant over the last few million years
—rather, the opposite. Moreover, had environments really become more
constant, other animals would also be expected to show more
transgenerational cultural transmission than they do.
A more compelling hypothesis is that our ancestors constructed the
environmental conditions that favored hominid reliance on culture,62
building niches in which it was advantageous for them to transmit more
information to their offspring.63 This is not as farfetched a suggestion as
might first appear. In fact, all organisms construct important aspects of
their local environments through their activities in a process known as
“niche construction.”64 For instance, countless animals dig burrows,
build nests and mounds, spin webs, and manufacture egg sacks, pupa
cases, and cocoons.65 Humans, of course, are renowned as “champion
niche constructors,” and our niche construction is more potent than that
of any other species largely because of our capacity for culture.66 That
human activities, particularly agriculture, deforestation, urbanization,
and the manufacture of transport systems, have driven dramatic changes
in our environment and in the process modified the natural selection
acting on our species and countless others is now well recognized.67 This
environmental modification also influences the constructor’s reliance on
culture. The more an organism controls and regulates its environment
and that of its offspring, the greater is the advantage of transmitting
cultural information across generations.68 For instance, by tracking the
movements of migrating or dispersing prey, our ancestors increased the
chances that a specific food source would be available in their
environments; that the same tools used for hunting could be used; and
that the skin, bones, antlers, and other materials from these animals
would be on hand for the manufacture of additional tools. Such activities
create the kind of stable social environment in which technologies such
as food preparation or skin-, bone-, and antler-processing methods would
be advantageous from one generation to the next, thereby increasing the
likelihood that these methods will be repeatedly transmitted across
generations. Once started, cultural niche construction may also become
autocatalytic, with greater culturally generated environmental regulation

leading to increasing homogeneity of the social environment as
experienced by old and young, which would favor further social learning
from parents and other adults.69
The emergence of language can be understood in a related manner.
Vocal learning in the food grunts of chimpanzees has recently been
reported,70 and some ape gestures are learned and flexibly used;71
however, nonhuman apes exhibit largely unlearned vocalizations.72 A
shift from unlearned to learned vocalization suggests an increase in the
rate of change of features of the environment that select for primate
communication. However, an explanation based on independently
changing external conditions, such as fluctuating climates, is not
particularly credible for several reasons. First, any such account violates
the uniqueness criterion for language: an external source of selection
ought equally to have favored extensive learned communication in other
primates, including other apes. Second, the requirement for increasing
rates of change in the external selective environment for language
contradicts the requirement for increasing stability in the external
selective environment for culture. Third, the scale of climatic change is
probably too slow. If, however, language initially evolved as an
adaptation to cope with self-constructed elements of the environment,
such problems are alleviated. Which features of the self-constructed ape
environment change and diversify sufficiently rapidly to require learning
to track them? From a comparative perspective, the most obvious
features to fit the bill are cultural practices, particularly tool use,
extractive foraging, and material culture. Cultural practices are typically
transmitted among close relatives, used to exploit difficult-to-access but
nutrient-rich foodstuffs, and are challenging to learn; these features
make them precisely the kind of traits that would benefit from teaching.
Human culture exhibits dramatic and relentless growth in complexity
and diversity with time,73 but such increments appear largely absent
from nonhuman ape culture.74 Hence, at some stage in the last two
million years, our ancestors began to generate cultural variants (e.g.,
tools, foraging techniques, social signals, courtship rituals, medicative
treatments, gestures) at such a rate that they could no longer
communicate about their world without being required to constantly
update and elaborate communicative signals and meanings. If each new
tool, foraging technique, display, or treatment has to be learned, and if,

as the comparative evidence suggests, cultural variants such as tool use
are typically learned by young apes from their mothers and older
siblings,75 then conceivably language may have coevolved with cultural
complexity as a means of facilitating and enhancing socially transmitted
life-skill acquisition in young hominins.76
Language originally evolved to teach, and specifically to teach close
relatives. That, at least, is my thesis. Difficult though it is to be totally
confident about any account of the selective scenario that originally
favored language, this explanation clearly has many virtues. The account
explains the honesty, cooperativeness, uniqueness, and “symbol
grounding” of language, as well as how it got started, its power of
generalization, and why it is learned. The explanation meets all seven of
the criteria required of a successful account of language origins—
something that, to my knowledge, no other hypothesis has done.77
Human language is unique (among extant species) because our species
uniquely constructed a sufficiently diverse, generative, and changeable
cultural world that had to be talked about.78
One curious feature of the debate over language evolution is that
there remains considerable doubt as to whether language is an
adaptation.79 Given that language is so manifestly complex and
functional, and exhibits many of those “design” properties associated
with adaptations, it is tempting to assume the neural mechanisms that
allow language must have been favored by natural selection specifically
for communication. However, there is a long-standing tradition of
describing language as a “spandrel,” the term within evolutionary
biology that describes a character that evolved as a side effect of
selection for some other capability. Chomsky, for instance, adopted this
position,80 maintaining that language is a side effect of a large and
complex brain and the enhancements in human thinking these afford. In
contrast, evolutionary psychologist Steven Pinker is perhaps the most
prominent critic of this stance.81 From the above account, it will be
apparent that I am suggesting language is indeed an adaptation;
specifically, it is an adaptation that functions to increase the accuracy,
reduce the costs, and increase the scope of teaching.
Naturally, the selective scenario for language only begins here, and is
likely to have been coopted and amplified in a wide variety of other
ways to fulfill diverse alternative functions. Tecumseh Fitch, an

evolution of language expert at the University of Vienna, has argued that
language originated to facilitate communication among close kin,82 and I
endorse this position. In the kin-structured groups exhibited by our
ancestors, the initial selection for language was probably an adjunct to
the teaching of young by parents or siblings. However, from that point,
early language could subsequently spread to teaching more distant
relatives—an expansion particularly relevant to activities such as
collective foraging, scavenging, and hunting, all of which required
coordinated activity among multiple individuals. The evolution of
teaching model described in the preceding chapter suggested that both a
significant fitness increment associated with the skill taught, and a high
degree of relatedness between tutor and pupil, are required for teaching
to be favored. Here, the direct benefits of ensuring that relatives possess
relevant skills and knowledge in the form of enhanced foraging returns,
would compensate for the reduction in the degree of relatedness among
more distant relatives. Complex, coordinated actions are often difficult
to carry out without a means to teach, or tell, individuals what their
specific roles should be. In this regard, language would prove an
extremely powerful coordination tool.83
Subsequently, with language, teaching could be extended to support
other established cooperative processes, such as mutualistic exchanges,
indirect reciprocity, and group selection. Both reciprocal altruism and
mutualistic trade (at least, the trade of distinct, desired commodities) are
surprisingly rare in other animals outside of the context of kinship.84
This may be because trade requires some capacity to agree on a rate of
exchange, something that would be very difficult without at least
protolanguage.85 Similarly, the efficient functioning of indirect
reciprocity probably requires gossip.86 Linguistically taught social norms
allow humans to institutionalize the punishment of noncooperative
individuals, for instance, through policing or socially sanctioned
retaliation, which further enhances cooperative endeavors.87 I suspect
that evolutionary biologist Mark Pagel is correct to suggest that
“language evolved as a trait for promoting cooperation,”88 but I maintain
that the origins of language began with a highly specific form of
cooperation—namely teaching. Other cooperative contexts could
certainly have exploited a pre-existing linguistic capability, generating
selection for enhanced linguistic skills. Such selective feedback would

likely have made a big difference both to the scale of human cooperation
that ensued, and to the potency of human language,89 and plausibly
helps to explain how early language extended into domains in which
honesty could not be assumed, and vigilance against malevolence or
incompetence was required. However, other cooperative contexts
struggle to meet the honesty and adaptive from outset criteria described
above, and hence cannot be the answer to how language got started.
I am far from the first person to suggest that language began with the
creation and use of meaningful signs. Many other scholars have
championed this argument, with perhaps the most prominent being
Terrence Deacon, an anthropologist at UC Berkeley.90 From a
comparative perspective, the suggestion makes sense, because the use of
symbols but not syntax is a feature of animal communication.91 As
described above, symbolism is present in the natural communication
systems of many animals; a variety of apes have been taught to
recognize and use symbols—whether gestures or lexical objects—with
meanings that are broadly equivalent to words, and have even learned to
string these together in simple combinations. However, there is little
compelling evidence that any nonhuman possesses an understanding of
syntax.92
As the number of socially transmitted food types, extractive foraging
skills, processing methods, gestures, patterns of coordination, and
labeled threats increased, learning their associated symbols would itself
start to become a challenging task, and a major source of selection
acting on our ancestors. Like others,93 I suspect that our ancestors
constructed a world sufficiently rich in symbolism to generate
evolutionary feedback in the form of self-modified selection pressures
that favored structures in the mind functioning to manipulate and use
those symbols with efficiency.94 Indeed, this feedback, variously cast as
manifestations of the Baldwin effect,95 or of niche construction,96 is
simply a more specific representation of the general “cultural drive”
argument laid out in the last two chapters of this book. That is, selection
for more efficient and higher fidelity forms of social learning has favored
the evolution of specific structures and functional capabilities in the
brain, and in the process has driven the evolution of brain and
intelligence. The syntax that we witness in contemporary human
language is only possible because of a long history, spanning perhaps

two million years, of symbolic manipulation in protolanguage, which
created selection pressures that, in turn, brought about significant
changes in the hominin brain.97
As the sheer volume of symbols that our ancestors were required to
learn the meaning of and string together in unambiguous messages
increased, the demand for rules and conventions specifying usage
patterns was created (and these are important aspects of syntax). If
words are simply strung together without syntax, then ambiguities over
their collective meaning rapidly arise and create a heavy processing
burden on the receiver of the message. For instance, the utterance “bear
man eat” is consistent with a bear eating a man, a man eating a bear, or
the bear and the man both eating other food. Syntax alleviates this
burden by breaking up the message hierarchically and recursively into
meaningful and readily comprehensible chunks, phrases, and clauses
that the brain can easily and quickly process. Syntax introduces rules
that eradicate ambiguities. With this syntax came not just fullblown
language, but an almost infinite flexibility in usage. Words have highly
restricted meanings until they are strung together; but in combination,
and underpinned by a mutually understood set of combinatorial rules,
they are capable of communicating highly complex messages.
Language probably began as a means of reducing the costs of
teaching complex foraging skills, but at some point it must have been
coopted to teach linguistic symbols too. Once early language itself
became something that was frequently taught (although often implicitly,
without overt tutelage), it would in turn have generated selection for
effective means of teaching language to children; this includes “infant-
directed speech,” also known as baby talk, or “motherese.”98 Children
are known to hear some linguistic structures selectively and to ignore
others, a phenomenon that may have generated selection for language
structure that is “child friendly.”99 Infant-directed speech is typically
slower and higher in pitch than regular speech, and uses shorter and
simpler words. Studies have shown that infants prefer to listen to this
type of speech, that it is more effective in getting and keeping their
attention, and that it helps them learn words faster, compared to
standard speech.100 The suggestion is commonly made that language
learning by children is spontaneous, or “instinctive,”101 as if adults play
little role in their learning. Such arguments underestimate the important

ways in which adults facilitate language learning in children.
Experimental studies show that the children who learn language fastest
are those who receive the most acknowledgement and encouragement of
what they say; who are given time and attention to speak; who are
corrected, questioned, and spoken to in a child-friendly manner; and
who are exposed to syntactically complex speech at the right time.102
Infant-directed speech is found in most, but possibly not all, societies,103
which suggests that it may be a widespread, socially learned tradition.
That, however, does not preclude the possibility that important elements
of infant-directed speech, such as children’s sensitivity to its linguistic
features, or adults’ tendency to engage in behavior that elicits rewarding
responses (e.g., smiles), have been favored through a biological
evolutionary process.
As protolanguages began to increase in complexity from their
rudimentary foundations, they would have generated strong selection for
cognitive adaptations that facilitated language learning and information
transmission. For instance, compared to other primates, humans appear
particularly adept at inferring the meaning of what others are saying.104
While this ability is partly attributable to the aforementioned
pedagogical activities of the transmitter, an enhanced capability of the
receiver to extract meaning through observation of others is also highly
likely. What is more, the selective feedback from the use and
manipulation of linguistic symbols to the human mind likely extends far
beyond the acquisition of a capacity to extract meanings and
comprehend syntax. Chomsky described language as the main engine of
thought, and there is now little doubt that humans possess a mind
uniquely fashioned to acquire and process information linguistically.
Indeed, language not only facilitates our own thought, but provides us
with a means to understand what others are thinking (“metacognition”).
Such metacognition further upgrades the human capacity to teach. For
instance, through the use of language a tutor can ask of a pupil, “Do you
understand that?” The tutor thereby gains a critical insight into the
pupil’s state of mind. Indeed, I suspect that it was in the context of
teaching, probably through language, that theory of mind (the ability to
attribute beliefs, desires and knowledge to others) initially evolved. In
all these ways, language is a powerful example of niche construction.105
It is a dramatic change that our ancestors brought about in their

(conceptual) world, and it is a transformation that helped make us
human.
As the conventions of linguistic structure varied from one (proto)
language to another, and changed over time, the rules of syntax would
themselves have to be learned. Whether they are learned through a
dedicated language acquisition device as envisaged by Chomsky,106 or
through some more general process mechanisms such as Bayesian
learning, is a moot point within the field.107 Either way, I believe that
the symbol-rich cultural world constructed by our ancestors was a major
source of selection for enhancements in language learning. That selective
feedback would have operated at two levels. These include a gene-
culture coevolutionary dynamic, where human cultural activities
generate natural selection favoring enhanced language learning and
transmission capabilities. But a cultural evolution dynamic also
functions, whereby human cultural activities feed back to affect the
learned properties of the language.
The notion that features of languages could be fashioned through
cultural transmission is perhaps less intuitive than the idea that our
ancestors’ minds were molded by natural selection. Yet, if linguistic
structures are to persist over time they must repeatedly survive the
process of being learned, expressed, and adopted by others. Utterances
that are difficult to learn or speak would be at a disadvantage relative to
those that are more intuitive; as a result, languages will adapt over time.
The Edinburgh linguist Simon Kirby and his colleagues labeled this
process cultural selection for learnability.108 Many researchers have been
impressed by the ease with which children acquire languages and have
assumed that this precocity implies that the human brain must possess a
specialized language-learning capability.109 However, children may
appear preadapted to decipher the rules of syntax in part because
languages have evolved rules that are easy to learn.110 The cultural
evolution of language has been studied through mathematical modeling,
and researchers have established that key properties of language could
evolve in this manner.111 For instance, compositionality—the idea that
the meaning of a complex signal is a function of the meaning of its parts
—can arise through a process of cultural evolution, and typically more
rapidly and at lower cost than through biological evolution.112 Likewise,
both transmission-chain experiments and mathematical models show

how languages that are propagated culturally evolve in such a way as to
maximize their own transmissibility, becoming easier to learn and more
structured over time.113 This research is important, because it shifts some
of the explanatory burden away from natural selection for language-
specific cognitive adaptations, and makes the challenge of explaining the
origins of language more manageable. Once our ancestors evolved a
socially transmitted system of symbolic communication, many other
features of language came for free.114
By and large, my argument in this chapter is a functional one. We
have been addressing the question: What was the original function of
language? However, there is another evolutionary question that we can
ask too, a question about the evolution of mechanism: How was it
computationally possible for hominins to learn language? The challenge of
language learning becomes substantially greater with the advent of
syntax, because it required not only learning the meaning of symbols,
but organizing them into appropriate strings in which order was critical,
and comprehending higher-order patterns of meaning in that sequence.
How can humans manage this?
Here, the coevolutionary argument presented in the previous
paragraph is, I think, only part of the story. I believe humans were
predisposed to be highly competent manipulators of strings of elements,
because many of their ancestors’ tool-manufacturing and tool-using
skills, extractive foraging methods, and food-processing techniques had
required them to carry out precise sequences of actions.115 These types of
skills only succeed if the action units are carried out in the right order.
Many foods can be rendered more nutritious and less toxic if
appropriately processed.116 For instance, many wild and domesticated
plants in the human diet, particularly the pulses and cereals such as rice
and wheat, cannot be properly digested when eaten raw. Legumes,
likewise, are highly nutritious foods but contain mildly toxic substances
that are difficult for humans to digest unless they are first detoxified by
soaking and cooking. The carbohydrates in root and seed foods, such as
starch, require chopping, slicing, mashing, and heating to change into
forms that humans can more easily chew and digest. Often these food
gathering and processing actions require long sequences of actions,
commonly comprising hierarchical, and sometimes recursive, elements,
where subsets of the sequence must be repeated. This is not just true for

contemporary humans, but even applies to some foraging methods used
by apes, such as nettle consumption by gorillas,117 and so is unlikely to
be a very recently acquired computational skill.
A theoretical study carried out by Andrew Whalen and Daniel
Cownden,118 graduate student and postdoc, respectively, in my
laboratory at St Andrews, has investigated the learning of such
sequences. Andrew and Daniel found that long sequences of actions are
unlikely to be learned through trial and error, but social learning hugely
increases the chances that individuals will acquire the appropriate
sequence. Sequences in which the reward comes right at the end of a
long string of behavioral elements, and where the final rewarding action
must be preceded by a long series of nonrewarding or aversive actions,
are particularly challenging to learn without help from others. The same
holds where there are a large number of options at earlier stages. For
acquisition of such tasks, social learning is vital. Such sequences may be
learned through imitation; indeed, one form known as “production
imitation” refers precisely to the learning of sequences of actions
through observation.119 Many tasks such as basket weaving or pot
making, may be more readily learned through “sequence emulation,”
where rather than attending to the motor pattern of the demonstrator,
the observer attends to the sequence of object movements effected by
the demonstrator’s actions.120 Irrespective of the mechanism, an
evolutionary history of acquiring long sequences of actions through
social learning, as well as the computational capabilities to process
hierarchical and recursive subroutines, may well have left humans
cognitively predisposed to learn and process long strings of symbols.
Indeed, many linguists believe that the key distinguishing feature of
language is hierarchical syntactic structure.121 I suspect that our ability
to process strings of elements into hierarchically organized sets arises
through hundreds of thousands of years of selection for the
computational skills necessary for complex food processing. Language
could probably only have evolved in an exceptionally proficient social
learner, an observation that again speaks to the uniqueness criterion
outlined above.
I end this chapter by describing an experiment with findings that
both support the argument that toolmaking, teaching, and language
coevolved, and illustrate the kind of selective scenario in which early

language was likely to have been favored.122 What is particularly
relevant here it is that the experiment provides a demonstration that a
specific learned skill, one known to have been widely practiced by our
ancestors, would certainly have generated a selection pressure for
enhanced teaching and language. That skill is stone toolmaking.
For over two million years, hominins were highly skilled at shaping
stones such as flint, chert, or obsidian into cutting and hammering tools,
a process known as “knapping.” Competent knappers were capable of
producing large numbers of sharp flakes and a variety of other tools
from a single cobblestone core by striking it with a hammerstone.
Analyses of recovered flake tools have shown this was far from the crude
bashing of stones together to generate a sharp edge, but comprised
systematic flake detachment, during which the manufacturer would
maintain precise flaking angles and would even repair the core stone if
damaged.123 This complexity, along with present day toolmaking
experiments,124 implies that even the oldest lithic (i.e., stone tool)
technology, known as Oldowan, was learned and required considerable
practice.125 Furthermore, the technology’s continual existence and wide
geographic spread, along with hints of regional traditions,126 strongly
imply that toolmaking methods were socially transmitted; however, the
underlying psychological mechanisms remain poorly understood.127
If I am correct, and feedback mechanisms have played important
roles in shaping the evolution of the human mind, language, and
intelligence, stone tool manufacture makes for an interesting test case.
The appearance of this technology 2.5 million years ago at the dawn of
Homo, and its repeated use for millions of years, means that stone tool
manufacture and use is a particularly strong candidate for an activity
that might have imposed selection on human cognitive evolution. The
ecological niche that early hominins occupied is widely thought to have
been extremely challenging,128 and toolmaking skills are known to be
difficult to acquire.129 Archaeologists have presented evidence that
fitness benefits were likely associated with the ability to construct and
use effective cutting tools, and to transmit those skills rapidly.130 Hence,
a coevolutionary relationship between toolmaking and cognition,
including teaching and early forms of language, would seem plausible.
Oldowan stone tool production could have been one of those
difficult-to-acquire skills, described above, that generated selection for

more complex and accurate forms of knowledge transfer, including
language. In turn, increments in the fidelity of information transmission
might have aided the acquisition and spread of more complex
toolmaking technologies, such as the Acheulean, which might have
generated selection for further increases in the complexity of social
transmission, and so on. Consistent with this hypothesis, paleontological
and archaeological remains show that changes to hominin morphology,
including increased overall brain size, follow the advent of Oldowan
toolmaking.131
Experiments with contemporary humans are one way to explore this
hypothesis further, as these have provided important insights into the
cognitive and motor processes supporting lithic technology.132 However,
until recently there had been virtually no research on the social learning
of making stone tools.133 Such experimentation would be instructive,
because the transmission mechanisms could plausibly constrain the
technology that can be propagated, yet researchers disagree as to the
mechanisms that toolmaking requires.134 Positions range from the
hypothesis that chimpanzee-like emulation or imitation was sufficient to
transmit knapping technology,135 to the view that toolmaking required a
major development in hominin cognition,136 such as language.137
We decided to carry out a large-scale experimental study testing the
capability of five social learning mechanisms to transmit Oldowan
knapping 
techniques 
across 
multiple 
transmission 
steps.138 
By
establishing the rates of transmission resulting from different
mechanisms, we set out to determine which forms of communication
might plausibly have been selected for as a result of reliance on stone
tool use. The project was carried out by a team of over 10 members of
my research group, led by graduate student Tom Morgan, and under the
guidance of archaeologist Natalie Uomini at the University of Liverpool.
In our experiment, adult human participants first learned to knap
stone flakes using a granite hammerstone and flint core, and then were
tested on their ability; next, they helped others learn this skill. The
process was repeated to explore whether and how toolmaking
knowledge was transmitted along chains of participants. Experimental
subjects were allocated to one of five conditions that varied according to
the type of information that could be passed from “tutor” to “pupil.”139
1. Reverse Engineering: Subjects were provided with a core and

hammerstone for practice, but only saw the flakes previously
manufactured by a “tutor”, without meeting the tutor or seeing the
flakes being made.
2. Imitation/Emulation: In addition to having their own core and
hammerstone, pupils also observed a tutor making flakes, but could not
interact with them.
3. Basic Teaching: In addition to demonstrating tool production, tutors
could also manually shape the pupil’s grasp of their hammerstone or
core, slow their own actions, and reorient themselves to allow the pupil
a clear view.
4. Gestural Teaching: Tutors and pupils could also interact using any
gestures, but no vocalizations.
5. Verbal Teaching: Tutors and pupils were also permitted to speak.
For each condition, we carried out 4 short transmission chains with 5
participants learning in sequence and 2 longer chains with 10
participants. Experimenters trained in stone knapping acted as tutor to
the first participant. Nearly 200 adult human participants took part in
the experiment, producing over 6,000 pieces of flint, each of which we
weighed, measured, and assessed for quality using a novel method that
we developed and verified.140 It was a mammoth research effort (perhaps
the biggest project ever carried out in the field of experimental
archaeology). However, the effort paid off in generating remarkably
helpful findings.
Across numerous measures, Tom and Natalie consistently found that
teaching and language, but not imitation or emulation, enhanced the
acquisition of stone knapping skills relative to the reverse engineering
condition. For instance, the quality of the flakes generated showed clear
improvement with gestural or verbal teaching, with language nearly
doubling 
performance 
relative 
to 
reverse 
engineering,141 
but
imitation/emulation generated no improvement in performance. The
number of viable flakes produced showed a similar pattern, with
substantial improvements in performance only occurring with gestural or
verbal teaching.142 Nor was there evidence for an increase in the rate of
manufacture of viable flakes with imitation/emulation; only verbal
teaching generated such an increase, and only verbal teaching led to a
clear increase in the volume of core reduced.143 Finally, although there
was no evidence that imitation/emulation increased the probability that

a viable flake would be produced per hit, gestural teaching doubled and
verbal teaching quadrupled this probability. Across the six measures
taken, there is strong evidence that verbal teaching increases
performance relative to gestural teaching.
Teaching, but particularly teaching through the use of language,
therefore greatly facilitated the rapid transmission of flaking, whereas
there is little evidence that imitation or emulation did so. As expected, in
all conditions performance decreased along chains as knapping
information was gradually lost in transmission. However, with teaching,
transmission was sufficiently improved that performance declined
steadily along chains,144 whereas without teaching, the drop in
performance was so severe that performance immediately fell to baseline
levels. Set in a more naturalistic context, with longer periods of
interaction between tutor and pupil, and interspersed with periods of
individual 
practice, 
teaching 
would 
certainly 
generate 
stable
transmission.145
Tom and Natalie’s study demonstrated that transmission of Oldowan
technology is enhanced by teaching and, in particular, by language.146
This fits with the suggestion that Oldowan stone tool manufacture would
have generated natural selection favoring increasingly complex teaching
and language. Critically, we found a continuous improvement in the rate
of transmission of toolmaking with increasingly complex forms of
communication.147 Such data imply that stone toolmaking would have
generated selection for improved communication, starting with
observational learning and continuing to the emergence of fullblown
language. This process was probably already underway during the
Oldowan and likely continued well after, with the transmission of more
complex technologies also benefitting from more sophisticated means of
communication. Indeed, the evolutionary feedback could have lasted for
millions of years, with more complex communication allowing the stable
and rapid transmission of increasingly multifaceted technologies; this in
turn 
would 
generate 
selection 
for 
even 
more 
complicated
communication and cognition, to then continue in perpetual cycles.
A second significant finding was that the rate of transmission of
Oldowan toolmaking is, at best, very minimally enhanced by imitation
or emulation.148 We cannot, of course, rule out the possibility that a
benefit of observational learning might have appeared had we conducted

our study over a longer learning period. However, any such benefit
would clearly have been less than what would be derived through
teaching across a similar timespan. While it is hard to say with absolute
confidence that lithic technology could not be transmitted through
imitation, our findings support other work in implying that observation
alone is a very inefficient means of acquiring stone toolmaking skills.149
Clearly, some information can be acquired through imitation—the
requirement to strike the core with the hammerstone and some notion of
the force required, for instance. However, it seems that the requisite
rapid striking action hinders the transmission of subtler information
crucial to knapping, such as details of precisely where to hit the core, at
what angle, and how best to first orientate the core. Here, teaching by
slowing down the striking action, pointing to appropriate targets to hit,
demonstrating core rotation, or manually shaping the pupil’s grasp—
particularly if aided by verbal instruction—provides immediate benefits
to the pupil. Written transcripts from our verbal teaching condition show
that abstract knapping concepts,150 such as the platform angle,151 were
indeed effectively transmitted between individuals in the verbal teaching
condition. Plausibly, the use of arbitrary labels such as “platform angle”
in verbal instruction facilitates transmission. Such labels break the task
into constituent parts, can be used to identify the important elements,
and provide a clear framework with which pupils can go on to teach
others. In other words, language not only allows acquisition of the skill
itself, but also enhances the learner’s ability to transmit the skill to
others.
What was particularly exciting was that Tom and Natalie’s findings
shed light on one of the most enduring puzzles of human evolution—the
apparent stasis of Oldowan technology.152 For a very long period of some
700,000 years, these stone tools did not change very much until
Acheulean technology appeared, around 1.7 million years ago.153 The
study implied that Oldowan technological change could well have been
restricted by the fidelity of social transmission—a suggestion supported
by the slow spread of Oldowan technology across Africa.154 We obviously
cannot conclusively identify what form Oldowan transmission might
have taken, but our data point to imitation or emulation as strong
candidates. While imitation and emulation generate higher-fidelity
transmission than simpler forms of social learning,155 the relatively poor

transmission of stone-tool manufacture that we observed with these
mechanisms might well, in naturalistic contexts, have been too slow and
imprecise for innovations to be conveyed reliably. If so, the technology
may plausibly have been unable to become much more complex until
more effective communication evolved.156
Our findings implied that the spread of the more regularly shaped
Acheulean tools probably would have required a capacity for teaching at
least equivalent to the “basic teaching” condition in our experiment.
Rudimentary forms of language are possible, but the suggestion that
modern language evolved during the Oldowan seems unlikely, given
how slowly technology evolved thereafter. More plausibly, the
transmission of Acheulean technology was reliant on a form of gestural
or verbal protolanguage.157 Acheulean hominins were probably not
capable of generating complex grammars, but they may well have
learned and strung together a small number of symbols. Our findings
imply that simple forms of positive or negative reinforcement, or
directing the attention of a learner to specific points on the core, as was
common in the gestural teaching condition, are considerably more
successful in transmitting stone knapping than observation alone. (This
finding neatly illustrates how a teaching explanation for early language
could meet Bickerton’s “ten word rule.”)
The study supports the hypothesis that a gene-culture coevolutionary
dynamic between tool use and social transmission was ongoing in
human evolution, starting at least 2.5 million years ago and continuing
to the present. The simplicity and stasis of Oldowan technology are
indicative of a restricted form of information transmission, such as
observational learning, that only allowed the communication of the
broadest concepts of stone-knapping technology. This mechanism was
sufficient to support limited knowledge transfer among individuals with
prolonged contact, but insufficient to propagate innovations more
rapidly than they were lost, and would have contributed to the stasis in
the Oldowan technocomplex. However, hominin reliance on stone
technology would have generated selection for increasingly complex
communication that allowed more effective spread of toolmaking
methods. 
Under 
this 
continued 
selection, 
teaching, 
symbolic
communication, and eventually language would have been favored,
allowing the transmission of abstract flaking concepts. Our results

suggest that hominins possessed a capacity for teaching, and probably
protolanguage, as early as 1.7 million years ago.
I reiterate that selection for language was not brought about by
toolmaking per se, but solely by those aspects of tool manufacture and
use that required teaching. More precisely, I submit that language
originally evolved to teach close kin, and that toolmaking was just one
of several life skills that our ancestors taught their relatives. However,
while manufacturing stone tools would not have been the only
technology taught by our ancestors, it almost certainly was an important
one, because the livelihood of hominins was critically dependent on this
technology for millions of years. Minimally, stone toolmaking is a good
example of the kind of technology that would have required teaching,
and would have generated selection for forms of teaching with reduced
costs and enhanced accuracy. The study also demonstrates beautifully
how early language could have begun to generalize from nouns, actions,
and prepositions to abstract concepts.
Derek Bickerton has made a case that language evolved to help our
forebears scavenge for large, dead prey items as a group, fighting off
competition from predators.158 I think this too is plausible since, as
Bickerton describes it, this coordination would have required teaching to
be carried out effectively. This would encompass teaching individual
scavenging roles, instructing about the whereabouts of food, telling
others what prey item has been found, coaching collective defense,
coordinating large teams of individuals, and so forth. The hypothesis is
attractive, not least, because it provides a further illustration of how
language might have been generalized to refer to events distant in space.
However, it was not the scavenging but the teaching that was critical to
the evolution of language. Likewise, Michael Tomasello has argued that
human language originally evolved to coordinate collaborative foraging
activities,159 and again I have sympathy with this position, because it is
hard to imagine collaborative, coordinated foraging among hominins
without teaching. Once again, however, I emphasize that it was not the
foraging but the teaching that was critical, and such teaching would
likely have been expressed in domains that extended beyond foraging.
Almost certainly, a broad array of different traits, skills, and knowledge
were taught by our ancestors, each exerting different demands on their
linguistic capabilities.

Language experts will, of course, point out that, even if my
hypothesis is correct, a great deal about language evolution would
remain a mystery. I have only hinted about how the generative
computations underlying language evolved, how systems of semantic
representations developed, how phonological representations emerged,
how the interfaces between these coevolved, and how all of this internal
machinery was externalized in linguistic communication, whether
expressed acoustically or visually. Nor have I said anything about the
evolution of vocal learning. That is all true, but I nonetheless believe
that the account is of value in removing some of the mystery of the
origin of language. The analysis places the origins of language in a
broader context through which we can understand the evolution of
diverse aspects of human cognition. Alfred Russel Wallace, codiscoverer
of natural selection, famously failed to accept that selection could
account for human evolution, partly because he could not imagine how a
trait like language, and the other unique features of human cognition,
could evolve.160 I would like to believe that, had he known of the
material in this chapter, he might have reached a different conclusion.

CHAPTER 9
GENE-CULTURE COEVOLUTION
In the classic sci-fi fantasy Planet of the Apes, space traveler Ulysse Mérou
becomes trapped on a terrifying planet in which gorillas, orangutans,
and chimpanzees have usurped control, having acquired human
language, culture, and technology by imitating their former masters.
Cast out of their homes, human beings rapidly degenerated into brutal
and unsophisticated beasts. Much of the sinister realism of Pierre
Boulle’s 1963 novel stems from the author’s impressive knowledge of
scientific research into animal behavior. Of course, in reality, here on
planet Earth other apes could never actually acquire human culture
solely through imitation, because that capability requires an underlying
evolved propensity. In our case, that propensity was fashioned by
millions of years of gene-culture coevolution.
In the last chapter, I described how the manufacture and use of stone
tools may have played a vital role in human evolution by generating
coevolutionary feedback between cultural practices and genetic
inheritance, and thereby contributed to the emergence of language. Our
tool knapping study supported the hypothesis that a gene-culture
coevolutionary dynamic between tool use and social transmission was
ongoing in human evolution, starting at least 2.5 million years ago and
continuing to the present.1 Indeed, this entire book is one long advocacy
for the significance of evolutionary feedback that encompasses a cultural
drive mechanism initiated by natural selection that favored accurate and
efficient copying. That selective feedback propelled the evolution of
cognition in some primate lineages, and ultimately was responsible for
the awesome computational power of the human brain.
Any such account, however, rests on the plausibility of gene-culture
coevolution. If the arguments are to prove compelling, at this juncture
some weighing up of the evidence for such evolutionary interactions
would be beneficial. Perhaps there are means to detect gene-culture

coevolution, or historical traces left in the human genome or brain that
are testament to its legacy. This chapter examines the evidence that our
cultural activities have influenced our biological evolution, again
drawing on a cocktail of theoretical and empirical findings. It begins by
relating findings from theoretical studies, which show through
mathematical modeling that gene–culture coevolution is, at least in
principle, highly plausible. Then the anthropological evidence for gene–
culture coevolution is surveyed. Here, compelling and well-researched
case studies provide incontrovertible evidence that gene-culture
coevolution is a biological fact. Finally, some genetic data are presented
—specifically, studies that have identified human genes subject to recent
natural selection, including genes expressed in the brain. Many such
genes (strictly, “alleles,” or gene variants) have increased extremely
rapidly in frequency over a few thousand years, and this unusually swift
spread, known as a “selective sweep,” is taken as a sign of their having
being favored by natural selection.2 The relevance of such studies stems
from the fact that the geneticists who carried them out have concluded
that the sweeps are almost certainly a response to human cultural
activities. Collectively, these three bodies of evidence make a compelling
case that culture is not just a product, but also a codirector, of human
evolution.
The argument that genes and culture can coevolve was first
championed over 30 years ago by pioneers of the field of “gene-culture
coevolution,” a branch of mathematical evolutionary genetics.3 These
researchers treated genes and culture as two interacting forms of
inheritance, with offspring acquiring both a genetic and a cultural legacy
from their ancestors. The two streams of knowledge flow down the
generations, but far from independently. Genetic propensities, expressed
throughout development, influence the cultural traits that are learned,
while cultural knowledge, expressed in behavior and artifacts, spreads
through populations and modifies how natural selection affects human
populations in repeated, richly interwoven interactions.
Gene–culture 
coevolutionary 
models 
build 
on 
conventional
evolutionary models. The latter track how the frequencies of genetic
variants change in response to evolutionary processes such as natural
selection or random genetic drift, but the former differ by incorporating
cultural transmission into the analyses. This allows exploration of how

learned behavior or knowledge coevolves with alleles that affect the
expression or acquisition of the behavior, or whose fitness is affected by
the cultural environment. The approach has been used to explore the
adaptive advantages of reliance on learning and culture,4 to investigate
the inheritance of behavioral and personality traits,5 and to examine
specific topics in human evolution, such as the evolution of language, or
cooperation.6 When my plans to work with Allan Wilson at Berkeley in
1991 were tragically curtailed, I started to collaborate with Marc
Feldman, a geneticist at Stanford University and leading authority on
gene-culture coevolution. I was delighted to get the opportunity to learn
gene-culture coevolutionary methods from arguably the world’s greatest
expert.
One of the first projects that I worked on with Feldman, his student
Jochen Kumm, and psychologist Jack van Horn (now at the University of
Southern California) was a model of the evolution of human handedness.
I’ll describe the study in detail, partly because it provides a useful
illustration of a gene-culture coevolutionary analysis, but also because it
connects with the topic of the preceding chapter.
The conundrum that prompted our study was the question of why
everyone isn’t right handed. Experimental studies had established that
globally, approximately 90% of people are right handed.7 This estimate
is loosely consistent across the world, although it does vary to some
degree among societies.8 Yet, in no society in the world are left-handed
people in the majority, and this has led researchers to conclude that
right handedness must have been favored by natural selection
throughout recent human evolution. However, if it is advantageous to be
right handed, why isn’t everybody? What processes might be preserving
left-handers in human populations? The most common answer to this
question is that genetic variation underlies variation in handedness. This
explanation suggests that left-and right-handed people have different
genotypes, and that this genetic variation had been preserved in human
populations through natural selection.9 However, if genes cause people
to be right-or left handed, with different combinations generating
different patterns of hand usage, then the more closely related a pair of
individuals (i.e., the more alike their genes), the more similar should be
their handedness, and this is not the case. To quote two leading
authorities: “knowledge of a person’s handedness tells us virtually

nothing of the handedness of that person’s twin or sibling.”10 Genetic
models would predict that identical twins (“monozygotic” twins), who
have the same genes, would be more alike for handedness than fraternal
(“dizygotic”) twins, who share only 50% of their genes; yet the two
types of twins have essentially the same concordance rates. If the
handedness of a thousand pairs of identical twins were measured, 772
pairs on average would possess the same pattern of handedness, while
the corresponding figure for fraternal twins would be 771.11 Handedness
does not exhibit strong heritability, which seriously undermines a purely
genetic explanation.12
Moreover, exclusively genetic models of handedness fail to account
for some well-established cultural influences on handedness. Left-handed
people have experienced a long history of discrimination in many parts
of the world,13 including parts if the Middle East and Far East, and some
eastern European countries; they are found at lower frequency in such
societies that have associated left handedness with clumsiness, evil,
dirtiness, or mental illness.14 As might be expected, societal attitudes
have an impact on patterns of handedness. Studies of schoolchildren in
China, where left handedness has historically been frowned upon, report
only 3.5% used their left hand for writing (the figure for Taiwan is only
0.7%), compared with a 6.5% estimate for children originating from the
same localities but living in the United States,15 where the pressure to
use the right hand is relaxed. Because the worldwide dominance of right-
handers suggests a role for genes, but cross-cultural variation reveals a
cultural influence, handedness appears to be well suited to a gene–
culture coevolutionary analysis. My colleagues and I set out to explore
the evolution of handedness to try and make sense of the observed
patterns.
We constructed a model that assumed that the probability of
becoming right or left handed was influenced by the combination of
alleles found at a single genetic locus.16 The two possible gene variants
at this locus were a “dextralizing” (or “right-shift”) allele that
predisposes its carrier toward right handedness, and a neutral allele that
put handedness down to chance.17 This is not to suggest that we believed
only a single gene influenced handedness, but rather we focused on a
single hypothetical gene as a means of exploring how any genetic
variation would respond to selection. (In fact, our model implies a series

of selective sweeps of dextralizing genes throughout human evolution,
each ratcheting up the proportion of right-handers.) Cultural factors
were also assumed to affect handedness, primarily operating through a
parental influence. This assumption seems reasonable given that
handedness is usually fully developed by the age of two to three.18
Hence, in our model handedness depended on the individual’s genotype
(i.e., whether the individual possesses zero, one, or two dextralizing
alleles) and the handedness of their parents. We also considered various
forms of selection operating on the population, including selection
favoring right handedness directly, or indirectly via selection on another
lateralized structure (e.g., like left cerebral dominance for language).
The findings of the analysis were extremely straightforward;
irrespective of the starting frequency of right handedness, the magnitude
of the selective advantage to right-handers, or the degree of dominance
of the two alleles, all initially genetically variable populations converged
on a single evolutionary trajectory and continued to evolve until the
dextralizing allele was completely fixed, with the chance allele
eliminated. No genetic variation in handedness had been preserved,
which ostensibly undermined the explanation that genetic differences
explained variation in handedness.19 Nor was it likely that human
populations were still evolving toward this equilibrium, because that
would require right handedness to be increasing over time when the
data suggested the opposite.20 How then could the existence of left-
handers be explained? A further possibility was suggested by our
analysis: human populations may have reached the final equilibrium
state predicted by the model, but left-handers could nonetheless remain
in the population if the influence of the dextralizing allele was
sufficiently weak.
We decided to explore this possibility by collating data on patterns of
handedness in families and using this data to estimate the values of the
model parameters, including the impact of the dextralizing allele. We
pulled together 17 studies that gave the frequencies of right-and left-
handed offspring born to parents categorized into 3 groups; both parents
were right handed, one was right handed and other left handed, or both
were left handed. As the number of left-handed parents increased, these
3 groups gave rise to increasing proportions of left-handed children. We
then carried out an analysis in which we used the data set on patterns of

handedness in families to estimate the best-fit values of the parameters
in our model.21 With these values, the model gives a good fit to 16 out of
the 17,22 and across all studies combined. Similar analyses applied to the
same data by the leading genetic models give a substantially poorer fit.
Our model had given a good fit to more studies, and a poor fit to fewer
studies, than any other model.
The analysis suggested that all humans are born with a predisposition
to be right handed. Other factors being equal, 78% of people would be
right handed (or a single child would have a 78% chance of growing up
to be right handed). All other factors are not equal, however, as parents
exert an important influence on patterns of handedness. Two right-
handed parents increase the probability that their child will be right
handed, by an amount that averages around 14%, to give an overall
probability of a right-handed child being born to right-handed parents of
92%. Likewise, two left-handed parents decrease the probability by the
same proportion, leaving a 64% probability of a right-handed child
being born to two left-handed parents. Parents of mixed handedness
roughly cancel out each other’s influence.
We went on to conduct various tests of our model. One such test was
to derive an overall expected frequency of right-handers, which
reassuringly came out at 88%, close to the observed value. A second,
stronger test was to collate studies giving the frequency of right-right,
right-left, and left-left pairs of identical and fraternal twins, and compare
the expected proportions in each category from our model with the
observed data. Using the same parameter values derived from the
familial data set, our model generated expectations that were a good fit
to 27 out of the 28 twin data sets, and across all studies combined. Once
again, our model outperformed all other published models.
The study strongly suggested that patterns of inheritance and
variation in human handedness are the outcome of a gene-culture
interaction. A history of selection of handedness has created a universal
genetic predisposition toward right handedness; our genes load the die
to favor the right, but not so strongly that right handedness is obligate.
However, patterns of hand use also show a parental influence—
specifically, an advertant or inadvertant parental tendency to shape their
child’s handedness to resemble their own. This parental influence
probably represents a combination of direct instruction (i.e., parents

telling their children to use their right hand), children imitating their
parents, and parents unintentionally shaping their child’s hand use (for
instance, repeatedly placing spoons or crayons in a particular hand),
although inherited epigenetic effects are a further possibility.23
An interesting connection arises between this study and the
experimental analysis of stone tool manufacture described in the
preceding chapter. When our ancestors made flake tools, they tended to
rotate the core stone as they broke off flakes, and the direction of
rotation turns out to be a reliable indicator of the handedness of the
knapper.24 Archaeologists sometimes find multiple flakes from the same
core at a single site, and can thereby reconstruct the knapping process.
This allows them to use patterns of flint knapping, supported by skeletal
data, to infer patterns of handedness in ancient hominin populations.
The data provide evidence for increasingly strong biases in handedness
with time, with 57% of the earliest stone tool makers (living 2.5–0.8
million years ago), 61% of Middle Pleistocene hominins (0.8–0.1 million
years ago), and 80–90% of Neanderthals (0.3–0.04 million years ago),
being right handed.25 Whether other primates, such as chimpanzees,
exhibit handedness is a contentious topic that has generated conflicting
findings, but any population-level bias in handedness among apes must
be quite weak.26 Individual animals might have strong hand preferences,
but across the entire population there is, at best, only a modest tendency
to prefer the same hand. Hence, archaeological and comparative data
support the suggestion that right handedness has increased over time,
almost certainly through the selection of (dextralizing) handedness
distorter genes, which have been repeatedly favored over hundreds of
thousands and perhaps even millions of years.
Knapping is a skill that takes time to master and requires strength
and precision; these are properties that tend to generate hand
specialization. One would imagine that the social transmission of
knapping skills would encourage pupils to use the same pattern of
handedness as their tutor—for instance, holding the core and
hammerstones in the equivalent hands, thereby generating a bias in
hand usage. Perhaps right-handers originally reached ascendency
through chance, or perhaps there was some pre-existing bias toward the
right. Either way, with each selective sweep favoring a dextralizing
allele, the proportion of right-handers would be ratcheted up. This

increase in right handedness would occur not just because of the
immediate effect of the alleles, but also because with the increasing
frequency of right-handed parents, the proportion of children exposed to
a parental bias favoring right handedness would increase. Both indirectly
(by introducing new behaviors that benefited from hand specialization)
and later directly (by constructing an environment suited to the right-
handed majority), hominin cultural processes increasingly reinforced
selection favoring right handedness, right up to the present.
Studies like this cannot prove that gene-culture coevolution occurred,
but they do demonstrate that the feedback mechanisms discussed in the
preceding chapter are logically sound and highly plausible. If the
cultural practices of our ancestors could generate selection for
dextralizing alleles, then they could also plausibly generate selection for
genetic variation expressed in larger brains, or advanced cognition. Such
a conclusion would hold even if my particular theory of handedness
were eventually disproven. Many such gene-culture coevolutionary
analyses have now been conducted, collectively generating a number of
important insights into human evolution. The studies conclusively
demonstrate that genes and culture could coevolve, and that in such
interactions culture would become a potent codirector of evolutionary
events. Cultural processes are every bit as influential as genetic processes
in gene–culture coevolution, and many circumstances arise where
cultural transmission overwhelms, or reverses, natural selection, or
where the observed patterns of selection depend intimately on the
details of cultural transmission.27
A consistent finding of these models is that cultural processes can
dramatically affect the rate of change of gene frequencies in response to
natural selection, sometimes speeding up genetic evolution, and other
times slowing it down. Recent estimates of the evolutionary response of
human genes exposed to culturally modified conditions reveal
extraordinarily strong natural selection. One of the best-studied cases is
the coevolution of dairy farming (and associated consumption of dairy
products) with alleles that allow humans to digest lactose, the sugar in
milk. In most humans, the ability to metabolize lactose disappears in
childhood, but in some populations lactase activity persists into
adulthood. This “lactose tolerance” is known to result from a mutation at
a single genetic locus. Both comparative analyses and ancient DNA

extracted from 7,000-year-old human remains reveal that dairy farming
appeared before the spread of lactose-tolerance alleles, generating
conditions that made the production of lactase by adults advantageous.28
Only subsequently did the genetic variant that promoted adult lactose
tolerance spread. This evolutionary response is now known to have
happened independently in at least six separate dairying populations,
with different mutations being favored in each case.29 Lactose-tolerance
alleles have spread from low to high frequencies in less than 9,000 years
since the inception of dairy farming and milk consumption, generating
an estimated selection coefficient of 0.09–0.19 in one Scandinavian
population30—one of the strongest responses to natural selection ever
detected. Such observations, combined with the recency with which
many human genes have been subject to selection,31 imply that natural
selection deriving from human cultural activities may be unusually
strong. The reasons for this are twofold. First, unlike the vagaries of the
weather, climate, or several other nonanthropogenic processes that
generate inconsistent selection from one year to the next, human
activities are purposeful and goal directed. Through the dissemination of
cultural knowledge, large numbers of individuals in a population engage
with their environment in a consistent, directed manner—generation
after generation manufacturing the same tools, eating the same foods,
and planting the same crops. The result is consistency in the patterns of
natural selection that such activities generate. Although their constancy
varies from trait to trait, evidence suggests that culturally modified
environments are capable of creating unusually strong natural selection,
because these conditions are highly consistent over time.32 Second, many
gene variants are favored as a result of coevolutionary episodes, such as
predator-prey or host-parasite interactions, triggered by evolutionary
changes in another species. When changes in one genetic trait are the
source of selection for changes in a second, the rate of response in the
latter depends in part on the rate of change in the former, which, as a
rule, is not fast. In comparison, if a cultural practice modifies selection
acting on human genetic variation, then the greater the proportion of
individuals in the population that exhibit the cultural trait, the stronger
the selection on the gene. As a consequence, the rapid spread of a
cultural practice often leads quickly to the maximally strong selection of
the advantageous genetic variant, which rapidly increases in frequency.

Cultural practices typically spread more quickly than genetic mutations,
simply because cultural learning typically operates at faster rates than
biological evolution.33 What does the speed with which a cultural trait
spreads depend upon? Answer: the fidelity of cultural transmission. The
very factor that is critical to the emergence of complex cumulative
culture in humans is also a major determinant of evolutionary responses
to that culture.
For illustration, consider a mathematical analysis of the coevolution
of dairy farming and adult lactose tolerance conducted by Stanford
geneticists Marc Feldman and Lucca Cavalli-Sforza.34 In their model,
adult lactose tolerance was controlled by a single gene, at which two
types of alleles arose, with one promoting adult lactose tolerance and the
other intolerance. The model showed that whether or not the lactose
tolerance allele achieved a high frequency in the population depended
crucially on the probability that the children of milk drinkers themselves
became milk drinkers; that is, it depended on the fidelity of cultural
transmission. If this probability was high, then lactose-tolerant
individuals would possess a significant fitness advantage, which resulted
in the spread of the lactose tolerance allele within a few hundred
generations. However, if a significant proportion of the offspring of milk
drinkers did not imbibe dairy products, then unrealistically strong
natural selection favoring lactose tolerance would be required for the
allele to spread.
Gene–culture coevolutionary models commonly report more rapid
responses to natural selection than conventional genetic models, arising
from the combined effects of the consistency and rapid spread of cultural
practices.35 This is one reason why many geneticists are now arguing
that culture has “ramped up” human evolution.36 High-fidelity
information transmission both supports cumulative culture and promotes
gene-culture coevolution, but the selective feedback does not end there.
The construction of a dairying niche allowed humans to disperse into
areas that otherwise would have been uninhabitable, and provided the
raw materials for the emergence of diverse technologies needed to
process dairy products. This generated an opportunistic expansion of the
dairy farming niche into new regions throughout Europe and Africa.
That dispersal, like earlier hominin dispersals from Africa, was critically
contingent on culture and was the catalyst for further gene-culture

coevolution.
Nearly two million years ago, and perhaps earlier, ancient hominin
species such as Homo erectus moved away from the tropics and began to
populate different regions of the world. The subsistence of these early
humans in many regions of Europe or Asia was contingent on their
ability to manufacture stone tools suited to the butchery of large
animals, control fire, make clothes and shelter, coordinate group
hunting, and use other technologies. Through these dispersals, our
ancestors modified the natural selection acting on themselves in
numerous ways. For example, the new environments had different
climatic regimes, which selected for genes expressed in skin
pigmentation, heat tolerance, and salt retention, all of which show signs
of being subject to recent selection.37 Humans need salt to transport
nutrients, transmit nerve impulses, and contract muscles within their
bodies. In the African regions where humans first appeared,
temperatures were high and available salt must have been limited and
quickly lost through sweat. People better able to cope with heat stress,
or with superior salt retention, would have had a significant survival
advantage. However, this advantage would decrease as humans spread
to cooler climates, where salt retention could lead to disease, and hence
the selection of alleles that reduced heat tolerance and salt retention.
Another example is provided by the movements of early Polynesians.
During their settlement of the Pacific, beginning around 1800 BCE and
continuing for two millennia, these people experienced long ocean
voyages that subjected them to severe cold stress and starvation.
Apparently genes expressed in enhanced energetic efficiency and fat
storage among the pioneers, which helped individuals to survive famine,
were favored by natural selection. Unfortunately, in contemporary
environments in which food is plentiful, these same genes predispose
their carriers to obesity and related health problems, such as diabetes.38
This explains why a type 2 diabetes–associated allele thought to lead to
a “thrifty” (i.e., fat-storing) metabolism is prevalent at a high frequency
in present-day Polynesians.39
Perhaps the most compelling illustration of the sheer multiplicity of
feedbacks that can arise from cultural activities is provided by the
agricultural practices of Kwa-speaking populations in West Africa.40 For
hundreds, perhaps thousands, of years, these people have cleared forests

through slash and burn techniques to create fields in which to plant their
crops, which are typically yams.41 Tree removal, however, had a striking
and unintended consequence, because with no roots to soak up all that
rainwater, the agricultural practice greatly increased the amount of
standing water. These puddles were perfect breeding grounds for
malaria-carrying mosquitoes, such as Anopheles gambiae, which need
sunlit pools to breed in and thrived in the new conditions.42 The
mosquitoes are vectors for the protozoan parasite Plasmodium falciparum,
which causes malaria. Mosquito bites transfer the parasite into the
human bloodstream, from where it travels to the liver and invades red
blood cells; these rupture within 72 hours and release more new
parasites into the blood.43 Today, there are several hundred million
clinical cases of malaria worldwide and roughly 800,000 deaths each
year,44 the majority of them in sub-Saharan Africa.
As an aside, lest you think that people in modern postindustrial
societies could not be so foolish as to construct an environment rife with
disease in this manner, let me point out that modern car tire
manufacturing is also promoting disease vectors today. Mosquitoes infest
pools of rainwater that collect in tires, which are typically stored
outside; in this way, tire export contributes to the spread of malaria and
dengue around the world.45 In fact, the transition to urban living and
associated increases in population density, as well as the spread of
pathogens through long-distance trade, and pathogen exposure through
animal husbandry and irrigation, have long been thought to have
promoted the spread of infectious diseases.46 Historically, these links
have been difficult to prove, because most infections do not cause
skeletal damage that can be detected in ancient specimens, while the
beginnings of urbanization typically predate writing.47 However, a recent
genetic study took an innovative approach by reasoning that, should an
association between urban history and disease exist, then populations
living in regions with a long period of urban settlement should have
evolved disease resistance to a greater extent than other populations.48
Variants of the SLC11A1 gene are known to be associated with
susceptibility to tuberculosis (TB) in humans,49 and are also linked to
other infectious diseases such as leprosy, leishmaniosis, and Kawasaki
disease.50 As predicted, the study found a highly significant correlation
between the frequency of those alleles that confer resistance and the

duration of urban settlement. Populations with a long history of living in
towns are now better adapted to resisting infections that thrive in the
urban environment.51
A similar story arises with the Kwa. By inadvertently promoting
malaria, they generated conditions in which alleles that confer resistance
to the disease would increase in frequency through natural selection.
One such allele is the hemoglobin S allele (HbS), generally known as the
sickle-cell allele because it causes red blood cells to become stiff and take
on a sickle shape. Those humans who carry two copies of the sickle-cell
allele suffer from sickle-cell anemia, itself a life-threatening disease.
Sickled red blood cells are stiff, and as a consequence tend to clog up
small blood vessels. This is particularly problematic for those individuals
who have two HbS alleles, and thus suffer from severe sickle-cell
disease.52 Most children with sickle-cell disease die before the age of
five.53 However, individuals with just one copy of the allele
(“heterozygotes”) experience comparatively mild sickling; this actually
provides some protection against malaria, because sickled cells are
recognized by the spleen as they flow through and are removed, flushing
the parasite out with them. The result, as many of us learned at school,
is a classic case of “heterozygote advantage, where individuals with one
copy of HbS survive better than those with either two copies or none.
Long periods of crop cultivation have intensified natural selection on the
HbS allele, causing it to increase in frequency. The fact that neighboring
Kwa-speakers, with different food-procurement practices, do not show
the same increase in HbS supports the conclusion that a cultural practice
(clearing fields to grow yams) has triggered genetic evolution.54
Between 1550 and 1820, some 12 million people were transported
from West Africa, first to the West Indies and then on to the Americas, as
a result of the slave trade.55 These people carried their HbS alleles to the
New World, where they again provided them with protection from
malaria. With the eradication of malaria in portions of the Western
Hemisphere by the mid-twentieth century (itself dependent on further
cultural practices, such as the use of pesticides to kill mosquitoes and the
discovery of medical treatments for malaria), one might predict that the
HbS allele would start to decrease in frequency. Consistent with this
expectation, people of African origin in North America today exhibit a
relatively low frequency of HbS compared to their African forebears.56

However, African-American ancestry includes people from other regions
of Africa, which complicates the inferences that can legitimately be
drawn. A neater comparison occurs in the West Indies where, some three
centuries ago, Dutch settlers imported slaves from West Africa to the
island of Curacao and neighboring mainland South America. On
Curacao, unlike the swampy and infested mainland, malaria has been
eradicated. Sure enough, by the mid-1960s, the frequency of HbS was
only 6.5% on Curacao but 18.5% on the adjacent mainland57—clear
evidence of relaxed selection on the HbS allele.
The coevolutionary dynamics are more complicated than thus far
described, however. In researching this example, my collaborator,
archaeologist Mike O’Brien, and I were astonished to discover that yams
may actually provide relief from the symptoms of sickle-cell anemia!58
Some foods, including horseradish, cassava, corn, sweet potatoes, and,
yes, yams, contain cyanogenic glucosides; as natural plant compounds,
these interact with bacteria in the large intestine and aid the body in
producing a type of hemoglobin that can effectively carry oxygen
through blood cells, leading to less pain.59 For the Kwa-speakers to have
chosen to cultivate a crop that by chance alleviates the symptoms of the
disease that their planting inadvertently promoted, indirectly via another
disease, would be too much of a coincidence. Far more plausible is the
hypothesis that these agriculturists originally planted other crops and
subsequently switched to planting yams once their medicinal properties
had been discovered.60
Inspired by this example, Luke Rendell and Laurel Fogarty, postdoc
and graduate student, respectively, at the University of St Andrews,
carried out theoretical work that modeled the coevolution of agricultural
practices and genes favored in the modified environmental conditions.
The study revealed that even if costly to engage in and difficult to learn,
the agricultural practice (slash-and-burn for planting crops) nonetheless
spreads rapidly by creating conditions under which particular genetic
variants are favored (e.g., HbS allele carriers), because the individuals
that carry such genes are far more likely to be those who engage in the
agricultural practice than those that do not.61 In other words, the
cultural practice can hitchhike to prevalence on the back of the selection
it generates, through gene-culture coevolution. The study implies that
slash-and-burn agriculture could have spread by increasing the incidence

of malaria in adjacent regions, allowing the agriculturalists to move in
on their neighbors’ patch because they are better able to survive the
diseased-riddled conditions that they themselves created.62
We can now start to see the full extent of the feedback from a single
human cultural activity.63 The initial crop planting generated selection
for the HbS allele by the convoluted route described, eventually leading
the agriculturalists to switch to the cultivation and consumption of
yams. Crop growing not only modified selection on the HbS allele, but
ultimately led to the development of medical treatments for malaria,
pesticide treatments for mosquitoes, medical treatments for sickle-cell
disease, and perhaps even to the spread of slash-and-burn agriculture to
neighboring regions. These cultural activities, in turn, resulted in natural
selection that favored alleles conferring resistance to pesticides in
mosquitoes, and also further modified selection on the HbS allele.
Causation is flowing through this ecosystem, from cultural practice, to
evolutionary response, back to modified cultural practice, and from one
species to the next, in perpetual cycles.
Anthropological evidence provides the clearest indication so far that
gene-culture coevolution is a fact of human history. Undoubtedly, during
the course of human evolution, genes and culture have shaped each
other’s characteristics in a multitude of ways. What such examples do
not make transparent, however, is just how much gene-culture
coevolution has occurred. The sheer scale of this feedback only becomes
apparent through consideration of the genetic evidence for gene-culture
coevolution. Only in the last few years has the attention of geneticists
been drawn to the central role of culture in human evolutionary
dynamics. A major catalyst for this was the development of methods for
detecting statistical “signatures” in the human genome of recent, positive
selection;64 these are methods for identifying genes that have been
favored by natural selection over the past 50,000 years or so.65 Thus far,
somewhere between a few hundred and a couple of thousand distinct
regions in the human genome have been identified as subject to recent
selection. Genetic variants showing signs of recent positive selection are
not restricted to simple mutations in the protein-coding regions of the
human genome, as in the lactose case, but also include chromosomal
rearrangements, copy-number variants, and mutations in regulatory
genes.66 What is particularly interesting about this data is a large

proportion of the variants that the geneticists identified as subject to
recent selection appear to have been favored by human cultural
practices.67
Recently, with evolutionary biologist John Odling-Smee at Oxford
University and human geneticist Sean Myles at Acadia University in
Canada, I collated genetic evidence for gene-culture coevolution. We
compiled records of human genes, known to have been subject to recent
selection, where the most likely source of selection is a human cultural
practice.68 In the vast majority of cases, whether cultural activities were
what triggered the genetic response has yet to be conclusively proven. A
lot of work still has to be done to complete the connections from the
genes to their impact on human bodies, and to the source of the natural
selection for the long list of human genes implicated as subject to recent
selection in genome-wide scans. Nonetheless, the data is highly
suggestive, and in a very large number of cases it is hard to imagine that
culture did not play a crucial role in the evolutionary episode.
Some of the most compelling examples concern genetic responses to
changes in human diet. Consider, for instance, the evolution of the
human ability to eat starchy foods.69 Starch consumption is a feature of
agricultural societies, whereas most hunter-gatherers and some
pastoralists consume much less starch. This behavioral variation raises
the possibility that different selective pressures have acted on amylase
(the enzyme responsible for breaking down the starch in our diets)
across populations with variant dietary habits. Sure enough, humans
from different populations have dissimilar numbers of copies of the
salivary amylase gene (AMY1), and the number of copies correlates
positively with the amount of the enzyme amylase in the carrier’s saliva.
Individuals from populations with high-starch diets have, on average,
more AMY1 copies than those with traditionally low-starch diets. Higher
AMY1 copy numbers and protein levels are thought to improve the
digestion of starchy foods and may also provide protection against
intestinal disease.
Humans have exposed themselves to a variety of novel foods through
their cultural activities, including through the colonization of new
habitats that contain different flora and fauna, the initial domestication
of plants and animals, and the advent of full-blown agriculture. That
such activities have been a major source of selection on the human

genome is supported by strong genetic evidence.70 Several genes related
to the metabolism of proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, phosphates, and
alcohol all show signals of recent selection, including genes involved in
metabolizing mannose, sucrose, cholesterol, and fatty acids,71 as well as
other nutrition-related genes.72 Several distinct cases of links between
differences in diet and specific genetic variants, as observed for AMY1,
have now been identified.73 Evidence for diet-related selection on the
thickness of human teeth enamel,74 and on bitter-taste receptors on the
tongue has also been forthcoming.75 As novel food items have largely
been introduced into human diets through cultural practices, the notion
that a gene-culture coevolutionary process has shaped the biology of
human digestion is hard to escape.76
Previous chapters described how through culturally informed access
to nutritionally rich food sources, our ancestors were able to pay the
energy costs of brain growth. Consistent with this, increases in hominin
brain size coincide with advances in technology.77 In turn, culturally
transmitted food-processing methods, from chopping and grinding to
cooking, externalized aspects of digestion and allowed nutrients to be
garnered from otherwise inaccessible sources; this resulted in reductions
in the size of the gut. In effect, control of fire, cooking, and other food-
preparatory techniques created “predigested” food.78 At the same time,
the evolution of an expanding brain, a shrinking large intestine, and
lengthening small intestine forced humans to eat nutritionally dense
foods.79 Omnivores like humans must seek out and consume new items
to fuel their varied diet but also need to avoid novel toxic items. Humans
are thought to have resolved this dilemma through the evolution of an
inborn mechanism that generates “palate fatigue,” a sensory-specific
form of satiety that results in growing tired with eating the same thing
again and again, thereby ensuring a variety of foods are consumed.80
Cultural traditions help facilitate the requisite nutritional diversity by
specifying which items found in nature are edible, and which (often
entirely edible) foodstuffs are to be avoided (“food phobias”).81 How
products are transformed into food, the flavors added to render food
consumption enjoyable, and even the etiquette associated with eating
are also socially learned traditions that vary across societies.82
Several other categories of human genes are overrepresented in lists
of alleles subject to positive selection. One study reported that among 56

separate heat-shock genes—those activated by stressful temperatures—
28 showed evidence of a recent selective sweep in at least one human
population, probably in response to culture-facilitated dispersal and local
adaptation.83 Evolved responses to cope with disease is another such
category, making up nearly 10% of recent selective events.84 As the
sickle-cell example illustrates, shifts from a nomadic hunter-gatherer
lifestyle to a more sedentary, agrarian way of life were likely to have
facilitated the spread of infectious agents and other diseases. This led to
a rapid rise in the frequency of alleles that protect against disease, which
was often one of the fastest genetic responses.85 Genes involved in the
human immune response are extremely well represented among those
subject to recent selection.86 These data confirm that cultural activities
have played an active role in the evolution of human responses to
diseases, by both inadvertently promoting conditions under which
diseases, and resistance to them, become widespread; and (typically
much later) devising treatments and practices that mitigate against
them.
Genes associated with our external appearance provide some of the
strongest signatures of recent local adaptation. For example, the lighter
skin of non-African populations is the result of selection on a number of
skin pigmentation genes.87 Ancient DNA extracted from a 7,000-year-old
skeleton from Spain reveals that the carrier possessed ancestral variants
of several skin pigmentation genes, implying that the light skin color of
modern Europeans has evolved quite recently—over the last few
thousand years.88 Various genes involved in skeletal development show
signatures of recent local adaptation,89 as do genes expressed in hair
follicles, eye and hair color, and freckles.90 The frequencies of these
alleles typically vary across societies. Although some of this variation
can be attributed to natural selection, many differential evolutionary
responses could potentially be explained through a form of sexual
selection,91 in which population-specific, culturally learned mating
preferences favor biological traits in the opposite sex.
Some years ago I developed a mathematical model that combines
sexual selection and gene-culture coevolutionary theory to explore such
interactions.92 I found that even if human mating preferences are
learned, socially transmitted, and culture specific, sexual selection will
still result. Indeed, culturally generated sexual selection was found to be

faster and more potent than its gene-based counterpart. Genetic and
psychological data support this hypothesis. A recent study identified
several genes that correlate with pair formation in humans, including
genes involved in skin appearance, body shape, immunity, and
behavior.93 The study indicates that the subset of people from whom we
will choose our partner can to a large extent be predicted by
consideration of the genes that we share, although the learned mate
preferences that we share are what is most likely to be causally relevant
here. Little overlap was found between three populations of African,
European American, and Mexican origins, and the study concluded that
mate choice is population specific and socially learned. Indeed,
experimental data shows that humans copy the mate choice decisions of
others, which can lead to the social transmission of preferences for
particular characteristics in the opposite sex.94 Given the pervasiveness
of cultural influences on human mating preferences, social transmission
may exert a powerful influence on the selection of secondary sexual
characteristics and other physical and personality traits.95
Some human genes subject to less recent selection have spread to
fixation, and are now be carried by all humans. An interesting case is
known as the sarcomeric myosin gene MYH16, which is expressed
primarily in the human jawbone, and which underwent a deletion
among our hominin ancestors, whereby a sizeable section of the gene
was lost.96 This deletion is thought to have resulted in a massive
reduction in jaw muscle, with a timing that coincides with the
appearance of cooking, over two million years ago. Unlike other apes
and early hominins, humans and most other members of the genus Homo
do not possess powerful chewing muscles. Seemingly, a cultural process
(cooking) removed a constraint (the requirement for jaw muscle to chew
raw meat), allowing genetic change to occur that would have been
severely deleterious in its absence.
The preceding chapters implicated gene-culture coevolution in the
evolution of large brains, enhanced learning capabilities, and many
cognitive traits, including language. Evidence for genetic change
associated with these characters is also forthcoming. Several genes
known to be involved in brain growth and development show signs of
recent natural selection,97 as do genes expressed in the nervous system,98
and those implicated in learning and cognition.99 Other genetic changes

involved in brain enlargement are more ancient, being shared with
Neanderthals and other extinct hominins.100 Genes expressed in neuronal
signaling and energy production have been upregulated in the human
neocortex (i.e., the genes increased their rate of production of a cellular
component, such as a protein or RNA),101 and the plasticity characteristic
of early brain development has been extended in humans relative to
other apes.102 The human brain has experienced far more evolutionary
changes than the chimpanzee brain over the last few million years,
particularly in the prefrontal cortex,103 a region thought to be
responsible for decision making, planning, and problem solving.
Structural reorganization of the brain during evolution is as
important as increases in brain volume.104 Indeed, as we have seen, the
two typically go together, because enlarged brains not only have more
neurons but also have greater organizational complexity.105 This
reorganization includes changes in the proportions of different brain
regions, the amounts of white and gray matter, the size and patterns of
folding of the neocortex and cerebellum, hemispheric asymmetry,
modularity, neurotransmitters activity,106 and in a variety of other
factors.107 In many instances, the genome regions underlying these
changes have been identified and are found to have been subject to
recent selection, or to exhibit differences from the homologous regions
of the chimpanzee genome.108
The hypothesis that language use generated selective feedback acting
on the organization of human brain has received considerable
attention.109 Consistent with this, genes involved in language learning
and production are among those subject to recent selection.110 The best-
known example is the FOXP2 gene, in which mutations cause
deficiencies in language skills.111 Only four FOXP2 mutations occur in
the evolutionary trees of mice, macaques, orangutans, gorillas,
chimpanzees, and humans, and two of these occur in the evolutionary
lineage leading to humans, which is suggestive of positive selection.112
The most common interpretation is that this selection introduced a
change in the FOXP2 gene that was a necessary step to the development
of speech, although the gene may also have been favored for other
reasons such as vocal learning or lung development.113
Preceding chapters also made the argument that the longevity of
some primates, including great apes, has been extended through cultural

practices that furnish individuals with the knowledge and skills to
survive. Here too there is supportive genetic evidence. Vacuole-protein
genes are essential in humans because they remove dangerous toxins
that gradually accumulate in cells, but the same genes are not so
essential in other animals, such as mice, where mutations are less
problematic. Recent increases in the longevity of humans have greatly
amplified the importance of these genes because toxins can now build up
over more time, to the point where they would be lethal if they were not
removed by the vacuole-protein genes.114 Cultural processes have thus
rendered these “housekeeping” genes critical, leaving any mutation
lethal.
Another way that gene-culture interactions can play a part in human
evolution is when linguistic and cultural differences affect patterns of
gene flow between human populations. For instance, in patrilocal
societies the married couple resides with the husband’s parents, and
males typically marry females from other societies, whereas matrilocal
societies exhibit the reverse pattern. These societal differences affect the
spread of genes, with genetic variants carried by females, such as
mitochondrial DNA, flowing into patrilocal societies from adjacent ones.
This occurs, for instance, in the Gilaki and Mazandarani in southern
regions of Iran.115 Whereas genetic variants carried by males, such as Y
chromosomes, flow into matrilocal societies, as witnessed in Polynesia.116
Other examples of indirect effects of cultural traits on human genetic
variation arise through differences in social systems.117 A recent study
found that differences in the social structure and cultural practices of
South Amerindian populations can dramatically affect their rate of
biological evolution, with Xavánte Indians experiencing a remarkable
pace of evolution compared to their sister group, the Kayapó.118
A common misconception is that modern hygiene, medicine, and
birth control have caused natural selection to stop working on human
populations. However, natural selection is relentless, and could only stop
if all individuals had exactly the same reproductive success, which is
unlikely to ever happen.119 Even in modern societies, extensive evidence
for human evolution exists. For instance, at least in some populations, an
earlier age for the birth of the first child is being selected for among both
fathers and mothers. Likewise, there is some evidence of selection for a
later age for the birth of the last child and later onset of menopause in

women.120 According to evolutionary biologist Stephen Stearns from Yale
University and his colleagues,121 the important role that culture plays in
shaping that selective environment becomes clear in the contrast
between the developed and the developing world: “In the developed
world, it is primarily variation in fertility rather than mortality that
shapes variation in lifetime reproductive success. In developing
countries, the variation in mortality has a greater contribution to
selection, particularly the variation in infant and child mortality that is
associated with infectious disease and deficiencies in child nutrition.”122
The studies that I have described only scratch the surface of the now
extensive data from numerous academic fields that demonstrate genes
and culture can, and do, coevolve. Theoretical models, such as the
handedness, sexual selection, and lactose tolerance case studies,
illustrate coevolutionary mechanisms, while genetic, anthropological and
archaeological data establish that this feedback is not just a hypothetical
possibility, but a fact of human evolution. The evolution of sickle-cell
disease in Kwa-speakers, like countless other examples, shows that
genetic and cultural change can occur on similar time scales, while
analyses of the human genome strongly imply that gene-culture
coevolutionary interactions are widely prevalent.
Eminent Harvard entomologist Edward Wilson, famous as one of the
architects of “sociobiology,”123 the modern approach to the study of
animal behavior, once controversially claimed that “genes hold culture
on a leash.”124 What Wilson meant was that genetic propensities shape
behavior and the acquisition of cultural knowledge. Some truth can be
found in this assertion; for instance, people are more likely to eat
particular diets if they possess the genetic variants that allow them to
metabolize those foods. However, Wilson’s claim was contentious
because it was understood to imply that human culture is constrained by
our biology to be adaptive.125 Irrespective of Wilson’s intent, this reading
would be difficult to defend. Human culture, like all aspects of human
development and behavior, is flexible, open-ended, and capable of
generating tremendous novelty, including the creation of new
circumstances that impose selection on our genes. What Wilson failed to
emphasize was that the gene-culture leash tugs both ways. Human
behavior, culture, and technology are shaped by genes to some degree,
but the architecture of the human genome has equally been profoundly

shaped by our culture, as the aforementioned genetic data affirm.
Cultural knowledge expressed in human behavior, tools, and
technology is amply manifest in our species’ extraordinarily potent
capacity to modify the circumstances of our lives.126 Our ancestors didn’t
just evolve to be suited to their world; they shaped their world. The
landscape of human evolution did not pre-exist us; we built it ourselves.
We constructed our niche. While all organisms engage in niche
construction,127 our species’ capacity to control, regulate, and transform
the environment is uniquely powerful, chiefly due to our extraordinary
capacity for culture. That capability for environmental regulation may
itself have been caught up in the runaway process that I have been
emphasizing.128 Theoretical analyses reveal coevolutionary dynamics in
which cultural processes can spread rapidly by hitchhiking on the
selection they themselves generate.129 That humans, the species most
reliant on culture, should have the most potent capability for niche
construction may be no coincidence; autocatalytic and runaway effects
may have fueled ever more powerful niche construction in our lineage,
just as they fueled more efficient copying, bigger brains and more
sophisticated communication.
Cultural niche construction did not just impose selection on our
bodies, 
thereby 
shaping 
our 
physical 
appearance, 
skin 
color,
susceptibility to disease, and ability to digest foodstuffs, but it also
transformed the human mind, leaving our cognition specifically adapted
for cultural life.130 Among those genes subject to recent selection are
numerous genes expressed in the human brain and nervous system,
including those expressed in our learning, cooperation, and language.131
These genetic data reinforce the message of comparative neural anatomy
specified in previous chapters, which suggests that human evolution has
been accompanied by expansions of regions of the brain linked to
innovation, imitation, tool use, and language.132
As documented earlier in this book, social learning is widespread
among animals and some species exhibit relatively stable behavioral
traditions. I would be very surprised if such traditions had not triggered
bouts of gene-culture coevolution in other animals too. Indeed, there are
hints that this has happened. Both sponging dolphins and tool-using New
Caledonian crows, for instance, are able to exploit different foods than
other dolphins and crows by virtue of their innovative foraging skills,

which are thought to be socially transmitted.133 Likewise, genetic
differentiation has followed cultural diversification in both sperm and
killer whales.134 How prevalent gene-culture coevolution is outside of
hominins remains to be established, and it may still be found that its
impact is substantial. The situation is much clearer for our own species,
where gene-culture coevolution may even be the dominant form of
evolution. Theoretical models consistently find that gene-culture
dynamics are typically faster, stronger, and operate over a broader range
of conditions than conventional evolutionary dynamics. By modifying
selection pressures and increasing the intensity of selection, cultural
processes can speed up evolution. Granted, in other circumstances, by
providing an alternative means of responding to ecological and social
challenges (for instance), cultural processes can also remove the
requirement for an evolutionary response. However, the data imply that
on average, human cultural activities have increased the pace of
biological evolution, probably substantially so. Much as Allan Wilson
envisaged decades ago, an autocatalytic process accelerated the
evolution of cognition in our lineage. Our potent culture and the
feedback it generated, switched on the evolutionary afterburners and
allowed our cognition to race ahead of that of other species, thereby
generating a major gulf between the intellectual capabilities of humans
and other animals.
This picture of the evolution of the human mind is radically different
from the portrayal advanced by evolutionary psychologists and many
popular science writers. These authors have often claimed that those
humans that walk the streets of today’s urban metropolises are left
struggling to cope with the modern world by the legacy of brains suited
to ancestral primate or stone-age conditions.135 This would imply that
modern 
humans 
have 
manufactured 
environmental 
conditions
fundamentally ill suited to their biology. While such “mismatch” does
occur, as the aforementioned evolved preferences for salt, sugar, and fat
testify, the extent of this incongruity is far more limited than these
authors envisioned. Humans do not modify their environment randomly
or haphazardly. Rather, like other animals who construct nests, mounds,
webs, and dams that help them and their offspring survive, humans
build structures and have other impacts on their world that broadly
enhance their evolutionary fitness.136 Animals also deplete resources and

pollute environments, but this too increases fitness in the short term and
is often tied to life-history strategies that take account of this activity—
for instance, through dispersal or migration when resource levels are low
or the environment becomes uninhabitable. The same holds when
humans plant crops that, under some circumstances, have negative
consequences (for instance, if the agriculture promotes disease), as those
crops typically provide nutritional benefits that outweigh the costs.
Niche construction does have diffuse and unintended negative impacts
on fitness, but in spite of this it will typically increase the fitness of the
constructors, at least in the short term.137 This is hardly contentious; the
fitness benefits of animal artifacts are well documented.138 In this
respect, humans are no different from other animals. We too construct
our world to suit ourselves, leaving our behavior largely adaptive in
spite of the radical transformations brought about in the environment.139
The changes that we impose on our world inevitably spill over to
affect other species—often for the worse, but sometimes for the better.
For instance, the use of fire by Australian Aborigines to clear vegetation
and thereby help in finding prey, such as small mammals that live in
burrows, has actually benefitted lizards who thrive in the resulting
patchy mosaics.140 Likewise, many commensals and inquilines thrive in
human-constructed 
environments. 
Eventually, 
human 
habitat
degradation, most obviously anthropogenic climate change, may well
negatively influence human fitness. However, for the time being, other
species bear the brunt of our activities, for whom the consequences are
rarely so positive. Siberian tigers, golden lion tamarins, checkerspot
butterflies, and countless other species are all endangered because of our
habitat degradation, deforestation, urban development, and agriculture.
In the meantime, the human species thrives and our numbers rise
relentlessly, a clear sign that in the short term humanity benefits from
our niche construction. Contrary to popularized narratives of
environmental exploitation leading to cultural collapse, recent studies
demonstrate that agricultural and other cultural practices shifted human
carrying capacity upward.141
Far from being trapped in the past by an outdated biological legacy,
humans are characterized by a remarkable plasticity. Our adaptiveness is
reinforced by both cultural and biological evolution.142 Through our
culture, we are frequently able to counteract any mismatch between our

biological adaptations and the world in which we find ourselves; for
instance, clothing, fires, and air conditioning buffer extremes of
temperature, while new agricultural practices and innovations alleviate
food shortages. Other animals exhibit plasticity in their responses to
novel conditions, but most do not possess anything approaching the
remarkable flexibility and problem-solving capabilities conferred by
human culture. On those occasions where humans fail to eradicate novel
conditions through cultural activities, natural selection ensues and, as
we have seen, culturally induced selection can be fast. In the malaria-
stricken regions of the Kwa homeland, being a heterozygote for the
sickle-cell allele is adaptive. Similarly, in dairying societies, genes
expressed in high lactase activity pay fitness dividends. These genetic
changes, induced by human cultural activities, have restored human
adaptiveness.
Hence, in spite of extensive change, both to ourselves—in our
anatomy, physiology, and cognition—and to our environments, which
for many of us are very different from African forest or savanna, we
humans nonetheless remain extremely well adapted to our surroundings.
That is because we built those surroundings to benefit ourselves, and
then adapted to life within them. Human minds and human
environments have been engaged in a long-standing, intimate exchange
of information, mediated by reciprocal bouts of niche construction and
natural selection, leaving each beautifully fashioned in the other’s
image.

CHAPTER 10
THE DAWN OF CIVILIZATION
The pace of change experienced by the members of our evolutionary
lineage has accelerated over recent times, and continues to accelerate.1
Like all species on Earth, humans possess an evolutionary history that
stretches back at least 3.6 billion years to the beginning of life. For the
vast majority of the many millions of living species aside from us, that
history of adaptive change has been written solely in terms of biological
evolution, and for at least 99.9% of our history we too adapted to the
world in this manner. However, for around the last two to four million
years and perhaps longer, our history has also been crafted through
gene-culture coevolution. The contribution of gene-culture dynamics to
our adaptive evolution was almost certainly modest at first, but grew in
influence over time as our cultural capacity was enhanced, and our
control of the environment increased. Eventually, culture began to take
over altogether, carrying us into an entirely new realm.
We are probably alone among the planet’s residents in having
experienced three ages of adaptive evolution. First, there was the age in
which biological evolution dominated, in which we adapted to the
circumstances of life in a manner no different from every other creature.
Second came the age when gene-culture coevolution was in the
ascendency. Through cultural activities, our ancestors set challenges to
which they adapted biologically. In doing so, they released the brake
that the relatively slow rate of independent environmental change
imposes on other species. The results are higher rates of morphological
evolution in humans compared to other mammals,2 with human genetic
evolution reported as accelerating more than a hundredfold over the last
40,000 years.3 Now we live in the third age, where cultural evolution
dominates. 
Cultural 
practices 
provide 
humanity 
with 
adaptive
challenges, but these are then solved through further cultural activity,
before biological evolution gets moving. Our culture hasn’t stopped

biological evolution—that would be impossible—but it has left it trailing
in its wake.
Through cultural evolution, our species is utterly transforming the
planet, and at breakneck speed. For hominins to evolve from a
chimpanzee-like creature to Homo sapiens took approximately 6 million
years, but in the last 10 to 12 thousand years of cultural evolution,
humanity has been to the moon, split the atom, built cities, compiled
encyclopedic knowledge, and composed symphonies. A frighteningly
high proportion of other species are simply unable to cope with the
express-train transformations of their environment that human beings
have imposed; as a consequence, they will almost certainly go extinct
before being able to adapt through natural selection. Our impact on the
planet is now so devastating that scientists have marked it as a new
geological epoch called the “Anthropocene.”4 We, on the other hand,
adapt with no problem at all, because we uniquely possess a culture that
enables it.
Culture provided our ancestors with food-procurement and survival
tricks, such as how to gain access to nutrient-rich foods, and how to
build a fire or make a cutting tool. As new inventions arose, hominin
populations were able to exploit their environments more efficiently.
Our forebears broadened their diet, for instance, to eat significant
amounts of meat, which is a more concentrated source of protein,
vitamins, minerals, and fatty acids than plant material. Later, our
ancestors began to cook their foods, which greatly reduced the digestive
burden and allowed further time and energy gains. Ultimately, an
elevated rate of nutrient harvesting paid the substantial energy costs of
growing and running a huge brain. The human brain uses up more
energy than any other single organ; it weighs about 2% of our body
weight, but burns about 20% of our energy. That extra energy has to
come from somewhere, compelling hominin species to forage in a
manner that yielded a bonanza of calories; the alternative was to go
extinct. Only when our intelligence paid for itself by procuring more
energy than it cost, could it become the direct target of positive
selection.5 Our brain growth, in turn, further augmented our capacities
for innovation and social learning.6
Increasing efficiency in exploiting our environment not only fueled
brain expansion, but population growth as well. Human numbers really

took off after the advent of agriculture, and our domination of Earth’s
ecosystems 
rapidly 
followed.7 
With 
each 
new 
invention—the
domestication of plants and animals, irrigation methods, plant and
animal breeding programs, hybrid cereals, fertilizers, pesticides,
biotechnology—food production increased, and the population expanded
further. The global population increased by around five orders of
magnitude, further fueling the adaptive evolution of our species at both
genetic and cultural levels. Larger populations typically mean faster
rates of biological evolution, due to increases in the numbers of novel
mutations, and a stronger effect of natural selection relative to genetic
drift.8 At the same time, cultural evolution flourished through
corresponding increases in the number of people who could devise new
inventions, and because innovations and knowledge were less likely to
be lost through chance events.9
With each increment in technology, the human population became
more and more dependent on socially transmitted knowledge to acquire
the skills necessary for survival. In turn, as the social learning strategies
tournament teaches us, with increasing reliance on social learning,
characteristic features of modern culture automatically surface,
including a larger cultural repertoire; the retention of knowledge for
long periods of time; some semblance of conformity in behavior; and
fads, fashions and rapid technological change.10 The remarkable success
of our species, our enhanced capacity to adapt, our astonishing diversity,
and the bewildering amounts of information that we have generated, all
follow directly from our heavy reliance on social learning.11 Insights
from mathematical analyses exploring the importance of transmission
fidelity, described in chapter 7, are also relevant here. These studies
suggest that with the evolution of more accurate transmission
mechanisms (either as legacies of our biological heritage such as our
capacities for teaching and language, or as products of cultural evolution
such as writing and record keeping), more cultural knowledge would be
retained, and lead to a more extensive cultural repertoire.12 With each
increment in transmission fidelity, knowledge would be preserved more
effectively and for longer periods of time, thereby generating
opportunities for conceptual lineages to cross-fertilize and to further
stimulate cultural accumulation. Thus, drawing solely on established
empirical and theoretical findings, not just one, but a whole a series of

interwoven feedback mechanisms can be envisaged, with each
reinforcing and invigorating the others to generate runaway niche
construction and adaptation in our lineage and in our lineage alone.
FIGURE 8. Honey is one of the most energy dense foods in nature, and is thought to have been
an important food source for our ancestors, and for many foraging populations today.
Surprisingly extensive cultural knowledge is required to harvest honey safely. By permission of
Joanna Eede/Survival.
Yet if this feedback was operating so relentlessly, why did the
members of our genus spend such a long time as hunter-gatherers? And
why are there still so many small-scale preindustrial societies around the
globe that have not devised wheels, arches, or metal extraction, let alone
quantum mechanics or gene-editing technology? The answer to these
questions is that the life of a hunter-gatherer imposes tough constraints
on the growth of cultural knowledge.
Hunter-gatherer societies are no less dependent on socially
transmitted knowledge than postindustrial societies. A simple illustration
suffices to make this point. Consider the seemingly uncomplicated

foraging challenge of harvesting honey, a behavior common to many
contemporary hunter-gatherer communities (figure 8).13 Honey is one of
the most energy dense foods in nature, and is thought to have been an
important food source for the earliest members of our genus.14 Among
the Hadza people of Tanzania, honey comprises approximately 15% of
their diet.15 This valued commodity is shared widely outside of the
household, and is the primary weaning food for children.16 You might
well imagine that you could easily pick up the ostensibly uncomplicated
skill of gathering honey without help from others. Of course, you almost
certainly already bring to the exercise the prior knowledge that honey is
nutritious, produced by bees, found in their nests, and more; this is
knowledge that you acquired socially. Yet even thus informed, there is a
great deal of additional knowledge that the novice honey harvester
would require in order to succeed. For instance, they would need to
know which bees to target because there are many species, and while
some are stingless, others, such as the African killer bees, will viciously
attack humans and repeated stings frequently lead to death. They also
need to know what the nests of the favored bees look like, where they
are typically located, and in which species of trees. The honey harvesters
need to know how to climb the trees safely—for instance, they might
hammer pointed sticks into the trunk to make a ladder, as the Hadza do.
They must know how to reveal the hive by chopping open the tree, how
to lull the bees into inactivity with smoke, as well as how to build the
fire to make the smoke. They need to know how to remove the nest, or a
part of it, from the tree without getting stung, and how to extract the
honey. Finally, if they are members of the Hadza, they need to know
how to speak the song of a bird known as the honeyguided.17 A
remarkably mutualistic relationship exists between the honeyguide and
humans; in order to obtain beeswax and larvae, this bird leads people to
the nests of wild bees. The Hadza engage in a “conversation” with the
honeyguide, which comprises a series of chatters and whistles, until the
bird leads the gatherer to the hive.18
What is relevant here is that all of this honey-harvesting knowledge
is acquired socially. Communities such as the Hadza, the Aché of
Paraguay, or the Machiguenga of Peru are only able to forge an
existence because they draw on a very long history of accumulated
adaptive know-how.19 Honey gathering is no different from countless

other essential skills, such as trapping animals; skinning and butchering
a deer; making a fire and keeping it lit; knowing which fruits and fungi
are safe to eat and which are not; making a spear, bow, and arrow; and
processing plant foods to remove toxins. Knowledge of how to carry out
such tasks is the lifeblood of these societies and must be passed down
through generations to ensure survival.20
In hunting and gathering societies of today, plant products supply the
bulk of the calories, while fish and game provide the major share of the
protein.21 However, humans are not well adapted biologically to extract
nutrients from many plant materials (we cannot digest cellulose like
ruminants, or detoxify the numerous chemicals that plants produce as
defenses), and this leaves our gathering largely restricted to fruits, seeds,
and tubers.22 Food-processing methods allow human populations to
broaden their diets to some degree, but such methods also require a
great deal of cultural knowledge.23
Acorns, for instance, can be consumed if first dried, their shells
removed, mashed, soaked in water, and rinsed repeatedly to remove the
tannin. The resultant mash can then be dried again to make a kind of
flour used for breads, a method deployed by some North American
hunter-gatherer communities. The leaching of the tannin is critical,
because tannin both makes the food taste bitter and binds its proteins to
inhibit digestion; acorns can lead to sickness if consumed unprocessed.24
Techniques such as these both improve yields and broaden diets, but
such complex procedures are a relatively recent advance in human
evolution. Most hunter-gatherer populations throughout history had to
craft a difficult living on slim pickings.
As a consequence, a typical human hunting and gathering band must
constantly be on the move to gather more food elsewhere as they rapidly
exhaust all of the easy returns in their locality.25 Often, they will move
as frequently as every few days. The rate at which they move depends
critically on two factors: the depth of the population’s accumulated
cultural knowledge of how to extract resources from the environment,
and the general productivity of the region. Hunter-gatherers will, of
course, forage some distance from their home base, but there is a limit
beyond which moving camp is easier than to forage at great distances
and return.
Early Homo probably did not even have home bases. Nomadic

hunting and gathering, perhaps following seasonally available wild
plants and game, is generally thought to be the oldest human subsistence
method. Human populations with a restricted repertoire of food-
procurement techniques, and communities in regions of low productivity
where an efficient strategy for exploiting scarce resources is required,
are well suited to this nomadic lifestyle. Even many contemporary
pastoralist societies that keep herds of cattle or goats must continuously
drive them in patterns that avoid depleting pastures beyond their ability
to recover.26
Constant movement imposes severe constraints on the size and
sophistication of the technological tool kits exhibited by a society.27 A
band of hunter-gatherers cannot afford to possess extensive equipment
when all of its members’ belongings must be carried from place to place
every few days. Everything that the group possesses must be light and
easily packed. A nomadic lifestyle does not lend itself to making
equipment that will not be required for weeks, or in different seasons,
because that paraphernalia would have to be transported. Once a group
has to move all the time, long-term food storage also becomes practically
impossible.
In addition, movement on foot effectively limits each woman to one
dependent child at a time, because she cannot gather food while holding
multiple young. Hunter-gatherer communities will space out the births
of children deliberately so that they only have to carry one at a time. For
instance, the !Kung San people who live in the Kalahari desert will
typically raise children about four years apart in age.28 This puts a severe
constraint on population sizes.
Discounting the division of labor between the sexes, in hunter-gather
societies all individuals essentially have the same job of foraging.29 As a
consequence, no one can accumulate wealth or resources or have a
higher status than anyone else, and there is little social structure.
Specialized, permanent roles are normally absent.30 While some
individuals are recognized as a Shaman, or as various types of
toolmakers, none are able to earn a living in those ways; rather, all able-
bodied individuals must hunt or gather. Only the very richest hunting
and gathering societies possess distinct occupations, including chief,
canoe builders, arrow makers, and so forth.31
This helps us understand why hunter-gather technology was only

slowly changing for such a long time, and also why, even today, many
small-scale societies possess limited technology.32 Hunter-gatherers are
effectively trapped in a vicious cycle that severely constrains their rate
of cultural evolution. Unless the group devises clever means of exploiting
their environments more efficiently, or just happens to live in an
extremely rich location, they must constantly be on the move in order to
garner sufficient resources merely to exist. Any new innovations would
also have to meet these constraints; a new tool or device, however
fantastic, is of little value if it cannot be easily transported. In any case,
there are likely to be few new inventions, both because there are few
individuals to come up with them, and because people would have little
time to innovate.33 Compelled to live in small societies with limited
technology, few opportunities arise for people to combine different
cultural elements into new and more complex inventions. As no wealth
or resources can accumulate, and everyone (even children) is pressed to
hunt or forage, the society is naturally egalitarian, with little social
structure. These factors combine to generate a comparatively slow pace
of change in cultural repertoires, at least relative to postagricultural
societies.34
The flip side of these constraints, however, is that once a population
does pass the critical threshold when the spread of novel technology
allows it to exploit its local environment with sufficient efficiency, then
lots of consequences immediately follow. First, the population does not
need to constantly be on the move. Second, they can have a stable home
base, or even lead an entirely sedentary existence. Third, they can now
store food and equipment, and thereby accumulate technology. Fourth,
expanding tool kits provide more opportunity for combining ideas or
borrowing elements from one domain and applying them to another.
Fifth, being more sedentary allows populations to reduce their birth
spacing,35 and permits an increase in foraging efficiency to raise the
carrying capacity; consequently, the population grows. Sixth, with more
people, there are more potential innovators, each of whom may have
more time, more resources, and more uses for the resulting innovations.
Seventh, more innovations potentially allow the population to exploit
new resources in their environment, or to exploit existing resources with
greater efficiency, further increasing the carrying capacity and allowing
the population to grow some more. Finally, with the opportunity for the

accumulation of wealth, social structure and division of labor is now
possible, leading to specialization and efficiency gains. With the advent
of a non-nomadic lifestyle, cultural and technological evolution can
really take off. That is the reason why cultural evolution appears to
accelerate with, or after, the appearance of agriculture and the
associated domestication of plants and animals. Only through agriculture
could most populations throughout human history throw off the shackles
that the requirement for constant movement places on the pace of
cultural change.
Considerable work within the field of archaeology has focused on the
origins of agriculture, particularly the questions of what species were
domesticated, when, and where.36 Researchers have established that
agriculture did not originate only once, but rather there were eight or
more locations of early plant domestication.37 This naturally raises the
question of what factors contributed to the origins of agriculture.
Classical arguments have mainly emphasized environmental change as
the trigger.38 Certainly, it is difficult to imagine how agriculture could
have been cost effective during an ice age, so we should not be surprised
that it first appears shortly after the end of the last ice age, around
11,500 years ago.39 However, researchers also have assumed that it
would only have been economical for our ancestors to turn to intensive
agriculture when the availability of wild resources was curtailed.40 Yet,
Bruce Smith at the Smithsonian Institution, a leading authority on the
topic, has recently noted a frequent context of a rich resource zone for
domestication of plants and animals worldwide.41
These prima facie conflicting conclusions reflect the common
assumption that some external condition or circumstance was what
triggered the initial tentative steps toward plant and animal
domestication and what rendered the transition to complete reliance on
agriculture economical.42 Together with my archaeologist collaborator
Michael O’Brien of the University of Missouri, I reached the conclusion a
few years ago that instead of (or in addition to, perhaps) searching for
an external “prime mover” for the origins of domestication and
agriculture, researchers would be well advised to focus greater attention
on the coevolutionary interactions between humans and domesticated
plants and animals, as well as the cultural niche-constructing practices
that underpinned them.43 An emphasis on external environmental factors

as the cause of the origins of agriculture is not wrong. During the last
glacial period, the climate was not only cold, but highly variable, and
plant and animal communities were forced to shift their ranges
frequently.44 Hominin groups would have been compelled to find a
favorable region that contained suitable forage and game, but then move
locations repeatedly as they chased their food across the landscape.45
Such unstable conditions mitigate against a sedentary existence.
Conversely, in the Holocene, the period since the end of the last ice age,
climates have not only been warmer, but also wetter and more stable,
with higher carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere; these are
conditions that favor a much higher reliance on plant resources.46 Of the
2 million years that our genus Homo has ranged the Earth, probably the
last 10,000 or so have been the most conducive to agriculture.
Certainly, the climate had to be suitable for domesticating plants
before agriculture could arise, but I tend to regard such external factors
as necessary preconditions rather than the direct cause. At best, climate
change is only part of the causal story. After all, Earth has experienced
many warm, wet periods of long duration in the past, and yet no species
devised agriculture.47 Nor do I envisage that, had the current interglacial
occurred, say, 500,000 years ago instead of in the present, hominins
would have devised agriculture then. The right species, with the
requisite knowledge and abilities, had to be in the right place, at the
right time and, crucially, had to behave in the right way. To understand
the origins of agriculture we need to consider how humans constructed a
niche in which domesticating plants and animals was economical.
Animals and plants coevolve as natural selection favors characters in
each that have an impact on the evolutionary fitness of the other. In this
instance, as the animal population is human, both genetic and cultural
evolution are involved.48 Agricultural practices are examples of cultural
niche construction that, as described in the previous chapter, can trigger
evolutionary episodes in both the domesticates and, via selective
feedback, in the human populations too.49 Cultural niche-constructing
processes that contribute to plant domestication include selective
collecting, transporting, storing, and planting of seeds; setting fire to
grasslands and forest, either intentionally or accidentally; cutting down
trees; tilling; weeding and the selective culling of competing species;
irrigation; and creating organically rich dump heaps.50 The skills and

information that underlay these processes were passed from one
generation to the next through a combination of teaching, imitation,
stories, myths, and ritual,51 with the knowledge base regularly
accumulating and being updated. Over time, these agricultural practices
had an impact on the plants, which underwent a series of dramatic
changes, such as major increases in size of the plant or its seeds, faster
seed germination, simultaneous ripening of the seed crop, and so forth.
The changes benefited both species by increasing the fitness of the plant
community and elevating its yield. Sowing seeds in prepared substrates,
for example, both induces changes in germination and dispersal
mechanisms through inadvertent artificial selection, and helps the
tended plants by increasing their likelihood of being included in next
year’s seed stock.52 The increased yield, in turn, encouraged humans to
perpetuate the practices that maintained or increased plant productivity,
thereby triggering natural selection that modified human digestive
enzymes. However, the methods of sowing selected seeds and harvesting
plants inadvertently imposed selection on the crops that eventually left
many inviable when in open competition with wild counterparts, and
hence utterly dependent on humans.53
The same reasoning applies to animals, where domestication again
selected for increased yields of animal products, such as milk, but also a
variety of other traits, including lowered reactivity to environmental
stimuli and a dependence on humans for survival and reproduction.54
The protection provided by corrals and pens, and selection of animals
that were easy to manage, again modified the impact of natural selection
on animal breeds. When removed from anthropogenic settings, that
selection left the animals concerned much more vulnerable to
predation.55 Hence, those plants and animals tended by humans became
increasingly dependent on their keepers. Through this reinforcement of
the mutually beneficial relationship between humans and the plants and
animals we domesticated, a codependence or coadaptation evolved.
In fact, the initial domestication of plants and animals typically
occurred well before the emergence of full-blown agriculture,56 which
can be thought of as the near total reliance of human societies upon
domesticated plants or animals.57 In some areas of the world, initial
domestication and agriculture were separated in time by thousands of
years.58 During that transitional window, small-scale societies had low-

level food production economies that included domesticates, but were
also strongly reliant on wild species of plants and animals.59 A key factor
determining if domestication occurred and transitioned to support stable
agricultural societies, was whether a suitable plant species was locally
available.60 The first domesticated crops were generally annuals with
large seeds or fruits. These included pulses such as peas, and cereals
such as rye, wheat, barley, and maize.61 An important advance was the
appearance of a new form of wheat (with large heads of seeds) in the
region surrounding the eastern Mediterranean, close to 9600 BCE.62 Prior
to that, wheat was nothing like we know it today, but rather resembled a
wild grass. Wild wheat was, either naturally or through human action,
crossed with other types of grass to produce a fertile polyploid hybrid,63
which possessed a fat and easily harvested ear, on account of a
quadruple dose of chromosomes. However, this particular plant had lost
the ability to propagate its swollen seeds in the wind, leaving the it
reliant on humans to gather the ears and scatter the seeds for next year’s
harvest.64 Barley appeared in the Fertile Crescent around the same
time.65 Maize was first farmed in southern Mexico, around 9,000 years
ago, and subsequently spread throughout the Americas,66 as did squash,
beans, and cassava. By 10,000 BCE the bottle gourd,67 which was used as
a container, also appears to have been domesticated. Use of this plant
had spread to the Americas from Asia by 8000 BCE, most likely due to
the migration of people.68 The first use of millet, one of the earliest crops
to be farmed in Asia, is dated to between 10,300 and 8,700 years ago in
China, with the success of this species attributed to an excellent
resistance to drought.69 Rice too had been domesticated in China by
9,000 years ago, and spread to India around 5,000 years ago.70
Plant domestication might reasonably be thought to have contributed
positively to the health of the population by reducing the risks of
starvation. In fact, that could not be further from the truth.71 Certainly
health was dramatically affected by the onset of agriculture, at least in
many parts of the world,72 but not generally for the better. Initially, and
temporarily, the transition of many human societies from a lifestyle of
hunting and gathering to one of agriculture and settlement dramatically
narrowed diets by decreasing the variety of foods consumed. A shift to
intensive agriculture thereby first created a decline in human nutrition,
with resulting impacts on human health.73 The health of many

Europeans began to decline markedly about 3,000 years ago, after
agriculture became widely adopted in Europe and during the rise of the
ancient Greek and Roman societies.74 The excess of genes expressed in
immunity and resistance to disease that have been subject to recent
selective sweeps, as described in the previous chapter, is a signature of
this fallout from the widespread implementation of agricultural practices
and the consequent increase in density and exposure to animal
diseases.75 Similarly, researchers document from these periods a growing
number of skeletal lesions from leprosy and tuberculosis—zoonotic
diseases caused by living close to livestock and other humans in
settlements where waste accumulated.76 The frequency of dental cavities
and enamel problems also increased as people switched to a grain-based
diet with fewer nutrients and more sugars.77 The net result was that
Europeans actually became shorter for a time, with males shrinking an
average of 7 cm between about 2,300 years ago and 400 years ago; this
was a sure sign that children who were not members of elite families
were eating less nutritious food or suffering from disease.78 Agricultural
innovations may have repeatedly increased yields, but populations
quickly responded by growing in numbers, leaving human misery much
as it was before.
Yet anthropologists have long held the view that the development of
large-scale, socially structured societies with extensive division of labor
would not have been possible without the extensive food base that only
intensive agriculture could provide.79 Such reasoning suggests a positive
connection between agriculture and evolutionary fitness, and that
connection may have motivated the agricultural innovation of our
forebears. Presumably, agriculture was attractive to our ancestors
because they believed that control of food production offered a means
both to increase the volume of food, and to reduce variation in food
availability.
In the same way that animals store food to cope with harsh times,
one might also expect humans to have engaged in potentially intensive
forms of food production when the alternative, in the form of readily
caught or easily gathered wild food, was not freely available. On this
reasoning, agriculture might be expected to have evolved when the
availability or productivity of wild resources was low. However, other
factors are being overlooked here; for instance, poor environments often

do not provide good conditions for growing crops,80 and individuals
living under such circumstances are unlikely to have had the time to
invest in innovation. Moreover, despite the benefits that agriculture
offers, little evidence supports the suggestion that its appearance greatly
reduced the risk of resource failure and starvation.81 Agricultural peoples
may have developed a more advanced knowledge of food storage and
transportation than hunter-gatherers, and they may not have faced some
of the severe fluctuations in natural resources that nonagricultural
groups did; however, the strategies that sedentary populations used to
reduce or eliminate food crises generated costs as well as benefits.82 In
fact, the advantages may often have been outweighed by such factors as
the greater vulnerability of domesticated crops to climate fluctuations or
other natural hazards—a vulnerability that could then be exacerbated by
the specialized nature or narrow focus of many agricultural systems.83
Such counterintuitive observations beg the question of why, when it
brought high labor costs, high rates of failure and, in some cases, no
clear economic incentive, numerous communities adopted systematic
agriculture. What circumstances favored the appearance of agriculture,
and how did it manage to flourish in spite of the problems generated?
Almost certainly, rich, rather than poor, environments favored
agriculture, although the associated technology often subsequently
spread to poorer regions.84 In a rich environment, populations could
afford to be more sedentary and thereby support a larger repertoire of
technologies. Such environments promoted human population growth,
which was frequently followed by resource depression and the reduction
in availability of desirable foods due to overexploitation. In turn, the
increased efficiency with which the population exploited the natural
world rendered food storage beneficial, and raised the economic value of
investing in agriculture.
Humans constructed the agricultural niche. Environments are not
fixed as rich or poor; they are dynamic variables, able to change as a
result of the activity of potent niche constructors like humans.85 The
wealth of resources that a particular locale affords depends critically on
the cultural sophistication of the populations that live there, the depth of
their knowledge bases, and ultimately on what they do to their
environments. We are champions of niche construction, largely because
human manipulation of the environment draws on a long legacy of

culturally acquired and transmitted information through which we can
modify our world and increase its carrying capacity.86
As to the reason why agricultural societies flourished in spite of all
the negative consequences, I suspect that there are two major factors.
The first really comes down to natural selection. In simple terms,
agricultural societies outbred hunter-gatherer communities. Agriculture
may well have initially had a negative impact on human health but, at
least in some societies, it afforded a gigantic leap in the environments’
carrying capacities.87 Through farming, humans were able to increase
the productivity of their local environments by several orders of
magnitude, allowing the support of far larger communities. Agricultural
societies took a hit with viability selection (that is, selection acting on
the ability to survive) as survival rates reduced marginally, but they
were more than compensated by fecundity selection (selection acting on
the ability to reproduce) as people had more surviving children.
Prior to the advent of agriculture, the world’s population is thought
to have stabilized at around a million, whereas it surpassed 60 million
by the time of the Roman Empire.88 Genetic data reinforce this view. A
recent analysis of human mtDNA has revealed strong evidence for
distinct recent demographic expansions, with timings corresponding
neatly to the origins of agriculture derived from archaeological
evidence.89 With the industrial revolution, like the agricultural
revolution, life expectancy again increased dramatically, which
reinforces the conclusion that population growth is genuinely linked to
societal development.90 Labor-saving farm machinery allowed the bulk of
the workforce to be employed elsewhere and produce other goods,
including other labor-saving devices, medical innovations, and
improvements in sanitation and living conditions. The genetic data
demonstrate how advances in technology and their spread can increase
human reproductive success.91
Agriculture led to more births than other forms of subsistence did,
primarily because it was accompanied by a settled, stationary existence;
this removed the major constraint on the birth rate, which had been the
need to constantly be on the move.92 No longer forced to impose severe
birth spacing, birth rates increased, slowly at first and then more rapidly.
As populations grew, the earliest cities appeared around 6,000 years
ago.93 The agricultural niches of many of these farming societies

expanded, evolving into larger and more complex social systems
characterized by urban centers and class inequalities. The relentless
spread of agriculture into new territories occurred through a
combination of population expansion and the diffusion of agricultural
innovations.94 As technology became more sophisticated, farming
became a plausible form of subsistence in regions that hitherto had
proven unproductive. The agricultural niche grew inexorably, extending
beyond its original zones through mechanisms such as conquest and
trade. Indeed, with this demographic expansion the very idea of leading
an agricultural existence spread through a process of selection acting on
cultural groups, in which agricultural centers swelled to the point where
they gave rise to daughter communities that embraced the same way of
life.95
In addition, from its inception, agriculture triggered a raft of further
innovations that dramatically changed human society. This is the second
major factor that explains the remarkable success of agricultural
societies. Some inventions are so momentous that they spawn an array
of secondary products or behaviors, with each new invention quickening
the pace of cultural evolution. Such discoveries are sometimes described
as “key innovations,”96 and agriculture certainly falls into this bracket.
Agriculture created a world in which spades, sickles, ploughs, draught
animals, harnesses, looms, storage containers, irrigation methods,
building materials, and countless other innovations became of value.
Agriculture also had a tremendous impact on social structure, creating
circumstances in which an organized workforce, division of labor, major
wealth differentials, and a much more stratified society flourished.97
Farming and urban living created new niches for a curious assortment of
other creatures, including cats, dogs, rats, mice, houseflies, pigeons,
bedbugs, rhododendrons, weeds, and microbes, with feedbacks that
shaped the cultural practices that followed.
With division of labor came enormous gains in efficiency and
productivity. In the Wealth of Nations, economist Adam Smith used the
example of a pin to illustrate this point: “One man draws the wire,
another straightens it, a third cuts it, a fourth points it.”98 As many as
seventeen people might work on a single pin, with a collective output of
4,800 pins per day. Without the division of labor, each worker would
produce less than twenty pins. (The industrial revolution increased

productivity further. The earliest pin-making machines made 72,000
pins per day.99)
Agriculture is regarded as a key innovation because it generated so
many opportunities for the creation and spread of further inventions.
The plough is a case in point.100 When agriculture was first developed in
rich zones such as the Nile Delta and Fertile Crescent, simple handheld
digging sticks were used to create holes in which to plant seeds. Known
historically as “the cradle of civilization,” the Fertile Crescent is
regarded as the (first) birthplace of agriculture, as well as of
urbanization, writing, and organized religion. The name derives from the
fertility of the land in the vicinity of the Nile, Euphrates, and Tigris
rivers, whose annual flood waters regularly rejuvenated the soil and
promoted vigorous plant growth—excellent conditions for cultivating
crops. That agriculture was first developed in fertile regions that were
rich in natural biodiversity comes as no surprise, because the regular
flooding meant the land could be farmed without turning it over.101 The
earliest farmers scratched at the earth with a hoe to form a tilth in which
seeds were sown. This traditional tillage method is still practiced in
some tropical or subtropical regions today. However, as soon as a
society’s struggle for survival became closely linked to the success of
farmed crops, the need to cultivate the land necessary to sustain a
burgeoning community generated a demand for greater farming
efficiency. The more the soil was tilled, the better the germination of the
seeds and higher the crop quality. In the struggle to become more
efficient, handheld hoes eventually evolved into simple ploughs.
The domestication of cattle in Mesopotamia and the Indus valley
civilizations, perhaps as early as 6000 BCE, provided humanity with the
draft power necessary to develop the larger, animal-drawn scratch
ploughs. This invention was used by the Egyptians over 4,000 years ago,
as can be seen in the many paintings, ceramics, and stone carvings in
which primitive ploughs are pulled by oxen (figure 9). Animals enabled
the land to be tilled more easily and faster, and allowed greater amounts
of food to be produced. In ancient Egypt, the fields were ploughed and
sown with food crops, as well as with flax for linen, and other products.
The Egyptians made considerable advances in the plough’s design,
including innovations that stabilized the blade, and lifted and turned the
soil. These advances, combined with the invention of complex irrigation

systems, meant that the Egyptians could grow many crop varieties in an
arid climate.102 The Greeks developed Egyptian ploughs further, by
fitting them with wheels, which provided far greater control and
maneuverability, and with iron cutting blades.103 Evidence of wheeled
vehicles appears from around 5,500 years ago, virtually at the same time
in Mesopotamia, Russia, and Central Europe, so the question of which
culture originally invented the wheel is still unresolved.104 The ancient
Greeks were almost certainly not the source of this innovation, but
rather adopted the wheel from elsewhere, as they did the plough. The
Greeks nonetheless showed considerable ingenuity in integrating wheel
and plough into a powerful new combination.
FIGURE 9. Agriculture in ancient Egypt. This painting by Charles Wilkinson, held in the
Metropolitan Museum, New York City, is a 1922 modern reproduction of a tomb painting dated
to 1299–1213 BCE.
Terracing and irrigation are also major consequences of agriculture.
High up in the Peruvian Andes, 2,500 meters above sea level, sits the
spectacular city of Machu Picchu. Built by the Incas at the height of their

powers, Machu Picchu was abandoned and virtually forgotten at the
time of the Spanish conquest until it was famously rediscovered in 1911
by Hiram Bingham, an archaeologist from Yale University. What makes
Machu Picchu such a dramatic setting is not just its altitude, but the
incredible, extensive mass of terraces that surround it, cut like giant
steps into the mountainside. Inca terracing covers huge distances, and
still shapes the Andean landscape today. Like any city, Machu Picchu
required a strong agricultural foundation, but suitable land for growing
crops is not easy to find on a mountain. Terraces were the ingenious
solution the Incas adopted. The terraces allowed them to drain and
siphon rainwater, and stabilize the soil, thereby allowing maize and
potatoes to be cultivated. Each terrace was multilayered, with topsoil
above the subsoil, sand, and finally stone chip layers (figure 10). The
Incas could then retain rainfall to water their crops rather than losing it
as runoff, while sophisticated channeling systems, complete with canals
and aqueducts, provided irrigation for the artificial fields.
FIGURE 10. Peruvian terraces spread over vast distances, and are thought to be thousands of

years old. They were the solution that the Incas and populations that preceded them adopted in
response to the challenge of growing crops on steep mountainsides. By permission of Ros Odling-
Smee.
The Incas, like the Egyptians and all of the world’s major, large-scale,
and complex societies were critically dependent on irrigation technology
that took water from natural sources and diverted it via artificial
channels to the crops. These irrigation systems required a huge
investment of resources and labor. Early cities were built on this
technology. In Mesopotamia, for instance, there was such low rainfall
that growing crops was only possible with water drawn from the Tigris
and Euphrates. The earliest city-states of Mesopotamia lay in the lowest,
most water-rich areas, and each city-state devised its own irrigation
systems. In fact, the cities were essentially local irrigation schemes
around which administrative, marketing, and defensive centers rose.105
The hot and dry Mediterranean regions were the same, where irrigation
was indispensable to the ancient Greeks and Romans.106
The central buildings of Machu Picchu are all built from blocks of
stone, fit together without mortar, but nonetheless cut with such
precision that they made remarkably stable drystone walls.107 Machu
Picchu’s 200 buildings are arranged around a huge central square, with
numerous stone stairways set in the walls for access to the different
levels.108 The buildings include granaries and warehouses, army
barracks, and living quarters. Roads and bridges extend from this center,
along which goods and materials were transported, as well as orders
dispatched from a central authority known as the supreme Inca. Ancient
numerical records were produced through an intricate series of knots on
strings called quipus; their subject matter was a numerical record of the
harvests.109
The Incas worshipped the sun, and the fact that the sun god, called
Inti, was also the god of agriculture clearly indicates the importance of
agriculture to their society. People were well aware that sunshine was
necessary for the production of crops like potatoes, maize, and other
grains.110 The same vital importance of agriculture was also apparent to
the ancient Egyptians, and led them to make many offerings to
Renenutet, the god of the harvest and nourishment. According to
hieroglyphic writings on the walls of the pyramids, Renenutet was the

goddess of plenty, and good fortune. She was depicted as a woman with
the head of a cobra. Snakes were often seen in the fields around harvest
time, hunting the rodents that threatened the crops. Renenutet was
thought to protect the harvest, and hence was given the epithets of
“Lady of Fertile Fields” and “Lady of Granaries.”111 Much the same is
found in Mesopotamia, where Ashnan, the goddess of grain, and her
brother Lahar, the Sumerian goddess of cattle, were thought to provide
people with food.112
In Ancient Greece, Demeter was one of the twelve Olympians, or
major deities, and was the goddess of the harvest who presided over
grains and was responsible for the fertility of the earth.113 According to
Greek legend, Demeter’s greatest gift to humankind was agriculture. The
Romans recognized over 30 Roman agricultural deities, included
Vervactor (“He who ploughs”), Subruncinator (“He who weeds”), and
Messor (“He who reaps”). The most important was Ceres, the Roman
counterpart of Demeter, who was ranked among the Dii Consentes,
Rome’s equivalent to the Twelve Olympians.114 Ceres was credited with
the discovery of wheat; the invention of ploughing; the yoking of oxen;
and the sowing, protection, and nourishing of seeds. Like Demeter, Ceres
is thought to have gifted agriculture to humankind. Before this, it was
said, humans had subsisted on acorns, and wandered without settlement
or laws.115 In all these populations, countless rituals, ceremonies, dances,
music, and theatrical performances grew in efforts to please the gods
who were thought to hold peoples’ lives in the balance.116
With agriculture, then, came so much more. Terraces, aqueducts,
bricks, complex buildings, road networks, bridges, stairs, warehouses,
food stores, armies, record keeping, hierarchical social structures, cities,
heads of states, and even gods all followed once the agricultural Rubicon
was crossed. From one innovation sprang countless others—each, in
turn, the source of further creativity. This is the nature of cultural
evolution. With every new invention the diversity of cultural life ratchets
up, and the opportunities for cross-pollination of ideas grow
geometrically. Innovations not only spawn better, faster, and cheaper
variants, but generate a cascade of new possibilities that deliver entirely
new kinds of functionality.117
Agriculture was not the only key innovation. The wheel, which the
Greeks fused with ploughs, was originally devised for pulling heavy

loads on a sledge-like structure. From this simple beginning, it was
converted into a potter’s wheel (in Mesopotamia), a cart (also in
Mesopotamia), a chariot (in Greece), an instrument for grinding wheat
(harnessing animal, wind, and water power, in diverse regions), a pulley
mechanism to draw water (in Sumer and Assyria), a spinning wheel (in
Asia), and innumerable other uses.118 Today, it is extremely difficult to
imagine how virtually any mechanized instrument would have been
possible without the seemingly simple invention of an object moving
around an axis. Such technology ranges from gears, to bicycles, cars, jet
engines, and computer drives.
The Greek chariots were pulled by horses, but they did not develop
horse domestication; that was first accomplished by the Scythians from
Central Asia. It is said that when the Greeks first saw the Scythians on
horseback they believed the horse and rider were a single animal.
Allegedly, that is how the legend of the centaur arose.119 Some of the
earliest evidence of horse domestication comes from the Botai people of
northern Kazakhstan, a community of foragers who adopted horseback
riding to hunt wild horses, around 3500–3000 BCE.120 Horseback riding
transformed warfare by allowing mobile hordes to sweep into battle at
great speed, to which numerous armies from the masses of Attila the
Hun to Genghis Khan attest.121 However, horses have also been used as
working animals on farms, and in factories and mines, as well as for
food. The ancient Greeks and Romans may be renowned for their
chariots, but they adopted this invention from other societies. The
critical innovation that allowed the construction of the light, horse-
drawn chariots for which the Greeks and Romans are famed was the
spoked wheel, which dates to around 2000 BCE in western Siberia.122
Chariots were initially devised for warfare, but long after they had been
superseded in this role, they were used for travel, hunting, games, races,
and in processions.
In this richly interwoven manner, cultural evolution proceeds. Novel
discoveries are copied, replicating first within the society, and later
adopted by other communities through diffusion, conquest, or trade.
These innovations are then adapted to other purposes, frequently by
uniting the idea with pre-existing elements into powerful new
complexes. So the great inventions of the ages in manufacturing,
engineering, architecture, the sciences, and the arts express an intricate

history of human endeavor, forged in constant debt to innovation and
social transmission.
Agriculture precipitated a transformation in society because it not
only led to directly related technologies such as spades, sickles, and
ploughs, but to the idea of domesticating animals, the wheel, new means
of transporting both people and goods, and to city-states; surely no early
farmer could ever have imagined such profound ramifications in their
wildest dreams. The same goes for the wheel, the arch, money, writing,
the printing press, the internal combustion engine, the computer, and
the internet. Each successful innovation propagates through repeated
bouts of social learning and refinement, giving rise to a barrage of new
ideas and devices in a never-ending hotchpotch of diversification and
adaptation where the pace of cultural change ceaselessly accelerates.123
In the process, cultural elements can accumulate a stunning complexity
of subcomponents, which operate in exquisite coherence and synchrony,
as well as a mind-blowing diversity.
Prior to the advent of agriculture, each population would have
possessed at most a few hundred types of artifacts, while today the
inhabitants of New York are able to choose between 100 billion bar-
coded items.124 Now innovation is in the hands of the professionals. New
businesses have arisen that are entirely dedicated to devising and
promoting a relentless stream of new products. Innovation is the
preserve of smart, suited professionals in industry and state-sponsored
research and development laboratories, while every major university is
surrounded by a burgeoning science park desperate to translate scientific
and engineering insights into patents, or new spin-off companies.
Invention in other animals may be driven, in part, by necessity, but
human innovation relates far more to wants than needs.125 Modern
medicine clearly has improved survival rates and quality of life—yet in
spite of that, comparatively few technological innovations affect our
biological fitness. Now we live in a world in which “fitness” has been
superseded by “virality” and what is trending on Facebook,126 where
advertising companies devote vast amounts of money to convince
consumers that the latest new gadget is critical to their identity or social
standing.
Not all inventions prove a success, of course. For every innovation
that triumphs there are multiple failures, ranging from the spectacular to

the comical. We have all witnessed such cases. New Coke, for instance,
was a huge commercial flop, and older readers may remember Sony’s
Betamax, the also-ran to VHS in videocassettes. The latter illustrates how
innovations can fail for reasons other than being a bad product. Betamax
was simply outcompeted in a conformist market in which the dominant
product would inevitably win. More recently, HD DVDs (digital optical
discs for storing data and playing back video) went the same way in
losing out to Blu-ray. Another spectacular disaster was the Sinclair C5,
the first commercially available electric car that was subject to a glitzy
launch in 1985 by a UK computer manufacturer. The vehicle’s
limitations (a short range, a maximum speed of only 15 miles per hour, a
battery that ran down quickly, and being open to the elements),
combined with some serious safety concerns, left the product
devastatingly unpopular and the company went into receivership. Even
more disastrous cases include asbestos, DDT, and thalidomide, which
were initially commercial successes, but hidden negative ramifications
emerged years later with tragic consequences.
In some instances, how anyone might have conceived that a
particular invention could ever have been a success is hard to image.
What possible market could there have been for the musical
flamethrower, or the cheese-flavored cigarette?127 In the nineteenth
century a bicycle manufacturer produced a one-pedaled bicycle,
designed to allow Victorian women to ride side-saddle; needless to say, it
was not a commercial success.128 More recent and slightly comical
disasters include cutlericks, an extremely bizarre integration of cutlery
and chop sticks, and phone fingers, a latex “glove” for your index finger,
to ensure that your smart phone doesn’t get covered in fingerprints.129
Such cases bring home how nothing is inevitable about the adoption
of an invention, even for a good product. All new ideas and devices must
battle it out in a tough market, in which success depends not just on the
product’s merits, but also its appeal, the learning strategies involved, the
nature of the competition, the level of exposure, the extent of promotion,
the size of the target population, and multiple other factors, including a
major dose of chance. Often, the potential of a new invention is not
immediately appreciated. In 1943, Thomas Watson, chairman of IBM, is
reputed to have claimed, “I think there is a world market for maybe five
computers.”130 However, stochastically and over time, the qualities of

beneficial variants will give them a statistical edge that, while not
guaranteeing success, stacks the deck in their favor. As for biological
evolution, where cultural variation, differential “fitness” (i.e., different
propensities to spread), and inheritance exist, cultural evolution will
ensue, and cultures will adapt, diversify, and accumulate complexities.
Agriculture also changed the face of human adaptation in another
manner, which resulted from its demographic impact. As we have seen,
agriculture caused population growth, and those greater numbers
strongly affected the pace of cultural evolution. Evolutionary biology
teaches us that in small populations, chance factors dominate and the
dynamics of evolving populations are dictated by drift, but as
populations get larger, natural selection starts to become more important
and advantageous mutations become more likely to propagate.131 The
same has been proven for cultural evolution, where again selective
processes become increasingly important as population sizes increase.132
This means in the larger societies that rich agricultural yields supported,
beneficial innovations would be more likely to spread and to be
retained.133
Cultures can be thought of as comprising a collective memory that
provides a knowledge-base for the community.134 The efficiency of these
informational repositories depend on the size and structure of the
populations, which means that demographic processes can both help and
hinder the buildup and retention of cultural memory.135 Formal theory
suggests that below certain population density thresholds not only is it
difficult for new innovations to accumulate, but adaptive cultural
knowledge may actually be lost.136 Why this should be is easily
understood. If you have a good idea that is not shared through social
learning, then it dies with you; while conversely, if enough people are
around for others to take your idea onboard, the idea may well outlive
you. Experiments have demonstrated that groups of individuals are
better able to solve complex problems than individuals alone, and that
the larger and better connected the population, the more complex the
innovations that can be devised.137 Most truly tough challenges are not
solved by a single genius, but by groups of individuals working
together.138 Larger or denser populations not only generate more
innovations, and more complex innovations, but are capable of
preserving them for longer, leading to bigger cultural repertoires.139 This

relationship 
between 
cultural 
repertoire 
and 
group 
size 
was
demonstrated through a theoretical analysis by Harvard University
anthropologist, Joseph Henrich, using the example of Tasmanian
culture.140 The separation of Tasmania from mainland Australia, due to
rising sea levels around 10,000 years ago, provides one of the most
famous examples of the loss of cultural memory. When no longer in
contact with Aboriginal populations on the mainland, the small
Tasmania community simply forgot numerous skills and technologies,
including how to manufacture cold-weather clothing, fishing nets, spear-
throwers, and boomerangs.141 More generally, anthropologists and
archaeologists have found a positive relationship between the size of the
population and the diversity of their tool kits (i.e., their technology). For
instance, among Oceanic populations at the time of early European
contact, larger populations had broader tool kits.142
One negative ramification of a long history of selection for high-
fidelity copying mechanisms is that humans sometimes retain
inappropriate or outdated knowledge.143 A famous example is the Norse
attempt to colonize Greenland, beginning around 1000 AD. The
Greenland colony ultimately failed because the colonists persisted in
trying to raise cattle for food, a socially transmitted norm that had been
adaptive in their Scandinavian homeland, but which was extremely
ineffective in the harsher environment of Greenland. The colony failed to
shed reliance on their old cultural knowledge, and the Norse starved.
Such examples are, however, more the exception than the rule. By and
large, cultural knowledge is broadly adaptive.144 One reason why human
global population growth is unerring is that our populations die out with
far less frequency than do those of most other species. We survive, in
challenging circumstances, precisely because our culture typically
confers an adaptive plasticity, rather than inflexibility.145 That plasticity
draws on a huge cultural knowledge base, which retains good ideas and
effective solutions to past problems over long periods of time, including
those that arise infrequently.
Language plays a central role in helping human societies to share and
retain knowledge, and many traditional societies possess oral traditions
and rituals that preserved historical information with remarkably
veracity. A compelling illustration of the potency of verbal tradition is
provided by an account of the history of the Maori.146 This people’s oral

history depicts the tale of their arrival in New Zealand after traveling
from their homeland Hawaiki in large, ocean-going canoes called waka.
According to legend, the first inhabitants to come to the Bay of Plenty
arrived in AD 1290, when Takitimu travelled across the ocean and
landed his canoes at Mount Manganui on the North Island. Consistent
with this account, archaeologists have dated the original Maori settlers
to this region at some time between AD 1250 and 1300. More than 400
years passed before the community was encountered by the English
explorer, Captain James Cook. In 1769, Cook sailed around New Zealand
and stopped at the Bay of Plenty to try to communicate with the locals.
The written account of his voyage describes how a Polynesian member
of the crew called Tupia was able to communicate perfectly well with
the Maori, despite the fact that he had lived his entire life on Tahiti, an
island some 2500 miles northeast of New Zealand.147 Back in Tahiti,
Tupia had been a priest and was therefore steeped in the oral tradition
of his community. Cook’s crew described him as a polished orator who
could recite the history of his people without error or omission, a feat
that took several weeks; he could also name his ancestors for the last
100 generations.148
The account of Cook’s voyage notes a remarkable similarity between
the Maori language and that of Tahitians in French Polynesia, and lists
large numbers of identical words. The report also notes extraordinary
parallels in their oral histories—for instance, both claimed to originate
from the same homeland to the northwest. Evidence from archaeology,
linguistics, and physical anthropology supports these accounts perfectly,
and indicates that the first settlers in New Zealand came from east
Polynesia and became the Maori. Language evolution studies and
mitochondrial DNA evidence suggest that most Pacific populations
originated from Taiwanese aborigines around 5,200 years ago, and
moved down through Southeast Asia and Indonesia;149 that is, they
traveled from a land to the northwest, exactly as the shared elements of
both traditions specified.
Such examples are impressive, but spoken tradition also has limited
fidelity and stability, even with ingenious inventions such as the
aboriginal use of song to maintain and transmit geographic knowledge.
However, the human knowledge base has been further enhanced by the
creation, again largely through cultural means, of systems of memory

that are external to our brains, such as written records, architecture,
painting, or the Incan quipus. This external storage, which includes all
aspects of material culture, has been crucial in the explosion of
cumulative culture in the last 10,000 years, because it massively
increases the pool of knowledge available to a population and
encompasses the recorded memories of individuals that lived in the
past.150 Even for those other species that possess some rudiments of
cultural transmission, animal memory relies largely on information
residing in brains, and there are concrete limits to both the amount and
duration of information any living population can carry in that manner.
Externalized and persistent social information appears to be a very rare
thing in nonhumans. Some ants leave pheromone trails to food sources,
for instance, but these trails are highly ephemeral and hardly ever
persist longer than 24 hours.151 In contrast, modern human societies are
hugely reliant on a collective, externalized, and persistent memory that
now encompasses books, records, libraries, computer databanks, and the
World Wide Web. These resources are a characteristic of entire societies,
or even global knowledge, rather than any one individual.152 The biggest
library in the world is the British Library in London, which holds about
170 million books. A typical book contains around a megabyte of
information, which would imply that the world’s biggest library contains
approximately 170 terabytes (170,000 gigabytes) of information. One
recent estimate of the amount of information now stored on the internet
is 1,200,000 terabytes.153 Externalized cultural memory stores far
outstrip the capability of any one individual’s memory to contain
information, or even any population’s collective knowledge, by several
orders of magnitude. Knowledge is becoming more difficult to lose, and
cultural evolution has ratcheted again, from a process encompassing
knowledge gains and losses, to a process greatly biased toward gains.
Our major problem now is that we are so swamped with information
that we cannot effectively filter it to locate what is immediately relevant.
With agriculture, then, came not just an upsurge in innovation, but a
population explosion and an information overload. To get off the
ground, agriculture required a favorable climate and soil, and a location
rich in biodiversity that included plants and animals suitable for
domestication. However, agriculture is not something that just happened
to people when a suitable climate transpired. More than anything,

agriculture required populations to draw on their guile and ingenuity
and seize the opportunity by actively creating the circumstances that
rendered it economical.154 While innumerable positive consequences
followed, the agricultural revolution has nonetheless proven a double-
edged sword. Return to the Fertile Crescent today, and you will find that
many of the famously rich plant resources of the region are being eroded
through degradation of natural habitats, intensification of the cultivation
of arable lands, expansion of cultivation into marginal areas, and
overexploitation of natural pastures and grazing lands.155 Now a grave
and ever-growing danger is that the same inherent biodiversity that
originally rendered this region the birthplace of agriculture, will
continue to be destroyed by its relentlessly unfurling spawn. The same
story is written the world over. Unless a credible approach to the
management of ecosystems that is based on sustainable agriculture and
development can be implemented on a global scale, no zones rich in
biodiversity will be left on our planet.
Humans trail in their evolutionary wake a disconcertingly long
history of biodiversity destruction.156 In the period between 50 thousand
and 10 thousand years ago, at least 101 out of 150 genera of Earth’s
megafauna (including woolly mammoths, giant sloths, and saber-toothed
cats) went extinct, and archaeologists are increasingly confident that
humans played important roles in these events.157 By 12 thousand years
ago our species had dispersed from Africa to the far corners of Eurasia,
Australia, and the Americas, and the concomitant increase in global
human populations is clearly associated with species extinctions and
habitat modification.158 Early colonists of New Guinea, Borneo,
Australia, and the Americas burned and disturbed the pre-existing forests
to promote the growth of useful plants and enhance hunting
opportunities. The inexorable spread of agriculture from a small number
of centers of early domestication to encompass large swaths of the planet
had unprecedented impacts on species distributions, including the
relentless promotion of domesticated crops and animals, commensals,
weeds, and microbes carried by humans. When Polynesian people
expanded across the Pacific, for instance, they carried with them taro,
yams, banana, pigs, chickens, dogs, and numerous unintentionally
transported species, including rats; thousands of endemic species are
now known to have gone extinct in the face of this invasion, including

two-thirds of nonpasserine birds.159 Far from being a product of
postindustrial societies, the Anthropocene began some tens of thousands
of years ago, and was gradually ramped up through increasingly
intensive cultural niche construction until virtually no “pristine” natural
environments now remain.
Agriculture produced a food bonanza for many, and the global
industrialization of food production has resulted in unprecedented
diversity of diet in many postindustrial societies. However, now an
abundance of inexpensive, high-density and high-caloric foods laden
with sugar and fats is made easily available to many of us through
means (such as driving to the supermarket) that require little
expenditure of energy. The result is increasing levels of obesity, and a
surge in heart disease, diabetes, high blood pressure, and cancer.
Agriculture gave rise to complex society, but with that shift arose
vast inequalities. Today, the 80 richest people on the planet have a
combined wealth comparable to the poorest 50% of the world’s
population.160 Billionaires’ businesses employ a great deal of people,
giving rise to some higher household incomes. However, any trickle-
down effect of this wealth is insufficient to prevent the lack of basic
services in many of the poorest countries, and on a global scale the gap
between rich and poor continues to widen.161
Complex societies first began to appear when humans accrued
sufficient socially transmitted acumen to increase the productivity of the
land and lead a settled, rather than nomadic, existence. A uniquely
potent innovativeness and enhanced capability for high-fidelity social
learning has allowed our species to devise means of exploiting our
environments with extraordinary efficiency. We have increased carrying
capacities by orders of magnitude and our numbers have soared.
Through our cultural niche construction, we have transformed and
regulated the circumstances of our lives to a degree unprecedented in
the natural world, and that transformation accelerated in the aftermath
of those early experiments in plant domestication. Agriculture is where
the modern era began; it was the first key innovation in an ever-
multiplying cascade of novel products and ideas that in developed
countries led inexorably to today’s “innovation society.” However, the
ideology of this society is that innovations solve problems, but that is
only half of the story. Innovations construct new niches, just as

organisms do, and every “solution” has the potential to generate many
new “problems.”162 When our ancestors first devised agriculture, they
opened up a Pandora’s box, and let lose the evil of the Anthropocene.

CHAPTER 11
FOUNDATIONS OF COOPERATION
You take a flight from New York to London. Thousands and perhaps
millions of people, including the pilot and flight attendants, air traffic
controllers, airport workers, baggage handlers, travel agents, and bank
workers cooperated to get you there. No one stole your luggage, no one
ate your in-flight food, and no one tried to sit in your seat. In fact, the
hundreds of people on the airplane, despite being mainly strangers,
behaved in an entirely civilized and respectful manner throughout.
Cooperation that comprises so many unrelated individuals performing
such diverse roles in such a coordinated manner is unprecedented in the
natural world.
The previous chapter discussed the emergence of complex human
societies, but arguably the most striking feature of early agricultural
communities was the rapid emergence of what can only have been large-
scale cooperative enterprises. Terraces cannot be carved out of the
mountain, extensive crops cannot be harvested, granaries cannot be
built, and city-states cannot function efficiently without an extraordinary
level of cooperation among community members. Hunter-gatherers also
coordinate their actions in cooperative endeavors such as group hunting
and foraging, as well as through sharing food, labor, and childcare; they
also gather together as a community when hostility or disputes with
other societies arise. How is this scale of cooperation to be explained?
Kin selection, which occurs when individuals help their relatives,
could certainly account for some aspects of the cooperation witnessed in
human societies, but it would not account for larger-scale projects
among unrelated or distantly related individuals. Our hominin ancestors
are thought to have aggregated into small bands that were often kin
based. However, modern hunter-gatherer societies are known to have
many interactions with nonrelatives, even in societies numbering only a
few hundred individuals.1 Such cooperative activities are regulated by

systems of norms and institutions. In agricultural societies also,
cooperative arrangements have to be negotiated and maintained among
thousands of often unrelated individuals.
Coercion certainly occurred in some instances, as when powerful
leaders and groups forced the weak to do their hard labor. By 4000 BCE,
the Sumerians were building cities of over 10,000 people, using slave
labor captured from the hill country,2 while the Old Testament book of
Exodus reports, “the Egyptians enslaved the children of Israel with
backbreaking labor.” However, this cannot be the whole story. In order
to get slaves, societies would need to engage in impressive acts of group
cooperation by, for instance, putting together a functioning army that
operated in an organized fashion. Moreover, historical research has
established that some of the major architectural projects of antiquity did
not get built by force. The pyramids, for instance, are now thought to
have been assembled by paid laborers.3 The builders came from poor
families from the north and south of Egypt and were respected for their
work—indeed, those who died during construction were bestowed the
honor of being buried in the tombs near the sacred pyramids of their
pharaohs. Ancient societies, just like today’s modern ones and including
contemporary hunter-gatherers, were built upon massive levels of
cooperation in which most individuals participated entirely voluntarily.
How 
was 
this 
possible? 
Conventional 
gene-based 
evolutionary
explanations alone cannot account for all aspects of human cooperation.4
The answer is multifaceted, and draws on some surprising and rarely
appreciated connections between cooperation and social learning.
One important step in getting large-scale cooperation off the ground
was the evolution of widespread teaching. Few people think of teaching
as an act of cooperation but, in fact, that is precisely what it is.
Cooperation is defined as behavior that provides a benefit to another
individual (the “recipient”) and that was favored by natural selection
because of this positive effect.5 In the case of teaching, the “benefit”
provided is “useful knowledge.” Theoretical work described in chapter 7
suggested that a generalized form of teaching coevolved in humans with
our cumulative culture. The analysis strongly suggested that teaching is
widespread in humans because cumulative cultural knowledge builds up
over time, leaving otherwise difficult-to-learn, but highly advantageous
information (such as how to make a functional stone tool, or gather

honey) available in the population for tutors to impart to their pupils.6
The claim is frequently made that human cooperation is unique,7 but in
what respects, and whether this claim is justified at all remains
contested.8 Our analysis of the evolution of teaching provided one
possible answer to this conundrum. Clearly, “complex and unique
mechanisms to enforce cooperation have arisen in humans, such as
contracts, laws, justice, trade and social norms,”9 and all of these
mechanisms require teaching in order to operate. Much human
cooperation apparently also requires a capacity for language, but as we
saw in chapter 8, there are good reasons for thinking the origin of
language is tied with teaching and cumulative culture. Language may
initially have evolved to enhance the efficiency and accuracy of teaching
and, even if it originated for some other reason, it could certainly have
been applied in this context. Human cooperation may, therefore, be
unusually extensive as a result of cumulative culture and may be
uniquely reliant on important mechanisms that are either rare or entirely
absent in other species—specifically, teaching and language.10
Two of the more intuitive findings to emerge from our investigation
of the evolution of teaching were that the likelihood of teaching
increases with the degree of relatedness between tutor and pupil, and
decreases with the costs of teaching.11 Empirical data from human
populations support these conclusions.12 Accordingly, we can envisage
the kind of widespread, generalized teaching observed in humans to
have initially appeared among close relatives; for instance, parents
teaching foraging skills to offspring, or siblings helping each other learn
toolmaking. Yet, without some rudimentary form of language, the
teaching of more distant relatives would rarely have been economical,
because 
the 
inclusive 
fitness 
benefits 
would 
be 
modest. 
By
simultaneously reducing the costs and incrementing the accuracy of
teaching, the advent of language would have allowed instruction to
spread to more distantly related individuals, including small groups of
kin such as hominin hunter-gatherer bands. This teaching may have
sufficed to allow individuals in small groups to teach each other specific
roles in coordinated tasks, such as hunting antelope or driving off
predators, thereby broadening the scale of kin-based cooperation.
As documented earlier in this book, many animals that are proficient
at social learning (primates or cetaceans) exhibit behavioral traditions,

which are effectively society-specific conventions for, say, singing the
local song or hunting prey. Our hominin ancestors also will have had
group-specific habits maintained as social conventions. Some traditional
behaviors could be picked up through observational learning, while
other, more challenging habits would have spread through teaching
among relatives. Most animal teaching merely creates enhanced
opportunities for learning in the pupil,13 as when meerkats provide pups
with disabled scorpions.14 However, in rare cases, animals show hints of
“coaching,” in which the response of the tutor functions to encourage or
discourage the pupil’s behavior;15 an example is the maternal display of
a mother hen who pecks and scratches the ground intensively to distract
her chicks from unpalatable food.16 Such error correction is, of course, a
feature of contemporary human teaching. It follows that at some
juncture in our history, our ancestors began systematically to correct the
behavior of the individuals they taught; in the process, they shifted their
society away from reliance on mere conventions and toward governance
through norms.17 People stopped illustrating a way to behave and began
insisting on the way to behave. Eventually, each society was
characterized by a particular set of norms that dictated how individuals
should behave (e.g., how they should build a fire, how they should catch
a turtle, how they should till the soil), each of which was propagated
through verbal instruction. Norms specify rules of social interaction too,
including specification of how people should respond to norm
violation.18 With the advent of norms, hominin social life effectively
became transformed from simply living in groups to identifying with the
group, abiding by its rules, and privileging in-group members.19 Norms
facilitated group coordination and thereby substantially enhanced the
society’s capacity for cooperative endeavor. In order to resolve conflicts
or prevent social problems from arising in the future, institutionalizing
the norm explicitly as a “rule of law” that all members of the society
must abide by, and agreeing on sanctions for violators, would sometimes
have been necessary.20
From that point onward, our ancestors lived in a society structured
by cooperatively created and enforced conventions and norms for how to
behave, many of which evolved into rule-governed social institutions.21
These norms are far from obvious, and young members of a community
must typically be taught both the nature of the norms and the need to

conform to them. This much is clear in contemporary human
populations where, say, how a check or bank transfer works; when, how,
and why citizens should pay their taxes; or the rules of driving, are not
transparent. All human societies possess such norms and laws, which
children generally learn well, largely because adults actively instruct
them, or else devise organized learning environments for that purpose.22
Human cooperation extends far beyond individuals helping their kin or
responding reciprocally to those that help them. The scale of human
cooperation is unprecedented in large part because it is uniquely built
upon socially learned and transmitted norms. These do not just specify
how to behave but also set guidelines for rewarding good behavior and
punishing the bad, as brought to prominence by the experimental work
of leading economist Ernst Fehr.23
Human social life is far more cooperatively structured than that of
any other primate,24 partly as a consequence of our norms. Large-scale
cooperation commonly requires coordinating the actions of many
individuals. Such organized action among pairs and groups of
contemporary humans typically involves shared intentionality and goals;
and joint attention, perspective-taking, and commitment.25 Here again,
teaching is relevant. Teaching another individual how to prepare food,
build a fire, or make a tool requires both joint attention and joint
commitment, as well as shared intentions and goals. Effective teaching
would also benefit from the tutor taking the perspective of the pupil. The
cognitive abilities necessary for coordinating action may initially have
evolved through teaching, and subsequently might have been applied to
facilitate diverse, large-scale cooperative enterprises. In this manner,
language, teaching and conformity have become central to human
behavior, in a way that they have not for other animals.
Research into the evolution of cooperation has generated a huge
literature focused on the problem of how cooperative societies prevent
individuals from cheating. However, it largely neglects a second and
equally challenging problem related to coordination: How do you induce
individuals to work together to generate a profitable output?26 Complex
coordinated action among multiple individuals is very difficult without
social learning, language, and teaching.27 Cooperative foraging, hunting,
and defense is seen in other animals (lions hunting, for instance, or the
circular defensive maneuvers of musk oxen against wolves), but in such

societies individuals rarely take up a variety of distinct and coherently
integrated roles. That would require some means of coordinating the
behavior of the collective, and such mechanisms are generally not
present. However, through our language, teaching, and the inadvertent
construction of learning environments for others, humans can solve the
coordination problem; they can assign distinct roles to individuals, and
ensure each is trained.28 Indeed, experimental studies have demonstrated
that language is an important mechanism through which humans resolve
coordination tasks.29
Training through apprenticeships may also have played vital roles in
organizing group coordination.30 In early agricultural societies, the
pressure to generate sufficient food to feed the mushrooming population
demanded division of labor and occupational specializations. For society
to function efficiently, relevant skills and expertise would need to be
passed among unrelated individuals, but these skills would frequently be
far too complex to pick up simply through imitation. They require the
cooperation of the would-be tutor to instruct the pupil. Much complex
human knowledge associated with manufacturing tools or goods, for
instance, or the extensive knowledge associated with a particular
profession can only reliably be passed on through a long period of
apprenticeship. This requires the establishment of a longstanding
cooperative relationship between a tutor and a pupil.31 Here, large-scale
cooperation took another step forward, as experts in a variety of trades
appeared. Unlike their predecessors, who benefited from teaching only
indirectly through helping their relatives, these experts began tutoring
unrelated individuals in exchange for the direct advantages of resources
such as food, clothing, or protection. Various classes of professional
teachers emerged; most commonly, priests taught children of the
wealthy the skills and knowledge necessary for their future roles, but
early agricultural societies also had teachers of military combat, farming
methods, and even dance.32
There are further grounds for thinking that the uniquely human
capacity for cultural learning, teaching, and language substantially
increased the scope of cooperation in our species.33 Teaching may have
originally evolved as cooperation among close kin; but with language,
teaching could be extended to support other established cooperative
processes, such as mutualistic exchanges, indirect reciprocity, and group

selection.34
Some human cooperation, both among unrelated individuals and
between groups of individuals, can be understood as mutualism.
Chimpanzees, orangutans, macaques, and capuchins all exhibit
population-level differences in their behavioral repertoires, but,
migration and dispersal aside, there is no evidence of exchange of valued
resources between communities. However, among those hominin
ancestors capable of nascent language, such population-level diversity in
material culture would have created the opportunity for trade in
extracted and constructed resources. Mutualistic relationships, where
two organisms provide resources that help each other, are widespread in
animals. For instance, a bird called the oxpecker will commonly take a
ride on the back of rhinoceroses, zebra, or cattle, and eat the ticks and
other parasites that live on their skin.35 The arrangement is mutually
beneficial, because the birds find food and the mammals receive
effective pest control. However, the evolution of this type of exchange is
comparatively easy to comprehend, because the mammals do not want
the parasites desired by the bird; to the contrary, they want rid of them.
Equally common are cases where animals provide the same service to
each other, such as horses or baboons grooming each other. Here again,
the evolution of this behavior is no mystery, as the two services are
equivalent, and hence the trade is easy to recognize as a fair exchange.
Conversely, evolution of the kind of trade or barter commonly observed
in humans, like swapping a tool for food, is more challenging to
comprehend; here both parties value both of the commodities but, as the
items are different, the exchange currency requires negotiation. This
form of mutualism appears to be rare or absent among other animals.36
The only documented example of which I am aware is the putative trade
of meat for sex among some chimpanzees that hunt red colobus
monkeys,37 but this claim is contested.38 A reasonable conclusion would
be that the trade of distinct, desired commodities is exceedingly rare in
other animals.39 That this phenomenon may be unique to humans is not
surprising, as it seemingly requires some capacity to agree on a rate of
exchange, something that would be very difficult without at least
protolanguage (or perhaps the flexible use of shared gesture). With the
evolution of language, trade becomes a possibility; with trade comes
negotiation, and selection for still more developed communication.

Particularly in environments that vary from one location to the next,
culturally transmitted population-specific diversity among linguistically
capable hominins creates the opportunity for the mutualistic exchange of
goods.
Trade exploits a division of labor in which valuable goods or services,
available to some individuals or societies but not to others, are
exchanged—this variation in the availability of resources is what makes
the contract economical.40 The emergence of large-scale, stratified
societies, and the associated development of distinct professions, would
immediately have created extensive opportunities for trade; indeed, such
division of labor almost certainly could not have arisen without trade.
The more division of labor exists within and between societies, the more
opportunities for trade arise. Eventually, a threshold is passed whereby it
becomes convenient to facilitate such exchange with a common
currency, and the institution of money arises. As early as 9000 BCE, both
grain and cattle were used as money or as barter.41 The Hebrew shekel is
thought to have originated as a weight of barley, corresponding to about
180 grains. That such agreements might arise without language is
difficult to imagine. In this manner, norms, institutions, and laws
stabilized cooperative interactions between nonrelatives on huge
scales,42 while language helped to ensure that these rules or agreements
were specified in detail and widely known.43
I suspect that the advent of teaching through language was a game
changer for our species, because it hugely enhanced the scale and
mechanisms of cooperation.44 For instance, that individuals will tend to
help those who help them in return is well established,45 but whether
individuals will tend to help those who help others,46 and how prevalent
this phenomenon (known as “indirect reciprocity”) is in nature, remains
far more contentious. Theoretical models have demonstrated that
indirect reciprocity can lead to cooperation, and explain why it might
pay individuals to develop a reputation for this.47 However, as Martin
Nowak, the Harvard evolutionary biologist who has pioneered research
into this mechanism stated: “Language is intimately linked with
cooperation. For the mechanism of indirect reciprocity to work
efficiently it needs gossip, from names to deeds and times and places,
too.”48 In addition, verbally taught social norms allow humans to
institutionalize the punishment of noncooperative individuals—for

instance, through policing or socially sanctioned retaliation. Theory and
experimentation show institutionalized punishment is a more effective
means of preserving cooperation than individual-level retaliation.49 Such
cooperation nonetheless allows the possibility of cheating over
cooperative endeavors. At least in humans, subtle cheats can operate by
gaining control of communication networks to ensure that messages sent
maximize their returns, or those to their group. This form of cheating
might again have selected for more competent, skillful communicators.
At the dawn of language, as the repertoire of local population-specific
symbols expanded, it would become increasingly difficult to understand
the protolinguistic symbols of other societies without effort, which
further reinforces the benefits of biasing learning toward the local
population. With time, local protolinguistic variants would start to
resemble dialects, and may define and signify a community.
Interpopulation cultural diversity sets a premium on recognizing and
preferentially learning from the members of one’s own group who have
useful local knowledge, rather than from outsiders who come from other
groups. Theoretical analyses suggest that conforming to local traditions
is favored in such circumstances, with several important consequences,
including the evolution of “ethnic markers” that symbolize group
membership, increased cooperation within groups, and the potential for
greater conflict between groups.50 Languages or dialects can function
effectively as ethnic markers and promote local learning and other
parochial tendencies.51 In turn, imitation, teaching, languages, and local
conventions all act to ensure that local differences in behavior among
groups are maintained in the face of the dispersal of individuals. This
allows an unusually stable form of group selection to arise, known as
“cultural group selection,” which has shaped human history.52
Anthropologists Rob Boyd and Peter Richerson first brought to
prominence the hypothesis that group selection works at the cultural
level through the selection of cultural traits,53 such as a population’s
reliance on agriculture. Those groups that possessed more effective or
efficient traditions, norms and institutions fared better in competition
with other groups. For instance, (1) societies with an organized army are
more likely to win conflicts than those without, (2) city-states with
division of labor and occupational specializations would tend to
outcompete 
those 
without 
these 
innovations, 
(3) 
agricultural

communities that have devised irrigation systems would flourish more
readily than others, and (4) societies with religious doctrines that
stabilize within-group cooperative activities will thrive at the expense of
those with no gods to help ensure compliance. The net result is the
spread of military technology, division of labor, irrigation, religious
doctrines, and many other cooperative endeavors. By these means,
societies are able to resolve many collective action problems.54
You might be wondering why, in this instance, I envisage that natural
selection will have operated on groups of individuals, rather than the
more conventional selection of individuals. If individuals in agricultural
societies end up having more offspring than those in nonagricultural
societies, then, provided offspring tend to adopt the means of subsistence
of their parents, agriculture will increase in frequency. What is missing
from this line of reasoning is the recognition that most of the fitness
benefits associated with agriculture derive from group-level activities. A
lone farmer scratching a living solely through his own efforts, would not
typically produce any more food or raise any more offspring than a
hunter-gatherer. Only when practiced by groups of people that engage in
shared enterprises to produce resources that benefit the collective
(known as “public goods”) does agriculture start to become highly
productive. Several hundred people are typically required to construct a
decent irrigation system. A similar number are required to build a corral
suitable for catching antelope or horses. Some fish weirs, which are traps
built of stone, nets, or wooden fencing for catching fish, are several
hundred meters long and would have required a large group of
individuals to manufacture. Burning the land, sowing the seeds,
harvesting the crops have all traditionally been activities in which entire
communities engaged. Such activities are infeasible for an individual
farmer, but a group of agriculturalists working together could yield
substantial dividends and those that cooperate in this manner generally
outcompete those that do not. The end result is the propagation of
cooperative practices.
Group-level cooperative enterprises are far from restricted to
agricultural communities. The Nuer and the Dinka are two African cattle
herding societies that live in Sudan. The two groups have a long history
of conflict, with the Nuer dramatically expanding their territory at the
expense of the Dinka throughout the nineteenth century. The success of

the Nuer in warfare is attributed to their social structure, which allowed
the Nuer to call on larger war parties than the Dinka. As a consequence,
the Nuer’s beliefs and practices spread.55 More generally, many small-
scale societies engage in cooperative hunting and foraging, and form war
parties when conflicts arise,56 and cultural group selection likely
operated on these societies to propagate their cultural traditions.57
Boyd and Richerson place emphasis on accurate social learning, a
“when in Rome do as the Romans do” conformity in which individuals
adopt the behavior of the majority, as well as on the norms and
institutions that regulate social behavior.58 The latter include the
institutionalized or socially sanctioned punishment of noncooperators.59
The significance of conformist transmission is that it minimizes
behavioral differences within groups, while maintaining differences
between groups. Moreover, as the payoff to any behavioral strategy
depends on the local frequency of its use, then even subpopulations in
identical environments may end up performing quite different
behavior.60 In other words, cultural processes generate plenty of
variation among human groups for natural selection to act upon.
Extensive data now demonstrate that the differences between human
societies result far more from cultural rather than genetic variation.61
Several factors make Boyd and Richerson’s idea highly plausible.
First, in cultural inheritance, unlike genetic inheritance, a descendant
can learn from individuals other than their biological parents, allowing
them to be sensitive to the most frequent cultural traits in their society
and to conform to the dominant local behavior. This helps preserve
cultural differences. Second, because a threatened or defeated people
may switch to the traits of a new conquering culture, either voluntarily
or under duress, migration will not weaken the cultural differences
between groups (unlike gene flow in genetic group selection). Thus the
movement of people between groups does not typically greatly erode
group-level variation. Third, symbolic group marker systems, such as
rituals, dances, songs, languages, dress, and flags, make it considerably
easier for cultures to maintain their identities and to resist imported
cultural traits from immigrants, than it is for local gene pools to
maintain their identity by resisting gene flow. Fourth, institutionalized
punishment (e.g., by a police force) or socially sanctioned retaliation
(e.g., beating of deserters during warfare) can stabilize cooperative

norms within the society, as both data and theory strongly attest.62
Collectively, this leaves cultural group selection substantially more likely
to be operational than genetic group selection, and indeed, the former
now commands extensive empirical support.63
Cultural processes, including cultural group selection, can feed back
through a gene-culture coevolutionary dynamic to affect genetic
evolution, and thereby influence our evolved cognition. This interaction
is thought to favor evolved psychological predispositions for cultural life,
which anthropologists Maciej Chudek and Joseph Henrich label a “norm
psychology.”64 Norm psychology refers to “a suite of psychological
adaptations for inferring, encoding in memory, adhering to, enforcing
and redressing violations of the shared behavioral standards of one’s
community.”65 Considerable theoretical evidence supports the suggestion
that once a species becomes heavily reliant on social learning and
culture, it will probably evolve a specialized norm psychology.66
Theoretical analyses suggest that humans should be particularly adept at
recognizing, representing, and adopting the local norms of their society,
as well as notice, condemn, and punish violations of those norms.67
For instance, moral norms could plausibly have generated natural
selection acting on human genes to favor cooperative tendencies.
Individuals who are more inclined to conform to norms would find it
easier to enter larger norm-bound societies and to abide by the rules,
than individuals lacking this tendency. These more “docile” individuals
would be at an advantage, to the extent that they would be better placed
to benefit from the society’s technologies and less vulnerable to
exclusion or punishment.68 In turn, a population of more docile
individuals could then permit the cultural evolution of more
sophisticated and effective norms, and allow groups to maintain more
reliable cooperation. A similar mechanism could have favored a
tendency of individuals to feel shame or guilt when they violate a social
norm.69 While such arguments are speculative, the fact that we would
struggle to imagine any other primate that could live in such a norm-
governed cooperative manner, combined with the observation that
artificial selection in many domesticated animals has favored docility,
suggests that selection for such tendencies in humans is credible.70
In addition, the extensive human history of coordinated group
behavior and the solving of collective action problems through social

learning, teaching, and language have seemingly also fed back to shape
human psychology in ways that leave us uniquely able to understand
and share the goals and intentions of others.71 We humans appear
unusually inclined and able to share experiences with others, via joint
attention, cooperative communication, and, of course, teaching.72
Humans have not just evolved advanced levels of individual cognition,
but also extensive skills and motivations for shared cognition (where
knowledge is constructed through dialogue between individuals). The
typical pattern of social foraging among other primates, as was seen in
the cumulative culture problem-solving task described in chapter 8,73 is
strong competition for food, low tolerance for food sharing, and almost
no food offering at all.74 Our ancestors somehow broke away from this
pattern to become cooperative foragers.75 I strongly suspect that one
ramification of the cultural drive process described in chapter 6 was that
in the quest for efficient and accurate information transmission, changes
in human temperament that left us more socially tolerant (together with
a generalized capacity for teaching) were favored by selection.76 Social
tolerance may also have been favored by cultural group selection, or by
other gene-culture coevolutionary processes.
Gene-culture coevolution could equally be implicated in the
evolution of the enhanced human capacity for imitation, as well as the
social bonding that imitation generates and the activities of caretakers
that elicit childhood imitation. For an adult to be imitated by a child
may be appealing or advantageous for a number of reasons. Being
imitated may be flattering to the imitated party to the extent that it
implies that they, their values, or choices have been noticed or chosen.
Second, the imitated individual may wish to encourage the learning of
life skills by the child, either because they inherently want the child to
develop and mature, or because they want to be relieved of their
childcaring responsibilities as soon as possible. Third, by engaging in
similar activities, children who imitate may be less disruptive, or even
helpful, than children who do not (consider children helping with
foraging activities). That might explain why parents and helpers
commonly encourage imitation in the children they look after, often
showering them with praise and positive reinforcement and sometimes
even imitating the child’s actions and sounds. Theory and data suggest
these responses strengthen imitative competence, and elicit further

imitation from the child.77 Natural selection could act on this
relationship, favoring a tendency to respond positively to and encourage
imitation by a child, and a corresponding tendency for infants to imitate
adult caregivers spontaneously and respond to encouragement with
further imitation. The positive emotions experienced by both caregiver
and child following imitation, and the enhanced social relationship that
results, may be nature’s way of encouraging imitation to the benefit of
both parties. Infant-directed speech may be a special case of this more
general process. Natural selection may have favored the tendency for
adults to produce infant-directed speech, and for children to respond to
it, because it accelerates language learning.78 Even everyday phenomena
such as smiling and frowning may have been coopted to become part of
our norm psychology; as cheap-to-produce but nonetheless highly
effective signals of approval or disapproval, they can be easily used to
teach others what they should or shouldn’t do.
Gene-culture coevolution may also explain the existence of a curious
relationship between imitation and cooperation. Like other animals,
people (often inadvertently) copy each other’s postures, mannerisms,
and facial expressions. This form of social learning is known variously as
“simple imitation,”79 “response facilitation,”80 “mimicry,”81 or the
“chameleon effect.”82 While experiments have established that such
copying allows animals to acquire valuable life skills, in humans it also
appears to enhance social interaction. Experimental investigations have
established that simple imitation is causally related to the emergence of
cooperative attitudes, and that the relationship between imitation and
cooperation is bidirectional; being imitated makes individuals more
cooperative, while being cooperative makes one more likely to imitate
others.83 The experiments show that if they are imitated, humans begin
to like the imitator more,84 find them more persuasive,85 and describe
their time together as more enjoyable than if they are not imitated.86
Children as young as 18 months will rush to help adults (for instance, by
picking up items that the adult has dropped) more readily when the
adult has imitated the child, compared to when no such imitation has
taken place.87 Adults too are more willing to help others with simple
tasks, and even donate more money to charity, after being imitated.88
This relationship is seemingly bidirectional. People imitate those they
like more than those they don’t like, and show a preference for imitating

members of their own group over members of an out-group,89 a finding
that held for both religious and ethnic groups.90
Oxford psychologist Cecilia Heyes has argued that the bidirectional
causal relationship between imitation and cooperation may function to
maintain cooperation, collective action, and information sharing among
members of a social group, via a “virtuous circle” of subconscious
imitation and prosocial attitudes.91 The fact that this virtuous circle
functions to maintain group boundaries is consistent with these
tendencies evolving through a cultural group selection mechanism. Like
dialects, local physical mannerisms can spread through imitation to act
as ethnic markers that subconsciously symbolize group membership.92 A
tendency to be well disposed toward individuals who behave like you,
and even exhibit your mannerisms, may have been favored as an aspect
of our evolved psychology, because it helps promote cooperation among
the group’s members. Conversely, mathematical models have found that
in variable environments it pays to copy locals, because they are more
likely to know the locally optimal behavior.93 Therefore, a tendency to
imitate cooperative individuals may have been favored because they are
more likely to be locals. Another possibility is that these tendencies may
be learned and socially transmitted.
Cultural group selection may also have favored social practices that
foster the development of enhanced imitative capabilities.94 Many
societies possess traditions of dancing in synchrony, and train their
military through extensive synchronous marching and fighting drills.
Such groups may have been more successful than others in part because
this synchronous activity trained individuals’ neural circuitry for
imitative proficiency, enabling them to connect the perception of others
performing the action to their own performance,95 thereby promoting
within-group bonding.96 Synchronous action that triggers endorphin
release (e.g., a group of individuals that exercise together) may lead to
individuals associating the simultaneous activity with positive reward,
resulting in synchrony itself becoming rewarding.97 Alternatively, if
rewards are received at the end of synchronous action, such as hunting
together, again a learned association may arise. If synchrony is
rewarding, then social behavior that promotes synchronous action will
be more likely to occur. The extensive use of rhythm (e.g., drumming)
and music as a means of helping to coordinate the actions of large

numbers of individuals and promote social bonding could be favored in
this context.98 Groups of soldiers that sing or chant when running can
run further, faster, with less pain, and bond with each other in the
process.
In fleshing out Allan Wilson’s cultural drive hypothesis in chapter 6, I
suggested that selection for more accurate and efficient forms of social
learning might have in turn generated selection for enhanced imitative
capabilities, as well as other aspects of cognition. Such imitative
capabilities might, for instance, be underpinned by dedicated structures
or networks in the human brain that allow us to solve the
correspondence problem (the challenge of imitating when the perception
of self and another individual performing the same action can be quite
different), or at least confer the neural plasticity to be able to solve this
problem with relevant experience. I believe that our potent capacity for
imitation is itself an adaptation to cultural life.
This issue remains contentious, however. Cecilia Heyes, for instance,
believes that the human capacity for imitation relies on an ancient
associative learning capability, and that both the extent of our reliance
on imitation, and our imitative proficiency, are socially constructed.99 I
agree that humans have constructed a world complete with mirrors and
rich with synchronous activities that is unusually replete with
opportunities to develop imitative competences through experience;
Cambridge ethologist Patrick Bateson and I made this argument some
years ago.100 Experimental evidence demonstrates that imitative
tendencies can be increased through positive reinforcement. For
instance, when infants imitate parents, the latter typically respond with
smiles and encouraging remarks.101 However, I do not believe that other
animals would become as competent at imitating as humans if given the
same prior experience; indeed, the experiments of teaching apes to talk
more or less demonstrate this. As the preceding chapter documented,
there has been extensive natural selection acting on the human brain in
the period since humans and chimpanzees shared a common ancestor,
including evidence that our learning capabilities have been massively
upregulated. Almost all human learning is socially guided and set in a
social context, and that is also likely to have been the case for our
hominin ancestors for over at least the last two million years. Therefore,
it would seem more appropriate to regard the enhanced human capacity

for asocial learning as a side effect of selection for proficient copying,
rather than the other way around.102
Showing that a character is an adaptation has proved surprisingly
difficult for evolutionary biologists,103 and demonstrating that certain
cognitive traits possessed by humans are adaptations to promote social
learning is therefore no trivial task. Indeed, I consider the issue of what
precisely are human social learning adaptations to be one of the great,
unresolved questions in the field. Nonetheless, there are a sufficient
number of strong candidates to leave me confident that humans will
eventually be shown to possess cognitive adaptations for cultural
learning.
The generalized capacity in humans for teaching, including the
motivation to teach and be taught, and the ability to comprehend the
state of knowledge of the pupil, is one such candidate. If I am correct
about the original function of language to promote teaching, then
language is another adaptation for social learning. The tendency to
produce, and to attend to, infant-directed speech are further traits that
may have evolved to promote social transmission, as are other forms of
pedagogical cueing.104 The extraordinary social motivation to imitate,
which anyone with children will recognize as powerful and pervasive,
and the social bonding between individuals that this generates,
constitutes another strong case.105 The tendency of young children to
attend to the gaze of others, and the motivation to share experience with
others via joint attention is a further compelling candidate.106 Even the
whites of our eyes may have evolved to make it easier for us to follow
another individual’s gaze when in close-quarter communicative
interactions.107 The extraordinary human tendency to conform to the
majority is another strong candidate for a social learning adaptation.108
Cultural evolution models, but not associative learning theory, can
explain why humans are more likely to copy an action that is performed
by three individuals one time each, than an action performed by one
individual three times.109 Our capacities for theory of mind and
perspective-taking, and abilities to read the intentions of others, are
surely also part of this story.110
Finally, I have presented both neural and genetic evidence that
humans possess elevated levels of plasticity that allows them to form
cross-modal neural connections between sensory inputs and motor

outputs; this plasticity thereby facilitates imitation and emulation.111 As
one would expect with the evolution of extended periods of juvenile
dependency to promote the transfer of knowledge across generations,
the period of synaptic plasticity characteristic of early brain
development has been extended in humans.112 Even our basic and
ancient learning capabilities, including our ability to see connections
among events, to discern the consequences of our actions, and to adjust
our behavior flexibly have been substantially upgraded,113 most probably
through selection for enhanced social learning. This enhancement in
general learning and plasticity is likely to play critical roles in human
cognitive development. While I anticipate that multiple psychological
adaptations for social learning may eventually be uncovered in our
species, I expect the unlearned roots of such cognition to be subtle.
Social learning adaptations are likely to be expressed as complex
products of development that build upon evolved motivational,
perceptual, or cognitive biases through very general learning processes
that respond sensitively to a culturally constructed, symbolically
encoded environment.114
In sum, there is strong evidence that the large-scale cooperation
observed solely in human societies arises because of our uniquely potent
capacities for social learning, imitation, and teaching, combined with the
coevolutionary feedbacks that these capabilities have generated on the
human mind. Culture took human populations down evolutionary
pathways not available to noncultural species, either by creating
conditions that promoted established cooperative mechanisms, such as
indirect reciprocity and mutualism; or by generating novel cooperative
mechanisms not seen in other taxa, such as cultural group selection. In
the process, gene-culture coevolution seemingly generated an evolved
psychology, comprising an enhanced ability and motivation to learn,
teach, communicate through language, imitate, and emulate, as well as
predispositions to docility, social tolerance, and the sharing of goals,
intentions, and attention. This evolved psychology is entirely different
from that observed in any other animal, or that could have evolved
through genes alone.115
The world’s people exhibit an extraordinary diversity of appearance,
fashion, language, diet, method of subsistence, and custom, and while
there are genetic differences between human populations, the genetic

variation among humans is tiny compared with that found in other apes.
What separates all human societies is not our genes, but the products of
a few thousand years of cultural evolution. However, it would be a
mistake to assume that our biology is irrelevant to understanding
contemporary human adaptation and diversity. Through our culture we
have built our world, but that is only possible because our minds are
fashioned for culture.

CHAPTER 12
THE ARTS
We have all experienced technological innovation during our lifetimes
and, depending on our age, can remember the first appearance of iPods
in 2001, the World Wide Web in the 1990s, mobile phones in the 1970s,
or color TV in the 1960s. Each of these influential innovations swept
society as the cutting-edge advance of the day, only to be refined,
elaborated, and improved upon by succeeding technology. The logic of
cultural evolution is identical to that of biological evolution, even if the
details differ.1 New ideas, behaviors, or products are devised through
diverse creative processes; these differ in their attractiveness, appeal, or
utility, and as a result are differentially adopted, with newfangled
variants superseding the obsolete. Technology advances and diversifies
by refining existing technology, which in turn has bolted the innovations
of earlier times onto their predecessor’s standard. Through endless waves
of innovation and copying, cultures change over time. The logic applies
broadly, from the simplest of manufactured products like pins and paper
clips, to the dazzling complexity of space stations and CRISPR gene
editing, and even back through time to the stone knapping of our
hominin ancestors and the creations of animal innovators from the
distant past. Technological evolution is relentless for exactly the same
reason that biological evolution is; where there is diversity, including
diversity in functional utility and inheritance, then natural selection
inevitably occurs.
Curiously, while the evolution of technology is apparent to many, the
evolution of the arts is less widely accepted.2 Yet the production of
artistic works, and the manner in which art changes over time, owes a
substantive debt to imitation that goes far beyond the copying of styles,
techniques, and materials. The film and theatre industries illustrate what
architecture, painting, and sculpture affirm. That is, in the absence of a
mind fine-tuned by natural selection for optimal social learning, art

simply could not be produced.
Having examined the little appreciated dues that the art world owes
to our biological heritage, we will go on to consider the evolution of
dance. The history of dance is particularly well documented, and
provides a wonderful case study with which to illustrate how human
culture evolves. We will see that cultural evolution is neither linear
(constantly progressing from simple to more complex over time), as
envisaged by nineteenth-century anthropologists,3 nor treelike with
independent lineages constantly branching, as Darwin portrayed
biological evolution.4 Cultural evolution is more of a melting pot, with
innovation often the product of borrowing from other domains, such that
cultural lineages come together as well as diverge. This can be seen in
the richly cross-fertilizing coevolution of dance, music, fashion, art, and
technology, whose histories are intimately entwined.
We will begin with the movies. In the critically acclaimed film The
Imitation Game, Benedict Cumberbatch received plaudits for his brilliant
portrayal of Alan Turing, the eccentric genius who cracked the cyphers
of the Enigma machine, used by the Nazis to send secure wireless
messages during the Second World War; in so doing, Turing devised the
world’s first computer. Turing’s machine endeavored to imitate the
human mind and perhaps a particular mind, the mind of his childhood
friend and first love, Christopher Morcom, after whom he named his
electromechanical code breaker. Turing was awarded the OBE by King
George VI for his Bletchley Park services, which were estimated to have
shortened the war by two to four years. But Turing’s life ended in
tragedy. Prosecuted for homosexual acts, still a criminal offense in
Britain in 1952, he endured two years of aggressive hormone
“treatment” before committing suicide by eating an apple laced with
cyanide shortly before his 42nd birthday.5 Only in 2013 did Queen
Elizabeth II grant him a posthumous pardon and British Prime Minister
Gordon Brown apologize for the appalling treatment that this brilliant
scientist and war hero suffered at the hands of his nation.
Turing is widely regarded as the father of modern computing.
According to artificial intelligence legend Marvin Minsky of MIT,
Turing’s landmark paper of 1937 “contains, in essence, the invention of
the modern computer and some of the programming techniques that
accompanied it.”6 The metaphor of the mind has inspired artificial

intelligence research for half a century, fueling countless advances in
computing technology. As far back as 1996, human conceit took a
humiliating hit when a supercomputer called Deep Blue defeated Garry
Kasparov, perhaps the greatest-ever chess grandmaster, to exert the
superiority of the mechanical over the organic mind. The world’s most
powerful computer today, the Tianhe-2 supercomputer at China’s
National University of Defense Technology, is the latest in a long line of
refined imitations of pre-existing technology that can be traced all of the
way back to Hut 8 at Bletchley Park. One day soon, quantum computers
are expected to supplant today’s digital computers. Already the world’s
most accurate clock is the Quantum Logic Clock, produced by the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), which uses the
vibrations of a single aluminum atom to record time so accurately that it
would neither gain nor lose as much as a second in a billion years. Yet,
in homage to their humble beginnings, such technologies are known as
“quantum Turing machines.”
We readily recognize the role that imitation plays in technological
evolution, just as we easily comprehend Turing’s attempt to imitate the
mind’s computational power with a thinking machine. What is often
overlooked is that, as every actor and actress earns a living by imitating
the individuals portrayed, all movies are in the imitation game. The entire
film industry relies on the ability of talented thespians to study their
focal character’s behavior, speech, and mannerisms in meticulous detail
and to duplicate these with sufficient precision to render their portrayal
a compelling likeness, and leave the storyline credible. Cumberbatch
convinces us that he really is Alan Turing, just as Marlon Brando
persuaded us that he was Vito Corleone in The Godfather, or Meryl
Streep is the quintessential Margaret Thatcher in The Iron Lady. The
magic of the movies would dissipate instantly if this pretense ever broke
down. Academy awards and Golden Globes are the ultimate recognition
handed out to honor the world’s most gifted imitators. Tens of millions
of years of selection for more and more accurate social learning has
reached its pinnacle in the modern world’s Brandos and Streeps. Yet
such extraordinary acting talent was clearly not directly favored by
natural selection. No amateur dramatic productions were performed in
the Pleistocene, and being a proficient actor did not bring reproductive
benefits to early hominins. Acting is not an adaptation, but rather an

“exaptation,”—that is, a trait originally fashioned by natural selection
for an entirely different role.7 Acting proficiency is a byproduct of
selection for imitation.
Among our distant ancestors, those individuals who were effective
copiers did indeed enjoy fitness benefits, but their copying was
expressed in learning challenging life skills, not the performing arts. We
are all descended from a long line of inveterate imitators. By copying,
our forebears learned how to make digging tools, spears, harpoons, and
fish hooks; make drills, borers, throwing sticks, and needles; butcher
carcasses and extract meat; build a fire and keep it going; pound, grind,
and soak plant materials; hunt antelope, trap game, and catch fish; cook
turtles, and make tools from their shells; mount a collective defense
against ferocious carnivores; as well as learn what each sign, sound, and
gesture observed in their society meant. These, and hundreds of others
skills, were what shaped the polished, imitative capabilities of our
lineage. Acquiring such proficiencies would have been a matter of life
and death to the puny and defenseless members of our genus in their
grim struggle to forge a living on the plains of Africa, the deserts of the
Levant, or the Mediterranean coast.
Hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions, of years of selection for
competent imitation has shaped the human brain, leaving it supremely
adapted to translate visual information about the movements of others’
bodies into matching action from their own muscles, tendons, and joints.
Now, eons later, we effortlessly direct this aptitude to fulfill goals utterly
inconceivable to our forebears, with little reflection on what an
extraordinary adaptation the ability to imitate represents. Imitation is no
trivial matter. Few other animals are capable of motor imitation, and
even those that do exhibit this form of learning cannot imitate with
anything like the accuracy and precision of our species.8 For over a
century psychologists have struggled to understand how imitation is
possible.9 Most learning occurs when individuals receive “rewards” or
“punishments” for their actions,10 like achieving a desired goal or else
experiencing pain. This reinforcement encourages us to repeat actions
that brought us pleasure and to avoid those activities that brought pain
or stress, a process known as operant conditioning. The reward systems
that elicit positive or negative sensations are ancient structures in the
brain, fashioned by selection to train animals’ behavior to meet adaptive

goals.11 However, when we learn to eat with chopsticks or to ride a
bicycle by observing another individual, we have seemingly not received
any direct reinforcement ourselves, so how do we do it? Even more
challenging to understand, how do we connect the sight of someone else
manipulating chopsticks, or peddling a bike, with the utterly different
sensory experience that we encounter when we do these things? This
correspondence problem has been the bugbear of imitation researchers
for decades. Even today, there is little consensus as to how this is done.12
One conclusion is clear, however. Solving the correspondence problem
requires links, in the form of a network of neurons, between the sensory
and motor regions of the brain. Years ago, when a postdoctoral fellow at
Cambridge University, working with eminent ethologist Patrick Bateson,
I explored the evolution and development of imitation using artificial
neural network models. We found that we could simulate imitation and
other forms of social learning, provided we pretrained the artificial
neural network with relevant prior experience that allowed it to create
such links between perceptual inputs and motor outputs.13 Interestingly,
our neural networks that simulated imitation possessed exactly the same
properties as “mirror neurons.”
Mirror neurons are cells in the brain that fire both when an
individual performs an action, and when the individual sees the same
action performed by others.14 Mirror neurons are widely thought to
facilitate imitation.15 As the brain expanded during human evolution,
those regions now known to be involved in imitation, such as the
temporal and parietal lobe, grew disproportionately larger.16 The parietal
lobe is that precise region of the primate brain in which mirror neurons
were first detected in monkeys, and brain-imaging studies show that the
same regions of the human brain indeed possess these mirroring
properties.17 Plausibly, the mirror neuron system was the direct product
of selection for enhanced imitation among our ancestors. These cognitive
abilities continue to allow us to learn new skills today—for instance,
how to drive, wield a hammer, or cook a meal. However, those same
cognitive abilities are also what permits Jimmy Stewart to impress us
every Christmas as George Bailey in It’s a Wonderful Life.
Also overlooked, but far less obvious, is how reliant film, theatre,
opera, and even computer games are on the audiences’ abilities to
imagine themselves part of the action, to experience the fear and the

tension, and to share the main character’s emotions vicariously. These
capabilities were also likely fashioned in the sweaty heat of the African
jungle, where the ability to take the perspective and understand the
goals and intentions of those occupied in important tasks helped the
observer to acquire the relevant technology. Here too, the ancestral
sharing of emotions in social settings, such as responding with anxiety to
the fear of another or drawing joy from the laughter of a child, helped to
shape the empathy and emotional contagion that makes the movie a
heartfelt experience. These sensitivities are also reliant on forms of social
learning with adaptive functions, such as helping individuals learn the
identity of predators or circumvent other dangers.18 In the absence of
these social learning abilities, we would all watch movies like
sociopaths, utterly indifferent to the lead character’s trauma, equally
unmoved by the Psycho shower scene or Rhett Butler and Scarlett
O’Hara’s kiss. Global box office revenue was estimated at $40 billion in
2015. Without the human ability to imitate there would be no movie
industry; and for that matter, no theatre or opera.
In fact, when we start to think about it, connections emerge between
a surprising number of the arts and the imitative and innovative
capabilities that drove the evolution of the human brain. Consider, for
instance, sculpture. In order to complete his statue of David in 1504,
Michelangelo had to solve a correspondence problem of his own. Rather
than moving his own body to match David’s posture, Michelangelo had
to move his hands and arms, skillfully wielding hammer and chisel to
transform a block of marble into an exact replica. To do this,
Michelangelo had to translate the visual inputs corresponding to the
sight of the male model into motor outputs that generated a matching
form in the stone. That he exceled in this challenge, and produced one of
the greatest masterpieces of the Renaissance, is testament not just to his
talent but also to many years of practice in stonework. Michelangelo
began his artistic training at the age of 13, and spent time as a
quarryman in Carrara, where he learned to brandish a hammer to good
effect. Those years of experience functioned to train the neural circuitry
of his brain (just as we trained our artificial neural networks) to be
sensitive to the correspondences between the movements associated with
his masonry and the physical results in the stone. That training,
however, could only be effective because Michelangelo possessed a brain

uniquely designed to generate rich cross-modal mappings between the
sensory and motor cortex when given the right experience; this was a
legacy of ancestral selection for imitative abilities.
Admiring marvelous sculpture like David or the Venus de Milo can be
a startlingly sensual experience, especially when one considers that we
are confronted with, in essence, a block of stone. One is often left
secretly wanting to reach out and touch the beautiful forms. Some
cultures, such as the Inuit, even make small sculptures that are solely
meant to be handled, rather than seen.19 That we should experience such
sensations again draws on those cross-modal neural networks. These
connect physical representations of objects in our minds to the objects
themselves, and from there to a pre-existing network of associations and,
often intimate, memories.
Only a very large-brained species could ever have produced works of
sculpture fashioned with such precision. Such works require meticulous
and controlled hand movements, manual dexterity that evolved along
with increased brain size. Mammalian brains changed in internal
organization as they got larger, inevitably becoming more modular and
asymmetrical with size,20 as described in chapter 6. With increasing
overall size, larger brain regions typically become better connected to
other regions and start to exert control over the rest of the brain.21 This
occurs because neurons vie with each other to connect to target regions
and this competition is generally won by those neurons that collectively
fire the target cells, giving large brain regions an advantage. The net
result is an increase in the ability of the larger brain regions to influence
other regions. The dominant structure in the human brain is the
neocortex, which accounts for approximately 80% of the brain by
volume, more than in any other animal. In the primate lineage to
humans, the neocortex (the thinking, learning, and planning part of the
brain) has become larger over evolutionary time, and has exerted
increasing control over the motor neurons of the spinal cord and brain
stem; this has led to increased manual dexterity and more precise control
of the limbs.22 The cerebellum, the second largest region of the human
brain, also plays an important role in motor control and has enlarged
during recent human evolution as well.23 This motor control is what
makes humans exceptional at finely coordinated movements. If I am
correct, and innovation and social learning have driven the neocortex

and cerebellum to become larger over evolutionary time, then this
natural selection may simultaneously have generated human greater
dexterity, which could be expressed not just in painting and sculpture,
but also acting, opera, and in particular, dance.
The motor control that allows humans to produce artistic works and
performances spontaneously is a capability that no other animal shares.
Granted, the internet is awash with reports and YouTube footage of
artistic animals, but these have not stood up to close scrutiny from
animal behavior experts. You may well be able to buy painting kits for
your cat or dog, and your pet may well enjoy the experience, but little
that is genuinely artistic is produced. Like most other animals that have
been handed a paintbrush, dogs and cats lack both the inclination and
motor control to produce representational art, and I strongly suspect that
any abstract beauty observed in the colorful product is strictly in the eye
of the pet owner.
Intriguingly, the Humane Society of the United States recently
organized a Chimpanzee Art Contest, to which six chimpanzees
submitted “masterpieces.” The winner, Brent, a 37-year-old male from
ChimpHaven in Louisiana, received a $10,000 prize from the stately
hands of Jane Goodall. Brent, apparently, produced the work with his
tongue, rather than bothering to use a paintbrush. The original works
were then auctioned off on eBay with the many thousands of dollars
raised going to support primate sanctuaries.24 Yet, however much one
admires this charming, clever, and well-motivated funding initiative, the
claim that the chimpanzees concerned are artists, in any meaningful
sense, is greeted with skepticism by animal behaviorists and art scholars
alike. A generous reading of the artistic pretensions of these animals
would at best acknowledge some pleasure in generating colorful
compositions.
Elephants are considerably more interesting because to the
astonishment of thousands of gullible tourists, they regularly produce
realistic paintings of trees, flowers, or even other elephants in
sensational public performances at several sanctuaries in Thailand
(figure 11). The artwork, which the elephants sometimes even sign with
their name, sells in droves. However, all is not as it seems. Each
paintbrush is placed in the elephant’s trunk by its trainer, who then
surreptitiously guides the trunk movements by gently tugging at its ears.

The elephant has been trained to hold the brush to the paper and move
it in the direction to which its ear is being pulled.25 At the very least, one
has to acknowledge an impressive piece of animal training,26 and one
cannot help but admire the precision and control that the painting
elephants exhibit with their trunks. Yet, a trick has taken place, and the
trainer gets away with it by cleverly positioning himself behind the
elephant. The tourists nonetheless typically go home happy, even those
who spot the ruse, since no one can say that their “priceless” artwork
was not painted by an elephant!27
FIGURE 11. Painting elephants are becoming a major tourist attraction in Thailand. The
elephants regularly produce realistic paintings of trees, flowers, and other elephants in
impressive public performances. However, all is not as it seems, and the tourists are being
hoodwinked. By permission of Philippe Huguen/AFP/Getty Images.
Representational art is a uniquely human domain. That elephants
can, with guidance, produce these pictures is nevertheless fascinating,
precisely because it demonstrates that with training, they too are
capable of building up cross-modal neural networks in their brains that

translate tactile sensory inputs into matching motor outputs. The
painting elephants have solved a correspondence problem of their own.
It may be no coincidence that an Asian elephant from South Korea called
Koshik was recently shown to be capable of vocal imitation, including
mimicking human speech,28 while Happy, another Asian elephant at the
Bronx Zoo in New York, was shown to be able to recognize herself in a
mirror.29 Almost certainly, these capabilities are related. Like sculpture,
producing paintings (and mirror self-recognition) makes demands on the
circuitry of the brain involved in imitation.30
Our big brains not only afford precise control of our hands, arms,
legs, and feet, but also of our mouth, tongue, and vocal chords, which is
what endowed our species with the vocal dexterity to speak and sing.31
Without that cortical expansion, members of our species could neither
have fashioned a work of art, nor vocally expressed their admiration for
it. The evolution of language is surely central to the origins of art, since
art is rife with symbolism. As described in chapter 8, symbolic and
abstract thinking are widely regarded as foremost features of human
cognition. The use of arbitrary symbols allows humans to represent and
communicate a wide range of ideas and concepts through diverse
mediums. We possess minds fashioned by natural selection to
manipulate symbols and think abstractly through spoken language, but
we also express this penchant for symbolism in numerous artistic
endeavors.
Architecture is one such domain. Victor Hugo’s 1831 masterpiece,
Notre Dame de Paris, contains an extraordinary chapter entitled, “This
Will Destroy That”; it echoes the enigmatic words of the evil Archdeacon
Frollo, who rants against the invention of the printing press. Frollo
expresses the terror of the church in the face of a rising new power—
printing—that threatens to supplant it. The concern was not just that
people might start to rely on books rather than priests to acquire their
knowledge and advice, but also that the cathedral’s magnificent gothic
architecture, already in disrepair, would lose its power and symbolism:
It was a premonition that human thought … was about to change its
outward mode of expression; that the dominant idea of each
generation would, in future, be embodied in a new material, a new
fashion; that the book of stone, so solid and so enduring, was to give

way to the book of paper.32
To the modern reader such fears appear irrational. Yet, in the preliterate
world, powerful institutions literally wrote their authority in stone. From
the Pyramids to St. Peter’s Basilica in Rome or the Palace of Versailles,
the magnificence, scale, wealth, and beauty percolated with the
symbolism of God-given command and assuredness.
Human artwork has a long history, dating back some 100,000
years.33 It exhibits all the hallmarks of cultural evolution.34 While
painting manifests multiple divergent styles, one ancient conceptual
lineage sets out to represent the visual experience with accuracy.
Consider, for instance, René Magritte’s famous painting The Treachery of
Images, which shows a pipe that looks as though it is a model for a
tobacco advertisement. Much to the puzzlement of millions of admirers,
Magritte painted below the pipe, “Ceci n’est pas une pipe,” which is
translated as “This is not a pipe.” At first sight, this appears completely
untrue. What we momentarily forget, of course, is that the painting is
not a pipe, but an image of a pipe. When Magritte was once asked to
explain this picture, he apparently replied that of course it was not a
pipe; just try to fill it with tobacco! Magritte’s point might appear trite to
some, privileged as we are to live in an age where we can overdose on
magnificent artworks that perfectly capture perspective and exhibit
astonishing accuracy of portrayal. In the contemporary artistic
movement of hyperrealism, the pictures of artists like Diego Fazio, Jason
de Graaf, or Morgan Davidson use acrylics, pencil, or crayons with such
astonishing accuracy that they are almost always mistaken for
photographs. Their work can be placed in a long-standing tradition that
sets out to produce precise, detailed, and accurate representation of the
actual visual appearance of scenes and objects. This movement
flourished at various periods, and has been known as “realism,”
“naturalism,” or (with appropriate reference to imitation) “mimesis.”
Such hyperreal works allow the viewer to escape the correspondence
problem by producing an image that exactly mimics what it represents.
However, there can be no such escape for the artist, who must overcome
this challenge in order to succeed.
Nowhere in the arts is the correspondence problem more clearly
manifest than in dance, which again harnesses those same cognitive

faculties that are necessary to integrate distinct sensory inputs and
outputs. Following an excited conversation in a Cambridge pub in 2014,
I recently began a collaboration with Nicky Clayton and Clive Wilkins to
study the evolution of dance. Nicky is a professor of psychology at
Cambridge University and expert of animal cognition; she is also a
passionate dancer, and she merges this with her research as scientific
director to the Rambert, a leading contemporary dance company.35 Clive
is equally impressive as a successful painter, writer, magician, and also a
dance enthusiast. We rapidly converged on the hypothesis that dancing
may only be possible because its performance exploits the neural
circuitry employed in imitation.36
Dancing requires the performer to match their actions to music, or to
time their movements to fit the rhythm, which can sometimes even be
an internal rhythm, such as the heartbeat. This demands a
correspondence between the auditory inputs the dancer hears and the
motor outputs they produce. Likewise, competent couple or group
dancing requires individuals to coordinate their actions, and in the
process match, reverse, or complement each other. This too calls for a
correspondence between visual inputs and motor outputs. That humanity
is able to solve these challenges, albeit with varying degrees of ease and
grace, is a testament to the neural apparatus that we uniquely possess as
a legacy of selection for imitative proficiency. The same reasoning
applies when individuals dance alone.
Contemporary theories suggest that while the potential for imitation
is inborn in humans, competence is only realized with appropriate
lifetime experience.37 Early experiences, such as being rocked and sung
to as a baby, help infants to form neural connections that link sound,
movement, and rhythm, while numerous experiences later in life, such
as playing a musical instrument, strengthen these networks. The
suggestion that taking up the piano will make you a better dancer might
seem curious, but that is a logical conclusion to draw from the
neuropsychological data.
The relentless motivation to copy the actions of parents and older
siblings that is apparent in young children may initially serve a social
function, such as to strengthen social bonds. However, childhood
imitation also trains the “mirroring” neural circuitry of the mind, leaving
the child better placed later in life to integrate across sensory

modalities.38 Theoretical work suggests that the experience of
synchronous action forges links between the perception of self and
others performing the same movements.39 Whether because past natural
selection has tuned human brains specifically for imitation, or because
humans construct developmental environments that promote imitative
proficiency—or both—there can be no doubt that, compared to other
animals, humans are exceptional imitators. A recent brain-scanning
analysis of the neural basis of dance found that foot movement timed to
music excited regions of the brain previously associated with imitation,
and this may be no coincidence.40 Dancing inherently seems to require a
brain capable of solving the correspondence problem.
Comparative evidence is remarkably consistent with this hypothesis.
A number of animals have also been characterized as dancers, including
snakes, bees, birds, bears, elephants, and chimpanzees; the last of these
perform a “rain dance” during thunderstorms, which has a rhythmic,
swaying motion. However, whether animals can truly be said to dance
remains a contentious issue,41 which depends at least in part on how
dance is defined. In contrast, the more specific question of whether
animals can move their bodies in time to music or rhythm has been
extensively investigated, with clear and positive conclusions. Strikingly,
virtually all animals that pass this test are known to be highly proficient
imitators, frequently in both vocal and motor domains.
This ability to move in rhythmic synchrony with a musical beat by
nodding our head or tapping our feet, for instance, is a universal
characteristic of humans,42 but is rarely observed in other species.43 The
most prominent explanation for why this should be, known as the “vocal
learning and rhythmic synchronization” hypothesis,44 is broadly in
accord with the arguments presented here.45 This hypothesis suggests
that moving in time to the rhythm (known as “entrainment”) relies on
the neural circuitry for complex vocal learning; it is an ability that
requires a tight link between auditory and motor circuits in the brain.46
The hypothesis predicts that only species of animal capable of vocal
imitation, such as humans, parrots and songbirds, cetaceans, and
pinnipeds, but not nonhuman primates and not those birds that do not
learn their songs, will be capable of synchronizing movements to music.
The many videos of birds, mostly parrots, moving to music on the
internet are consistent with the hypothesis, but compelling footage of

other animals doing the same is comparatively rare. Some of these
“dancing” birds have acquired celebrity status; the best known is
Snowball, a sulphur-crested cockatoo,47 whose performances on YouTube
have “gone viral.” Snowball can be seen to move with astonishing
rhythmicity, head banging and kicking his feet in perfect time to Queen’s
“Another One Bites The Dust” or the Backstreet Boys (figure 12).48 Home
videos can be faked, and parrots also have the ability to mimic human
movements,49 so the footage alone cannot show that Snowball is keeping
time to music directly. For this reason, a team of researchers led by
Aniruddh Patel at The Neurosciences Institute in San Diego brought
Snowball into the laboratory to carry out careful experiments.50
Manipulating the tempo of a musical excerpt across a wide range, the
researchers conclusively demonstrated that Snowball spontaneously
adjusts the tempo of his movements to stay synchronized with the beat.

FIGURE 12. Snowball, a sulphur-crested cockatoo, performs dances on YouTube that have
thrilled millions. Careful experiments have demonstrated that Snowball adjusts his movements to
keep time to the music. By permission of Irena Schulz.

Thus far, evidence for spontaneous motor entrainment to music has
been reported in at least nine species of birds including several types of
parrot, and the Asian elephant, all of whom are vocal imitators,51 and
several of which show motor imitation.52 Entrainment has also been
shown in a chimpanzee,53 a renowned motor imitator.54 The sole
exception to this association is the California sea lion,55 which is not
known to exhibit vocal learning. However, the fact that related species
show vocal learning, including several seals and the walrus,56 raises the
possibility that this capability or a relevant precursor may yet be
demonstrated. Lyrebirds have not been subject to entrainment
experiments, but males are famous for their ability to imitate virtually
any sounds, including dog barks, chainsaws, and car alarms. They can
match subsets of songs from their extensive vocal repertoire with tail,
wing, and leg movements to devise their own “dance” choreography.57
Clearly, there is more to dance, at least social or collective dance, than
entrainment to music. There must also be coordination with others’
movements, which would seemingly draw on the neural circuitry that
underlies motor, rather than vocal, imitation.58 However, a recent
analysis of the avian brain suggests that vocal learning evolved through
exploitation of pre-existing motor pathways,59 implying that vocal and
motor imitation are reliant on similar circuitry. The animal data provide
compelling support for a causal link between the capabilities for
imitation and dance. Whether this is because imitation is necessary for
entrainment, or merely facilitates it through reinforcing relevant neural
circuitry, remains to be established.
Dance often tells a story, and this representational quality provides
another link with imitation. For instance, in the “astronomical dances”
of ancient Egypt, priests and priestesses accompanied by harps and pipes
mimed significant events in the story of a god, or imitated cosmic
patterns such as the rhythm of night and day.60 Through dance,
Australian Aborigines depict the spirits and ideas associated with every
aspect of the natural and unseen world.61 There are animal dances for
women, which are thought to function like love potions or fertility
treatments to make a lover return, or to induce pregnancy, while male
dances are more often about fishing, hunting, and fighting. Africa, Asia,
Australasia, and Europe all possess long-standing traditions for mask-
culture dances, in which performers assume the role of the character

associated with the mask and, often garbed in extravagant costumes,
enact religious stories.62 Native Americans are famed for their war
dances, which were thought so powerful and evocative they were
banned by the United States government—the law was not repealed
until 1934.63 A variety of animal dances are also performed by Native
Americans, and include the buffalo dance, which was thought to lure
buffalo herds close to the village, and the eagle dance, which is a tribute
to these venerated birds.64 This tradition continues right through to the
present. For instance, in 2009, the Rambert Dance Company marked the
bicentenary of Darwin’s birth by collaborating with Nicky Clayton to
produce The Comedy of Change, which evoked animal behavior on stage
with spellbinding accuracy (figure 13). In all such instances, the creation
and performance of the dance requires an ability on the part of the
dancer to imitate the movements and sounds of particular people,
animals, or events. This reproduction contributes importantly to the
meaning of the dance in the community, and imparts a bonding or
shared experience. Such dances reintroduce the correspondence
problem, since the dancer, choreographer, and audience must be able to
connect the dancers’ movements to the represented target phenomenon.

FIGURE 13. Dancers from the Rambert Dance Company in The Comedy of Change. Several lines of
evidence connect the ability to dance with imitation. By permission of Hugo Glendinning.
The most transparent connection between dance and imitation,
however, will be readily apparent to just about anyone who has ever
taken or observed a dance lesson; that is, dance sequences are typically
learned through imitation. From beginner ballet classes for infants to
professional dance companies, the learning of a dance routine invariably
begins with a demonstration of the steps from an instructor or
choreographer, which the dancers then set out to imitate. It is no
coincidence that dance rehearsal studios around the world almost always
have large mirrors along one wall. These allow the learner to flit rapidly
between observing the movements of the instructor or choreographer
and observing their own performance. This not only allows them to see
the correspondence, or lack of correspondence, between the target
behavior and what they are doing, but also allows the dancers to connect
feedback from their muscles and joints to visual feedback on their
performance, allowing error correction and accelerating the learning
process.65
Prospective new members of professional dance companies are given
challenging auditions in which they are evaluated partly on their ability
to pick up new dance routines with alacrity, an essential skill for a
dancer. Dancing is not just about body control, grace, and power, but it
also demands its own kind of intelligence.66 A key element in whether or
not a dancer makes the grade essentially comes down to how good they
are at imitating. A professional dancer at the Rambert once told Nicky
and me that she had recently taken up sailing, and her instructor was
flabbergasted at how quickly she had picked up the techniques involved.
What the instructor had failed to appreciate was that dancers earn their
living by imitation.
Imitation is not the only cognitive faculty that is necessary for
learning dance. Also important is sequence learning, particularly in
choreographed dances, which require the learning of a long, and often
complex, sequence of actions. Even improvised dances such as the
Argentine tango require the leader to plan a sequence of movements that
provide the basis for the exquisite conversation between leader and
follower. As we have learned, long strings of actions are very difficult to

learn asocially, but social learning substantially increases the chances
that individuals will acquire the appropriate sequence.67 Our ancestors
were predisposed to be highly competent sequence learners because
many of their tool-manufacturing and tool-using skills, as well as food-
processing techniques, required them to carry out precise sequences of
actions, with each step in the right order. The fact that these sequence-
learning capabilities are clearly exploited in dance provides further
evidence of the extent of the surprising connection between imitation
and dance.
Let us now turn to the history of dance, and consider whether this
particular art form can be said to evolve in any rigorous sense. In
principle, any system that possesses variation, differential fitness, and
inheritance is expected to change over time through a selective
process.68 These necessary conditions are well recognized in biological
evolution, where species evolve by natural selection, but they occur in
many other spheres of life too. The vertebrate immune system, for
instance, responds to disease by first generating diverse antibodies, then
determining which are most effective at countering the pathogen, and
finally reproducing in large numbers the most effective disease-
combating molecules; variation, differential fitness, and inheritance thus
lead to a within-lifetime “adaptation” in immunity.69 The central nervous
system, vascular system, and muscular system all operate in a similar
manner, throwing out axons, blood vessels, or muscle cells, respectively,
and then strengthening those connections that prove useful, while letting
the less helpful ones die away.70 Charles Darwin himself pointed out that
one aspect of culture—namely language—evolves, and this has been
confirmed by extensive research.71 Is the same true of dance?
It is said that among the Bantu peoples of Central Africa, when an
individual from one tribe meets someone from a different group, they
ask, “What do you dance?”72 Throughout time, communities have forged
their identities through dance rituals that mark important events in the
life of individuals, including birth, coming of age, marriage, and death—
as well religious festivals, and critical points in the seasons, such as the
cycle of crops.73 The social structure of many communities, from Africa
tribes to Spanish gypsies, and to Scottish clans, gain much of their
cohesion from the group activity of dancing. Historically, dance has been
a strong, binding influence on community life, a means of expressing the

social identity of the group, and participation allows individuals to
demonstrate a belonging. As a consequence, in many regions of the
world there are as many types of dances as there are communities with
distinct identities.
Dances certainly exhibit variation, in no small part because they are
often an important part of the cultural identity of a people. For instance,
documenting the vast corpus of folk dances around Europe is a
monumental task that has occupied scholars and amateur enthusiasts for
decades.74 The many resulting volumes detail literally thousands of
different dances, or dance variants. Many are now forgotten, but others
remain popular. One fragment of this immense body are the diverse
European sword dances, forms of which are listed in fifteen separate
countries.75 In current performances, the weapons are entirely symbolic.
For instance, in Scotland, where I live, two swords are placed crossed on
the ground, marking out four quadrants between which the kilted dancer
must hop and skip lightly. However, the origin of such dances can be
traced all of the way back to ancient Greece; they were brought to
Britain by the invading Danes and Vikings, who performed them prior to
battle with vigorous swordplay.76 Similar diversity exists among the
hundreds of different masked dances performed throughout Asia, from
the Kathakali dancers of India to the Kabuki dramas of Japan.77 Another
example concerns the regional Spanish folk dances, the best known of
which is the gypsy’s flamenco, but there are also jotas from the north of
Spain, seguidillas from the central regions, sardanes from the east, the
fandangos of Andalucia, and the zapateados of the south. Dance diversity
is also manifest at different scales, with closely related communities
often exhibiting similar dances, but with larger differences found
between more distinct regions of the world. For instance, in much
Western dancing, exemplified by ballet, the dancer seeks to exhibit
lightness of movement, and tries almost to fly, to disavow gravity
through athletic leaps, elongation of the body, and the pointe work of
ballerinas. In contrast, dances of Eastern origin often assert the
importance of gravity, in which feet may stamp and thump the ground,
but contact with the earth is constant.78
Innovation in dance often results from the recombination of distinct
elements of culture from different communities.79 When the Moors
invaded southern Spain, they brought a sinuosity of torso and use of

hands and fingers to local dance. Likewise, when the Russians dominated
ballet, they introduced high leaps and other extreme feats of male
athleticism, in keeping with the folk dancing traditions of the Caucasus
that contain many leaping steps through which young men demonstrate
their virility. Often the extraction of dance elements from other
communities is deliberate, as in the reproduction of Roman dance
spectacles in the Renaissance, or Martha Graham’s famous Primitive
Mysteries that drew on Native American themes.80 Sometimes change has
been deliberately institutionalized, as in the formalization of the five
positions in ballet, or the codification of ballroom dances by the Imperial
Society of Teachers of Dancing in the early twentieth century. Moreover,
in the same ways that the Impressionists were moved to produce blurry
paintings as a rebellious reaction against the realism that dominated
European art in the nineteenth century, and that Debussy and Stravinsky
shifted away from the dominant tonal tradition in classical music around
the same time, modern dance pioneers like Isadora Duncan and Martha
Graham devised compositions that contrasted to the stylized dance
strictures exemplified in ballet. Vital though imitation is to dance, the
inspiration for much dance innovation has been precisely a reaction
against “mere imitation.”
The rapid spread of such innovations illustrates the second condition
necessary for adaptive cultural evolution, namely “differential fitness,”
which in this instance means different rates of uptake. Few dance
innovations had more impact than the waltz. At the end of the
eighteenth century, the waltz took the many hundreds of dance halls in
Paris by storm. The word “waltz” means to turn, and the dance
originated through refinements of pre-existing turning dances, such as
the länder, an extremely popular dance among poorer people of
Germany. Refined and modified in ballrooms, both the Viennese waltz
and the slower German variant rapidly swept Europe, and easily
charmed the dance-crazed middle classes bored with stuffy, aristocratic
minuets. The dance’s intoxicating swirling, and the dangerously intimate
contact between male and female were a major draw. Nowadays, to
think of the waltz as debauched is difficult, but at the time it was a
source of great controversy, and many people of prominence spoke out
against this “vulgar new craze.” Nevertheless, the attraction of its music
and its emotional appeal to the courting young left the waltz

unstoppable. The dance’s pinnacle was in the second half of the
nineteenth century, when Johann Strauss II was composing classics such
as The Blue Danube. But the allure of the waltz has never completely
faded, and it remains a staple of the ballroom.
Relative to other dances in the late eighteenth century, the waltz
could be said to possess high “cultural fitness,” which really means little
more than it was unusually appealing and as a result increased readily in
frequency. Of course, the waltz is far from the only dance to sweep the
populace. Shortly afterward, the Polish mazurka conquered the
ballrooms, and subsequently polka-mania inflamed the masses, spreading
like wildfire from the Czech Republic where it originated to Paris and
London in the 1840s. In the nineteenth century, an influx of immigrants
brought European social dances to America, where the waltz, polka, and
many others were rapidly adopted. A few decades later, the Americans
returned the gift when barn dances and “two steps” swept Europe, and
the export of dance from the United States has continued ever since. In
the twentieth century, the Charleston, the jitterbug, rock n roll, disco, and
breakdancing all crossed the Atlantic to overwhelm their predecessors.
Dances are also clearly inherited, being transmitted both among
individuals and across generations, often with remarkable stability.
Circle dances, for instance, have a history that can be traced back, quite
literally, thousands of years.81 The book of Exodus recounts how David
and the people of Israel danced around the golden calf in a ring. Scholars
have mapped this particular circle dance back to the ancient Egyptian
cult of Apis, and traced it forward to the religious ring dances performed
around Europe in the Middle Ages. The circling of a central object
representative of a divine force (e.g., a sacrificial stone, altar, tree, or
fire) was a recurrent theme in countless folk dances across the whole of
Europe, and from the twelfth century to the present. Such circles often
represented the cycle of life, the seasons, or daily rhythms. These round
dances, in turn, gave birth to the “carole,” which is still performed today
through Europe, and to the numerous maypole dances that stretch across
Europe from north to south, and even into Mexico as a result of the
Spanish conquest. Here the totemistic nature of the pole combines the
aforementioned symbols of divinity with those of a fruitful and
protective tree, where the ribbons represent the tree’s branches and
connect the dancers to the central source of fertility.

The ancient Greeks believed that the oldest dance was connected to
the birth of Zeus; the dancers impersonated the mythical rescuers of the
infant god who had saved the child from being eaten by his father,
Kronos.82 In fact, the origins of this dance have been found to relate to
an even more ancient fertility ritual, in which leaping dancers, shouting
and beating weapons, invoked prosperity for their crops or banished evil
spirits. These same traditions, which can be still be seen in certain
African tribal dances today, repeatedly recurred throughout the Middle
Ages and in the many Christian religious dances observed in Europe in
the sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries.83
The rather curious English morris dance, with its ringing leg bells, high
jumps, and clashing sticks is also thought to have originated as an
ancient fertility ritual, but one that acquired an entirely new identity
following the Crusades.84 The stamping and leaping refer back to ageless
religious rites invoking divine intervention to encourage rich harvests;
the crops were thought to grow to the height that the dancers jump, and
the jingling bells served to ward off evil spirits. However, the name
“morris” is a corruption of “Moorish,” and the clashing of sticks
represents the Christian armies’ attempts to beat down the Muslim
enemy and free the Holy Land from their rule. Morris dances are still
performed throughout England today, although audiences rarely
appreciate their symbolism.
There are even “rave”-like traditions that recur with surprising
frequency throughout history.85 These began with the crazed and
intoxicated Dionysiac dances of ancient Greece, where after harvesting
the grapes, villagers celebrated with a drunken orgy in honor of
Dionysus, god of wine. Their feverish stomping is a favorite scene on
Greek vases, and these drunken dancing girls were immortalized in a
tragedy by Euripides, the Bacchae, in which their frenzy led them to
commit murder. Countless societies since have witnessed similar
traditions for frantic dancing in a mood of exhilaration heightened by
pounding rhythm and flowing alcohol. These occur in dances as distant
in space and time as those in ancient Rome, among Native Americans, in
the West Indies (the Voodoo dances), in Turkey (whirling dervishes),
right up to those in the techno and acid house scene that hit western
Europe and North America in the 1990s.
Once we recognize that dance possesses the properties of ample

variation, differential fitness, and inheritance, we can start to
comprehend how even the richest and most challenging dance forms
could evolve. The earliest agricultural societies that emerged in the Near
and Middle East—in Sumeria, Assyria, Babylon, Egypt, and the cultures
of the Mediterranean—had dance at their very heart. In each instance,
the society’s beliefs were enacted in rituals of dance and drama, partly as
acts of celebration, partly as worship, and partly to ensure good
harvests. In both ancient Greece and Rome, dance was so fundamental to
worship and social life that it was considered a necessary part of a young
man’s education. In The Odyssey, Homer describes how, after eating, the
suitors to Penelope “turned their thoughts to … the music and dancing
without which no banquet is complete.”86 Sacred occasions, such as the
games at Olympia from the eighth century BCE, were inaugurated with
dancing by the temple virgins. In the East, the earliest Hindu book on
dance, the Natya Shastra of Bharati, dated to between the second century
BCE and the third century AD is considered a sacred text. As far back as
records go, numerous communities from African tribes to Native
American peoples, to Australian Aborigines, mark key events in the lives
of individuals or the annual cycle, with dancing.
Dance originated as a cohesive symbol of tribal identity,
choreographed in religious ritual. However, in many larger stratified
societies, at least from ancient Egypt onward, dance evolved more
specialized manifestations in which priests or professional dancers
became the representative of the people who would communicate
directly with the gods. From this juncture, dance came to be concerned
with creating effects upon the audience, from inspiring religious
devotion to ensuring that legends and histories were preserved. The
significance attributed to dance also created another professional
position at this early stage, that of the dance instructor, whose job was
to ensure their pupils received an appropriate education. Once dancers
became professionals, dance simultaneously moved into a parallel realm
as display; here, dance sought to communicate with the audience, but
did not involve its members as direct participants. Gradually, in this
domain, the desire for impressive performance led to arduous training
and the development of exceptional physical skills in the dancers,
through which the twin ideals of beauty and athleticism could be
expressed.

Dance may have been steeped in religious symbolism from the outset,
but it has nonetheless endured a long-standing rocky relationship with
the authorities. Throughout time, religious leaders have sought to
control and regulate dance, attempting to constrain it to be a pious
expression of doctrine or faith, or a symbolic casting out of demons. Yet
participation dances have seemingly always been capable of evoking
positive moods, particularly when heightened by pounding rhythms and
intoxicating drugs, leading some practitioners to get carried away. As
early as AD 554, Childebert, King of the Franks, was forced to ban
dancing because of its tendency to descend into depravity, and
throughout the following 1,500 years the Christian church repeatedly
sought to control dance and rid it of any licentious leanings. These
efforts shaped the evolving medium, thereby imposing a top-down
structure and formalism on dances in the form of acceptable steps or
appropriate forms of contact between the sexes. Change through
regulation by authoritative institutions has been a feature of dance
through its history, from the strictures of the church, to the codification
of ballet positions in the seventeenth century, to the production of dance
manuals in recent times.
Dance often generates feelings of release, arousal, pleasure, and
excitement. Let us, as an aside, reflect briefly on why dance should be so
enjoyable. Part of the explanation for the positive mood elicited by
dance may be the release of endorphins that accompanies exercise, and
of hormones such as oxytocin that circulate with increased arousal and
social behavior.87 Another factor is the thrill of courtship in dancing with
someone attractive, or for the observer, the voyeurism associated with
observing lithe, athletic, and appealing young bodies move with grace
and beauty. Yet, in many cultures, individuals of the same sex dance
together in groups and happily share the experience with individuals to
whom they are not sexually attracted. Moreover, people still enjoy dance
when the physical demands are too modest to lead to an endorphin rush.
Of particular interest here is social dance (dancing with a partner or in a
group), especially when the dancing is coordinated and synchronized, as
in ceilidh or “river dance.” Such dance often appears to lead to a sense of
bonding, or at least shared pleasure, and can induce positive emotions in
an audience.88 While some properties of dance that make people feel
socially close are very general, such as sharing attention and goals with

others,89 others may be dance-specific, such as the externalization
through music making of predictable rhythms, which helps people to
synchronize their movements.90 Indeed, synchronized activities have
long been associated with social bonding.91
Here the intriguing relationship between imitation and cooperation,
described in the preceding chapter, may be relevant. We saw how
imitation enhances social interaction and induces positive moods, even
when the imitated individual is unaware of being copied and the
imitator does so unintentionally. Recall that the relationship between
imitation and cooperation is bidirectional; being imitated makes
individuals more cooperative, while being in a cooperative frame of
mind makes one more likely to imitate others.92 These bidirectional,
causal relationships may function to maintain cooperation, collective
action, and information sharing among members of a social group.93 If
positive rewards to synchronous behavior have been favored by selection
to facilitate cooperation, then dancing in a synchronous manner would
be expected to induce warm feelings.94 The same imitative neural
networks in our brains that link sound and rhythm, and thereby allow us
to dance to music, are also almost certainly what explains our tendency
to tap or clap to music, and the pleasure that experience affords.
Just as the fossil record allows biologists and paleontologists to
reconstruct the histories of biological species,95 and to comprehend the
patterns of diversity observed as a combination of historical legacy and
local adaptation, so historical records have allowed dance scholars to
document the journeys that individual dances have undertaken, to make
sense of the variation in form observed, and to understand how the
structure and complexity of some complicated dance forms have arisen
over time. For instance, the origins of most ballroom dances have been
traced back to earlier folk dances, which were adapted and codified by
dancing masters and subsequently exported to other countries as dance
hall fashions. Latin dances have a similar, if more exotic, history. The
origins of the tango can be traced to a slave dance in Cuba, from where it
spread to the River Plate and was transformed, around the turn of the
twentieth century, into the Argentinian classic. Samba is known as the
dance of Brazil, but was originally taken there by African slaves, where
it was transformed into the national dance that explodes onto the streets
of Rio during carnival season. Subsequently, samba was exported around

the world, via film and television, and codified by dance masters as a
ballroom complement. The paso doble, which contains steps that imitate
the bullfight, originates from Spain, but was refined for the ballroom in
southern France. Salsa dancing, so popular today, is a descendant of the
Cuban mambo, a pedigree that it shares with the cha cha cha.96
The history of ballet is also well researched, with a gradual evolution
that 
began 
in 
fifteenth-century 
Italy, 
was 
formalized 
and
professionalized in seventeenth-century France, and polished in
nineteenth-and twentieth-century Russia. Ballet originated in the Italian
Renaissance courts, where noblemen and women were treated to lavish
events; especially at wedding celebrations, dancing and music created an
elaborate spectacle.97 Several important innovations critical to modern
ballet were devised in this period, including the creation of dance
rhythms, codification of movements, emergence of professional dancing
masters and choreographers, and the appearance of dancers in
allegorical or mythical narratives with costumes and settings.98 Dancing
masters taught the steps to the nobility, and the court participated in the
performances.
In the sixteenth century, Catherine de Medici, an Italian noblewoman
who was the wife of King Henry II of France and a great patron of the
arts, began to promote ballet in France. She devised elaborate festivals
that combined dance, costume, song, and music. These were known as
ballet de cour because they were performed in the French courts.
Between 1583 and 1610 there are records of more than 800 ballets being
performed in France.99 Later, King Louis XIV, himself an enthusiastic
dancer, helped to popularize and standardize ballet, and took the first
steps toward professional ballet by forming the Académie Royale de
Danse, as well as the Académie Royale de Musique. In the 1680s, French
opera began to incorporate ballet elements into their performances,
creating an opera-ballet tradition. Women participated as theatrical
dancers, but played a secondary role to men, partly because their
costumes prohibited any great agility.100
By the mid-1700s, ballet began to stand on its own as an art form,
incorporating expressive, dramatic movements capable of telling a story.
Early classical ballets such as Giselle and La Sylphide were created during
the Romantic Movement in the first half of the nineteenth century,
which emphasized the supernatural world of spirits and fairy tales. The

dancer Marie Taglioni is credited with transforming the image of the
ballerina to one exemplifying grace, demure charm, and delicacy, which
fit with the Romantic period’s portrayal of women as passive and fragile.
Taglioni introduced dancing on the tips of the toes, known as pointe
work, which subsequently became the norm for the ballerina. The tutu,
at that stage a calf-length skirt, was introduced to show off the
ballerinas’ intricate footwork. Gradually the ballerina became the central
figure on stage, and it was the male dancer’s turn to be sidelined.101
In the nineteenth century, ballet became a declining art in France
and the baton was passed to Russia, where its popularity, in contrast,
soared. Russian choreographers and composers took ballet to new
heights, producing some of the best-loved classical ballets, including The
Nutcracker, Sleeping Beauty, and Swan Lake. The Russians introduced
their own acrobatic style, incorporating complicated sequences with
demanding steps, leaps, and turns. This set the scene for the return of
gifted and athletic male dancers, such as Vaslav Nijinsky and Rudolf
Nureyev. A much shorter and stiffer classical tutu was introduced at this
time to allow the ballerina greater range of movement. The plots of the
stories were also altered to make them ideologically suited to Soviet
Russia. Subsequently, ballet has thrived in many countries around the
world, 
intertwining 
classical 
forms, 
traditional 
stories, 
and
choreographic innovations.
The history of contemporary dance has also been carefully studied.
The brilliant but heartrending Isadora Duncan is widely considered the
mother of modern dance. Duncan was born in San Francisco in 1878, but
established herself as a dance pioneer in Paris and later moved to
Moscow, inspired by the idea of the Russian Revolution. Duncan rejected
conventional dance in favor of flowing movement in modern dress,
which better expressed her unbridled passions. She was moved by the
ideals of freedom and scholarship that she drew from ancient Greece,
and would dance to classical music, including Beethoven, Wagner, and
Brahms. Initially her dances were light in texture, but from 1913, when
her two children tragically drowned, her art took on a darker form.
Duncan’s short life was marred by drunkenness and marital failure, and
ended prematurely, in calamitous fashion. When she was just 49,
Duncan was strangled by her own scarf when it was caught in the wheels
of her car. However, Duncan left behind a legacy that truly

revolutionized dance. She possessed enormous power to excite and
inspire others, and created a vast following.
Another pioneering American dancer of this period was Ruth St.
Denis, who equally felt the need to break away from the constraints of
ballet, but in her case, she drew inspiration from Asian dances. In 1914,
she married fellow dancer Ted Shawn, and the two of them created the
influential Denishawn School, which integrated ballet, European, and
Oriental dance forms. The most famous Denishawn student was Martha
Graham, who in turn reacted against its Orientalism to usher in a new
expressionist style of contemporary dance relevant to twentieth-century
America. Graham’s principle innovation was a particular technique, in
which the lower back and pelvis are the source of all movement, and
where traveling into space is the result of a subtle off-balancing of the
dancer’s weight.102 Graham effectively devised and codified the language
of modern dance, utilized by the generations that followed her, and
continuing up to the present. Her influence was absolutely central to the
expansion of American modern dance. Indeed, a survey of a hundred
prominent 
contemporary 
dance 
companies 
identified 
“parental”
influences that traced back to seminal troupes; the most prominent of
these was Martha Graham’s company.103
Thus far, I have focused on dance as if it were an isolated and
blinkered province of culture, but any such impression would of course
be entirely misleading. From the outset, dance traditions have been
enriched by tremendously creative interactions with music, fashion, art,
technology, and many other aspects of culture. Dance began in alliance
with music, frequently through instruments of religious ritual. In
traditional African, Asian, and Native American dances, the drum
provides an essential rhythm, which is the heartbeat of the ceremony.
European folk dancers are variously accompanied by musicians and
singers. Flamenco dance, for instance, requires an auxiliary troupe of
guitarists, singers, clappers, and stampers. In fact, music and dance have
always gone hand in hand, with innovation in each art form inspiring
change in the other. From at least the sixteenth century onward, the
demand for public dancing has created an industry of dance music, as
witnessed by the publication of sheet music and, centuries later, of
recordings. The popularity of the waltz stirred Johan Strauss, Frederic
Chopin, and Franz Schubert, among others, to compose some of the most

evocative and romantic classical music, and that music, in turn, fueled
the dance craze. The intimate relationship between music and dance is
seen in the coevolution of the one step and ragtime music, or the jitterbug
and swing music, but is most overt in dance forms that share their name
with the music, such as rock n roll, disco, hip hop, or salsa. Indeed, the
connection is so strong that some aspects of musical rhythm, such as
groove and syncopation, can only be fully understood in the context of
dance.104 Classical music and dance are also strongly connected.
Tchaikovsky, Stravinsky and Prokofiev composed the scores for the
classical ballets Swan Lake, Petrushka, and Romeo and Juliet, respectively.
Likewise, for nearly a century, pioneering modern dancers have
commissioned original music for their performances.
Equally, dress and other forms of adornment have served to heighten
the visual, symbolic, and dramatic power of dance.105 From the earliest
times, performers dressed to dance by painting, decorating, marking, and
even mutilating themselves for their performances, as well as frequently
donning ornate costumes and masks.106 How one dresses has been a
critical aspect of social dancing for centuries. Likewise, clothes and
fashion designers have long been inspired by the way that dancers
look.107 When Marie Taglioni and her contemporaries learned to dance
on their toes they created a market for the blocked pointe shoe. The
subsequent development of pointe technique depended intimately on the
interaction between the materiality of the shoes and the training
methods of the dancers, and these elements coevolved.108 Numerous
other forms of footwear, from ballet slippers to tap shoes, are of course
now widely manufactured, while under the influence of modern dance
choreographers such as Merce Cunningham, contemporary dance has
gravitated toward a simple uniform of leotards and tights.
Clothing fashions have also shaped dance. For instance, in the late
eighteenth century, a neoclassical style swept the world of fashion,
leading to lighter dresses and flatter shoes. These indirectly
revolutionized choreography by permitting greater speed and range of
movement.109 The relationship was reciprocal, and many famous
dancers, including Isadora Duncan and Margot Fonteyn, became fashion
icons who greatly influenced the clothing industries.110 The influence of
dancers on fashion continues to the present.111 Christian Dior, for
instance, was explicitly inspired by the tutus and pointe shoes of

ballerinas, while Yves Saint Laurent was influenced by the Orientalism
of the Ballet Russes.112 Just as professional dance companies
commissioned music from leading composers, so the companies forged
alliances with fashion designers. As early as 1924, Coco Chanel designed
costumes for the Russian ballet Le Train Blue, while in 1965 Yves Saint
Laurent designed for the ballet Notre Dame de Paris. In recent years, it
would appear that virtually everyone in the fashion world, from
Valentino to Vivienne Westwood, is designing dance costumes.113 The
tension between the demands of performance and societal decorum have
led to some famous fashion battles. In 1885, the great nineteenth-
century ballerina Virginia Zucchi caused a scandal by insisting on
performing in a shortened tutu, while in 1910, Vaslav Nijinsky was
sacked after refusing to cover up his tights!114
A long-standing relationship between art and dancing exists. Edgar
Degas devoted much of his career to painting and sculpting dancers, and
Toulouse Lautrec was commissioned to paint the posters for the Moulin
Rouge. Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse each designed sets for various
ballets and dance productions, while Martha Graham collaborated with
the Japanese-American sculptor Isamu Noguchi, whose settings were
thought to enhance a dance’s visual power.115 Dance also shares
entwined histories with theatre, opera, and comedy. Cinema too has
played important roles in popularizing dances, from the ballroom and
tap era of Fred Astaire, Ginger Rogers, and Gene Kelly with classics like
Top Hat and Singin’ in the Rain. Polished film adaptations of dance
musicals have proliferated, such as Oklahoma, Guys and Dolls, and West
Side Story, through to the rock ‘n roll and disco eras, with Rock Around the
Clock, Saturday Night Fever, and Grease.
The evolution of technology has shaped the medium too, most
obviously through the manufacture of music recording and playing
devices, beginning with the gramophone and records in the early part of
the twentieth century, right up to today’s iPods. These advances allowed
the owner to produce music and dance anywhere. The invention of
radio, cinema, and television propagated dance and music, and
transformed regional and national dances into global exports. Printing
and lithography allowed sheet music and dance steps to be formalized
and widely distributed, and also led to the widespread circulation of
prints of dancing icons like Taglioni and Duncan, as well as more

disreputable pictures of scantily dressed dancers. Then there are various
dance industries. These include not just professional dance companies
but also the pursuits of dance instruction, choreography, commercial
dance production, set design, and costume manufacture; the dance hall,
ballroom, and nightclub industries; composition and sales of dancing
books, manuals, and dance music; as well as businesses in dance exercise
and dance therapy. Dance has certainly not evolved in a vacuum, but has
been subject to constant stimulation and cross-fertilization from many
other domains.
This brief précis of how dance has changed over millennia, while
inadequate as a historical analysis, serves I hope to illustrate two
important points. First, in spite of the fact that dance exhibits
bewildering variation in form, the manifest diversity can nonetheless be
understood by tracing back the interwoven histories of each lineage,
recognizing the impact of miscellaneous internal and external influences
that fueled dance innovations, as well as the social contexts to which the
dances were adapted. The chronicle is beguiling, and there are certainly
details of history that have been lost or remain unclear, but the
processes by which such a vast corpus of dance could arise are, at least
in general terms, not at all mysterious. In spite of awesome diversity, we
have no problem comprehending how so much dance could have arisen.
This is significant, since if we can, at least in principle, understand the
processes that explain the diversity of dance, then we should not be
flummoxed by the diversity of foods, medical treatments, motorized
vehicles, or languages. Each cultural sphere may well change through
unique details, but if we think in broad-brush terms about the three
prerequisites of variation, differential fitness, and inheritance, then sheer
diversity is no impediment to comprehending any sphere’s existence.
Second, we can also start to see how, gradually over time, complexes
of complementary ideas have become cobbled together to generate
highly intricate, coherent, and sophisticated dance forms; these are often
deeply embedded in other aspects of culture, particularly music,
technology, costume, and performance. The evolution of ballet, for
instance, is not easily described as the spread of a single ballet “meme,”
but required the painstaking accumulation of countless innovations over
several centuries, each triggering a cascade of reverberations in the other
cultural elements central to the developing structure. In many respects,

the emergence of complex, integrated cultural forms resembles the
evolution of composite biological adaptations—such as the eye—which
typically require the fixation of numerous individual mutations to
exhibit any semblance of adaptedness and design. If, notwithstanding
the awesome talent on show, we can understand how something as
magical as Swan Lake could have come into existence, then the
complexity of satellites, financial markets, or Catholicism are also
rendered potentially comprehensible.
Culture evolves in two senses: the observation that cultural
phenomena change over time, and the evolution of the capacity for
culture. Evolutionary biology can shed light on these issues by helping to
explain how the psychological, neurological, and physiological attributes
necessary for culture came into existence. In the case of dance,
evolutionary insights explain how humans are capable of moving in time
to music; how we are able to synchronize our actions with others or
move in a complementary way; how we can learn long, complex
sequences of movements; why it is that we have such precise control of
our limbs; why we want to dance what others are dancing; and why both
participating in dancing and watching dance is fun. Armed with this
knowledge, we can make better sense of why dance possesses some of
the properties that it does, and why dances changed in the manner they
did. As it is for dance, so it is for sculpture, acting, music, computer
games, or just about any aspect of culture. Biology provides no substitute
for a comprehensive historical analysis. However, our understanding of
the underlying biology feeds back to make the historical analysis so
much richer and intelligible.

EPILOGUE
AWE WITHOUT WONDER
This book began with an innocent glance out of the window to
contemplate the entangled bank of human culture. Like many before me,
I was inspired to ask whether evolutionary theory, such a powerful
source of explanation for the natural world, could also account for the
existence of cars and houses, hospitals and factories, road networks and
electricity grids, or theatrical productions and orchestral symphonies.
Was there a scientific explanation for the origins of technology,
engineering, the arts, and science itself, with roots that could be traced
back to the realm of animal behavior?
Nearly thirty years ago, as a graduate student at University College
London, I first asked these questions, and found myself surprised to be
stymied for an answer. To simply state that building contractors erected
the structures seen (the immediate mechanical explanation) was
inadequate. I wanted to know how we evolved the underlying capability
to build, plan, coordinate, and work together in teams that such
extraordinary edifices demanded. Nor was merely attributing human
successes to our culture, language, intelligence, or cooperation
satisfactory, because these attributes were themselves mysterious, and
utterly unprecedented in the natural world.
The more that I contemplated the problem, the more the multifaceted
richness, complexity, and diversity of human culture appeared to elude
scientific analysis. Rather than leaving me satisfied that evolutionary
principles could explain these most human aspects of our existence,
more and more challenging questions began to emerge, like layers of an
onion. Far from the confident satisfaction that I had expected the
biological sciences to deliver, I was left with an overwhelming sense of
awe and wonder. How on earth were we to account for the majesty of
human culture? The very characteristic that marked our species out as
exceptional, that accounted for our extraordinary ecological and

demographic success as a species, also seemed to separate us from the
rest of nature. Not only were the origins of culture hard to explain, but
there was a huge gulf between the cognitive abilities of humans and
other animals, which far from shrinking as new research emerged over
the decades, was being cemented. How could science bridge that gap?
Now, having dedicated my career to addressing this challenge, and
abetted by the many members of my research group and numerous other
professional colleagues, I finally feel like I have some semblance of an
answer. Certainly it is not the whole story. Probably there are elements
that I have got wrong. Undoubtedly I have not done justice to the
contributions of others. What is important to me, however, is that the
scientific method should have delivered enough insight for the utter
mystery of culture’s origins to have dissipated. Researchers may never
know exactly how the psychological capabilities that underlie our
capacity for culture evolved. A perfect reconstruction of how that
evolved psychology combined with a rich social environment to spawn
myriad ideas, behaviors, and artifacts may also remain evasive.
Nonetheless, a great deal of satisfaction can be derived from the fact that
science now has a credible account of the genesis of central aspects of
the human mind, intelligence, and culture, and in a world in which a
large proportion of the population disputes the fact that humans have
evolved, that is very much worth having. Here is my explanation.
We have learned through extensive experimental work by behavioral
scientists that both copying and innovation are widespread among
animals, but that animals can be highly strategic about the manner in
which they exploit learned information. The social learning strategies
tournament explained much about this learning by demonstrating a
selective advantage to copying when implemented with accuracy and
efficiency. Strategic, high-fidelity copying confers fitness benefits. This
theoretical insight leads to the expectation that natural selection would
have favored more efficient and higher-fidelity forms of social learning,
as well as those neural structures and functional capabilities in the
primate brain capable of bringing this about. In the process, natural
selection will have shaped the evolution of the primate brain and
intelligence.
Comparative data across primates support this suggestion and reveal
strong associations between social learning, innovativeness, and brain

size in primates; social learning also covaries with a number of measures
of intelligence, including naturalistic measures like tool use and
performance in laboratory tests of learning and cognition. The findings
imply that a “cultural drive” process may have been operational across
several distinct primate lineages, whereby natural selection favored
efficient copying. Selection for high intelligence in primates almost
certainly derives from multiple sources; however, comparative analyses
suggest that widespread selection for social intelligence in monkeys and
apes was followed by more restricted selection for cultural intelligence
in the great apes, capuchins, and macaques, mediated by conferred
increases in longevity and diet quality. This selection is thought to have
enhanced several aspects of cognition, including learning, perspective-
taking, computation, tool use, and in particular, collaborative social
interaction.
The comparative analyses, in turn, raise the question of why humans
alone should exhibit a culture that ratchets up in complexity. The
answer, derived from theoretical work, is that complex culture requires
high-fidelity information transmission. Analyses show that small
increases in the accuracy of social transmission can lead to big increases
in the amount and longevity of culture, and that high-fidelity knowledge
transfer is necessary for cumulative culture. In addition, the tournament
taught us that high levels of reliance on social learning automatically
generated extreme longevity of cultural knowledge. Populations
appeared to pass a threshold level of reliance on social learning, above
which cultural knowledge became extremely stable and persisted almost
indefinitely. With increasing social, as opposed to asocial, learning, our
ancestors’ behavior also became more conformist, and started to exhibit
fads and fashions as we commonly see in human populations today. Put
together, these theoretical results suggested that once our ancestors had
evolved sufficiently strategic and accurate forms of copying, many
aspects of the cultural capability witnessed in modern humans would
arise.
How 
did 
our 
ancestors 
achieve 
high-fidelity 
information
transmission? The obvious answer is through teaching, which is rare in
nature but universal in human societies, once the many subtle forms it
takes are recognized. Mathematical analyses reveal tough conditions that
must be met for teaching to evolve, but show that cumulative culture

relaxes these conditions. This implies that teaching and cumulative
culture coevolved in our ancestors, creating for the first time in the
history of life on earth a species that taught their relatives across a broad
range of contexts. Humans are unique in the extensiveness of their
teaching mainly because cumulative culture makes knowledge that is
otherwise difficult to acquire available in the population to be taught.
Teaching is expected to evolve when (1) its costs are low or can be
offset against the costs of provisioning; (2) instruction is highly accurate
and effective in transmission; and (3) there is a strong degree of
relatedness between tutor and pupil. Any adaptation that reduces the
costs of teaching ought to be favored by selection provided that it does
not seriously diminish teaching efficacy. It was here, in the
unprecedented context of the widespread teaching exhibited by our
hominin ancestors, that language first evolved as an adjunct to teaching.
Language is an adaptation, fashioned by natural selection to reduce the
costs, increase the accuracy, and expand the domains of teaching. This
explanation has the advantage that it accounts for the honesty,
cooperativeness, and uniqueness of language, as well as its power of
generalization, how it was grounded, and why it was learned. Human
language is unique, at least among extant species, because only humans
constructed a sufficiently diverse, generative, and changeable cultural
world that demanded talking about. Once our ancestors evolved a
socially transmitted system of symbolic communication, other features of
language, such as compositionality, came along for free.
Experimental studies support the hypothesis that a gene-culture
coevolutionary dynamic arose between socially transmitted skills,
including tool use, and aspects of human anatomy and cognition. This
interaction was ongoing in human evolution from at least 2.5 million
years 
ago, 
and 
has 
continued 
to 
the 
present. 
Theoretical,
anthropological, and genetic studies all attest to the importance of gene-
culture coevolutionary feedback in recent human evolution, which has
shaped both our anatomy and our cognition, and speeded up rates of
change. As expected, the brain regions associated with imitation,
innovation, and tool use are among those that expanded during recent
hominin evolution. Just as biological evolution gave way to gene-culture
coevolution, cultural evolution then took over the reins of human
adaptation, and the pace of change experienced by the members of our

evolutionary lineage accelerated further. Culture provided our ancestors
with food-procurement and survival tricks, and as each new invention
arose, the population was able to exploit its environment more
efficiently. This not only fueled brain expansion but population growth
as well.
Human numbers and societal complexity both increased dramatically
with the domestication of plants and animals and the advent of
agriculture. These freed societies from the constraints imposed on
hunter-gatherers by the requirement to be constantly on the move.
Agricultural societies flourished both because they outgrew hunter-
gatherer communities, through generating an increase in their
environments’ carrying capacity, and because agriculture triggered a raft
of follow-on innovations that dramatically changed human society. In
the larger populations that were supported by agricultural yields,
beneficial innovations were more likely to spread and be retained.
Agriculture precipitated a revolution through not only triggering the
invention 
of 
related 
technologies, 
but 
by 
spawning 
entirely
unanticipated initiatives, such as the wheel, the development of city-
states, and religions. Through oral traditions, dance, and ritual, historical
accounts were preserved and supplemented by externalized cultural
memory stores, from written records and books to today’s computer
banks, which left cultural knowledge increasingly difficult to lose.
The scale and complexity of human cooperation is unprecedented.
Theoretical and experimental data suggest that large-scale cooperation
arose in human societies because of our uniquely potent capacities for
social learning, imitation, and teaching. Culture took human populations
down novel evolutionary pathways, both by creating conditions that
promoted established cooperative mechanisms, such as indirect
reciprocity and mutualism, and by generating novel cooperative
mechanisms not seen in other animals, such as cultural group selection.
In the process, gene-culture coevolution generated an evolved
psychology entirely different from that observed in any other animal.
This evolved psychology comprises a motivation to teach, speak, imitate,
emulate, and share the goals and intentions of others, as well as a
massively upgraded capacity for learning and computation. Theoretical
and experimental studies suggest that both human cognition and culture
differ from those found in other apes because our species uniquely

possesses a package of sociocognitive capabilities that underlie human
culture, including teaching, language, superior imitation, and enriched
prosociality. These capabilities have coevolved with cumulative culture
because they enhance the fidelity of information transmission.
Evolutionary biology can shed light on both the manner in which
contemporary cultural phenomena change over time, and the origins of
the psychological, neurological and physiological attributes necessary for
culture to come into existence. This was illustrated with the example of
the evolution of dance, which revealed, for instance, why humans are
capable of moving in time to music, how we are able to synchronize our
actions with others, and how we can learn long sequences of
movements. In spite of the fact that dance exhibits bewildering variation
in form, this diversity can be understood by tracing back lineages,
recognizing diverse influences underlying dance innovations, and the
social contexts to which dances adapted. We can also see how, gradually
over time, complexes of complementary ideas have been drawn together
to generate highly intricate dance forms that resemble the evolution of
composite biological adaptations. As it is for dance, so it is for other
aspects of culture, whether associated with the arts, the sciences, or
technology; in all elements of culture, new forms arise as refinements or
combinations of existing forms. Extremes of diversity and complexity are
no impediment to scientific investigation. Far from destroying culture,
our understanding of the underlying science feeds back to make the
historical analysis richer and less mysterious. Human culture is indeed
amenable to evolutionary analysis.
With the benefit of hindsight, we can understand now why
illuminating the origins of human cognition and intelligence has proven
such a tough task, one that thwarted the efforts of some of history’s
greatest minds, including Darwin’s. Three factors in particular made this
challenge acutely mountainous. First, the origins of none of the critical
elements of human cognition (our cultural learning, intelligence,
language, cooperation, or powers of computation) can be completely
understood in isolation, because each shaped the others in a nexus of
complex coevolutionary feedbacks. Second, the human mind did not
evolve in a straightforward, linear manner, with changes in the external
environment generating natural selection favoring cognitive adaptations.
Rather, our mental abilities evolved through a convoluted, reciprocally

caused process, whereby our ancestors constantly constructed aspects of
their physical and social environments that fed back to impose selection
on their bodies and minds, in endless cycles. Third, to understand the
intricate dynamic process through which the human mind evolved
required the tools of modern genomics, population genetics, gene-culture
coevolution, anatomy, archaeology, anthropology, and psychology in a
concerted multidisciplinary effort. The elements of this tool box were not
available to Darwin or to any of his predecessors until recently. Our
abilities to think, learn, understand, and communicate leave humanity
genuinely different from other animals. Scientists can now comprehend
that divergence as reflecting the operation of a broad array of feedback
mechanisms in the hominin lineage, through which key elements of
human cognition and culture accelerated together in a runaway,
autocatalytic process.
As I look back now, I can see that my research group’s struggles to
comprehend the evolution of culture proved difficult for the very same
reasons as understanding the origins of the human mind has proved
challenging to the broader scientific community. The human cultural
capability did not evolve in isolation but in intricate coevolution with
central aspects of cognition and behavior, including our language,
teaching, intelligence, perspective-taking, powers of computation,
cooperative tendencies, tool use, memory, and control of the
environment. An unanticipated bonus for our efforts is that in struggling
to understand the origins of culture, we may in the process have shed
some light on the origins of the human mind, language, and intelligence.
I would like to believe that my efforts, and those of the many
talented scientists that shared this journey with me, have gradually
chipped away at some of the bewilderment that the dazzling complexity
of human culture originally inspired. Yet the creative and analytical
power of the human mind, and the insatiable potency with which
cultural evolution generates ever more richness to our cultural lives,
remain just as impressive. The magic of a Mozart, a Shakespeare, or a da
Vinci, lingers every bit as poignantly in light of the deeper
understanding that an evolutionary analysis of cultural origins affords.
The genius of Alan Turing, Marie Curie, and Isadora Duncan continues to
be just as inspirational. The awe remains, even if a small part of the
wonderment subsides.

NOTES
CHAPTER 1: DARWIN’S UNFINISHED SYMPHONY
1.  Darwin 1859, p. 459.
2.  Cultural evolution is the idea that changes in human cultural beliefs, knowledge, customs,
skills, and languages can be understood as an evolutionary process. Mesoudi 2011, and
Richerson and Boyd 2005 provide recent overviews, while Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman
1981, and Boyd and Richerson 1985 give pioneering and important formal treatments.
3.  In The Selfish Gene (1976), Richard Dawkins introduces the notion of the “meme,” a
cultural replicator with gene-like properties. However, the modern science of cultural
evolution derives very little from memetics. For an introduction to the now extensive
experimental and theoretical work that underpins this field, see Mesoudi 2011, Richerson
and Boyd 2005, or Henrich 2015. For a critical evaluation of the field, see Lewens 2015.
4.  The uniqueness of human cooperation is discussed in Boyd and Richerson 1985, Richerson
and Boyd 2005, Henrich and Henrich 2007, and Henrich 2015.
5.  Caro and Hauser 1992, Hoppitt et al. 2008, and Thornton and Raihani 2008 provide
reviews of animal teaching. Thornton and McAuliffe 2006 describe teaching in meerkats,
one of the most compelling examples of animal teaching.
6.  Cooperation in animals is not restricted to kin selection, and can occur through a variety of
mechanisms. See Nowak and Highfield 2011 for a recent overview.
7.  Darwin 1871, p. 160.
8.  Currie and Fritz 1993.
9.  Winterhalder and Smith 2000, Brown et al. 2011.
10.  Gagneux et al. 1999.
11.  Klein 1999, Boyd and Silk 2015.
12.  Sterelny 2012a makes this case in more detail.
13.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Tomasello 1994, Richerson and Boyd 2005, Boyd et al. 2011,
Henrich 2015.
14.  Pinker 2010.
15.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Tomasello 1994, Richerson and Boyd 2005; Boyd et al. 2011,
Henrich 2015.
16.  Basalla 1988, Petroski 1992.
17.  Petroski 1992.
18.  Ibid.
19.  See Petroski 1992 for a detailed treatment.
20.  Cumulative culture is also described as “ratcheting”; see Tomasello 1994.
21.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, 2005; Tomasello 1999; Whiten and Van Schaik 2007; Pagel
2012.

22.  Zentall and Galef Jr. 1988, Avital and Jablonka 2000, Leadbeater and Chittka 2007,
Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
23.  My use of the term “copying” throughout this book refers to any form of “social
learning,”—that is, any means by which one animal comes to learn as a consequence of
observing or interacting with another animal or its products.
24.  Warner 1988, Whiten et al. 1999, Van Schaik et al. 2003, Perry et al. 2003, Rendell and
Whitehead 2001, Fragaszy and Perry 2003.
25.  Fragaszy and Perry 2003, Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
26.  On whales, see Rendell and Whitehead 2001, and Whitehead and Rendell 2015. On birds,
see Mundinger 1980, Avital and Jablonka 2000, Emery and Clayton 2004, and Emery
2004.
27.  For chimpanzees, see Whiten et al. 1999, 2009; for orangutans, see Van Schaik et al. 2003;
for capuchin monkeys, see Perry et al. 2003.
28.  Whiten 1998, Whiten et al. 2009.
29.  Tomasello and Call 1997.
30.  Claims of cumulative culture in animals remain rare and controversial (Tennie et al. 2009,
Dean et al. 2012, 2014). One possibility is provided by the complex fishing tools of
chimpanzees (Sanz et al. 2009), while a second are the stepped pandanus foraging tools of
New Caledonian crows (Hunt and Gray 2003).
31.  Boesch 2003.
32.  Tennie et al. 2009.
33.  Ectoparasite manipulation, well digging, and the use of sets of tools in sequence are all
candidates for cumulative culture. See Boesch 2003, and Sanz et al. 2009.
34.  Hunt and Gray 2003.
35.  A recent study failed to find evidence for the observational learning of problem solving in
these birds (Logan et al. 2015), but it is difficult to rule out the possibility that social
learning might play a role in the acquisition of foraging skills and dietary preferences in
more naturalistic settings, particularly as these birds are known to acquire a wide variety of
rich foods through tool use (Rutz et al. 2010).
36.  Basalla 1988, Ziman 2000.
37.  McBrearty and Brooks 2000, D’Errico and Stringer 2011.
38.  McPherron et al. 2010.
39.  Stringer and Andrews 2005.
40.  Ibid., Klein 2000.
41.  Stringer and Andrews 2005.
42.  Thieme 1997.
43.  James 1989.
44.  Movius 1950, Stringer and Andrews 2005.
45.  Mellars 1996.
46.  McBrearty and Brooks 2000.
47.  For hafting implements, see Boeda et al. 1996. For awls, see Hayden 1993.
48.  These dates are usually associated with Europe, but there is increasing evidence for this
“Upper Paleolithic” technology in other regions of the world, and at earlier times. See
McBrearty and Brooks 2000.
49.  Stringer and Andrews 2005.
50.  Ibid.
51.  Bronowski 1973, Diamond 1997.
52.  Ibid.
53.  Laland and Galef Jr. 2009, Whiten et al. 2011.

54.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, 1996; Galef Jr. 1992; Heyes 1993; Boesch and Tomasello 1998.
55.  For a readable introduction to the history of the field of human evolution research, see
Lewin 1987; for a more up-to-date summary, see Boyd and Silk 2015.
56.  Darwin 1859, p. 458.
57.  Darwin 1871, p. 327.
58.  See the entry for René Descartes in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Hatfield 2016).
59.  Darwin 1872.
60.  Wallace 1869; see also “The Limits of Natural Selection as Applied to Man (S165:
1869/1870)” 
on 
the 
Alfred 
Russel 
Wallace 
Page
(http://people.wku.edu/charles.smith/wallace/S165.htm).
61.  However, a variety of interpretations can be found; see http://wallacefund.info/wallace-
biographies.
62.  Darwin 1871, p. 158.
63.  See Miller’s The Mating Mind (2001) for an account of the evolution of intelligence that is
heavily reliant on Darwinian sexual selection theory.
64.  Tomasello and Call 1997.
65.  See Shettleworth 2010 for an excellent introduction.
66.  Witness, for instance, the chapters in Kappeler and Silk 2009, in which the existence of a
gap between the intellectual abilities of humans and other animals is acknowledged. See
also Suddendorf 2013.
67.  Linden 1975; Wallman 1992; Radick 2007; Byrne and Whiten 1988; Whiten and Byrne
1997; de Waal 1990, 1996, 2007, 2010.
68.  See, for instance, the writings of philosopher Peter Singer or primatologists Frans de Waal
and Jane Goodall.
69.  Morris 1967.
70.  Lorenz 1966, Ardrey 1966.
71.  Diamond 1991.
72.  Lewin and Foley 2004, Stringer and Andrews 2005.
73.  Glazko et al. (2005) report that 80% of proteins are different between humans and
chimpanzees.
74.  Frazer et al. 2002.
75.  Haygood et al. 2007.
76.  Fortna et al. 2004.
77.  Hahn et al. 2007.
78.  Calarco et al. 2007.
79.  King and Wilson 1975.
80.  Carroll 2005, Müller 2007.
81.  Birney 2012.
82.  Other minor differences exist too, such as the eszett, which is a letter that exists only in
German.
83.  Carroll 2005.
84.  Voight et al. 2006, Wang et al. 2006. See Laland et al. 2010 for an overview.
85.  Caceres et al. 2003.
86.  Enard, Khaitovich, et al. 2002.
87.  Taylor 2009.
88.  Striedter 2005.
89.  Other recently discovered members of our genus include Homo naledi and H. floresiensis.
90.  Henrich et al. 2001.
91.  For an overview of human cooperation see Henrich and Henrich 2007, or Henrich 2015.

92.  Jensen et al. 2007.
93.  Fehr and Fischbacher 2003, Richerson and Boyd 2005, Henrich and Henrich 2007.
94.  Tomasello and Call 1997.
95.  Povinelli et al. 1992, Tomasello and Call 1997, Tomasello 2009.
96.  Premack and Woodruff 1978.
97.  Call and Tomasello 2008.
98.  Call et al. 2004, Call and Tomasello 1998.
99.  Heyes 1998, Seyfarth and Cheney 2000.
100.  Call and Tomasello 2008.
101.  Onishi and Baillargeon 2005.
102.  Dennett 1983.
103.  See, for instance, Call and Tomasello 2008, Herrmann et al. 2007, and Whiten and Custance
1996.
104.  Herrmann et al. 2007.
105.  Whiten 1998, Whiten et al. 2009, Tomasello and Call 1997.
106.  Horner and Whiten 2005, Dean et al. 2012.
107.  Byrne and Whiten 1988, Whiten and Byrne 1997, Dunbar 1995, Tomasello 1999.
108.  Hauser 1996.
109.  Seyfarth et al. 1980.
110.  Caesar et al. 2013.
111.  Janik and Slater 1997; Wheeler and Fischer 2012, 2015.
112.  Bickerton 2009.
113.  Ibid.
114.  For more on attempts to teach apes to talk, see Gardner and Gardner 1969, Terrace 1979,
and Radick 2008.
115.  Radick 2008, Bickerton 2009, Fitch 2010.
116.  Herbert Terrace famously “changed his mind” about apes possessing language. After many
years of working with chimpanzee Nim Chimpsky, he was forced to conclude that Nim’s
behavior could be understood as the product of established learning processes and did not
imply any linguistic ability. See Terrace 1979.
117.  de Waal 1990, 1996, 2007, 2010.
118.  Dawkins 2012.
119.  Silk 2002.
120.  This is also known as vicarious instigation (Galef Jr. 1988). Emotional contagion is
discussed in Berger 1962, Curio et al. 1978, Kavaliers et al. 2003, Olsson and Phelps 2007,
and Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
121.  de Waal 1990, 1996, 1999, 2007, 2010.
122.  See Bshary et al. 2002, and Bshary 2011; see also Abbott 2015.
123.  de Waal 1990, 1996, 2007, 2010.
124.  Lewin and Foley 2004, Stringer and Andrews 2005.
125.  Ibid.
126.  Caceres et al. 2003.
127.  Enquist et al. 2008, 2011.
128.  Barrett et al. 2001.
129.  The World Intellectual Property Organization’s 2013 report described 2.35 million patent
applications filed worldwide in 2012 alone. They also reported that 24 million trademark
registrations 
were 
active 
worldwide. 
See
http://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/intproperty/941/wipo_pub_941_2013.pdf.

CHAPTER 2: UBIQUITOUS COPYING
1.  Galef Jr. 2003, p. 165.
2.  Galef Jr. 2003; Barnett 1975.
3.  Darwin 1871.
4.  Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
5.  Darwin 1871, p. 50.
6.  Twigg 1975; Barnett 1975.
7.  Steiniger 1950.
8.  Hepper 1988.
9.  Galef Jr. and Henderson 1972.
10.  Galef Jr. and Clark 1971b.
11.  Ibid.
12.  Galef Jr. and Clark 1971a.
13.  Galef Jr. and Buckley 1996.
14.  Galef Jr. and Heiber 1976, Laland and Plotkin 1991, Galef Jr. and Beck 1985.
15.  Laland 1990, Laland and Plotkin 1991.
16.  Laland and Plotkin 1993.
17.  Galef Jr. and Wigmore 1983, Posadas-Andrews and Roper 1983, Galef Jr. et al. 1988.
18.  Galef Jr. et al. 1984.
19.  Laland and Plotkin 1993.
20.  Galef Jr. and Allen 1995.
21.  Valsecchi and Galef Jr. 1989, Galef Jr. et al. 1998, Lupfer et al. 2003, McFayden-Ketchum
and Porter 1989, Lupfer-Johnson and Ross 2007, Ratcliffe and Ter Hofstede 2005.
22.  Atton 2013.
23.  Dornhaus and Chittka 1999, Leadbeater and Chittka 2007.
24.  Jablonka and Lamb 2005, Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
25.  Fisher and Hinde 1949, Hinde and Fisher 1951.
26.  Marler 1952.
27.  Marler and Tamura 1964; Catchpole and Slater 1995, 2008.
28.  Von Frisch 1967.
29.  Kawai 1965.
30.  Kawai 1965.
31.  Wilson 1975, Bonner 1980.
32.  Kummer and Goodall 1985.
33.  Huffman and Hirata 2003, Reader et al. 2011.
34.  McGrew and Tutin 1978, McGrew 1992.
35.  de Waal 2001, Galef and Laland 2009.
36.  Whiten et al. 1999, 2001.
37.  Ibid.
38.  Ibid.
39.  Hoppitt and Laland 2013, chapter 7.
40.  Lonsdorf 2006.
41.  Lonsdorf et al. 2004.
42.  Pongo spp.
43.  Van Schaik et al. 2003, Van Schaik 2009.
44.  Ibid.
45.  Ibid.
46.  Cebus capuchinus.

47.  Perry et al. 2003, Perry 2011.
48.  Huffman 1996, Huffman and Hirata 2003, Leca et al. 2007.
49.  Darwin 1841.
50.  Leadbeater and Chittka 2007 point out that there are several routes by which honeybees
could have acquired this behavior, only some of which involve social learning.
51.  Blue tits (Cyanistes caeruleus). Great tits (Parus major).
52.  Slagsvold and Weibe 2007, 2011.
53.  Ibid.
54.  Slagsvold et al. 2013.
55.  Slagsvold et al. 2002, Hansen et al. 2008.
56.  Johannessen et al. 2006.
57.  Slagsvold and Hansen 2001.
58.  Sargeant and Mann 2009.
59.  Rendell and Whitehead 2001, Baird 2000.
60.  Schuster et al. 2006.
61.  Thornton et al. 2010, Kirschner 1987.
62.  Cloutier et al. 2002.
63.  Elgar and Crespi 1992.
64.  Mery et al. 2009.
65.  Dugatkin 1992, Witte and Massmann 2003, Godin et al. 2005.
66.  White and Galef Jr. 2000, White 2004, Swaddle et al. 2005.
67.  Galef 2009.
68.  Little et al. 2008, and Jones et al. 2007.
69.  Fruit flies (Drosophila melanogaster). Mery et al. 2009.
70.  See, for instance, Goldsmidt et al. 1993, Kraak and Weissing 1996, and Forsgren et al. 1996.
71.  Largiader et al. 2001.
72.  Poecilia reticulate.
73.  Dugatkin 1992.
74.  Dugatkin and Godin 1992.
75.  Poecilia mexicana.
76.  Witte and Ryan 2002.
77.  Plath et al. 2008.
78.  Catchpole and Slater 1995, 2008.
79.  Caldwell and Caldwell 1972, Janik and Slater 1997.
80.  Tursiops spp.
81.  Orca orca.
82.  Megaptera novaeangliae. See Janik and Slater 1997 for much of the research on these
species.
83.  Payne and Payne 1985.
84.  Noad et al. 2000.
85.  Garland et al. 2011.
86.  Throughout this book I adopt the common scientific convention of using the term “fishes”
to refer to multiple species of fish, with the term “fish” being the plural applied to multiple
individuals of the same species.
87.  Brown and Laland 2003, 2006.
88.  Thalassoma bifascatum.
89.  Warner 1988.
90.  Warner 1990.
91.  Boyd and Richerson 1985.

92.  Diamond 2006.
93.  Laland and Williams 1997, 1998.
94.  Couzin et al. (2005) show that as the number of informed individuals in an animal group
(such as a shoal of fish) increases there is a corresponding increase in the ability of these
knowledgeable individuals to lead a group to a desired location, such as a food source.
Nonetheless, these authors found that the proportion of knowledgeable individuals can be
strikingly small and yet are still able to lead the group effectively. At the extreme, less than
5% of the individuals can have the information and, provided they deploy some simple
rules, such as leading the others to aggregate and move together, all of the group will reach
the destination. A recent analysis of baboons confirmed these earlier findings, with the
movements of individuals shaped more by a small number of individuals moving in a
particular direction together than by high-status individuals imposing their decisions on
others when conflicts over movement patterns arise (Strandberg-Peshkin et al. 2015).
95.  Laland & Williams 1997, 1998.
96.  Stanley et al. 2008.
97.  Warner 1988, 1990; Helfman and Schultz 1984.
98.  Lachlan et al. 1998, Laland and Williams 1998.
99.  Lachlan et al. 1998, Day et al. 2001, Pike and Laland 2010.
100.  Laland and Williams 1998.
101.  Warner 1988.
102.  Mueller et al. 2013.
103.  Biesmeijer and Seeley 2005.
104.  Macaca mulatta.
105.  Mineka and Cook 1988, Mineka et al. 1984.
106.  Mineka and Cook 1988.
107.  Ibid., Mineka et al. 1984.
108.  Mineka and Cook 1988.
109.  Turdus merula.
110.  Curio 1988.
111.  Hoppitt and Laland 2013, Olsson and Phelps 2007, Leadbeater and Chittka 2007.
112.  Brown and Laland 2001, Hirvonen et al. 2003, Brown and Day 2002.
113.  Brown, Markula, et al. 2003; Brown, Davidson, et al. 2003; Brown and Laland 2002.
114.  I place the terms “instinct” and “innate” in quotes to highlight the fact that these are
problematic terms. Not only are they ambiguous, with multiple meanings (unlearned,
species-specific, evolved, unchanging, etc.) attached to each, but these meanings have been
found frequently to not co-occur. See Bateson and Martin 2000 for discussion.
115.  Gerull and Rapee 2002.
116.  Bandura and Menlove 1968, Mineka and Zinbarg 2006, Olsson and Phelps 2007.
117.  Rogers 1988.
CHAPTER 3: WHY COPY?
1.  Pennisi 2010 (the commentary), p. 167; Rendell et al. 2010.
2.  Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
3.  Bandura et al. 1961.
4.  Carpenter 2006.
5.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Tomasello 1999.
6.  Anderson and Bushman 2001.
7.  Halgin and Whitbourne 2006.

8.  Horner and Whiten 2005.
9.  Whiten et al. 2009.
10.  Lyons et al. 2007.
11.  Over and Carpenter 2012.
12.  Evans 2016.
13.  Flynn 2008.
14.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Rogers 1988, Feldman et al. 1996, Henrich and McElreath 2003,
Enquist et al. 2007.
15.  Barnard and Sibly 1981, Giraldeau and Caraco 2000.
16.  Or at least, this is what has generally been assumed. In a study carried out by one of my
students, Alice Cowie, on social foraging in budgerigars (small parrots), we found that
producer birds in fact consistently garnered more food than scroungers (Cowie 2014). This
may reflect a tendency for budgerigars to satisfice—that is, settle for a reasonable return. It
may imply that the birds do not have good comprehension of the returns available for other
strategies, or perhaps there are constraints, such as ability or personality differences, that
render switching strategies difficult for some individuals.
17.  Kameda and Nakanishi 2002.
18.  In fact, more recent theoretical work suggests that this conclusion may not always be
robust, and there are a variety of circumstances under which social and asocial learning
will not have equal fitness at equilibrium (Boyd and Richerson 1985; van der Post and
Hogeweg 2009; Rendell et al. 2010; Rendell, Boyd, et al. 2011).
19.  Rogers 1988.
20.  A strategy is an ESS if, were it adopted by the whole population, it cannot be invaded by
any other strategy that is initially rare.
21.  Giraldeau et al. 2002, Henrich and McElreath 2003.
22.  Boyd and Richerson 1985.
23.  Tellier 2009.
24.  Caselli et al. 2005.
25.  This conclusion is reinforced by theoretical models that allow for more strategic copying
behavior—for instance, only copying where asocial learning fails, or copying in proportion
to the payoff to the copied individual—which reveals fitness benefits to copying over
asocial learning (see Boyd and Richerson 1995, Laland 2004, and Enquist et al. 2007).
26.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Rogers 1988, Feldman et al. 1996, Giraldeau et al. 2002.
27.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Henrich and McElreath 2003, Laland 2004.
28.  Laland 2004.
29.  Ibid.
30.  Ibid.
31.  Henrich and McElreath 2003; Laland 2004; Kendal et al. 2005; Kendal et al. 2009; Rendell,
Fogarty, Hoppitt, et al. 2011; Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
32.  There is circumstantial evidence consistent with all of these ideas, and more, although that
data (a combination of experimental and observational findings) is rarely sufficiently
detailed to be able to specify a unique strategy that is supported. More frequently, the
findings are consistent with multiple alternative strategies (Rendell, Fogarty, Hoppitt et al.
2011; and Hoppitt and Laland 2013).
33.  See, for instance, Kendal et al. 2009.
34.  The term “optimal” is given in quotes here to signify the fact that there is a subtle
difference between those traits that are expected to evolve in a given circumstance and
those that are optimal. In reality, most theoretical analyses of this nature—for instance,
those using evolutionary game theory—are seeking ESS’s, which are better characterized as

“uninvadable” rather than globally optimal (Maynard-Smith 1982).
35.  Axelrod 1984.
36.  European Commission contract FP6–2004-NESTPATH-043434.
37.  The payoffs were drawn from an exponential distribution.
38.  When the payoffs of a multi-armed bandit change over time, the bandit is termed “restless.”
Restless multi-armed bandits are widely recognized as hard problems, and satisfactory
analytical solutions have not been found (Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis 1999).
39.  New behaviors were selected at random.
40.  This is known as an exploration-exploitation trade-off.
41.  The set of rules was specified either verbally, in “pseudocode,” or in a computer language
(Matlab).
42.  To do this, we established pairwise contests in which initially all agents in the population
utilized a single strategy, and then a small number of agents using the alternative strategy
would be introduced. We then looked to see whether the introduced strategy could invade
and take over the population by outcompeting the resident. The strategy that was more
effective at performing high-payoff behavior would, on average, be able to reproduce more
frequently than the alternative, and would come to dominate. Each pairwise match
comprised repeated 10,000-round contests between a pair of strategies, which took turns in
being the resident and invader. We recorded the average frequency of each strategy in the
population over the last 2,500 rounds of each simulation and gave each strategy a score
that was the mean of these values over the simulations in which it participated.
43.  The euro to USD exchange rate has changed since the time of the tournament, but the value
given represents the amount around the time of the contest.
44.  The full list of fields is anthropology, biology, computer science, engineering,
environmental science, ethology, interdisciplinary centers, management, mathematics,
philosophy, physics, primatology, psychology, sociology, and statistics.
45.  As in Axelrod’s tournament, the best-performing strategy had also come from Canada.
46.  In the melee, DISCOUNTMACHINE won 35% of its contests, substantially more than the
second-placed strategy INTERGENERATION, which won 24% of contests.
47.  Indeed, many of the top strategies relied more heavily on recently acquired information.
48.  Here, uniquely among the finalists, DISCOUNTMACHINE used a proxy of geometric
discounting.
49.  Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
50.  Asch 1955, Latane 1981, Boyd and Richerson 1985, Henrich and Boyd 1998, Morgan et al.
2012, Morgan and Laland 2012.
51.  Rogers 1988.
52.  Rogers 1988, Feldman et al. 1996, Wakano et al. 2004.
53.  Rendell et al. 2010.
54.  Furthermore, the mean lifetime payoff in the population when all strategies competed
together under the same conditions was lower than the levels achieved by lower-ranking
strategies when playing alone.
55.  Tilman 1982.
56.  Kendal et al. 2009.
57.  The average lifetime of agents in our tournament was 50 rounds. Life expectancy at birth
for humans is currently around 67 years globally, which has increased from 26 years since
the Bronze and Iron ages (Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1961). This affords a crude comparison
between tournament rounds and human years.
58.  Rendell, Boyd, et al. 2011; Laland and Rendell 2013.
59.  In my judgment, the success of the tournament was in part attributable to the use of a

multi-arm bandit. Multi-armed bandits have been widely deployed to study learning across
a host of academic disciplines, including biology, economics, artificial intelligence, and
computer science, because they mimic a common problem faced by individuals who must
make decisions about how to allocate their time in order to maximize their payoffs (Schlag
1998, Koulouriotis and Xanthopoulos 2008, Gross et al. 2008, Bergemann and Valimaki
1996, Niño-Mora 2007, and Auer et al. 2002). They capture the essence of many difficult
problems in the real world—for instance, where there are many possible actions, only a few
of which yield a high payoff; where it is possible to learn asocially or through observation
of others; where copying error occurs; and where the environment changes. Of course, the
simulation framework remains a simplification of the real world where, for instance,
individuals may choose demonstrators with particular characteristics and where direct
interactions between individuals operate (Apesteguia et al. 2007, Boyd and Richerson 1985,
and Laland 2004). It remains to be established to what extent our results will hold if these
are introduced in future tournaments, where the specific strategies that prospered in ours
may not do so well. (At the time of writing, my collaborators and I are currently analyzing
the findings of the second social learning strategies tournament, which has three extensions
of the original framework, allowing for model-based biased, spatially variable
environments, and cumulative cultural learning.) Nonetheless, our tournament offers
greater realism than past analytical theory, which is why I place particular weight on its
findings. The basic generality of the multi-armed bandit problem we posed lends
confidence that the insights derived from the tournament will prove to be reliable and
general.
60.  In the tournament, individual strategies had no control over the rate of copy error, but it is
easy to see how, had mutant strategies been allowed that could reduce copy error, these
strategies would have thrived, for the same reason that copying thrives: each time copy
error occurs, strategies receive a randomly chosen behavior (or in some of our simulations,
no new behavior), while accurate copying taps into those high-return behaviors selected for
performance by the demonstrators.
61.  Lyons et al. 2011.
62.  Van Bergen et al. 2004.
63.  The most compelling example is found in the caching behavior of scrub jays (Clayton and
Dickinson 1998, 2010; see also Suddendorf and Corballis 2007).
64.  Fisher 1930.
65.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1981.
CHAPTER 4: A TALE OF TWO FISHES
1.  Indeed, the whole notion of a “genetic program” has come into scientific disrepute. For
developmental biologists, the metaphor of genotype as “program” or “blueprint” has
proved inconsistent with the dynamic, reciprocal nature of development and inheritance
emerging from their studies (see, e.g., Gottlieb 1992, Keller 2010, and Pigliucci and Müller
2010). Developing organisms both modify gene expression and modify developmental
environments, generating feedback in the processes of ontogeny that invoke organism-
environment relationships and nongenetic inheritance as causes of species-typical,
invariant, phenotypes typically seen as “genetically determined” by evolutionary biologists
(Oyama 1985, Gottlieb 1992, Oyama et al. 2001, Gilbert 2003, Jablonka and Lamb 2005,
Keller 2010, Bateson and Gluckman 2011, and Uller 2012).
2.  See Brown and Laland 2003, 2006; and Laland et al. 2011 for reviews of social learning in
fishes.

3.  See http://www.fishbase.org/home.htm.
4.  Our studies of primates are observational studies conducted in zoos or in the wild, and we
have never kept primates in our laboratory.
5.  For my laboratory’s fish-study derived insights into innovation, see Laland and Reader
1999a, 1999b. For our fishbased insights into social learning, see Day et al. 2001; Brown
and Laland 2002; Reader et al. 2003; Brown et al. 2003; Kendal et al. 2004; Kendal, Coolen
et al. 2005; Croft et al. 2005; Webster, Adams, and Laland 2008; Webster and Laland 2008,
2011, 2012, 2013; and Duffy et al. 2009. For our studies of diffusion of innovations in
fishes, see Reader and Laland 2000, Swaney et al. 2001, Morell et al. 2008, Atton et al.
2012, and Webster et al. 2013. For our studies of traditionality in fishes, see Laland and
Williams 1997, 1998; and Stanley et al. 2008.
6.  The now prevalent approach of using a specific form of social learning in a specific animal
as a model system for exploring some more general issues concerning social learning
processes was pioneered by Jeff Galef, the Canadian psychologist whose rat work is
described in chapter 2. Galef spent over 30 years investigating the transmission of dietary
preferences among rats via cues on their breath, and the system proved highly productive,
leading to countless valuable insights that were published in over a hundred papers.
7.  Templeton and Giraldeau 1996.
8.  Gasterosteus aculeatus.
9.  Pungitius pungitius.
10.  In our more recent public-information use experiments, conducted by Mike Webster, the
demonstrators and food patches were placed in entirely separate tanks, adjacent to the test
tank, to rule out any possibility of residual olfactory cues interfering with the findings. This
refinement in the apparatus did not change the experimental findings—ninespines but not
threespines exhibited public-information use.
11.  Milinski et al. 1990, Frommen et al. 2007, Atton et al. 2012, Webster et al. 2013.
12.  Boyd and Richerson 1985.
13.  The number of dorsal spines actually varies considerably in Pungitius pungitius, ranging from
7–12, but with most individuals having 9 or 10. The same species is also known as the
tenspined stickleback in some locations.
14.  Hoogland et al. 1957.
15.  A theoretical framework for studying such phenomena originated in economics. It considers
a scenario where individuals copy others’ choices without regard to their personal
information, thereby leading to informational cascades where everyone ends up doing the
same thing irrespective of whether it is the best thing to do (Bikhchandani et al. 1992,
1998; Giraldeau et al. 2002).
16.  Giraldeau et al. 2002.
17.  Coolen et al. 2005.
18.  The argument being made here is that the experimental subjects swam toward the former
location of the larger shoal as a means to find food, even though the demonstrator fish
were no longer present, and when present had not been feeding. This is thought to be
plausible, because fish have been shown to learn to associate aggregations of fish with
opportunities to feed (Brown and Laland 2003).
19.  Van Bergen et al. 2004.
20.  We doubt this is simply due to forgetting, as sticklebacks have been shown to retain patch
preferences for periods longer than a week (Milinski 1994).
21.  Schlag 1998.
22.  Kendal et al. 2009.
23.  Pike et al. 2010.

24.  Schlag 1998.
25.  Schlag (1998) termed his rule “proportional observation,” and his analysis demonstrated
that this rule is an optimal social learning strategy, which will take populations to the
fitness maximizing behavior.
26.  The “ratcheting up” that occurs through the use of this hill-climbing algorithm in
sticklebacks differs from human cumulative culture in that it is bounded. The algorithm
potentially allows animals to approach the optimal behavior in an environment, but at that
juncture cumulative knowledge gain would stop. This stands in contrast to human
cumulative culture, in which new behavior or products opens up further possibilities for
innovation in an unbounded manner.
27.  Webster and Laland 2011.
28.  Krause and Ruxton 2002.
29.  Wingfield et al. 2001, Kambo and Galea 2006.
30.  Kavaliers et al. 2001.
31.  The absence of sex differences in nonreproductive fish, and the intermediate level of
copying exhibited by them, confirms that it is reproductive state, not sex, that favors
divergent sex-specific adaptive social learning strategies (Webster and Laland 2011).
32.  Culaea inconstans.
33.  Apeltes quadracus and Spinachia spinachia.
34.  See, for instance, Emery and Clayton 2004.
35.  Laland 2004.
36.  The primary source of this idea is Boyd and Richerson’s 1985 book Culture and the
Evolutionary Process. This discussed “transmission biases” that affect the likelihood of
exploiting socially available knowledge.
37.  See, for instance, Boyd and Richerson 1985, Giraldeau and Caraco 2000, and Schlag 1998.
38.  Coolen et al. 2003.
39.  Van Bergen et al. 2004.
40.  Pike and Laland 2010.
41.  Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
42.  Grüter et al. 2010, Grüter and Ratnieks 2011.
43.  Webster and Laland 2008.
44.  Mason 1988.
45.  Horner et al. 2010.
46.  See Hoppitt and Laland 2013 for a summary of these data.
47.  Morgan et al. 2012.
48.  Wood et al. 2012 reached comparable conclusions in a study with children.
49.  For instance, there are no data consistent with sticklebacks pursuing a random copying
strategy, nor is there evidence found for copy if dissatisfied (Pike et al. 2010).
50.  Laland 2004, Rendell, Fogarty, Hoppitt, et al. 2011; Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
51.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Henrich and McElreath 2003, Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
52.  Coolen et al. 2003, Van Bergen et al. 2004.
53.  Coolen et al. 2005.
54.  Ibid.
55.  Pike and Laland 2010.
56.  Henrich and Boyd 1998.
57.  Laland 2004. There are good evolutionary reasons for anticipating hierarchical
organization of behavior (Dawkins 1976), and hierarchical control has been reported for a
great deal of human and animal behavior (Byrne et al. 1998).
58.  Both of these views can be found in the literature (e.g., Boyd and Richerson 1985, Heyes

2012, Henrich 2015).
59.  This stance is explicitly in accordance with behavioral ecologists’ use of the phenotypic
gambit (Grafen 1984). It does not matter whether animals adopt such strategies as a
consequence of evolved psychological mechanisms, learning, culture, or some combination
of processes. Strategies can still fruitfully be studied as if the simplest genetic system
controlled them (Laland 2004). This pragmatic stance has proven extremely productive in
the field, but experimental investigations of the underlying learning mechanisms are also
important to a complete understanding of the phenomenon.
60.  Shettleworth 2001.
61.  Mineka and Cook 1988.
62.  Marler and Peters 1989.
63.  Sealey 2010.
64.  Thornton and McAuliffe 2006.
65.  Rutz et al. 2010.
66.  For instance, in canaries, aggression between males has been found to preclude social
transmission (Cadieu et al. 2010).
CHAPTER 5: THE ROOTS OF CREATIVITY
1.  Fisher and Hinde 1949, Hinde and Fisher 1951, Martinez del Rio 1993.
2.  Hinde and Fisher 1972.
3.  Sherry and Galef Jr. 1984, 1990; Kothbauer-Hellman 1990.
4.  Lefebvre 1995.
5.  Lefebvre 1995.
6.  Byrne 2003, Reader and Laland 2003a, Lefebvre et al. 2004, Casanova et al. 2008.
7.  Russon 2003.
8.  Young 1987.
9.  Eaton 1976.
10.  J. M. Brown 1985.
11.  Goodall 1986.
12.  Hosey et al. 1997.
13.  Schönholzer 1958.
14.  Morand-Ferron et al. 2004. These authors report that there are now several species of birds
that have picked up the dunking habit.
15.  Reader and Laland 2003a.
16.  Kummer and Goodall 1985; Lefebvre et al. 1997; Reader and Laland 2001, 2002, 2003b;
Biro et al. 2003.
17.  Sol 2003.
18.  Sol and Lefebvre 2000, Sol et al. 2002.
19.  Greenberg and Mettke-Hofman 2001.
20.  Laland and Reader 2009.
21.  Boinski 1988.
22.  Kummer and Goodall 1985.
23.  Thorndike described this as follows: “The Law of Effect is that, other things being equal,
the greater the satisfyingness of the state of affairs which accompanies or follows a given
response to a certain situation, the more likely that response is to be made to that situation
in the future” (1898, p. 103). In modern parlance, we would simply say that actions that
are followed by a positive outcome are likely to be repeated, while those followed by a
negative outcome will be eliminated.

24.  This learning process is nowadays known as “operant” or “instrumental conditioning.”
25.  Morgan 1912.
26.  Thorpe 1956, Cambefort 1981, Lefebvre et al. 2004.
27.  Zentall and Galef Jr. 1988, Heyes and Galef Jr. 1996, Box and Gibson 1999, Galef Jr. and
Giraldeau 2001, Shettleworth 2001, Fragaszy and Perry 2003.
28.  Kummer and Goodall 1985.
29.  Kummer & Goodall 1985, p. 213.
30.  Hamadryas baboons (Papio hamadryas). See Kummer and Kurt 1965.
31.  Laland and Reader 1999a, 1999b; Laland 2004; Sol, Lefebvre, et al. 2005; Gajdon et al.
2006.
32.  Kummer and Goodall 1985, p. 213. This article is also reproduced in Reader and Laland
2003a, where the quote is found on page 234.
33.  Reader and Laland 2003a.
34.  Reader and Laland 2003b.
35.  See Reader and Laland 2003b for discussion.
36.  Nihei 1995.
37.  See http://www.snopes.com/photos/animals/carwash.asp.
38.  Reader and Laland 2003b.
39.  This stance contrasts with some definitions of human innovation, which refer to acquisition
of a novel act by any route as innovation, and the initial inception as “invention” (Rogers
1995).
40.  Reader and Laland 2003b.
41.  Simon and I chose to adopt a broad definition of animal innovation deliberately (Reader
and Laland 2003b). Our definition, for instance, made no distinction between totally novel
behavior and modifications of existing behavior, as had been the practice among
researchers studying birdsong learning (Slater and Lachlan 2003). Some researchers argued
that we should reserve the term “innovation” for qualitatively new or cognitively
demanding tasks or processes. However, we felt that it would have been a mistake to insist
that an innovator must express a previously unobserved motor pattern, demonstrate an
unusual cognitive ability, or devise a sophisticated product since this might undermine the
collection of data. Moreover, it is open to question whether such criteria could be applied
objectively. Virtually all animal innovators have likely used motor actions already in their
repertoire (Hinde and Fisher 1951), while subjective judgments of cognitive ability or
complexity are infamously vulnerable to anthropocentric prejudice. As I described in
chapter 2, when Imo the Japanese macaque first invented sweet potato washing,
researchers were greatly impressed, and she was heralded as a “genius” and “gifted.”
However, subsequent study established that food washing is a common feature in the
behavior of several macaque species. Armed with this background knowledge, Imo’s
invention still qualifies as an innovation by my definition, but would have been
mischaracterized had the definition stipulated that some level of complex cognition must
be involved. The key characteristic of animal innovation is the introduction of a novel
behavior pattern into a population’s repertoire. See Ramsey et al. (2007) for an alternative
view.
42.  Née Rachel Day.
43.  Bateson and Martin 2013.
44.  Day 2003, Kendal et al. 2005.
45.  This finding is replicated in other studies (Reader and Laland 2001, 2009; Laland and
Reader 2010).
46.  A recent example is provided by the diffusion of foraging information in sticklebacks (Atton

et al. 2012).
47.  Laland and Janik 2006, Laland and Galef 2009.
48.  Day 2003, Kendal et al. 2009.
49.  A recent study reveals strikingly similar findings in humans, with innovation increasing
with age and experience, and imitation showing a corresponding decrease (Carr et al.
2015).
50.  Studies of other primates have found that adults acquire information more efficiently and
can recognize and classify objects more quickly than nonadults (Menzel and Menzel 1979,
and Kendal et al. 2015).
51.  Leontopithecus (lion tamarins), Saguinus (tamarins), Callithrix (marmosets). Day et al. 2003.
52.  Gibson 1986.
53.  King 1986.
54.  Rowe 1996.
55.  Ibid.
56.  Dunbar 1995.
57.  Gibson 1986, King 1986.
58.  Sturnus vulgaris (starlings).
59.  Boogert et al. 2008.
60.  If social learning underlies the diffusion of innovations, we would expect individuals
acquiring the behavior later in the diffusion to exhibit shorter learning times, given that
they will have more demonstrators than the individuals that acquire the behavior early.
This proved to be the case. Contact latency and solving duration were negatively
correlated, consistent with social learning underlying the spread of solving.
61.  Aplin et al. 2012, Aplin et al. 2014.
62.  Network based diffusion analysis was initially developed by Franz and Nunn 2009, but was
extended by Hoppitt et al. 2010a, 2010b; Hoppitt and Laland 2011; and Nightingale et al.
2015. Statistical packages allowing implementation of the methods are available from my
website http://lalandlab.st-andrews.ac.uk/freeware.html.
63.  Webster et al. 2013, Allen et al. 2013, Claidiere et al. 2013, Aplin et al. 2014.
64.  Poecilia reticulate.
65.  The mazes were designed so that at each partition, fish were initially required to swim
away from the smell of the food in order to reach it. This was important, since it meant
that the task could not be solved merely by swimming up an odor gradient.
66.  Reader and Laland (2000) found a significant positive correlation between the time taken
for guppies to complete a maze for the first time and the number of trials that it took to
learn the maze according to a trials-to-criterion measure (e.g., completing the maze within
a set time window, with no wrong turns, on three consecutive trials), which legitimized our
use of the first solver as a proxy measure of innovation.
67.  Laland and Reader 1999a.
68.  In addition, in order to be confident that it was the quest to find food that generates these
patterns in who swims the maze first, we replicated the experiments with no food in the
tanks. When we did so, all of the reported differences disappeared, confirming that the
original patterns were specifically related to the foraging task.
69.  Oikawa and Itazawa 1992, Pedersen 1997.
70.  Reader and Laland 2000.
71.  Laland and Reader 1999b.
72.  All fish received some food, no health problems to any fish arose from this feeding regime,
and the entire procedure was overseen by the university vet to ensure that no animal
welfare concerns arose.

73.  Bateman 1948, Trivers 1972.
74.  Kokko and Monaghan 2001, Kokko and Jennions 2008.
75.  Brown et al. 2009.
76.  Bateman 1948, Trivers 1972, Davies 1991.
77.  Reznick and Yang 1993, Sargent and Gross 1993.
78.  Ibid.
79.  Farr and Herrnkind 1974.
80.  Magurran and Seghers 1994.
81.  Lefebvre et al. 1997.
82.  Wilson 1985. Wilson also called this hypothesis “behavioral drive,” but I prefer the term
cultural drive, since it is more descriptive of Wilson’s proposed mechanism.
83.  See also Wyles et al. 1983.
84.  Measured per avian parvorder (a taxon above superfamily and below infraorder).
85.  Various factors can bias the number of reports of innovation associated with a species. For
instance, in theory, researchers might study some species more than others, some birds
might live in locations where their behavior is more likely to be observed, or journals
might be more willing to publish articles on some species than others. It is important that
such factors are controlled for in comparative analyses, so they do not distort the
conclusions.
86.  Lefebvre et al. 2004.
87.  Sol and Lefebvre 2000; Sol et al. 2002; Sol, Duncan, et al. 2005; Sol 2003.
88.  Ibid.
89.  Sol, Lefebvre, et al. 2005.
90.  Again, consistent with Wilson’s hypothesis, both innovation rate and brain size have
recently been shown to correlate with avian species (and subspecies) richness, suggesting
that evolutionary rates are accelerated in large-brained, innovative taxa, as the behavioral
drive hypothesis predicts (Nicolakakis et al. 2003; Sol 2003; and Sol, Stirling, et al. 2005);
Lefebvre et al. (2016) reached a similar conclusion in Darwin’s finches, a different group of
birds.
91.  Reader and Laland 2001, 2002. Nearly half of the examples were innovations in foraging,
but innovations also appeared in aggressive, communicative, display, grooming, sexual,
and play behaviors, and a number of other contexts.
92.  Reader and Laland 2001.
93.  Jolly 1966, Humphrey 1976, Byrne and Whiten 1988.
94.  Reader and Laland 2001, Van Bergen 2004.
95.  Daubentonia madagascariensis (aye-aye), Galagos (busy babies).
96.  Reader and Laland 2002.
97.  These relationships between rates of innovation or social learning and brain size have now
been replicated several times, using a variety of different methods and brain measures, and
have proven robust. See Reader et al. 2011, and Navarette et al. 2016 for details.
98.  DeVoogd et al. 1993.
99.  Krebs et al. 1989, Hampton et al. 1995, Jacobs and Spencer 1994.
100.  Barton 1999, Joffe and Dunbar 1997, Harvey and Krebs 1990, De Winter and Oxnard 2001.
101.  The same study (Reader and Laland 2002) found that tool use also fit this pattern.
102.  Lefebvre et al. 1997, Reader and Laland 2002.
103.  We found that the frequency of tool use also covaried with brain size, innovation, and
social learning, as might be expected if innovative primates used tools to solve many of
their problems (Reader and Laland 2002). A couple of years later Cambridge PhD student
Yfke van Bergen found that rates of extractive foraging—that is, removing concealed or

embedded food from a substrate, such as eating nuts or honey—also covaried with brain
size and innovation in primates (Van Bergen 2004).
104.  Leadbeater and Chittka 2007b.
105.  Wisenden et al. 1997.
106.  Dunbar and Shultz 2007a, 2007b.
CHAPTER 6: THE EVOLUTION OF INTELLIGENCE
1.  The cells of multicellular organisms contain mitochondria, the organelles that convert
chemical energy from food into a form of energy that the cells can use. Mitochondria
possess a small amount of DNA. Mitochondrial DNA is inherited maternally, with no
recombination. Therefore, assuming it accumulates mutations at a roughly constant rate,
the number of differences between individuals will covary with the time since they shared
a common ancestor, and knowledge of the mutation rate allows such ancestors to be dated.
See Cann et al. 1987; note mitochondrial Eve is not the common ancestor of all humans,
but rather the ancestor of all human mtDNA. Cann et al. extracted mitochondrial DNA from
186 people around the world and used it to construct a genealogy. All of the oldest
branches of the tree terminated in the mtDNA of modern Africans, and the African
branches exhibited more variation. Since the mitochondria in any population are descended
from a single woman in the past, this woman was given the name “Eve”—but she was
obviously not the only woman living at the time, nor was she the first female human. The
authors’ finding suggests Eve was an African who lived about 200 kya (CI = 100–400; kya
= 1,000 years ago). Vigilant et al. (1991), also from Wilson’s lab, refined this estimate to
166–249 kya.
2.  The Out of Africa model specifies that between 100 and 200 kya, anatomically modern H.
sapiens arose in Africa and later spread around the world, replacing the other archaic
populations with little or no gene flow.
3.  This was a Human Frontier Science Programme postdoctoral fellowship.
4.  Wilson’s cultural drive hypothesis was first published in 1983 (Wyles et al. 1983), and later
elaborated on in Wilson 1985. However, it was spelled out most clearly in Wilson 1991.
5.  Wyles et al. 1983; Wilson 1985, 1991.
6.  Wilson 1991, p. 335.
7.  Large animals typically have large organs, and small animals, small organs. For instance,
being much larger than humans, whales possess larger brains than we do, while cows have
bigger brains than most monkeys. When body size and brain size are plotted against each
other, a positive correlation is found. Many researchers studying brain evolution maintain
that the actual size of an animal’s brain relative to the brain size one would expect for an
animal of that size is a better indicator of the animal’s intelligence than the absolute size of
the animal’s brain. However, this remains a contentious issue. One complication is that
animals’ brains vary in their neuronal density, with primates possessing both large relative
brain sizes and unusually high neuronal densities.
8.  Wyles et al. 1983.
9.  Wilson 1985, p. 157.
10.  Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
11.  Lynch 1990 examined the rates of change of cranial morphology in mammals, and
concluded that the rate of morphological divergence of almost all lineages, including the
great apes, is consistent with the expectations of a neutral evolution model (i.e. the analysis
provides little evidence that selection affects evolutionary rates). The only data point for
which an elevated rate of long-term evolution was observed is for humans. Lynch suggested

that this could be an artifact of temporal scaling, but in recent years this conclusion has
been refuted by extensive genetic data showing a massive increase in the rate of molecular
evolution in humans (e.g., Hawks et al. 2007, Cochran and Harpending 2009). At the time
of writing, the idea that “behavioral drive” or “cultural drive” has accelerated evolutionary
rates in mammals (hominins aside) and birds is supported by little concrete evidence, and
it may be that the mechanism Wilson envisaged has solely affected rates of evolution in
hominins, or even just humans. In contrast to the impact on evolution rates, the hypothesis
that behavioral/cultural drive is causally responsible for the evolution of large brains and
complex cognition is now supported by extensive data (Reader and Laland 2002, Reader et
al. 2011, and Navarette et al. 2016). Throughout this book, my references to cultural drive
refer to this latter effect.
12.  Deary 2001.
13.  MacPhail 1982.
14.  Lefebvre et al. 1997.
15.  Reader and Laland 2002.
16.  See Kaufman and Kaufman 2015 for a recent overview of this literature. See also Reader et
al. 2016 and articles therein.
17.  Chittka and Niven 2009.
18.  Rendell et al. 2010.
19.  Brass and Heyes 2005, Heyes 2009.
20.  Kohler 1925, Tomasello 1999.
21.  The claim that animals cannot follow the majority behavior if they cannot compute that
behavior is not true in all circumstances. For instance, following simple rules, groups of
animals can also accurately and quickly come to a consensus and travel in the direction
preferred by the majority, despite the fact that individuals are likely to have no explicit
knowledge of whether they are in the majority or minority, or even if there are any other
informed individuals at all (Couzin et al. 2005, Couzin 2009).
22.  Evolutionary models have shown that it is almost always adaptive to do what the majority
are doing, because this “conformist transmission” is a very effective means for individuals
to acquire the locally optimal behavior (Boyd and Richerson 1985, and Henrich and Boyd
1998).
23.  A caveat here is that if the frequency of performance of a behavior correlates positively
with the frequency of individuals that exhibit that behavior, then the former may prove to
be a useful proxy for the latter, particularly because the former may well be easier for
animals to compute. Indeed, a recent study found that in great tits, these two variables
were correlated (Aplin et al. 2015).
24.  Whiten and Van Schaik 2007, Van Schaik and Burkart 2011.
25.  Van Schaik et al. 1999.
26.  This advantage arises through the animals increasing the likelihood of their relatives
reproducing (i.e., increasing their inclusive fitness); see Hamilton 1964.
27.  Fragaszy and Perry 2003, Lonsdorf 2006, Biro et al. 2006, Fragaszy 2012, Schuppli et al.
2016.
28.  Goodall 1986, Lonsdorf 2006, Biro et al. 2006.
29.  Reader 2000.
30.  See previous chapter.
31.  Goodall 1986, Lonsdorf 2006, Biro et al. 2006.
32.  Boyd and Richerson 1985.
33.  Kaplan et al. 2000, Kaplan and Robson 2002.
34.  As discussed later, there are grounds for anticipating that cultural drive might also have

operated in other animal taxa—for instance, in whales, parrots, and corvids.
35.  Cheney and Seyfarth 1988, Reader and Lefebvre 2001.
36.  Cosmides and Tooby 1987, Carruthers 2006, Roberts 2007.
37.  MacPhail and Bolhuis 2001, Byrne 1995.
38.  Dunbar and Shultz 2007a, 2007b.
39.  Tomasello and Call 1997, Herrmann et al. 2007.
40.  For instance, primate genera differed in their performance in laboratory tests of cognition,
with great apes typically outperforming other primates (Tomasello and Call 1997, Deaner et
al. 2006). Moreover, in two primate species, cotton-top tamarins and common
chimpanzees, individual performance had been found to covary across multiple laboratory
tasks (Banerjee et al. 2009, Herrmann et al. 2010). These and related data from other
mammals and birds (Emery and Clayton 2004, Matzel et al. 2003, Kolata et al. 2008) can be
viewed as consistent with the hypothesis that a single general cognitive factor underlies
laboratory performance.
41.  Reader and Laland 2002, Deaner et al. 2000, Byrne 1992.
42.  Lefebvre et al. 1997.
43.  Lefebvre et al. 1997, 2004; Lefebvre 2010.
44.  Byrne and Whiten 1988, Whiten and Byrne 1997.
45.  Byrne and Whiten 1990.
46.  Byrne and Corp 2004.
47.  Byrne and Whiten 1988, Whiten and Byrne 1997.
48.  Kudo and Dunbar 2001, Nunn and Van Schaik 2002, Kappeler and Heyman 1996.
49.  Dunbar 1992.
50.  Ibid.
51.  Diet breadth data were compiled by allocating prey to 13 categories. These were (1)
invertebrate prey; (2) vertebrate prey; (3) fruit, fungus, and honey; (4) seeds and nuts; (5)
exudates; (6) flowers; (7) nectar / pollen; (8) roots, tubers, bulbs, and truffles; (9) leaves,
shoots, stems, herbs, and buds; (10) wood and bamboo; (11) bark; (12) pith; and (13)
lichen, with each species given a score between 1 and 13 to specify diet breadth.
52.  Dunbar 1995; Dunbar and Shultz 2007a, 2007b.
53.  We also carried out factor analyses, which gave equivalent results to the PCAs (see
electronic supplementary material of Reader et al. 2011, table S1).
54.  All corrected for research effort (the fact that some species are studied more than others,
and hence will have higher reports).
55.  Reader et al. 2011 called this single dominate component primate gs1. The “s” subscript
denotes that primate g is an across-species construct, while the “1” in the subscript specifies
that it is the first of multiple measures of primate g, computed in different ways.
56.  See table 1 in Reader et al. 2011.
57.  All 10 pairwise correlations between the five cognitive measures were strongly significant
(p < 0.001). See table 3 in Reader et al. 2011.
58.  We called this principal component primate gs2. The dominant eigenvalue = 3.77, and was
significantly higher than all other components. The eight-variable PCA also extracted a
second component, on which diet breadth, percentage of fruit in diet, and group size
loaded. See table 2 in Reader et al. 2011. We found that primate gs2 covaried strongly with
primate gs1.
59.  If the relationship between different measures of primate cognitive ability reflects an
evolutionary history of coevolution, then the primate gs component should remain when
phylogeny is taken into account using independent contrasts for each measure. Repeated

using CAIC (Purvis and Rambaut 1995), the five-variable PCA revealed a single component
on which all cognitive measures loaded (n = 57, d.f. = 14, χ2 = 70.20, p < 0.0001,
variance contribution = 0.53, extractive foraging, social learning, and tool-use loadings =
0.76–0.84, innovation and tactical deception loadings = 0.66 and 0.55, respectively).
Further analyses can be found in Reader et al. 2011.
60.  The finding is no artifact. We took several approaches to address potential confounding
variables. The observed associations were not caused by data points that qualified
simultaneously for more than one measure, since these were removed. Nor are the
associations an artifact of the covariance of each individual measure with brain volume,
body mass, or correlated error variance in research effort; analyses using residuals of each
cognitive measure from multiple regressions that included (i) relative brain volume, (ii)
body mass, (iii) that did not correct for research effort, or (iv) that deployed five
independent measures of research effort gave equivalent results (See Reader et al. 2011,
electronic supplementary material). To account for the possibility that observers may be
more willing to ascribe behavioral flexibility to the great apes than to other primates, we
repeated the analysis with great apes removed, finding equivalent results (Reader et al.
2011, electronic supplementary material). To address the concern that there may be error
in individual species data, particularly in the case of species that have not been well
studied, we repeated the PCA using the same procedures at the genera level. Once again,
we found a single dominant component (χ2 = 116.28, p < 0.0001, variance contribution
= 75%). The same pattern was observed when the analysis also incorporated Deaner et
al.’s (2006) genus-level composite index of performance in laboratory tests of cognition (χ2
= 131.12, p < 0.0001, variance contribution = 73%). Deaner et al.’s reduced model
measure (inversed so that high scores represent high performance) loads heavily on g
(loading = 0.73). This supports the argument that laboratory performance is reliant on
general intelligence and demonstrates the covariation of six cognitive measures across
extant primate genera.
61.  Deary 2001, p. 17.
62.  The strong correlation between distinct measures of primate cognitive performance that
Reader et al. 2011 found, was, of course, strikingly evocative of the correlations in
performance on different IQ tests observed in humans. The most likely explanation for this
correspondence is that the g factor reported in humans reflects underlying general
processes that evolved in our common ancestors and are thus shared by our primate
relatives. Naturally, care is warranted in interpreting this finding, since here the observed
associations occur across, rather than within, species.
63.  This corresponds to each species’ loadings on the principal component.
64.  Cacajao calvus.
65.  Principal Component Analysis (PCA) can be used to calculate factor scores for each
component it extracts, providing a composite score for the variables loading on a
component. Reader et al. 2011 calculated gs1 factor scores to provide a composite gs
measure for each species, which can be interpreted as a measure of comparative general
intelligence. On average, the Hominoidea (excluding humans) outscored other taxa, but no
significant mean differences in gs1 scores were found between Cercopithecoidea, Ceboidea,
and Prosimii.
66.  For instance, neocortex ratio (neocortex size relative to rest of brain size) or executive brain
ratio (neocortex and striatum relative to brainstem) give similar results.
67.  The associations between gs1 and various measures of brain size are given in table 4 of
Reader et al. 2011. Subsequent to conducting these analyses we have collected further brain

data, which we used when conducting the analyses again, but with more powerful
statistical methods. The findings have proven very robust (Street 2014, Navarette et al.
2016).
68.  Gray and Thompson 2004, Van der Maas et al. 2006, Deary 2000, Schoenemann 2006.
69.  Deaner et al. 2006.
70.  Animals are classified hierarchically, with closely related species in genera, closely related
genera in families, closely related families in orders, and so forth. Primates occupy the
taxonomic rank of an order, and comprise multiple families (including the great apes, the
Old World monkeys, the capuchin and squirrel monkeys, etc.). Each primate genera can be
regarded as the major subdivision of one of these primate families, typically consisting of
more than one species.
71.  Deaner et al. 2006.
72.  Riddell and Corl 1977.
73.  Lefebvre 2010, Healy and Rowe 2007, Dechmann and Safi 2009.
74.  Reader and Laland 2002; Van Schaik and Burkart 2011; Dunbar 1995; Byrne and Whiten
1988; Whiten and Byrne 1997; Harvey and Krebs 1990; Barton 2006; Deaner et al. 2000;
Dunbar and Shultz 2007a, 2007b; Clutton-Brock and Harvey 1980.
75.  Reader et al. 2011.
76.  This was done with the use of MACCLADE v. 4.08.
77.  Cebus.
78.  Papio.
79.  Macaca.
80.  Hominoidea. It is important to note that while humans are located within the superfamily
with the highest gs scores, the analysis conflicts with a Scala naturae conception, suggesting
instead that convergent selection may have repeatedly favored intelligence in distant
primate lineages. This interpretation involves fewer evolutionary events, and is thus more
parsimonious than all alternative scenarios, such as that high general intelligence evolved
once in the common ancestors of apes and Old World monkeys and was then repeatedly
lost. Some variance among genera is probably attributable to measurement error, and error
variance is expected to be highest in the least-studied taxa.
81.  To address the concern that the data for little-studied species may be unreliable, Reader et
al. 2011 repeated the phylogenetic reconstruction with the less well-studied species
removed, finding similar results. Reader et al.’s 2011 results are consistent with findings
that great apes’ social learning abilities are superior to other primates (Van Schaik and
Burkart 2011, Whiten 2011) and are broadly consistent with Van Schaik and Burkart’s
2011 meta-analysis of taxonomic differences in primate cognition; however, the Reader et
al. analysis provides no evidence for a difference between prosimians and monkeys.
82.  Cosmides and Tooby 1987, Carruthers 2006.
83.  Fernandes et al. 2014.
84.  Cheirogaleus medius.
85.  Striedter 2005, Montgomery et al. 2010.
86.  Finlay and Darlington 1995, Rilling and Insel 1999, Striedter 2005.
87.  Barton and Venditti 2013.
88.  Striedter 2005.
89.  Ibid.
90.  Finlay and Darlington 1995, Shultz and Dunbar 2006.
91.  This statement also holds irrespective of whether brain evolution is better characterized by
variation in a single dimension of size or by the independent evolution of component parts
(Finlay and Darlington 1995, Barton and Harvey 2000, Deaner et al. 2000, and Dunbar and

Shultz 2007b).
92.  Stephan et al. 1981.
93.  Healy and Rowe 2007.
94.  Sally Street was cosupervised by Gillian Brown.
95.  This work was funded by grants from the John Templeton Foundation and an ERC
Advanced Grant.
96.  These specimens derived from recently deceased animals in zoos, which had died for other
reasons. No animals were sacrificed for the study.
97.  The analyses entailed a combination of phylogenetically controlled multiple regression
models, multivariate Bayesian phylogenetic Poisson models, and phylogenetically
controlled causal graph analysis.
98.  Strictly speaking, what these analyses can achieve is to identify variables that are unlikely
to be causally involved, and thereby allow us to reject alternative hypotheses. For instance,
the analyses do not prove that selection for longer, slower lifespans was a primary cause of
the evolution of large primate brains and high intelligence. However, a cluster of
hypotheses in which longevity is causally involved in the evolution of intelligence remain
credible, while alternative hypotheses stressing other factors as the primary agents of
selection can be dismissed as inconsistent with the data.
99.  Street 2014, Navarette et al. 2016. At the time of writing, this work is ongoing.
100.  Kaplan et al. 2000.
101.  Whiten et al. 1999, Van Schaik et al. 2003, Perry et al. 2003, Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
102.  Kaplan et al. 2000.
103.  Causal-graph analyses support these conclusions, with the best-supported graphs in
phylogenetic exploratory path analyses linking technical innovation directly to brain size
and social learning, and nontechnical innovation to brain size via diet and life-history
measures (Navarette et al. 2016).
104.  Kaplan et al. 2000. Mathematical theory suggests that a longer juvenile period can also be
favored if there are important gains in productive ability with body size—for instance,
through juvenile social learning from adults (Kaplan and Robson 2002).
105.  Dunbar 1995; Dunbar and Schultz 2007a, 2007b.
106.  Reader et al. 2011.
107.  Group size can be viewed as a marker or indicator variable for this social intelligence, with
large brains favored among primates because of the computational demands of living in
large, complex societies. Recently Dunbar and Shultz refined their argument slightly to
suggest that what favors large brains is selection for the cognitive skills needed to manage
intense forms of pair bonding, with primate societies based on bonded relationships that
are only found in pair bonds in other taxa (Dunbar and Schultz 2007b).
108.  Here various measures of slow life history (particularly maximum longevity and duration of
the period of juvenile dependency) can be viewed as a marker or indicator variable for this
cultural intelligence, with large brains and longer lifespans favored in specific primate
lineages because of the computational demands of acquiring complex skills (e.g., tool use)
through social learning.
109.  Henrich 2004a; Powell et al. 2009.
110.  Striedter 2005.
111.  Ibid.
112.  I say dubious because there are multiple other differences among primates, whales, and
elephants, both with respect to their anatomy and the environments that they encounter
(e.g., terrestrial vs. aquatic), that make such comparisons difficult to interpret. For this
reason, most comparative analyses of brain evolution focus on smaller taxonomic groups,

such as the mammalian orders.
113.  Several researchers have emphasized the importance of the size of the prefrontal cortex or
frontal lobes (Deaner et al. 2006, Dunbar 2011).
114.  Byrne 1995, Dunbar 2011, Striedter 2005, MacLean et al. 2014.
115.  Striedter 2005.
116.  Ibid.
117.  Deacon 1990.
118.  Rakic 1986, Purves 1988.
119.  By the same reasoning, disproportionately large brain regions should attract some new
inputs, and disproportionately small regions should lose some old inputs.
120.  Heffner and Masterton 1975, 1983.
121.  Deacon 1990.
122.  Finlay and Darlington 1995, Barton and Venditti 2013.
123.  Fernandes et al. 2014.
124.  Barton 2012.
125.  Navarette et al. 2016.
126.  Barton and Capellini 2011. The relationship between brain size and longevity in mammals
is well established, but has generally been interpreted as indicative of a constraint on,
rather than a cause of, brain evolution, including in primates (Dunbar and Shultz 2007a).
Our analyses of this issue are ongoing and are not entirely unequivocal. Hence the
hypothesis that the observed relationship between brain size and longevity in primates
signifies developmental constraint rather than cultural drive remains a possibility, even
though it is currently not the best-supported explanation.
127.  Glickstein and Doron 2008, Wolpert et al. 1998.
128.  On nut cracking in chimpanzees, see Marshall-Pescini and Whiten 2008. On nettle
processing in gorillas, see Byrne et al. 2011.
129.  Byrne 1997.
130.  Hunt and Gray 2003, Rendell and Whitehead 2001, Emery and Clayton 2004, Bugnyar and
Kortschal 2002.
131.  Interestingly, episodic-like memory has recently been demonstrated in rats and
chimpanzees (Corballis 2013, and Clayton and Dickinson 2010), species not renowned for
their food caching, but famed for their social learning. This fits with Allan Wilson’s
argument.
132.  Emery and Clayton 2004.
133.  Ibid. Note, such comparisons between distantly related species are dubious (see n. 112,
above).
134.  Emery and Clayton 2004.
135.  Heyes and Saggerson 2002, Pepperberg 1988, Moore 1996.
136.  Rendell and Whitehead 2001, 2015; Krutzen et al. 2005; Allen et al. 2013.
137.  Wilson 1985.
138.  Moas: Dinornithiformes. Elephant birds: Aepyornithidae.
139.  A fascinating case study here is the Hawaiian crow (Corvus hawaiiensis), which shows
remarkable tool-using capabilities and yet lies on the verge of extinction (Rutz et al. 2016).
This species would appear to be highly adept at using tools to probe for invertebrate prey,
but seemingly fails to show the behavioral flexibility to adjust to changed environmental
conditions.
140.  Wilson 1985, Boyd and Richerson 1985, Pagel 2012.
CHAPTER 7: HIGH FIDELITY

1.  Joseph Henrich has recently written a compelling book on this topic (The Secret of Our
Success, 2015) that answers this question in a manner very consistent with the arguments
presented here; however, his discussion focuses largely on humans.
2.  Henrich 2004a, Powell et al. 2009.
3.  Enquist et al. 2010.
4.  Cultural parents, as the term implies, are the cultural equivalents of biological parents.
They are transmitters of information. For instance, if an individual acquires cultural
knowledge from two biological parents and one schoolteacher, then they have three
cultural parents.
5.  For instance, the Enquist et al. 2010 analysis seemed to imply that one-to-one transmission
was infeasible, though the social learning literature was replete with claims to the contrary,
including daughters learning from their mothers, or sons from their fathers.
6.  Tomasello 1994.
7.  Laland and Hoppitt 2003, Laland et al. 2009.
8.  Hoppitt and Laland 2008, 2013.
9.  Laland et al. 1993.
10.  Whiten and Custance 1996, Whiten 1998.
11.  Whiten et al. 1999.
12.  Darwin 1871.
13.  Whiten et al. 1999.
14.  This too would serve to promote more culture in humans rather than other animal groups,
since the former are typically more populous. The findings reinforce earlier theoretical
studies that imply demographic factors, such as how large and well connected a population
is, could make a big difference to how much culture it would exhibit (Henrich 2004a,
Powell et al. 2009).
15.  Boesch 2003 (chimpanzees), Hunt and Gray 2003 (New Caledonian crows).
16.  Tomasello 1994, Tennie et al. 2009, Galef Jr. 1992, Heyes 1993.
17.  Galef Jr. 1992, Galef 2009, Heyes 1993, Whiten and Erdal 2012, Dawkins 1976. Dawkins
emphasizes the importance of fidelity to effective replicators.
18.  Lewis and Laland 2012.
19.  Such analyses, which are a commonly used tool within behavioral and evolutionary
biology, iterate processes or recursive equations through the use of a computer program to
investigate how systems are expected to evolve under diverse conditions.
20.  Lewis and Laland 2012.
21.  An increase in novel invention has been shown to increase the number of independent
cultural traits held by an individual and a population (Lehmann et al. 2011).
22.  Enquist et al. 2011; Boyd and Richerson 1985; Reader and Laland 2003a, 2003b.
23.  Lehmann et al. 2011, Enquist et al. 2011, Eriksson et al. 2007, Strimling et al. 2009, Van der
Post and Hogeweg 2009.
24.  Enquist et al. 2011.
25.  Lewis and Laland 2012.
26.  Our analysis built on the modeling framework developed by Enquist et al. 2011, which
focuses on the cultural traits present in a population, rather than considering the specific
traits held by individuals, or individual-level processes. This allows us to look at the
cultural development of a population based on general cultural rates, and explore the
complex dependencies among cultural processes; we then can go beyond the simple
accumulation of a single one-dimensional improvement or of multiple unrefined traits.
27.  After Enquist et al. 2011. For simplicity, we assumed that there were up to 10 seed traits in
a population. To begin, each cultural group was initialized with two cultural seed traits,

selected at random.
28.  We carried out two types of simulation. For the first, the four events were constrained such
that ρ1 + ρ2 + ρ3 + ρ4 = 1. In this case, one of these four events must happen at the
next time step, which corresponds to the assumption that the time between events is
variable. This analysis allowed us to avoid any assumptions about underlying demographic
rates (births, deaths, migrations) and to interpret the results in several ways with respect to
time. Additionally, this approach is computationally simple and therefore allowed
exploration of many parameter sets. Loss rate ranged from 0.2 to 0.7 in increments of 0.1;
the remaining parameters were varied in increments of 0.1, with no parameter allowed to
be zero (because we were particularly interested in how the processes interact and not in
the effects of major evolutionary changes that bring forth the processes). For each
parameter set, 10 independent, replicate cultural groups were simulated. In the second set
of simulations, rates varied independently, allowing additional analysis of parameter
interactions, but the approach was more computationally expensive and so was limited to
exploring more course parameter space. The results of the two approaches were in broad
agreement.
29.  We also assumed that each cultural seed had a “utility,” which was a quantitative measure
of its usefulness to the user, and that on average, less useful traits would be lost before
more useful traits. Traits generated through modifications or combinations were allotted
similar utilities as the originals, while the probability that a particular trait was lost was
inversely proportional to the trait’s utility. The latter assumption is consistent with the
findings from several social learning experiments that have shown humans and other
animals regularly copy the most successful individuals, or copy in proportion to the
demonstrator’s payoff (Morgan et al. 2012, Mesoudi 2008, Kendal et al. 2009, and Pike et
al. 2010). We devised several measures of cumulative culture, including the “number of
traits” in a population, “mean trait complexity” (number of elements comprising a trait),
“number of lineages,” “mean lineage complexity,” and “maximum utility.” Together, these
complexity and utility measures enabled us to describe the cumulative qualities of the
cultures of each simulated population. For further methodological details, see Lewis and
Laland 2012.
30.  In our analyses, typically loss rates <0.5 were required for cumulative culture. See figure
1, Lewis and Laland 2012.
31.  See figure 2 in Lewis and Laland 2012.
32.  We also found that loss rate has the largest coefficient of individual regressions relating the
various cultural rates to the measure of cumulative culture (extracted by PCA). In the
individual regression, loss rate explains 75% of the variance in this measure, compared
with 30% explained by combination when considered independently, and with lower
percentages for the other processes. These findings draw from a constrained analysis, where
we considered the loss rate relative to the other, creative, processes. In this analysis, the
three other (creative) processes occurred with probability 1 − ρ4, so it might be argued
that the cumulative nature of the culture could equally be due to an increase in overall
creativity. However, we also conducted simulations where the parameters were allowed to
vary independently, which confirmed that loss rate is genuinely the most important of the
rates rather than an artifact. The four strongest effects in a linear regression analysis of the
rates against a measure of cumulative culture were all either interactions that included loss
rate or the loss rate alone. Thus, the independent parameter simulations strongly support
our finding that loss rate is the most important factor in determining the cumulative nature
of culture.
33.  Tomasello 1994, 1999; Tennie et al. 2009.

34.  Hoppitt et al. 2008.
35.  Bickerton 2009.
36.  Whiten 1998, Dorrance and Zentall 2002, Saggerson et al. 2005.
37.  Herrmann et al. 2007, Whiten et al. 2009.
38.  Henrich and Boyd 2002.
39.  Simonton 1995.
40.  Petroski 1992.
41.  Basalla 1988.
42.  This study also supports the argument (e.g., Henrich 2004a, Powell et al. 2009) that large
population sizes facilitate cumulative knowledge gain (Lewis and Laland 2012).
43.  Fogarty et al. 2011.
44.  Csibra and Gergely 2006, Csibra 2007. It may be more accurate to write that human
teaching draws on key psychological adaptations, rather than that it is one. While cases of
animal teaching are probably legitimately regarded as adaptations, human teaching may be
better regarded as a domain-general competence (Premack 2007), although one that is
likely heavily reliant on evolved capabilities that are possibly adaptations. Such capabilities
may include the motivation to teach and be taught, the facility to comprehend the
knowledge state of the pupil, and the ability to produce and attend to infant-directed
speech.
45.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Tomasello 1994, Fehr and Fischbacher 2003, Csibra and Gergely
2006, Csibra 2007.
46.  Danchin et al. 2004.
47.  Hoppitt and Laland (2013) discuss how the term “demonstrator” misleadingly implies an
active role for the individual being copied; they note that other terms exist, such as
“model,” that are more neutral, and hence that might be preferred were this the only
consideration. There are also problems with the term “observer.” The authors note,
however, that alternative terms bring their own potential for confusion, and resolve that on
balance there are no clearly superior terms to “demonstrator” and “observer.”
48.  Pearson 1989.
49.  Tim Caro is now at UC Davis, and Marc Hauser is at Risk-Eraser, LLC, West Falmouth, UK.
Caro and Hauser 1992.
50.  Caro and Hauser 1992, p. 153.
51.  Caro 1980a, 1980b, 1995.
52.  Cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus). Domestic cat (Felis silvestris catus).
53.  Franks and Richardson 2006, Leadbeater et al. 2006, Hoppitt et al. 2008.
54.  Suricata suricatta.
55.  Thornton 2007.
56.  Thornton and McAuliffe 2006.
57.  Thornton and McAuliffe are now at the University of Exeter and Yale University,
respectively.
58.  In Thornton & McAuliffe’s experiments, the scorpions were rendered stingless, so that
inexperienced pups would not be hurt. The researchers went on to record instances of pups
being “psuedo-stung” (stung with a stingless tail), and found that all pups trained solely on
dead scorpions would have been killed by stings from their prey, whereas only one pup
trained on live prey was pseudo-stung.
59.  Clutton-Brock et al. 1999.
60.  Moglich and Holldobler 1974, Moglich 1978, Pratt et al. 2005.
61.  Here the study species is Temnothorax albipennis, but many groups of ants engage in tandem
running, so teaching may be widespread in ants.

62.  Such following occurs in other taxa too—for instance fishes. See Laland and Williams 1997.
63.  Franks and Richardson 2006.
64.  Leadbeater and Chittka 2007b.
65.  Observations of other species of ants that are moving their nest site support this
interpretation (Moglich 1978). Some species use both tandem running and carrying to
transport fellow workers to new nest sites. During the first phase of the move, the number
of tandem runners stays constant, but the number of carriers increases, indicating that the
number of workers with knowledge of the route is increasing. However, once the
population at the new nest site reaches a critical mass, tandem running ceases, and the
remaining workers are carried. This suggests that the function of tandem running during
nest emigration is to ensure that sufficient workers know the location of the new nest site
to ensure that the move occurs efficiently.
66.  Franks and Richardson 2006, Leadbeater et al. 2006, Thornton and McAuliffe 2006,
Raihani and Ridley 2008, Rapaport and Brown 2008, Colombelli-Negrel et al. 2012; see
Hoppitt et al. 2008, and Rapaport and Brown 2008 for reviews.
67.  Csibra and Gergely 2006, Hoppitt et al. 2008.
68.  Hoppitt et al. 2008.
69.  Leadbeater et al. 2006, Csibra 2007, Premack 2007.
70.  Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1981, Boyd and Richerson 1985, Feldman and Zhivotovsky
1992, Rendell et al. 2010.
71.  Kirby et al. 2007, 2008; Boyd et al. 2010.
72.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Peck and Feldman 1986, Boyd et al. 2003, Fehr and Fischbacher
2003, Gintis 2003.
73.  West et al. 2007.
74.  Sachs et al. 2004, Lehmann and Keller 2006, West et al. 2007.
75.  Fogarty et al. 2011.
76.  This was formalized by William Hamilton (1964) as c < br, where c is the reproductive
cost to the helper, b is the reproductive benefit to the recipient, and r is the degree of
relatedness between them; relatedness is defined as the probability that they share an
altruistic gene.
77.  A real cumulative culture scenario would have multiple bouts of refinement, rather than a
single one, but our model suffices to establish the nature of the effects that cumulative
culture has.
78.  The analysis also found that the fitness advantage of teaching over nonteaching increased
with the fidelity of teaching, and did so more sharply in a cumulative compared with a
noncumulative setting.
79.  A second learning opportunity in the noncumulative culture setting (when w1 ≥ w1w2)
does not increase a teacher’s fitness. Thus, the difference between the cumulative and
noncumulative model is not explained by the fact that there are two learning opportunities
in the cumulative setting.
80.  This is shown in figure 2 of Fogarty et al. 2011.
81.  Franks and Richardson 2006, Leadbeater et al. 2006, Thornton and McAuliffe 2006, Hoppitt
et al. 2008.
82.  Strong conclusions on the frequency of teaching are difficult in the absence of experimental
confirmation of teaching in a number of cases (e.g., cats), where circumstantial evidence
for teaching exists. Fogarty et al. (2011) present a formal analysis that establishes the
precise conditions under which teaching will evolve in each genetic system. This suggests
that there are likely to be circumstances in which teaching evolves more readily among
haplodiploid workers than in diploids—other factors being equal—because of the

possibility of higher levels of relatedness between workers in relatively monogamous
haplodiploid colonies (Cornwallis et al. 2010).
83.  Lukas and Clutton-Brock 2012.
84.  Hrdy 1999.
85.  Thornton and McAuliffe 2006.
86.  Langen 2000.
87.  Cooperative-breeding species also often exhibit high levels of relatedness (Cornwallis et al.
2010), which may be another factor that enhances the likelihood of teaching evolving
among them.
88.  Thornton and Raihani 2008.
89.  The obvious counterexample are felids, for which teaching of young by mothers may
perhaps be favored because hunting skills, or the opportunities to gain them, are difficult to
acquire through asocial or inadvertent social learning (corresponding to low A and S, but
high T in our model).
90.  Hoppitt et al. 2008, Thornton and Raihani 2008, Laland and Hoppitt 2003.
91.  In the analysis, the fidelity of human teaching corresponds to the magnitude of T. On the
high fidelity of human teaching relative to other animals, see Tomasello 1994, Csibra and
Gergely 2006, and Csibra 2007.
92.  Tomasello and Call 1997, Premack 2007.
93.  Draper 1976, Whiten et al. 2003, Lewis 2007, McDonald 2007.
94.  Csibra and Gergely 2006.
95.  Tehrani and Riede 2008, Hewlett et al. 2011, Garfield et al. 2016.
96.  Dean was cosupervised by Rachel Kendal, a primatologist at Durham University, UK.
97.  Dean et al. 2012.
98.  Tomasello 1994, Galef Jr. 1992, Heyes 1993, Tennie et al. 2009.
99.  Tennie et al. 2009, Tomasello 1999, Laland 2004, Marshall-Pescini and Whiten 2008.
100.  Large social networks may enhance cultural diversity and promote cumulative culture
(Henrich 2004a, Hill et al. 2011), but we did not consider this hypothesis because it
presupposes the existence of the necessary cognitive capabilities.
101.  Giraldeau and Lefebvre 1987.
102.  Coussi-Korbel and Fragaszy 1995.
103.  Reader and Laland 2001, Biro et al. 2003.
104.  Hrubesch et al. 2008.
105.  At least, no such study that was capable of evaluating all of the plausible hypotheses had
simultaneously tested humans and other animals using the same apparatus.
106.  Cumulative culture had been investigated through historical analysis (Basalla 1988) in
psychology laboratories (Caldwell and Millen 2008), and through experimentation in
chimpanzees (Marshall-Pescini and Whiten 2008).
107.  A first experiment included two conditions. One was an “open” condition, where groups
could gain access to all stages; and the other was a “scaffolded” condition, where guards
prevented access to the manipulanda associated with higher stages until performance at the
lower stage reached the criterion. In a second experiment, conducted only with
chimpanzees, one female from each of four additional groups was isolated from her group
and trained to use the puzzle box to stage 3. The use of trained females of differing status
as demonstrators allowed us to investigate how social rank affected the spread of solutions.
108.  The Michale E. Keeling Center for Comparative Medicine and Research, University of
Texas.
109.  The Centre de Primatologie, Strasbourg.
110.  Chimpanzees and capuchins were selected because the evidence for cultural traditions is as

strong in these species as in any nonhuman, which maximized the chances of observing
cumulative cultural learning. Moreover, as our closest relative, chimpanzees provide an
appropriate comparator to humans, with the performance of capuchins aiding
interpretation of any chimpanzee-human differences. Children are widely used in
comparative studies to help tease out the effects of culture, as adults have been greatly
enculturated by society.
111.  A further 4 chimpanzees reached stage 2; however, each group witnessed multiple solvers
at stage 1.
112.  Wood et al. 1976.
113.  There was a positive, rather than the predicted negative, correlation between the amount of
scrounging an individual falls victim to and performance in capuchins, chimpanzees, and
children; and there was no sign that scrounging hindered performance. Dominant children
and chimpanzees did not monopolize the puzzle box, and although there was a positive
correlation between rank and puzzle box use among capuchins in 2007, this was not
repeated in 2008. When manipulating the box, low rankers did not receive less attention
than high rankers, nor was there any evidence for satisficing or conservatism, with
individuals continuing to manipulate the dials and buttons after they had found the
solution to stage 1. In the open condition, where they received rewards at all stages, both
chimpanzees and children manipulated the puzzle box slightly more, rather than less, than
individuals in the scaffolded condition, despite the latter being unrewarded at the previous
stage(s). Although we did not find a significant difference between the proportions of
rewards that chimpanzees scrounged at each stage, they expressed clear and strong
preferences for the three foods in pilot work, and olfactory holes in the doors allowed these
to be detected in the apparatus prior to their extraction. Moreover, many of the
chimpanzees performed failed attempts to access the foods by “termiting” (inserting stalks
through the olfactory holes), and all 29 cases involved an attempt to reach the highest-
stage food that was available. In the children and capuchins, more low-stage than high-
stage rewards were scrounged, which reflects a greater motivation to retain high-grade
rewards.
114.  Whiten et al. 1999, Perry et al. 2003.
115.  Whiten et al. 2007, Dindo et al. 2008.
116.  For that view, see Tennie et al. 2009, and Tomasello 1999. All alternative causal
hypotheses can be rejected as highly improbable. It is not clear why success in solving the
task should cause children to imitate, be taught by, or receive rewards from others, nor
how an unspecified third variable might account for our within-species data. For instance,
although it is possible that the relationship between imitation and performance reflects the
child’s cognitive ability, this explanation cannot account for the relationships of both
teaching and prosociality with performance, because in both cases the donor (of knowledge
or reward) is a different individual from the learner.
117.  Tomasello 1994, 1999; Tennie et al, 2009.
CHAPTER 8: WHY WE ALONE HAVE LANGUAGE
1.  These well-known phrases appear in a speech in Shakespeare’s Hamlet (Act II, Scene 2):
“What a piece of work is a man! How noble in reason, how infinite in faculty! In form and
moving how express and admirable! In action how like an Angel! In apprehension how like
a god! The beauty of the world! The paragon of animals!”
2.  Vygotsky (1934) 1986.
3.  Chomsky 1968.

4.  For excellent overviews, see Fitch 2010, and Hurford 2014.
5.  Washburn and Lancaster 1968.
6.  Miller 2001.
7.  Dunbar 1998.
8.  Deacon 2003a.
9.  Falk 2004.
10.  Power 1998.
11.  Greenfield 1991.
12.  Burling 1993.
13.  Hauser et al. 2014.
14.  Fitch 2010, Hurford 2014, Bolhuis et al. 2010.
15.  Bickerton 2009, Hurford 2014.
16.  Hauser 1996.
17.  Wheeler and Fischer 2012, 2015.
18.  But see Watson et al. 2014.
19.  Pika et al. 2005.
20.  Ibid.
21.  Fitch 2010, Hurford 2014.
22.  Hauser 1996, Bickerton 2009, Fitch 2010, Hauser et al. 2014, Hurford 2014.
23.  Yang 2013, Truswell 2015.
24.  Terrace 1979.
25.  Bickerton 2009.
26.  Szamado and Szathmary 2006.
27.  Bickerton 2009.
28.  Odling-Smee and Laland 2009.
29.  Grafen 1990; but see Kotiaho 2001.
30.  Searcy and Nowicki 2005.
31.  Maynard-Smith 1991.
32.  For instance, see Smith et al. 2003.
33.  Szamado and Szathmary 2006.
34.  By protolanguage, I mean strings of words with no structural relationships or syntax.
35.  A symbol is an object or a concept that represents or suggests another idea, belief, action,
or material entity.
36.  Szamado and Szathmary 2006.
37.  Hurford 1999.
38.  Szamado and Szathmary 2006.
39.  Gray and Atkinson 2003, Pagel et al. 2007, Smith and Kirby 2008, Kirby et al. 2008.
40.  Janik and Slater 1997, Fitch 2010, Hurford 2014.
41.  Bergman and Feldman 1995, Boyd and Richerson 1985, Feldman et al. 1996, Stephens
1991.
42.  For instance, see Rendell et al. 2010.
43.  Laland 2016.
44.  This claim is supported by both ethnographic (e.g., Hewlett et al. 2011, Tehrani and Riede
2008) and experimental (e.g., Dean et al. 2012) data.
45.  Stringer and Andrews 2005.
46.  Hrdy 1999.
47.  See also Isler and Van Schaik 2012.
48.  Anton 2014.
49.  Stringer and Andrews 2005, Anton 2014.

50.  Fitch 2004 makes a compelling argument along these lines.
51.  Trivers 1974.
52.  Tomasello 1999, Gergely and Csibra 2005, Gergely et al. 2007, Csibra 2010.
53.  Walden and Ogan 1988.
54.  Tomasello 1999, Gergely and Csibra 2005, Gergely et al. 2007, Csibra 2010.
55.  Tomasello 1999. Some of our own experimental data also demonstrates this. For instance,
in one study, Dean et al. (2012) found that all 23 observed instances of teaching that
involved verbal instruction (e.g., “push that button,” “slide that door”) combined with
gesture and movement that effectively grounded the vocalization.
56.  Stringer and Andrews 2005.
57.  Whiten et al. 1999, Van Schaik et al. 2003.
58.  Oldowan tools are named after the Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania, where the tools were first
discovered, and date from c. 2.5–1.2 mya. Oldowan artifacts have been recovered from
several localities in eastern, central, and southern Africa, the oldest of which is a site at
Gona, Ethiopia. Oldowan technology is typified by what are known as “flakes” and
“choppers.” Microscopic surface analysis of the flakes struck from cores has shown that
these flakes were used as tools for cutting plants and butchering animals. Choppers are
stone cores with flakes removed from part of the surface, creating a sharpened edge that
was also used for cutting, chopping, and scraping. Acheulean stone tools, named after the
site of St. Acheul in France, where artifacts from this tradition were first discovered, date
from c. 1.7–0.2 mya, and are widely thought to be a technological advance on Oldowan
tools. They have been found over an immense area of the Old World, from southern Africa
to northern Europe and from western Europe to the Indian subcontinent. Acheulean
technology is best characterized by its distinctive pear-shaped and symmetrical stone hand
axes.
59.  McBrearty and Brooks 2000, D’Errico and Stringer 2011.
60.  Laland et al. 2000.
61.  Galef Jr. 1988, Laland et al. 1993.
62.  Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
63.  Laland et al. 2000.
64.  Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
65.  Ibid.
66.  Odling-Smee et al. 1996, 2003; Smith 2007a, 2007b; Kendal et al. 2011.
67.  Laland et al. 2010.
68.  Laland et al. 2000.
69.  Ibid.
70.  Watson et al. 2014. However, this claim remains contentious (see Fischer et al. 2015).
71.  Pika et al. 2005, Janik and Slater 1997, Zuberbuhler 2005.
72.  Fitch 2010, Hurford 2014.
73.  Enquist and Ghirlanda 2007, Enquist et al. 2011.
74.  Tomasello 1994.
75.  Whiten et al. 1999, Reader 2000.
76.  Csibra and Gergely 2011.
77.  While this claim holds at the time of writing, it is only honest to acknowledge that similar
claims have been made in the past for other hypotheses with respect to other, or more
restricted, sets of criteria (e.g., Bickerton 2009). Hence, the fact that a particular hypothesis
meets all the designated criteria is no guarantee that it is correct, or that it will stand the
test of time as new sets of criteria are devised.
78.  Odling-Smee and Laland 2009.

79.  Here a distinction between an “adaptation” (a character favored by natural selection for a
particular role or function) and an “adaptive trait” (a character that increases biological
fitness) is relevant. To my knowledge, no one (Chomsky included) denies that
communication through language is an adaptive trait. The debate concerns whether the
original function of the psychological and neural mechanisms that allow language was
communication.
80.  Noam Chomsky has argued that the language faculty, specifically the property of discrete
infinity or recursion that plays a central role in his theory of Universal Grammar, may have
evolved as a spandrel: in this view, Chomsky initially pointed to language being a result of
increased brain size and increasing neural complexity, as well as the enhancements in
human thinking these afford. However, he provides no definitive answers as to what factors
led to the brain attaining the size and complexity of which discrete infinity is a
consequence. A recent account is given in Hauser et al. 2002.
81.  See, for instance, Pinker and Jackendoff 2005.
82.  Fitch 2004; see also Nowicki and Searcy 2014, and Smit 2014.
83.  Sterelny 2012a, 2012b.
84.  Fitch 2005, Ridley 2011.
85.  Pagel 2012.
86.  Nowak and Highfield 2011.
87.  Fehr and Gachter 2002, Fehr and Fischbacher 2003, Boyd and Richerson 1985, Henrich
2015.
88.  Pagel 2012.
89.  Ibid.
90.  Deacon 1997; see also Bickerton 2009.
91.  Hauser 1996, Bickerton 2009.
92.  Hauser 1996, Bickerton 2009, Hauser et al. 2014,
93.  Derek Bickerton and Terrence Deacon have both argued that the continued use and
manipulation of symbols exerted selection on the human mind and favored an evolved
structure for language learning, including the learning of syntax. See Deacon 1997, and
Bickerton 2009. Other researchers have proposed theories of language evolution that stress
both biological and cultural evolution, but without greatly emphasizing this selective
feedback; notably, Arbib (2012).
94.  Rilling et al. 2008, Schenker et al. 2010.
95.  Deacon 1997, 2003b. The Baldwin effect is named after psychologist James Mark Baldwin,
who proposed a specific mechanism for adaptive evolution in 1896 (Baldwin 1896, 1902).
Baldwin argued that animals could adjust to environmental conditions phenotypically—for
instance, through learning, which would not only help them to survive but create a
situation in which natural selection would favor an unlearned tendency to perform the
same behavior. Although largely ignored by evolutionary biologists for almost a century,
the idea is experiencing a renaissance. For instance, Baldwin effect arguments have
influenced the field of research exploring the role of developmental plasticity in evolution
(e.g., West-Eberhard 2003).
96.  Bickerton 2009.
97.  Hauser 1996, Bickerton 2009.
98.  Falk 2004; I prefer the term “infant-directed speech,” because many of us fathers also
adjust our speech for infants.
99.  Deacon 1997; Fitch 2004, 2005; Falk 2004.
100.  Thiessen et al. 2005, Fitch 2010.
101.  Pinker 1995.

102.  Waterson 1978, Thiessen et al. 2005, Fitch 2010; Huttenlocher et al. 2002.
103.  Falk (2004) claims that infant-directed speech occurs worldwide, but this claim is
contested. For instance, Masataka 2003 (p. 137) writes: “Evidence for cross-cultural
universality of the production of motherese is less convincing and actually very
controversial.”
104.  Bloom 1997, 2000; Fitch 2010.
105.  Bickerton 2009.
106.  Chomsky 1965.
107.  Fitch 2010.
108.  Brighton et al. 2005.
109.  This argument was made most prominently by Chomsky (1980), who emphasized “the
poverty of the stimulus,” or the fact that data from which language must be learned lack
direct evidence for a number of features of grammar that children must learn.
110.  Deacon 1997.
111.  Smith and Kirby 2008, Kirby et al. 2007.
112.  Smith and Kirby 2008.
113.  Kirby et al. 2008.
114.  Smith and Kirby 2008; Kirby et al. 2007, 2008, 2015.
115.  Byrne 2016.
116.  Wollstonecroft 2011.
117.  Byrne and Russon 1998, Byrne 2016.
118.  Whalen et al. 2015.
119.  Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
120.  Heyes 2012.
121.  Bolhuis et al. 2014.
122.  Morgan et al. 2015.
123.  Delagnes and Roche 2005.
124.  Toth 1987.
125.  Roche et al. 1999, Callahan 1979.
126.  Schick and Toth 2006, Braun et al. 2009.
127.  Hovers 2012.
128.  Blumenschine 1986, Potts 2013.
129.  Callahan 1979.
130.  Potts 2013.
131.  Schick and Toth 2006.
132.  Stout et al. 2000, Uomini and Meyer 2013.
133.  A recent review of Acheulean toolmaking found that reduction strategies (i.e., the manner
in which flakes are produced) were highly consistent across individuals (Shipton et al.
2009). The authors suggest “true imitation” (i.e., reproducing the motor pattern of another
individual through observational learning) is the minimal form of social transmission that
could produce such consistency. Furthermore, an unpublished experimental study found
that “demonstrative gestures” were sufficient for the cooperative procurement and initial
reduction of bedrock slabs (Petraglia et al. 2005). Only two studies have directly
investigated the ability of contemporary adult humans to make tools following different
means of social transmission, both comparing the efficacy of speech with symbolic gestural
communication. One investigated the acquisition of Levallois technology (Ohnuma et al.
1997), which is a complex technology prevalent from 300–30 kya; the study reported no
differences between the conditions. However, the measure of performance was a binary
(yes / no) assessment by the experimenter, leaving the possibility that more subtle

differences existed but were undetected. The second (Putt et al. 2014) investigated bifacial
knapping, a technique associated with Acheulean technology. Although the tools produced
in both conditions showed similar shape, symmetry, and quality, the two groups used
different techniques, with verbally taught participants more accurately replicating the
technique of the instructor (even though they lacked the skill to enact it effectively). As
verbal and gestural communication are both symbolic forms of communication, further
differences may yet emerge if a wider range of social transmission mechanisms, including
imitation, emulation, and subtle forms of pedagogy, are considered. This is particularly
relevant to the manufacture of Oldowan technology, where the debate over the underlying
transmission mechanisms is at its fiercest.
134.  Whether Oldowan stone toolmaking has implications for the evolution of human language
and teaching is hotly debated. See, for instance, Gibson and Ingold 1993, and Ambrose
2001.
135.  Wynn et al. 2011.
136.  Hovers 2012.
137.  Bickerton 2009.
138.  Morgan et al. 2015.
139.  Participants were assigned to conditions at random and blinding was not possible.
140.  This involved using a novel metric we developed. It assessed quality, taking into account
flake mass, cutting edge length, and diameter. See “Supplementary Methods” in Morgan et
al. 2015 for details.
141.  It also improved performance relative to the imitation/emulation and basic teaching
conditions.
142.  Improvements are specified relative to the reverse engineering condition.
143.  The magnitude of this was 430%.
144.  Analyses of the utterances by participants in the verbal teaching condition showed that the
rate of decline varied with topic.
145.  Morgan et al. (2015) suggest that the steady decline of performance to baseline levels, even
in conditions that allow teaching and language, merely reflects the short learning time
employed in this study. Previous transmission chain studies have established that periods of
individual practice can bolster the stability of socially transmitted knowledge (see Hoppitt
and Laland 2013 for a review of this literature). This suggests that with more time to learn,
with bouts of teaching and language integrated with periods of individual practice, the
benefits of teaching and language would likely have been preserved for longer.
146.  The short learning period in our experiment (five minutes long) was clearly unrealistic
compared with the length of time that Oldowan hominins likely had available for learning.
This is particularly true given available data showing that precise control of conchoidal
fracture can take decades to acquire (Nonaka et al. 2010) and anthropological data showing
that knapping skills are acquired across an apprenticeship lasting several years (Stout
2002). However, a short learning period is sufficient to examine the relative rates of
transmission, which was the focus of this work. Naturally, we cannot rule out the
possibility that with a longer learning period, performance across conditions would have
converged. But given that knapping skills are known to take years to develop fully, we
suspect that increasing the time spent learning would initially only increase the differences
in performance across conditions, with any convergence only occurring after extensive
learning. Given their magnitude, the observed differences in performance between
conditions would likely translate into significant fitness differences in the shorter term.
147.  For example, if verbal teaching provided transmission benefits, but simpler forms of
teaching did not, then the coevolutionary process would not be able to account for the

evolution of these simpler forms of teaching. Likewise, if the transmission of toolmaking
benefitted from simple teaching, but gained no further benefit from verbal teaching, then
the coevolutionary process would stop with simpler forms of teaching and could not
explain the evolution of verbal teaching.
148.  That the low level of performance with imitation/emulation and reverse engineering is
stable along chains (and that performance with teaching and language eventually decreases
to this level) suggests a baseline level of performance reliant on little transmitted
knowledge. It is possible that this baseline level could also be achieved through intuition
and individual trial-and-error learning. We suggest that the decline of performance with
teaching and language to this baseline merely reflects the short learning time employed in
this study. Previous transmission chain studies have established that periods of individual
practice can bolster the stability of socially transmitted knowledge (Hoppitt and Laland
2013). This suggests that with more time to learn, with bouts of teaching and language
integrated with periods of individual practice, the benefits of teaching and language would
likely have been preserved for longer.
149.  Stout et al. 2000, 2010; Uomini 2009.
150.  After the experiment, we tested our subjects’ knowledge, asking them a series of questions
about toolmaking to determine what they had learned.
151.  The platform angle is the angle between the struck surface (the “platform”) and the
underhanging surface below. For successful knapping this must be below 90 degrees, and
ideally around 70 degrees. The angle is measured in the plane generated by rotating the
plane of the platform 90 degrees around an axis that runs through (1) the point of impact,
and (2) the closest point on the edge.
152.  Hovers 2012, Ambrose 2001, De la Torre 2011, Stout et al. 2010.
153.  Beyene et al. 2013, Lepre et al. 2011.
154.  Schick and Toth 2006.
155.  Evans 2016.
156.  This raises the supplementary question: If the selective advantage was present, why did it
take 700,000 years for more complex communication to evolve? The most likely
explanation is that this did indeed evolve during the Oldowan, but the appearance of more
advanced tools may have additionally been contingent on the evolution of other aspects of
cognition, such as technical comprehension or the hierarchical planning of actions, as well
as demographic factors.
157.  Bickerton 2009, Donald 1991, Corballis 1993.
158.  Bickerton 2009.
159.  Tomasello 2008.
160.  Wallace 1869; see also “The Limits of Natural Selection as Applied to Man (S165:
1869/1870)” 
on 
the 
Alfred 
Russel 
Wallace 
Page
(http://people.wku.edu/charles.smith/wallace/S165.htm).
CHAPTER 9: GENE-CULTURE COEVOLUTION
1.  Morgan et al. 2015.
2.  Other signals of recent selection include high-frequency alleles in linkage disequilibrium
and unusually long haplotypes of low diversity.
3.  Feldman and Cavalli-Sforza 1976, Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1981, Boyd and Richerson
1985, Rogers 1988, Feldman and Laland 1996, Enquist et al. 2007, Richerson and Boyd
2005.
4.  Feldman and Cavalli-Sforza 1976, Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1981, Boyd and Richerson

1985, Rogers 1988, Feldman and Laland 1996, Enquist et al. 2007, Richerson and Boyd
2005.
5.  Laland et al. 1995, Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1973, Otto et al. 1995.
6.  Feldman and Laland 1996, Richerson and Boyd 2005, Richerson et al. 2010.
7.  Corballis 1991.
8.  Ibid.
9.  In principle, selective regimes such as heterozygote advantage (Annett 1985, McManus
1985) or frequency-dependent selection (Faurie and Raymond 2005) could preserve
variation in handedness.
10.  Morgan and Corballis 1978.
11.  This data is based on a meta-analysis of 14 twin studies in McManus 1985.
12.  While isolated studies (e.g., Warren et al. 2006) have reported positive heritabilities for
some handedness measures, the overall picture across multiple studies remains that
handedness, at least as measured in the vast majority of questionnaire and performance
studies, does not exhibit strong heritability (McManus 1985, Neale 1988, and Su et al.
2005).
13.  Corballis 1991.
14.  Harris 1980, Corballis 1991.
15.  Hardyck et al. 1976, Hung et al. 1985, Teng et al. 1976.
16.  Laland et al. 1995.
17.  Previous studies had established that if there was a genetic influence on handedness, it
operated through dextralizing and chance alleles, rather than right-biased and left-biased
alleles (Annett 1985, McManus 1985).
18.  Bishop 1990.
19.  In principle, genetic variation affecting handedness could be preserved through forms of
selection such as frequency dependent selection or heterozygote advantage. However, there
is little compelling evidence that such selection is widespread (Laland et al. 1995).
20.  The hypothesis that human populations are currently evolving toward an equilibrium in
which dextralizing alleles are fixed is inconsistent with data revealing a decreasing trend in
right handedness in the United States and Australia over the last century (Corballis 1991).
This data is generally interpreted as reflecting a relaxation in the social pressure to conform
to a right-handed standard.
21.  The method used is maximum likelihood. See Laland et al. 1995.
22.  The one study with a poor fit was the earliest, which has been criticized for its
methodology. In early studies of handedness, researchers were unaware of potential biases
generated by advertising for experimental subjects to take part in a handedness
investigation. Such advertisements distort the subject pool, since left-handers are
disproportionately interested in the topic. For further details, see Laland et al. 1995.
23.  Laland et al. 1995.
24.  Toth 1985, Uomini 2011.
25.  Toth 1985, Uomini 2011.
26.  Bradshaw 1991, Hopkins and Cantalupo 2004.
27.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Feldman and Laland 1996, Kumm et al. 1994, Laland et al. 1995.
28.  Holden and Mace 1997, Burger et al. 2007.
29.  Peng et al. 2012.
30.  Bersaglieri et al. 2004.
31.  Voight et al. 2006.
32.  Bersaglieri et al. 2004.
33.  Feldman and Laland 1996; Perreault 2012.

34.  Feldman and Cavalli-Sforza 1989.
35.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Feldman and Laland 1996, Feldman and Cavalli-Sforza 1989,
Laland 1994, Laland et al. 1995.
36.  Hawks et al. 2007. Other factors may have played a role in the speeding up of human
evolution, such as the increased number of new mutations in the larger populations that
have been facilitated by agriculture. See Cochran and Harpending 2009.
37.  Gleibermann 1973, Williamson et al. 2007.
38.  Helgason et al. 2007.
39.  Myles, Hradetzky, et al. 2007; Neel 1962.
40.  O’Brien and Laland 2012.
41.  Posnansky 1969.
42.  Livingstone 1958.
43.  Evans and Wellems 2002.
44.  Kappe et al. 2010.
45.  Hawley et al. 1987.
46.  Roberts and Buikstra 2003, Barnes 2005.
47.  Barnes et al. 2011.
48.  Ibid.
49.  Bellamy et al. 1998, Li et al. 2006.
50.  Govoni and Gros 1998.
51.  Barnes et al. 2011.
52.  Aidoo et al. 2002.
53.  Weatherall et al. 2006.
54.  Durham 1991.
55.  Lovejoy 1989.
56.  Piel et al. 2010.
57.  Jonxis 1965.
58.  O’Brien and Laland 2012.
59.  Agbai 1986, Houston 1973.
60.  O’Brien and Laland 2012.
61.  Rendell, Fogarty, and Laland 2011.
62.  Rendell, Fogarty, and Laland 2011 labelled this process “runaway niche construction.”
63.  O’Brien and Laland 2012.
64.  Such signals include high-frequency alleles in linkage disequilibrium, unusually long
haplotypes of low diversity, and an excess of rare variants.
65.  Voight et al. 2006; Wang et al. 2006; Sabeti et al. 2006, 2007; Nielsen et al. 2007; Tang et
al. 2007.
66.  Stefansson et al. 2005, Nguyen et al. 2006, Prabhakar et al. 2008, Quach et al. 2009.
67.  Laland et al. 2010.
68.  Ibid.
69.  Perry et al. 2007. This is a good example of gene-culture coevolution in which changes in
human diet favor copies of a gene.
70.  Voight et al. 2006, Richards et al. 2003.
71.  Voight et al. 2006, Williamson et al. 2007, Han et al. 2007.
72.  Haygood 2007.
73.  Hunemeier, Amorim et al. 2012; Acuna-Alonzo et al. 2010; Magalon et al. 2008; Sabbagh et
al. 2011.
74.  Kelley and Swanson 2008.
75.  Soranzo et al. 2005.

76.  Armelagos 2014.
77.  Striedter 2005, Schick and Toth 2006, Stringer and Andrews 2005.
78.  Armelagos 2014.
79.  Ibid.
80.  Remick et al. 2009, Armelagos 2014.
81.  Aunger 1992, 1994a, 1994b; Armelagos 2014.
82.  Ibid.
83.  Williamson et al. 2007.
84.  Wang et al. 2006.
85.  Olalde et al. 2014.
86.  Williamson et al. 2007, López Herráez et al. 2009.
87.  Izagirre et al. 2006; Lao et al. 2007, Myles, Somel, et al. 2007.
88.  Olalde et al. 2014.
89.  Voight et al. 2006, Myles et al. 2008.
90.  Voight et al. 2006, Wang et al. 2006. Genes expressed in hair follicles include ectodysplasin
A receptor (EDAR) and EDA2R. Those expressed in eye and hair color include solute carrier
family 24, member 4 (SLC24A4), KIT ligand (KITLG), tyrosinase (TYR), and oculocutaneous
albinism II (OCA2). Genes expressed in freckles include 6p25.3 and melanocortin 1 receptor
(MC1R).
91.  Sexual selection is a mode of natural selection in which some individuals out-reproduce
others in a population because they are better at securing (more or higher quality) mates
(Darwin 1871). Sexual selection can lead to the evolution of costly and viability reducing
traits, such as elaborate plumage or large antlers, because of the advantage that these
afford in attracting or fighting for mates.
92.  Laland 1994.
93.  Laurent et al. 2012.
94.  Jones et al. 2007, Little et al. 2008.
95.  Laland 1994, Ihara et al. 2003.
96.  Stedman et al. 2004.
97.  Williamson et al. 2007 previously identified several genes involved in nervous system
development as candidates of recent selective sweeps. These include abnormal spindle,
microcephaly associated (ASPM) and microcephalin 1 (MCPH1). Other genes involved in
nervous system development, synapse formation, nerve growth factors, and both neuron
and dendritic spine generation are identified by de Magalhaes and Matsuda 2012. See also
Hill and Walsh 2005.
98.  de Magalhaes and Matsuda 2012.
99.  Laland et al. 2010. Examples include cyclin dependent kinase 5 regulatory subunit-
associated protein 2 (CDK5RAP2), centromere protein J (CENPJ), and γ-aminobutyric acid
A receptor, subunit a4 (GABRA4). Other genes implicated in human brain evolution and
identified through comparative genomics include microcephalin 1 (MCPH1), asp
homologue, microcephaly associated (Drosophila) (ASPM), CDK5 regulatory subunit
associated protein 2 (CDK5RAP2), solute carrier family 2 (facilitated glucose transporter),
member 1 (SLC2A1), SLC2A4, neuroblastoma breakpoint family (NBPF) genes, growth
arrest and DNA-damage-inducible gamma (GADD45G), ret finger protein-like 1, 2, and 3
(RFPL1, RFPL2 and RFPL3), and genes associated with neuronal functionality (dopamine
receptor D5 [DRD5]), glutamate receptor, ionotropic, NMDA 3A (GRIN3A), GRIN3B, and
SLIT-ROBO Rho GTPase activating protein 2 (SRGAP2). For further details see Somel et al.
2013.
100.  These include a deletion of one enhancer of the growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible

gamma (GADD45G) gene, which is postulated to have led to brain size expansion and is
shared with Neanderthals. Likewise, a human-specific duplication of a truncated version of
the gene SLIT-ROBO Rho GTPase activating protein 2 (SRGAP2) was dated to
approximately 2.4 mya. This duplication is predicted to increase dendritic spine density in
the cortex and could have enhanced signal processing in hominin brains. See Somel et al.
2013 for further detail.
101.  Uddin et al. 2004, Caceres et al. 2003.
102.  Somel et al. 2014. The promoter regions of many neural genes have also experienced
positive selection during human evolution (Haygood et al. 2007).
103.  Somel et al. 2014.
104.  Hill and Walsh 2005, Sakai et al. 2011, Blazek et al. 2011.
105.  Striedter 2005, Marino 2006, Sherwood et al. 2006.
106.  Blazek et al. 2011.
107.  Relative to chimpanzees, studies have identified increases in (1) glia to neuron ratios, (2)
spacing between neurons, (3) astrocyte complexity, and (4) neuropile density in the human
brain. Some of these changes, however, may be a result of the overall brain size increase on
the human evolutionary lineage. See Marino 2006, Sherwood et al. 2006, Semendeferi et al.
2011, Oberheim et al. 2009, and Spocter et al. 2012.
108.  Blazek et al. 2011.
109.  Deacon 1997, 2003a; Milbrath 2013.
110.  For example, forkhead box P2 (FOXP2), ASPM, Microcephalin (MCPH1), protocadherin 11
X-linked (PCDH11X), and PCDH11Y are all linked to language or speech. Somel et al. 2013.
111.  Fisher et al. 1998.
112.  Enard, Przeworski, et al. 2002.
113.  Enard et al. 2009.
114.  Liao and Zhang 2008.
115.  Nasidze et al. 2006.
116.  Kayser et al. 2006.
117.  Oota et al. 2001, Cordaux et al. 2004.
118.  Hunemeier, Gómez-Valdés, et al. 2012.
119.  Stearns et al. 2010.
120.  Ibid.
121.  Ibid.
122.  Ibid, p. 621.
123.  Wilson 1975.
124.  Wilson 1978. p. 167.
125.  Laland and Brown 2011.
126.  Laland et al. 2000.
127.  Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
128.  Laland et al. 2000.
129.  Laland 1994; Rendell, Fogarty, and Laland 2011.
130.  Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1981, Boyd and Richerson 1985, Richerson and Boyd 2005,
Henrich 2015.
131.  Laland et al. 2010.
132.  Striedter 2005.
133.  Rutz et al. 2010, Kruetzen et al. 2014.
134.  Whitehead 1998, Baird & Whitehead 2000.
135.  Morris 1967, Buss 1999.
136.  Such structures are often “extended phenotypes” (Dawkins 1982); these are biological

adaptations, such as nests, burrows, and webs, expressed outside the body of the
constructor.
137.  Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
138.  Dawkins 1982, Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
139.  Laland and Brown 2006.
140.  Bird et al. 2013.
141.  Boivin et al. 2016; see Diamond 2006 for the evidence that over-exploitation led to
collapse.
142.  Laland and Brown 2006.
CHAPTER 10: THE DAWN OF CIVILIZATION
1.  This assertion, while almost certainly correct, has not to my knowledge been conclusively
proven. One complication in its demonstration is that researchers know a lot more about
recent evolution on short time scales than they know about what happened deeper in the
past. As biological evolution on short time scales is faster than that observed at longer
intervals (Gingerich 1983), this would create an illusion of accelerating evolution in the
recent past, even if no such acceleration had occurred. Perreault (2012) has shown that the
same considerations apply to cultural evolution. What has been established is that cultural
evolution is faster than biological evolution, when controlling for the correlation between
rate and time intervals, and the generation time of the species (Perreault 2012), and that
many aspects of knowledge and technology show a hyperexponential increase over time
(Enquist et al. 2008, Enquist et al. 2011). As described in the previous chapter, several
theoretical studies have concluded that gene-culture coevolution is typically faster than
conventional biological evolution, in part because cultural evolution occurs at faster rates
than biological evolution. There is also genetic evidence that human evolution has
accelerated during the last 40,000 years (Hawks et al. 2007). Collectively, these findings
render my claim highly likely to be correct.
2.  Lynch 1990 reports this finding, but draws attention to potential sources of bias and
expresses the concern that it may be an artifact. More recent genetic data suggest that the
accelerated rates of evolution observed in our species are probably genuine (e.g., Hawks et
al. 2007).
3.  Hawks et al. 2007, Cochran and Harpending 2009. The more recent acceleration in human
genetic evolution is likely also to reflect increases in global population size (Cochran and
Harpending 2009). Human numbers have increased from less than a million, 50,000 years
ago, to several billion today. That represents several orders of magnitude more novel
mutations being introduced into the population, and upon which selection can act.
However, as that population growth was made possible by culture, ultimately the
acceleration can be regarded as an example of gene-culture coevolution.
4.  Vitousek et al. 1997, Waters et al. 2016, Boivin et al. 2016.
5.  There is some evidence that human numbers were modest until somewhere in the realm of
50 kya (e.g., Li and Durbin 2011). This might be interpreted as implying that the energetic
cost of our brain was such that it was barely able to “pay its way” until more recent times.
6.  Kaplan et al. 2000; Kaplan and Robson 2002.
7.  Vitousek et al. 1997.
8.  Cochran and Harpending 2009. Chance fluctuations in genotype frequencies typically
dictate evolutionary dynamics in small populations, but as populations get larger, natural
selection starts to dominate as it becomes less probable that a beneficial allele will be lost
by chance.

9.  Henrich 2004a, Powell et al. 2009, Lewis and Laland 2012.
10.  Rendell, Boyd, et al. 2011, Laland and Rendell 2013.
11.  Ibid., Boyd and Richerson 1985, Henrich 2015.
12.  Enquist et al. 2010; Lewis and Laland 2012.
13.  Crittenden 2011.
14.  Ibid.
15.  Marlowe 2001.
16.  Ibid.
17.  Indicatoridae spp.
18.  Crittenden 2011.
19.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Henrich and McElreath 2003, Richerson & Boyd 2005, Henrich
and Henrich 2007.
20.  Richerson et al. 1996.
21.  For instance, for the !Kung Bushmen, plant foods supply 60–80% of calories (Lee 1979).
22.  Richerson et al. 1996, Hill et al. 2009.
23.  Wollstonecroft 2011.
24.  Basgall 1987.
25.  Richerson et al. 1996.
26.  Ibid.
27.  Ibid.
28.  Blurton Jones 1986, 1987.
29.  Lee and Daly 1999.
30.  Richerson et al. 1996.
31.  Lee and Daly 1999.
32.  Collard et al. 2012.
33.  Lee and Daly 1999.
34.  As archaeological data has accumulated, increasing evidence for cultural change in the
behavior of hunter-gatherer communities—in dietary shifts, for instance—is being detected
(see, for example, Bettinger et al. 2015). Nonetheless, the general point holds that rates of
change in technology appear modest relative to agricultural societies.
35.  Armelagos et al. 1991.
36.  Smith 1998, 2007a, 2007b.
37.  Smith 1998, Richerson et al. 2001, Zeder et al. 2006, Bar-Yosef and Price 2011.
38.  Winterhalder and Kennett 2006, Childe 1936, Wright 1977, Richerson et al. 2001.
39.  Richerson et al. 2001.
40.  Barlow 2002.
41.  Smith 2007b, p. 196.
42.  Smith 2007a, 2007b.
43.  Laland and O’Brien 2010, O’Brien and Laland 2012.
44.  Richerson 2013.
45.  Ibid.
46.  Ibid.
47.  Actually, this assertion is not quite accurate, as leaf-cutter ants (Atta and Acromyrmex) have
evolved a capability to harvest a fungus (Lepiotaceae), which could be regarded as a form of
agriculture. The ants’ cultivation, however, is clearly an adaptive specialization rather than
a flexible, learned, and socially transmitted general capability to domesticate another
species. Another interesting challenge to the claim that agriculture is unique to humans is
provided by the spotted bowerbird (Ptilonorhynchus maculates). These birds have been
found to grow plants with berries close to their bowers, which are then used to decorate

the bowers as part of the mating process; however, whether the cultivation is deliberate
remains to be established (Madden et al. 2012).
48.  Laland and O’Brien 2010.
49.  Laland and O’Brien 2010, O’Brien and Laland 2012.
50.  Laland and O’Brien 2010, Zeder 2016.
51.  Archaeologists and anthropologists sometimes refer to this as “traditional ecological
knowledge.”
52.  Zeder 2016.
53.  Zeder 2012, 2016.
54.  Beja-Pereira et al. 2003, Zeder 2016.
55.  Zeder 2016.
56.  Smith 1998, 2007a, 2007b; Zeder 2016.
57.  Winterhalder and Kennett 2006, p. 3.
58.  Smith 1998, 2007a, 2007b.
59.  Smith 2001.
60.  Diamond 1997. For instance, Blumler 1992 found that, in contrast to Mediterranean
regions, California had no large-seeded annual grasses; as a consequence, no agriculture
could develop until the import of maize.
61.  Diamond 1997.
62.  Feldman and Kislev 2007.
63.  The DNA of living organisms is found on chromosomes, which typically are found in paired
sets. Polyploid organisms are those containing more than two paired sets of chromosomes.
A hybrid is the offspring resulting from the cross-breeding of two distinct organisms or
strains.
64.  Bronowski 1973.
65.  Badr et al. 2000. The Fertile Crescent is a crescent-shaped region of the Middle East that
curves from northern Egypt through to the Persian Gulf, encompassing regions of present-
day Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, and Iraq.
66.  Matsuoka et al. 2002.
67.  Lagenaria siceraria.
68.  Erickson et al. 2005.
69.  Lu et al. 2009.
70.  Fuller 2011. See also http://archaeology.about.com/od/domestications/a/rice.htm.
71.  Armelagos et al. 1991, O’Brien and Laland 2012.
72.  Cohen and Armelagos 1984, Cohen and Crane-Kramer 2007.
73.  O’Brien and Laland 2012.
74.  Gibbons 2009.
75.  O’Brien and Laland 2012.
76.  Armelagos and Harper 2005, Pearce-Duvet 2006.
77.  O’Brien and Laland 2012.
78.  Gibbons 2009.
79.  Mahatma Gandhi famously quipped: “What do I think of Western civilization? I think it
would be a very good idea.” The quote beautifully illustrates some of baggage that comes
with the use of the term “civilization.” For instance, the term implies that Western societies
are in some respects superior or more sophisticated than other societies. My use of the term
in the title of this chapter rejects such connotations, and refers solely to large-scale
structured societies with extensive division of labor. See O’Brien and Laland 2012.
80.  Smith 1998, 2007a, 2007b.
81.  Cohen 1989.

82.  Diamond 1997.
83.  Cohen 1989, Rowley-Conwy and Layton 2011.
84.  Smith 1998, 2007a, 2007b; Laland and O’Brien 2010.
85.  Laland and O’Brien 2010.
86.  Odling Smee et al. 2003, Smith 2007a.
87.  Armelagos et al. 1991.
88.  Tellier 2009.
89.  Gignoux et al. 2011.
90.  Caselli et al. 2005.
91.  Of course, a major demographic effect of the industrial revolution has been the
demographic transition to below-replacement fertility in many countries, which severs the
link between innovation and population growth.
92.  Armelagos et al. 1991.
93.  The oldest city is thought to be Uruk, in Mesopotamia. It was first settled circa 4500 BCE
(http://www.ancient.eu/city/).
94.  Smith 2009.
95.  Boyd and Richerson 1985; Richerson et al. 2014.
96.  Reader and Laland 2003b.
97.  Bronowski 1973.
98.  Smith 1776, p. 195.
99.  Petroski 1992.
100.  Bronowski 1973. See also http://www.ploughmen.co.uk/about-us/history-of-the-plough.
101.  Farming practices that rely on rainfall for water, known as “rainfed agriculture,” provide
much of the food consumed by poor communities in developing countries, including
regions of Africa, Latin America, and southeast Asia. Early agricultural experiments may
have also occurred in some of these regions. However, in the absence of effective irrigation
systems, levels of productivity remain low.
102.  Bronowski 1973. See http://www.ploughmen.co.uk/about-us/history-of-the-plough.
103.  Ibid.
104.  Anthony 2007.
105.  Bronowski 1973.
106.  Some Mediterranean regions were also reliant on rainfed agriculture.
107.  Bronowski 1973.
108.  Ibid.
109.  Ibid.
110.  Bushnell 1957.
111.  See http://www.ancientegyptonline.co.uk/renenutet.html.
112.  Kramer 1964.
113.  Grant and Hazel 2002. I am indebted to Thomas Laland-Brown for drawing this point to my
attention.
114.  Grant and Hazel 2002.
115.  Ibid.
116.  Bronowski 1973, Clarke and Crisp 1983.
117.  Lane 2016.
118.  Bronowski 1973.
119.  Ibid.
120.  Anthony and Brown 2000, Anthony 2007.
121.  Bronowski 1973.
122.  See https://www.britannica.com/technology/spoked-wheel.

123.  The assertion that the pace of cultural evolution is accelerating is supported by an analysis
of 154 inventions created between 1800 and 1960, from microwave ovens to
electroencephalographs (Michel et al. 2011). More recent innovations took far less time to
become widely adopted.
124.  Lane 2016, Beinhocker 2006.
125.  Petroski 1992.
126.  Virality refers to the tendency of a piece of information to be circulated rapidly across the
internet (i.e., to go “viral”).
127.  Bijker 1995.
128.  Ibid.
129. 
 
See
http://content.time.com/time/specials/packages/completelist/0,29569,1991915,00.html
and http://thestubble.com/6-weird-inventions-couldve-invented.html.
130.  See http://www.farnhamconsulting.com/A31%20Watson.htm.
131.  Futuyma 1998.
132.  Feldman and Cavalli-Sforza 1981.
133.  See also Henrich 2004a and Powell et al. 2009.
134.  Laland and Rendell 2013.
135.  Derex and Boyd 2015.
136.  Henrich 2004a, Powell et al. 2009.
137.  Mesoudi and O’Brien 2008, Derex and Boyd 2015.
138.  Richerson and Boyd 2005, Derex and Boyd 2015, Henrich 2015.
139.  Henrich 2004a, Powell et al. 2009.
140.  Henrich 2004a.
141.  Ibid.
142.  Kline and Boyd 2010.
143.  Laland and Rendell 2013.
144.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Laland and Brown 2006.
145.  Rendell, Boyd, et al. 2011.
146.  Hawkesworth 2014; see also http://nzetc.victoria.ac.nz/tm/scholarly/tei-HawAcco-t1-g1-
t1-body-d3-d4.html, 
and 
http://www.tourism.net.nz/new-zealand/about-new-
zealand/regions/bay-of-plenty/history.html.
147.  Blunden 2003; see also http://nzetc.victoria.ac.nz/tm/scholarly/tei-HawAcco-t1-g1-t1-
body-d3-d4.html.
148.  Blunden 2003.
149.  On the language evolution, see Gray and Jordan 2000. For the mitochondrial DNA
evidence, see Trejaut et al. 2005.
150.  Donald 1991.
151.  Evison et al. 2008.
152.  Laland and Rendell 2013.
153. 
 
See 
https://www.google.co.uk/search?
client=safari&rls=en&q=how+many+bytes+in+a+book&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-
8&gfe_rd=cr&ei=U5uiVpGKLcn5-
gb8jLjYDw#q=how+much+information+on+the+internet (dated 23 January 2013).
154.  See also Smith 1998, 2007a, 2007b; and Zeder 2012, 2016 for complementary arguments.
155.  Jaradat 2007.
156.  Boivin et al. 2016.
157.  Ibid.
158.  Ibid.

159.  Ibid.
160.  See http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-30875633 (dated 19 January 2015).
161.  The ratio between incomes of the richest and poorest nations widened from 3:1 in 1820 to
70:1 
in 
2000
(http://www.rgs.org/OurWork/Schools/Teaching+resources/Key+Stage+3+resources/W
This report claims that by making an annual contribution of just 1% of their wealth, the
world’s 200 richest people could provide primary education for every child in the world.
162.  Lane 2016.
CHAPTER 11: FOUNDATIONS OF COOPERATION
1.  Hill et al. 2011.
2.  Guillermo 2005.
3.  Shaw 2003.
4.  Fehr and Fischbacher 2003; Henrich 2015.
5.  West et al. 2007.
6.  Fogarty et al. 2011.
7.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, 1988; Henrich 2004b.
8.  West et al. 2011.
9.  West et al. 2011, p. 255.
10.  Fogarty et al. 2011.
11.  Fogarty et al. 2011.
12.  Kline et al. 2013.
13.  Caro and Hauser 1992.
14.  Thornton and McAuliffe 2006.
15.  Caro and Hauser 1992.
16.  Nicol and Pope 1996.
17.  Castro and Toro 2004 make a similar argument.
18.  Fehr and Fischbacher 2003.
19.  Sterelny 2012a.
20.  Fehr and Fischbacher 2003.
21.  Fehr and Fischbacher 2003; Tomasello 2010.
22.  Sterelny 2012a.
23.  This tendency to reward cooperators and punish noncooperators is known as “strong
reciprocity.” See Fehr and Gachter 2002, and Fehr and Fischbacher 2003.
24.  Tomasello 2010.
25.  Tomasello 1999, 2008, 2010.
26.  Sterelny 2012a.
27.  Ibid.
28.  Ibid.
29.  Brosnan et al. 2012.
30.  Sterelny 2012a, de Waal 2001.
31.  Sterelny 2012a.
32.  Bronowski 1973, Clarke and Crisp 1983.
33.  Boyd and Richerson 1985; Fehr and Fischbacher 2003; Gintis 2003; Henrich 2004b, 2015;
Henrich and Henrich 2007; Richerson and Boyd 2005; Nowak and Highfield 2011.
34.  Nowak and Highfield 2011.
35.  Oxpecker: Buphagus spp.
36.  There are, as yet unpublished, reports and video footage of a group of Balinese long-tailed

macaques stealing tourist objects, such as mobile phones and sunglasses; subsequently, they
are willing to relinquish the objects in exchange for food. This “trade” appears to have
emerged as a cultural tradition. See http://jbleca.webs.com/currentresearch.htm for further
details.
37.  Stanford et al. 1994.
38.  Gilby et al. 2010.
39.  Ridley 2011.
40.  Ibid.
41.  Davies and Bank 2002.
42.  Richerson and Boyd 2005.
43.  I suspect that some simple institutions could be learned without language.
44.  Pagel 2012 makes a similar argument.
45.  Trivers 1971.
46.  Alexander 1987.
47.  Nowak and Sigmund 1998.
48.  Nowak and Highfield 2011.
49.  Fehr and Gachter 2002, Fehr and Fischbacher 2003.
50.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Richerson and Boyd 2005, Henrich and Boyd 1998.
51.  In this respect, experiments by Karen Kinzler and colleagues are of interest (Kinzler et al.
2009). These authors show that when presented with photographs and voice recordings of
novel children, 5-year-olds chose to be friends with native speakers of their own language
rather than foreign-language or foreign-accented speakers. Also, children chose those of the
same race as friends when the target children were silent, but they chose those of other
races with a native accent when accent was pitted against race. The results suggest that
children preferentially evaluate others along dimensions that distinguished social groups in
prehistoric human societies.
52.  Richerson and Boyd 2005, Richerson et al. 2014.
53.  Boyd and Richerson 1985.
54.  Richerson and Henrich 2012.
55.  Richerson et al. 2014, Henrich 2004b.
56.  Lee and Daly 1999.
57.  Richerson et al. 2014.
58.  Tomasello 1999.
59.  Fehr and Gachter 2002, Fehr and Fischbacher 2003.
60.  Frequency-dependent payoffs and multiple stable equilibria are probably very common in
human social institutions. See, for instance, Cooper 1999.
61.  Bell et al. 2009.
62.  Boyd and Richerson 1992, Fehr and Gachter 2002, Fehr and Fischbacher 2003, Richerson et
al. 2014, Henrich 2004b.
63.  Richerson et al. 2014.
64.  This idea was championed by Richerson and Boyd (1998), who refer to the evolved
psychological mechanisms as “tribal social instincts.” However, I find the term “instinct”
problematical (see note 114, chapter 2), and hence prefer the alternative term “norm
psychology” promoted by Chudek and Henrich (2011). See also Fehr and Fischbacher
(2003) and Richerson and Henrich (2012) for related treatments.
65.  Chudek & Henrich 2011, p. 218.
66.  Chudek & Henrich 2011.
67.  Ibid., Fehr and Fischbacher 2003.
68.  Richerson and Boyd 1998, Richerson et al. 2014.

69.  Richerson and Boyd 1998, Richerson and Henrich 2012.
70.  Further support for the hypothesis that humans could have been subject to natural selection
favoring docility comes from the findings of the Second Social Learning Strategies
Tournament. The tournament found that a cumulative culture setting created a selective
context in which the best strategy was simply to play OBSERVE once and then play
EXPLOIT thereafter. The greater the buildup of cumulative culture (the more the move
REFINE had been played in that environment), the greater the advantage to this simple
strategy relative to more sophisticated strategies that exhibit greater social or asocial
learning.
71.  Tomasello 2010.
72.  Tomasello 1999, 2010.
73.  Dean et al. 2012.
74.  See, for instance, Melis et al. 2006.
75.  Sterelny 2012a, 2012b.
76.  Van Schaik and Burkart 2011.
77.  Laland and Bateson 2001, Pawlby 1977.
78.  These phenomena could also have arisen through a cultural evolutionary process. See
chapter 8 for discussion and references.
79.  Heyes 2012.
80.  Byrne 1994, Hoppitt and Laland 2008a.
81.  Van Baaren et al. 2009.
82.  Chartrand and Van Baaren 2009.
83.  Heyes 2012, Chartrand and Van Baaren 2009, Van Baaren et al. 2004.
84.  Chartrand and Bargh 1999.
85.  Van Swol 2003.
86.  On finding time more enjoyable when imitated, see Tanner et al. 2008.
87.  Carpenter et al. 2013.
88.  Van Baaren et al. 2004.
89.  Stel et al. 2010, Heyes 2012.
90.  Heyes 2012, Yabar et al. 2006.
91.  Heyes 2012.
92.  Ibid.
93.  Boyd and Richerson 1985.
94.  Heyes 2012.
95.  Laland and Bateson 2001, Heyes 2005.
96.  Heyes 2012, Wen et al. 2016.
97.  This is known as “secondary reinforcement,” a well-established finding in research into
learning processes.
98.  Tarr et al. 2014.
99.  Heyes 2012.
100.  Laland and Bateson 2001.
101.  Pawlby 1977.
102.  Van Schaik and Burkart (2011) make a similar argument.
103.  Rose and Lauder 1996.
104.  Gergely and Csibra 2005, Gergely et al. 2007, Csibra 2010.
105.  Tennie et al. 2009.
106.  Tomasello 1999, 2010.
107.  Tomasello et al. 2007.
108.  For clear experimental evidence and further discussion on conformity, see Morgan et al.

2012, and Morgan and Laland 2012.
109.  Haun et al. 2012. See also Herrman et al. 2013.
110.  Call et al. 2004; Call and Tomasello 1998, 2008.
111.  For the neural evidence, see Striedter 2005, and Marino 2006. For the genetic evidence, see
Laland et al. 2010. Examples of the latter include cyclin dependent kinase 5 regulatory
subunit-associated protein 2 (CDK5RAP2); centromere protein J (CENPJ); and γ-
aminobutyric acid A receptor, subunit a4 (GABRA4). Other genes implicated in human
brain evolution, identified through comparative genomics, include microcephalin 1
(MCPH1); asp homologue, microcephaly associated (Drosophila) (ASPM); CDK5 regulatory
subunit associated protein 2 (CD-K5RAP2); solute carrier family 2 (facilitated glucose
transporter), member 1 and 4 (SLC2A1, SLC2A4); neuroblastoma breakpoint family (NBPF)
genes; growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible gamma (GADD45G); ret finger protein-like
1, 2, and 3 (RFPL1, RFPL2 and RFPL3); and genes associated with neuronal functionality
(dopamine receptor D5) (DRD5), glutamate receptor, ionotropic, NMDA 3A and 3B
(GRIN3A, GRIN3B), and SLIT-ROBO Rho GTPase activating protein 2 (SRGAP2). For further
details, see Somel et al. 2013.
112.  Somel et al. 2014.
113.  That is, our capability for classical conditioning, operant conditioning, and reversal
learning.
114.  Bolhuis et al. 2011; see Carey 2009 for illustrations of how such cognitive adaptations
emerge.
115.  Boyd and Richerson 1985, Henrich 2009, Chudek and Henrich 2011.
CHAPTER 12: THE ARTS
1.  Mesoudi et al. 2004, 2006; Mesoudi 2011.
2.  This is perhaps because the arts place a particular premium on creativity and originality,
and also possibly because evolution has a bad name in some areas of the humanities (see
Laland and Brown 2011 for historical details).
3.  Morgan 1877; Spencer 1857, (1855) 1870; Tylor 1871.
4.  Darwin 1859.
5.  A story pervades that the apple logo found on iPhones and Macintosh computers is a
tribute to Alan Turning, the father of modern computing, who died by biting into an apple
laced with cyanide. While differing opinions abound, this story sadly would appear more
likely to be an urban legend than the truth.
6.  Turing 1937; Minsky 1967, p. 104.
7.  Gould and Vrba 1982.
8.  Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
9.  Galef Jr. 1988.
10.  Strictly, the “most learning” referred to here should read most “instrumental” (or
“operant”) learning.
11.  Pullium and Dunford 1980.
12.  For a recent review, see Brass and Heyes 2005.
13.  Laland and Bateson 2001.
14.  Rizzolatti and Craighero 2004.
15.  Ibid.
16.  Striedter 2005.
17.  Iacoboni et al. 1999.
18.  This form of social learning is typically referred to as “observational conditioning.”

19.  Bronowski 1973.
20.  Striedter 2005.
21.  Deacon 1997.
22.  Striedter 2005; Heffner and Masterton 1975, 1983.
23.  Barton 2012.
24. 
 
Prints 
of 
these 
are 
still 
available 
for 
$20 
each
(https://secure.donationpay.org/chimphaven/chimpart.php).
25.  For an accessible animal behaviorist’s assessment of elephant painting, see
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-1151283/Can-jumbo-elephants-really-
paint—Intrigued-stories-naturalist-Desmond-Morris-set-truth.html.
26.  Tourist camps in Thailand that boast “painting elephants” have attracted criticism from
animal rights activists who express concerns that the training regimes may be cruel to the
animals. The tourist camps, in response, claim that the elephants are mentally and socially
healthy.
27.  Footage of painting elephants and chimpanzees can easily be found on YouTube.
28.  Stoeger et al. 2012.
29.  Plotnik et al. 2006.
30.  Consistent with this argument is the finding that rhesus monkeys can be trained to produce
mirror-induced, self-directed behavior resembling mirror self-recognition, with appropriate
visual-somatosensory training that links visual and somatosensory information (Chang et al.
2015).
31.  Striedter 2005.
32.  Hugo (1831) 1978, p. 189.
33.  The first use of perforated shells as beads is dated to over 100,000 years ago (D’Errico and
Stringer 2011, McBrearty and Brooks 2000). The shells frequently have geometrical
patterns cut into them, and have been colored with pigments. The use of red ochre as a
painting material dates back further. Engraved ostrich shells dated to 60,000 years ago
have been found in South Africa (Texier et al. 2010). By around 45,000 to 35,000 years
ago, art was widespread (at least in western Europe) and highly consistent, and comprised
pierced beads of ivory and shells, etched and carved stones, engraved decorations on bone
and antler tools and weapons, and sculpted statues of animals and female figures, which
were thought to be fertility symbols. However, the most evocative and striking images of
Paleolithic artwork are unquestionably the magnificent cave art paintings discovered in
several European countries (Sieveking 1979). Many caves are renowned for their artwork;
the oldest include the spectacular paintings found at the Le Chauvet Cave in France, dated
to 30,000 years ago. Perhaps the most remarkable collection of cave paintings is at Lascaux
in Dordogne, France, where an incredible 2,000 painted images of horses, deer, cattle,
bison, humans, and a 5-meter high bull, have been dated to 18,000–12,000 years ago. Also
renowned is the beautiful painted ceiling of the cave at Altamira, in northern Spain. This
was the first cave art to be discovered, in 1879. The art at Altamira, which has been dated
to around 19,000–11,000 years ago, comprises stunning representations of bison, horses,
and other large animals, with extraordinary use of colors and shading to indicate depth.
The quaint story of its discovery details that the paintings, which are on a low ceiling, were
initially missed by the team of archaeologists, but were spotted by one of the team’s 8-year-
old daughter; she was the only individual small enough to stand erect and still look up at
the ceiling (Tattersall 1995).
34.  There is the expected regional variation, with particular techniques, styles and materials
used in specific locations, indicating that the art expressed particular meanings that were
socially learned and shared by the members of the community (Zaidel 2013). The paintings

record for posterity what dominated the minds of those peoples, the animals that they lived
by and stalked, and the power and potencies that those creatures symbolized. The
correspondence between those species that were painted and those that have been
independently verified as present is sufficiently tight that ecologists now use paleolithic art
to infer species distributions (Yeakel et al. 2014). There is also continuity over time, as the
same methods and skills are reproduced throughout the millennia. For instance, the
European cave art tradition lasts tens of thousands of years, while the use of pigments, such
as red ochre, in rock paintings is still used today (McBrearty and Brooks 2000). These
traditions were passed on from one generation to the next, picking up innovations from
numerous creative, avant-garde, or radical individuals along the way, in a continuum that
stretches back to the origins of our species, and forward to those exhibits found in today’s
contemporary art museums. Finally, the observed patterns of change are historically
contingent. Like technology, novel art does not spring forth fully formed from the mind of
the maker, but rather is a creative reworking of existing artistic forms.
35.  The company was Ballet Rambert until 1966, and then Rambert Dance Company until
2013.
36.  Laland et al. 2016.
37.  Byrne 1999, Laland and Bateson 2001, Heyes 2002, Brass and Heyes 2005.
38.  Carpenter 2006.
39.  Heyes and Ray 2000, Laland and Bateson 2001.
40.  Brown et al. 2006.
41.  Some animals’ movements, such as the coordinated jumping and wing-flapping courtship of
pairs of Japanese cranes, or the communication system of honeybees, possess some dance-
like properties, but these are species-specific behavior patterns that have evolved to fulfil
quite separate functions.
42.  Nettl 2000.
43.  Fitch 2011.
44.  Patel 2006.
45.  In contrast to this hypothesis, I also place emphasis on motor imitation.
46.  Doupe 2005, Jarvis 2004.
47.  Cacatua galerita eleonora.
48.  You can see Snowball on YouTube at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cJOZp2ZftCw.
49.  Moore 1992.
50.  Patel et al. 2009.
51.  Schachner et al. 2009, Patel et al. 2009, Dalziell et al. 2013.
52.  Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
53.  Fitch 2013.
54.  Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
55.  Cook et al. 2013, Fitch 2013.
56.  Ibid.
57.  Dalziell et al. 2013.
58.  Indeed, in a number of both classical and modern dance forms, motor imitation is key.
Dancers are required to copy the process but not the product of the movement, and operate
under socially constrained rules that depend critically on the technique and style of their
particular school (e.g., Martha Graham vs. Merce Cunningham styles).
59.  Feenders et al. 2008.
60.  Clarke and Crisp 1983.
61.  Clarke and Crisp 1983, Dudley 1977.
62.  Clarke and Crisp 1983.

63.  Laubin and Laubin 1977.
64.  Clarke and Crisp 1983.
65.  Correction may also occur through manual shaping of the dancer’s body by the teacher or,
to a lesser degree, through verbal instruction. In some dances, specific steps are given
verbal labels, as in ballet in particular, which has its own elaborate glossary of terms, such
as fondu, arabesque, chassé, and grand jeté, each with its own characteristic movements.
Except in those cases, however, describing bodily movements with words is typically
difficult. Hence, when dance instruction is given verbally, it is often through the use of
imagery, where again an ability to relate one’s own bodily movements to another object,
emotion, or entity is required.
66.  I am indebted to Nicky Clayton for drawing my attention to many of these points.
67.  Whalen et al. 2015.
68.  Lewontin 1970.
69.  Plotkin 1994.
70.  Kirschner and Gerhart 2005.
71.  Darwin 1871, Pagel et al. 2007, Gray and Atkinson 2003, Gray and Jordan 2000, Kirby et
al. 2008.
72.  Clarke and Crisp 1983.
73.  Ibid., Dudley 1977.
74.  Clarke and Crisp 1983.
75.  Lawson 1964.
76.  Clarke and Crisp 1983.
77.  Ibid.
78.  Ibid.
79.  Lawson 1964, Clarke and Crisp 1983.
80.  Clarke and Crisp 1983.
81.  Lawson 1964, Clarke and Crisp 1983.
82.  Clarke and Crisp 1983.
83.  Ibid.
84.  Lawson 1964, Clarke and Crisp 1983.
85.  Clarke and Crisp 1983.
86.  Homer. The Odyssey. Book I, p. 29.
87.  Tarr et al. 2014.
88.  Ibid.
89.  Tomasello et al. 2005.
90.  Tarr et al. 2014.
91.  Ibid.
92.  Heyes 2012, Chartrand and Van Baaren 2009, Van Baaren et al. 2009.
93.  Heyes 2012.
94.  Oxford University psychologist and expert on imitation, Celia Heyes, has suggested that
certain social dance forms may have spread through a cultural group selection mechanism
precisely because they generated these positive, prosocial sentiments (Heyes 2012).
95.  Fossil evidence is supplemented by other data sources, most obviously molecular data.
96.  The mambo also has an interesting and unexpected history, with both African and European
roots. In Cuba, it designates a sacred song of the Congos, a group of Cubans of Bantu origin.
Mambo is the Bantu name for a musical instrument that is used in religious rituals.
However, the mambo can also be traced back to the unlikely source of English country
dance, which in the seventeenth century became the contredanse at the French court, and
later the contradanza in Spain. A century later, contradanza reached Cuba, where it became

known as danza. Danza was subsequently modified by the arrival of the planters and their
slaves who fled from Haiti after it became independent; they added a syncopation called
cinquillo. By the nineteenth century, freer and more spontaneous dancing by couples had
replaced the formality of the contredanse, with the new music known as danzon; this, in
turn, gave rise to mambo in the 1930s. See Clarke and Crisp (1983) for further details.
97.  See http://www.pbt.org/community-engagement/brief-history-ballet.
98.  Clarke and Crisp 1983.
99.  Ibid., Dudley 1977.
100.  Clarke and Crisp 1983.
101.  Ibid.
102.  Dudley 1977.
103.  McDonagh 1976.
104.  Fitch 2016.
105.  Steele 2013.
106.  Clarke and Crisp 1983.
107.  Steele 2013.
108.  Kant 2007.
109.  Steele 2013.
110.  Clarke and Crisp 1983.
111.  The role of dance and adornment in premodern societies remains significant even in
modern societies, both because so many choreographers have been inspired by visions of
“ancient” or “primitive” cultures and ritual dance, and because some of the most famous
ballets draw on myths that go back thousands of years; these have not only influenced
ballet narratives but also their costumes (Steele 2013).
112.  Steele 2013.
113.  Ibid.
114.  Clarke and Crisp 1983, Steele 2013.
115.  Ibid.

REFERENCES
Abbott, A. 2015. Clever fish. Nature 521:412–414.
Acuna-Alonzo, V., T. Flores-Dorantes, J. K. Kruit, T. Villarreal-Molina, O. Arellano-Campos, T.
Hunemeier, A. Moreno-Estrada, et al. 2010. A functional ABCA1 gene variant is associated
with low HDL-cholesterol levels and shows evidence of positive selection in Native
Americans. Human Molecular Genetics 19:2877–2885.
Agbai, O. 1986. Anti-sickling effect of dietary thiocyanate in prophylactic control of sickle cell
anemia. Journal of the National Medical Association 78:1053–1056.
Aidoo, M., D. J. Terlouw, M. S. Kolczak, P. D. McElroy, F. O. ter Kuile, S. Kariuki, B. L. Nahlen, et
al. 2002. Protective effects of the sickle cell gene against malaria morbidity and mortality.
Lancet 359:1311–1312.
Alexander, R. D. 1987. The Biology of Moral Systems. New York, NY: Aldine de Gruyter.
Allen, J., M. Weinrich, W. Hoppitt, and L. Rendell. 2013. Network-based diffusion analysis
reveals cultural transmission of lobtail feeding in humpback whales. Science 340:485–488.
Ambrose, S. H. 2001. Paleolithic technology and human evolution. Science 291: 1748–1753.
Anderson, C. A., and B. J. Bushman. 2001. Effects of violent video games on aggressive behavior,
aggressive cognition, aggressive affect, physiological arousal, and prosocial behavior: a meta-
analytic review of the scientific literature. Psychological Science 12:353–359.
Annett, M. 1985. Left, Right, Hand and Brain: The Right Shift Theory. London, UK: Erlbaum.
Anthony, D. W. 2007. The Horse, the Wheel, and Language: How Bronze-Age Riders from the
Eurasian Steppes Shaped the Modern World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Anthony, D. W., and D. Brown. 2000. Neolithic horse exploitation in the Eurasian steppes: diet,
ritual and riding. Antiquity 74:75–86.
Anton, S. C. 2014. Evolution of early Homo: an integrated biological perspective. Science
345:6192, doi:10.1126/science.1236828.
Apesteguia, J., S. Huck, and J. Oechssler. 2007. Imitation-theory and experimental evidence.
Journal of Economic Theory 136:217–235.
Aplin, L. M., D. R. Farine, J. Morand-Ferron, A. Cockburn, A. Thornton, and B. C. Sheldon. 2014.
Experimentally induced innovations lead to persistent culture via conformity in wild birds.
Nature 518:538–541.
Aplin, L. M., D. R. Farine, J. Morand-Ferron, A. Cockburn, A. Thornton, and B. C. Sheldon. 2015.
Counting conformity: evaluating the units of information in frequency-dependent social
learning. Animal Behaviour 110:E5–E8.
Aplin, L. M., D. R. Farine, J. Morand-Ferron, and B. C. Sheldon. 2012. Social networks predict
patch discovery in a wild population of songbirds. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B
279:4199–4205.
Arbib, M. A. 2012. How the Brain Got Language: The Mirror System Hypothesis. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Ardrey, R. 1966. The Territorial Imperative. London, UK: Collins.

Armelagos, G. J. 2014. Brain evolution, the determinates of food choice, and the omnivore’s
dilemma. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 54:1330–1341.
Armelagos, G. J., A. H. Goodman, and K. H. Jacobs. 1991. The origins of agriculture: population
growth during a period of declining health. Population and Environment 131:9–22.
Armelagos, G. J., and K. S. Harper. 2005. Genomics at the origins of agriculture, part two.
Evolutionary Anthropology 14:109–121.
Arnold, C., L. J. Matthews, and C. L. Nunn. 2010. The 10k Trees website: A new online resource
for primate phylogeny. Evolutionary Anthropology 19:114–118.
Asch, S. E. 1955. Opinions and social pressure. Scientific American 193(5):31–35.
Atton, N. 2013. Investigations into Stickleback Social Learning. PhD diss., University of St
Andrews.
Atton, N., W. Hoppitt, M. M. Webster, B. G. Galef, and K. N. Laland. 2012. Information flow
through threespine stickleback networks without social transmission. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London B 279:4272–4278.
Auer, P., N. Cesa-Bianchi, and P. Fischer. 2002. Finite-time analysis of the multi-armed bandit
problem. Machine Learning 47:235–256.
Aunger, R. 1992. The nutritional consequences of rejecting food in the Ituri Forest of Zaire.
Human Ecology 30:1–29.
——. 1994a. Are food avoidances maladaptive in the Ituri Forest of Zaire? Journal of
Anthropological Research 50:277–310.
——. 1994b. Sources of variation in ethnographic interview data: food avoidances in the Ituri
Forest, Zaire. Ethnology 33:65–99.
Avital, E., and E. Jablonka. 2000. Animal Traditions. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Axelrod, R. 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Badr, A. M., K. Sch, R. Rabey, H. E. Effgen, S. Ibrahim, H. H. Pozzi, C. Rohde, and W. F. Salamini.
2000. On the origin and domestication history of Barley (Hordeum vulgare). Molecular Biology
and Evolution 17(4):499–510.
Baird, R. W. 2000. The killer whale: foraging specializations and group hunting. In: Cetacean
Societies: Field Studies of Dolphins and Whales, ed. J. Mann, R. C. Connor, P. L. Tyack, and H.
Whitehead. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Baird, R. W., and H. Whitehead. 2000. Social organization of mammal-eating killer whales: group
stability and dispersal patterns. Canadian Journal of Zoology 78:2096–2105.
Baldwin, J. M. 1896. A new factor in evolution. American Naturalist 30:441–451.
Baldwin, J. M. 1902. Development and Evolution. New York, NY: Macmillan.
Bandura, A., and F. L. Menlove. 1968. Factors determining vicarious extinction of avoidance
behavior through symbolic modeling. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 8:99–108.
Bandura, A., D. Ross, and S. A. Ross. 1961. Transmission of aggression through the imitation of
aggressive models. Journal of Abnormal Social Psychology 63:575–582.
Banerjee, K., C. F. Chabris, V. E. Johnson, J. J. Lee, F. Tsao, and M. D. Hauser. 2009. General
intelligence in another primate: individual differences across cognitive task performance in a
new 
world 
monkey 
(Saguinus 
oedipus). 
PLOS 
ONE 
4:e5883,
doi:org/10.1371/journal.pone.0005883.
Barlow, K. R. 2002. Predicting maize agriculture among the Fremont: an economic comparison of
farming and foraging in the American southwest. American Antiquity 67:65–88.
Barnard, C. J., and R. M. Sibly. 1981. Producers and scroungers: a general model and its
application to captive flocks of house sparrows. Animal Behaviour 29:543–550.
Barnes, E. 2005. Diseases and human evolution. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico
Press.
Barnes, I., A. Duda, O. G. Pybus, and M. G. Thomas. 2011. Ancient urbanization predicts genetic

resistance to tuberculosis. Evolution 65:842–848.
Barnett, S. A. 1975. The Rat: A Study in Behavior. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Barrett, D. B., G. T. Kurian, and T. M. Johnston. 2001. World Christian Encyclopedia. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Barton, R. A. 1999. The evolutionary ecology of the primate brain. In: Comparative Primate
Socioecology, ed. P. C. Lee. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 167–194.
——. 2006. Primate brain evolution: integrating comparative, neurophysiological, and
ethological data. Evolutionary Anthropology 15:224–236.
——. 2012. Embodied cognitive evolution and the cerebellum. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London B 367:2097–2107.
Barton, R. A., and I. Capellini. 2011. Maternal investment, life histories, and the costs of brain
growth in mammals. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 108:6169–6174.
Barton, R. A., and P. H. Harvey. 2000. Mosaic evolution of brain structure in mammals. Nature
405:1055–1058.
Barton, R. A., and C. Venditti. 2013. Human frontal lobes are not relatively large. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences USA 110:9001–9006.
Bar-Yosef, O., and T. D. Price, eds. 2011. The origins of agriculture: new data, new ideas. Current
Anthropology 52, special supplement 4.
Basalla, G. 1988. The Evolution of Technology. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Basgall, M. E. 1987. Resource intensification among huntergatherers: acorn economies in
prehistoric California. Research in Economic Anthropology 9:21–52.
Bateman, A. J. 1948. Intra-sexual selection in Drosophila. Heredity 2:349–368.
Bateson, P., and P. Gluckman. 2011. Plasticity, Robustness, Development and Evolution. Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Bateson, P., and P. Martin. 2000. Design for a Life: How Behavior and Personality Develop. New
York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
——. 2013. Play, Playfulness, Creativity and Innovation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Beinhocker, E. 2006. The Origin of Wealth: Evolution Complexity and the Radical Remaking of
Economics. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Beja-Pereira, A., G. Luikart, P. R. England, D. G. Bradley, O. C. Jann, G. Bertorelle, A. T.
Chamberlain, et al. 2003. Gene–culture coevolution between cattle milk protein genes and
human lactase genes. Nature Genetics 35:311–313.
Bell, A. V., P. J. Richerson, and R. McElreath. 2009. Culture rather than genes provides greater
scope for the evolution of large-scale human prosociality. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 106:17671–17674.
Bellamy, R., C. Ruwende, T. Corrah, K. McAdam, H. Whittle, and A. Hill. 1998. Variations in the
Nramp1 gene and susceptibility to tuberculosis in West Africans. New England Journal of
Medicine 338:640–644.
Bergemann, D., and J. Valimaki. 1996. Learning and strategic pricing. Econometrica 64:1125–
1149.
Berger, S. M. 1962. Conditioning through vicarious instigation. Psychological Review 69:450–466.
Bergman, A., and M. W. Feldman. 1995. On the evolution of learning: representation of a
stochastic environment. Theoretical Population Biology 48:251–276.
Bersaglieri, T., P. C. Sabeti, N. Patterson, T. Vanderploeg, S. F. Schaffner, J. A. Drake, M. Rhodes,
et al. 2004. Genetic signatures of strong recent positive selection at the lactase gene. American
Journal of Human Genetics 74:1111–1120.
Bettinger, R. L., R. Garvey, and S. Tushingham. 2015. HunterGatherers: Archaeological and
Evolutionary Theory. New York, NY: Springer.

Beyene, Y., S. Katoh, G. WoldeGabriel, W. K. Hart, K. Uto, M. Sudo, M Kondo, et al. 2013. The
characteristics and chronology of the earliest Acheulean at Konso, Ethiopia. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA 110:1584–1591.
Bickerton, A. 2009. Adam’s Tongue. New York, NY: Hill and Wang.
Biesmeijer, J. C., and T. D. Seeley. 2005. The use of the waggle dance information by honey bees
throughout their foraging careers. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 59:133–142.
Bijker, W. 1995. Of Bicycles, Bakelites, and Bulbs: Toward a Theory of Sociotechnical Change.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bikhchandani, S., D. Hirshleifer, and I. Welch. 1992. A theory of fads, fashion, custom, and
cultural change as informational cascades. Journal of Political Economy 100:992–1026.
——. 1998. Learning from the behavior of others: conformity, fads, and informational cascades.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 12:151–170.
Bird, R. B., N. Taylor, and F. Codding. 2013. Niche construction and dreaming logic: aboriginal
patch mosaic burning and varanid lizards (Varanus gouldii) in Australia. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London B, doi:10.1098/rspb.2013.2297.
Birney, E. 2012. An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human genome. The
ENCODE Project consortium. Nature 489:57–74.
Biro, D., N. Inoue-Nakamura, R. Tonooka, G. Yamakoshi, C. Sousa, and T. Matsuzawa. 2003.
Cultural innovation and transmission of tool use in wild chimpanzees: evidence from field
experiments. Animal Cognition 6:213–223.
Biro, D., C. Sousa, and T. Matsuzawa. 2006. Ontogeny and cultural propagation of tool use by
wild chimpanzees at Bossou, Guinea: case studies in nut cracking and leaf folding. In:
Cognitive Development in Chimpanzees, ed. T. Matsuzawa, M. Tomonaga, and M. Tanaka.
Tokyo, Japan: Springer, pp. 476–508.
Bishop, D.V.M. 1990. Handedness and Developmental Disorder. Hove, UK: Erlbaum.
Blazek, V., J. Bruzek, and M. F. Casanova. 2011. Plausible mechanisms for brain structural and
size changes in human evolution. Collegium Antropologicum 35:949–955.
Bloom, P. 1997. Intentionality and word learning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 1: 9–12.
——. 2000. How Children Learn the Meaning of Words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Blumenschine, R. J. 1986. Early Hominid Scavenging Opportunities: Implications of Carcass
Availability in the Serengeti and Ngorongoro Ecosystems. Oxford, UK: Archaeopress.
Blumler, M. A. 1992. Seed Weight and Environment in Mediterranean-type Grasslands in
California and Israel. PhD diss., University of California, Berkeley.
Blunden, G. 2003. Charco Harbour. Sydney, Australia: Sydney University Press.
Blurton Jones, N. G. 1986. Bushman birth spacing: a test for optimal inter-birth intervals.
Ethology and Sociobiology 7:91–105.
——. 1987. Bushman birth spacing: direct tests of some simple predictions. Ethology and
Sociobiology 8:183–204.
Boeda, E., J. Connan, D. Dessort, S. Muhesen, N. Mercier, H. Valladas, and N. Tisnerat. 1996.
Bitumen as a hafting material on Middle Paleolithic artefacts. Nature 380:336–338.
Boesch, C. 2003. Is culture a golden barrier between human and chimpanzee? Evolutionary
Anthropology 12:26–32.
Boesch, C., and M. Tomasello. 1998. Chimpanzee and human cultures. Current Anthropology
39:591–604.
Boinski, S. 1988. Sex differences in the foraging behavior of squirrel monkeys in a seasonal
habitat. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 23:177–186.
Boivin, N. L., M. A. Zeder, D. Q. Fuller, A. Crowther, G. Larson, J. M. Erlandson, T. Denham, and
M. D. Petraglia. 2016. Ecological consequences of human niche construction: examining long-
term anthropogenic shaping of global species distributions. Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences USA 113(23):6388–6396.
Bolhuis, J. J., G. R. Brown, R. C. Richardson, and K. N. Laland. 2011. Darwin in mind: new
opportunities 
for 
evolutionary 
psychology. 
PLOS 
Biology 
9(7):e1001109,
doi:org/1371/journal.pbio.1001109.
Bolhuis, J. J., K. Okanoya, and C. Scharff. 2010. Twitter evolution: converging mechanisms in
birdsong and human speech. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 11:747–759.
Bolhuis, J. J., I. Tattersall, N. Chomsky, and R. C. Berwick. 2014. How could language have
evolved? PLOS Biology 12(8):e1001934, doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001934.
Bonner, J. T. 1980. The Evolution of Culture in Animals. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Boogert, N. J., S. M. Reader, W. Hoppitt, and K. N. Laland. 2008. The origin and spread of
innovations in starlings. Animal Behaviour 75:1509–1518.
Boulle, P. (1963) 2011. Planet of the Apes. New York, NY: Vintage Books.
Box, H. O., and K. R. Gibson, eds. 1999. Mammalian Social Learning: Comparative and Ecological
Perspectives. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.
——. 1988. The evolution of reciprocity in sizable groups. Journal of Theoretical Biology 132:337–
356.
——. 1992. Punishment allows the evolution of cooperation or anything else in sizable groups.
Ethology and Sociobiology 133:171–195.
——. 1995. Why does culture increase human adaptability? Ethology and Sociobiology 16:125–
143.
——. 1996. Why culture is common, but cultural evolution is rare. Proceedings of the British
Academy of Science 88:77–93.
——. 2005. The Origin and Evolution of Cultures. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Boyd, R., and J. Silk. 2015. How Humans Evolved, 7th ed. New York, NY: Norton.
Boyd, R., H. Gintis, and S. Bowles. 2010. Coordinated punishment of defectors sustains
cooperation and can proliferate when rare. Science 328:617–620.
Boyd, R., H. Gintis, S. Bowles, and P. J. Richerson. 2003. The evolution of altruistic punishment.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 100:3531–3535.
Boyd, R., P. J. Richerson, and J. Henrich. 2011. The cultural niche: why social learning is
essential for human adaptation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
108:10918–10925.
Bradshaw, J. L. 1991. Animal asymmetry and human heredity: dextrality, tool use and language
in evolution—10 years after Walker (1980). British Journal of Psychology 82:39–59.
Brass, M., and C. Heyes. 2005. Imitation: Is cognitive neuroscience solving the correspondence
problem? Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9:489–495.
Braun, D. R., T. Plummer, P. W. Ditchfield, L. C. Bishop, and J. V. Ferraro. 2009. Oldowan
technology and raw material variability at Kanjera South. In: Interdisciplinary Approaches to
Oldowan, ed. E. Hovers and D. R. Braun. New York, NY: Springer, pp. 99–110.
Brighton, H., S. Kirby, and K. Smith. 2005. Cultural selection for learnability: three principles
underlying the view that language adapts to be learnable. In: Language Origins: Perspectives on
Evolution, ed. M. Tallerman. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, pp. 291–309.
Bronowski, J. 1973. The Ascent of Man. London, UK: BBC Books.
Brosnan, S. F., B. J. Wilson, and M. J. Beran. 2012. Old world monkeys are more like humans
than New World monkeys when playing a coordination game. Proceedings of the Royal Society
of London B, 279:1522–1530.
Brown, C., and R. L. Day. 2002. The future of stock enhancements: lessons for hatchery practice
from conservation biology. Fish and Fisheries 3:79–94.

Brown, C., and K. N. Laland. 2001. Social learning and life skills training for hatchery reared fish.
Journal of Fish Biology 59:471–493.
——. 2002. Social learning of a novel avoidance task in the guppy: conformity and social release.
Animal Behaviour 64:41–47.
——. 2003. Social learning in fishes: a review. Fish and Fisheries 4:280–288.
——. 2006. Social learning in fishes. In: Fish Cognition and Behaviour, ed. C. Brown, K. N. Laland,
and J. Krause. Oxford, UK: Blackwell, pp. 186–202.
Brown, C., T. Davidson, and K. N. Laland. 2003. Environmental enrichment and prior experience
improve foraging behaviour in hatchery-reared Atlantic salmon. Journal of Fish Biology
63:187–196.
Brown, G. R., K. N. Laland, and M. Borgerhoff Mulder. 2009. Bateman’s principles and human
sex roles. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 24:297–304.
Brown, G. R., T. Dickins, R. Sear, and K. N. Laland. 2011. Evolutionary accounts of human
behavioural diversity. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 366:313–324.
Brown, C., A. Markula, and K. N. Laland. 2003. Social learning of prey location in hatchery-
reared Atlantic salmon. Journal of Fish Biology 63:738–745.
Brown, M. F. 1985. Rooks feeding on human vomit. British Birds 78:513.
Brown, R. E. 1985. The rodents II: suborder Myomorpha. In: Social Odours in Mammals, ed. R. E.
Brown and D. W. Macdonald. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press, pp. 345–457.
Brown, S., M. J. Martinez, and L. M. Parsons. 2006. The neural basis of human dance. Cerebral
Cortex 16:1157–1167.
Bshary, R. 2011. Machiavellian intelligence in fishes. In: Fish Cognition and Behaviour, ed. C.
Brown, K. N. Laland, and J. Krause. Oxford, UK: Blackwell, pp. 277–297.
Bshary, R., W. Wickler, and H. Fricke. 2002. Fish cognition: a primate’s eye view. Animal
Cognition 5:1–13.
Bugnyar, T., and K. Kortschal. 2002. Observational learning and the raiding of food caches in
ravens (Corvus corax): Is it “tactical deception”? Animal Behaviour 64:185–195.
Burger, J., M. Kirchner, B. Bramanti, W. Haak, and M. G. Thomas. 2007. Absence of the lactase-
persistence associated allele in early Neolithic Europeans. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 104:3736–3741.
Burling, R. 1993. Primate calls, human language, and nonverbal communication. Current
Anthropology 34:25–53.
Bushnell, G.H.S. 1957. Peru. London, UK: Thames and Hudson.
Buss, D. M. 1999. Evolutionary Psychology: The New Science of the Mind. London, UK: Allyn &
Bacon.
Byrne, R. W. 1992. The evolution of intelligence. In: Behaviour and Evolution, ed. P.J.B. Slater and
T. R. Halliday. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 223–265.
——. 1994. The evolution of intelligence. In: Behaviour and Evolution, ed. P.J.B. Slater and T. R.
Halliday. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 223–265.
——. 1995. The Thinking Ape. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
——. 1997. The Technical Intelligence hypothesis: An additional evolutionary stimulus to
intelligence? In: Machiavellian Intelligence II: Extensions and Evaluations, ed. A. Whiten and R.
W. Byrne. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 289–311.
——. 1999. Imitation without intentionality. Using string parsing to copy the organization of
behaviour. Animal Cognition 2:63–72.
——. 2003. Novelty in deceit. In: Animal Innovation, ed. S. M. Reader and K. N. Laland. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
——. 2016. Evolving Insight. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Byrne, R. W., and N. Corp. 2004. Neocortex size predicts deception rate in primates. Proceedings

of the Royal Society of London B 271:1693–1699.
Byrne, R. W., and A. E. Russon. 1998. Learning by imitation: a hierarchical approach. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 21:667–684.
Byrne, R. W., and A. Whiten. 1988. Machiavellian Intelligence: Social Expertise and the Evolution of
Intellect in Monkeys, Apes and Humans. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
——. 1990. Tactical deception in primates: the 1990 database. Primate Report 27 (entire vol.):1–
101.
Byrne, R. W., C. Holbaiter, and M. Klailova. 2011. Local traditions in gorilla manual skill:
evidence for observational learning of behavioral organization. Animal Cognition 14:683–693.
Caceres, M., J. Lachuer, M. A. Zapala, J. C. Redmond, L. Kudo, D. H. Geschwind, D. J. Lockhart,
et al. 2003. Elevated gene expression levels distinguish human from nonhuman primate
brains. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 100:13030–13035.
Cadieu, N., S. Fruchard, and J.-C. Cadieu. 2010. Innovative individuals are not always the best
demonstrators: feeding innovation and social transmission in Serinus canaria. PLOS ONE
5:e8841, doi:org/10.1371/journal.pone.0008841.
Calarco, J. A., Y. Xing, M. Caceres, J. P. Calarco, X. Xiao, Q. Pan, C. Lee, et al. 2007. Global
analysis of alternative splicing differences between humans and chimpanzees. Genes &
Development 21:2963–2975.
Caldwell, C., and A. Millen. 2008. Experimental models for testing hypotheses about cumulative
cultural evolution. Evolution and Human Behavior 29:165–171.
Caldwell, M. C., and D. K. Caldwell. 1972. Behavior of marine mammals. In: Mammals of the Sea,
ed. H. Ridgway. Springfield, IL: C. C. Thomas, pp. 419–465.
Call, J., and M. Tomasello. 1998. Distinguishing intentional from accidental actions in
orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus), chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes), and human children (Homo
sapiens). Journal of Comparative Psychology 112:192–206.
——. 2008. Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? 30 years later. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 12:187–192.
Call, J., B. Hare, M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2004. Unwilling or unable? Chimpanzees’
understanding of intentional actions. Developmental Science 7: 488–498.
Callahan, E. 1979. The Basics of Biface Knapping in the Eastern Fluted Point Tradition: A Manual for
Flintknappers and Lithic Analysts. Bethlehem, CT: Eastern States Archaeological Federation.
Cambefort, J. P. 1981. A comparative study of culturally transmitted patterns of feeding habits in
the chacma baboon (Papio ursinus) and the vervet monkey (Cercopithecus aethiops). Folia
Primatologica 36:243–263.
Cann, R. L., M. Stoneking, and A. C. Wilson. 1987. Mitochondrial DNA and human evolution.
Nature 325:31–36.
Carey, S. 2009. The Origin of Concepts. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Caro, T. M. 1980a. Predatory behaviour in domestic cat mothers. Behaviour 74:128–147.
——. 1980b. Effects of the mother, object play and adult experience on predation in cats.
Behavioral and Neural Biology 29:29–51.
——. 1995. Short-term costs and correlates of play in cheetahs. Animal Behaviour 49:333–345.
Caro, T. M., and M. D. Hauser. 1992. Is there teaching in nonhuman animals? Quarterly Review of
Biology 67:151–174.
Carpenter, M. 2006. Instrumental, social and shared goals and intentions in imitation. In:
Imitation and the Social Mind: Autism and Typical Development, ed. S. J. Rogers and J.H.G.
Williams. New York, NY: Guilford, pp. 48–70.
Carpenter, M., J. Uebel, and M. Tomasello. 2013. Being mimicked increases prosocial behaviour
in 18-month-old infants. Child Development 84:1511–1518.
Carr, K., R. L. Kendal, and E. G. Flynn. 2015. Imitate or innovate? Children’s innovation is

influenced by the efficacy of observed behaviour. Cognition 142:322–332.
Carroll, S. B. 2005. Endless Forms Most Beautiful: The New Science of Evo Devo. New York, NY: W.
W. Norton.
Carruthers, P. 2006. The Architecture of the Mind: Massive Modularity and the Flexibility of Thought.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Casanova, C., R. Mondragon-Ceballos, and P. C. Lee. 2008. Innovative social behavior in
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). American Journal of Primatology 70:54–61.
Casar, C., K. Zuberbuehler, R. J. Young, and R. W. Byrne. 2013. Titi monkey call sequences vary
with predator location and type. Biology Letters 9, 20130535, doi: 10.1098/rsbl.2013.0535.
Caselli, G., J. Vallen, and G. Wunsch. 2005. Demography: Analysis & Synthesis. Cambridge, MA:
Academic Press.
Castro, L., and M. A. Toro. 2004. The evolution of culture: from primate social learning to human
culture. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 101:10235–10240.
Catchpole, C. K., and P.J.B. Slater. 1995. Bird Song: Biological Themes and Variations. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
——. 2008. Bird Song: Biological Themes and Variations, 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and M. W. Feldman. 1973. Models for cultural inheritance I: group mean
and within-group variation. Theoretical Population Biology 4:42–55.
——. 1981. Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative Approach. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Chang, L., Q. Fang, S. Zang, M. Poo, and N. Gong. 2015. Mirror-induced self-directed behaviors
in rhesus monkeys after visual-somatosensory training. Current Biology 25(2):212–217.
Chartrand, T. L., and J. Bargh. 1999. The chameleon effect: the perception-behavior link and
social interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 766:893–910.
Chartrand, T. L., and R. van Baaren. 2009. Human mimicry. Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology. 4108:219–274.
Cheney, D. L., and R. M. Seyfarth. 1988. Social and non-social knowledge in vervet monkeys. In:
Machiavellian Intelligence: Social Expertise and the Evolution of Intellect in Monkeys, Apes and
Humans, ed. R. W. Byrne and A. Whiten. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, pp. 255–270.
Childe, V. G. 1936. Man Makes Himself. London, UK: Watts.
Chittka, L., and J. Niven. 2009. Are bigger brains better? Current Biology 19:R995–R1008.
Chomsky, N. 1965. Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——. 1968. Language and Mind. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
——. 1980. Rules and Representations. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Chudek, M., and J. Henrich. 2011. Culture-gene coevolution, norm psychology and the
emergence of human prosociality. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 155:218–226.
Claidiere, N., E.J.E. Messer, W. Hoppitt, and A. Whiten. 2013. Diffusion dynamics of socially
learned foraging techniques in squirrel monkeys. Current Biology 23:1251–1255.
Clarke, M., and C. Crisp. 1983. The History of Dance, 5th ed. New York, NY: Crown.
Clayton, N. S., and A. Dickinson. 1998. Episodic-like memory during cache recovery by scrub
jays. Nature 395:272–274.
——. 2010. Mental time travel: Can animals recall the past and plan for the future? In: The New
Encyclopedia of Animal Behaviour, Vol. 2, ed. M. D. Breed ad J. Moore. Oxford, UK: Academic
Press, pp. 438–442.
Cloutier, S., R. C. Newberry, K. Honda, and J. R. Alldredge. 2002. Cannibalistic behaviour spread
by social learning. Animal Behaviour 63:1153–1162.
Clutton-Brock, T. H., and P. H. Harvey. 1980. Primates, brain and ecology. Journal of Zoology,
London 190:309–323.

Clutton-Brock, T. H., D. Gaynor, G. M. MacIlrath, A.D.C. MacColl, R. Kansky, P. Chadwick, M.
Manser, et al. 1999. Predation, group size and mortality in a cooperative mongoose (Suricata
suricatta). Journal of Animal Ecology 68:672–683.
Cochran, G., and H. Harpending. 2009. The 10,000 Year Explosion: How Civilization Accelerated
Human Evolution. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Cohen, M. N. 1989. Health and the Rise of Civilizations. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Cohen, M. N., and G. Armelagos. 1984. Paleopathology at the Origins of Agriculture. Orlando, FL:
Academic.
Cohen, M. N., and G.M.M. Crane-Kramer. 2007. Ancient Health: Skeletal Indicators of Agricultural
and Economic Intensification. Gainesville, FL: University of Florida Press.
Collard, M., B. Buchanan, A. Ruttle, and M. J. O’Brien. 2012. Niche construction and the toolkits
of hunter–gatherers and food producers. Biological Theory 6:251–259.
Colombelli-Négrel, D., M. E. Hauber, J. Robertson, F. J. Sulloway, H. Hoi, M. Griggio, and S.
Kleindorfer. 2012. Embryonic learning of vocal passwords in superb fairy-wrens reveals
intruder cuckoo nestlings. Current Biology 22:2155–2160.
Cook, P., A. Rouse, M. Wilson, and C. Reichmuth. 2013. A California sea lion (Zalophus
californianus) can keep the beat: motor entrainment to rhythmic auditory stimuli in a non-
vocal mimic. Journal of Comparative Psychology 127(4):412–427.
Coolen, I., R. L. Day, and K. N. Laland. 2003. Species difference in adaptive use of public
information in sticklebacks. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 270:2413–2419.
Coolen, I., A. J. Ward, P.J.B. Hart, and K. N. Laland. 2005. Foraging ninespined sticklebacks
prefer to rely on public information over simpler social cues. Behavioral Ecology 16:865–870.
Cooper, R. W. 1999. Coordination Games: Complementarities and Macroeconomics. Cambridge, UK,
and New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Corballis, M. C. 1991. The Lopsided Ape: Evolution of the Generative Mind. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
——. 1993. The Lopsided Ape: Evolution of the Generative Mind. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
——. 2013. Mental time travel: a case for evolutionary continuity. Trends in Cognitive Sciences
17:5–6, doi:10.1016/j.tics.2012.10.009.
Cordaux, R., R. Aunger, G. Bentley, I. Nasidze, S. M. Sirajuddin, and M. Stoneking. 2004.
Independent origins of Indian caste and tribal paternal lineages. Current Biology 14:231–235.
Cornwallis, C., S. West, K. Davis, and A. Griffin. 2010. Promiscuity and the evolutionary
transition to complex societies. Nature 466:969–972.
Cosmides, L., and J. Tooby. 1987. From evolution to behavior: evolutionary psychology as the
missing link. In: The Latest on the Best: Essays on Evolution and Optimality, ed. J. Dupre.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 277–306.
Coussi-Korbel, S., and D. Fragaszy. 1995. On the relation between social dynamics and social
learning. Animal Behaviour 50:1441–1453.
Couzin, I. D. 2009. Collective cognition in animal groups. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 13(1):36–
43.
Couzin, I. D., J. Krause, N. R. Franks, and S. A. Levin. 2005. Effective leadership and decision-
making in animal groups on the move. Nature 433:513–516.
Cowie, A. 2014. Experimental Studies of Social Foraging in Budgerigars (Melopsittacus undulates).
PhD diss., University of St Andrews.
Crittenden, A. N. 2011. The importance of honey consumption in human evolution. Food and
Foodways: Explorations in the History and Culture of Human Nourishment 19:257–273.
Croft, D. P., R. James, A.J.W. Ward, M. S. Botham, D. Mawdsley, and J. Krause. 2005. Assortative
interactions and social networks in fish. Oecologia 143:211–219.

Csibra, G. 2007. Teachers in the wild. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 11:95–96.
——. 2010. Recognizing communicative intentions in infancy. Mind & Language 25:141–168.
Csibra, G., and G. Gergely. 2006. Social learning and social cognition: the case for pedagogy. In:
Processes of Change in Brain and Cognitive Development, ed. Y. Munakata and M. H. Johnson.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, pp. 249–274.
——. 2011. Natural pedagogy as evolutionary adaptation. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B 366:1149–1157.
Curio, E. 1988. Cultural transmission of enemy recognition by birds. In: Social Learning:
Psychological and Biological Perspectives, ed. B. G. Galef and T. R. Zentall. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum, pp. 75–97.
Curio, E., U. Ernst, and W. Vieth. 1978. Cultural transmission of enemy recognition: one function
of mobbing. Science 202:899–901.
Currie D. J., and J. T. Fritz. 1993. Global patterns of animal abundance and species energy use.
Oikos 67:56–68.
Dalziell, A. H., R. A. Peters, A. Cockburn, A. D. Dorland, A. C. Maisey, and R. D. Magrath. 2013.
Dance choreography is coordinated with song repertoire in a complex avian display. Current
Biology 23:1132–1135.
Danchin, E., L.-A. Giraldeau, T. J. Valone, and R. H. Wagner. 2004. Public information: from
nosy neighbours to cultural evolution. Science 305:487–491.
Darwin C. R. 1986. Letter from Charles Darwin to the Gardener’s Chronicle, [Aug. 16, 1841]. In:
The Correspondence of Charles Darwin, Vol. 2. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp.
1837–1843. Darwin Correspondence Project, “Letter no. 607,” accessed on 12 July 2016,
http://www.darwinproject.ac.uk/DCP-LETT-607.
——. (1859) 1968. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of
Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life. London: John Murray. First edition reprint. London, UK:
Penguin Books, London.
——. (1871) 1981. The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. London: John Murray. First
edition reprint. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
——. 1872. The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. London: John Murray.
Davies, G., and J. H. Bank. 2002. A History of Money: From Ancient Times to the Present Day.
Cardiff, UK: University of Wales Press.
Davies, N. B. 1991. Dunnock Behaviour and Social Evolution. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Dawkins, R. 1976. The Selfish Gene. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
——. 1982. The Extended Phenotype. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Dawkins, M. 2012. Why Animals Matter. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Day, R., T. MacDonald, C. Brown, K. N. Laland, and S. M. Reader. 2001. Interactions between
shoal size and conformity in guppy social foraging. Animal Behaviour 62:917–925.
Day, R. L. 2003. Innovation and Social Learning in Monkeys and Fish: Empirical Findings and
Their Application to Reintroduction Techniques. PhD diss., University of Cambridge.
Day, R. L., R. L. Coe, J. R. Kendal, and K. N. Laland. 2003. Neophilia, innovation and social
learning: a study of intergeneric differences in callitrichid monkeys. Animal Behaviour 65:559–
571.
Deacon, T. W. 1990. Fallacies of progression in theories of brain-size evolution. International
Journal of Primatology 11:193–236.
——. 1997. The Symbolic Species: The Coevolution of Language and the Brain. New York, NY:
Norton.
——. 2003a. The Symbolic Species, 2nd ed. London, UK: Penguin Books.
——. 2003b. Multilevel selection in a complex adaptive system: the problem of language origins.
In: Evolution and Learning: The Baldwin Effect Reconsidered, ed. B. Weber and D. Depew.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 81–106.
Dean, L. G., R. L. Kendal, S. J. Schapiro, B. Thierry, and K. N. Laland. 2012. Identification of the
social and cognitive processes underlying human cumulative culture. Science 335:1114–1118.
Dean, L. G., G. Vale, K. N. Laland, E. Flynn, and R. L. Kendal. 2014. Human cumulative culture: a
comparative perspective. Biological Reviews 89:284–301.
Deaner, R. O., C. L. Nunn, and C. P. van Schaik. 2000. Comparative tests of primate cognition:
different scaling methods produce different results. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 55:44–52.
Deaner, R. O., C. van Schaik, and V. Johnson. 2006. Do some taxa have better domain-general
cognition than others? A meta-analysis of nonhuman primate studies. Evolutionary Psychology
4:149–196.
Deary, I. J. 2000. Looking Down on Human Intelligence: From Psychometrics to the Brain. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
——. 2001. Intelligence: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Dechmann, D.K.N., and K. Safi. 2009. Comparative studies of brain evolution: a critical insight
from the chiroptera. Biological Review 84:161–172.
Delagnes, A., and H. Roche. 2005. Late Pliocene hominid knapping skills: the case of Lokalalei
2C, West Turkana, Kenya. Journal of Human Evolution 48:435–472.
De la Torre, I. 2011. The origins of stone tool technology in Africa: a historical perspective.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 366:1028–1037.
de Magalhaes, J. P., and A. Matsuda. 2012. Genome-wide patterns of genetic distances reveal
candidate loci contributing to human population-specific traits. Annals of Human Genetics
76:142–158.
Dennett, D. C. 1983. Intentional systems in cognitive ethology: the ‘Panglossian paradigm’
defended. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 6:343–355.
Derex, M., and R. Boyd. 2015. The foundations of the human cultural niche. Nature
Communications 6:8398, doi:10.1038/ncomms9398.
d’Errico, F., and C. Stringer. 2011. Evolution, revolution or saltation scenario for the emergence
of modern cultures? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 366:1060–
1069.
DeVoogd, T. J., J. R. Krebs, S. D. Healy, and A. Purvis. 1993. Relations between song repertoire
size and the volume of brain nuclei related to song: comparative evolutionary analysis among
oscine birds. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 254:75–82.
de Waal, F. 1990. Peacemaking among Primates. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——. 1996. Good Natured: The Origins of Right and Wrong in Humans and Other Animals.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——. 2001. The Ape and the Sushi Master. London, UK: Penguin Books.
——. 2007. Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex among Apes. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
——. 2010. The Age of Empathy: Nature’s Lessons for a Kinder Society. London, UK: Souvenir Press.
de Winter, W., and C. E. Oxnard. 2001. Evolutionary radiations and convergences in the
structural organization of mammalian brains. Nature 409:710–714.
Diamond, J. 1991. The Rise and Fall of the Third Chimpanzee. London, UK: Vintage.
——. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. London, UK: Jonathon Cape.
——. 2006. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. London, UK: Penguin Books.
Dindo, M., B. Thierry, and A. Whiten. 2008. Social diffusion of novel foraging methods in brown
capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella). Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 275:187–193.
Donald, M. 1991. Origins of the Modern Mind: Three Stages in the Evolution of Culture and Cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dornhaus, A., and L. Chittka. 1999. Evolutionary origins of bee dances. Nature 401:38.

Dorrance, B. R., and T. R. Zentall. 2002. Imitation of conditional discriminations in pigeons
(Columba livia). Journal of Comparative Psychology 116:277–285.
Doupe, A. J., D. J. Perkel, A. Reiner, and E. A. Stern. 2005. Birdbrains could teach basal ganglia
research a new song. Trends in Neuroscience 28:353–363.
Draper, P. 1976. Social and economic constraints on child life among the !Kung. In: Kalahari
HunterGatherers: Studies of the !Kung San and Their Neighbors, ed. R. B. Lee and I. DeVore.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, pp. 199–217.
Dudley, J. 1977. The early life of an American modern dancer. In: The Encyclopedia of Dance and
Ballet, ed. M. Clarke and D. Vaughan. London, UK: Pitman.
Duffy, G. A., T. W. Pike, and K. N. Laland. 2009. Size-dependent directed social learning in
ninespined sticklebacks. Animal Behaviour 78:371–375.
Dugatkin, L. A. 1992. Sexual selection and imitation: females copy the mate choice of others.
American Naturalist 139:1384–1389.
Dugatkin, L. A., and J. Godin. 1992. Reversal of female mate choice by copying in the guppy
(Poecilia reticulata). Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 249:179–184.
Dunbar, R.I.M. 1992. Neocortex size as a constraint on group size in primates. Journal of Human
Evolution 20:469–493.
——. 1995. Neocortex size and group size in primates: a test of the hypothesis. Journal of Human
Evolution 28:287–296.
——. 1998. Theory of mind and the evolution of language. In: Approaches to the Evolution of
Language, ed. J. R. Hurford, M. Studdert-Kennedy, and C. Knight. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 92–110.
——. 2011. Evolutionary basis of the social brain. In: Oxford Handbook of Social Neuroscience, ed.
J. Decety and J. Cacioppo. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, pp. 28–38.
Dunbar, R.I.M., and S. Shultz. 2007a. Understanding primate brain evolution. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 362:649–658.
——. 2007b. Evolution in the social brain. Science 317:1344–1347.
Durham, W. H. 1991. Coevolution: Genes, Culture, and Human Diversity. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Eaton, G. G. 1976. The social order of Japanese macaques. Scientific American 234: 96–106.
Elgar, M. A., and B. J. Crespi. 1992. Ecology and evolution of cannibalism. In: Cannibalism.
Ecology and Evolution among Diverse Taxa, ed. M. A. Elgar and B. J. Crespi. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, pp. 1–12.
Emery, N. J. 2004. Are corvids ‘feathered apes’? Cognitive evolution in crows, jays, rooks and
jackdaws. In: Comparative Analysis of Minds, ed. S. Watanabe. Tokyo, Japan: Keio University
Press, pp. 181–213.
Emery, N. J., and N. S. Clayton. 2004. The mentality of crows: convergent evolution of
intelligence in corvids and apes. Science 306:1903–1907.
Enard, W., S. Gehre, K. Hammerschmidt, S. M. Holter, T. Blass, M. Somel, M. K. Bruckner, et al.
2009. A humanized version of Foxp2 affects cortico-basal ganglia circuits in mice. Cell
137:961–971.
Enard, W., P. Khaitovich, J. Klose, S. Zollner, F. Heissiq, P. Giavalisco, K. Nieselt-Struwe, et al.
2002. Intra-and interspecific variation in primate gene expression patterns. Science 296:340–
343.
Enard, W., M. Przeworski, S. E. Fisher, C. Lai, V. Wiebe, T. Kitana, A. P. Monaco, et al. 2002.
Molecular evolution of FOXP2, a gene involved in speech and language. Nature 418:869–872.
Enquist, M., and S. Ghirlanda. 2007. Evolution of social learning does not explain the origin of
human cumulative culture. Journal of Theoretical Biology 1479:449–454.
Enquist, M., K. Eriksson, and S. Ghirlanda. 2007. Critical social learning: a solution to Rogers’

paradox of nonadaptive culture. American Anthropologist 109:727–734.
Enquist, M., S. Ghirlanda, and K. Eriksson. 2011. Modelling the evolution and diversity of
cumulative culture. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 366:412–423.
Enquist, M., S. Ghirlanda, A. Jarrick, and C.-A. Wachtmeister. 2008. Why does human culture
increase exponentially? Theoretical Population Biology 74:46–55.
Enquist, M., P. Strimling, K. Eriksson, K. N. Laland, and J. Sjostrand. 2010. One cultural parent
makes no culture. Animal Behaviour 79:1353–1362.
Erickson, D. L., B. D. Smith, A. C. Clarke, D. H. Sandweiss, and N. Tuross. 2005. An Asian origin
for a 10,000-year-old domesticated plant in the Americas. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 102(51):18315–18320.
Eriksson, K., M. Enquist, and S. Ghirlanda. 2007. Critical points in current theory of conformist
social learning. Journal of Evolutionary Psychology 5:67–87.
Evans, A. G., and T. E. Wellems. 2002. Coevolutionary genetics of Plasmodium malaria parasites
and their human hosts. Integrative and Comparative Biology 42:401–407.
Evans, C. 2016. Empirical Investigations of Social Learning, Cooperation, and Their Role in the
Evolution of Complex Culture. PhD diss., University of St Andrews.
Evison, S. F., O. Petchey, A. Beckerman, and F. W. Ratnieks. 2008. Combined use of pheromone
trails and visual landmarks by the common garden ant (Lasius niger). Behavioral Ecology and
Sociobiology 63:261–267.
Falk, D. 2004. Prelinguistic evolution in early hominins: whence motherese? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 27:491–503.
Farr, J. A., and W. F. Herrnkind. 1974. A quantitative analysis of social interaction of the guppy
(Poecilia reticulata) as a function of population density. Animal Behaviour 22:582–591.
Faurie, C., and M. Raymond. 2005. Handedness, homicide and negative frequency-dependent
selection. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 272:25–28.
Feenders, G., M. Liedvogel, M. Rivas, M. Zapka, H. Horita, E. Hara, K. Wada, et al. 2008.
Molecular mapping of movement-associated areas in the avian brain: a motor theory for vocal
learning origin. PLOS ONE 3:e1768, doi:org/10.1371/journal.pone.0001768.
Fehr, E., and U. Fischbacher. 2003. The nature of human altruism. Nature 425:785–791.
Fehr, E., and S. Gachter. 2002. Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature 415:137–140.
Feldman, M., and M. E. Kislev. 2007. A century of wheat research—from wild emmer discovery
to genome analysis. Israel Journal of Plant Sciences 55(3–4):207–221.
Feldman, M. W., and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza. 1976. Cultural and biological evolutionary processes,
selection for a trait under complex transmission. Theoretical Population Biology 9:238–259.
Feldman, M. W., and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza. 1981. Cultural Evolution: A Quantitative Approach.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
——. 1989. On the theory of evolution under genetic and cultural transmission with application
to the lactose absorption problem. In: Mathematical Evolutionary Theory, ed. M. W. Feldman.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, pp. 145–173.
Feldman, M. W., and K. N. Laland. 1996. Gene-culture coevolutionary theory. Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 11:453–457.
Feldman, M. W., and L. A. Zhivotovsky. 1992. Gene-culture coevolution: toward a general theory
of vertical transmission. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 89:935–938.
Feldman, M. W., K. Aoki, and J. Kumm. 1996. Individual versus social learning: evolutionary
analysis in a fluctuating environment. Anthropological Science 104:209–232.
Fernandes, H.B.F., M. A. Woodley, and J. te Nijenhuis. 2014. Differences in cognitive abilities
among primates are concentrated of G: Phenotypic and phylogenetic comparisons with two
meta-analytical databases. Intelligence 46:311–322.
Finlay, B. L., and R. B. Darlington. 1995. Linked regularities in the development and evolution of

mammalian brains. Science 268:1578–1584.
Fischer, J., B. C. Wheeler, and J. P. Higham. 2015. Is there any evidence for vocal learning in
chimpanzee food calls? Current Biology 25:1028–1029.
Fisher, J., and R. A. Hinde. 1949. The opening of milk bottles by birds. British Birds 42:347–357.
Fisher, R. A. 1930. The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
Fisher, S. E., F. Vargha-Khadem, K. E. Watkins, A. P. Monaco, and M. E. Pembrey. 1998.
Localisation of a gene implicated in a severe speech and language disorder. Nature Genetics
18:168–170.
Fitch, W. T. 2004. Kin selection and “mother tongues”: a neglected component in language
evolution. In: Evolution of Communication Systems: A Comparative Approach, ed. D. Kimbrough
Oller and U. Griebel. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 275–296.
——. 2005. The evolution of language: a comparative review. Biology and Philosophy 20:193–230.
——. 2010. The Evolution of Language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
——. 2011. The biology and evolution of rhythm: unraveling a paradox. In: Language and Music
as Cognitive Systems, ed. P. Rebuschat, M. Rohrmeier, J. Hawkins, and I. Cross. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, pp. 73–95.
——. 2013. Rhythmic cognition in humans and animals: distinguishing meter and pulse
perception. Frontiers Systems Neuroscience 7:1–16.
——. 2016. Dance, music, meter and groove: a forgotten partnership. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, doi:org/10.3389/fn-hum.2016.00064.
Flynn, E. 2008. Investigating children as cultural magnets: do young children transmit redundant
information along diffusion chains? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B
363(1509):3541–3551.
Fogarty, L., P. Strimling, and K. N. Laland. 2011. The evolution of teaching. Evolution 65:2760–
2770.
Forsgren, E., A. Karlsson, and C. Kvarnemo. 1996. Female sand gobies gain direct benefits by
choosing males with eggs in their nests. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 39:91–96.
Fortna, A., Y. Kim, E. MacLaren, K. Marshall, G. Hahn, L. Meltesen, M. Brenton, et al. 2004.
Lineage-specific gene duplication and loss in human and great ape evolution. PLOS Biology
2(7):e207, doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0020207.
Fragaszy, D. M. 2012. Community resources for learning: how capuchin monkeys construct
technical traditions. Biological Theory 6:231–240, doi:10.1007/s13752–012–0032–8.
Fragaszy, D. M., and S. Perry, eds. 2003. The Biology of Traditions: Models and Evidence.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Franks, N. R., and T. Richardson. 2006. Teaching in tandem-running ants. Nature 439:153.
Franz, M., and C. L. Nunn. 2009. Network-based diffusion analysis: a new method for detecting
social learning. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 276:1829–1836.
Frazer, K. A., X. Chen, D. A. Hinds, P. V. Pant, N. Patil, and D. R. Cox. 2002. Genomic DNA
insertions and deletions occur frequently between humans and nonhuman primates. Genome
Research 13:341–346.
Frommen, J. G., C. Luz, and T.C.M. Bakker. 2007. Nutritional state influences shoaling preference
for familiars. Zoology 110:369–376.
Fuller, D. 2011. Pathways to Asian civilizations: tracing the origins and spread of rice and rice
cultures. Rice 43:78–92.
Futuyma, D. J. 1998. Evolutionary Biology, 3rd ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Gagneux, P., C. Wills, U. Gerloff, D. Tautz, P. A. Morin, C. Boesch, B. Fruth, et al. 1999.
Mitochondrial sequences show diverse evolutionary histories of African hominoids.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 96:5077–5082.
Gajdon, G. K., N. Fijn, and L. Huber. 2006. Limited spread of innovation in a wild parrot, the Kea

(Nestor notabilis). Animal Cognition 9:173–181.
Galef, B. G., Jr. 1988. Imitation in animals: history, definition and interpretation of the data from
the psychological laboratory. In: Social learning: Psychological and Biological Perspectives, ed. B.
G. Galef Jr. and T. R. Zentall. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 3–28.
——. 1992. The question of animal culture. Human Nature 3:157–178.
——. 2003. Traditional behaviors of brown and black rats R. norvegicus and R. rattus. In: The
Biology of Traditions: Models and Evidence, ed. S. Perry and D. Fragaszy. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press, pp. 159–186.
Galef, B. G. 2009. Culture in animals? In: The Question of Animal Culture, ed. K. N. Laland and B.
G. Galef. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, pp. 222–246.
Galef, B. G., Jr., and C. Allen. 1995. A new model system for studying animal tradition. Animal
Behaviour 50:705–717.
Galef, B. G., Jr., and M. Beck. 1985. Aversive and attractive marking of toxic and safe foods by
Norway rats. Behavioral and Neural Biology 43:298–310.
Galef, B. G., Jr., and L. L. Buckley. 1996. Use of foraging trails by Norway rats. Animal Behaviour
51:765–771.
Galef, B. G., Jr., and M. M. Clark. 1971a. Social factors in the poison avoidance and feeding
behavior of wild and domesticated rat pups. Journal of Comparative Physiology and Psychology
78:341–357.
——. 1971b. Parent–offspring interactions determine time and place of first ingestion of solid
food by wild rat pups. Psychonomic Science 25:15–16.
Galef, B. G., Jr., and L. Giraldeau. 2001. Social influences on foraging in vertebrates: causal
mechanisms and adaptive functions. Animal Behaviour 61:3–15.
Galef, B. G., Jr., and L. Heiber. 1976. The role of residual olfactory cues in the determination of
feeding site selection and exploration patterns of domestic rats. Journal of Comparative
Physiology and Psychology 90:727–739.
Galef, B. G., Jr., and P. W. Henderson. 1972. Mother’s milk: a determinant of the feeding
preferences of weaning rat pups. Journal of Comparative Physiology and Psychology 78:213–
219.
Galef, B. G., and K. N. Laland. 2009. The Question of Animal Culture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Galef, B. G., Jr., and S. W. Wigmore. 1983. Transfer of information concerning distant foods: a
laboratory investigation of the ‘information-centre’ hypothesis. Animal Behaviour 31:748–758.
Galef, B. G., Jr., D. J. Kennett, and S. W. Wigmore. 1984. Transfer of information concerning
distant foods in rats: a robust phenomenon. Animal Learning and Behavior 12:292–296.
Galef, B. G., Jr., J. R. Mason, G. Preti, and N. J. Bean. 1988. Carbon disulfide: A semiochemical
mediating socially–induced diet choice in rats. Physiology and Behavior 42:119–124.
Galef, B. G., Jr., B. Rudolf, E. E. Whiskin, E. Choleris, M. Mainardi, and P. Valsecchi. 1998.
Familiarity and relatedness: effects on social learning about foods by Norway rats and
Mongolian gerbils. Animal Learning & Behavior 26:448–454.
Gagneux, P., C. Wills, U. Gerloff, D. Tautz, P. A. Morin, C. Boesch, B. Fruth, et al. 1999.
Mitochondrial sequences show diverse evolutionary histories of African hominoids.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 96:5077–5082.
Gardner, R. A., and B. T. Gardner. 1969. Teaching sign language to a chimpanzee. Science
165:664–672.
Garfield, Z. H., M. J. Garfield, and B.S. Hewlett. 2016. A cross-cultural analysis of huntergatherer
social learning. In: Social Learning and Innovation in Contemporary Huntergatherers: Evolutionary
and Ethnographic Perspectives, ed. H. Terashima and B. S. Hewlett. Tokyo, Japan: Springer.
Garland, E. C., A. W. Goldizen, M. L. Rekdahl, R. Constantine, C. Garrigue, N. D. Hauser, M. M.

Poole, et al. 2011. Dynamic horizontal cultural transmission of humpback whale song at the
Ocean Basin scale. Current Biology 21:687–691.
Gergely, G., and G. Csibra. 2005. The social construction of the cultural mind: imitative learning
as a mechanism of human pedagogy. Interaction Studies 6:463–481.
Gergely, G., K. Egyed, and I. Kiraly. 2007. On pedagogy. Developmental Science 10:139–146.
Gerull, F. C., and R. M. Rapee. 2002. Mother knows best: effects of maternal modelling on the
acquisition of fear and avoidance behaviour in toddlers. Behaviour Research and Therapy
40:279–287.
Gibbons, A. 2009. Civilization’s cost: the decline and fall of human health. Science 324:588.
Gibson, K. R. 1986. Cognition, brain size and the extraction of embedded food resources. In:
Primate Ontogeny, Cognition and Social Behavior, ed. J. G. Else and P. C. Lee. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 93–103.
Gibson, K. R., and T. Ingold. 1993. Tools, Language and Cognition in Human Evolution. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Gignoux, C. R., B. M. Henn, and J. L. Mountain. 2011. Rapid, global demographic expansions
after the origins of agriculture. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 108:6044–
6049.
Gilbert, S. F. 2003. The morphogenesis of evolutionary developmental biology. International
Journal of Developmental Biology 47:467–477.
Gilby, I. C., M. E. Thompson, J. D. Ruane, and R. Wrangham. 2010. No evidence of short-term
exchange of meat for sex among chimpanzees. Journal of Human Evolution 59:44–53.
Gingerich, P. D. 1983. Rates of evolution: effects of time and temporal scaling. Science 222:159–
161.
Gintis, H. 2003. The hitchhiker’s guide to altruism: gene-culture coevolution, and the
internalization of norms. Journal of Theoretical Biology 220:407–418.
Giraldeau, L.-A., and T. Caraco. 2000. Social Foraging Theory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Giraldeau, L.-A., and L. Lefebvre. 1987. Scrounging prevents cultural transmission of food-finding
behaviour in pigeons. Animal Behaviour 35:387–394.
Giraldeau, L.-A., T. J. Valone, and J. J. Templeton. 2002. Potential disadvantages of using
socially acquired information. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B
357:1559–1566.
Glazko, G., V. Veeramachaneni, M. Nei, and W. Makalowski. 2005. Eighty percent of proteins are
different between humans and chimpanzees. Gene 346:215–219.
Gleibermann, L. 1973. Blood pressure and dietary salt in human populations. Ecology of Food and
Nutrition 2:143–155.
Glickstein, M., and K. Doron. 2008. Cerebellum: connections and functions. Cerebellum 7:589–
594.
Godin, J., E. Herman, and L. A. Dugatkin. 2005. Social influences on female mate choice in the
guppy, Poecilia reticulata: generalized and repeatable trait-copying behaviour. Animal
Behaviour 69:999–1005.
Goldsmidt, T., T.C.M. Bakker, and E. Feuth-de Brujin. 1993. Selective choice in copying of female
sticklebacks. Animal Behaviour 45:541–547.
Goodall, J. 1986. The Chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of Behavior. Cambridge MA: Harvard
University Press.
Gottlieb, G. 1992. Individual Development and Evolution: The Genesis of Novel Behavior. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Gould, S. J., and E. Vrba. 1982. Exaptation: a missing term in the science of form. Paleobiology
8:4–15.

Govoni, G., and P. Gros. 1998. MacrophageNRAMP1 and its role in resistance to microbial
infections. Inflammation Research. 47:277–284.
Grafen, A. 1984. Natural selection, kin selection and group selection. In: Behavioural Ecology: An
Evolutionary Approach, 2nd ed., ed. J. R. Krebs and N. B. Davies. Oxford, UK: Blackwell
Scientific, pp. 62–84.
——. 1990. Biological signals as handicaps. Journal of Theoretical Biology 144: 517–546.
Grant, M., and J. Hazel. 2002. Who’s Who in Classical Mythology. London, UK: Routledge.
Gray, J. R., and P. M. Thompson. 2004. Neurobiology of intelligence: science and ethics. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience 5:471–482.
Gray, R. D., and Q. D. Atkinson. 2003. Language tree divergence times support the Anatolian
theory of Indo-European origin. Nature 426:435–439.
Gray, R. D., and F. M. Jordan. 2000. Language trees support the express-train sequence of
Austronesian expansion. Nature 405:1052—1055.
Greenberg, R., and C. Mettke-Hofman. 2001. Ecological aspects of neophobia and exploration in
birds. Current Ornithology 16:119–178.
Greenfield, P. M. 1991. Language, tools and brain: the ontogeny and phylogeny of hierarchically
organized sequential behaviour. Behavior and Brain Science 14:531–595.
Gross, R., A. I. Houston, E. J. Collins, J. M. McNamara, F. X. Dechaume-Moncharmont, and N. R.
Franks. 2008. Simple learning rules to cope with changing environments. Journal of the Royal
Society, Interface 5:1193–1202.
Grüter, C., and F. L. W. Ratnieks. 2011. Honeybee foragers increase the use of waggle dance
information when private information becomes unrewarding. Animal Behaviour 81:949–954.
Grüter, C., E. Leadbeater, and F. L. W. Ratnieks. 2010. Social learning: the importance of copying
others. Current Biology 20:R683–R685.
Guillermo, A. 2005. The Uruk World System: The Dynamics of Expansion of Early Mesopotamian
Civilization, 2nd ed. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Hahn, M., J. P. Demuth, and S.-G. Han. 2007. Accelerated rate of gene gain and loss in primates.
Genetics 177:1941–1949.
Halgin, R. P., and S. Whitbourne. 2006. Abnormal Psychology with MindMap II. CD-ROM and
PowerWeb. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Hamilton, W. 1964. The genetical evolution of social behaviour: I. Journal of Theoretical Biology
7:1–16.
Hampton, R. R., D. F. Sherry, M. Khurgel, and G. Ivy. 1995. Brain Behavior and Evolution 45:54–
61.
Han, Y., S. Gu, H. Oota, M. V. Osier, A. J. Pakstis, W. C. Speed, J. R. Kidd, et al. 2007. Evidence
of positive selection on a class I ADH locus. American Journal of Human Genetics 80:441–456.
Hansen, B. T., L. E. Johannessen, and T. Slagsvold. 2008. Imprinted species recognition lasts for
life in free-living great tits and blue tits. Animal Behaviour 75:921–927.
Hardyck, C., L. Petriovich, and R. Goldman. 1976. Left handedness and cognitive deficit. Cortex
12:266–278.
Harris, L. J. 1980. Left handedness: early theories, facts and fancies. In: Neuropsychology of Left
Handedness, ed. L. J. Herron. London, UK: Academic Press, pp. 3–78.
Harvey, P. H., and J. R. Krebs. 1990. Comparing brains. Science 249:140–146.
Harvey, P. H., and M. D. Pagel. 1991. The Comparative Method in Evolutionary Biology. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Hatfield, G. 2016. René Descartes. In: The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2016
Edition), ed. E. N. Zalta, http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2016/entries/descartes/.
Haun, D.B.M., Y. Rekers, and M. Tomasello. 2012. Majority-biased transmission in chimpanzees
and human children, but not orangutans. Current Biology 22: 727–731.

Hauser, M. D. 1996. The Evolution of Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hauser, M. D., N. Chomsky, and W. T. Fitch. 2002. The faculty of language: what is it, who has
it, and how did it evolve? Science 298:1569–1579.
Hauser, M. D., C. Yang, R. C. Berwick, I. Tattersall, M. J. Ryan, J. Watumull, N. Chomsky, et al.
2014. The mystery of language evolution. Frontiers in Psychology 5:401–412.
Hawks, J., E. T. Wang, G. M. Cochran, H. C. Harpending, and R. K. Moyzis. 2007. Recent
acceleration of human adaptive evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
104:20753–20758.
Hawkesworth, J. (1773) 2014. An Account of the Voyages Undertaken by the Order of His Present
Majesty for Making Discoveries in the Southern Hemisphere. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press.
Hawley, W. A., P. Reiter, R. S. Copeland, C. B. Pumpuni, and G. B. Craig Jr. 1987. Aedes
albopictus in North America: probable introduction in used tires from northern Asia. Science
236:1114–1116.
Hayden, B. 1993. The cultural capacities of Neandertals: a review and re-evaluation. Journal of
Human Evolution 24:113–146.
Haygood, R., O. Fedrigo, B. Hanson, K. D. Yokoyama, and G. A. Wray. 2007. Promoter regions of
many neural-and nutrition-related genes have experienced positive selection during human
evolution. Nature Genetics 39:1140–1144.
Healy, S. D., and C. Rowe. 2007. A critique of comparative studies of brain size. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London B 274:453–464.
Heffner, R. S., and R. B. Masterton. 1975. Variation in the form of the pyramidal tract and its
relationship to digital dexterity. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 12:161–200.
——. 1983. The role of the corticospinal tract in the evolution of human digital dexterity. Brain,
Behavior and Evolution 23:165–183.
Helfman G. S., and E. T. Schultz. 1984. Social transmission of behavioural traditions in a coral
reef fish. Animal Behaviour 32:379–384.
Helgason, A., S. Palsson, G. Thorleifsson, S.F.A. Grant, V. Emilsson, S. Gunnarsdottir, A.
Adeyemo, et al. 2007. Refining the impact of TCF7L2 gene variants on type 2 diabetes and
adaptive evolution. Nature Genetics 39:218–225.
Henrich, J. 2004a. Demography and cultural evolution: why adaptive cultural processes
produced maladaptive losses in Tasmania. American Antiquity 69:197–221.
——. 2004b. Cultural group selection, coevolutionary processes and large-scale cooperation.
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 53:3–35.
——. 2009. The evolution of costly displays, cooperation and religion: credibility enhancing
displays and their implications for cultural evolution. Evolution of Human Behavior 30:244–
260.
——. 2015. The Secret of our Success. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Henrich, J., and R. Boyd. 1998. The evolution of conformist transmission and between-group
differences. Evolution of Human Behavior 19:215–242.
——. 2002. On modeling cognition and culture: why cultural evolution does not require
replication of representations. Journal of Cognitive Culture 2:87–112.
Henrich, J., and R. Henrich. 2007. Why Humans Cooperate: A Cultural and Evolutionary
Explanation. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Henrich, J., and R. McElreath. 2003. The evolution of cultural evolution. Evolutionary
Anthropology 12:123–135.
Henrich, J., R. Boyd, S. Bowles, C. Camerer, E. Fehr, H. Gintis, and R. McElreath. 2001. In search
of Homo economicus: behavioral experiments in 15 small-scale societies. American Economic
Review 91:73–7.

Hepper, P. 1988. Adaptive fetal learning: prenatal exposure to garlic affects postnatal
preferences. Animal Behaviour 36:935–936.
Herrmann, E., J. Call, M. V. Hernandez-Lloreda, B. Hare, and M. Tomasello. 2007. Humans have
evolved specialized skills of social cognition: the cultural intelligence hypothesis. Science
317:1360–1366.
Herrmann, E., M. V. Hernandez-Lloreda, J. Call, B. Hare, and M. Tomasello. 2010. The structure
of individual differences in the cognitive abilities of children and chimpanzees. Psychological
Science 21:102–110.
Herrman, P. A., C. H. Legare, P. L. Harris, and H. Whitehouse. 2013. Stick to the script: the effect
of witnessing multiple actors on children’s imitation. Cognition 129:536–543.
Hewlett, B. S., and C. J. Roulette. 2016. Teaching in huntergatherer infancy. Royal Society Open
Science 3:150403.
Hewlett, B. S., H. N. Fouts, A. H. Boyette, and B. L. Hewlett. 2011. Social learning among Congo
Basin huntergatherers. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 366:1168–
1178.
Heyes, C. M. 1993. Imitation, culture and cognition. Animal Behaviour 46:999–1010.
——. 1998. Theory of mind in nonhuman primates. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21:101–114.
——. 2002. Transformational and associative theories of imitation. In: Imitation in Animals and
Artefacts, ed. K. Dautenhahn and C. L. Nehaniv. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 501–524.
——. 2005. Imitation by association. In: Perspectives on Imitation: From Mirror Neurons to Memes,
ed. S. Hurley and N. Chater. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 157–176.
——. 2009. Evolution, development and intentional control of imitation. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 364:2293–2298.
——. 2012. What can imitation do for cooperation? In: Signalling, Commitment & Cooperation, ed.
B. Calcott, R. Joyce, and K. Sterelny. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Heyes, C. M., and B. G. Galef Jr. 1996. Social Learning in Animals: The Roots of Culture.
Cambridge, MA: Academic Press.
Heyes, C. M., and Ray, E. D. 2000. What is the significance of imitation in animals? Advances in
the Study of Behavior 29:215–245.
Heyes, C. M., and A. Saggerson. 2002. Testing for imitative and non-imitative social learning in
the budgerigar using a two-object /two-action test. Animal Behaviour 64:851–859.
Hill, K., M. Barton, and A. M. Hurtado. 2009. The emergence of human uniqueness: characters
underlying behavioral modernity. Evolutionary Anthropology 18:174–187.
Hill, K. R., R. S. Walker, M. Bozicevic, J. Eder, T. Headland, B. Hewlett, A. M. Hurtado, et al.
2011. Co-residence patterns in huntergatherer societies show unique human social structure.
Science 331:1286–1289.
Hill, R. S., and C. A. Walsh. 2005. Molecular insights into human brain evolution. Nature 437:64–
67, doi:10.1038/nature04103.
Hinde, R. A., and J. Fisher. 1951. Further observations on the opening of milk bottles by birds.
British Birds 44:393–396.
——. 1972. Some comments on the republication of two papers on the opening of milk bottles by
birds. In: Function and Evolution of Behavior: An Historical Sample from the Pen of Ethologists, ed.
P. H. Klopfer and J. P. Hailman. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, pp. 377–378.
Hirvonen, H., S. Vilhunen, C. Brown, V. Lintunen, and K. N. Laland. 2003. Improving anti-
predator responses of hatchery reared salmonids by social learning. In: Fish Models as
Behavior, Conference Proceedings: Fisheries Society of the British Isles Annual Symposium,
Norwich, UK, June 30–July 04, 2003. Journal of Fish Biology 63:Supplement A. 63(232),
10.1111/j.1095–8649.2003.0216n.x.
Holden, C., and R. Mace. 1997. Phylogenetic analysis of the evolution of lactose digestion in

adults. Human Biology 69:605–628.
Hoogland, R. D., D. Morris, and N. Tinbergen. 1957. The spines of sticklebacks (Gasterosteus and
Pygosteus) as a means of defence against predators (Perca and Esox). Behaviour 10:205–237.
Hopkins, W. D., and C. Cantalupo. 2004. Handedness in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) is
associated with asymmetries of the primary motor cortex but not with homologous language
areas. Behavioral Neuroscience 118:1176–1183.
Hoppitt, W.J.E., and K. N. Laland. 2008. Social processes influencing learning in animals: a
review of the evidence. Advances in the Study of Behavior 38:105–165.
——. 2011. Detecting social learning using networks: a user’s guide. American Journal of
Primatology 73:834–844.
——. 2013. Social Learning: An Introduction to Mechanisms, Methods, and Models. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Hoppitt, W.J.E., N. J. Boogert, and K. N. Laland. 2010a. Detecting social transmission in
networks. Journal of Theoretical Biology 263:544–555.
Hoppitt, W.J.E., G. Brown, R. L. Kendal, L. Rendell, A. Thornton, M. Webster, and K. N. Laland.
2008. Lessons from animal teaching. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 23:486–493.
Hoppitt, W.J.E., A. Kandler, J. R. Kendal, and K. N. Laland. 2010b. The effect of task structure on
diffusion dynamics: implications for diffusion curve and network-based analyses. Learning and
Behavior 38:243–251.
Horner, V., and A. Whiten. 2005. Causal knowledge and imitation/emulation switching in
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and children (Homo sapiens). Animal Cognition 8:164–181.
Horner, V., D. Proctor, K. E. Bonnie, A. Whiten, and F.B.M. de Waal. 2010. Prestige affects
cultural learning in chimpanzees. PLOS ONE 5:e10625, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010625.
Hosey, G. R., M. Jacques, and A. Pitts. 1997. Drinking from tails: social learning of a novel
behaviour in a group of ring-tailed lemurs (Lemur catta). Primates 38:415–422.
Houston, R. G. 1973. Sickle cell anemia and dietary precursors of cyanate. American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 26:1261–1264.
Hovers, E. 2012. Invention, reinvention and innovation: makings of Oldowan lithic technology.
In: Origins of Human Innovation and Creativity, ed. S. Elias. Vol. 16 in Developments in
Quaternary Science, ed. J.J.M. van der Meer. Maryland Heights, MO: Elsevier, pp. 51–68.
Hrdy, S. 1999. Mother Nature—Maternal Instincts and How They Shape the Human Species. New
York, NY: Ballantine Books.
Hrubesch, C., S. Preuschoft, and C. van Schaik. 2008. Skill mastery inhibits adoption of observed
alternative solutions among chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Animal Cognition 12:209–216.
Huffman, M. A. 1996. Acquisition of innovative cultural behaviors in nonhuman primates: a case
study of stone handling, a socially transmitted behavior in Japanese macaques. In: Social
Learning in Animals: The Roots of Culture, ed. C. M. Heyes and B. G. Galef Jr. Cambridge, MA:
Academic, pp. 267–290.
Huffman, M. A., and S. Hirata. 2003. Biological and ecological foundations of primate behavioral
tradition. In: The Biology of Traditions: Models and Evidence, ed. D. M. Fragaszy and S. Perry.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 267–296.
Hugo, V. (1831) 1978. Notre-Dame of Paris. London, UK: Penguin Classics.
Humphrey, N. K. 1976. The social function of intellect. In: Growing Points in Ethology, ed. P.P.G.
Bateson and R. A. Hinde. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 303–317.
Hunemeier, T., C.E.G. Amorim, S. Azevedo, V. Contini, V. Acuna-Alonzo, F. Rothhammer, J.-M.
Dugoujon, et al. 2012. Evolutionary responses to a constructed niche: ancient Mesoamericans
as 
a 
model 
of 
gene-culture 
coevolution. 
PLOS 
ONE 
7:e38862,
doi:org/10.1371/journal.pone.0038862.
Hunemeier, T., J. Gómez-Valdés, M. Ballesteros-Romero, S. de Azevedo, N. Martínez-Abadías, M.

Esparza, T. Sjøvold, et al. 2012. Cultural diversification promotes rapid phenotypic evolution
in Xavánte Indians. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 109(1):73–77.
Hung, C. C., Y. K. Tu, S. H. Chen, and R. C. Chen. 1985. A study of handedness and cerebral
speech dominance in right-handed Chinese. Journal of Neurolinguistics 1:143–163.
Hunt, G. R., and R. D. Gray. 2003. Diversification and cumulative evolution in New Caledonian
crow tool manufacture. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 270:867–874.
Hurford, J. R. 1999. The evolution of language and of languages. In: The Evolution of Culture, ed.
R. Dunbar, C. Knight, and C. Power. Edinburgh, UK: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 173–
193.
——. 2014. Origins of Language: A Slim Guide. Oxford, UK: Oxford Linguistics.
Huttenlocher, J., M. Vasilyeva, E. Cymerman, and S. Levine. 2002. Language input and child
syntax. Cognitive Psychology 45:337–374.
Iacoboni, M., R. P. Woods, M. Brass, H. Bekkering, J. C. Mazziotta, and G. Rizzolatti. 1999.
Cortical mechanisms of human imitation. Science 286(5449):2526–2528.
Ihara, Y., K. Aoki, and M. W. Feldman. 2003. Runaway sexual selection with paternal
transmission of the male trait and gene-culture determination of the female preference.
Theoretical Population Biology 63:53–62.
Ingram, J. 1998. The Barmaid’s Brain. New York, NY: Viking.
Isler, K., and C. P. van Schaik. 2012. How our ancestors broke through the gray ceiling:
comparative evidence for cooperative breeding in early Homo. Current Anthropology
53(6):453–465.
Izagirre, N., I. Garcia, C. Junquera, C. de la Rua, and S. Alonso. 2006. A scan for signatures of
positive selection in candidate loci for skin pigmentation in humans. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 23:1697–1706.
Jablonka, E., and M. J. Lamb. 2005. Evolution in Four Dimensions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jacobs, L. F., and W. D. Spencer. 1994. Natural space-use patterns and hippocampal size in
kangaroo rats. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 44:125–132.
James, S. R. 1989. Hominid use of fire in the lower and middle Pleistocene. Current Anthropology
30:1–26.
Janik, J. M., and P.J.B. Slater. 1997. Vocal learning in mammals. Advances in the Study of
Behavior 26:59–99.
Jaradat, A. A. 2007. Biodiversity and sustainable agriculture in the Fertile Crescent. Yale Forestry
& Environmental Science Bulletin 103:31–57.
Jarvis, E. D. 2004. Learned birdsong and the neurobiology of human language. Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences 1016:749–777.
Jensen, K., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2007. Chimpanzees are rational maximizers in an
ultimatum game. Science 318:107–109.
Joffe, T. H., and R.I.M. Dunbar. 1997. Visual and socio-cognitive information processing in
primate brain evolution. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 264:1303–1307.
Johannessen, L. E., T. Slagsvold, and B. T. Hansen. 2006. Effects of social rearing conditions on
song structure and repertoire size: experimental evidence from the field. Animal Behaviour
72:83–95.
Jolly, A. 1966. Lemur social behavior and primate intelligence. Science 153:501–506.
Jones, B. C., L. M. DeBruine, A. C. Little, R. P. Burriss, and D. R. Feinberg. 2007. Social
transmission of face preferences among humans. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 274:899–
903.
Jonxis, J.H.P. 1965. Haemoglobinopathies in West Indian groups of African origin. In: Abnormal
Haemoglobins in Africa, ed. J.H.P. Jonxis. Oxford, UK: Blackwell, pp. 329–338.
Kambo, J. S., and L.A.M. Galea. 2006. Activational levels of androgens influence risk assessment

behaviour but do not influence stress-induced suppression in hippocampal cell proliferation in
adult male rats. Behavioural Brain Research 175:263–270.
Kameda, T., and D. Nakanishi. 2002. Cost-benefit analysis of social/cultural learning in a
nonstationary uncertain environment: an evolutionary simulation and an experiment with
human subjects. Evolution and Human Behavior 23:373–393.
Kant, M. 2007. The Cambridge Companion to Ballet. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kaplan, H. S., and J. A. Robson. 2002. The emergence of humans: the coevolution of intelligence
and longevity with intergenerational transfers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
USA 99:10221–10226.
Kaplan, H. S., K. Hill, J. Lancaster, and A. M. Hurtado, 2000. A theory of human life history
evolution: diet, intelligence, and longevity. Evolutionary Anthropology 9:156–185.
Kappe, S.H.I., A. M. Vaughan, J. A. Boddey, and A. F. Cowman. 2010. That was then but this is
now: malaria research in the time of an eradication agenda. Science 328:862–866.
Kappeler, P. M., and E. W. Heyman. 1996. Nonconvergence in the evolution of primate life
history and socio-ecology. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 59:297–326.
Kappeler, P., and J. Silk. 2009. Mind the Gap: Tracing the Origins of Human Universals. New York,
NY: Springer.
Kaufman, A. B., and J. C. Kaufman. 2015. Animal Creativity and Innovation. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Kavaliers, M., E. Choleris, and D. D. Colwell. 2001. Brief exposure to female odors ‘emboldens’
male mice by reducing predator-induced behavioural and hormonal responses. Hormones and
Behavior 40:497–509.
Kavaliers, M., D. Colwell, and E. Choleris. 2003. Learning to fear and cope with a natural
stressor: individually and socially acquired corticosterone and avoidance responses to biting
flies. Hormones and Behavior 43:99–107.
Kawai, M. 1965. Newly-acquired pre-cultural behavior of the natural troop of Japanese monkeys
on Koshima islet. Primates 6:1–30.
Kayser, M., S. Brauer, R. Cordaux, A. Castro, O. Lao, L. Zhivotovsky, C. Moyse-Faurie, et al. 2006.
Melanesian and Asian origins of Polynesians: mtDNA and Y chromosome gradients across the
Pacific. Molecular Biology and Evolution 23:2234–2244.
Keller, E. 2010. The Mirage of a Space between Nature and Nurture. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.
Kelley, J. L., and W. J. Swanson. 2008. Dietary change and adaptive evolution of enamelin in
humans and among primates. Genetics 178:1595–1603.
Kendal, J. R., J. J. Tehrani, and J. Odling-Smee. 2011. Human niche construction in
interdisciplinary focus. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366(1566):785–792.
Kendal, R. L., R. L. Coe, and K. N. Laland. 2005. Age differences in neophilia, exploration, and
innovation in family groups of callitrichid monkeys. American Journal of Primatology 66:167–
188.
Kendal, R. L., I. Coolen, and K. N. Laland. 2004. The role of conformity in foraging when
personal and social information conflict. Behavioral Ecology 15:269–277.
Kendal, R. L., I. Coolen, Y. van Bergen, and K. N. Laland. 2005. Tradeoffs in the adaptive use of
social and asocial learning. Advances in the Study of Behaviour 35:333–379.
Kendal, R. L., L. M. Hopper, A. Whiten, S. F. Brosnan, S. P. Lambeth, S. J. Schapiro, and W.
Hoppitt. 2015. Chimpanzees copy dominant and knowledgeable individuals: implications for
cultural diversity. Evolution and Human Behavior 36:65–72.
Kendal, J. R., L. Rendell, T. Pike, and K. N. Laland. 2009. Ninespined sticklebacks deploy a hill-
climbing social learning strategy. Behavioral Ecology 20:238–244.
King, B. J. 1986. Extractive foraging and the evolution of primate intelligence. Human Evolution

14:361–372.
King, M. C., and A. C. Wilson. 1975. Evolution at two levels in humans and chimpanzees. Science
188:107–116.
Kinzler, K. D., K. Shutts, J. DeJesus, and E. S. Spelke. 2009. Accent trumps race in guiding
children’s social preferences. Social Cognition 27(4):623–634.
Kirby, S., H. Cornish, and K. Smith. 2008. Cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory: an
experimental approach to the origins of structure in human language. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA 105:10681–10686.
Kirby, S., M. Dowman, and T. L. Griffiths. 2007. Innateness and culture in the evolution of
language. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 104:5241–5245.
Kirby, S., M. Tamariz, H. Cornish, and K. Smith. 2015. Compression and communication in the
cultural evolution of linguistic structure. Cognition 141:87–102.
Kirschner, M., and J. Gerhart. 2005. The Plausibility of Life: Resolving Darwin’s Dilemma. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Kirschner, W. H. 1987. Tradition im Bienenstaat: Kommunikation Zwichen den Imagines und der
Brut der Honigbiene Durch Vibrationssignale. PhD diss., Julius-Maximilians Universität.
Klein, R. G. 1999. The Human Career, 2nd ed. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
——. 2000. Archeology and the evolution of human behavior. Evolutionary Anthropology 9:17–36.
Kline, M. A., and R. Boyd. 2010. Population size predicts technological complexity in Oceania.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 277:2559–2564.
Kline, M. A., R. Boyd, and J. Henrich. 2013. Teaching and the life history of cultural transmission
in Fijian villages. Human Nature 24(4):351–374.
Kohler, W. 1925. The Mentality of Apes. Translated from the 2nd revised edition by E. Winter.
New York, NY: Harcourt, Brace. Kokko, H., and M. D. Jennions. 2008. Parental investment,
sexual selection and sex ratios. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 21:919–948.
Kokko, H., and P. Monaghan. 2001. Predicting the direction of sexual selection. Ecology Letters
4:159–165.
Kolata, S., K. Light, and L. D. Matzel. 2008. Domain-specific and domain-general learning factors
are expressed in genetically heterogeneous cd-1 mice. Intelligence 36:619–629.
Kothbauer-Hellman, R. 1990. On the origin of a tradition: milk bottle opening by titmice.
Zoologischer Anzeiger 225:353–361.
Kotiaho, J. S. 2001. Costs of sexual traits: a mismatch between theoretical considerations and
empirical evidence. Biological Reviews 76:365–376.
Koulouriotis, D. E., and A. Xanthopoulos. 2008. Reinforcement learning and evolutionary
algorithms for nonstationary multi-armed bandit problems. Applied Mathematics and
Computation 196:913–922.
Kraak, S.B.M., and F. J. Weissing. 1996. Female preference for nests with many eggs: a cost-
benefit analysis of female choice in fish with paternal care. Behavioral Ecology 7:353–361.
Kramer, S. N. 1964. The Sumerians: Their History, Culture, and Character. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Krause, J., and G. D. Ruxton. 2002. Living in Groups. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Krebs, J. R., D. F. Sherry, S. D. Healy, H. Perry, and A. L. Vaccerino. 1989. Hippocampal
specialization of food-storing birds. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
86:1388–1392.
Kruetzen, M., S. Kreicker, C. D. MacLeod, J. Learmonth, A. Kopps, P. Walsham, and S. Allen.
2014. Cultural transmission of tool use by Indo-Pacific bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops sp.)
provides access to a novel foraging niche. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B
281(1784):20140374, doi:10.1098/rspb.2014.0374.
Krutzen, M., J. Mann, M. R. Heithaus, R. C. Connor, L. Bejder, and W. B. Sherwin. 2005. Cultural

transmission of tool use in bottlenose dolphins. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
USA 102:8939–8943.
Kudo, H., and R.I.M. Dunbar. 2001. Neocortex size and social network size in primates. Animal
Behaviour 62:711–722.
Kumm, J., K. N. Laland, and M. W. Feldman. 1994. Gene-culture coevolution and sex ratios: the
effects of infanticide, sex-selective abortion, and sex-biased parental investment on the
evolution of sex ratios. Theoretical Population Biology 46:249–278.
Kummer, H., and J. Goodall. 1985. Conditions of innovative behavior in primates. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 308:203–214.
Kummer, H., and F. Kurt. 1965. A comparison of social behaviour in captive and wild hamadryas
baboons. In: The Baboon in Medical Research, ed. H. Vagtbord. Austin, TX: University of Texas
Press, pp. 65–80.
Lachlan, R., L. Crooks, and K. N. Laland. 1998. Who follows whom? Shoaling preferences and
social learning of foraging information in guppies. Animal Behaviour 56:181–190.
Laland, K. N. 1990. A Theoretical Investigation of the Role of Social Transmission in Evolution.
PhD diss., University College London.
——. 1994. Sexual selection with a culturally transmitted mating preference. Theoretical
Population Biology 45:1–15.
——. 2004. Social learning strategies. Learning & Behavior 32:4–14.
——. 2016. The origins of language in teaching. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
doi:10.3758/s13423–016–1077–7.
Laland, K. N., and P.P.G. Bateson. 2001. The mechanisms of imitation. Cybernetics and Systems
32:195–224.
Laland, K. N., and G. R. Brown. 2006. Niche construction, human behaviour and the adaptive lag
hypothesis. Evolutionary Anthropology 15:95–104.
——. 2011. Sense and Nonsense. Evolutionary Perspectives on Human Behaviour. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Laland, K. N., and B. G. Galef Jr., eds. 2009. The Question of Animal Culture. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Laland, K. N., and W.J.E. Hoppitt. 2003. Do animals have culture? Evolutionary Anthropology
12:150–159.
Laland, K. N., and V. M. Janik. 2006. The animal cultures debate. Trends in Ecology and Evolution
21:542–547.
Laland, K. N., and M. J. O’Brien. 2010. Niche construction theory and archaeology. Journal of
Archaeological Method and Theory 17:303–322.
Laland, K. N., and H. C. Plotkin. 1991. Excretory deposits surrounding food sites facilitate social
learning of food preferences in Norway rats. Animal Behaviour 41:997–1005.
——. 1993. Social transmission of food preferences amongst Norway rats by marking of food
sites, and by gustatory contact. Animal Learning and Behavior 21:35–41.
Laland, K. N., and S. M. Reader. 1999a. Foraging innovation in the guppy. Animal Behaviour
57:331–340.
——. 1999b. Foraging innovation is inversely related to competitive ability in male but not in
female guppies. Behavioral Ecology 10:270–274.
——. 2009. Comparative perspectives on human innovation. In: Innovation in Cultural Systems, ed.
M. J. O’Brien and S. Shennan. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 37–51.
——. 2010. Innovation in Animals. In: Encyclopaedia of Animal Behaviour, ed. M. D. Breed and J.
Moore. Oxford, UK: Academic, pp. 150–154.
Laland, K. N., and L. R. Rendell. 2013. Cultural memory. Current Biology 2317: R736–R740.
Laland, K. N., and K. Williams. 1997. Shoaling generates social learning of foraging information

in guppies. Animal Behaviour 53:1161–1169.
——. 1998. Social transmission of maladaptive information in the guppy. Behavioral Ecology
9:493–499.
Laland, K. N., J. R. Kendal, and R. L. Kendal. 2009. Animal culture: problems and solutions. In:
The Question of Animal Culture, ed. K. N. Laland and B. G. Galef Jr. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, pp. 174–197.
Laland, K. N., J. Kumm, and M. W. Feldman. 1995. Gene-culture coevolutionary theory: a test
case. Current Anthropology 36:131–156.
Laland, K. N., J. Kumm, J. D. Van Horn, and M. W. Feldman. 1995. A gene-culture model of
handedness. Behavior Genetics 25:433–445.
Laland, K. N., F. J. Odling-Smee, and M. W. Feldman. 2000. Niche construction, biological
evolution and cultural change. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23:131–146.
Laland, K. N., F. J. Odling-Smee, and S. Myles. 2010. How culture shaped the human genome:
bringing genetics and the human sciences together. Nature Reviews Genetics 11:137–148.
Laland, K. N., P. J. Richerson, and R. Boyd. 1993. Animal social learning: towards a new
theoretical approach. In: Behavior and Evolution, ed. P. H. Klopfer, P. P. Bateson, and N. S.
Thompson, Vol. 10 of Perspectives in Ethology. Berlin, Germany: Plenum, pp. 249–277.
Laland, K. N., K. Sterelny, F. J. Odling-Smee, W.J.E. Hoppitt, and T. Uller. 2011. Cause and effect
in biology revisited: Is Mayr’s proximate-ultimate dichotomy still useful? Science 334:1512–
1516.
Laland, K. N., C. Wilkins, and N. S. Clayton. 2016. The evolution of dance. Current Biology 26:R1–
R21.
Lane, D. 2016. Innovation cascades: artefacts, organization, attributions. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, doi:10.1098/rstb.2015.0194.
Langen, T. A. 2000. Prolonged offspring dependence and cooperative breeding in birds. Behavior
Ecology 11:367–377.
Lao, O., J. M. de Gruijter, K. van Duijn, A. Navarro, and M. Kayser. 2007. Signatures of positive
selection in genes associated with human skin pigmentation as revealed from analyses of
single nucleotide polymorphisms. Annals of Human Genetics 71:354–369.
Largiader, C. R., V. Fries, and T.C.M. Bakker. 2001. Genetic analysis of sneaking and egg-thievery
in a natural population of the threespined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) Heredity
48:459–468.
Latane, B. 1981. The psychology of social impact. American Psychologist 36:343–356.
Laubin, R., and G. Laubin. 1977. Indian Dances of North America. Norman, OK: University of
Oklahoma Press.
Laurent, R., B. Toupance, and R. Chaix. 2012. Non-random mate choice in humans: insights from
a genome scan. Molecular Ecology 21:587–596.
Lawson, J. 1964. European Folk Dance. London, UK: Pitman and Sons.
Leadbeater, E., and L. Chittka. 2007a. The dynamics of social learning in an insect model: the
bumblebee (Bombus terrestris). Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 61:1789–1796.
——. 2007b. Social learning in insects—from miniature brains to consensus building. Current
Biology 17:R703–R713.
Leadbeater, E., N. E. Raine, and L. Chittka. 2006. Social learning: ants and the meaning of
teaching. Current Biology 16:R323e–R325.
Leca, J. B., N. Gunst, and M. A. Huffman. 2007. Age-related differences in the performance,
diffusion, and maintenance of stone handling, a behavioral tradition in Japanese macaques.
Journal of Human Evolution 53:691–708.
Lee, R. B. 1979. The !Kung San: Men, Women, and Work in a Foraging Society. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.

Lee, R. B., and R. Daly, eds. 1999. The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Hunters and Gatherers.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lefebvre, L. 1995. The opening of milk-bottles by birds: evidence for accelerating learning rates,
but against the wave-of-advance model of cultural transmission. Behavioral Processes 34:43–
53.
——. 2010. Taxonomic counts of cognition in the wild. Biology Letters 7:631–633.
Lefebvre, L., S. Ducatez, and J. N. Audet. 2016. Feeding innovations in a nested phylogeny of
Neotropical passerines. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B,
doi:10.1098/rstb.2015.0188.
Lefebvre, L., S. M. Reader, and D. Sol. 2004. Brains, innovations and evolution in birds and
primates. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 63:233–246.
Lefebvre, L., P. Whittle, E. Lascaris, and A. Finkelstein. 1997. Feeding innovations and forebrain
size in birds. Animal Behaviour 53:549–560.
Lehmann, L., and L. Keller. 2006. The evolution of cooperation and altruism. Journal of
Evolutionary Biology 19:1365–1376.
Lehmann, L., K. Aoki, and M. W. Feldman. 2011. On the number of independent cultural traits
carried by individuals and populations. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London B 366:424–435.
Lepre, C. J., H. Roche, D. V. Kent, S. Harmand, R. L. Quinn, J.-P. Brugal, P.-J. Texier, et al. 2011.
An earlier origin for the Acheulian. Nature 477:82–85.
Lewens, T. 2015. Cultural Evolution: Conceptual Challenges. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Lewin, R. 1987. Bones of Contention: Controversies in the Search for Human Origins. London, UK:
Penguin.
Lewin, R., and R. A. Foley. 2004. Principles of Human Evolution, 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK:
Blackwell.
Lewis, H. M., and K. N. Laland. 2012. Transmission fidelity is the key to the build-up of
cumulative culture. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 367:2171–2180.
Lewis, J. 2007. Ekila: blood, bodies, and egalitarian societies. Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute 14:297–335.
Lewontin, R. C. 1970. The units of selection. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics
1:1–18.
Li, H., and R. Durbin. 2011. Inference of human population history from individual whole-
genome sequences. Nature 475:493–496.
Li, H. T., T. T. Zhang, Y. Q. Zhou, Q. H. Huang, and J. Huang. 2006. SLC11A1 (formerly
NRAMP1) gene polymorphisms and tuberculosis susceptibility: a meta-analysis. International
Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease 10:3–12.
Liao, B. Y., and J. Zhang. 2008. Null mutations in human and mouse orthologs frequently result
in different phenotypes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 105:6987–6992.
Linden, E. 1975. Apes, Men and Language. New York, NY: Bookthrift.
Little, A. C., R. P. Burriss, B. C. Jones, L. M. DeBruine, and C. Caldwell. 2008. Social influence in
human face preference: men and women are influenced more for long-term than short-term
attractiveness decisions. Evolution and Human Behavior 29:140–146.
Livingstone, F. B. 1958. Anthropological implications of sickle-cell distribution in west Africa.
American Anthropologist 60:533–562.
Lloyd Morgan, C. 1912. Instinct and Experience. London, UK: Methuen.
Logan, C. J., A. J. Breen, A. H. Taylor, R. D. Gray, and W.J.E. Hoppitt. 2015. How New
Caledonian crows solve novel foraging problems and what it means for cumulative culture.
Learning & Behavior 44:18–28, doi:10.3758/s13420–015–0194-x.
Lonsdorf, E. V. 2006. What is the role of mothers in the acquisition of termite-fishing behaviors

in wild chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes schweinfurthii)? Animal Cognition 9:36–46.
Lonsdorf, E. V., E. A. Pusey, and L. Eberly. 2004. Sex differences in learning in chimpanzees.
Nature 428:715–716.
López Herráez, D., M. Bauchet, K. Tang, C. Theunert, I. Pugach, J. Li, M. Nandineni, et al. 2009.
Genetic variation and recent positive selection in worldwide human populations: evidence
from nearly 1 million SNPs. PLOS ONE 4:e7888, doi:org/10.1371/journal.pone.0007888.
Lorenz, K. 1966. On Aggression. London, UK: Routledge.
Lovejoy, P. E. 1989. The impact of the Atlantic slave trade on Africa: a review of the literature.
Journal of African History 30:365–394.
Lu, H., J. Zhang, K.-B. Liu, N. Wu, Y. Li, K. Zhou, M. Ye, et al. 2009. Earliest domestication of
common millet (Panicum miliaceum) in East Asia extended to 10,000 years ago. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences USA 10618:7367–7372.
Lukas, D., and T. Clutton-Brock. 2012. Life histories and the evolution of cooperative breeding in
mammals. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 279:4065–4070.
Lupfer, G., J. Frieman, and D. L. Coonfield. 2003. Social transmission of flavour preferences in
social and non-social hamsters. Journal of Comparative Psychology 117:449–455.
Lupfer-Johnson, G., and J. Ross. 2007. Dogs acquire food preferences from interacting with
recently fed conspecifics. Behavioural Processes 10:104–106.
Lynch, M. 1990. The rate of morphological evolution in mammals from the standpoint of the
neutral expectation. American Naturalist 136(6):727–741.
Lyons, D. E., D. H. Damrosch, J. K. Lin, D. M. Macris, and F. C. Keil. 2011. The scope and limits
of overimitation in the transmission of artefact culture. Proceedings of the Royal Society B
366:1158–1167.
Lyons, D. E., A. G. Young, and F. C. Keil. 2007. The hidden structure of overimitation. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences USA 104(5):19751–19756.
MacLean, E. L., B. Hare, C. L. Nunn, E. Addessi, F. Amici, R. Anderson, F. Aureli, et al. 2014. The
evolution of self-control. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111:2140–2148.
Macphail, E. M. 1982. Brain and Intelligence in Vertebrates. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
Macphail, E. M., and J. J. Bolhuis. 2001. The evolution of intelligence: adaptive specializations
versus general process. Biological Review of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 76:341–364.
Madden, J. R., C. Dingle, J. Isden, J. Sarfeld, A. Goldizen, and J. A. Endler. 2012. Male spotted
bowerbirds propagate fruit for use in the sexual display. Current Biology 22:R264–R265.
Magalon, H., E. Patin, F. Austerlitz, T. Hegay, A. Aldashev, L. Quintana-Murci, and E. Heyer.
2008. Population genetic diversity of the NAT2 gene supports a role of acetylation in human
adaptation to farming in Central Asia. European Journal of Human Genetics 16:243–251.
Magurran, A. E., and B. H. Seghers. 1994. A cost of sexual harassment in the guppy, Poecilia
reticulata. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 258:89–92.
Marino, L. 2006. Absolute brain size: Did we throw the baby out with the bathwater? Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences USA 103:13563–13564.
Marler, P. 1952. Variations in the song of the chaffinch, Fringilla coelebs. Ibis 94:458–472.
Marler, P., and S. S. Peters. 1989. The Comparative Psychology of Audition: Perceiving Complex
Sounds, ed. S. Hulse and R. Dooling. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 243–273.
Marler, P., and M. Tamura. 1964. Culturally transmitted patterns of vocal behaviour in sparrows.
Science 146:1483–1486.
Marlowe, F. 2001. Male contribution to diet and female reproductive success among foragers.
Current Anthropology 42:755–760.
Marshall-Pescini, S., and A. Whiten. 2008. Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and the question of
cumulative culture: an experimental approach. Animal Cognition 11:449–456.
Martinez del Rio, C. 1993. Do British tits drink milk or just skim the cream? British Birds 86:321–

322.
Masataka, N. 2003. The Onset of Language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Mason, J. R. 1988. Direct and observational learning by red-winged blackbirds (Agelaius
phoneniceus): the importance of complex stimuli. In: Social Learning: Psychological and
Biological Perspectives, ed. B. G. Galef Jr. and T. R. Zentall. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 99–117.
Matsuoka, Y., Y. Vigouroux, M. M. Goodman, G. J. Sanchez, E. Buckler, and J. Doebley. 2002. A
single domestication for maize shown by multilocus microsatellite genotyping. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences USA 99:6080–6084.
Matzel, L. D., Y. R. Han, H. S. Grossman, M. S. Karnik, D. Patel, N. Scott, S. M. Specht, and C. C.
Gandhi. 2003. Individual differences in the expression of a ‘general’ learning ability in mice.
Journal of Neuroscience 23:6423–6433.
Maynard-Smith, J. 1982. Evolution and the Theory of Games. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Maynard-Smith, J. 1991. Honest signalling: the Phillip Sidney game. Animal Behaviour 42:1034–
1035.
MacDonald, K. 2007. Cross-cultural comparison of learning in human hunting. Human Nature
18:386–402.
McBrearty, S., and A. S. Brooks. 2000. The revolution that wasn’t: a new interpretation of the
origin of modern human behaviour. Journal of Human Evolution 39:453–563.
McDonagh, D. 1976. The Complete Guide to Modern Dance. New York, NY: Doubleday.
McFadyen-Ketchum, S. A., and R. H. Porter. 1989. Transmission of food preferences in spiny
mice (Acomys cahirinus) via nose–mouth interaction. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology
24:59–62.
McGrew, W. C. 1992. Chimpanzee Material Culture: Implications for Human Evolution. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
McGrew, W. C., and C.E.G. Tutin. 1978. Evidence for a social custom in wild chimpanzees? Man
13:234–251.
McManus, I. C. 1985. Handedness, language dominance and aphasia. Psychological Medicine
Monograph Supplement 8:3–40.
McPherron, S. P., Z. Alemseged, C. W. Marean, J. G. Wynn, D. Reed, D. Geraads, R. Bobe, et al.
2010. Evidence for stone-tool-assisted consumption of animal tissues before 3.39 million
years ago at Dikika, Ethiopia. Nature 466:857–860.
Melis, A., B. Hare, and M. Tomasello. 2006. Engineering cooperation in chimpanzees: tolerance
constraints on cooperation. Animal Behaviour 72:276–286.
Mellars, P. 1996. The Neanderthal Legacy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Menzel, E. W., and C. R. Menzel. 1979. Cognitive, developmental and social aspects of
responsiveness to novel objects in a family group of marmosets (Saguinus fusicollis). Behaviour
70:251–279.
Mery, F., S. Varela, E. Danchin, S. Blanchet, D. Parejo, I. Coolen, and R. Wagner. 2009. Public
versus personal information for mate copying in an invertebrate. Current Biology 19:730–734.
Mesoudi, A. 2008. An experimental simulation of the ‘copy-successful-individuals’ cultural
learning strategy: adaptive landscapes, producer-scrounger dynamics, and informational
access costs. Evolution and Human Behavior 29:350–363.
——. 2011. Cultural Evolution: How Darwinian Theory Can Explain Human Culture and Synthesize
the Social Sciences. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Mesoudi, A., and M. J. O’Brien. 2008. The cultural transmission of Great Basin projectile point
technology II: an agent-based computer simulation. American Antiquity 73(4):627–644.
Mesoudi, A., A. Whiten, and K. N. Laland. 2004. Is human cultural evolution Darwinian?
Evidence reviewed from the perspective of The Origin of Species. Evolution 58:1–11.

——. 2006. Towards a unified science of cultural evolution. Behavioural and Brain Sciences
29:329–347.
Michel, J. B., Y. K. Shen, A. P. Aiden, A. Veres, M. K. Gray, The Google Books Team, J. P. Pickett,
et al. 2011. Quantitative analysis of culture using millions of digitized books. Science
331(6014):176–182.
Milbrath, C. 2013. Socio-cultural selection and the sculpting of the human genome: cultures’
directional forces on evolution and development. New Ideas in Psychology 31:390–406.
Milinski, M. 1994. Long-term memory for food patches and implications for ideal free
distributions in sticklebacks. Ecology 75:1150–1156.
Milinski, M., D. Kulling, and R. Kettler. 1990. Tit for tat: sticklebacks (Gasterosteus aculeatus)
‘trusting’ a cooperating partner. Behavioral Ecology 1:7–11.
Miller, G. 2001. The Mating Mind: How Sexual Choice Shaped the Evolution of Human Nature. New
York, NY: Anchor Books.
Mineka, S., and M. Cook. 1988. Social learning and the acquisition of snake fear in monkeys. In:
Social Learning: Psychological and Biological Perspectives, ed. B. G. Galef Jr. and T. R. Zentall.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 51–73.
Mineka, S., and R. Zinbarg. 2006. A contemporary learning theory perspective on the etiology of
anxiety disorders: it’s not what you thought it was. American Psychologist 61:10–26.
Mineka, S., M. Davidson, M. Cook, and R. Keir. 1984. Observational conditioning of snake fear in
rhesus monkeys. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 93:355–372.
Minsky, M. 1967. Computation: Finite and Infinite Machines. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Moglich, M. 1978. Social organization of nest emigration in Leptothorax (Hym., Form.) Insectes
Sociaux 25:205–225.
Moglich, M., and B. Holldobler. 1974. Social carrying behavior and division of labor during nest
moving in ants. Psyche: A Journal of Entomology 81:219–236.
Montgomery, S. H., I. Capellini, R. A. Barton, and N. I. Mundy. 2010. Reconstructing the ups and
downs of primate brain evolution: implications for adaptive hypotheses and Homo floresiensis.
BMC Biology 8:9, doi:10.1186/1741–7007–8–9.
Moore, B. R. 1992. Avian movement imitation and a new form of mimicry: tracing the evolution
of a complex form of learning. Behaviour 122:231–263.
Moore, B. R. 1996. The Evolution of imitative language. In: Social Learning in Animals: The Roots
of Culture, ed. C. M. Heyes and B. G. Galef Jr. London, UK: Academic, pp. 245–265.
Morand-Ferron, J., L. Lefebvre, S. M. Reader, D. Sol, and S. Elvin. 2004. Dunking behaviour in
Carib grackles. Animal Behaviour 68:1267–1274.
Morgan, C. L. 1912. Instinct and Experience. London, UK: Methuen.
Morgan, L. H. 1877. Ancient Society, or Researches in the Lines of Human Progress from Savagery
through Barbarism to Civilization. New York, NY: Holt.
Morgan, M. J., and M. C. Corballis. 1978. The inheritance of laterality. Behavioral and Brain
Science 2:270–277.
Morgan, T.J.H., and K. N. Laland. 2012. The biological bases of conformity. Frontiers in Decision
Neuroscience, doi:10.3389/fnins.2012.00087.
Morgan, T.J.H., L. E. Rendell, M. Ehn, W. Hoppitt, and K. N. Laland. 2012. The evolutionary
basis of human social learning. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 279:653–662.
Morgan, T.J.H., N. Uomini, L. E. Rendell, L. Chouinard-Thuly, S. E. Street, H. M. Lewis, C. P.
Cross, et al. 2015. Experimental evidence for the coevolution of hominin tool-making,
teaching and language. Nature Communications, doi: 10.1038/ncomms7029.
Morrell, L. J., D. P. Croft, J.R.G. Dyer, B. B. Chapman, J. L. Kelley, K. N. Laland, and J. Krause.
2008. Association patterns and foraging behaviour in natural and artificial guppy shoals.
Animal Behaviour 76:855–864.

Morris, D. 1967. The Naked Ape. London, UK: Vintage.
Movius, H. L., Jr. 1950. A wooden spear of third interglacial age from lower Saxony. Southwestern
Journal of Anthropology 6:139–142.
Mueller, T., R. O’Hara, S. J. Converse, R. P. Urbanek, and W. F. Fagan. 2013. Social learning of
migratory performance. Science 341:999–1002.
Müller, G. 2007. Evo-devo: extending the evolutionary synthesis. Nature Review Genetics 8:943–
950.
Mundinger, P. C. 1980. Animal cultures and a general theory of cultural evolution. Ethology and
Sociobiology 1:83–223.
Myles, S., E. Hradetzky, J. Engelken, O. Lao, P. Nürnberg, R. J. Trent, X. Wang, et al. 2007.
Identification of a candidate genetic variant for the high prevalence of type II diabetes in
Polynesians. European Journal of Human Genetics 15:584–589.
Myles, S., M. Somel, K. Tang, J. Kelso, and M. Stoneking. 2007. Identifying genes underlying skin
pigmentation differences among human populations. Human Genetics 120:613–621.
Myles, S., K. Tanq, M. Somel, R. E. Green, J. Kelso, and M. Stoneking. 2008. Identification and
analysis of high Fst regions from genome-wide SNP data from three human populations.
Annals of Human Genetics 72:99–110.
Nasidze, I., D. Quinque, M. Rahmani, S. A. Alemohamad, and M. Stoneking. 2006. Concomitant
replacement of language and mtDNA in South Caspian populations of Iran. Current Biology
16:668–673.
Navarette, A. F., S. M. Reader, S. E. Street, A. Whalen, and K. N. Laland. 2016. The coevolution
of innovation and technical intelligence in primates. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London B 371:20150186, http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0186.
Neale, M. C. 1988. Handedness in a sample of volunteer twins. Behavior Genetics 18:69–79.
Neel, J. V. 1962. Diabetes mellitus: a “thrifty” genotype rendered detrimental by “progress”?
American Journal of Human Genetics 14:352–362.
Nettl, B. 2000. An ethnomusicologist contemplates universals in musical sound and musical
culture. In: The Origins of Music, ed. N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, pp. 463–472.
Nguyen, D.-Q., C. Webber, and C. P. Ponting. 2006. Bias of selection on human copy-number
variants. PLOS Genetics 2:e20, doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.0020020.
Nicol, C. J., and S. J. Pope. 1996. The maternal feeding display of domestic hens is sensitive to
perceived chick error. Animal Behaviour 52:767–774.
Nicolakakis, N., D. Sol, and L. Lefebvre. 2003. Behavioral flexibility predicts species richness in
birds, but not extinction risk. Animal Behaviour 65:445–452.
Nielsen, R., I. Hellmann, M. Hubisz, C. Bustamante, and A. G. Clark. 2007. Recent and ongoing
selection in the human genome. Nature Reviews Genetics 8:857–868.
Nightingale, G., N. J. Boogert, K. N. Laland, and W.J.E. Hoppitt. 2015. Quantifying diffusion on
social networks: a Bayesian approach. In: Animal Social Networks: Perspectives and Challenges,
ed. J. Krause, D. Croft, and R. James. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, pp. 38–52.
Nihei, Y. 1995. Variations of behaviour of carrion crows (Corvus corone) using automobiles as
nutcrackers. Japanese Journal of Ornithology 44:21–35.
Niño-Mora, J. 2007. Dynamic priority allocation via restless bandit marginal productivity
indices. TOP 15:161–198.
Noad, M. J., D. H. Cato, M. M. Bryden, M. N. Jenner, and K. C. Jenner. 2000. Cultural revolution
in whale songs. Nature 408:537.
Nonaka, T., B. Bril, and R. Rein. 2010. How do stone knappers predict and control the outcome
of flaking? Implications for understanding early stone tool technology. Journal of Human
Evolution 59:155–167.

Nowak, M., and R. Highfield. 2011. Super-cooperators: The Mathematics of Evolution, Altruism and
Human Behaviour or Why We Need Each Other to Succeed. London, UK: Canongate.
Nowak, M. A., and K. Sigmund. 1998. Evolution of indirect reciprocity by image scoring. Nature
393(6685):573–577.
Nowicki, S., and W. A. Searcy. 2014. The evolution of vocal learning. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology 28:48–53.
Nunn, C. L. 2011. The Comparative Approach in Evolutionary Anthropology and Biology. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Nunn, C. L., and C. P. van Schaik. 2002. Reconstructing the behavioural ecology of extinct
primates. In: Reconstructing Behaviour in the Primate Fossil Record, ed. J. M. Plavcan, R. F. Kay,
W. L. Jungers, and C. P. van Schaik. New York, NY: Plenum, pp. 159–199.
Oberheim, N. A., T. Takano, X. Han, W. He, J. H. Lin, F. Wang, Q. Xu, et al. 2009. Uniquely
hominid features of adult human astrocytes. Journal of Neuroscience 29:3276–3287.
O’Brien, M. J., and K. N. Laland. 2012. Genes, culture and agriculture: an example of human
niche construction. Current Anthropology 53:434–470.
Odling-Smee, F. J., and K. N. Laland. 2009. Cultural niche construction: evolution’s cradle of
language. In: The Prehistory of Language, ed. R. Botha and C. Knight. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, pp. 99–121.
Odling-Smee, F. J., K. N. Laland, and M. W. Feldman. 1996. Niche construction. American
Naturalist 147:641–648.
——. 2003. Niche Construction: The Neglected Process in Evolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Ohnuma, K., K. Aoki, and T. Akazawa. 1997. Transmission of tool-making through verbal and
nonverbal 
communication-preliminary 
experiments 
in 
Levallois 
flake 
production.
Anthropological Science 105:159–168.
Oikawa, S., and Y. Itazawa. 1992. Relationship between metabolic rate in vitro and body mass in
a marine teleost, porgy (Pagrus major). Fish Physiology and Biochemistry 10:177–182.
Olalde, I., M. E. Allentoft, F. Sanchez-Quinto, G. Santpere, C. W. Chiang, M. DiGiorgio, J. Prado-
Marinez, et al. 2014. Derived immune and ancestral pigmentation alleles in a 7,000-year-old
Mesolithic European. Nature 507:225–228.
Olsson, A., and E. Phelps. 2007. Social learning of fear. Nature Neuroscience 10: 1095–1102.
Onishi, K. H., and R. Baillargeon. 2005. Do 15-month-old infants understand false beliefs? Science
308:255–258.
Oota, H., W. Settheetham-Ishida, D. Tiwawech, T. Ishida, and M. Stoneking. 2001. Human
mtDNA and Y-chromosome variation is correlated with matrilocal versus patrilocal residence.
Nature Genetics 29:20–21.
Otto, S. P., F. B. Christiansen, and M. W. Feldman. 1995. Genetic and Cultural Inheritance of
Continuous Traits. Morrison Institute for Population and Resource Studies Paper, no. 0064.
Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Over, H., and M. Carpenter, M. 2012. Putting the social into social learning: explaining both
selectivity and fidelity in children’s copying behavior. Journal of Comparative Psychology
126(2):182–192.
Oyama, S. 1985. The Ontogeny of Information: Developmental Systems and Evolution, 2nd ed.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Oyama, S., P. E. Griffiths, and R. D. Gray, eds. 2001. Cycles of Contingency: Developmental Systems
and Evolution. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pagel, M. 2012. Wired for Culture: The Natural History of Human Cooperation. London, UK: Allen
Lang.
Pagel, M., Q. D. Atkinson, and A. Meade. 2007. Frequency of word use predicts rates of lexical

evolution throughout Indo-European history. Nature 449:717–720.
Papadimitriou, C. H., and J. N. Tsitsiklis. 1999. The complexity of optimal queuing network
control. Mathematics of Operations Research 24:293–305.
Patel, A. D. 2006. Musical rhythm, linguistic rhythm, and human evolution. Music Perception
24:99–104.
Patel, A. D., J. R. Iversen, M. R. Bregman, and I. Schulz. 2009. Experimental evidence for
synchronization to a musical beat in a nonhuman animal. Current Biology 19:827–830.
Pawlby, S. J. 1977. Imitative interaction. In: Studies in Mother-Infant Interaction, ed. H. Scaffer.
New York, NY: Academic, pp. 203–224.
Payne, K., and R. Payne. 1985. Large scale changes over 19 years in songs of humpback whales
in Bermuda. Zeitschrift fur Tierpsychologie 68:89–114.
Pearce-Duvet, J. M. 2006. The origin of human pathogens: evaluating the role of agriculture and
domestic animals in the evolution of human disease. Biological Reviews 81:369–382.
Pearson, A. T. 1989. The Teacher: Theory and Practice in Teacher Education. London, UK:
Routledge.
Peck, J. R., and M. W. Feldman. 1986. The evolution of helping behavior in large, randomly
mixed populations. American Naturalist 127:209–221.
Pedersen, B. H. 1997. The cost of growth in young fish larvae, a review of new hypotheses.
Aquaculture 155:259–269.
Peng, M. S., J. D. He, C. L. Zhu, S. F. Wu, J. Q. Jin, and Y. P. Zhang, et al. 2012. Lactase
persistence may have an independent origin in Tibetan populations from Tibet, China. Journal
of Human Genetics 57:394–397.
Pennisi, E. 2010. Conquering by copying. Science 328:165–167.
Pepperberg, I. M. 1988. The importance of social interaction and observation in the acquisition
of communicative competence. In: Social Learning: Psychological and Biological Perspectives, ed.
T. R. Zentall and B. G. Galef Jr. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 279–299.
Perreault, 
C. 
2012. 
The 
pace 
of 
cultural 
evolution. 
PLOS 
ONE 
7(9):e45150,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0045150.
Perry, G. H., N. J. Dominy, K. G. Claw, A. S. Lee, H. Fiegler, R. Redon, J. Werner, et al. 2007.
Diet and the evolution of human amylase gene copy number variation. Nature Genetics
39:1256–1260.
Perry, S., M. Baker, L. Fedigan, J. Gros-Louis, K. Jack, K. MacKinnon, J. Manson, et al. 2003.
Social conventions in wild white-faced capuchin monkeys: evidence for traditions in a
neotropical primate. Current Anthropology 44:241–268.
Perry, S. 2011. Social traditions and social learning in capuchin monkeys (Cebus). Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 366:988–996.
Petraglia, M., C.B.K. Shipton, and K. Paddayya. 2005. Hominid Individual Context in Archaeological
Investigations of Lower and Middle Palaeolithic Landscapes, Locales and Artefacts, ed. C. Gamble
and M. Porr. London, UK: Routledge.
Petroski, K. 1992. The Evolution of Useful Things. New York, NY: Vintage Books.
Piel, F. B., A. P. Patil, R. E. Howes, O. A. Nyangiri, P. W. Gething, T. N. Williams, D. J.
Weatherall, and S. I. Hay. 2010. Global distribution of the sickle cell gene and geographical
confirmation of the malaria hypothesis. Nature Communications, doi:10.1038/ncomms1104.
Pigliucci, M., and G. B. Müller. 2010. Evolution, The Extended Synthesis. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Pika, S., K. Liebal, J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2005. The gestural communication of apes. Gesture
5(1–2):41–56.
Pike, T., and K. N. Laland. 2010. Conformist learning in ninespined sticklebacks’ foraging
decisions. Biology Letters 64:466–468.

Pike, T. W., J. R. Kendal, L. Rendell, and K. N. Laland. 2010. Learning by proportional
observation in a species of fish. Behavioral Ecology 20:238–244.
Pinker, S. 1995. The Language Instinct. New York, NY: Penguin.
——. 2010. The cognitive niche: coevolution of intelligence, sociality, and language. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences USA 107:8993–8999.
Pinker, S., and R. Jackendoff. 2005. The faculty of language: What’s special about it? Cognition
95:201–236.
Plath, M., D. Blum, R. Tiedemann, and I. Schlupp. 2008. A visual audience effect in a cavefish.
Behaviour 145:931–947.
PLOS Biology Synopsis. 2005. Mitochondrial DNA provides a link between Polynesians and
Indigenous Taiwanese. PLOS Biology 38:e281, doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0030281.
Plotkin, H. 1994. Darwin Machines and the Nature of Knowledge. London, UK: Penguin.
Plotnik, J. M., F.B.M. de Waal, and D. Reiss. 2006. Self-recognition in an Asian elephant.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 103:17053–17057.
Posadas-Andrews, A., and T. J. Roper. 1983. Social transmission of food preferences in adult rats.
Animal Behaviour 31:265–271.
Posnansky, M. 1969. Yams and the origins of West African agriculture. Odu 1:101–107.
Potts, R. 2013. Hominin evolution in settings of strong environmental variability. Quaternary
Science Reviews 73:1–13.
Povinelli, D. J., K. E. Nelson, and S. T. Boysen. 1992. Comprehension of role reversal in
chimpanzees: Evidence of empathy? Animal Behaviour 43:633–640.
Powell, A., S. Shennan, and M. G. Thomas. 2009. Late Pleistocene demography and the
appearance of modern human behavior. Science 324:1298–1301.
Power, C. 1998. Old wives’ tales: the gossip hypothesis and the reliability of cheap signals. In:
Approaches to the Evolution of Language, ed. J. R. Hurford, M. Studdert-Kennedy, and C.
Knight. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 111–129.
Prabhakar, S., A. Visel, J. Akiyama, M. Shoukry, K. Lewis, A. Holt, I. Plajzer-Frick, et al. 2008.
Human-specific gain of function in a developmental enhancer. Science 321:1346–1350.
Pratt, S. C., D. Sumpter, E. Mallon, and N. Franks. 2005. An agent-based model of collective nest
choice by the ant (Temnothorax albipennis). Animal Behaviour 70:1023–1036.
Premack, D. 2007. Human and animal cognition: continuity and discontinuity. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA 104:13861–13867.
Premack, D., and G. Woodruff. 1978. Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Behavioral and
Brain Science 1:515–526.
Pullium, H. R., and C. Dunford. 1980. Programmed to Learn. New York, NY: Columbia University
Press.
Purves, D. 1988. Body and Brain: A Trophic Theory of Neural Connections. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Purvis, A., and A. Rambaut. 1995. Comparative analysis by independent contrasts CAIC: an Apple
Macintosh application for analysing comparative data. Computer Applications in the Biosciences
11:247–251.
Putt, S. S., A. D. Woods, and R. G. Franciscus. 2014. The role of verbal interaction during
experimental bifacial stone tool manufacture. Lithic Technology 39:96–112.
Quach, H., L. B. Barreiro, G. Laval, N. Zidane, E. Patin, K. Kidd, J. Kidd, et al. 2009. Signatures of
purifying and local positive selection in human miRNAs. American Journal of Human Genetics
84:316–327.
Radick, G. 2008. The Simian Tongue: The Long Debate about Animal Language. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Raihani, N. J., and A. R. Ridley. 2008. Experimental evidence for teaching in wild pied babblers.

Animal Behaviour 75:3–11.
Rakic, P. 1986. Mechanisms of ocular dominance segregation in the lateral geniculate nucleus:
competitive elimination hypothesis. Trends in Neuroscience 9:11–15.
Ramsey, G., M. L. Bastian, and C. van Schaik. 2007. Animal innovation defined and
operationalized. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30:393–437.
Rapaport, L. M., and G. R. Brown. 2008. Social influences on foraging behaviour in young
nonhuman primates: learning what, where, and how to eat. Evolutionary Anthropology 17:189–
201.
Ratcliffe, J. M., and H. M. ter Hofstede. 2005. Roosts as information centres: social learning of
food preferences in bats. Biology Letters 1:72–74.
Reader, S. M. 2000. Social Learning and Innovation: Individual Differences, Diffusion Dynamics
and Evolutionary Issues. PhD diss., University of Cambridge.
Reader, S. M., and K. N. Laland. 2000. Diffusion of foraging innovations in the guppy. Animal
Behaviour 60:175–180.
——. 2001. Primate innovation: sex, age and social rank differences. International Journal of
Primatology 22:787–805.
——. 2002. Social intelligence, innovation and enhanced brain size in primates. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA 99:4436–4441.
——eds. 2003a. Animal Innovation. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
——. 2003b. Animal innovation: an introduction. In: Animal Innovation, ed. S. M. Reader and K.
N. Laland. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, pp. 3–35.
Reader, S. M., and L. Lefebvre. 2001. Social learning and sociality. Behavioral and Brain Science
24:353–355.
Reader, S. M., E. Flynn, J. Morand-Ferron, and K. N. Laland. 2016. Innovation in animals and
humans: understanding the origins and development of novel and creative behavior.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 371(1690).
Reader, S. M., Y. Hager, and K. N. Laland. 2011. The evolution of primate general and cultural
intelligence. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 366:1017–1027.
Reader, S. M., J. R. Kendal, and K. N. Laland. 2003. Social learning of foraging sites and escape
routes in wild Trinidadian guppies. Animal Behaviour 66:729–739.
Remick, A. K., J. Polivy, and P. Pliner. 2009. Internal and external moderators of the effect of
variety on food intake. Psychological Bulletin 135(3):434–451.
Rendell, L., and H. Whitehead. 2001. Culture in whales and dolphins. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 24:309–324.
——. 2015. The Cultural Lives of Whales and Dolphins. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Rendell, L., R. Boyd, D. Cownden, M. Enquist, K. Eriksson, M. W. Feldman, L. Fogarty, et al.
2010. Why copy others? Insights from the social learning strategies tournament. Science
327:208–213.
Rendell, L., R. Boyd, M. Enquist, M. W. Feldman, L. Fogarty, and K. N. Laland. 2011. How
copying affects the amount, evenness and persistence of cultural knowledge: insights from the
social learning strategies tournament. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London
B 366:1118–1128.
Rendell, L., L. Fogarty, W.J.E. Hoppitt, T.J.H. Morgan, M. Webster, and K. N. Laland. 2011.
Cognitive culture: theoretical and empirical insights into social learning strategies. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 15:68–76.
Rendell, L., L. Fogarty, and K. N. Laland. 2011. Runaway cultural niche construction.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 366:823–835.
Reznick, D., and A. P. Yang. 1993. The influence of fluctuating resources on life-history patterns
of allocation and plasticity in female guppies. Ecology 74:2011–2019.

Richards, M. P., R. J. Schulting, and R.E.M. Hedges. 2003. Archaeology: sharp shift in diet at
onset of Neolithic. Nature 425:366.
Richerson, P. J. 2013. Rethinking paleoanthropology: a world queerer than we supposed. In:
Evolution of Mind, Brain and Culture, ed. G. Hatfield and H. Pittman. Philadelphia, PA:
University of Pennsylvania Press, pp. 263–302.
Richerson, P. J., and R. Boyd. 1998. The evolution of human ultrasociality. In: Indoctrinability,
Ideology, and Warfare: Evolutionary Perspectives, ed. I. Eibl-Eibesfeldt and F. K. Salter. New
York, NY: Berghahn Books, pp. 71–95.
——. 2005. Not by Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed Human Evolution. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Richerson, P. J., and J. Henrich. 2012. Tribal social instincts and the cultural evolution of
institutions to solve collective action problems. Cliodynamics 3:38–80.
Richerson, P. J., R. Baldini, A. Bell, K. Demps, K. Frost, V. Hillis, S. Mathew, et al. 2014. Cultural
group selection plays an essential role in explaining human cooperation: a sketch of the
evidence. Behavioural and Brain Science 28:1–71.
Richerson, P. J., M. Borgerhoff Mulder, and B. J. Vila. 1996. Principles of Human Ecology. New
York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Richerson, P., R. Boyd, and R. Bettinger. 2001. Was agriculture impossible during the Pleistocene
but mandatory during the Holocene? American Antiquity 66: 387–411.
Richerson, P. J., R. Boyd, and J. Henrich. 2010. Gene-culture coevolution in the age of genomics.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 107:8985–8992.
Riddell, W. I., and K. G. Corl. 1977. Comparative investigation of the relationship between
cerebral indices and learning abilities. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 14:385–398.
Ridley, M. 2011. The Rational Optimist. New York, NY: HarperCollins.
Rilling, J. K., and T. R. Insel. 1999. The primate neocortex in comparative perspective using
magnetic resonance imaging. Journal of Human Evolution 37:191–223.
Rilling, J. K., M. F. Glasser, T. M. Preuss, X. Ma, T. Zhao, X. Hu, and T.E.J. Behrens. 2008. The
evolution of the arcuate fasciculus revealed with comparative DTI. Nature Neuroscience
11(4):426–428.
Rizzolatti, G., and L. Craighero. 2004. The mirror-neuron system. Annual Review of Neuroscience
27(1):169–192.
Roberts, C. A., and J. E. Buikstra. 2003. The Bioarchaeology of Tuberculosis: A Global View on a Re-
emerging Disease. Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida.
Roberts, M. J. 2007. Integrating the Mind. New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Roche, H., A. Delagnes, J.-P. Brugal, C. Feibel, M. Kibunjia, V. Mourre, and P.-J. Texier. 1999.
Early hominid stone tool production and technical skill 2.34 myr ago in West Turkana, Kenya.
Nature 399:57–60.
Rogers, A. 1988. Does biology constrain culture? American Anthropologist 90:819–813.
Rogers, E. M. 1995. Diffusion of Innovations, 4th ed. New York, NY: Free Press.
Rose, M. R., and G. V. Lauder. 1996. Adaptation. San Diego, CA: Academic.
Rowe, N. 1996. The Pictorial Guide to the Living Primates. New York, NY: Pogonias.
Rowley-Conwy, P., and R. Layton. 2011. Foraging and farming as niche construction: stable and
unstable adaptations. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 366:849–862.
Russon, A. E. 2003. Innovation and creativity in forest-living rehabilitant orangutans. In: Animal
Innovation, ed. S. M. Reader and K. N. Laland. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, pp. 279–
306.
Rutz, C., L. A. Bluff, N. Reed, J. Troscianko, J. Newton, R. Inger, A. Kacelnik, and S. Bearhop.
2010. The ecological significance of tool use in New Caledonian crows. Science 329:1523–
1526.

Rutz, C., B. C. Klump, L. Komarczyk, R. Leighton, J. Kramer, S. Wischnewski, et al. 2016.
Discovery of species-wide tool use in the Hawaiian crow. Nature 537:403–407.
Sabbagh, A., P. Darlu, B. Crouau-Roy, and E. S. Poloni. 2011. Arylamine N-acetyltransferase 2
NAT2 genetic diversity and traditional subsistence: a worldwide population survey. PLOS
ONE 6:e18507, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0018507.
Sabeti, P. C., S. F. Schaffner, B. Fry, J. Lohmueller, P. Varilly, O. Shamovsky, A. Palma, et al.
2006. Positive natural selection in the human lineage. Science 312:1614–1620.
Sabeti, P. C., P. Varilly, B. Fry, J. Lohmueller, E. Hostetter, C. Cotsapas, X. Xie, et al. 2007.
Genome-wide detection and characterization of positive selection in human populations.
Nature 449:913–918.
Sachs, J. L., U. G. Mueller, T. P. Wilcox, and J. J. Bull. 2004. The evolution of cooperation.
Quarterly Review of Biology 79:135–160.
Saggerson, A. L., D. N. George, and R. C. Honey. 2005. Imitative learning of stimulus response
and response-outcome associations in pigeons. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal
Behavior Processes 31:289–300.
Sakai, T., A. Mikami, M. Tomanaga, M. Matsui, J. Suzuki, Y. Hamada, M. Tanaka, et al. 2011.
Differential prefrontal white matter development in chimpanzees and humans. Current Biology
21:1397–1402.
Sanz, C. M., J. Call, and D. B. Morgan. 2009. Design complexity in termite-fishing tools of
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Biology Letters 5:293–296.
Sargeant, B. L., and J. Mann. 2009. Developmental evidence for foraging traditions in wild
bottlenose dolphins. Animal Behaviour 78:715–721.
Sargent, R. C., and M. R. Gross. 1993. Williams’ principle: an explanation of parental care in
teleost fishes. In: Behavior of Teleost Fishes, 2nd ed., ed. T. J. Pitcher. London, UK: Chapman
and Hall, pp. 333–361.
Schachner, A., T. F. Brady, I. M. Pepperberg, and M. D. Hauser. 2009. Spontaneous motor
entrainment to music in multiple vocal mimicking species. Current Biology 19:831–836.
Schenker, N. M., W. D. Hopkins, M. A. Spocter, A. R. Garrison, C. D. Stimpson, J. M. Erwin, P. R.
Hof, and C. C. Sherwood. 2010. Broca’s area homologue in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes):
probabilistic mapping, asymmetry and comparison to humans. Cerebral Cortex 20:730–742.
Schick, K., and N. Toth. 2006. Oldowan Case Studies into Earliest Stone Age, ed. N. Toth and K.
Schick. Gosport, UK: Stone Age Institute.
Schlag, K. H. 1998. Why imitate and if so, how? A boundedly rational approach to multi-armed
bandits. Journal of Economic Theory 78:130–156.
Schoenemann, P. T. 2006. Evolution of the size and functional areas of the human brain. Annual
Review of Anthropology 35:379–406.
Schönholzer, L. 1958. Beobachtungen über das Trinkverhalten bei Zootieren. Der Zoologische
Garten (N. F.) 24:345–431.
Schuppli, C., E.J.M. Meulman, S.I.F. Forss, F. Aprilinayati, M. A. van Noordwijk, and C. P. van
Schaik. 2016. Observational social learning and socially induced practice of routine skills in
immature wild orangutans. Animal Behaviour 119:87–98.
Schuster, S., S. Wohl, M. Griebsch, and I. Klostermeier. 2006. Animal cognition: how archer fish
learn to down rapidly moving targets. Current Biology 16:378–383.
Sealey, T. D. 2010. Honeybee Democracy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Searcy, W. A., and S. Nowicki, S. 2005. The Evolution of Animal Communication. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Semendeferi, K., K. Teffer, D. P. Buxoeveden, M. S. Park, S. Bludau, K. Amunts, K. Travis, et al.
2011. Spatial organization of neurons in the frontal pole sets humans apart from great apes.
Cerebral Cortex 21:1485–1497.

Seyfarth, R. M., and D. L. Cheney. 2000. Social awareness in the monkey. American Zoologist
40:902–909.
Seyfarth, R. M., D. L. Cheney, and P. Marler. 1980. Vervet monkey alarm calls: semantic
communication in a free-ranging primate. Animal Behaviour 28:1070–1094.
Shaw, J. 2003. Who built the pyramids? Harvard Magazine 7:42–99.
Sherry, D. F., and B. G. Galef Jr. 1984. Cultural transmission without imitation: milk bottle
opening by birds. Animal Behaviour 32:937–938.
——. 1990. Social learning without imitation: more about milk bottle opening by birds. Animal
Behaviour 40:987–989.
Sherwood, C., C. D. Stimpson, M. A. Raghanti, D. E. Wildman, M. Uddin, L. Grossman, M.
Goodman, et al. 2006. Evolution of increased glia-neuron ratios in the human frontal cortex.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 103:13606–13611.
Shettleworth, S. J. 2001. Animal cognition and animal behavior. Animal Behaviour 61:277–286.
——. 2010. Cognition, Evolution, and Behavior, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Shipton, C.B.K., M. Petraglia, and K. Paddayya. 2009. Stone tool experiments and reduction
methods at the Acheulean site of Isampur Quarry, India. Antiquity 83:769–785.
Shultz, S., and R.I.M. Dunbar. 2006. Both social and ecological factors predict ungulate brain
size. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 273:207–215.
Sieveking, A. 1979. The Cave Artists. London, UK: Thames and Hudson.
Silk, J. B. 2002. The form and function of reconciliation in primates. Annual Review of
Anthropology 31:21–44.
Simonton, D. K. 1995. Exceptional personal influence: an integrative paradigm. Creativity
Research Journal 8:371–376.
Slagsvold, T., and B. T. Hansen. 2001. Sexual imprinting and the origin of obligate brood
parasitism in birds. American Naturalist 158:354–367.
Slagsvold, T., and K. L. Wiebe. 2007. Learning the ecological niche. Proceedings of the Royal
Society B 274:19–23.
——. 2011. Social learning in birds and its role in shaping a foraging niche. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 366:969–977.
Slagsvold, T., B. T. Hansen, L. E. Johannessen, and L. T. Lifjeld. 2002. Mate choice and
imprinting in birds studied by cross-fostering in the wild. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London B 269:1449–1455.
Slagsvold, T., K. Wigdahl Kleiven, A. Eriksen, and L. E. Johannessen. 2013. Vertical and
horizontal transmission of nest site preferences in titmice. Animal Behaviour 85:323–328.
Slater, P.J.B., and R. F. Lachlan. 2003. Is innovation in bird song adaptive? In: Animal Innovation,
ed. S. M. Reader and K. N. Laland. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, pp. 117–135.
Smit, H. 2014. The Social Evolution of Human Nature. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, A. 1776. The Wealth of Nations. London, UK: W. Strahan.
Smith, B. D. 1998. The Emergence of Agriculture. New York, NY: Freeman.
——. 2001. Low level food production. Journal of Archaeological Research 9: 1–43.
——. 2007a. The ultimate ecosystem engineers. Science 315:1797–1798.
——. 2007b. Niche construction and the behavioral context of plant and animal domestication.
Evolutionary Anthropology 16:188–199.
Smith, E. A., R. Bliege Bird, and D. W. Bird. 2003. The benefits of costly signaling: Meriam turtle
hunters. Behavioral Ecology 14:116–126.
Smith, K., and S. Kirby. 2008. Cultural evolution: implications for understanding the human
language faculty and its evolution. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B
363(1509):3591–3603.
Smith, M. E. 2009. V. Gordon Childe and the urban revolution: a historical perspective on a

revolution in urban studies. Town Planning Review 80:3–29.
Sol, D. 2003. Behavioral flexibility: A neglected issue in the ecological and evolutionary
literature? In: Animal Innovation, ed. S. M. Reader and K. N. Laland. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, pp. 63–82.
Sol, D., and L. Lefebvre. 2000. Behavioral flexibility predicts invasion success in birds introduced
to New Zealand. Oikos 90:599–605.
Sol, D., R. P. Duncan, T. M. Blackburn, P. Cassey, and L. Lefebvre. 2005. Big brains, enhanced
cognition and response of birds to novel environments. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 102:5460–5465.
Sol, D., L. Lefebvre, and J. D. Rodríguez-Teijeiro. 2005. Brain size, innovative propensity and
migratory behavior in temperate Palaearctic birds. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B
272:1433–1441.
Sol, D., L. Lefebvre, and S. Timmermans. 2002. Behavioral flexibility and invasion success in
birds. Animal Behaviour 63:495–502.
Sol, D., D. G. Stirling, and L. Lefebvre. 2005. Behavioral drive or behavioral inhibition in
evolution: subspecific diversification in Holarctic passerines. Evolution 59:2669–2677.
Somel, M., X. Liu, and P. Khaitovich. 2013. Human brain evolution: transcripts, metabolites and
their regulators. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 14:112–127.
Somel, M., R. Rohlfs, and X. Liu. 2014. Transcriptomic insights into human brain evolution:
acceleration, neutrality, heterochrony. Current Opinion in Genetics and Development 29:110–
119.
Soranzo, N., B. Bufe, P. C. Sabeti, J. F. Wilson, M. E. Weale, R. Marquerie, W. Meyerhof, et al.
2005. Positive selection on a high-sensitivity allele of the human bitter-taste receptor
TAS2R16. Current Biology 15:1257–1265.
Spencer, H. (1855) 1870. Principles of Psychology, 2nd ed. London, UK: Longman.
Spocter, M. A., W. D. Hopkins, S. K. Barks, S. Bianchi, A. E. Hehmeyer, S. M. Anderson, C. D.
Stimpson, et al. 2012. Neuropil distribution in the cerebral cortex differs between humans and
chimpanzees. Journal of Comparative Neurology 520:2917–2929.
——. 1857. Progress: Its law and cause. Westminster Review 67:445–485.
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, http://plato.stanford.edu.
Stanford, C. B., J. Wallis, E. Mpongo, and J. Goodall. 1994. Hunting decisions in wild
chimpanzees. Behaviour 131(1):1–18.
Stanley, E. L., R. L. Kendal, J. R. Kendal, S. Grounds, and K. N. Laland. 2008. The effects of group
size, rate of turnover and disruption to demonstration on the stability of foraging traditions in
fish. Animal Behaviour 75:565–572.
Stearns, S. C., S. G. Byars, D. R. Govindaraju, and D. Ewbank. 2010. Measuring selection in
contemporary human populations. Nature Reviews Genetics 11:611–622.
Stedman, H. H., B. W. Kosyak, A. Nelson, D. M. Thesier, L. T. Su, D. W. Low, C. R. Bridges, et al.
2004. Myosin gene mutation correlates with anatomical changes in the human lineage. Nature
428:415–418.
Steele, V. 2013. Dance and Fashion. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Stefansson, H., A. Helgason, G. Thorliefsson, V. Steinthorsdotti, G. Masson, J. Barnard, A. Baker,
et al. 2005. A common inversion under selection in Europeans. Nature Genetics 37:129–137.
Steiniger, von, F. 1950. Beitrage zur Sociologie und sonstigen Biologie der Wanderratte.
Zeitschrift fur Tierpsychologie 7:356–379.
Stel, M., J. Blascovich, C. McCall, J. Mastop, R. B. van Baaren, and R. Vonk. 2010. Mimicking
disliked others: effects of a priori liking on the mimicry-liking link. European Journal of Social
Psychology 40:867–880.
Stephan, H., H. Frahm, and G. Baron. 1981. New and revised data on volume of brain structures

in insectivores and primates. Folia Primatologica 35:1–29.
Stephens, D. 1991. Change, regularity and value in the evolution of learning. Behavioral Ecology
2:77–89.
Sterelny, K. 2012a. The Evolved Apprentice. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——. 2012b. Language, gesture, skill: the coevolutionary foundations of language. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B 367:2141–2151.
Stoeger, A. S., D. Mietchen, S. Oh, S. de Silva, C. T. Herbst, S. Kwon, and W. T. Fitch. 2012. An
Asian elephant imitates human speech. Current Biology 22:2144–2148.
Stout, D. 2002. Skill and cognition in stone tool production: an ethnographic case study from
Irian Jaya. Current Anthropology 43:693–723.
Stout, D., S. Semaw, S., M. J. Rogers, and D. Cauche. 2010. Technological variation in the
earliest Oldowan from Gona, Afar, Ethiopia. Journal of Human Evolution 58:474–491.
Stout, D., N. Toth, K. Schick, J. Stout, and G. Hutchins. 2000. Stone tool-making and brain
activation: position emission tomography PET studies. Journal of Archaeological Science
27:1215–1223.
Strandberg-Peshkin, A., D. R. Farine, I. D. Couzin, and M. C. Crofoot. 2015. Shared decision-
making drives collective movement in wild baboons. Science 348(6241):1358–1361.
Street, S. 2014. Phylogenetic Comparative Investigations of Sexual Selection and Cognitive
Evolution in Primates. PhD diss., University of St Andrews.
Striedter, G. F. 2005. Principles of Brain Evolution. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Strimling, P., J. Sjostrand, M. Enquist, and K. Eriksson. 2009. Accumulation of independent
cultural traits. Theoretical Population Biology 76:77–83.
Stringer, C., and P. Andrews. 2005. The Complete World of Human Evolution. London, UK: Thames
and Hudson.
Su, C. H., P. H. Kuo, C.C.H. Lin, and W. J. Chen. 2005. A school-based twin study of handedness
among adolescents in Taiwan. Behavior Genetics 35:723–733.
Suddendorf, T. 2013. The Gap: The Science That Separates Us from Other Animals. New York, NY:
Basic Books.
Suddendorf, T., and M. C. Corballis. 2007. The evolution of foresight: What is mental time travel
and is it unique to humans? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30:299–313, and discussion, pp.
313–315.
Swaddle, J. P., M. G. Cathey, M. Correll, and B. P. Hodkinson. 2005. Socially transmitted mate
preferences in a monogamous bird: a non-genetic mechanism of sexual selection. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London B 272:1053–1058.
Swaney, W., J. R. Kendal, H. Capon, C. Brown, and K. N. Laland. 2001. Familiarity facilitates
social learning of foraging behaviour in the guppy. Animal Behaviour 62:591–598.
Szamado, S., and E. Szathmary. 2006. Selective scenarios for the emergence of natural language.
Trends in Ecology and Evolution 21:555–561.
Tang, K., K. R. Thornton, and M. Stoneking. 2007. A new approach for using genome scans to
detect 
recent 
positive 
selection 
in 
the 
human 
genome. 
PLOS 
Biology 
5:e171,
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050171.
Tanner, R., R. Ferraro, T. L. Chartrand, J. R. Bettman, and R. van Baaren. 2008. Of chameleons
and consumption: the impact of mimicry on choice and preferences. Journal of Consumer
Research 34:754–766.
Tarr, B., J. Launay, and R.I.M. Dunbar. 2014. Music and social bonding: “self-other” merging and
neurohormonal mechanisms. Frontiers in Psychology 5:1096, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01096.
Tattersall, I. 1995. The Fossil Trail. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Taylor, J. 2009. Not a Chimp: The Hunt to Find the Genes That Make Us Human. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.

Tehrani J. J., and F. Riede. 2008. Towards an archaeology of pedagogy: learning, teaching and
the generation of material culture traditions. World Archaeology 40:316–331.
Tellier, L. N. 2009. Urban World History. Québec City, Québec, Canada: Presses de l’Université du
Québec.
Templeton, J. J., and A. Giraldeau. 1996. Vicarious sampling: the use of personal and public
information by starlings in a simple patchy environment. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology
38:105–114.
Teng, E. L., P. Lee, P. C. Yang, and P. C. Chang. 1976. Handedness in a Chinese population:
biological, social and pathological factors. Science 193:1148–1150.
Tennie, C., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2009. Ratcheting up the ratchet: on the evolution of
cumulative culture. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 364:2405–2415.
Terrace, H. S. 1979. How Nim Chimpsky Changed My Mind. San Francisco, CA: Ziff-Davis.
Texier, P.-J., G. Poraraz, J. E. Parkington, J. P. Rigaud, C. Poggenpoel, C. Miller, C. Tribolo, et al.
2010. A Howiesons Poort tradition of engraving ostrich eggshell containers dated to 60,000
years ago at Diepkloof Rock Shelter, South Africa. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 107:6180–6185.
Thieme, H. 1997. Lower Palaeolithic hunting spears from Germany. Nature 385:807–810.
Thiessen, E. D., E. Hill, and J. R. Saffran. 2005. Infant-directed speech facilitates word
segmentation. Infancy 7:53–71.
Thorndike, E. L. 1898. Animal intelligence: An experimental study of the associative processes in
animals. The Psychological Review, Series of Monograph Supplements, Vol. 2, No. 4. New York,
NY: Macmillan.
Thornton, A. 2007. Early body condition, time budgets and the acquisition of foraging skills in
meerkats. Animal Behaviour 75:951–962.
Thornton, A., and K. McAuliffe. 2006. Teaching in wild meerkats. Science 313:227–229.
Thornton, A., and N. J. Raihani. 2008. The evolution of teaching. Animal Behaviour 75:1823–
1836.
Thornton, A., J. Samson, and T. Clutton-Brock. 2010. Multi-generational persistence of traditions
in neighbouring meerkat groups. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 277:3623–3629.
Thorpe, W. H. 1956. Learning and Instinct in Animals. London: Methuen.
Tilman, D. 1982. Resource Competition and Community Structure. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Tomasello, M. 1994. The question of chimpanzee culture. In Chimpanzee Cultures, ed. R.
Wrangham, W. McGrew, F. de Waal, and P. Heltne. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, pp. 301–317.
——. 1999. The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——. 2008. Origins of Human Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——. 2009. Why We Cooperate. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——. 2010. Human culture in evolutionary perspective. In: Advances in Culture and Psychology,
ed. M. J. Gelfand, C. Chui, and Y. Hong. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, pp. 5–51.
Tomasello, M., and J. Call. 1997. Primate Cognition. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Tomasello, M., M. Carpenter, J. Call, T. Behne, and H. Moll. 2005. Understanding and sharing
intentions: the origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28:675–735.
Tomasello, M., B. Hare, H. Lehmann, and J. Call. 2007. Reliance on head versus eyes in the gaze
following of great apes and human infants: the cooperative eye hypothesis. Journal of Human
Evolution 52:314–320.
Toth, N. 1985. Archaeological evidence for preferential right handedness in the Lower and
Middle Pleistocene, and its possible implications. Journal of Human Evolution 14:607–614.
——. 1987. Behavioral inferences from early stone artifact assemblages: an experimental model.

Journal of Human Evolution 16:763–787.
Trejaut, J. A., T. Kivisild, J. H. Loo, C. L. Lee, C. L. He, C. J. Hsu, Z. Y. Li, et al. 2005. Traces of
archaic mitochondrial lineages persist in Austronesian-speaking Formosan populations. PLOS
Biology 38:e247, doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0030247.
Trivers, R. L. 1971. The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly Review of Biology 46:35–57.
——. 1972. Parent investment and sexual selection. In: Sexual Selection and the Descent of Man:
1871–1971, ed. B. Campbell. Chicago, IL: Aldine, pp. 136–179.
——. 1974. Parent-offspring conflict. American Zoologist 14:249–264.
Truswell, R. 2015. Dendrophobia in bonobo comprehension of spoken English. Paper presented
at the 11th International Conference for The Evolution of Language, New Orleans, LA, March
2016, http://evolang.org/neworleans/papers/87.html.
Turing, A. M. 1937. On computable numbers, with an application to the Entscheidungsproblem.
Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 2nd ser., 42:230–265.
Twigg, G. 1975. The Brown Rat. New Pomfret, VT: David and Charles.
Tylor, E. B. 1871. Primitive Culture: Researches into the Development of Mythology, Philosophy,
Religion, Art, and Custom, 2 vols. London, UK: John Murray.
Uddin, M., D. E. Wildman, G. Liu, W. Xu, R. M. Johnson, P. R. Hof, G. Kapatos, et al. 2004. Sister
grouping of chimpanzees and humans as revealed by genome-wide phylogenetic analysis of
brain gene expression profiles. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 101:2957–
2962.
Uller, T. 2012. Parental effects in development and evolution. In: Evolution of Parental Care, ed.
N. J. Royle, P. Smiseth, and M. Kölliker. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Uomini, N. T. 2009. The prehistory of handedness: archaeological data and comparative
ethology. Journal of Human Evolution 57:411–419.
Uomini, N. T. 2011. Handedness in Neanderthals. In: Neanderthal Lifeways, Subsistence and
Technology, ed. N. J. Conard and J. Richter. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer, pp. 139–154.
Uomini, N. T., and G. F. Meyer. 2013. Shared brain lateralization patterns in language and
Acheulean stone tool production: a functional transcranial Doppler ultrasound study. PLOS
ONE 8(8):e72693, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0072693.
Valsecchi, P., and B. G. Galef. 1989. Social influences on the food preferences of house mice (Mus
musculus). International Journal of Comparative Psychology 2: 245–256.
van Baaren, R. B., R. W. Holland, K. Kawakami, and A. Van Knippenberg. 2004. Mimicry and
prosocial behavior. Psychological Science 15:71–74.
van Baaren, R. B., L. Janssen, T. L. Chartrand, A. Dijksterhuis, et al. 2009. Where is the love? The
social aspects of mimicry. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B
364:2381–2389.
van Bergen, Y. 2004. An Investigation into the Adaptive Use of Social and Asocial Information.
PhD diss., University of Cambridge.
van Bergen, Y., I. Coolen, and K. N. Laland. 2004. Ninespined sticklebacks exploit the most
reliable source when public and private information conflict. Proceedings of the Royal Society
of London B 271:957–962.
van der Maas, H.L.J., C. V. Dolan, R.P.P.P. Grasman, J. M. Wicherts, H. M. Huizenga, and M.E.J.
Raijmakers. 2006. A dynamical model of general intelligence: the positive manifold of
intelligence by mutualism. Psychological Review 113: 842–861.
van der Post, D. J., and P. Hogeweg. 2009. Cultural inheritance and diversification of diet in
variable environments. Animal Behaviour 78:155–166.
van Schaik, C. P., R. O. Deaner, and M. Y. Merrill. 1999. The conditions for tool use in primates:
implications for the evolution of material culture. Journal of Human Evolution 36:719–741.
van Schaik, C. P. 2009. Geographic variation in the behavior of wild great apes: Is it really

Cultural? In: The Question of Animal Culture, ed. K. N. Laland and B. G. Galef. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 70–98.
van Schaik, C. P., and J. M. Burkart. 2011. Social learning and evolution: the cultural intelligence
hypothesis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 366:1008–1016.
van Schaik, C. P., M. A. van Noordwijk, and S. A. Wich. 2003. Innovation in wild Bornean
orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus wurmbii). Behaviour 143:839–876.
Van Swol, L. M. 2003. The effects of nonverbal mirroring on perceived persuasiveness,
agreement with an imitator, and reciprocity in a group discussion. Communication Research
304:461–480.
Vigilant, L., M. Stoneking, H. Harpending, K. Hawkes, and A. C. Wilson. 1991. African
populations and the evolution of human mitochondrial DNA. Science 253:1503–1507.
Vitousek, P. M., H. A. Mooney, J. Lubchenko, and J. M. Mellilo. 1997. Human domination of
earth’s ecosystems. Science 277:494–499.
Voight, B. F., S. Kudaravalli, X. Wen, and J. K. Pritchard. 2006. A map of recent positive
selection in the human genome. PLOS Biology 4:e72, doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0040072.
von Frisch, K. 1967. The Dance Language and Orientation of Bees. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1934) 1986. Thought and Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wakano, J. Y., K. Aoki, and M. W. Feldman. 2004. Evolution of social learning: a mathematical
analysis. Theoretical Population Biology 66:249–258.
Walden, T. A., and T. A. Ogan. 1988. The development of social referencing. Child Development
59(5):1230–1240.
Wallace, A. R. 1869. Geological climates and the origin of species. Quarterly Review 126:359–394.
Wallman, J. 1992. Aping Language. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Wang, E. T., G. Kodama, P. Baldi, and R. K. Moyzis. 2006. Global landscape of recent inferred
Darwinian selection for Homo sapiens. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
103:135–140.
Warner, R. R. 1988. Traditionality of mating-site preferences in a coral reef fish. Nature 335:719–
721.
Warner, R. R. 1990. Male versus female influences on mating-site determination in a coral-reef
fish. Animal Behaviour 39:540–548.
Warren, D. M., M. Stern, R. Duggirala, T. D. Dyer, and L. Almasy. 2006. Heritability and linkage
analysis of hand, foot, and eye preference in Mexican Americans. Laterality 11:508–524.
Washburn, S. L., and C. Lancaster. 1968. The evolution of hunting. In: Man the Hunter, ed. R. B.
Lee and I. DeVore. Venice, Italy: Aldine, pp. 293–303.
Waters, C. N., J. Zalasiewicz, C. Summerhayes, A. D. Barnosky, C. Poirier, A. Galuszka, A.
Cearreta, et al. 2016. The Anthropocene is functionally and stratigraphically distinct from the
Holocene. Science 351(6269):aad2622, doi:10.1126/science.aad2622.
Waterson, N. 1978. The Development of Communication. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Watson, S. K., S. W. Townsend, A. M. Schel, C. Wilke, E. K. Wallace, L. Cheng, L. West, and K. E.
Slocombe. 2014. Vocal learning in the functionally referential food grunts of chimpanzees.
Current Biology 25:495–499, doi:org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.12.032.
Weatherall, D., O. Akinyanju, S. Fucharoen, N. Olivieri, and P. Musgrove. 2006. In: Disease
Control Priorities in Developing Countries, ed. D. T. Jamison, J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G.
Alleyne, M. Claeson, D. B. Evans, P. Jha, et al. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, pp. 663–
680.
Webster, M. M., and K. N. Laland. 2008. Social learning strategies and predation risk: minnows
copy only when using private information would be costly. Proceedings. of the Royal Society of
London B 275:2869–2876.

——. 2010. Reproductive state affects reliance on public information in sticklebacks. Proceedings
of the Royal Society Series B 278:619–627, doi:10.1098/rspb.2010.1562.
——. 2012. Social information, conformity and the opportunity costs paid by foraging fish.
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 66:797–809, doi:10.1007/s00265–012–1328–1.
——. 2013. The learning mechanism underlying public information use in ninespine sticklebacks
(Pungitius pungitius). Journal of Comparative Psychology 127:154–165.
Webster, M. M., E. L. Adams, E. L., and K. N. Laland. 2008. Diet-specific chemical cues influence
association preferences and patch use in a shoaling fish. Animal Behaviour 76:17–23.
Webster, M. M., N. Atton, W. Hoppitt, and K. N. Laland. 2013. Environmental complexity
influences association network structure and network-based diffusion of foraging information
in fish shoals. American Naturalist 181:235–244.
Webster, M. M., A.J.W. Ward, and P.J.B. Hart. 2008. Shoal and prey patch choice by co-
occurring fish and prawns: inter-taxa use of socially transmitted cues. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London B 275:203–208.
Wen, N., P. A. Herrman, and C. H. Legare. 2016. Ritual increases children’s affiliation with in-
group members. Evolution and Human Behavior 37:54–60.
West, S. A., A. S. Griffin, and A. Gardner. 2007. Social semantics: altruism, cooperation,
mutualism, strong reciprocity and group selection. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 20:415–432.
West, S. A., C. El Mouden, and A. Gardner. 2011. Sixteen common misconceptions about the
evolution of cooperation in humans. Evolution and Human Behavior 32:231–262.
West-Eberhard, M. J. 2003. Developmental Plasticity and Evolution. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Whalen, A., D. Cownden, and K. N. Laland. 2015. The learning of action sequences through
social transmission. Animal Cognition 18:1093–1103. doi:10.1007/s10071–015–0877-x.
Wheeler, B. C., and J. Fischer. 2012. Functionally referential signals: a promising paradigm
whose time has passed. Evolutionary Anthropology 21:195–205.
——. 2015. The blurred boundaries of functional reference: a response to Scarantion & Clay.
Animal Behaviour 100:e9–e13, doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2014.11.007.
White, D. J. 2004. Influences of social learning on mate-choice decisions. Learning and Behavior
32:105–113.
White, D. J., and B. G. Galef. 2000. ‘Culture’ in quail: social influences on mate choices of female
Coturnix japonica. Animal Behaviour 59:975–979.
Whitehead, H. 1998. Cultural selection and genetic diversity in matrilineal whales. Science
282:1708–1711.
Whitehead, H., and L. Rendell. 2015. The Cultural Lives of Whales and Dolphins. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Whiten, A. 1998. Imitation of the sequential structure of actions by chimpanzees (Pan
troglodytes). Journal of Comparative Psychology 112:270–281.
——. 2011. The scope of culture in chimpanzees, humans and ancestral apes. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 366:997–1007.
Whiten, A., and R. W. Byrne. 1997. Machiavellian Intelligence II. Extensions and Evaluations.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Whiten, A., and D. Custance. 1996. Studies of imitation in chimpanzees and children. In: Social
Learning in Animals: The Roots of Culture, ed. C. M. Heyes and B. G. Galef Jr. San Diego, CA:
Academic, pp. 291–318.
Whiten, A., and D. Erdal. 2012. The human socio-cognitive niche and its evolutionary origins.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 367:2119–2129.
Whiten, A., and C. P. van Schaik. 2007. The evolution of animal ‘cultures’ and social intelligence.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 363:603–620.

Whiten, A., J. Goodall, W. C. McGrew, T. Nishida, V. Reynolds, Y. Sugiyama, C.E.G. Tutin, et al.
1999. Cultures in chimpanzees. Nature 399:682–685.
Whiten, A., J. Goodall, W. C. McGrew, T. Nishida, V. Reynolds, Y. Sugiyama, C.E.G. Tutin, et al.
2001. Charting cultural variation in chimpanzees. Behaviour 138:1481–1516.
Whiten, A., R. Hinde, K. N. Laland, and C. Stringer. 2011. Introduction. Discussion Meeting issue
‘Culture Evolves,’ ed. A. Whiten, R. A. Hinde, C. B. Stringer, and K. N. Laland. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 366:938–948.
Whiten, A., V. Horne, and S. Marchall-Pescini. 2003. Cultural panthropology. Evolutionary
Anthropology 12:92–105.
Whiten, A., N. McGuigan, S. Marshall-Pescini, and L. M. Hopper. 2009. Emulation, imitation,
overimitation and the scope of culture for child and chimpanzee. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society B 364:2417–2428.
Whiten, A., A. Spiteri, V. Horner, K. E. Bonnie, S. P. Lambeth, S. J. Schapiro, and F.B.M. de Waal.
2007. Transmission of multiple traditions within and between chimpanzee groups. Current
Biology 17:1038–1043.
Williamson, S. H., M. J. Hubisz, A. G. Clark, B. A. Payseur, C. D. Bustamante, and R. Nielsen.
2007. Localizing recent adaptive evolution in the human genome. PLOS Genetics 3:e90,
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.0030090.
Wilson, A. C. 1985. The molecular basis of evolution. Scientific American 253:148–157.
——. 1991. From molecular evolution to body and brain evolution. In: Perspectives on Cellular
Regulation: From Bacteria to Cancer, ed. J. Campisi and A. B. Pardee. New York, NY: John
Wiley/A. R. Liss, pp. 331–340.
Wilson, E. O. 1975. Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——. 1978. On Human Nature. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wingfield, J. C., S. E. Lynn, and K. K. Soma. 2001. Avoiding the ‘costs’ of testosterone: ecological
bases of hormone-behaviour interactions. Brain Behavior and Evolution 57:239–251.
Winterhalder, B., and D. Kennett. 2006. Behavioral ecology and the transition from hunting and
gathering to agriculture. In: Behavioral Ecology and the Transition to Agriculture, ed. D. Kennett
and B. Winterhalder. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, pp. 1–21.
Winterhalder, B., and E. A. Smith. 2000. Analysing adaptive strategies: human behavioral
ecology at twenty-five. Evolutionary Anthropology 9:51–72.
Wisenden, B. D., D. P. Chivers, and R.J.F. Smith. 1997. Learned recognition of predation risk by
damselfly larvae on the basis of chemical cues. Journal of Chemical Ecology 23:137–151.
Witte, K., and R. Massmann. 2003. Female sailfin mollies, Poecilia latipinna, remember males and
copy the choice of others after 1 day. Animal Behaviour 65:1151–1159.
Witte, K., and M. J. Ryan. 2002. Mate choice in the sailfin molly, Poecilia latipinna, in the wild.
Animal Behaviour 63:94–949.
Wollstonecroft, M. 2011. Investigating the role of food processing in human evolution: a niche
construction approach. Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences 3:141–150.
Wolpert, D. M., R. C. Miall, and M. Kawato. 1998. Internal models in the cerebellum. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 2:338–347.
Wood, D., J. S. Bruner, and G. Ross. 1976. The role of tutoring in problem solving. Child
Psychology and Psychiatry 17:89–100.
Wood, L., R. L. Kendal, and E. Flynn. 2012. Context dependent model-based biases in cultural
transmission: children’s imitation is affected by model age over model knowledge state.
Evolution and Human Behavior 104:367–381.
Wright, H. E., Jr. 1977. Environmental change and the origin of agriculture in the Old and New
Worlds. In: Origins of Agriculture, ed. C. A. Reed. The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton, pp. 281–
318.

Wyles, J. S., J. G. Kunkel, and A. C. Wilson. 1983. Birds, behavior, and anatomical evolution.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 80:4394–4397.
Wynn, T., A. Hernandez-Aguilar, L. F. Marchant, and W. C. McGrew. 2011. “An ape’s view of the
Oldowan” revisited. Evolutionary Anthropology 20:181–197.
Yabar, Y., L. Johnston, L. Miles, and V. Peace. 2006. Implicit behavioral mimicry: investigating
the impact of group membership. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior 30:97–113.
Yang, C. 2013. Ontogeny and phylogeny of language. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 110:6323–6327.
Yeakel, J. D., M. M. Pires, L. Rudolf, N. J. Dominy, P. L. Koch, P. R. Guimarães Jr., and T. Gross.
2014. Collapse of an ecological network in ancient Egypt. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA 110:14472–14477.
Young, H. G. 1987. Herring gull preying on rabbits. British Birds 80:630.
Zaidel, D. W. 2013. Cognition and art: the current interdisciplinary approach. WIREs Cognitive
Science 4:431–439.
Zeder, M. A. 2012. The broad spectrum revolution at 40: resource diversity, intensification and
an alternative to optimal foraging explanations.Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
31(3):241–264.
Zeder, M. A. 2016. Domestication as a model system for niche construction theory. Evolutionary
Ecology 30:325–348.
Zeder, M. A., D. G. Bradley, E. Emshwiller, and B. D. Smith, eds. 2006. Documenting
Domestication: New Genetic and Archaeological Paradigms. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Zentall, T. R., and B. G. Galef, eds. 1988. Social Learning: Psychological and Biological Perspectives.
London, UK: Erlbaum.
Ziman, J. 2000. Technological Evolution as an Evolutionary Process. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Zuberbuhler, K. 2005. The phylogenetic roots of language—evidence from primate
communication and cognition. Current Directions in Psychological Science 14: 126–130.

INDEX
Ache, 238
Acheulian, 10, 189
acting, 285–286, 290, 314
action, synchronous, 278–279, 294, 307
adaptation, 17, 35–36, 49, 54, 57, 75, 81–82, 91–92, 96, 107, 134, 158, 180, 182–186, 191–192,
197, 225, 229, 232–233, 234–239, 255, 257–259, 275, 279–282, 286, 300, 307, 313, 318,
320, 353n44, 360n79
agriculture, 10, 190, 223, 232, 241–247, 251, 253–255, 263, 272, 273, 319, 372nn47, 60,
374n101; and loss of biodiversity, 221–222, 231, 262; population growth, 235, 242–243,
248–250, 257, 261, 366n36
AMY1, 223–224
Anthropocene, 235, 262–263
ants: tandem running behaviour of, 161, 167, 354nn61, 65
apprenticeship, 269
archerfish, 40
architecture, 255, 260, 283, 292
art, 10, 13, 283–284, 290, 291–292, 302, 312, 381nn33, 34
association patterns, 47, 110–111, 178, 279, 289
Atlantic molly, 42
attention, joint, 183, 187, 268, 276, 306
Attila the Hun, 255
Atton, Nicola, 35, 83
Axelrod, Robert, 59–62, 64, 65, 333n45
Bandura, Albert, and bobo doll, 51
barley, 63, 245, 271
barter, 270–271
Bateman, Angus, 113
Bateman’s principle, 113
Bateson, Patrick, 279, 287
bees, 22, 49, 127, 128, 161, 162, 167, 177, 238, 295; bumblebees, 9, 35, 39, 74; honeybees, 36,
38–39, 40, 46, 94, 97, 126, 328n50, 382n41
behavioral drive (see cultural drive)
Bickerton, Derek, 178–180, 205–206, 360n93
biodiversity, 250, 261–262
birds, 4, 40–41, 48, 79, 92, 99–100, 102, 110–111, 114–119, 125, 148–149, 156, 262, 295,
324n35, 331n16, 338n14, 341nn85, 90, 343n11, 372n47; migration of, 46; and song, 6, 12,
35, 42, 97, 295, 297, 339n41

blue tits, 35, 39–40, 99
bluehead wrasse, 43
Boesch, Christophe, 9
Boogert, Neeltje, 110
Boyd, Rob, 62, 84, 89, 272, 274, 336n36, 378n64
brain size: absolute, 118, 138, 140, 142, 145, 343n7; relative, 118, 123–124, 138, 140–142,
144–145, 148, 343n7, 346nn60, 65
Brando, Marlon, 285
breeding, cooperative, 167–168, 355n87
Brown, Culum, 48
callitrichid monkeys, 107, 109, 117
capuchin monkeys, 6, 9, 38–39, 78, 102, 139, 143, 150, 151, 170–174, 270, 317, 356nn110, 113
Carib grackles 100
Caro, Tim, 158–161, 353n49
cerebellum, 142, 144–147, 227, 289–290
chaffinches, 2, 35
chariots, 254–255
chickens, cannibalism in, 40
chimpanzees, 2, 4, 9, 11, 15, 16–18, 20–21, 23, 36, 37, 53, 59, 71, 77, 78, 94, 100, 108, 118,
132, 137, 138, 147, 148, 151, 153, 156, 162, 164–165, 178, 189, 214, 227, 270, 295, 297,
324n30, 325n73, 327n116, 344n40, 350nn128, 131, 356nn106, 107, 110, 111, 112 and 113,
369n107; and art contests, 290; comparison with children, 20, 21–22, 24, 170–174
Chomsky, Noam, 176, 192, 196, 360nn79, 80, 361n109
Chudek, Maciej, 275, 378n64
cities, 248, 251–252, 255, 264–265, 272, 373n93
Clayton, Nicky, 293, 298, 383n66
coercion, 265
cognition, 4, 9, 11–14, 19, 26, 35, 61, 79, 97, 126, 138–139, 144, 169, 172–173, 176, 201, 203,
215, 226, 231, 275, 279, 292, 317–321, 339n41, 343n11, 346n60, 364n156; bird, 115, 148;
fish, 83; primate, 28, 78, 134, 208, 344n40, 347n81
commitment: joint, 268
communication, 22–24, 156, 162, 171, 176—183, 191–194, 197, 201, 203–206, 230, 271–272,
360n79, 362n133, 364n156
computers, 2, 257, 284, 380n5, invention of 255; most powerful 285; quantum, 285
conditioning, 47, 380n18; classical, 379n113; operant, 286, 338n24, 380n10
Cook, James, 259–260
cooking, 188, 198, 224–226, 235
Coolen, Isabelle, 79
cooperation: large-scale, 29, 264–265, 268–269, 281
copying: blind, 74; high fidelity, 74, 128, 147, 150–174, 183, 189, 204, 217, 258, 316–317;
mate-choice, 41–42, 226
correspondence problem, 129, 279, 287–288, 291, 293, 295, 299
corvids, 4, 148, 344n34
costly information hypothesis, 84, 86, 89–90
Cownden, Daniel, 68, 198
cross-fostering, 40
cultaptation, 61
culture: collapse of, 232, 370n141; cumulative, 8–11, 90, 152–157, 166–174, 183–186, 189, 217,

260, 265–266, 276, 317–318, 320, 324nn20, 30, 33, 334n59, 336n26, 352nn29, 30, 32,
355nn77–79, 356nn100, 106, 378n70; drive of, 114–120, 123–126, 128, 129, 131, 133,
139–143, 148–149, 150, 168, 174, 183, 194, 208, 276, 279, 317, 341n82, 342n4, 343n11,
344n34, 349n126; evolution of, 3, 61–62, 76, 197, 234–236, 240–241, 243, 249, 254, 255,
257, 261, 275, 283–284, 293, 302, 318, 321, 323nn2, 3, 361n93, 370n1, 374n123, 378n78;
and group selection, 272, 274–276, 278, 281, 384n94; inertia of, 44, 46; intelligence of, 139,
144, 147, 149, 317, 349n108; and memory, 258, 261, 319; seed traits of, 155, 351n27; and
selection for learnability, 197
Cumberbatch, Benedict, 284–285
Curie, Marie, 321
Curio, Ernst, 47
dairy farming, 215–217
dance: animal, 297–298; and the arts, 283–313, astronomical, 297; ballet, 151, 299, 301–302,
306, 308–313, 383n65, 384n111; cha-cha, 308; circle, 303; and clothing, 311; contemporary,
293, 309–311; as display, 305; and film, 312; folk, 301–303, 307, 310; history of, 284,
300–312; inheritance of, 300, 305; Morris, 304; and music, 294–297; paso doble, 308; rave,
304; regulation of, 306; representational, 297; samba, 307; tango, 299, 307; and technology,
283–285, 288, 312–313; waltz, 302–303, 310
dancing: correspondence problems in, 287–288, 291, 293, 295, 299; entrainment to music, 295,
297; and intelligence, 299; and mirrors, 292, 299; Snowball (dancing cockatoo), 295–297,
382n48; and vocal learning and rhythmic synchronization hypothesis, 295–297
Darwin, Charles, 1–2, 11–15, 26, 31–32, 39, 49, 153, 182, 284, 300, 312
Davidson, Morgan, 293
da Vinci, Leonardo, 321
Dawkins, Richard, 154, 323n3, 351n17
Deacon, Terrence, 145, 194, 360n93
Deacon’s rule, 145
Dean, Lewis, 169, 356n96
Deaner, Robert, 138, 346n60
deception, 42, 135–136, 137, 139, 186
de Graaf, Jason, 293
Descartes, René, 12
diabetes, 218, 262
diet, 33–35, 126, 141, 143, 185, 188, 198, 223–224, 229, 237, 348n103, 367n69, 371n34;
breadth of, 129, 133, 135–137, 139, 235, 239, 245, 262, 345nn51, 58; quality of, 129, 135,
143, 147, 185, 317
Dinka, 273–274
discountmachine strategy, 68–72, 75, 131, 333nn46, 48
docility, 276, 281, 378n70
dolphins, 4, 9, 23, 25, 40, 42, 100, 108, 148, 162, 230
domestication: of animals, 7, 10, 223, 235, 241–245, 250, 254, 276, 372n47; of plants, 198, 223,
235, 241, 242–243, 247, 263
dominance, 4, 22, 100, 178
Dugatkin, Lee, 41
Duncan, Isadora, 302, 309, 311, 312, 321
Egypt, ancient, 74, 250–251, 265, 297, 303
elephants, 4, 25, 34, 145, 290, 295, 349n112; Asian, 291; and painting, 290–291, 297,

380nn25–27
emotion, 25, 47, 175, 277, 288, 306, 383n65
Enquist, Magnus, 62, 151, 350n5, 351nn26, 27
Eriksson, Kimmo, 62
European blackbird: mobbing behavior in, 47–48
evolutionary game theory, 58, 89, 94, 332n34
experiments: comparative, 26, 134–135, 138, 146, 156, 183, 215, 295, 316–317, 341n85
exploration, 102, 107, 332n40, 352n28
Facebook, 150, 256
fads, 74, 75, 236, 317
fashion, 6, 74, 75, 236, 282, 284, 292, 310, 311–312, 317
Fazio, Diego, 293
Feldman, Marcus, 62, 210, 217
Fertile Crescent, 245, 249, 261, 372n65
film, 283, 285, 287
fish: experiments with, 41–45, 48, 79–98, 112–113, 117, 335nn5, 18, 340nn65, 66, 68, 72
Fitch, Tecumseh, 192
Fogarty, Laurel, 62, 163, 221
food: choice of, 33–34; cues, 35; processing of, 36–38, 39, 57, 100, 102, 128, 158, 188, 198–199,
224, 238–239, 300, 350n128; production of, 54; sharing of, 20, 79–98, 113–114, 161
foraging: extractive, 109–110, 119, 129, 133, 135, 136, 139, 143, 145, 146, 148, 149, 185, 188,
191, 194, 198, 342n103
FOXP2, 227, 369n110
Franks, Nigel, 161
fruit flies, 9, 27, 41, 59, 71, 74, 119, 126
Galef, Bennett, 32–33, 154, 335n6
gaze: following of, 187, 280
genes: and alleles, 209, 211, 212, 214–225, 233, 364n2, 365nn17, 20, 367n64, 371n8;
alternative splicing of, 17; copy number variation of, 17, 222, 223; deletions of, 16, 226,
368n100; ENCODE, 17; enhancers, 17, 368n100; as expressed in the brain, 18, 209; regulation
of, 26; heat-shock, 224; insertions of, 16; positive selection of, 18, 146, 184, 222, 224, 227,
235, 368n102; promoters, 17, 368n100; and selective sweep, 209, 211, 214, 224, 245, 368n97
gene-culture coevolution, 208–233, 234, 276–277, 281, 367n69, 370nn1, 3
Ghirlanda, Stefano, 62
Gilaki, 228
glacial period, 242
gods, 83, 254, 273, 305
Goodall, Jane, 36, 100, 104–105, 290
gorillas, 22, 24, 147, 150, 177, 178, 198, 208, 227, 350n128; Koko, 24, 177
Graham, Martha, 302, 310, 312, 382n58
great tits, birds, 35, 40, 344n23
Greeks, 74, 245, 250, 252–255, 304
Greenland, 44, 259
group size, 135–139, 141–142, 144, 258, 345n58, 349n107
guppys, 41, 144, 147
Hadza, 237–238
hamadryas baboons, 105

handedness, 210–215, 229, 365nn9–11, 17, 19–22
hatchery, 48
Hauser, Marc, 158–161, 353n49, 360n80
Henrich, Joseph, 258, 275, 350n1
herring gull, 100
Herrmann, Esther, 21
Heyes, Cecilia, 154, 278–279, 384n94
hominins, 10, 15, 18, 20, 145, 189, 191, 198–200, 204–206, 214, 226, 230, 235, 243, 271, 286,
343n11, 363n146
Homo erectus, 10, 18, 188, 217
Homo ergaster, 10
Homo habilis, 18, 188
Homo sapiens, 10, 235, 342n2
honey, 11, 143, 237–238, 266
honeyguide, 238
horseback riding, 254–255
Hrdy, Sarah, 185
Hugo, Victor, 292
human brain: energy cost of, 224, 235
hunter-gatherer, 150, 169, 185, 223, 225, 237–240, 247, 264–266, 273, 371n34
imitation, 9, 24, 51, 52, 74, 129, 131, 134, 144, 147–148, 153, 156, 158, 168, 170, 172–174,
187, 199, 201–204, 208, 230, 269, 272, 276–281, 285–287, 292–295, 297–300, 302, 307,
357n116, 362n133, 363n141, 364n148, 382nn45, 58; and chameleon effect, 277; and
cooperation, 277–278, 307; and mimicry, 277; response facilitation of, 277; simple, 277
Incas, 251–253, 260
infant-directed speech (baby talk, motherese), 195, 277, 280, 353n44, 361nn98, 103
information: bad, 35
innovation, 7, 10, 49, 75, 100–119, 123, 124–126, 131, 133, 135, 143–144, 147–148, 154–155,
157, 204, 230, 240–241, 246, 249, 254–258, 261, 263, 273, 283, 301–302, 308, 310, 313,
319, 335n5, 336n26, 339nn39, 41, 49, 340nn60, 66, 341nn85, 90, 91, 97, 342n103, 373n91;
technical, 56, 146, 348n103
intelligence: artificial, 284, 333n59; general, 8, 27, 28, 79, 92, 110, 118, 123–149, 183, 194,
316–317, 320, 343n7, 346nn60, 65, 347n80; Machiavellian, 135; social, 22, 135, 139, 144,
349n107; technical, 148
Iran, 228, 348n98
irrigation systems, 10, 219, 235, 249–252, 273, 374n101
Japanese carrion crows, 106
Japanese macaques, 36, 38, 59, 71, 77, 100–101, 339n41
jaw muscle, 226
juvenile period, 107, 129, 142, 348n104
Khan, Genghis, 255
Kaplan, Hillard, 142–143
Kayapo, 228
Kendal, Jeremy, 89
Kendal, Rachel, 107, 356n96
kin selection, 164, 264,
Kirby, Simon, 197

Kummer, Hans, 104–105, 107, 110
!Kung San, 240, 371n21
Kwa: speakers of, 218, 220–221, 229, 233
labor: division of, 240–241, 246, 249, 269, 271, 273, 373n79
lactose: tolerance of, 215–217, 222, 229
language, 175–207
law of effect, 103, 338n23
learning: asocial, 49, 54–57, 63, 69–73, 75, 84, 89, 94, 108, 110, 127, 131, 163–164, 182, 280,
331nn18, 25, 355n89, 378n70; sequence, 147, 199, 299–300; vocal, 190, 206, 227, 295, 297
Lefebvre, Louis, 114–118, 135
Lewis, Hannah, 154
libraries, 260, 261
life history: length/longevity of, 7, 26, 118, 131, 133, 142, 231, 348n103, 349n108
Lillicrap, Timothy, 68
lion tamarin, 107, 109, 119, 232
Lonsdorf, Elizabeth, 37
lyrebirds, 297
Machu Picchu, 251, 253
Machiguenga, 238
Magritte, René, 293
maize, 245, 251, 253, 372n60
malaria, 219–222, 233
Maori, 259–260
marmoset, 107, 109, 119, 138
mate choice, 41–42, 182, 226
mathematical models, 8, 27, 49, 55–56, 58, 94, 99, 151, 154–155, 163, 197, 209, 225, 278
Mazandarani, 228
McAuliffe, Katherine, 159–160, 323n5, 354n57
McGrew, William, 36
meerkat, 40, 98, 159–161, 163, 267, 323n5
memory, 12, 131, 148, 260, 275, 321, 350n131; collective, 258, 261, 319; spatial, 22
mental time travel, 69, 75, 129, 131
Mesopotamia, 250, 252–253, 254, 373n93
metacognition, 196
Michelangelo: statue of David, 288
milk bottle-top opening, 35, 99–100, 106
millet, 245
Minsky, Marvin, 284
mismatch, 231–232
money, 5, 19, 61, 62, 256, 271
Monroe, Marilyn, 53
morals, 2, 6, 13, 24–26, 275
Morgan, Conwy Lloyd, 104
Morgan, Thomas, 94, 201, 363n145
mosquitoes, 219–222
motivation, 52, 96, 104, 112, 172, 276, 280–281, 294, 319, 353n44, 357n113
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 321

Mueller, Thomas, 46
multi-armed bandit, 62, 65, 332n38, 333n59
music, 13, 254, 279, 284, 294–297, 302, 305, 307–314, 320, 384n96
MYH16, 226
Myles, Sean, 223
Navarette, Ana, 141
Neanderthals, 10, 214, 226, 368n100
neocortex, 18, 118, 140–141, 144–147, 226, 227, 289, 346n66
neophilia, 104, 107
neophobia, 110
neural network, 66, 146, 287, 289, 291, 307
New Caledonian crows, 9, 11, 98, 154, 230, 324n30
New Zealand, 115, 259–260
niche construction, 125, 190–196, 208, 217, 230–233, 236, 243, 247, 262–263, 367n62
nomadic lifestyle, 225, 239–241, 263
norms, 6, 16, 19, 20, 95, 158, 193, 264, 266–268, 271, 274, 275
Norse, 258–259
Nowak, Martin, 271
Nuer, 273–274
O’Brien, Michael, 221, 242
Odling-Smee, John, 223
Oldowan, 10, 189, 200–201, 203–205, 359n58, 362nn133, 134, 363n146, 364n156
option-bias method, 108
orangutans, 21–22, 100, 138, 227, 270; blowing raspberries, 37; making dolls, 38; traditions of,
37–38, 189
out-of-Africa model of human evolution, 123, 217, 262, 342nn1, 2
overimitation, 53
paper clip, 7–8
parrots, 4, 148, 295, 297, 331n16
perception, 279, 294; auditory, 129–130, 145, 294–295; visual, 129–130, 145, 278
Perry, Susan, 38
perspective-taking, 130, 148, 268, 280
phobias, 49, 224
phylogenetic statistics: comparative, 16, 117, 137–138, 141, 316
plough/plow, 10, 249–251, 253–255
Polynesians, 218, 228, 259–262
predation, 43, 84, 91, 94, 177, 244
prefrontal cortex, 131, 144, 227, 349n113
pre-release training, 48
primate g, 137–140, 142, 147, 345nn55, 58, 59
primates, 2, 9, 14–16, 20, 25, 28, 31, 36, 100, 107, 111, 115–120, 124–127, 132–141, 143–144,
147–149, 171, 176, 183, 191, 227, 276, 316–317, 335n4, 339n50, 342n103, 343n7, 344n40,
346n60, 347nn70, 81, 349nn107, 126
principal components analysis, 136, 345nn58–60, 346n65, 352n32
printing press, 255, 292
prisoner’s dilemma, 59–61
problem solving, 103, 109, 111, 114–120, 137, 140, 227, 232, 276, 324n35

prosociality, 170, 173, 320, 357n116 protolanguage, 23, 180, 188, 193–196, 204–205, 270,
358n34
psychology, 51, 130, 176, 187, 278, 321; comparative, 21, 84; evolutionary, 139, 281, 316, 319;
norm, 275–277, 378n64
public-information use, 79–93, 96–97, 335n10
puzzle-box experiment, 53, 105, 107, 109–110, 170–173, 356nn107, 113
Rambert Dance Company, 293, 298–299, 382n35
Rapoport, Anatol, 60
rats, 12, 31–35, 41–42, 78, 262, 335n6, 350n131
Reader, Simon, 106, 112, 116, 125, 339n41, 340n66, 347n81
reciprocity: indirect, 193, 270, 271, 281, 319
religion, 29, 52, 250, 319
Rendell, Luke, 61, 221
rhesus monkeys: fear of snakes in, 47
Rice, 198, 245
Richardson, Tom, 161
Richerson, Peter, 84, 272, 274, 323n2, 378n64
Rogers, Alan, 49, 55, 56
Rogers’ paradox, 49, 55–56, 71, 72
Romans, 252–253, 255, 274
rook, 100
salmon videos, 48
salt, retention of, 218
scrounging, 356n113
sculpture, and manual dexterity required, 288
sexual selection, 325n63
Shakespeare, William: sonnets of, 175, 321
sickle-cell anaemia, 220–222, 225, 229, 233
sign language: talking apes, 24, 178
Skinner, Burrhus, 103–104
Slagsvold, Tore, 39–40
Smith, Adam, 249
Smith, Bruce, 242
social learning strategies: conform/copy the majority, 94, 96, 130, 274, 280; copy when asocial
learning is costly, 57, 84, 89, 94; copy if dissatisfied, 57, 58, 337n49; copy when uncertain, 45,
57, 58, 89, 94, 95; hill-climbing strategy, 89, 97, 336n26; metastrategy, 95; payoff-based
strategy, 59, 63–64, 67, 68, 70, 71–74, 89, 90, 94, 96, 98, 127, 130, 332nn25, 42, 352n29
social learning strategies tournament, 74–75, 78, 98, 127, 131, 157, 183, 236, 316, 334n59,
378n70
society: matrilocal, 228; and networks, 150, 356n100; and rank, 110, 111, 356n107; and
tolerance, 129, 131–132, 170, 276, 281
Sol, Daniel, 115
specialization, adaptive, 81–82, 86, 92, 372n47
St Andrews, 1, 45, 198
starch: consumption of, 198
Stearns, Stephen, 228
Steininger, Fritz, 32

Stewart, Jimmy, 287
sticklebacks: ninespine, 79–97, 335n10; threespine, 79–97, 335n10
stone tools, 10, 26, 185, 188, 189, 199–205, 208, 214, 218, 359n58; knapping of, 199, 201–205,
208, 214, 283, 362n133, 364n151, and stone flakes, 10, 185, 199, 201–202, 214, 359n58,
362n133, 363n140; and toolmaking, 199–201, 203, 205, 362nn133, 134, 363n147
Streep, Meryl, 285
Street, Sally, 141, 348n94
Striedter, Georg, 145
Strimling, Pontus, 163
suicide, 53, 284
sweet potato washing, 36, 107, 339n41
symbolism, 17, 23–24, 176, 181, 184, 187, 192, 194–199, 205, 272, 274, 281, 292, 304, 306,
318, 358n35, 360n93, 362n133
syntax, 24, 194–198, 358n34, 360n93
Tasmania, 258
teaching: definition of, 5, 28, 157–158, 159
technology, 3, 7–10, 27, 56, 151–152, 154, 157 174, 200–205, 224, 236, 240, 241, 248, 254,
258, 283–285, 312, 315, 320, 325n48, 359n58, 362n133, 370n1, 71n34
Terrace, Herbert, 178, 327n116
terracing, 251–252, 254, 264
The Imitation Game, 284
theatre, 176, 283, 287, 312
theory of mind, 20, 129, 130, 196, 280
Thorndike, Edward, 103, 338n23
Thornton, Alec, 159–160, 354nn57, 58
three ages of adaptive evolution, 234
tit-for-tat, 60
Tomasello, Michael, 20, 152–154, 156, 174, 206, 357n116
tools: use of, 9, 22, 28, 119, 129, 132, 133, 135, 137, 139, 143, 145–149, 191, 201, 205, 208,
230, 316, 318, 321, 324n35, 342nn101, 103, 349n108
trade, 5, 193, 249, 255, 266, 269–271, 377n36
tradition, 13, 28, 74, 174, 224, 272, 274, 293, 298, 302, 304, 359n58, 372n51, 382n34; animal,
2, 9, 11, 33–45, 48, 77, 139, 143, 153, 169, 189, 230, 266, 356n110; spoken, 259–260, 319
transmission chain experiment, 197
Tupia, 259
Turing, Alan, 284–285, 321
twins, 210–213, 365n11
Uomini, Natalie, 201
urban living, disease resistance in, 219
vacuole-protein genes, 227–228
van Bergen, Yfke, 87, 135, 342n103
van Schaik, Carel, 132, 347n81
vervet monkeys: calls of, 22
video games, 52–53
Vikings, 44, 301
violence, 51–53
virtuous circle, 278

Vygotsky, Lev, 176
Wallace, Alfred, 13, 206
Warner, Robert, 43–44, 46
Watson, Thomas, 257
Webster, Michael, 82, 90, 92, 96, 335n10
Whalen, Andrew, 198
whales, 27, 42, 61, 100, 145, 148, 343n7, 344n34, 349n112; humpback, 42–43, 148; killer, 9,
40, 42, 148, 230
wheat, 36, 198, 245, 253, 254
wheel, 10, 106, 237, 250–251, 254–255, 319
white-crowned sparrows, 35
Whiten, Andrew, 37, 154
Wiebe, Karen, 39–40
Wilkins, Clive, 293
Williams, Kerry, 44
Wilson, Allan, 17, 114–119, 123–128, 131, 133–135, 139, 143, 148, 149, 168, 174, 210, 231,
279, 341nn82, 90, 342nn1, 4, 343n11, 350n131
Wilson, Edward, 36, 229
wood crickets, 34, 59, 71, 74, 126
World Wide Web, 106, 260, 283
Xavante Indians, 228
yams: cultivation of, 218, 220–222, 262
Y-chromosomes, 228

