 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Beyond Buddhist Apology 
  
The Political Use of Buddhism by Emperor Wu of the 
Liang Dynasty (r.502-549) 
 
 
Tom De Rauw 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To my daughter Pauline, 
the most wonderful distraction one could ever wish for 
 
 
 
and to my grandfather, 
a cakravartin who ruled his own private universe 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
 
 
 
Although the writing of a doctoral dissertation is an individual 
endeavour in nature, it certainly does not come about from the 
efforts of one individual alone. The present dissertation owes much 
of its existence to the help of the many people who have guided my 
research over the years. My heartfelt thanks, first of all, go to Dr. 
Ann Heirman, who supervised this thesis. Her patient guidance has 
been of invaluable help. Thanks also to Dr. Bart Dessein and Dr. 
Christophe Vielle for their help in steering this thesis in the right 
direction. I also thank Dr. Chen Jinhua, Dr. Andreas Janousch and 
Dr. Thomas Jansen for providing me with some of their research and 
for sharing their insights with me. My fellow students Dr. Mathieu 
Torck, Leslie De Vries, Mieke Matthyssen, Silke Geffcken, Evelien 
Vandenhaute, Esther Guggenmos, Gudrun Pinte and all my good 
friends who have lent me their listening ears, and have given steady 
support and encouragement. To my wife, who has had to endure an 
often absent-minded husband during these first years of marriage, I 
acknowledge a huge debt of gratitude. She was my mentor in all but 
the academic aspects of this thesis. To my mother, who has always 
encouraged my academic explorations and inquired into the progress 
of my research with the same enthusiasm she would undoubtedly 
have shown if I had chosen to pursue the career of a circus clown, I 
can only bow in reverence. Finally, I would like to extend my 
gratitude to the institutions that provided the indispensable financial 
means to conduct this research: the Research Foundation – Flanders 
(FWO) and Ghent University. And of course you, the reader, for 
taking the time to peruse this work that lies before you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………..1 
 
 
CHAPTER I: 
EMPEROR WU’S ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE  
CONFUCIAN AND DAOIST TRADITIONS……………………….................6 
 
 
I.1. Emperor Wu and the Confucian Tradition………………………6 
 
I.2. Emperor Wu and the Daoist Tradition………………………….25 
 
I.3. Assessment…………………………………………………….....36 
 
CHAPTER II: 
CREATING A FOUNDATION OF LEGITIMACY: 
REINVENTING THE IDEOLOGY OF EMPERORSHIP……………….…..40 
 
 
II.1. The bodhisattva ideal……………………………………..…….40 
 
II.2. Final [Period of the] Dharma (mofa)…………………………...56 
II.2.1. The Final [Period of the] Dharma at the time of  
Liang Wudi……….……………………………………..……59 
 
 
II.2.2. Use of the terms jidai and modai…………………...69 
 
 
II.2.3. Emperor Wu and his application of mofa thought..84 
 
CHAPTER III: 
APPLICATION OF THE NEW BUDDHIST IMPERIAL 
IDEOLOGY IN SOCIETY: KARMIC RETRIBUTION……………………….90 
 
 
III.1. The theory of karmic retribution……………………………….91 

v 
 
 
 
 
III.1.1. Transfer of merit in Buddhist thought……………..92 
 
 
III.1.2. The debates on the existence of the soul and  
karmic retribution………………………………….....97 
 
 
III.1.3. Merit as ideology………………….……………….123 
 
III.2. The promotion of vegetarianism……..………………………167 
 
CHAPTER IV: 
WHERE SECULAR AND SACRED MEET: COOPERATION 
AND OPPOSITION WITHIN THE SAṂGHA…...………………………….186 
 
 
IV.1. Liang Wudi’s attempts to control the saṃgha…...…………186 
 
 
IV.1.1. Personal advisors………………………………….187 
 
 
IV.1.2. Monks of the [Imperial] Family (jiaseng)………..191 
 
IV.2. Cooperation and opposition: two case studies…………....197 
 
 
IV.2.1. Baochang………………………………….……….197 
 
 
IV.2.2. Zhizang………………………………………..……211 
 
CONCLUSION……………………………………………...………………...220 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY……………………………………………………………...232 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
 

1 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
When Xiao Yan 蕭衍 (464-549) ascended the throne of the Liang 梁 
(502-557) Dynasty as Emperor Wu 武 (r.502-549), he was faced with 
some huge challenges. First was the problem of legitimacy. Emperor Wu 
had seized power from one of his kinsmen, Xiao Baorong 蕭寶融 (488-
502), in revenge for the murder of his older brother. According to traditional 
Chinese political theory, that would make Emperor Wu a usurper, as the 
founder of a new dynasty had to come from outside the imperial family. 
Aside from his personal problem of legitimation, he inherited an empire 
that was marked by centuries of devolution, which had started with the 
disintegration of the Han. The political reality of the time was that the 
emperors of the Southern courts did not possess any real authority, but 
were in fact no more than a primus inter pares, ruling by the grace and 
with the support of their fellow literati. There was a delicate equilibrium of 
power in which the elite of literati families was dependent on the existing 
Confucian political system (with the emperor as a nominal figure head) for 
their titles, salaries and legitimacy to govern over society. The emperor in 
turn needed these powerful literati families to support his claim on the 
throne. This co-dependence was a constant feature, even though the 
equilibrium often shifted to favour different families at different times. 
Emperor Wu was not the first Southern Dynasties emperor who tried to 
restore the imperial authority. What seemed to make him somewhat more 
effective than his predecessors, was his unique ability to make reforms in 
the political, cultural and religious realm which tied different modes of 
thought together in such an innovative way that it positioned him as 
ultimate head of a new cosmic order. I am in no way suggesting that 
Emperor Wu succeeded in becoming an autocratic ruler by his own right, 

2 
 
but his amazing skill in reforming state ideology does seem to have 
brought considerable (if temporary) stability and prosperity to his realm. 
In this thesis, I will take a closer look at the tactics used by Emperor 
Wu to reinvent the imperial persona. Despite his reputation amongst later 
Buddhist and Confucian historiographers, Emperor Wu was not as single-
mindedly Buddhist as he is sometimes portrayed to be. He continued to 
fulfil his Confucian duties as head of state and even made concerted 
efforts to revive the faltering Confucian tradition. Although he is often 
stigmatized as a persecutor of Daoism, we will show that there is little 
basis to this claim. In fact he lavishly sponsored the Daoist community on 
Mao Shan and relied on the medical and alchemical expertise of some of 
its most respected exponents. But emperor Wu was a pragmatic politician, 
and he realized when he ascended the throne that, if he continued down 
the path of his forerunners, his rule would probably end as untimely as 
theirs. In the practical matters of bureaucracy and legislation there was no 
viable alternative to the traditional Confucian system. Yet Emperor Wu 
also realised that to continue in his role as Confucian head of state would 
for ever leave him in a vulnerable position, as he was essentially 
dependant on the Confucian tradition, dominated by the literati families, for 
his prestige as emperor. For this reason he set out to reform the imperial 
ritual in such a way so as to create his own legitimacy as a ruler, 
independent from the existing system. Fully realising the precariousness of 
his position, Emperor Wu made the first steps towards independent 
legitimacy in the field of Confucian ritual. He ordered the compilation of a 
ritual code that would link him directly to the idealized rituals of the Zhou, 
and return the prerogative of determining proper conduct and ceremony to 
the imperial figure. Despite this small revival of Confucian scholarship, it 
was clear from the start that Buddhism was set up to play the most 
prominent role in Emperor Wu’s reforms. For the day of the coronation 
ceremony, he chose the eighth day of the fourth month. By the early sixth 
century, this date was already widely recognized among Buddhists as the 

3 
 
birthday of Śākyamuni Buddha. As such, his coronation ceremony was 
nothing more than a representation of the birth of a Buddha into this world. 
In the first chapter I shall examine Liang Wudi’s attitude towards the 
Confucian and Daoist tradition. 
In Emperor Wu’s Buddhist reform of imperial ideology three 
concepts played an important role: (1) the bodhisattva ideal, linked to a 
new view on emperorship; (2) the Buddhist concept of mofa (the decline of 
the Buddhist Teaching); and (3) the process of karmic retribution. These 
three elements were all part of a single imperial Buddhist ritual program, 
but each of them worked on a different level. The bodhisattva ideal was 
meant to remould the imperial persona into a saviour figure. After decades 
of constant warfare, most people were preoccupied with survival, not with 
who was on the throne. Moreover in the traditional Confucian ritual, an 
emperor was elevated far above the common people, and as such there 
was no direct contact between them. Everything had to be mediated by the 
literati. In order to make contact with his subjects directly, Emperor Wu 
would organise large assemblies which everyone was free to attend, from 
commoner to aristocracy. At these assemblies, the emperor would strip 
himself of his imperial regalia and don a monastic robe.  
The concept of mofa was Emperor Wu’s legitimation for asserting 
his control over the Buddhist saṃgha. He claimed that in the final period of 
the Buddhist Teaching, when monks and nuns have lost their way and 
commit grave sins, it was up to the wise ruler of state to correct their 
behaviour. 
In chapter two I will show how these two elements of legitimation in 
Emperor Wu’s Buddhist reform were theorised and how they played out in 
reality. 
The third chapter deals with the concept of karmic retribution. The 
idea that one’s actions would have direct consequences for oneself and for 
other was at once meant to create a sense of hope among his people, as 
well as a new found unity. After he had successfully pushed his view on 

4 
 
the existence of an enduring self that travel from one existence to another, 
Emperor Wu had the theoretical means to start implementing it. In his 
capacity as bodhisattva emperor, he would set up many initiatives of 
meritorious work in order to accumulate merit for the state and its people. 
His large assemblies functioned as fund-raisers to pay for all of these 
initiatives. 
One thing that made Emperor Wu’s reforms in imperial ritual and 
ceremony so successful was his obsession with scriptural authority. Both 
in the field of Confucianism and Buddhism, Emperor Wu ordered the 
collection and cataloguing of texts. In his reforms, he made sure to have 
ample reference to historic precedent from these scriptures. While it was 
his prerogative as emperor to make changes in Confucian state ritual, he 
was faced with the rift that existed between those that lived outside this 
world to pursue religious goals and those who lived in the world. As the 
direct descendants of Buddha, the saṃgha was the bearer of the scriptural 
authority Emperor Wu needed. As he was no monk, Emperor Wu could not 
make decisions on the authority of a scripture. For that reason the success 
of the appropriation of Buddhist elements for his political goals hinged on 
four factors: (1) His ability to study and survey as many of the Buddhist 
scriptures as he could to make sure that no usable elements went 
unnoticed, and that no conflicting elements remained undetected which 
could be used to undermine his projected image; (2) His ability to rally the 
support of influential, learned monks to help him in this endeavours and to 
provide him with the necessary sanction for his interpretations; (3) His 
ability to control the Buddhist saṃgha in order to make it do his bidding; (4) 
His ability to tie all of the different elements, which were often taken out of 
context, together with an irrefutable internal logic. This would leave him 
vulnerable to attack from both political opponents and Buddhist monks 
who were not happy with the increased politization of, and corresponding 
meddling in their religion. In chapter four I shall explore the ways in which 

5 
 
Emperor sought to assert his control over the monastic community, 
starting from two case studies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
EMPEROR WU’S ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE CONFUCIAN AND 
DAOIST TRADITIONS 
 
 
I.1. Emperor Wu and the Confucian tradition 
 
 
Confucian and modern Chinese historians have often depicted the 
Southern Dynasties as examples of weak and ineffective government.1 
The cause for this, they reckoned, was the abeyance of Confucian values, 
which was the result of the ruling elite’s preoccupation with frivolous 
pursuits such as literature, philosophical speculation (most importantly 
xuanxue 玄學and Buddhism), “pure conversation” (qingtan 清談), and the 
lofty ideal of reclusion, which implied a complete withdrawal from active 
political life.2
 
 But, as C. Holcombe has stated in his attempt to revaluate 
the Period of Division (A.D. 220-589), even though the collapse of the Han 
Dynasty in 220 liberated thought from the constraints of Han (Confucian) 
orthodoxy 
the Neo-Taoist metaphysical interests of third- and fourth-
century Chinese gentlemen caused few if any of them to 
reject Confucianism. They simply superimposed their new 
interests as an additional and higher layer over the traditional 
Confucian substrate. The Confucian classics remained the 
                                                 
1 For some selected references to sources asserting this opinion, see Holcombe, 1994: 128. 
2 For more on qingtan, see further in this chapter. For more on the ideal of reclusion, see 
Berkowitz, 2000. 

7 
 
foundation of all education, and Confucian virtues stood 
unchallenged. But hsüan-hsüeh thinkers had higher, cosmic 
principles in mind that caused them to reevaluate the 
importance of political activity, traditionally the focus of 
Confucian attention, and relegate it to a subsidiary position.3
 
 
One could add to Holcombe’s statement that just as the Neo-Daoist 
metaphysical interests of medieval Chinese gentlemen did not cause them 
to reject Confucianism, neither did their interest in Buddhism. Despite the 
changing conception of political responsibilities, it was the Confucian state 
that provided the literati families with the sanction of legitimacy. And even 
though the monopolisation of higher offices by the powerful literati families 
made possible a high degree of independence from imperial interference, 
they still relied on their official positions within the state bureaucracy for 
their privileged position in society.4
Before we turn to Emperor Wu’s endeavours in the Confucian 
sphere, let us take a closer look at the literati’s general stance towards 
Confucian values at the time of Emperor Wu. For this we have an 
important contemporary document at our disposal, namely the Yanshi 
jiaxun 顏氏家訓 (Family Instructions for the Yan Clan), written by Yan 
Zhitui 顏之推 (531-591 CE).
 The emperor, from his part, needed the 
sanction of his fellow members of the elite to support his claim on the 
throne. This is undoubtedly a major reason why Emperor Wu, despite his 
illustrious devotion to Buddhism, was also a great patron of the Confucian 
tradition. 
5
                                                 
3 Holcombe, 1994: 93. 
 This is the earliest complete example of the 
traditional instructions left behind for one’s family members by a pater 
4 Holcombe, 1994: 72. See also Kuhn, 1991: 485. 
5 For a full translation of this work into English, see Teng Ssu-yü, 1968. For more on its 
author, see Dien, 1962. 

8 
 
familias close to his death.6 In these family instructions, Yan Zhitui lays the 
most emphasis on a thorough education in the Chinese Classics, since he 
sees this as the foundation for proper conduct and a prerequisite for 
having any chance of a career in civil office. The latter attitude betrays a 
certain degree of pragmatism embedded in the Confucian traditionalism of 
the literati families. 7 This pragmatic streak of Yan Zhitui can be found 
throughout his Instructions, as he also warns his descendents against 
becoming soldiers or marrying into powerful families, and urges them to 
settle for middle ranks in office in order to avoid sticking out from a crowd, 
for this could be very dangerous in the unstable times of the Northern and 
Southern Dynasties.8 As much as Yan Zhitui’s instructions are drenched in 
traditional Confucian values with regards to all aspects of family life, 
education, customs and manners, and public service, he is not blind to the 
realities of human nature. In chapter eleven, entitled “Shewu 涉務 (Taking 
care of practical affairs)”, Yan Zhitui criticizes the excesses of the literati 
community, which was according to him “to a great extent absurd, 
pompous, and ignorant of worldly affairs.” 9 Their indifference to self-
cultivation and duty undermined the very foundation on which their 
superior social status was based, for in theory their occupation with the 
perfection of oneself in the pursuit of becoming superior gentlemen was 
what gave them the privilege to govern over society as a whole.10
                                                 
6 See Dien, 1962: 44, and Teng Ssu-yü, 1968: x, note 1 and 2 for references. 
 If the 
7 Although Yan Zhitui glorifies men of great learning who, despite their failure to attain an 
official appointment to office, are praiseworthy for their high standard of self-cultivation, he 
stresses the importance of a good Confucian education as an insurance for making a living in 
troubled times: “Those who have learning or skill can settle down anywhere. 有學藝者，觸地
而安。[…] Whoever can keep steadily at work on a few hundred volumes will, in the end, 
never remain a common person. 若能常保數百卷書，千載終不為小人也。” (Teng Ssu-yü, 
1968: 54) 
8 Teng Ssu-yü, 1968: 126-130. 
9 Teng Ssu-yü, 1968: 115. 
10 Holcombe demonstrates how the cultural ideal of private rigorous self-cultivation was 
compatible with active public service. The ‘True Man (junzi 君子)’ governs others by his moral 

9 
 
key to literati power was their “aura of cultural superiority”, as M. Rogers 
calls it,11
Emperor Wu was not blind to this situation either. The recruitment of 
government officials through the Nine Ranks (jiu pin 九品) system
 this aura had lost a lot of its lustre over the centuries. 
12
                                                                                                                
example and personal virtue, so within Confucian society, personal cultivation is actually a 
crucial requirement for public service, even if on the surface it makes someone appear 
indifferent to it. See Holcombe, 1994: 125-134. 
 had 
brought about a gravely impaired bureaucracy since by this time virtually 
all higher offices were monopolised by members from powerful literati 
families who were more concerned with there own family interests and 
indulgences than with the affairs of state, while the day to day running of 
affairs was left to the lowest of officials. Fully realising the precariousness 
of his position, Emperor Wu did not confront his political adversaries head-
on through a series of institutional reforms, but, as illustrated by Andreas 
Janousch, he sought to revive the centrality and prestige of the imperial 
11 Rogers, 1968: 56. 
12 The Nine Ranks system was created by Cao Cao 曹操 (155-220) and institutionalized 
during the Wei  魏kingdom (220-265 CE) as a modified version of the Han selection system 
for government officials. During the Han dynasty local officials were expected to recommend 
candidates for office from their local area, based on “public opinion” of the candidate’s 
reputation. Under the Nine Ranks system, officials called ‘arbiters (zhongzheng 中正)’ were 
appointed by the court with the sole task of evaluating possible candidates within their 
jurisdiction, and ranking them on a scale from one to nine. Appointments to office were then 
made on the basis of these ratings. Shortly after it was initiated, the political instability of the 
times, and the inevitable resulting decentralisation, caused the court to lose its grip on the 
Nine Ranks system. Consequently control over the official selection process shifted from the 
court and local administration towards the members of the official class themselves. Needles 
to say that this led to much abuse, as the members of the official class started closing their 
ranks to newcomers and essentially became an hereditary elite which basically looked after 
its own interests, and where the rank of an individual was determined by family descent and 
intermarriage between powerful clans. The Nine Ranks system was in operation throughout 
the Southern dynasties until it was finally abolished by the Sui emperor Wen in 583 CE. For 
more on the Nine Ranks system, see Holzman, 1957; Miyazaki, 1956. See also Grafflin, 1990: 
146-148; Jansen, 2000: 33-34; Holcombe, 1994: 77-81; Lee, 2000: 123-131. 

10 
 
institution through changes in the realm of culture and ritual.13
Looking at the practical measures first, one notices that Emperor 
Wu’s efforts of institutional reform were mainly limited to the restructuring 
of the educational system and, paired with that, the opening up of lower 
and middle rank offices to men of humble origin (xiaoren 小人).
 As will be 
argued later on, Buddhism was to play the lead role in these innovations 
for the reason that it would allow Emperor Wu to circumvent the literati in 
his claim to supreme authority. But Emperor Wu was shrewd enough as a 
politician to realise that these changes could not be effected abruptly over 
night. Since both emperor and literati traditionally drew legitimacy and 
status from the Confucian tradition in a complementary way, Emperor Wu 
started out his mandate with serious efforts to revive the faltering 
Confucian tradition in order to consolidate his throne and strengthen the 
administrative offices by the infusion of capable, motivated and trustworthy 
officials. 
14
                                                 
13 Janousch, 1998. 
 Emperor 
Wu did not attempt to abolish the existing Nine ranks system altogether, as 
he could not risk turning the powerful families against him. However, he 
14  By this time the ranking of eminent literati families had already been solidified in 
genealogies (baijia pu 百家譜), which meant that all but the lowest ranks were virtually closed 
off to newcomers. While those with enough money to bribe there way (higher) into a falsified 
genealogy could still gain access to these higher social strata, most families not included in 
these lists were condemned to the lower offices, if any were given to them at all. These lower 
class literati families were designated as hanmen 寒門 (Cold gate families), referring to their 
limited career possibilities and the accompanying impoverishment. Military families were also 
often of the hanmen group, as military activities were regarded as inferior. Those families who 
fell out of the Nine Ranks system all together were called shuren 庶人 (commoner), or were 
disdainfully labelled xiaoren 小人 (inferior men). The xiaoren may not have shared in the 
status and privileges of the higher ranking families, but they still enjoyed a family education in 
the Confucian tradition, which gave them access to jobs within the official administration such 
as junior-secretary (lingshi 令史), head-clerk (zhushu 主書) and so on. For more on the 
development of the family classifications, see Grafflin, 1990. Also see Kuhn, 1991: 480-488. 
For the genealogies, see Johnson, 1977: 36f. 

11 
 
did try to correct its most flagrant abuses. 15 To him, this meant leaving the 
influential literati families in the highest offices well enough alone, but at 
the same time setting up state schools for those of humble origin to 
receive a thorough education that would prepare them for public service. 
Emperor Wu’s preference for placing these “inferior men” in the non-
ceremonious positions where the daily practical affairs were handled 
apparently earned him some sneers from men of status who concealed 
their shortcomings in administrative duties by engaging in so-called “pure 
(qing 清)” activities.16 Yan Zhitui, in his Family Instructions, sticks up for 
Emperor Wu, praising him for his insightfulness, and then goes on to once 
more criticize the parasitic literati who had been drawing their salaries for 
generations without contributing anything in public service.17 The reform 
and revival of the institutions of Confucian learning under Emperor Wu has 
been examined by A. Janousch. 18 He concludes that these institutions 
were quite different from the ones established during the preceding two 
dynasties as they targeted a much larger social group, now including 
members from the lower ranks, they were in continuous operation 
throughout the dynasty, they were run by officially appointed scholars as 
opposed to the private initiatives of independent scholars in the previous 
Southern dynasties, and the subjects taught at these institutions were 
once again focussed on the Confucian classics. While the Imperial 
University (Taixue 太學) and the School of National Youth (Guozi xue 國子
學)19
                                                 
15 One decree ordered a change in the age requirements for holding certain offices (see Liang 
shu 1: 22-23), but there is no clear evidence to prove that these constraints on office holding 
were lived up to.  
 continued in the line of tradition with a broad curriculum of which 
16 These pure activities involved xuanxue and Buddhist metaphysical speculation, conducted 
through the medium of “pure conversation (qingtan 清談)”. See Holcombe, 1994: 78. 
17 Teng Ssu-yü, 1968: 114-117. 
18 Janousch, 1998: 60-68. 
19 The School of National Youth was essentially an elite university for the male descendents 
of the ruling class. There was thus a theoretical distinction between two classes of students 

12 
 
Confucian studies was only one,20 the School of Five Halls (Wuguan 五官), 
newly founded in 505,21 was dedicated exclusively to the study of the Five 
Classics.22 It is remarkable that the Erudites of the Five Classics (Wujing 
boshi 五經博士) appointed to run this institution all came from lower 
ranking families and had previously filled lowly positions in the Liang 
military hierarchy.23 This is already a reflection of Emperor Wu’s intention 
for creating this school, namely the recruitment of trained officials of lower 
rank, more likely to be grateful for the opportunity they have been 
handed.24 Most of the graduates from the School of Five Halls joined the 
clerical offices (li 吏), which were more concerned with the practical aspect 
of administration than the more prestigious offices (guan 官).25 Despite 
Emperor Wu’s attempts to further undermine the Nine Ranks system by a 
renewal of the examination process, hoping thereby to redirect the 
emphasis back on scholarly achievement instead of pedigree, he was 
never able to bar the influential literati families from their hereditary 
offices.26
                                                                                                                
where one had access to a better education. In reality this distinction often proved impractical 
to apply, which meant that students of the Imperial University and the School of National 
Youth used the same campus and most likely had the same educational opportunities. Male 
members of the imperial family usually attended the School of National Youth, as did those of 
Emperor Wu, upon its establishment in 508 (Liang shu, 3: 49). See Lee, 2000: 59. 
 The most he could hope to achieve was to force a wedge in their 
20 Subjects taught at the University were: Confucian studies (ruxue 儒學), Mysterious 
Learning (xuanxue 玄學, comprising the study of the Book of Changes, the Laozi and the 
Zhuangzi), historical studies (shixue 史學), literary studies (wenxue 文學), medicine (yixue 醫
學), and as an addition of the Liang in 505, legal studies (lüxue 律學). See Lee, 2000: 60-61. 
21 Liang shu, 3: 96. 
22 The Five Classics are the Book of Changes (Yijing 易經), the Book of Odes (Shijing 詩經), 
the Book of Documents (Shujing 書經), the Spring and Autumn Annals (Chunqiu 春秋), and 
the Book of Rites (Liji 禮記). 
23 Janousch, 1998: 67. 
24 The Imperial University was open only to students of families with an official rank of 5 and 
above. Nan Qi shu, 9: 145. 
25 Liang shu, 48: 662. See Janousch, 1998: 66. 
26 See Janousch, 1998: 68-73; 80. 

13 
 
closed ranks to offer the lower ranking families a chance to rise in the 
imperial bureaucracy, thus giving the impression that the bestowal of rank 
in office was an imperial favour, when in reality it remained for a large part 
a privilege of birth. Janousch argues that the infusion of lower rank officers 
into the bureaucracy, promoted on the basis of merit, must have put 
pressure on the higher officers to clean up their act and brush up on their 
knowledge. Due to the limited scope of the traditional historiography, which 
would have focused only on those who were in favour with the emperor, 
this claim however is hard to verify.27
As another sample of Emperor Wu’s political realism, the Liang shu 
contains an edict that calls for the drafting of new genealogies (jiapu 家
譜).
  
28
Emperor Wu’s efforts to undermine the influential literati families’ 
monopoly of higher offices might have more to do with streamlining the 
bureaucratic apparatus than with actually seizing power from them. From 
the descriptions given to us by Yan Zhitui, it seems that these families kept 
far from anything that came close to political and administrative duties, and 
one may wonder just how powerful in a political sense they actually were. 
They certainly exerted a lot of social influence through their status as 
‘superior gentlemen (junzi 君子)’, as their purported preoccupation with 
self-cultivation and moral perfection was what gave them the privilege and 
 If he could not stop the established families from monopolising the 
higher offices, he could always try to weed out the elements in the 
genealogies which had crept in through bribery and falsification of records. 
The degree in which Emperor Wu’s institutional reforms were successful at 
achieving their aim is still a matter of debate, but this sort of damage 
control operation gives us the idea that the appointment to office remained 
basically a matter of family descent until the final abolition of the Nine 
ranks system in 583. 
                                                 
27 Janousch, 1998: 71-73. 
28 Liang shu, 1: 22-23. 

14 
 
the right to govern over society as a whole.29 However, the fact that they 
were often able to survive the rapid changes of regime during the Period of 
Division suggests that they were not too involved with court politics unless 
it directly concerned their privileged status.30 During the Period of Division 
the power of an emperor was severely limited in a political, but also in a 
geographical sense. Geographical fragmentation meant that many of the 
more remote provinces plotted an individual course. Even the appointment 
of members of the imperial household to the position of provincial governor 
(cishi 刺史), which put them in charge of the armies stationed in the 
provinces, did not mean de facto control over these regions. This was 
demonstrated by the rebellion of Hou Jing 侯景 (d. 552),31
                                                 
29 Their program of self-cultivation and education did not merely involve Confucian studies. 
Xuanxue and Buddhism had also become an important aspect of their aura as guardians of 
the high cultural values. As Emperor Wu recognized the limitations of his role as emperor in 
the traditional Confucian system, he adopted a new strategy which would place Buddhism at 
the top of the list, which would free him up to assume a whole new role as head of state, and 
concurrently make the literati’s cultural status subjugated to his own. 
 when many of 
30 Holcombe, 1994: 129. 
31 Hou Jing was a general of the Eastern Wei 東魏 (534-550). When his good friend and ally 
Gao Huan 高歡 (496-547, founder of the Eastern Wei) was on his deathbed, he received a 
summon which he suspected was a forgery by Gao Huan’s son, Cheng 澄 (521-549). Cheng 
had become wary of Hou Jing’s strength as by this time he commanded an army of one 
hundred thousand men, and wanted to strip him of his power. Hou Jing decided to seek 
refuge in the rival Western Wei 西魏 (534-556), but when it became clear that they did not 
trust him either and demanded him to relinquish control over his forces and territory, he 
turned to Emperor Wu of the Liang for help, even though as a general of the Eastern Wei he 
had often made plans to abduct the emperor and make him abbot of the Taiping 太平 
monastery (Nanshu, 80: 1993-4). Emperor Wu accepted Hou Jing’s defection against the 
advice of his officials, and commissioned an army to aid Hou Jing in 548. However, this army, 
under the command of Emperor Wu’s nephew Xiao Yuanming 蕭淵明 (d. 556), suffered a 
catastrophic defeat in which the latter was captured and most of Hou Jing’s soldiers 
surrendered or deserted. Startled by this turn of events, Emperor Wu quickly sent an envoy to 
the Eastern Wei to make peace. Hou Jing was distrustful of these negotiations and forging a 
letter in the name of the Wei court, he discovered that Emperor Wu would be willing to 
exchange him for Xiao Yuanming. Thereupon Hou Jing decided on pre-emptive action 

15 
 
the emperor’s relatives stood by and watched, waiting for the opportune 
moment to take a shot at the throne.32
This does not mean that an emperor did not have any power at all. 
As a ceremonious ruler he was the source of the literati’s claim to 
existence, and the belief that the proper ritual and ceremony should be 
performed correctly in order for the country to be at peace was very real. 
That’s why Emperor Wu also committed to the task of reviving and 
updating the court ritual to the contemporary social condition, thus 
repairing the link to the sacred past of the Zhou ritual (Zhou li 周禮).
 
33 
Shortly after his ascension of the throne in 502, Emperor Wu ordered the 
compilation of a definitive ritual codex, stating in his decree that the 
division of the country and the strife among the families had come about 
because ritual (li禮) and music (yue 樂) had been deficient for a long time. 
Previous attempts at recompilation and revision of the rituals by some of 
his predecessors had all failed miserably because, in the opinion of 
Emperor Wu, the men who were assigned to this task were all selected on 
the basis of personal feelings rather than on account of advancement in 
scholarship.34
                                                                                                                
against the Liang and launched his rebellion which lasted until 552 and lay much of the 
country to waste. For more on Hou Jing and his rebellion, see Liang shu, 56: 833-863; Nan 
shi, 80: 1993-2017; Zizhi tongjian 資治通鋻 (Comprehensive Mirror for Aid in Government, 
compiled by Sima Guang 司馬光 (1019-1086) and finished in 1084), 6: 4970-5095. See also 
Buttars, 1998: 271-296; Marney, 1976: 135-158; Pearce, 2000; Li, 2003. 
 For this reason he appointed five of his most trusted military 
aids, who came from the (per definition) low ranking ‘military families’ 
(junjia 軍家), to each supervise the compilation of one branch of the so-
32 Nan shi, 52: 1296. See Buttars, 1998: 270. 
33 See the memorial that Xu Mian 徐勉 (466-535) wrote in 524 to accompany the completed 
ritual code (Liang shu, 25: 379-383; translated in part by Janousch, 1998: 85-90). Xu Mian 
was an important political figure and personal assistant to Emperor Wu who, after the death 
of Fan Yun 范雲 (451-503), entrusted him with important matters of state. For Xu Mian’s 
biography, see Liang shu, 25: 377-389. Also see Nan shi, 60: 1477-1486. 
34 Liang shu, 25: 381. 

16 
 
called Five Rituals (wuli 五禮)35 which were to make up this new ritual 
code. These were the same five men who a few years later were made 
Erudites of the Five Classics and each placed at the head of a department 
of the School of Five Halls.36 The scholarship and the institutions which 
were a direct result of Emperor Wu’s commissioning of this immense 
labour signified a revival of Confucian studies. Many commentaries on the 
classics appeared during this time, and the number of books in the 
imperial library (not counting the Buddhist books, which were 
accommodated in a separate Buddhist library) grew to a phenomenal 
44,526 scrolls (representing 6,288 different titles), which was unparalleled 
by any of the Northern or Southern dynasties.37
The revision and recompilation of state ritual, like many of the other 
measures taken by Emperor Wu, were probably not a sudden inspiration 
of his upon ascending the throne, nor was the idea developed by him 
alone. The well known circle of people around prince Xiao Ziliang 蕭子良 
(460-494; posthumous name Wenxuan 文宣) of the Southern Qi 南齊 
(479-502), did not only occupy itself with literary and philosophical 
activities, but was also kind of a progressive think tank which sought to 
affect changes in the literati consciousness and political culture in the 
South.
  
38
                                                 
35 These were the ‘rituals for auspicious events’ (jili 吉禮), ‘rituals for inauspicious events’ 
(xiongli 凶禮), ‘rituals for guests’ (binli 賓禮), ‘rituals for military events’ (junli 軍禮), and ‘rituals 
for blessings’ (jiali 嘉禮). Liang shu, 25: 381. 
 The young literati who frequented Xiao Ziliang’s villa came from 
36 For their names and functions, see Liang shu, 25: 381. 
37 T.2103.110a23-b1. See Lee, 2000: 61, 405-6. Also see Janousch, 1998: 93. 
38 In 487, Xiao Ziliang, the son of Emperor Wu 武 (r. 482-493) of the Qi dynasty and prince of 
Jingling 竟陵, took up residence in his new villa on Mount Jilong 雞籠山, situated northwest of 
the capital Jiankang 建康 (present Nanjing), and therefore also called the Western Hill 
(Xishan 西山). This villa gave its name to the group of young literati that frequented it, namely 
“Salon of the Western Villa” (xidi 西邸). The most famous of its members were the so-called 
“Eight Friends of Jingling” (Jingling bayou 竟陵八友), of which Xiao Yan (the future Emperor 
Wu of the Liang) was one. Some of these eight people would take an active role in the 
formative years of the Liang dynasty, including the compilation of the Liang ritual code. For a 

17 
 
both high and low ranking families, a theme which, as we have seen, was 
carried on by Emperor Wu, who had himself been a member of this group. 
Thus it seems that Emperor Wu carried out some of the political and 
sociological ideas that had originated in the clique around Xiao Ziliang.39 
This is further evidenced by the fact that many of the people who had been 
part of this clique later served in important positions during the formative 
years of the Liang dynasty, including the compilation of the Liang law 
codex,40 and the drafting of imperial decrees.41
Unfortunately, the Liang Ritual Code, which was finished in 524, is 
no longer extant, so it is impossible to determine what these rituals looked 
like.
 
42 However, one striking aspect of the renewed state ritual is rather 
well documented, and this is what Janousch calls the vegetarian reforms. 
In 517, Emperor Wu decreed that the sacrificial animals used in the 
ancestral temple (zongmiao 宗廟) were to be replaced with fruit, 
vegetables and rice-flower-dough victims.43
                                                                                                                
listing of the names of these eight people, see Liang shu, 1: 2 (repeated in Nan shi, 6: 168). 
For a detailed study of the salon around Xiao Ziliang, see Jansen, 2000. Also see Vande 
Walle, 1976 and 1979; Tang, 1983: 457-461. 
 On the suggestion of Liu Xie 
39 Jansen, 2000: 207-226. 
40 Liang shu, 2: 38. 
41 Janousch, 1998: 93. 
42 The Liang Ritual Code was actually the first of its kind and inspired the compilation of later 
dynastic ritual codes. See Janousch, 1998: 14-15. 
43 Liang shu, 2: 57 and Nan shi, 6: 196. As the treatise on ritual in the Sui shu describes, this 
reform was hotly debated, but Emperor Wu chose not to take the opinion of its opponents into 
account (Sui shu, 7: 134). The edict ordering the abolition of animal sacrifice in the ancestral 
temple is preserved in the Guang Hongmingji 廣弘明集 (Further Collection for the 
Propagation and Clarification [of Buddhism], T.2103; compiled by Daoxuan 道宣 (596-667) in 
664) under the title “Duansha jue zongmiao xisheng zhao 斷殺絕宗廟犧牲詔 (Edict for the 
total abolition of the killing of domestic animals as sacrifice at the ancestral temple, 
T.2103.293b28-294a12). In T.2103 the date 513 is given for the promulgation of the edict, but 
this is probably an error caused by the fusion of several events into one. The petition by the 
monk Sengyou 僧祐 (445-518) and others to forbid hunting and fishing in the vicinity of the 
capital, mentioned at the beginning of the entry in the Guang Hongming ji,  was launched in 

18 
 
劉勰 (ca. 465-522)44, who noted that a discrepancy had arisen between 
the offerings of fruit and vegetables at the ancestral temple and the use of 
animals in other sacrificial ceremonies, this ban was expanded to the 
semi-annual sacrifices at the suburban altars to Heaven and Earth (tiandi 
erjiao 天地二郊).45 The question of the development of the vegetarian ideal 
in Medieval China is a complicated one, so I will not go into detail here.46 
What I would like to point out is that, even though abstention from meat 
was already part of the pre-Buddhist Chinese tradition, 47 a fact which 
certainly contributed to the widespread promotion of vegetarianism at this 
time, its broad scale application in the state sacrifices during the Liang was 
quite extraordinary. Even more so because the denunciation of blood 
sacrifice was only one facet of a reform that sought to banish all forms of 
harmful behaviour towards living beings, including hunting and fishing, the 
use of medicine made from animal parts and so on.48
                                                                                                                
513. See Lavoix, 2002: 118n65. Emperor Wu’s lengthy treatise Duan jiurou wen 斷酒肉文 
(On ending the use of wine and meat), in which he swears of all worldly pleasures, can be 
found in T.2103.294b16-303c5. 
 I will return to this 
44 Liu Xie studied Buddhism under the guidance of Sengyou, and towards the end of his life 
he became a monk himself. He is the author of an important text in the defence of Buddhism, 
titled Miehuo lun 滅惑論 (On the elimination of doubts), contained in his teacher’s Hongming ji 
(T.2102.49c3-53c19). He is also well-known for his authorship of the Wenxin diaolong 文心調
龍 (On the Literary Mind and Ornate Rhetoric), one of the most influential works of literary 
criticism, and his claimed authorship of the Liuzi xinlun 劉子新論 (Master Liu’s Treatise on 
Renewal [in Time of Crisis]), although this is a subject of debate. For some recent studies on 
Liu Xie and his Wenxin diaolong, see Cai, 2001; Mair, 2002. For a full translation of the Liuzi 
xinlun and Liu Xie’s debated authorship, see Arndt, 1994. See also Gibbs, 1970-1971. 
45 Liang shu, 50: 710 and Nan shi, 72: 1781. 
46 Quite a few studies on the subject exist. See, for instance, Kieschnick, 2005; Lavoix, 2002; 
Mather, 1981; Suwa, 1978 and 1986. 
47 The abstention from meat during the mourning period was a regular custom, and those who 
continued their vegetarian diet for the rest of their lives were praised in the Confucian 
biographies for their exceptional filial piety (see, for example, Nan Qishu, 55: 958, 962, 964, 
965, 966; Liang shu, 47: 648, 654, 655). 
48 Lavoix, 2002: 120. 

19 
 
issue when addressing Emperor Wu’s use of Buddhism in state affairs. In 
the context of Emperor Wu’s restructuring of Confucian ritual, it is worth 
mentioning that the vegetarian reforms were codified in the customary 
hymns (ya 雅) performed at these ritual ceremonies. The original hymns, 
written by Shen Yue 沈約 (441-513) 49 only a few years earlier, were 
rewritten by Xiao Ziyun 蕭子雲 (487-549)50 to correspond to the modified 
rituals. The two hymns accompanying the inspection of the sacrificial 
animal and the sacrifice itself were abolished, and the remaining hymns 
were redrafted with abundant references to the Five Classics. Janousch 
argues that the many quotations from the classics in these new hymns 
points to a Confucian motivation, and warns that the vegetarian reforms 
are not to be seen as simply Buddhist in inspiration.51
                                                 
49 Shen Yue was an important figure at the court of Xiao Ziliang and later played an important 
role in assisting Emperor Wu of the Liang during the period of dynastic consolidation. As a 
former arbiter in the Nine ranks system, he was one of the chief advisors on ritual matters of 
Emperor Wu, but towards the end of his life he fell out of favour. As an expert in the fields of 
poetry and music, he is remembered as a promoter of rules for tonal euphony, and as a 
historian he is celebrated as the author of the official history of the Southern Song dynasty. 
For Shen Yue’s biography, see Liang shu, 13: 232-243 and Nan shi, 58: 1403-1414. For an 
extensive study on the life and work of Shen Yue, see Mather, 1988. For Shen Yue’s input in 
the ritual reforms of Emperor Wu, see Janousch, 1998: 35-46. 
 However, as I shall 
argue in the chapter on Emperor Wu’s construction of a Buddhist world 
view, Emperor Wu’s stress on vegetarianism as an expression of universal 
compassion and benevolence seems to have been part of a greater 
scheme in which the Buddhist elements outweighed the Confucian or 
Daoist elements. Emperor Wu’s aspiration to portray himself as the saviour 
of all living beings through the powerful image of a bodhisattva-king, 
required him to be consistent in Confucian state ritual as well. Given that 
his political position was still precarious when starting out on the total 
reconstruction of the traditional role of an emperor figure from a head of 
state in the Confucian sense to spiritual world leader in a Buddhist sense, 
50 Biography in Liang shu, 35: 513-516. 
51 Janousch, 1998: 119, 134. 

20 
 
he had to find a way to incorporate the Buddhist elements he needed to 
that end into the existing Confucian tradition. Thus it can be argued that 
the quotation of passages from the classics relating to vegetarianism were 
more a justification or pretext for the changing of these long-standing 
traditions of animal sacrifice and consumption, rather than a specific 
expression of deeper Confucian moral values. This is not to oversimplify 
things. For example, the process of karman and rebirth (which had been 
actively promoted since the days of Xiao Ziliang) implied that anyone could 
be reborn as an animal in a future life, so refraining from killing animals for 
eating or for sacrifice in this way became not only proper Buddhist practice, 
but an act of filial piety (xiao 孝) and humaneness (ren 仁) as well.52 There 
certainly was mutual influence between the Confucian and Buddhist 
traditions, whereby concepts from one were integrated into the other.53
Of course the line between the Confucian, Daoist and Buddhist 
traditions should not be drawn all too explicitly. All three traditions were 
part of one and the same cultural sphere. The point to make here, however, 
is that despite the fact that many people were a little bit Confucianist, 
Daoist, and Buddhist at the same time does not mean that these people 
were not aware of their unique qualities and origins, and the possible 
 But 
this syncretism seems to have grown primarily from the efforts of Buddhist 
apologists, and was pushed increasingly hard by Emperor Wu. 
                                                 
52 More on this in chapter three, which deals with the mechanism of karman and the debates 
about the existence of a soul. 
53 This process of mutual influence was not limited to concepts and terminology. For instance, 
there was a Buddhicisation of state banquets and imperial sacrifice through the introduction 
of vegetarianism, but also in the other direction we see an impact on Buddhist ritual from 
these traditional Confucian rituals. For instance, special hymns were written for performance 
during the imperial Buddhist assemblies, in likeness of state ritual. See Janousch, 1998: 168. 

21 
 
discrepancies between them. Otherwise, why would the Mingfo lun 明佛
論,54
 
 for example, say that one should 
今依周孔以養民, 味佛法以養神。則生為明后, 歿為明神, 而常
王矣。 
now rely on Confucius of the Zhou to take care of the people 
and savour the Buddhadharma to nurture one’s spirit. Then, 
in life you will be an enlightened sovereign, and in death an 
enlightened spirit, thus will you rule eternally as a king.55
 
 
There are many other examples to be found that give expression to the 
view that the Buddhist and classical tradition were both valid, but each in 
its own sphere. The classical tradition encompassed the perfect code of 
behaviour and the values of the past sages, a way of life that had the 
sanction of tradition. 56
                                                 
54 The Mingfo lun (Treatise on explaining Buddhism) was written by Zongbing 宗炳 (375-433), 
and is included in Sengyou’s 僧祐 (445-518) Hongming ji  弘明集 (Collection [of texts] for the 
dissemination and clarification [of Buddhism], T.2102).  
 But since the decline of strict Han Confucian 
orthodoxy, an ever increasing number of scholars openly acknowledged 
that this classical tradition was not the be all and end all of philosophical 
thinking. There were many questions for which the Classics provided no 
satisfactory answer, and it was acceptable to search for these answers 
elsewhere, which is exactly what happened with the development of 
xuanxue and Buddhist philosophy. Of course these three modes of thought 
were all part of one shared cultural discourse, and, as has been discussed 
extensively in the secondary literature, they all had an influence and 
impact on one another. Nevertheless the terms “Confucianism”, “Daoism 
(both the philosophical xuanxue and the religious-devotional forms)” and 
“Buddhism” had meaning to the Chinese of the time, and sometimes sharp 
55 T.2102.16a6-7. 
56 Dien, 1962: 52. 

22 
 
lines were drawn between them by adherents of either one of these 
traditions.57 For reasons of apologetics, Buddhism was often equated with 
Confucianism, and suitable parallels were drawn.58 However, precedence 
is still given to the “inner scriptures (neijing 內經, i.e. Buddhist scriptures)” 
over the “outer scriptures (waidian 外典 , i.e. non-Buddhist scriptures)”, 
their teachings considered to be far more profound. Yan Zhitui, for 
example, says in his Family Instructions that Yao, Shun, the Duke of Zhou 
and Confucius can not be compared with Buddha.59
Janousch, in his dissertation, equates Emperor Wu’s (Buddhist) 
bodhisattva ordination ritual
 As far as syncretism 
goes: for the literati it was more the norm to be Confucian in their public 
lives, and Buddhist (or Buddho-Daoist) in their personal life. Confucianism, 
up to the time of Emperor Wu, was deemed to be the norm for one’s public 
behaviour, and dictated one’s status within society, while xuanxue and 
Buddhist philosophical speculation fulfilled a personal need to understand 
the human condition. In the course of time a proficiency in these fields 
would also become a requirement for acceptance into the higher social 
strata as a mark of one’s level of self-cultivation, and it is exactly this 
growing status of Buddhist discourse among the literati elite which 
Emperor Wu sought to take advantage of for the creation of a new form of 
imperial legitimacy. 
60 to the (Confucian) ploughing ritual (gengji li  
耕籍禮), saying that Emperor Wu’s ceremonial surrender of imperial 
regalia before commencing with the bodhisattva vow stood on a par with 
his personal performance of the ploughing ritual, which visibly demeaned 
his imperial persona for the benefit of his subjects.61
                                                 
57 An obvious demonstration of this are the surviving records of debates between opponents 
and proponents of Buddhism, many of which were for the first time collected in the Hongming 
ji. For more on these debates, see Kohn, 1995. 
 Although Janousch 
58 See Teng Ssu-yü, 1968: 138-139. 
59 Ibid.: 138. 
60 See Chapter II.1. 
61 Janousch, 1998: 209-210 and 1999: 147. 

23 
 
astutely observes that the bodhisattva ordination and the ploughing 
ceremony focussed on a different target audience, in his desire to link the 
traditional Confucian rituals and the new Buddhist rituals of Emperor Wu, 
he places too much importance on the occurrence of the ploughing ritual 
itself. The Liang shu refers to ten instances of Emperor Wu’s personal 
performance of the ploughing ritual (qin/gong geng jitian 親/躬耕籍田).62 
However, an emperor’s personal performance of the ploughing ritual is 
actually described in the Liji  禮記,63 and other examples of it can be found 
throughout the dynastic histories predating or contemporary to the Liang 
dynasty.64
 
 On the occasion of the ploughing ritual of 523, Emperor Wu 
issued a decree that stated: 
夫 耕 籍 之 義 大 矣 哉 ！ 粢 盛 由 之 而 興 ， 禮 節 因 之 以 
著 ， 古 者 哲 王 咸 用 此 作 ． 
The significance of the ploughing ritual is great indeed! The 
sacrificial offering of millet stems from it, and the rules of 
ceremony were composed on the basis of it. That’s why all 
wise kings of yore have used this custom.65
 
 
This suggests that Emperor Wu did not see his performance of this ritual 
as something innovative, but rather as a continuation of a long established 
tradition. There is thus no need to see the ploughing ritual as some sort of 
Confucian counterpart to the Buddhist bodhisattva ordination ritual. 
Especially since, starting in 534 (perhaps due to his weakening physical 
state, since he had at this point reached seventy years of age), the Liang 
shu mentions that he performed every ploughing ritual from his imperial 
                                                 
62 Liang shu, 2: 54; 3: 66, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 84, 85, 91. This corresponds to the years 514, 
523, 534, 535, 536, 537, 538, 540, 541, and 547 respectively. 
63 Book IV: Yueling 月令Proceedings month by month. Legge, 1885: 208. 
64 See, for example, Sanguo zhi, 1: 47; Songshu, 9: 184, 14: 47 and 18: 495; Weishu, 108: 
2735. 
65 Liang shu, 3: 66. 

24 
 
carriage (yujia 輿駕). This can hardly be called a demeaning posture, an 
important element that made Janousch compare it to Emperor Wu’s 
ceremonial stripping of imperial regalia before taking the bodhisattva vows. 
In conclusion, we can say that Emperor Wu continued, and even 
revived the Confucian tradition throughout his reign, but most ardently in 
the first decade of his rule, because he simply had no other choice. He 
relied on the sanction of the Confucian tradition to legitimize his claim on 
the throne and needed a this-worldly oriented educational tradition to 
supply him with trustworthy and competent bureaucratic officials. The 
reforms in Confucian state ritual were aimed at taking back the prerogative 
of determining the cultural and political tone from the influential literati 
families, and created the opportunity to inject them with Buddhist concepts, 
such as vegetarianism, under the guise of returning to the wisdom of the 
Ancient Sages. However, Emperor Wu’s Buddhist intentions were obvious 
from the very start, as he chose the eighth day of the fourth month, which 
was traditionally considered to be the Buddha’s birthday, as the day to 
proclaim the foundation of his Liang dynasty.66 On May 10th 504, three 
days after declaring his renunciation of Daoism in favour of Buddhism,67
 
 
Emperor Wu issued a decree that clarified the way he actually felt about 
the non-Buddhist teachings, including Confucianism: 
道有九十六種。惟佛一道是於正道。其餘九十五種名為邪道。
[…] 老子周公孔子等。雖是如來弟子而化跡既邪。止是世間之
善。不能革凡成聖。其公卿百官侯王宗族。宜反偽就真捨邪入
正。 
There are ninety-six teachings, but only the Buddhist teaching 
is the correct teaching. All the other ninety-five teachings are 
                                                 
66 Liang shu, 2: 34. The Liang shu specifies the date of Emperor Wu’s ascension of the throne 
as a bingyin 丙寅 day in the fourth month of the first year of tianjian 天監 (502-519), which is 
the eighth day of that month in the sixty-day cyclical lunar calendar. 
67 Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.112a3-a22. See further. 

25 
 
false teachings. […] Even though Laozi, the Duke of Zhou, 
Confucius and others were disciples of the Tathāgata, their 
bequeathed teachings are heterodox (heretical, deviant). 
They stop at this-worldly benevolence, and can not turn the 
commoner into a sage. You, high ministers, officials, nobles, 
and clansmen should avert from what is false and go toward 
what is right. You should discard the false and hold to the 
correct.68
 
 
It would have been odd for Emperor Wu to openly reject all non-Buddhist 
philosophies, including Confucianism, but carry on endorsing the latter, 
unless of course we acknowledge his pragmatic need for it. Emperor Wu’s 
crafty use of the Confucian tradition is a prime example of just how shrewd 
a political tactician he was. 
 
 
I.2. Emperor Wu and the Daoist tradition 
 
 
When discussing Emperor Wu’s attitude towards the Daoist tradition, 
we must make a clear distinction between xuanxue 玄學 (“Mysterious 
Learning”) and the religious form of Daoism. Xuanxue, which is often 
misleadingly labelled as “Neo-Daoism”, was essentially a revival of interest 
in the philosophical Daoism of Laozi and Zhuangzi among Confucian 
scholars. This renewed form of metaphysical thinking had started to 
emerge towards the end of the Han dynasty when an increasing number of 
Confucian scholars grew disaffected towards the picayune, hair-splitting 
style of scholarship known as “chapter and verse (zhangju 章句)”. This 
was an approach to the study of the classics that focussed on inordinate 
                                                 
68 Guang Hongmingji, T.2103.112a24-b1. 

26 
 
textual exegesis to the extent that “the explanation of a passage of five 
characters could amount to as much as twenty to thirty thousand words”.69 
This rigid mode of Confucian learning, in which there was little room for 
individual thought, caused many to shift their interest towards the texts of 
Laozi, Zhuangzi, and Yijing, which together were known as the “Three 
Mysteries” (sanxuan 三玄). This vogue of Lao-Zhuang thought spread 
among the literate class like a wildfire upon the publication of such 
commentaries on the Laozi and Zhuangzi as by He Yan 何晏 (c.190-249) 
and Wang Bi 王弼 (226-249) in the beginning of the third century. Many 
more commentaries would follow. But however much the fundamentals of 
xuanxue were derived from written texts, it was generally expounded orally 
through the medium of “pure conversation” (qingtan 清談) in a kind of 
literary salons. “Pure Conversation” had come into vogue towards the end 
of the Han dynasty. It originally started as a sort of reactionary movement. 
As power at the Han court increasingly slipped into the hands of eunuchs, 
an important number of officials decided to withdraw from their posts and 
started writing critical appraisals of the contemporary political climate and 
important political personalities. This movement, which was known as 
“pure criticism” (qingyi 清議), was violently repressed by those it targeted. 
As a consequence many intellectuals shifted their discourse away from 
politics to abstract metaphysical speculation, either genuinely or as a 
concealed form of criticism. The “pure criticism” was thus transformed into 
the more philosophically oriented “pure conversation”. 70
                                                 
69 Han shu, 30: 1723. 
 This “pure 
conversation” would gradually become even more widespread and turn 
into a medium to demonstrate one’s wit and sharp tongue by way of quick 
repartee between two individuals, making use of references to classical 
writings, poetry, folk sayings and the like. Eventually the skill of “pure 
conversation” became the standard to which one had to measure up in 
70 See Holzman, 1956: 326-327. Also see Yu, 1985, passim; Holcombe, 1994: 91-94. 

27 
 
order to get higher up in society. 71
                                                 
71 Many illustrations of qingtan repartee are reproduced in the Shishuo xinyu 世說新語 (A 
New Account of Tales of the World, compiled by Liu Yiqing 劉義慶 towards the middle of the 
fifth century), translated by Mather, 1976. 
 Because of the many superficial 
similarities between the concepts of Lao-Zhuang thought and those 
concepts contained in the Prajñāpāramitā-scriptures of Mahāyāna 
Buddhism, the literary salons and “pure conversation” served as an 
excellent medium for mutual discussion and exchange of ideas between 
xuanxue scholars and Buddhist thinkers, and thus were a catalyst for a 
Buddho-Daoist hybrid philosophy. A case in point is the concept of 
‘emptiness’, which initially had two very different interpretations for 
xuanxue and Buddhist thinkers. The xuanxue approach to “original non-
being” (benwu 本無) had all the trappings of nihilism, as it claimed that 
everything comes forth from this original nothingness, but this ‘void’ itself, 
paradoxically, does not exist. Many Buddhist thinkers asserted instead that 
it is the material world in which we dwell that is illusory, while the ‘void’ (Skt. 
śūnyatā, Ch. kong 空) is in fact real. This subtle, but nonetheless 
fundamental change in view, which was ultimately more positive and 
emotionally satisfying, was adopted in xuanxue philosophy. In the Chinese 
Buddhist interpretation of the cycle of reincarnation (Skt. saṃsāra) we see 
the influence of native Chinese materialism on Buddhist beliefs. Counter to 
the doctrine of anātman (Ch. wuwo 無我, the absence of an absolute 
individual consciousness that passes from one incarnation to the next), 
Chinese Buddhists believed that there had to be something like a “soul” 
that had to be reborn. I shall return to this in the following chapter on 
Emperor Wu’s use of Buddhism for the creation of a new world view. The 
point to make for now is that since xuanxue was in essence a non-
institutionalised philosophy, which by the time of Emperor Wu had become 
thoroughly entwined with Buddhist metaphysics, there was no reason for 
Emperor Wu to change or to prohibit it in any way. On the contrary, the 
philosophical discussions in the form of qingtan were a way to show off 

28 
 
one’s superior level of self-cultivation, and carried many Buddhist concepts 
across to the people engaged in the activities in the literary salons, thus 
serving as a medium for expounding the Buddhist doctrine. The sources 
remain fairly quiet about the state of xuanxue scholarship at the time of 
Emperor Wu, but this should not come as a surprise, as it is rarely 
mentioned anywhere in the official dynastic histories, which are biased 
towards Confucianism. However, two references can be found, which 
indicate that xuanxue continued in pretty much the same way as it had in 
the previous centuries. The Nan shi describes how in 548, Xiao Gang 蕭綱 
(503-551), the later emperor Jianwen 簡文 (r. 550-551), personally 
lectured on the Laozi and Zhuangzi on several occasions,72 something he 
would certainly not have done, had his father been opposed to it. That 
same Nan shi also says that Liang Wudi frequently lectured on the Laozi in 
the Chongyun Hall 重雲殿, a place that was mostly used for Buddhist 
affairs.73
 
 Yan Zhitui, in his Family Instructions, says that: 
自 於 梁 世 ， 茲 風 復 闡 ， 莊 、 老 、 周 易 ， 總 謂三 
玄 。 武 皇 、 簡 文 ， 躬 自 講 論 。 周 弘 正 奉 贊 大 猷 ， 
化 行都 邑 ， 學 徒 千 餘 ， 實 為 盛 美 。 
[c]oming to the Liang period, this tendency [of Taoist 
discussion] again flourished. The Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu, and 
Chou I were called the Three Schools of Mysticism (Taoism) 
which the emperors Wu (502-549) and Chien-wen (550-551) 
personally lectured on and discussed. Chou Hung-cheng 74
                                                 
72 Nan shi, 30: 799. 
 
was appointed to assist in promoting the great interest by 
establishing the instruction throughout the capital and other 
73 Ibid., 71: 1753. For a study on the religious functions of the Chongyun Hall, see Chen, 2006: 
52-57. 
74 Zhou Hongzheng 周弘正 (496-574) was said to have mastered the Laozi and Zhuangzi at 
the age of ten. He was very good at metaphysical speculation and was even asked questions 
by Buddhist monks. See Chenshu, 24: 305-310; Nan shi, 34: 898-899. 

29 
 
cities; he gathered more than a thousand students – truly a 
splendid result.75
 
 
This passage claims that under the rule of Emperor Wu, xuan studies 
reached a new climax. Regardless of possible exaggerations on the part of 
Yan Zhitui, this is a clear indication of Emperor Wu’s positive attitude 
towards xuanxue scholarship, a fact that is corroborated by the continued 
importance of “Mysterious Learning” in the school curriculum.76
Matters become quite a bit more complicated when we examine 
Emperor Wu’s attitude toward the religious form of Daoism, which reached 
scriptural maturity around the fourth century.
 
77 Although many literati 
subscribed to the Daoist faith, Daoism as a salvationist religion had the 
greatest appeal to the uneducated mass and the impoverished families 
that had been excluded from the higher social strata by the more influential 
literati families.78 So as an instrument of mass appeal it could certainly 
rival with Buddhism for the status of state religion. Why then did Emperor 
Wu not only opt for Buddhism to fulfil this role, but chose to publicly 
denounce Daoism, said to have traditionally been the religious orientation 
of the Xiao clan? Admittedly, the edict of 504 in which Emperor Wu 
forsakes Daoism in favour of the Buddhist teaching is preserved only in 
Buddhist sources, 79
                                                 
75 Translation by Teng Ssu-yü, 1968: 70. 
 which might indicate that it is perhaps a later 
76 Lee, 2000: 372. The Nan shi (71: 1753)  
77 For an overview of the development of the early Daoist tradition, see Seiwert, 2003: 23-93. 
For more on the differentiation between Daoism and popular religions, see Stein, 1979. 
78 Holcombe, 1994: 96. As an example of the scepticism with which Daoist religious practices 
were sometimes received by the members of educated literati families might serve Yan 
Zhitui’s warning “not to waste money on crazy superstitions such as Daoist charms or 
thanksgiving sacrifices.” Teng Ssu-yü, 1968: 21. 
79 The edict is included in Guang Hongming ji (T.2103.112a3-a22), and quoted in Bianzheng 
lun 辯正論 (Treatise on Discerning what is Correct, compiled by Falin 法琳 (d. 640) in 626; 
T.2110.549b5-c12). A full translation can be found in Jansen, 2001: 93-94 (and also in 
Jansen, 2000: 212-214). 

30 
 
falsification by Buddhists who wished to provide the Tang rulers with a 
precedent. As M. Strickmannn points out, this question had already been 
raised by the Guang Hongming ji study group at Kyoto University in 
1974.80 Strickmann, however, claims to have found evidence for Emperor 
Wu’s suppression of Daoism in the Daoist scriptures themselves, which, 
strangely enough, he qualifies as more forthcoming in factual information 
than the often biased Confucian and Buddhist texts.81 As it turns out, this 
evidence is nothing more than a single passage in a text called Zhoushi 
mingtong ji 周氏冥通記 (A Record of Master Zhou’s Communications with 
the Invisible World, HY 302).82 This text recounts the visions of the Daoist 
adept Zhou Ziliang 周子良 (497-516), who on account of these visions 
committed suicide at the age of twenty because he believed the immortals 
living beneath Mao Shan 茅山 urged him to take up an official position in 
the administration of the spirit-world. Zhou Ziliang was a disciple of the 
famous Daoist master Tao Hongjing 陶弘景 (456-536)83
                                                 
80 Strickmann, 1978: 468n2. See Ota, 1964. 
, who collected 
and annotated his visions and presented the completed text to the throne 
in 517. In one of Tao’s commentaries he describes the fate of Zhou 
Ziliang’s maternal aunt, who had entered a Daoist convent at the age of 
ten, but in 504 “she was constrained by a government regulation (gong zhi  
公制), and several Daoists urged her to wed out of practical 
81 Ibid: 468. 
82 See Daozang: Sanjiaben, volume 5, pp. 518-542. 
83 Tao Hongjing was one of the most important Daoist scholars of his time, and he is seen as 
the foremost representative of the Mao Shan school of Daoism. He had close ties to Emperor 
Wu of the Liang. Tao Hongjing had interpreted the many auspicious signs that were 
reportedly seen all over the country upon the founding of the Liang dynasty, and thus 
provided the emperor with an important tool of legitimation, the approval of Heaven. Emperor 
Wu had great respect for Tao Hongjing’s talents and in 535 conferred the title of Shanzhong 
zaixiang 山中宰相 “Prime Minister Amidst the Mountains” on him (see Fozu lidai tongzai, 
T.2036.550.c25; Nan shi, 76: 1899). Tao Hongjing’s biography can be found in the Liang shu, 
51: 742-743; Nan shi, 76: 1897-1901. For a study on Tao Hongjing’s life and work, see 
Strickman, 1977 and 1979. Also see Berkowitz, 2002: 209-215. 

31 
 
considerations.” 84  The fact that Zhou’s aunt decided to get married 
because of the pressure placed upon her by a government regulation was 
proof to Strickmann of the repressive measures taken against Daoism by 
Emperor Wu in 504.85 Jansen has already observed that it is dangerous to 
make such a generalisation on the basis of so little information, and one 
can only agree with that.86 The leap from a single case of a woman who, 
because of some unspecified government regulation, left the convent to 
get married, to the wholesale repression of Daoism is more a leap of faith 
than a well-founded conclusion. The edict of 504 in which Emperor Wu 
denounces Daoism nowhere mentions any active repression to be 
undertaken. If it is a genuine contemporary document, then at the most it 
seems to have been composed for propaganda reasons, rather than as an 
official document containing any real policy. The only source to mention a 
persecution of Daoists in the true sense of the word, is the Fozu tongji 佛
祖統紀 (Comprehensive Records of Buddha and other Patriarchs, T.2035; 
compiled by Zhipan 志磐 (1220-1275) in 1269), which says that in 517 
Emperor Wu issued an order to abandon all Daoist monasteries and to 
laicize all Daoist clergy.87 It is very suspect that this order did not surface 
until more than seven centuries after these events allegedly took place, 
and to base any conclusions on this one sentence is imprudent at best. In 
further support of his hypothesis, Strickmann points to the increase of 
Buddhist references in Tao Hongjing’s writings after 517 and a discernable 
decrease in the production of Daoist texts between 517 and 549 in 
Southern China, which he blames on the flight of many Daoist scholars to 
the North.88
                                                 
84 Daozang, volume 5: 533a. Cf. Strickmann, 1978: 468-469. 
 The former argument can easily be explained as a sign of the 
85 Strickmann, 1978: 469. 
86 Jansen, 2002: 108. Thomas Jansen (2002) gives a short overview on the state of Chinese, 
Japanese and Western scholarship regarding the question of Emperor Wu’s alleged 
persecution of Daoism. 
87 T.2035.350a1. 
88 Strickmann, 1978: 472. 

32 
 
zeitgeist. There is nothing unusual about the mixed use of Daoist and 
Buddhist concepts in a single text, as there was a prolific cross-pollination 
between these two religions during the Period of Division, despite (or 
perhaps because of) the efforts on both sides to make distinctions 
between them. 
For the latter argument Strickmann does not provide us with much 
concrete evidence, other than an enumeration of texts composed shortly 
after Emperor Wu’s death, which he contrasts to the limited output of 
scriptures in the years between 517 and 549. 89  In search of some 
references to Daoists fleeing north due to an active repression of their 
religion in the Liang, I found only one case, which is repeated in several 
Buddhist sources. This case concerns a Daoist priest named Lu Xiujing 陸
修靜 (d.u.)90, who is primarily referred to in the context of his disastrous 
debate with the Buddhist monk Tanxian 曇顯 (d.u.)91, which eventually 
drove emperor Wenxuan 文宣 (r. 550-559) of the Northern Qi to issue his 
own decree to discard Daoism in 555.92
                                                 
89 Strickmann, 1978: 472n20,21. 
 What is relevant to the present 
90 The Buddhist sources speak of a Lu Xiujing who lived in the sixth century, so it is clearly a 
different person from his famous namesake who lived from 406 to 477. The latter Lu Xiujing 
was an influential Daoist scholar of the Tianshi 天師 (Heavenly Master) tradition who codified 
Daoist liturgy and whose catalogue Sandong jingshu mulu 三洞經書目錄 (Catalogue of the 
Scriptures of the Three Caverns) laid the foundation for the formation of the later Daoist 
canon (see Verellen, 2004: 239). Zhipan, in the Fozu tongji, also points to this fact in an 
editorial note, saying that “since some forty years separate the Taishi 泰始period of the 
[Southern] Song dynasty (465-472) from the Tianjian 天監period of the Liang dynasty (502-
520), this can not be the same Lu Xiujing. Therefore, when it says that he fled from Liang to 
Wei because of Emperor Wu’s abandonment of Daoism, we must presume it refers to Lu 
Xiujing’s disciples in order for this to be credible.” (T.2035.357b19-21) 
91 Biography in Xu Gaoseng zhuan 續高僧傳 (Continued Biographies of Eminent Monks, 
T.2060; compiled by Daoxuan): T.2060.625a19-c13. 
92 This decree, and the circumstances leading up to its promulgation, can be found in the 
Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.112c8-113b16. Lu Xiujing had made the mistake of attacking the 
Buddhists with an argument based on terminology, saying that the Buddhists labelled their 
own religion as “inner (nei 內)”, which he saw as a synonym for “small (xiao 小)”, while they 

33 
 
topic, is that when Daoxuan tells this anecdote, he starts off by saying that 
Lu Xiujing was originally from the Liang, but travelled north with his 
students in an act of rebellion because he was angry that Emperor Wu had 
given up his Daoist beliefs.93
                                                                                                                
branded the Daoist religion as “outer (wai 外)”, which he associated with “great (da 大)”. 
Tanxian rebutted by applying Lu Xiujing’s associations to the emperor, which made it look as 
if Xiujing regarded the emperor, who lived inside [the palace] (chunei 處內), as less important 
than the officials, who lived outside [the palace] (chuwai 處外). Lu Xiujing and his companions 
could not respond to this, and so the emperor declared the Daoists swindlers and frauds that 
the unenlightened laymen continued to worship for no good reason. Emperor Wenxuan 
challenged those who called themselves immortals (zi wei shenxian zhe 自謂神仙者) to climb 
the Three Ranks Terrace (Sanjue Tai 三爵臺), throw themselves from it and fly to the sky as 
immortals. All who tried fell to their deaths, thus wiping out the false and erroneous teaching 
from the realm of the Qi, so there were no longer two faiths. See T.2103.113a12-17, 113a22-
24. 
 The initiative for the self induced exile is 
clearly placed with Lu Xiujing himself, and is even interpreted as a 
malicious defection. Taking into account Daoxuan’s motives for making his 
collection of Buddhist apologetic writings, it is all the more significant that 
he does not place the cause for Lu Xiujing’s departure from Liang with a 
persecution of Daoists, but rather with the resentment he felt towards 
Emperor Wu for his choice of religion. After all, if it was Daoxuan’s purpose 
to give the Tang emperors a precedent for publicly converting to Buddhism, 
he could have made a very strong case by giving them a model for 
persecution. However, presuming that Daoxuan would have made use of 
any and all arguments against his Daoist adversaries, the fact that he 
limited himself to portraying only the sordid personalities and the narrow-
mindedness of his Daoist adversaries, makes it unlikely that a persecution 
of Daoism took place during the Liang dynasty. The story of Lu Xiujing is 
repeated in three later Buddhist sources as well, but with slight 
modifications. The Zhenzheng lun 甄正論 (Treatise on Determining the 
Truth, T.2112; compiled during the reign of Empress Wu, sometime after 
93 See Guang Hongmingji, T.2103.112c12-13 and Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.625.b1-3. 

34 
 
690) 94 says that Emperor Wu was for some time at the beginning of his 
reign deceived by Lu Xiujing, but later came to his senses and wrote the 
letter in which he rejected Daoism.95 The Beishan lu 北山錄 (Record of 
North Mountain, T.2113; compiled by Shenqing 神清 [d. 814]) takes this 
story one step further and asserts that Lu Xiujing fled (ben 奔) to the 
Northern Qi because he had slandered the Buddhist teaching, for which 
Emperor Wu had ordered his execution.96 The Fozu tongji, finally, says 
that Lu Xiujing had changed the Liang for the Wei, only to find that 
emperor Wenxuan of the succeeding Northern Qi dynasty also favoured 
Buddhism, which once again filled him with resentment.97
Regardless of historical truth, it is clear that, on the basis of the 
scarce sources relating to Emperor Wu’s attitude towards Daoism, it is 
impossible to ascertain if a suppression of Daoism took place during the 
Liang. However, for the reasons cited above, it seems highly unlikely that 
such an active repression occurred. The purported ‘suppression’ of 
Daoism is merely the result of wishful thinking that links Emperor Wu’s 
personal letter of conversion to Buddhism (and his later circular urging 
others to do the same) to the passage in the Fozu tongji  that speaks of 
the laicization of Daoist clergy members. Even Strickmann, the most 
 
                                                 
94 The Kaiyuan shijiao lu 開元釋教錄 (Kaiyuan Era [713-741] Catalogue of Buddhist 
Scriptures, T.2154; compiled by Zhisheng 智昇in 730) says it was compiled in the Tianhou 
era (tianhou dai 天后代) of the Tang dynasty (T.2154.625a12). There is no era name 
(nianhao 年號) like this during the Tang dynasty. Tianhou (Heavenly Empress) is, however, a 
title of Empress Wu Zetian 武則天 (r. 684-704). In 674, Emperor Gaozong 高宗 (r. 649-683) 
bestowed the title Tianhuang 天皇 (Heavenly Emperor) on himself and the title Tianhou on his 
wife, Wu Zhao 武曌, the later Empress Wu (see Chen Jinhua, 2002: 125). The author of the 
anti-Daoist pamphlet Zhenzheng lun, was Xuanyi 玄嶷, a converted Daoist who, under the 
name Du Yi 杜乂, served as Head (zhu 主) of the Hongdao Daoist monastery 弘道觀before 
his conversion sometime between 690 and 695 (see Forte 1976: 123-124). For more on the 
date and author of the Zhenzheng lun, see Palumbo, 1997. 
95 T.2112.568c17-18. 
96 T.2113.593c23-24. 
97 T.2035.357b1-2. 

35 
 
vehement proponent of the Daoist repression theory, seems undecided at 
times. Although on one occasion he says that “there is no doubt that the 
ban against Taoists was both serious and effective,” 98 in another instance 
he says that “[t]here is no evidence that the effects of this were felt at Mao 
Shan,” 99 and concludes that “Mao Shan continued to function as an 
officially recognized centre of Taoist ordination even after the proscriptive 
measures of 504.” 100 In addition, Tao Hongjing was not the only Daoist 
master that Emperor Wu admired. The Nan shi, for example, also speaks 
of the great admiration Emperor Wu had for Deng Yu 鄧郁 (d. 511), who 
made an elixir for him.101 Running ahead to one of Emperor Wu’s most 
important Buddhist ceremonies, namely that of the Great Assemblies, to 
which we shall return in detail when discussing Wu’s practical application 
of Buddhism in government, we can add one more piece of evidence in 
support of our claim that no major persecution of Daoism took place. On 
one of these Great Assemblies, organised in 547 – to which people from 
all walks of life were welcome, regardless of their social or religious 
status – a three-hundred-year-old women showed up with a gift for the 
emperor. She identified herself as the leader of a Daoist community living 
on an island mountain called Fuhu 浮鵠 “Floating Snowgoose”. All 
members of that community were over one hundred years old, which was 
an indication of their successful practice of longevity techniques. The gift 
was a red sitting mat, made of reed under which red birds often made their 
nest, which was taken as an auspicious sign. 102
                                                 
98 Strickmann, 1978: 469. 
 If we assume that 
Emperor Wu truly received an auspicious gift from the leader of a Daoist 
community who exaggerated her age for dramatic impact, then we have 
here another element of proof that no persecution of Daoism occurred. If it 
99 Strickmann, 1979: 157. 
100 Strickmann, 1979: 157n102. 
101 Nan shi, 76: 1896. For some reason, Emperor Wu did not dare to take this elixir. See 
Jansen, 2001: 108n74. 
102 Nan shi, 7: 225. Cf. Chen, 2006: 71. 

36 
 
did, then it would be unlikely that a Daoist community would attend one of 
Emperor Wu’s Buddhist ceremonies bearing auspicious gifts. 
The relative silence in the Daoist sources pertaining to the time of 
Emperor Wu then should be sufficient to conclude that, although Emperor 
Wu probably did not persecute the Daoists, neither did he support them on 
a scale comparable to his sponsorship of Buddhism, with the exception of 
certain schools such as that of Tao Hongjing on Mao Shan, which 
focussed primarily on alchemy and medicine. As we will see in the 
following chapter, Emperor Wu chose to adopt Buddhism as state religion 
because it was better suited for his purpose of reinventing the imperial 
figure as a universal, compassionate ruler. Proclaiming the outright 
repression of a religion which many of his subjects subscribed to would 
have run counter to all that he tried to achieve, namely a harmonious 
society with the emperor as political and spiritual leader. He might have 
discouraged the practice of Daoism, as he considered it inferior to 
Buddhism, but that must have been about all the negative measures he 
took towards the restriction of Daoism. 
 
I.3. Assessment of Emperor Wu’s stance towards the Confucian and 
Daoist traditions 
 
 
As we have seen in this chapter, Emperor Wu of the Liang was, 
despite 
his 
reputation 
amongst 
later 
Buddhist 
and 
Confucian 
historiographers, not as single-mindedly Buddhist as he is sometimes 
portrayed to be. He continued to fulfil his Confucian duties as head of state 
and even made concerted efforts to revive the faltering Confucian tradition. 
Although he is often stigmatized as a persecutor of Daoism, we have 
shown that there is little basis to this claim. In fact he lavishly sponsored 
the Daoist community on Mao Shan and relied on the medical and 

37 
 
alchemical expertise of some of its most respected exponents. But 
Emperor Wu was a pragmatic politician, and he realized when he 
ascended the throne that, if he continued down the path of his forerunners, 
his rule would probably end as untimely as theirs. In the practical matters 
of bureaucracy and legislation there was simply no alternative to the 
traditional Confucian system, which meant that Emperor Wu was confined 
to the boundaries set by tradition and by its bearers, the powerful literati 
families. Emperor Wu’s efforts were for the largest part directed towards 
the training of the lower ranking literati families and their integration into 
the official bureaucracy. But he also realised that to continue in his role as 
Confucian head of state would for ever leave him in a vulnerable position, 
as he was essentially dependant on the Confucian tradition, dominated by 
the literati families, for his prestige as emperor. For this reason he set out 
to reform the imperial ritual in a profound way so as to create his own 
legitimacy as a ruler, independent from the existing system that left the 
literati families and the emperor co-dependant on one another for their 
authority as leaders of society. Fully realising the precariousness of his 
position, Emperor Wu made the first steps towards independent legitimacy 
in the field of Confucian ritual. He ordered the compilation of a ritual code 
that would link him directly to the idealized rituals of the Zhou, and return 
the prerogative of determining proper conduct and ceremony to the 
imperial figure. 
But, as we have observed when discussing Emperor Wu’s relation 
to the Confucian tradition, it was clear from the start that Buddhism was 
set up to play the most important role in Emperor Wu’s reforms. For the 
day of the coronation ceremony, he chose the eighth day of the fourth 
month. By the early sixth century, this date was already widely recognized 
among Buddhists as the birthday of Śākyamuni Buddha. One of the 
earliest references to this date can be found in the Xiuxing benqi jing 修行
夲起經 (Scripture on the Origin of the Self-Cultivation [of the Buddha], 
T.184), which was translated by the Indian Zhu Dali 竺大力 (d.u.) and the 

38 
 
Sogdian Kang Mengxiang康孟詳 (d.u.) at the end of the second century.103 
During the festivities in celebration of the Buddha’s birthday it became 
customary to wash a statue of the Buddha with fragrant water in 
commemoration of the washing of the Buddha by the gods immediately 
after his birth. 104 The earliest scripture translated into Chinese that is 
dedicated to the practice of “bathing the Buddha (xifo 洗佛, guanfo 灌佛, 
yufo 浴佛)” is the Guanxi foxingxiang jing 灌洗佛形象經 (Scripture on 
Bathing the Buddha Image, T.695), translated by Faju 法炬 (fl. 290-306) 
around the turn of the third century. This scripture states that all Buddha’s 
from the ten directions are born on the eighth day of the fourth month, all 
of them leave home on this day to embark on their spiritual quest, they all 
achieve enlightenment on this day, and they all enter parinirvāṇ a on this 
day. 105 The earliest record of the performance of the Buddha bathing 
ceremony also dates from the end of the third century,106 and another early 
allusion to it is recorded in the biography of Fotudeng 佛圖澄 (d. 348) in 
the Gaoseng zhuan 高僧傳 (Biographies of Eminent Monks, T.2059; 
compiled by Huijiao 慧皎 (497-554) ca. 530).107
                                                 
103 T.184.463c11. On this scripture, see Zürcher, 1972: 36, 333n99. For an overview of the 
existing translations of the accounts of the Buddha’s life at the end of the fifth century, see 
Mather, 1987: 31-32. 
 Other references to this 
ceremony, predating the Liang dynasty, can be found for both northern 
(Wei shu, 114: 3032) and southern dynasties (Song shu, 47: 1409, Nan shi, 
17: 473; 32: 833), which suggests that by the sixth century the concept of 
the Buddha’s birthday was well known in all of China. The significance of 
Emperor Wu’s symbolic choice of date would therefore not have gone 
unnoticed to the people of his realm. Although there are no other 
references to Buddhist symbolism in the ceremony that inaugurated the 
104 See Zürcher, 1972: 327n53. 
105 T.695.796c16-20. 
106 Zürcher, 1972: 28. 
107 T.2059.384b26. For more on Fotudeng and a full translation of his biography, see Wright, 
1948. 

39 
 
beginning of his reign, it would not be long until Emperor Wu gradually 
introduced more and more Buddhist elements into the imperial ritual and 
ideology. The eighth day of the fourth month would be used for the staging 
of other important events, such as the bodhisattva ordination ceremony, 
which we will discuss in more detail in the following chapter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
CREATING A FOUNDATION OF LEGITIMACY: REINVENTING THE 
IDEOLOGY OF EMPERORSHIP 
 
 
II.1. The bodhisattva ideal 
 
In the bodhisattva concept of Mahāyāna Buddhism Emperor Wu 
found the perfect ideological basis to remould the traditional view on the 
imperial persona.108 Emperor Wu, over the years, carefully constructed the 
foundations for his new image of emperor as bodhisattva, starting off with 
making personal symbolic gestures and gradually building up to more 
institutionalised events. His choice to ascend the throne on the eighth day 
of the fourth month, which coincided with the Buddha’s birthday, must 
surely have had a symbolic significance, although to my knowledge no 
sources mention any Buddhist inspired ceremony to accompany it. It was 
not until 504, also on the Buddha’s birthday, that Emperor Wu publicly 
denounced his belief in Daoism and announced his conversion to 
Buddhism. Although he also urged his ministers and members of his family 
to follow his example, no “official” action was taken.109
                                                 
108 Several sources refer to Emperor Wu’s adoption of titles linked to the bodhisattva ideal. 
The Nan shi (7: 206, 219)  and Wei shu (98: 2187) report that he was addressed as Huangdi 
pusa 皇帝菩薩 (Imperial Bodhisattva). The Buddhist historical work Fozu tongji 佛祖統紀 
(Comprehensive Records of the Buddha, T.2035; compiled by Zhipan 志磐 (d.u.) between 
1258-1269) cites a memorial in which he is addressed as Guozhu jiushi pusa 國主救世菩薩 
(Bodhisattva-ruler that Saves the World). See T.2035.350b23. 
 A few days after 
Emperor Wu’s appeal, two officials sent a memorial to the throne in which 
109 For the discussion on Emperor Wu’s alleged repression of Daoism, see chapter one. 

41 
 
they declared their wish to convert to Buddhism.110 In this memorial, the 
authors already talk about the possible advantage of having an “imperial 
bodhisattva” (huangdi pusa 皇帝菩薩) on the throne to lead the people to 
salvation.111 From this moment on, the official dynastic histories describe 
Emperor Wu’s increasingly ascetic lifestyle, culminating around his fiftieth 
birthday, in 513.112 Renouncing all pleasures of life, Emperor Wu stopped 
eating meat and fish, and limited himself to only one meal a day, 
consisting of bean soup and coarse grains. He dressed in cotton garments, 
ceased all sexual activity, stopped drinking wine and never listened to 
music again. In 517 Emperor Wu ordered the sacrificial victims in state and 
court rituals to be replaced by dough effigies, and two years later, after 
almost two decades on the throne, he extended his prerogative to make 
changes in the traditional (Confucian) imperial ritual to include the realm of 
Buddhist ritual, when he took the bodhisattva vows in a ceremony of his 
own design. Emperor Wu’s bodhisattva ordination ritual has been the 
subject of a detailed study by Andreas Janousch, so I shall limit myself 
here to discussing some aspects relevant to the present research on the 
political use of Buddhism by Emperor Wu.113
By the early sixth century, the bodhisattva ideal had firmly lodged 
itself in the thought-patterns of Chinese Buddhists, and it had become 
fashionable among laymen and monks alike to take the bodhisattva vows 
(pusa jie 菩薩戒) to affirm their aspiration to strive for Buddhahood for the 
 
                                                 
110 T.2103.112b8-c5. This memorial is appended to Emperor Wu’s appeal to stop worshiping 
the teaching of Laozi (Sheshi Lilao daofa zhao 捨事李老道法詔), as preserved in the Guang 
Hongming ji, T.2103.111c24-112c7. 
111 T.2103.112b21-22. 
112 Liang shu, 3: 97; Nan shi, 7: 223. Although only the Nan shi explicitly links this ascetic 
lifestyle to his believe in Buddhism, it is clear that Emperor Wu wanted to create an aura of 
sanctity around his person that could fit both the ideal of the bodhisattva and that of the 
sagacious scholar-recluse. 
113 Janousch, 1998: 173-226; 1999. Also see Yan, 1999: 173-225. 

42 
 
sake of others.114 The origins of the bodhisattva vow in China can be 
traced to the translations of the Daśabhūmikasūtra (Sūtra on the Ten 
Stages [of the Bodhisattva Path])115 and the Bodhisattvabhūmisūtra (Sūtra 
on the Stages of the Bodhisattva [Path]),116 as well as to the indigenous 
Chinese Fanwang jing 梵網經 (Brahmājālasūtra, T.1484).117 At the time of 
Emperor Wu, various methods of bodhisattva ordination, based on these 
and other scriptural sources, were used side by side. Through a careful 
selection of passages from several of these existing methods, Emperor 
Wu constructed his own unique bodhisattva ordination ritual. 118  The 
performative aspects of this ritual are preserved in a Dunhuang manuscript 
entitled Chujiaren shou pusajie fa  出家人受菩薩戒法 (Procedure for 
Ordaining Those Who Have Left the Family Life in the Bodhisattva 
Precepts, Pelliot 2196).119
                                                 
114 For a study of the bodhisattva precepts, see Demiéville, 1930; Kuo, 1994: 37-58. 
 The colophon does not allow us to directly link 
this manuscript to Emperor Wu’s bodhisattva ordination of 519, but as 
115 Translated by Dharmarakṣa (Ch. Zhu fahu 竺法護, ca. 233-311) as Jianbei yiqie zhide jing 
漸備一切智德經 (T.285) and later by Kumārajīva as Shizhu jing 十住經 (T.286). These two 
sūtras are also included as a chapter in the Buddhāvataṃ sakasūtra (Da fangguang fo huayan 
jing 大方廣佛華嚴經), translated by Buddhabhadra (Ch. Fotuobatuoluo 佛馱跋陀羅, 359-429) 
between 418 and 422 (Gregory, 1991: 9. See T.278.542a1-548b29) and by Śikṣānanda (Ch. 
Shicha’nantuo 實叉難陀, 652-710) around 699 (Gregory, 1991: 66. See T.279.178b25-
184c29). 
116 Two translations of this text were made in the fifth century. One is the Pusa di chi jing 菩薩
地持經 (T.1581), translated by Dharmakṣema (Ch. Tanwuchen 曇無讖, 385-433) between 
414 and 421. The other is the Pusa shanjie jing 菩薩善戒經 (T.1582), translated by 
Guṇavarman (Ch. Qiunabamo 求那跋摩, 367-431) in 431. These two translations are possibly 
based on two different Indian versions (Groner, 1990: 226).  
117 The Fanwang jing was traditionally said to have been translated by Kumārajīva in 406, but 
it was in fact composed in China, probably around the middle of the fifth century (see Groner, 
1990a: 252-257). For a translation, see De Groot, 1983. 
118 For Emperor Wu’s scriptural sources, see Janousch, 1998: 177-183; 1999: 116-121. 
119 This manuscript has been transcribed and edited with a short introduction by Tsuchihashi 
Shūkō, 1968. For a summary of the procedure described in this manuscript, see Janousch, 
1999: 123-128. 

43 
 
Andreas Janousch points out, the postscript gives the date of completion 
as the fifth month of 519, which is only one month after Emperor Wu’s 
ordination ritual. In addition, it mentions that the text was copied by 
imperial order.120 If it truly was, then it is very likely that this is the text 
compiled and used by Emperor Wu himself, for it is improbable that he 
would endorse the spread of a rival ordination method alongside his’. 
Contrary to what its title suggests, the Chujiaren shou pusajie fa also 
contains the method for ordaining lay people as bodhisattva.121 In his study 
of this manuscript, Andreas Janousch notices some striking differences 
between the ordination ritual of lay people and members of the monastic 
community. The biggest difference is that, while in the ordination ritual for 
monks and nuns the precepts are itemised in great detail, in the ordination 
ritual for the laity the emphasis is not on the precepts themselves (in fact, 
they are not even summed up before being conferred) but on the religious 
zeal and devotion expected of the bodhisattva-to-be. In the ordination for 
lay people, the presiding “Master of Ceremonies” (zhizhe 智者, lit. “Wise 
man”) expounds the merits and obligations of a bodhisattva and asks the 
candidate whether he or she would be able to perform these duties. The 
Master of Ceremonies then asks twenty specific questions to test the 
willingness of the candidate to make sacrifices for the sake of the greater 
good. These questions include, for example, whether the disciple is willing 
to sacrifice various parts of his body and even his own life for the sake of 
all sentient beings, and whether he or she is able to sacrifice his 
possessions, body, family, and country for the furthering of the Buddhist 
Teaching.122
                                                 
120 Janousch, 1999: 116. 
 Keeping in mind that this ordination ritual was compiled, and 
121 Perhaps the original full title was Zaijia chujia shou pusa jie fa 在家出家受菩薩戒法, as the 
text is referred to by the author in the postscript. See Janousch, 1999: 119. 
122 See Janousch, 1999: 123. These questions on the willingness to sacrifice one’s body, 
family, and possessions already hint to the emperor’s later ceremonies of self-renunciation 
(sheshen 捨身), wherein Emperor Wu gave himself to the monks as slave only to be 
ransomed by huge sums of cash. We shall return to the sheshen ceremony in chapter three. 

44 
 
first performed by Emperor Wu, the question about the willingness to 
sacrifice one’s country (more to the point one’s rule thereof) for the good of 
the Buddhist Dharma seems to make a lot more sense. In front of a great 
mass of witnesses, Emperor Wu thus stated his intentions to work for the 
salvation of all sentient beings and propagate the True Dharma in his role 
as imperial bodhisattva. This strategic move broke him free from the 
shackles of traditional Confucian emperorship, which defined the imperial 
prestige in terms of a privilege bestowed by Heaven. By propagating his 
new bodhisattva ordination ritual, Emperor Wu wanted to create a new 
form of community in which everyone – monks and lay people alike – is 
linked to each other in the universal network of karmic retribution and 
where everyone is equally able and responsible to accumulate merit that 
could be distributed to those who might need it. In this new society, 
religious prestige is measured by the accumulation of merit, and as 
emperor, Wu was in a more powerful position to accumulate merit than 
others. It is exactly this accumulation and distribution of merit that was an 
important aspect of Emperor Wu’s use of Buddhism for the purpose of 
imperial legitimation. 
Before we continue, it is necessary to nuance some of Andreas 
Janousch’s conclusions about Emperor Wu’s bodhisattva ordination ritual. 
When confronted with the above-mentioned differences between the 
ordination procedure for laity and clergy, he deduces that these differences 
were deliberately inserted to symbolically make the monastic ideal of the 
traditional saṃgha inferior to the bodhisattva ideal. 123
                                                 
123 Janousch, 1999: 122; 129. 
 While it is 
undoubtedly so that the altruistic, universal qualities of bodhisattvahood 
were pushed forward as the highest attainable ideal, elements of Emperor 
Wu’s bodhisattva ordination and his broader policies make it unlikely that 
the ultimate goal was to completely bypass the saṃgha as mediators 
between the secular and the sacred. If it were the goal of Emperor Wu’s 
bodhisattva ordination ritual to give the laity complete spiritual 

45 
 
independence from the saṃgha,124 then why was the presiding Master of 
Ceremonies a monk? If bodhisattvahood was deemed to be attainable 
without the mediation of the monastic community, and if the monastic ideal 
was seen as inferior to the bodhisattva ideal, then why did Emperor Wu 
put on a monk’s robe before undergoing the ordination ritual?125 Despite 
the fact that final ordination was granted directly by the Buddha without 
mediation of the Master of Ceremonies who (after having questioned the 
ordinand on his earnestness and religious zeal) merely acted as a 
guarantor,126  the ordinand starts the ceremony by requesting the Master 
of Ceremonies “the favour of being granted the ordination.127” During the 
course of the ceremony, the ordinand was expected to repeatedly show 
his reverence for the Master of Ceremonies, a monk, by bowing to him and 
by touching his feet.128 Andreas Janousch is right when he says that the 
saṃgha was cast in a role as guardian of the precepts,129 but this need not 
be as negative as he interprets it to be, since a great deal of emphasis is 
placed by Emperor Wu on the observance of these rules of behaviour. 
Only if people keep to the bodhisattva precepts can the ideal of a universal 
community in which everyone works together to accrue merit be attained. 
While it is true that the bodhisattva ordination ritual of Emperor Wu 
followed an existing trend that signified a steady departure from the more 
Indianised model of monastic-oriented Buddhism of previous centuries 
towards the more lay-oriented, individualistic Chinese Buddhism of later 
ages,130
                                                 
124 Ibid., 132. 
 it cannot be maintained that this was its explicit purpose. With the 
bodhisattva ordination ritual, as with every other Buddhist element used in 
his reforms, Emperor Wu was very meticulous about providing a sound 
125 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.469b24. 
126 Janousch, 1999: 130-131. 
127 Ibid., 123. 
128 Ibid., 123-125. 
129 Ibid., 133. 
130 Ibid., 132n45. Also see Weinstein, 1973: 269-274. 

46 
 
scriptural basis for his claims. In the colophon to the Chujiaren shou 
pusajie fa, Emperor Wu writes: 
 
The sequence compiled here does not necessarily derive 
from one particular sūtra. [The individual stes] follow what has 
been translated from sūtras and are substantiated through 
quotations. Some of the instructions of these sūtras were not 
complete. [Thus,] I have compared [these scriptural sources] 
to orally transmitted practices, and, [so] there is a basis for 
everything. I did not presume to hold to my own privately 
cherished [views], [which would lead to] unfounded action. 
Only the order of the compiled [instruction] has been arranged 
[relying on] my own power to make the “Method by Which 
Laypeople and Those Who Have Joined the Sangha Receive 
the Bodhisattva Precepts,” zaijia chujia shou pusa jie 在家出
家受菩薩戒. [Thus,] I do not dare to denigrate myself. As 
everything has been compiled and collected by myself, how 
could I exalt myself [and this ritual]? [On the other hand,] 
everything in this text is [either] from the sūtras, i.e., is the 
Buddha’s word, or is from the sayings of the bodhisattvas and 
is based on their practices. How could I [therefore] slight 
myself [and this ritual]?131
 
 
This colophon is an important piece of information, as it describes in the 
words of emperor Wu himself his strategy of taking elements from different 
scriptures and pasting them back together (admittedly sometimes out of 
context at his own discretion, as it was his imperial prerogative to make 
changes in the realm of imperial ceremony) while adding, where necessary, 
elements from “orally transmitted practices”. This is nothing more than a 
fancy way of saying that he took from the scriptures the elements that 
                                                 
131 Original text in Tsuchihashi, 1968: 109. Translation by Janousch, 1998: 181. 

47 
 
were useful to his purposes, and if he did not find what he needed, simply 
added them on the recommendation and authority of his (monastic) 
advisors. The great care taken in securing scriptural authority for his 
Buddhist reforms is characteristic for Emperor Wu’s methodology. As the 
saṃgha was not only a guardian of the precepts, but of the scriptural 
tradition as well, Emperor Wu still relied on the exegetical compliance of 
the members of the monastic community to legitimize his claims in the 
sphere of Buddhism. 
To conclude, the reason that the ordination ritual for the laity was so 
different from that for the clergy, was probably not because it was the 
intention to lower the prestige of the monastic community below that of the 
ordained laity, but because they were simply designed for different target 
audiences. The ordination for monks and nuns focuses more on the 
technical side of things, such as going over the different precepts for 
novices, monks and bodhisattvas, because this was after all the 
distinguishing feature of what it meant to be a monk. The ordination for lay 
people puts the emphasis more on the devotional aspect, because one 
could not expect all lay people to uphold all of the regulations all of the 
time in real life situations. More important for these lay people was the 
expression of their religious zeal, rather than the technicalities of the 
precepts themselves. As a result of the huge popularity of Emperor Wu’s 
bodhisattva ordination, the saṃgha did come under pressure, but not in 
the way suggested by Andreas Janousch. It was not the saṃgha‘s status 
that became affected by it, but it did increase the pressure on the monastic 
ideal, which translated into higher demands on the monks’ and nuns’ 
behaviour and religious motivation, as we shall see with the propagation of 
the vegetarian ideal. When so many lay people took the bodhisattva vows 
and strove to uphold the bodhisattva precepts, it follows that those who 
had left the family life in pursuit of spiritual advancement were expected to, 
at the very least, uphold these same principals. If not, then what was the 
point of becoming a monk or nun? In other words, the true power of 

48 
 
Emperor Wu’s bodhisattva ordination lay in the fact that it used an existing 
concept to create a religious community that transcended the boundaries 
between monks and laymen, and “united the worlds of the secular and the 
sacred under his all-encompassing rule.132
For now, let us return to Emperor Wu and the political dimension of 
his bodhisattva ordination. A description of Emperor Wu’s ordination can 
be found in the biography of the monk Huiyue 慧約 (450-535), who acted 
as ‘Master of Ceremonies’ on the occasion.
” This religious community was 
bound to each other through the workings of karmic retribution, so all 
members of this community were called upon to look out for one another 
by adhering to a set of moral guidelines, captured in the bodhisattva vows. 
But through all this, the saṃgha never lost its prestige as an important 
pillar of the triratna, and remained important as a field of merit to Emperor 
Wu and to all pious laymen. 
133 Although the biography 
does not go into the details of the ceremony itself, it does reveal some 
interesting elements. First of all, it says that Emperor Wu “humbled his 
imperial dignity by bowing down three times in reverence and temporarily 
changing his imperial robes for a monk’s robe (屈萬乘之尊。申在三之敬。
暫屏袞服恭受田衣。)”. The fact that Emperor Wu discards his imperial 
robes is a symbolic transition from his role as a secular ruler to that of a 
spiritual leader.134
                                                 
132 Ibid., 113. 
 In switching garments, Emperor Wu did not really mean 
133 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.469b21-28. For a translation, see Janousch, 1999: 114-115 
(For the reference to Huiyue’s role as Master of Ceremonies, see T.2060.464c5). According 
to the Xu Gaoseng zhuan, Zhizang was also nominated for the job of Master of Ceremonies 
by the Rectifier of Monks Huichao, but Emperor Wu decided on Huiyue instead 
(T.2060.467a15-17). This is more than likely because of the fact that Zhizang had foiled 
Emperor Wu’s plans on more than one occasion, such as his attempt to become a lay 
Rectifier of Monks. For more on the selection of the Master of Ceremonies, see Yan, 1999: 
191-199. 
134 Emperor Wu’s biography in the Wei shu (96: 2172-2188) also explicitly mentions how he 
consistently exchanged his ritual imperial robes for a monk’s robe when performing Buddhist 
rituals (see Wei shu, 96: 2187). The Nan shi contains two more examples of Emperor Wu 

49 
 
to debase his imperial persona, but aimed at heightening his prestige and 
extending his influence by assuming the part of a religious saviour figure. 
Second, it says that Emperor Wu was the very first to be ordained, and on 
that day another forty-eight thousand people (members of the imperial 
household, as well as clergy and laity, literati and commoners) were 
registered (zhuji 著籍) as [bodhisattva] disciples. If the account of the 519 
bodhisattva ordination is accurate, this would mean that everyone who 
took the bodhisattva vows was entered into a register. Since there is no 
mention of this register in other sources, it is impossible to ascertain what 
the function of such a register might have been. Was a person’s real name 
entered into this register, or was the newly ordained bodhisattva’s religious 
name written down so as to create an alternate community of initiated? Did 
the bodhisattva ordination come with any rights or duties such as 
exemption of taxes (like an ordained monk or nun) or obligatory financial 
contributions? Were these registers consulted when it was time to appoint 
offices or consider promotions? Unfortunately, until some new sources turn 
up, we may never know the answer to these tantalising questions. 
Regardless of the fact whether or not these registers were used as an 
incentive or pressure tool, the massive scale on which the people of the 
Liang are said to have taken the bodhisattva vows suggests that this 
strategy of Emperor Wu was one of the most successful in the whole 
campaign for the Buddhification of state and court ritual. Not only Buddhist 
sources like the biographies of Huiyue and Fayun法雲 (467-529) speak of 
the large number of people who “followed the fashion of the time (qushi 趣
時)” and underwent Emperor Wu’s bodhisattva ordination.135
                                                                                                                
dressing in monastic robes during Buddhist gatherings, which suggests that this had become 
a standard symbolic gesture (see Nan shi, 7: 206; 7: 218). 
 The official 
dynastic histories, which generally take a censorious or indifferent stance 
towards Emperor Wu’s Buddhist activities, have records of this as well. 
Although the bodhisattva ordination of Emperor Wu himself is largely 
135 See Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.496b21-28 and T.2060.464c5-14 respectively. 

50 
 
ignored – save for the Nanshi, which laconically states: “On the eighth day 
of the forth month the emperor received the Buddha precepts at the Wu’ai 
hall.136
In 524, Xiao Yu 蕭昱 (d.u.), a paternal cousin of Emperor Wu, was 
brought up on charges for casting unauthorised coin money. His family 
background saved him from execution, but as an alternative he was 
banished to Linhai 臨海, about 300 km southeast of the capital Jiankang. 
However, before he was even half way there, Emperor Wu recalled him to 
the capital, on the condition that he would take the bodhisattva vows. 
Moved by this act of clemency, Xiao Yu changed his behaviour and firmly 
kept to the precepts, earning the praise and encouragement of Emperor 
Wu.
” – the biography sections of both the Liangshu and Nanshi contain 
references to people who took the bodhisattva vows. The fact that several 
records of the bodhisattva ordination made it into the dynastic histories 
despite their conservative, anti-Buddhist bias is a sign of the deep 
penetration of this custom in the society of the time. 
137
The biography of Jiang Ge 江革 (d. 535)
 This incident shows that Emperor Wu’s bodhisattva ordination was 
not merely intended as a tool for imperial legitimation, but was genuinely 
believed to have the potency to change a person’s behaviour for the better, 
as this story no doubt was meant to illustrate. In this instance, it also 
allowed the emperor to camouflage the preferential treatment of one of his 
relatives as the act of a compassionate bodhisattva-emperor. 
138
 
 mentions how: 
時 高 祖 盛 於 佛 教。 朝 賢 多 啟 求 受 戒。139
at the time, Emperor Wu was deeply immersed in 
Buddhism,
 
140
                                                 
136 Nan shi, 6: 197. See Janousch, 1999: 114. 
 and many court nobles requested to receive the 
[bodhisattva] precepts. 
137 Liang shu, 24: 372; Nan shi, 51: 1265. 
138 Liang shu, 36: 522-526; Nan shi, 60: 1473-1477. 
139 Liang shu, 36: 524; Nan shi, 60: 1475. 

51 
 
 
Jiang Ge sincerely believed in cause and effect (yinguo 因果), but the 
emperor, who was not aware of this, labelled him a non-believer. In an 
effort to change Jiang Ge’s mind, Wu wrote him a poem called “Awakening 
the Mind” (jueyi shi 覺意詩), which was accompanied by an order that said: 
“One cannot but believe in retribution in this world. Why should you 
oppose me like you opposed Yuan Yanming元延明 (d.u.)? 141
                                                                                                                
140 As an illustration of how much the official historians frowned upon Emperor Wu’s 
sponsorship of Buddhism, we see that the Nan shi uses the much stronger and more 
negative expression ‘deluded by Buddhism’ (huo yu fojiao  惑於佛教). 
” With this 
question Emperor Wu clearly links the validity of the doctrine of karmic 
retribution to the legitimacy of his rule as emperor. The reason that Jiang 
Ge stubbornly refused to serve Yuan Yanming was that he did not 
recognize him as his legitimate sovereign. If Jiang Ge saw Emperor Wu as 
his legitimate sovereign, then he should accept the reality of karmic 
retribution. If he refused to belief in the Buddhist doctrine of cause and 
consequence, then this would be interpreted as a rejection of the 
141 When Yuan Faseng 元法僧, governor of Xuzhou 徐州 (in present day northern Jiangsu), 
changed his allegiance from the Wei to the Liang in 525, he brought the territory of 
Pengcheng 彭城 with him. Jiang Ge was dispatched by the Liang court to assist Yuan Faseng 
at Pengcheng, but by the time he got there, it had already been reconquered by Wei troops, 
and Jiang Ge was captured. Yuan Yanming, the new governor of Xuzhou, heard of his talents 
and sought to employ him. Jiang Ge, feigning an illness of the feet, did not bow to him. 
Yanming wanted to punish him by hurting the very feet where Jiang Ge claimed to feel pain, 
but when he noticed the severity in Jiang Ge’s speech and facial expression, he decided not 
to. In another incident, Jiang Ge scolded one of his fellow captives for cooperating with 
Yanming. When the latter heard of this, he ordered Jiang Ge to write the text for a 
dedicational stele and for a sacrificial ceremony. Ge once again refused in protest of his 
prolonged captivity. Yanming repeatedly pressed him under the threat of suffering, and when, 
finally, Jiang Ge was brought in for whipping, he turned to Yanming with a stern countenance 
and said: “I am sixty years old. You cannot kill me without reporting this to your lord. But 
though I might die on this fortunate day, I swear I will never pick up a brush for you.” 
Realising that he could never break Jiang Ge’s spirit, Yanming stopped his attempts to 
coerce him into submission. A short while later, Jiang Ge was released and sent back to the 
Liang court with a letter of praise from his former captor (Liang shu, 36: 524). 

52 
 
legitimacy of his rule, parallel to the case of Yuan Yanming. Thus, the 
belief in karmic retribution is seen as proof of loyalty to the emperor and 
acceptance of the legitimacy of his rule, founded as it was in Buddhist 
principles. The biography goes on to report that immediately after, Jiang 
Ge begged to receive the bodhisattva precepts, thus clearly pledging his 
allegiance to Emperor Wu. From this account one cannot help but feel that, 
at the time of Emperor Wu, taking the bodhisattva vows was not always a 
voluntary decision to make, and political reasons were at least as 
important as religious motivation. As the biography of Jiang Ge shows, an 
official who did not take the bodhisattva vows was clearly at risk of being 
labelled a potential political adversary. 
Michel Strickmann says that even the Daoist alchemist Tao 
Hongjing took the bodhisattva vows,142 which, if true, would be another 
potent example of the socio-political pressure that came along with it. 
Unfortunately, he does not list a source for this claim, and based on the 
account in the Liang shu and Nan shi, it seems that Tao Hongjing did take 
the five precepts for Buddhist lay people (wu dajie 五大戒) on the occasion 
of his visit to the Aśoka temple in 505, but there is no mention of him 
taking the bodhisattva vows.143 Since he was favoured by Emperor Wu for 
his skill in alchemy, Tao Hongjing might have gone through the motions of 
taken the lay precepts to please his benefactor, but from the 
correspondence between him and Shen Yue, it is clear that he did not 
have a particularly high opinion of the Buddhist doctrine of karman.144
The Wei shu, which is noticeably cynical about Emperor Wu’s lavish 
sponsorship of Buddhism, has the following entry: 
 It is 
therefore unlikely that he would have undergone Emperor Wu’s 
bodhisattva ordination ritual as a sign of his approval. 
 
                                                 
142 Strickmann, 1978: 471. 
143 Liang shu, 51: 743; Nan shi, 76: 1899. 
144 T.2103.122b-123a. See Mather, 1988: 138-141. 

53 
 
令 其 王 侯 子 弟 皆 受 佛 誡。 有 事 佛 精 苦 者, 輒 加 以 菩 
薩 之 號。 其 臣 下 奏 表 上 書 亦 稱 衍 為 皇 帝 菩 薩。 衍 所 
部 刺 史 郡 守 初 至 官 者, 皆 責 其 上 禮 獻 物。 多 者 便 云 
稱 職, 所 貢 微 少, 言 為 弱 惰。 故 其 牧 守, 在 官 皆 競 事 聚 
斂, 劫 剝 細 民, 以 自 封 殖。 多 妓 妾 粱 肉 金 綺, 百 姓 怨 苦, 
咸 不 聊 生。145
[Emperor Wu] ordered his noblemen, sons and brothers to 
take the Buddhist precepts (most likely the bodhisattva 
precepts). Those who served the Buddha, strove [for good] 
(Skt.vīrya) and underwent hardships (Skt. duḥkha) were 
unceremoniously awarded the title of bodhisattva. When his 
ministers wrote memorials to the throne, they called [Xiao] 
Yan “imperial bodhisattva” (huangdi pusa). When the 
governors and prefects appointed by Yan first took up their 
office, they were all commanded to make offerings.
 
146
 
 In 
many cases it happened that, although a person was 
competent in his function, when his offerings were small, he 
was labelled as weak and indolent. Therefore, once Yan’s 
officials were in office, they all vied with each other in 
accumulating wealth through heavy taxation, and they 
plundered and fleeced the populace in order to get 
themselves appointed to office. While they had many 
concubines, fine millet, meat, precious metals and silk, the 
people suffered hardships and had nothing left from which to 
live. 
                                                 
145 Wei shu, 96: 2187. 
146 It is not very clear for whom these offerings were destined. If these offerings were meant 
to be made to the “Imperial Bodhisattva”, it seems unlikely that he would keep them for 
himself, but rather it can be assumed that these donations would be handed over to Emperor 
Wu’s various institutions for meritorious works. Another possibility is that the offerings were to 
be made to the Buddhist monasteries directly, as a sign of allegiance to Emperor Wu’s cause. 

54 
 
Although this description of the influence of Buddhism in the appointment 
to office is somewhat coloured by anti-Buddhist feelings, there seems to 
be no reason to assume we have to discard it as totally fictional either. As 
the account of Jiang Ge shows, officials were sometimes pressed to 
openly show their support of Buddhism or run the risk of being labelled as 
potential subversive elements. Therefore there is no reason to assume 
that those who were a candidate for being appointed to some of the 
highest offices, such as governor and prefect, were not expected to make 
massive donations as a token of their allegiance to the Buddhist 
programme of Emperor Wu. And even if we compensate for possible 
exaggerations by the author of the Weishu, it is quite plausible that some 
officials sought to heighten their chances of promotion by making large 
donations to Emperor Wu’s cause. It is difficult to ascertain whether these 
large scale donations put such devastating extra strain on the taxpaying 
population, since this argument is so reminiscent of the traditional 
accusation by anti-Buddhists that the sponsoring of Buddhist monasteries 
is a waste of government resources.147
Before we conclude this discussion on the bodhisattva precepts, I 
would like to point out a conflicting source that I came across in my 
research on the political aspect of the ordinations. The Bianzheng lun 辯正
論 (Treatise on Discerning the Right) devotes its entire last chapter to 
“exposing the falsehoods of Daoism (chu dao weimiu 出道偽謬).” Towards 
the end of this chapter, the author, Falin, encloses Liang Wudi’s edict of 
504 in which the latter denounces his belief in Daoism and urges others to 
follow his example. This is followed by a letter written by his sixth son, Xiao 
Lun 蕭綸 (ca. 503/8-551),
   
148
                                                 
147 For more on the economics of Emperor Wu’s Buddhist ritual programme, see further. 
 in which he asks permission to denounce 
148 Despite his alleged bodhisattva ordination, Xiao Lun appears to have been severely 
lacking in bodhisattva qualities. His biography mentions several incidents in which he 
humiliates or even murders commoners. He is also credited with having planned several 
attempts on his father’s life, for which he was initially stripped of his rank and status. He was, 
however, pardoned by his father and reinstated. When Hou Jing invaded the capital, Xiao Lun 

55 
 
Daoism and take the bodhisattva precepts (chi she laozi shou pusa jie wen 
勅捨老子受菩薩戒文).149 According to Falin, Xiao Lun received permission 
to “turn away from his misguided beliefs and set out on the right path” on 
May 5, 505. If this account is reliable, then this would mean that the 
imperially sanctioned bodhisattva ordination came into play shortly after 
Wu’s denunciation of Daoism, fifteen years before the emperor’s public 
bodhisattva ordination. However, reliability is exactly what this document is 
lacking, as in 505 Xiao Lun was only two years old at he most.150 Though 
not likely, it is still possible that this request was written on the young 
prince’s behalf. But yet another piece of information contradicts this. Xiao 
Lun is referred to as the Prince of Shaoling 邵陵王 (a fiefdom of two-
thousand households), but he did not receive this title until 514.151
From the examples above, it is clear that, aside from a ritual function, 
the bodhisattva ordination ritual had a political and social dimension as 
well. Since Emperor Wu had established himself as an imperial 
 Both 
these factors suggest that this document has either been dated incorrectly 
by Falin, or that it is a forgery, made to convince the rulers of the Tang – 
who were supporters of Daoism – that there were precedents for members 
of the imperial family to embrace the Buddhist faith. We can therefore not 
take Falin’s proof for an early performance of the imperially sanctioned 
bodhisattva ordination into account. 
                                                                                                                
fled to the Northern Qi 北齊 (550-577), where he was recognized as the Prince of Liang (i.e. 
rightful successor to the Liang throne), but shortly after he was captured and killed by the 
Western Wei 西魏 (534-556), who feared he might have been planning an offensive against 
their own contender for the Liang throne, Xiao Cha 蕭詧 (519-562). For his biography, see 
Liang shu, 29: 431-436; Nan shi, 53: 1322-1326. Cf. Buttars, 1998: 269-270, 414-415. 
149 Bianzheng lun, T.2110.549c20-550a18. 
150 His precise date of birth is not given in his biography, but we can estimate his approximate 
year of birth. Xiao Lun was designated as the sixth son of emperor Wu. Xiao Gang 蕭綱, the 
later Emperor Jianwen 簡文 (r.549-551), was born in 503 as Wudi’s third son. Xiao Yi 蕭繹, 
Wudi’s seventh son, was born in 508. Therefore Xiao Lun must have been born between 503 
and 508 to merit his designation as sixth son.  
151 Liang shu, 29: 431. 

56 
 
bodhisattva, his prestige as emperor-saviour now hinged on his ability to 
accumulate and distribute merit on a scale that was bigger than anyone in 
the empire or the entire world could muster. In chapter three will shall take 
a closer look at the different initiatives of Emperor Wu for accumulating 
merit and explore how he distributed it in large orchestrated events. 
 
II.2. Final [Period of the] Dharma (mofa 末法) 
 
Another important element with which Emperor Wu sought to shape 
his new world vision, was the widespread notion that the Buddhist teaching 
had entered, or was about to enter, the final phase before its total 
disappearance from this world. In particular he focused on the role he felt a 
bodhisattva-emperor should assume during this final period, while at the 
same time carefully avoiding the eschatological imagery which had come 
to surround this concept. Sometime between 519 and 522, Emperor Wu 
had conceived of the idea to assert his personal control over the saṃgha’s 
behaviour by proclaiming himself “Lay Rectifier of Monks (baiyi sengzheng
白衣僧正)”.152
                                                 
152 The title of sengzheng 僧正 “Rectifier of Monks” was given to the supervisor of the 
Buddhist saṃgha, who was primarily responsible for upkeeping the moral standards of the 
monks and nuns. The sengzheng was recruited from within the saṃgha and appointed by the 
emperor. The term first appeared under the Liang dynasty (see Forte, 2003: 1043-1070). The 
baiyi 白衣 (white-clad) in Emperor Wu’s title, refers to his lay status. In the 
Mahāprajñāpāramitāśāstra (Dazhidu lun 大智度論, T 1509), the term baiyi 白衣 (“White Clad”, 
Skt.: avadātavasana) refers to a Buddhist lay believer who observes the ten basic precepts, 
without having been ordained. In China, the habit of wearing white clothes as a characteristic 
of Buddhist lay devotees was rather unusual. Instead, the symbolism of white clothes became 
in some way related to prophecies about a future ruler. It does not appear that Emperor Wu 
intended to use this connotation of the term for propaganda reasons, as later the Sui 
emperors would. See Seiwert, 2003: 153-157. 
 In the biography of the monk Zhizang智藏 (458-522) we find 

57 
 
a rendering of the discussion that ensued after Emperor Wu asked for this 
monk’s opinion concerning his plan: 153
 
 
後以疏聞藏。藏以筆橫轢之告曰。佛法大海非俗人所知。帝覽
之不以介意。斯亦拒懷略萬乘季代一人。而帝意彌盛。事將施
行於世。雖藏後未同。而敕已先被。晚於華光殿設會。眾僧大
集。後藏方至。帝曰。比見僧尼多未誦習。白衣僧正不解科
條。俗法治之傷於過重。弟子暇日欲自為白衣僧正亦依律立
法。此雖是法師之事。然佛亦復付囑國王。向來與諸僧共論。
咸言不異。法師意旨如何。藏曰。陛下欲自臨僧事。實光顯正
法。但僧尼多不如律。所願垂慈矜恕此事為後。帝曰。弟子此
意豈欲苦眾僧耶。正謂俗愚過重。自可依律定之。法師乃令矜
恕。此意何在。答曰。陛下誠欲降重從輕。但末代眾僧難皆如
律。故敢乞矜恕。154
Later, in a written demand, he asked Zhizang [for his opinion]. 
Zhizang crossed out the letter with a brush and said: “The 
vast sea of the Dharma (dharmasamudra) is not something a 
layman can understand.” The emperor, upon inspecting [the 
reply], did not think it was something he had to take seriously. 
This was, to him, just another monk who in the age of decline 
(jidai) opposed and belittled the emperor. In any case, his 
mind had been made up to put this measure into effect, even 
if Zhizang would disagree to the end. So a decree had been 
issued to arrange an assembly at the Huaguang Hall
 
155
                                                 
153 Zhizang’s biography can be found in the Xu Gaoseng zhuan 續高僧傳, T.2060.465c7-
4467b27. We shall examine the figure of Zhizang and his discussion with Emperor Wu in 
more detail in chapter four. 
 that 
evening. The monastic community had already assembled in 
great numbers, and only later did Zhizang arrive. The 
154 T.2060.466b14-b28. For a discussion of this debate, see Janousch, 1999: 137-140. 
155 For more on this hall, see Chen, 2007: 22-26. 

58 
 
emperor said: “If we scrutinize the monks and nuns, [we find] 
that there are many who are not well versed [in the Buddhist 
teaching]. If a lay Rectifier of Monks should not understand 
the regulations [of the vinaya], and should want to control 
them through the use of secular law, they would be harmed 
by excessive strictness. I, the Buddha’s disciple, will in my 
spare time assume the role of lay Rectifier of Monks, and 
shall establish a law codex [for monks and nuns], based on 
the vinaya. Even though this is [normally] the duty of a 
Dharma master, the Buddha also entrusted it to the king of 
state. I have hitherto discussed this matter with [members of] 
the saṃ ̣ gha, and they all expressed the same [support for my 
plan]. Dharma master, what is your opinion?” Zhizang replied: 
“Your Majesty wishes to personally supervise the affairs of the 
monastic community, and this will truly bring splendour to the 
True Dharma. But even though many monks and nuns do not 
act in accordance to the vinaya, the vows you made to be 
compassionate and forgiving are more important than this 
matter [of punishing them for their wrongdoings]. The emperor 
said: “How could it be my intention as the Buddha’s disciple to 
wish hardship on the saṃgha? As I just said, excessive 
strictness is [an attribute] of ignorant laymen. I [on the other 
hand] can personally bring [the samgha] to order by relying 
on the vinaya regulations. When you, Dharma master, 
commanded to be compassionate and forgiving, what did you 
mean by this?” Zhizang answered: “Your Majesty truly wishes 
to stop being severe and rather be lenient. However, during 
the final period [of the Dharma] (modai) it is nearly impossible 
for all members of the saṃgha to act according to the vinaya. 
Therefore, I dare to beg you to be compassionate and 
forgiving. 

59 
 
  
Embedded in this conversation are important clues to Emperor Wu’s 
ideological justification for assuming control of the monastic community. 
First, there are the two terms jidai  季代 and modai  末代, which hint at the 
use of mofa imagery in this debate. Second, we notice how Emperor Wu 
claims that Buddha himself entrusted the task of regulating the monastic 
community to the king of state. Before elaborating on these two markers of 
Emperor Wu’s use of mofa belief in the shaping of his Buddhist world 
vision, I will take a few pages to go into the concept of the decline of the 
Buddhist teaching as it existed at the beginning of the sixth century.156
 
 
II.2.1. The Final [Period of the] Dharma at the time of Liang Wudi  
 
 Since the complex subject of mofa cannot possibly be done justice 
here in a few pages, I shall limit myself to some relevant remarks on the 
Buddhist concept of decline as it was conceptualised both in institutional 
and non-institutional Buddhist circles.157
 
 
 
                                                 
156 The most up-to-date study of the Buddhist doctrine of decline is that of Nattier (1991). For 
some interesting comments on Nattier’s book, see the review by Hubbard (1993). In his study 
on the Three Stages (Sanjie 三階) movement, Hubbard (2001) also gives an extensive 
treatment of the rhetorical function of mofa. See also Hubbard (1999), Chappell (1980), 
Lamotte (1958: 210-222), Yamada Ryūjō (1956), Takao (1937). 
157 With the terms “institutional” and “non-institutional” Buddhism, I wish to distinguish 
between a) Buddhism as it was shaped by an established (mostly metropolitan) clerical elite, 
who (often in conjunction with the secular authorities) built a canon of scriptures which to 
them contained the authoritative Buddhist teachings; and b) so-called “popular” Buddhism as 
it was practiced by the common people, which readily adopted elements from local Chinese 
cults and practices. It must be said that on more than one occasion the elements of folk belief 
which sneaked into Buddhism were valorised by the elite doctrinal specialists, and 
subsequently became part of the mainstream tradition. 

60 
 
Mofa in institutional Buddhist circles 
 
The Buddhist prophesy of its own decline is almost as old as 
Buddhism itself. Even though the Buddha’s teaching was conceived as 
absolute and unchanging (Skt. paramārtha), the fact that it was taught, 
learned, and practiced by sentient beings meant that it also operated, like 
these sentient beings, within the conventional realm (Skt. samvrti), and 
was thus transitory (Skt. anitya) and subject to causality. 
One of the earliest traditions foretelling the eventual extinction of the 
Dharma is the story of Mahāprajāpatī, the aunt and foster mother of the 
Buddha.158 When she asks permission to go forth and become a nun, her 
request is initially refused by Buddha, but owing to the arbitration of 
Ānanda, she was in the end granted ordination. However, Buddha warns 
Ānanda that because of the admittance of women into the order, the true 
Dharma will only endure for five hundred instead of one thousand years. 
Unrelated to this anecdote, there are other predictions about the extinction 
of the Dharma in both Hīnayāna and Mahāyāna texts.159
                                                 
158 For a study on the story of Mahāprajāpatī, see Heirman, 2001: 278-293. See also Nattier, 
1991: 28-33. 
 It can thus be 
159 One of the more famous stories in Hīnayāna literature is that of the King of Kauśāmbī. This 
story is set in an unspecified future time, when northwest India is attacked by a coalition of 
foreign kings, and Buddhists everywhere are brutally persecuted. The King of Kauśāmbī will 
defeat this alliance of anti-Buddhist kings, but fearing the karmic consequences of his bloody 
military campaign, he will invite all the monks of Jambudvīpa to the capital to attend a great 
posadha ceremony in order to gain merit for himself. At this ceremony, however, a conflict 
arises between the followers of the last arhat named Sūrata, and those of the last tripitaka-
master named Śisyaka. The following struggle ends in the death of all monks present and 
with that, the Correct Teaching will disappear from the world until the future Buddha Maitreya 
will bring it back. For the different versions of this story, see Nattier (1991: 145-207). For 
other predictions of decline in Hīnayāna, see Chappell (1980: 124-133); Nattier (1991: 27-64 
passim). Major Mahāyāna texts with reference to the extinction of the Dharma are the Lotus 
Sūtra 
(Saddharmapundarīka-sūtra), 
Diamond 
(Cutter) 
Sūtra 
(Vajracchedikā-
prajñāpāramitā-sūtra) and other major Prajñāpāramitā scriptures; the Mahāparinirvāna-

61 
 
said that the ultimate demise of the Buddhist Dharma was universally 
accepted throughout the Buddhist community, and was certainly not 
considered heterodox. It is interesting to see then that many scriptures 
which formed the basis for these beliefs blame the downfall of Buddhism 
(though inevitable in any case, due to the working of causality) on the 
laxity 
and 
moral 
depravity 
within 
the 
samgha.
160
 The 
Mahāparinirvānasūtra translation by Faxian 法顯 (ca. 340- ca. 420),161 
for example, quotes Buddha as saying that after his nirvāna, eighty 
years before the True Dharma will be extinguished, evil monks will join up 
with demons to corrupt and destroy the True Dharma. They will 
themselves make [fake] scriptures in which they turn right and wrong 
upside down.162 It is peculiar that a religion would make prophesies about 
its own disappearance, let alone hold its own clergy accountable for this 
demise. As Buddhism gained popularity in China, the latter would be used 
against it not only by opponents of this non-Chinese religion, but also by 
sectarian Buddhist milieus who singled out the established clergy as the 
evil monks who are responsible for the downfall of the Buddhist teaching of 
which the texts speak.163
                                                                                                                
sūtra, which in its Chinese recension also mentions the Kauśāmbī story (T.374.473c14-
474a5); and the Sukhāvatīvyūha-sūtra (Hubbard, 2001: 56). 
 
160 Not all scriptures that predict a decline of Buddhism offer any explanation of its cause, 
though. For a short treatment of the reasons for decline, see Nattier, 1991: 119-132. 
161 Three versions of the Mahāparinirvānasūtra exist in Chinese: (1) the Da banniyuan jing 
大般泥洹經 in 6 fascicles (T.376), a short, preliminary translation by Faxian 法顯 (? - 422), 
made between 416 and 418; (2) the Da banniepan jing 大般涅槃經 in 40 fascicles (T.374), a 
more complete version, translated by Tanwuchen 曇無讖 (?Dharmaksema) (385-433) 
between 414 and 421 (also called the Northern Text); and (3) the Da banniepan jing 大般涅槃
經 in 36 fascicles (T.375), which is a revision and integration of versions (1) and (2), edited by 
Huiyan 慧嚴, Xie Lingyun 謝靈運and others during the first half of the Liu Song (420-479) 
Dynasty (also called the Southern Text). See Demiéville et al., 1978: 47, 243; Mizuno, 1982: 
195. For a translation into English of the northern text (T.374), see K. Yamamoto, 1973-1975. 
162 T.376.894c9-12. 
163 The orthodox monks in turn applied the same judgement to the sectarians, blaming them 
and their heterodox views and interpretations for the sorry state the Buddhist monastic 

62 
 
Besides struggling to cope with the consequences of the decline 
theory (mainly the question whether it was still possible to attain true 
insight and correct practice in the time of decline), Chinese Buddhists also 
looked into the academic question of how the dates for the respective 
stages in the decline of the Buddhist doctrine were to be calculated. 
Already early on in India there existed a tradition that after the “golden 
age” of the Buddha’s own lifetime would follow a less favourable period in 
which it would be increasingly difficult to practice and study the True 
Teaching, and in which more and more misconceptions would gain 
currency, as it was no longer possible to check doubtful issues with the 
teacher. But the stages in the existence of the Buddha’s doctrine were not 
dated the same by everybody, and different timetables of decline existed 
side by side.164 Stemming from the traditional Chinese preoccupation with 
history, these timetables were used by Chinese Buddhists to locate their 
place in Buddhist history. Later Chinese Buddhist scholars such as Jizang 
吉藏 (549-623), Fei Changfang 費長房 (d. after 596), Daoshi 道世 (d. 
683), 165 and others would compare all the existing schemes known to 
them in an attempt to establish a definitive historical timetable of 
decline,166
                                                                                                                
community was in. Daoxuan 道宣 (596-667), for example, saw the widespread distribution of 
heterodox scriptures (i.e. scriptures that were not officially sanctioned by the established 
clergy through admission in the catalogues of canonical texts, see note 69) as an evidence 
that the final period of the Dharma had been reached (T.2149.333c26). See Seiwert, 2003: 
132. 
 but already from the fifth century there are records of people 
164 For an overview of the existing timetables of decline, see Nattier, 1991: 27-64. Also see 
Chappell, 1980: 133-135. 
165 For references, see Hubbard, 2001: 68, note 41. 
166 It is to the efforts of these scholars that we owe the scheme of the “three stages (sanjie 三
階) of the teaching”, dividing the post-Buddha era into three periods: a first period of the True 
Dharma (zhengfa 正法), during which the teachings of Buddha are known and practiced in all 
their purity; a second period of the Semblance Dharma (xiangfa 像法), during which religious 
practice limits itself to the emulation of external forms, but lacks true insight; and a third and 

63 
 
dating a certain historical event, or an historical person in reference to the 
timetables of decline.167 Emperor Wu of the Liang is also said to have 
historically situated Aśvaghosa (Ch. Maming 馬鳴; second century CE) 
at the time of the True Teaching (zhengfa) and Nāgārjuna (Ch. Longshu 龍
樹; late second century CE) at the time of the Semblance Teaching 
(xiangfa),168
 
 which proves his familiarity with, and adoption of the widely 
held Buddhist notion of decline. As we shall see, there was, at the time of 
Emperor Wu, no uniform terminology to describe the point in time when 
the Buddhist doctrine is about to disappear from this world, but the belief 
that this moment was inevitably to come (or had already begun) certainly 
had currency among all layers of monks and laymen. The noticeable 
difference between the institutional and non-institutional Buddhist circles 
was mainly the adding of apocalyptic themes by the latter.  
 
                                                                                                                
last period of the Final Dharma (mofa 末法) in which even the semblance of religious practice 
is gone and the world is lost in sin and injustice. 
Hubbard compares the development of the Chinese tripartite system of decline to the 
construction of the panjiao 判教systems. He argues that “the various systems of organizing 
the teachings along a continuum of decline should be seen as but another variant of p’an 
chiao, including the polemic and/or apologetic hermeneutics of such organizing schemes. 
That is to say, in the Indian “production” stage of the decline tradition, we are dealing with 
disparate units of oral and literary tradition deployed in a polemic fashion and not with a 
coherent or systematized doctrine of decline. In China, however, […] the disparate units of 
the decline tradition were combined and organized until they coalesced and came to be 
thought of as a coherent system or doctrine of decline. (Hubbard, 2001: 69)” See also 
Hubbard 1993, 141-144. 
167 See Hubbard, 2001: 66. 
168 In his commentary on the Bailun 百論 (Skt. Śata[ka]śāstra, Treatise in One Hundred 
Verses, T.1569; attributed to Āryadeva, 3rd century CE), Jizang enumerates some sources 
with conflicting datings for Nāgārjuna, among which he also mentions the Fa puti xin yinyuan 
發菩提心因緣 (The Causes for Uttering [the Vow] of Attaining the Enlightened Mind) by 
Emperor Wu of the Liang (T.1827.233a12-13). Unfortunately this text is not extant. See 
Hubbard, 2001: 66, note 35. 

64 
 
 
Mofa in non-institutional Buddhism 
 
As the scriptures that formed the basis for the decline-of-Buddhism 
concept were gradually translated into Chinese, the interest of the Chinese 
was peaked, and the Buddhist imagery related to the end of Buddhism 
soon began to mix with indigenous belief systems. The constant 
interaction and mutual influence which characterised the relationship 
between Buddhism and Daoism from the very beginning, eventually led to 
the formation of a mixed Buddho-Daoist eschatology from around the 
beginning of the fourth century. The general tenor of the time, 
characterised by a sense of social, political and moral degeneration (which 
seems to have been triggered by the collapse of the Han Empire and 
intensified with the conquest of Northern China by non-Chinese nomadic 
tribes) caused many people to believe that the world was heading for a 
cataclysmic end, which in turn fuelled the development of new and existing 
eschatological themes. The imagery and terminology for this eschatology 
seems to have been largely borrowed from Mahāyāna devotionalism, while 
Daoism provided the theme and model for the structure as a whole.169
E. Zürcher identifies five Buddhist themes which originally had no 
eschatological or messianic connotations, but got mixed up with Daoist 
believes to form a Buddho-Daoist hybrid eschatology: the cyclical 
conception of time, devided into cosmic eras (Skt. kalpa, Ch. jie 劫), and 
the periodic destruction of the universe; the prophecies concerning the 
degeneration and final disappearance of the Buddhist doctrine; the 
appearance of future Buddhas, in particular Maitreya; the saving powers of 
Bodhisattvas; and the belief that pious believers could be reborn in 
paradise-like regions outside our universe (for instance Amitābha’s “Pure 
Land” in the West, or Akşobhya’s paradise in the East).
 
170
                                                 
169 Zürcher, 1982b: p.10. 
 These themes 
170 Zürcher, 1982b: 6-10. 

65 
 
were not correlated in a coherent structure, but often contradicted each 
other.171 However, under the influence of the existing Daoist tradition,172 
these themes were all to be joined together into a single prophesy of the 
end of time from around the fourth century: the mofa notion (which 
originally merely implied a state of moral degeneration) was directly linked 
to the idea of kalpa-disasters, and the occurrence of both was bumped up 
from the distant to the near future. This meant that the disappearance of 
Buddha’s teaching and the consequent moral depravity, ignorance and 
suffering were merely a prelude to the imminent destruction of the physical 
world. Similarly, the incarnation of Maitreya was moved forward from a 
time of prosperity in the distant future to this impending age of doom, and 
his function was changed from that of a teacher to a powerful Messiah, 
with the power to deliver the good people from these cosmic disasters.173
Focussing on the element of the Final Period of the Dharma, we can 
say that even though the Buddhist mofa thought was not stricto sensu 
eschatological in nature, the perception of it underwent a strong influence 
from the emerging Buddho-Daoist eschatology. The (Foshuo) fa miejin jing 
佛說法滅盡經 (Sūtra on the Annihilation of the Dharma, T.396; compiled in 
the late fourth to mid fifth-century by an unknown author)
  
174
                                                 
171 The descent of the future Buddha Maitreya into this world, for example, was described as 
taking place in a time of great moral and material prosperity, whereas the mofa theme depicts 
the period after the final disappearance of the doctrine as a time of extreme ignorance, 
misery and sin. 
 paints a vivid 
image of the last years of the Buddhist doctrine. In a world corrupted by 
defilements, demons will join the monastic order to destroy it from the 
inside. These demons will break every possible precept, slander the 
172 For a short overview of the Daoist eschatological tradition, see Seiwert, 2003: 80-93. 
Zürcher (1982: 2-6) also briefly lists the basic concepts in Daoist eschatology. Also see 
Mollier, 1990.   
173 For more on the Maitreya cult, see Zürcher, 1982b: 13-16; Sponberg & Hardacre, 1988; 
Deeg, 1999. 
174 The earliest extant catalogue to mention the Fa miejin jing is Sengyou’s Chu sanzang jiji 
(T.2145.28c18). For further bibliographical details on this text, see Zürcher, 1981: 48, note 20. 

66 
 
Buddha’s and bodhisattvas, and make life impossible for those still trying 
to practice the doctrine. They will indulge in commerce with no thought for 
charity and cause the temples and monasteries to fall into disrepair. This 
moral depravation will also be accompanied by apocalyptic occurrences 
such as warfare, famine, floods and epidemics. The length of days will 
shorten and man’s lifespan will decrease. 175  It is obvious that the clerical 
establishment was not keen on these kinds of scriptures, since they, in 
essence, ratified the view of many of the opponents of Buddhism, namely 
that the monks were degenerate and severely lacking in religious fervour. 
Many titles of apocryphal 176
                                                 
175 Several other Chinese Buddhist apocrypha give similar detailed descriptions of the moral 
degeneration during this final period, for example: Foshuo danglai bian jing 佛說當來變經 
(Sūtra on Imminent Changes, T.395; attributed to Dharmaraksa, 3rd century?), Foshuo 
xiangfa jueyi jing 佛說像法決疑經 (Sūtra For Removing Doubts During the Semblance 
Dharma, T.2870 ; anon., 5th century?), Guanding jing 灌頂經 (Consecration Sūtra, T.1331; 
wrongfully attributed to Śrīmitra, early 6th century. See Strickman, 1990: 90). See Zürcher, 
1982b: 17n32; Seiwert, 2003: 129-130. 
 scriptures with millenarian and messianic 
content, usually branded as “spurious (wei 偽)” or “dubious (yi 疑)” in the 
176 Despite its Judeo-Christian connotations, the term “apocrypha” is conventionally applied to 
scriptures of Chinese origin which had no Sanskrit original counterpart. Up to the time when 
the Buddhist scriptures started to circulate in printed form, hand-copies of these scriptures 
had to be made. This provided ample opportunity for the creation of new scriptures, which 
were consequently introduced as translations of Sanskrit or Middle Indic originals, and thus 
“genuine” sūtras. A more appropriate term, Buswell suggests, might therefore be “indigenous 
scripture” or “original [Chinese] scripture” (Buswell, 1990: 5). The criteria used by compilers of 
official catalogues, however, were not so unambiguous, and there are many examples of 
scriptures from Chinese provenance which made it into the canon of orthodox scriptures, 
because they were not recognized as such, or because their content was considered 
harmless or even beneficial. The content or political implications of a text might cause it to be 
excluded, and it was not uncommon for the same scripture to be judged differently at different 
times, according to the political situation (Seiwert, 2003: 131-132). For more on Buddhist 
apocrypha and the function of catalogues with regards to canonisation, see Tokuno [1990: 
31-74] and Mizuno, 1982: 111-128. For the relationship between Buddhist apocrypha and 
political issues, see Zürcher (1982a); Lewis (1990: 207-238); and Forte (1990: 239-249). For 
more on the creation of Buddhist catalogues, see Drége (1991: 177-193). 

67 
 
official catalogues, are littered across the Buddhist bibliographies, their 
authors warning against their potentially harmful effects.177 The reason that 
the Fa miejin jing was included in the official Buddhist canon, despite its 
initial rejection as a “spurious” scripture,178
The Fa miejin jing is a representative example of Six Dynasties 
eschatological theory, as it contains many of the elements popular during 
this period, including the appearance of the bodhisattva-saviour Yueguang 
月光 (T.396.1119b1).
 was perhaps the fact that it did 
not mention a time frame in which these catastrophic events were to take 
place (so it might be said to take place in the distant future) and because it 
is clearly stated that the ones responsible for the wretched image of the 
monastic community are the demons who have infiltrated it. 
179
                                                 
177 Among these are several scriptures in which Maitreya is associated with eschatological 
themes. For some examples, see Zürcher, 1982b: 14-16. 
 Yueguang had at this point already evolved from 
being only a minor character in an avadāna story to being a powerful 
bodhisattva-saviour who, in the final period of the Dharma, appears on this 
world to restore the True Doctrine for an interlude of fifty-two years, after 
which the Buddhist Teaching will disappear from this world completely and 
178 While Sengyou listed the Fa miejin jing in the category “translator’s [name] lost (shiyi 失
譯)”, Fajing 法經 (d.u.), the author of the Zhongjing mulu 眾經目錄 (Catalogue of Scriptures, 
T.2146; compiled in 594), branded it (and other editions of this text with different titles) as a 
spurious scripture (T.2146.127a2). Only a few years later, Fei Changfang included the Fa 
miejin jing in his Lidai sanbao ji 歷代三寶記 (Record of the Three Treasures Throughout 
History, T.2034; compiled in 597) without even hinting at its possible Chinese origin 
(T.2034.58c12). However, Fei Changfang is notorious for arbitrarily assigning dates and 
author’s names to texts of uncertain origin for the sake of enhancing the authenticity and 
credibility of the Buddhist textual transmission (see Mizuno, 1982: 104-106; Tokuno, 1992: 
43-47). But except for the critical Daoxuan, who still doubted its authenticity (T.2149.334c21), 
the Fa miejin jing escaped further scrutiny by later cataloguers and was included in the 
Buddhist canon. 
179Yueguang is short for Yueguang tongzi 月光童子 (Skt. Candraprabhakumāra, “Prince 
Moonlight”). For an extensive treatment of this figure, see Zürcher (1982b). 

68 
 
mankind will be steeped in spiritual darkness. 180  The popularity of 
Yueguang would later be exploited by both emperor Wen 文 (r. 581-604) of 
the Sui 隋Dynasty (581-618) and by Wu Zetian武則天 (r. 690-705) for 
reasons of legitimation,181 but it is clear from scriptural sources such as the 
Fa miejin jing that this bodhisattva-saviour was already the focus of 
apocalyptic expectations at the time of Emperor Wu of the Liang and 
before.182
 
 But before we take a closer look at the ways in which Emperor 
Wu did or did not make use of these notions of decline of the Buddhist 
Dharma, it is necessary to examine the terminology used in the 
conversation between emperor Wu and Zhizang more closely, since the 
meaning of the terms jidai and modai is not described in the secondary 
literature.  
 
                                                 
180 The emergence of Yueguang during the time of the disappearance of the Buddhist 
doctrine is, in the Foshuo fa miejin jing, likened to an oil-lamp that briefly flickers up right 
before it is extinguished (T.396.1119b4-5). This idea of a final revival of Buddhism before it is 
extinguished can also be found in other, contemporary scriptures. For references, see 
Zürcher, 1982b: 28, note 51. 
181 Both Sui Wendi and Wu Zetian had legitimation problems, since they were regarded as 
members of the imperial family whose emperor they ousted. Because of their family relations, 
they could not legitimately found a new dynasty of their own, but would be seen by tradition 
as usurpers, who broke the rightful line of succession. Wu Zetian had the additional problem 
that she was a woman, and in imperial China, political ethics excluded a woman from 
assuming supreme power. Wu Zetian was the consort of the third emperor of the Tang 唐 
dynasty (618-907), Gaozong 高宗 (r. 649-683). When he died, she successively deposed two 
of her sons and personally took control of the government as Wuhou 武后 “Empress Dowager 
Wu” until in 690 she declared the founding of her own dynasty, Zhou 周 (690-705). To solve 
their problem of legitimacy, both emperor Wen and empress Wu made use of Buddhist 
themes such as the cakravartin ideal, relic-veneration and the prophesy of Yueguang (Prince 
Moonlight). For the political use of Buddhism by emperor Wen, see Wright, 1957; Chen, 
2002a: 51-118. For Wu Zetian, see Forte, 1976; Chen, 2002a: 112-148; Chen, 2002b; Guisso, 
1978; Deeg, 2001. 
182 See Zürcher, 1982b: 27-29. 

69 
 
 
II.2.2. Use of the terms jidai 季代and modai 末代 
 
In the following section I will show that both the terms jidai and 
modai belong to the Buddhist eschatological discourse, which was so 
popular throughout medieval times in China. 
 
 
The term jidai 季代 
 
Jidai 183
 
 was not very commonly used, and unfortunately the earliest 
examples to be found in Buddhist sources all date from well over a century 
after Liang Wudi’s time. Assuming that Daoxuan 道宣 (596-667), the 
author of the Xu gaoseng zhuan, relied on a contemporary record of 
events leading up to the discussion between Emperor Wu and Zhizang, 
this would make it the earliest documented use of the term. It makes sense 
therefore to see if Daoxuan uses this term elsewhere in his oeuvre, and 
what he understood by it. Towards the end of his Shimen guijing yiyi 釋門
歸敬意儀 (Procedures of Veneration for Buddhists, completed in 661, 
T.1896) Daoxuan writes: 
季代常徒禮敬為切。領余撰銀擬用箴銘。184
                                                 
183 Ji 季 is here used in the sense of ‘last month (of a season)’ and jidai as such is probably 
related to jishi 季世, which is used to designate the last, declining years of a dynasty. The 
closing years of a dynasty are traditionally described as a period of moral depravity on the 
part of government and officials, when corruption, rebellion and warfare is rampant, and 
Heaven shows its discontent by way of natural disasters. This aspect of the traditional view of 
dynastic cyclicity, as we have seen, bears a certain resemblance to the moral depravity and 
calamities described in Buddhist eschatological writings. 
 
184 T.1896.868c19. 

70 
 
During the final period [of the Dharma], the disciples’ display 
of reverence is of the utmost importance, which led me to 
compile these precious propositions [for correct veneration], 
using admonitions carved in stone. 
 
This remark of Daoxuan reflects the view that in the final period of the 
Dharma, it is no longer possible to come to a correct understanding of the 
True Buddhist Dharma, but the best thing to hope for is accumulating merit 
through the rigorous practice of the monastic discipline and the austere 
reverence of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas. In the Ji gujin fodao lunheng 
集古今佛道論衡 (A Collection of Discussions concerning the Buddhist 
Teaching in Past and Present, T.2104; compiled in 664) another of 
Daoxuan’s writings, he designates two monks as “jidai hufa zhi kaishi 季代
護法之開士 (Bodhisattva who defends the Buddhist Dharma during the 
final period)185” and “jidai zhi bianshi 季代之辯士 (Disputer of the final 
era)186
An additional, but even later example of the use of jidai can be 
found in the preface to the Zhenzheng lun 甄正論 (Treatise on Determining 
the Truth), in which the author Xuanyi 玄嶷 (d.u.) states: 
” respectively. Since there is nothing in the context which links jidai 
to the end of a dynasty or something similar, it is reasonable to assume 
Daoxuan was referring to a Buddhist concept. 
 
生於季代。心有昏於通理。187
Being born in the final period, my heart was ignorant of true 
insight into the nature of things. 
 
 
Xuanyi, with this remark, undoubtedly wished to explain the reason for his 
initial adherence to Daoism. However, it is not certain beyond any doubt 
                                                 
185 T.2104.381a13. 
186 T.2104.382b10. 
187 T.2112.559c7. 

71 
 
that jidai here refers to the final period of the Dharma (mofa), because, as 
we will see further on, Empress Wu, who granted Xuanyi’s request to 
become a Buddhist monk and appointed him as duweina 都維那 (Skt. 
karmadāna, overseer of monks, responsible for the distribution of duties in 
a monastery) of the Fo shouji Monastery 佛授記寺 in the capital Luoyang, 
was opposed to the view that mofa had been reached. An innocent, short 
reference to the final period of the Dharma, like the one made by Xuanyi, 
might have been tolerated, however, for it did not have any dangerous 
consequences for the legitimacy of the rule of Empress Wu. 
 
The term modai 末代 
 
Modai is found much more frequently than jidai, and although it also 
occurs in a context in which it merely refers to the period after Buddha’s 
death, there is an equal amount of instances where it is an allusion to the 
final period of the Dharma with its eschatological connotations. This broad 
application of the term modai is not a sign of a possible incorrect 
interpretation. On the contrary, in this sense the use of the term modai is 
comparable to that of the term mofa 末法, which, according to J. Nattier, 
started out as nothing more than a stylistic variant of the term moshi 末世 
(Skt. paścimakāla; “later age”, i.e. the period after Buddha’s death)188
                                                 
188 According to Nattier the term mofa is not a Chinese translation of an Indian Buddhist term 
or concept, but was rather a stylistic variant of moshi 末世, first used by Kumārajīva in some 
of his translations to better correspond with the terminology of the already familiar concepts of 
zhengfa 正法 (Skt. saddharma, True Dharma) and xiangfa 像法 (Skt. saddharma-pratirūpaka, 
Semblance [of the True] Dharma). See Nattier, 1991: 103. 
, but 
With the translation of Buddhist texts in China, a vast number of technical terms had to be 
transferred into Chinese, including the terms discussed above. The huge linguistic differences 
between Sanskrit and Chinese provided ample room for reinterpretations, as the characters 
used for the translation of a certain Sanskrit term often had other connotations besides the 
meaning used to convey the Sanskrit original. This was also the case for the term moshi 
which was used to translate the Skt. paścimakāla. Although the original Sanskrit term referred 
only to the period following Buddha’s death, the use of the Ch. mo 末 (with a superlative 

72 
 
over time became a focal point for the scattered notions about the eventual 
disappearance of the Buddha’s teaching.189
 
    
For the sake of brevity, I shall limit myself to some of the more 
representative examples of the term modai to be found in various genres 
of Buddhist texts. Regrettably, as was the case with jidai, these examples 
all post-date Emperor Wu of the Liang, most of them dating from the sixth 
and seventh centuries. Still, these examples can give us an indication of 
how we should perceive modai at the time of the Liang dynasty. 
In Narendrayaśas’ (Ch. Naliantiyeshe 那連提耶舍, 490?-589) 
translation of the Samādhirājasūtra (Ch. Yuedeng sanmei jing 月燈三眛經, 
T. 639; translated in 557)190
 
 modai appears in several of the verses (Ch. jie 
偈, Skt. gāthā). For example: 
末代可怖時。近於無上道。護持我法藏。 記彼持是經。191
                                                                                                                
meaning of “end, last, final”) for the Skt. paścima (which most often has a comparative 
meaning of “later, subsequent, following”) opened the way to the unique interpretation of 
three distinct periods in the Buddhist Doctrine in Chinese Buddhism. 
 
189 The vague line between these two connotations of the term mofa lasted at least until the 
formation of the Three Stages School (Sanjie jiao 三階教), established by Xinxing 信行 (540-
594). In the Lotus and Nirvāna Sūtra, mofa is used as an equivalent for moshi 末世 or 
houshi 後時, which are terms used to refer to the period after Buddha’s extinction, rather than 
as references to a specific period in a formal system of time periods (Hubbard, 2001: 77-79). 
190  Skilton (1999a: 347-8) suggests that Narendrayaśas made his translation of the 
Samādhirājasūtra from a separate Sanskrit recension of the text, which went by the title 
Candrapradīpasamādhisūtra. 
The 
change 
in 
title, 
he 
says, 
post-dates 
that 
of 
Samādhirājasūtra and probably came into vogue as an alternative title because the sūtra 
deals with the enlightenment of Candraprabhakumāra (Ch. Yueguang tongzi 月光童子, Prince 
Moonlight), who, as we shall see, rose from being an secondary figure in avadāna literature 
to being a prominent saviour figure who was prophesised to be reborn in China. For more on 
the Samādhirājasūtra, see Skilton 1999a and 1999b. 
191 T.639.591a8-9. 

73 
 
In the final period, in this terrifying age, keep close to the 
supreme way [of Buddha]. Protect and keep my storehouse of 
Buddhadharma, keep this in mind and sustain this sūtra. 
 
 
    於此末代惡世時。斯為最勝上供養。192
In this final period, in this evil time, this is the supreme 
offering (Skt. pūjā). 
 
 
 
彼見彌勒佛。若於末代時。持於此經者。得上愛樂心。193
Those who see the Buddha Maitreya, even if they [live] in the 
final period, if they keep to this sūtra, they will obtain a 
supreme loving, good mind. 
 
 
 
末代怖畏時。難可得修行。若得聞此經。便得無盡辯。194
In the final age, in this fearful time, when it is difficult to obtain 
the proper conduct, if one hears this sūtra, one will obtain 
inexhaustible powers of discrimination. 
 
 
於末代惡世中。正戒正法毀壞時。195
In the evil time of the final age, in the time when the True 
precepts and the True Dharma are destroyed […] 
 
 
 
                                                 
192 T.639.563a21. 
193 Ibid., p.594b7-8. 
194 Ibid., p.594b13-14. 
195 Ibid., p.573c13-14. 

74 
 
There are many more references to the final period of the Dharma in 
Narendrayaśas’ translation, and even though there is no statement of a 
distinct third period of mofa, such as was expounded by Huisi only a year 
later,196 Chappell (1980: 146) interprets these references in a similar way, 
and claims that his “message of impending doom left an indelible mark on 
Chinese Buddhists at the end of the sixth century, and seemed to be 
quickly corroborated by the persecution of the Northern Chou.197
The Tiantai 天台 patriarch Zhiyi 智顗 (538-597) usually avoided any 
mention of the end of the Dharma in his commentaries,
” 
198
 
 but in the 
Weimo jing xuanshu 維摩經玄疏 (Profound Commentary on the 
Vimalakīrtinirdeśasūtra, T.1777; written shortly before his death) he does 
show himself to be a disciple of his master, Huisi: 
異外國外人各說一究竟道。末代時有師子身內蟲法師禪師。云
莊老教與佛教一種。199
In other countries, other people will each proclaim their very 
own ultimate (Skt. uttarā) doctrine. In the final period the 
Buddhist Teaching will be destroyed from the inside,
 
200
                                                 
196 The theory of the three stages of the Dharma was for the first time elaborated in the 
Nanyue Si da chanshi li shiyuan wen 南嶽思大禪師立誓願文 (Document of the Great Chan-
master [Hui]si on Establishing the Vow, T.1933), written by Huisi 慧思 (515-577), the second 
patriarch of the Tiantai 天台 school, and said to have been completed in 559 AD. Huisi was 
actually one of the few preachers who openly declared that the world had already entered the 
Final Period. In the Nanyue Si da chanshi li shiyuan wen he states that he was born in the 
82nd year of mofa (T.1933.787a5). See Magnin, 1979: 104-116. 
 and 
197 For more on Narendrayaśas and the “Three Stages” concept, see Chappell, 1980: 145-
147. Also Hubbard 2001: 62, n24. 
198 Lewis 1990: 212, 234n16. 
199 Weimo jing xuanshu, T.1777.530b14-15. 
200 The expression “shizi shen nei chong 師子身內蟲 (the lion gets eaten by worms from the 
inside)” goes back to Narendrayaśas’ translation of the Lianhuamian jing 蓮華面經 (T.386; 
translated in 584) in which Buddha tells Ānanda: 
 

75 
 
dharma masters and meditation masters will say that the 
Zhuang-Lao Teaching and the Buddhist Teaching are the 
same. 
 
Most of Zhiyi’s other writings lack the connotation of modai in the sense of 
a period of degeneration of Buddha’s teaching. Instead it is occasionally 
used to refer to the later period of Buddha’s sermonising career, when, 
                                                                                                                
譬如師子命絕身死。若空若地若水若陸。所有眾生不敢食彼師子身肉。唯師子
身自生諸虫。還自噉食師子之肉。阿難。我之佛法非餘能壞。是我法中諸惡比
丘猶如毒刺。破我三阿僧祇却積行勤苦所集佛法。(T.386.1072c23-28) 
When a lion dies, none of the sentient beings which live in the sky, on earth, 
in water, or on the land will dare eat its body. Only from the lion's body itself 
will issue forth insects which will eat the lion's flesh. Ananda, my teaching 
cannot be destroyed by others [non-Buddhists]. It is evil monks from within 
the teaching who, like a creeping poison, will destroy the teaching which I 
collected through accumulating practice and working hard for three great 
numberless aeons. 
 
This expression can also be found in the Renwang banruo boluomi jing 仁王般若波羅蜜經 
(Transcendent Wisdom Scripture of Humane Kings, T.245; attributed to Kumārajīva, but 
written ca. 470-490) and Renwang huguo banruo boluomiduo jing 仁王護國般若波羅蜜多經 
(Transcendent Wisdom Scripture of Humane Kings Who Wish to Protect Their States, T.246; 
“retranslated” by Bukong 不空 (Skt. Amoghavajra; 705-774) around the middle of the eighth 
century), where Buddha warns King Prasenajit: 
 
大王我滅度後四部弟子。一切國王王子百官。乃是任持護三寶者。而自破滅如
師子身中虫。自食師子肉非外道也。 
Great King! After my extinction the four classes of disciples, all the kings of 
states, the princes, and the one hundred officers and those appointed to hold 
and protect the Three Jewels will themselves destroy [the Teaching] as 
worms in a lion’s body consume his own flesh. [And these] are not the 
heterodox [teachers]! (T.246.844b23-25; see Orzech 1998: 272 for translation) 
 
The influence of the fifth-cenury version of the Renwang jing on Zhiyi will be touched upon a 
little further. 

76 
 
from the viewpoint of the panjiao 判教 system,201 he revealed the most 
complicated, and most correct teaching.202 It is important to note that the 
Weimo jing xuanshu is in fact the only work which was written down by 
Zhiyi himself. All other works attributed to him were actually put on paper 
by his disciple Guanding 灌頂 (561-632), and some of them were not 
compiled in their final form until 27 years after the original lecture. 203 
Therefore there is no sure way of attributing specific passages or ideas to 
either Zhiyi or Guanding,204
                                                 
201 Panjiao, or ‘classification of the periods of teaching’ started as early as the mid-fifth 
century with the monk Huiguan 慧觀 (d. between 424 and 453, T.2059.368b25). Faced with a 
large body of Buddhist scriptures which contained numerous internal contradictions and 
discrepancies, but were all believed to be the word of Buddha, the Chinese Buddhists 
attempted to bring order to this situation by dividing the Buddha’s teachings into chronological 
periods. In the earlier periods, Buddha had to adapt to the level of understanding of his 
audience and preached a simplified version of the doctrine. As the understanding of his 
audience grew, he revealed more difficult and abstract facets of the doctrine until at last the 
ultimate truth had been revealed. 
 except for the Weimo jing xuanshu. To me it 
does not seem unlikely that the silence of Zhiyi concerning the concept of 
a degeneration of the Dharma is due to the filtering out of these elements 
(which were, at the time, regarded as potentially disruptive by orthodox 
Buddhism) by Guanding. Given that Zhiyi’s mentor, Huisi, was an avid 
proponent of the mofa thought, it would be rather peculiar that Zhiyi had no 
opinions about the subject. In fact, Orzech has shown that Zhiyi’s thought 
was influenced by the fifth-century recension of the Renwang jing 
(Scripture for Humane Kings), a scripture with very overt references to the 
demise of the Buddhist Teaching. The correspondence between Zhiyi and 
Yang Guang 楊廣 (569-618), the future Emperor Sui Yangdi 隋煬帝 (r. 
202 For more on Zhiyi’s system of panjiao, see Ch’en 1964: 305-311. 
203 T.1718.1b20-22. 
204 See Swanson’s review of Hirai Shun'ei 平井俊榮, Hokke mongu no seiritsu ni kansuru 
kenkyū 法華文句の成立 に関する研究 [Studies on the formation of the Fa hua wen chu], 
Tokyo: Shunjūsha, 1985; in Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 14: 2-3 (1987), pp. 271-
273. 

77 
 
604-617),205 is strewn with references to the Renwang jing, and quotations 
from the Renwang jing can be found throughout his works, mainly as a 
basis for the construction of his Three Truths (san di 三諦) concept.206
Another Tiantai patriarch, Zhanran 湛然(711-782), in a review of 
Zhiyi’s commentary of the Vimalakīrtinirdeśasūtra, writes: 
 
Based on these facts, I suggest that the quotation from Zhiyi’s Weimo jing 
xuanshu, using the term modai, should indeed be interpreted as a 
reference to a period of degeneration of the Buddhist Teaching, similar to 
the concept of a final period (mofa). 
 
如來大慈平等說法。非止但為現在亦欲遠被正像末代有緣。207
The Tathāgata, in his great compassion, expounded the 
Dharma to all beings equally. It does not cease to be, but its 
manifestation does undergo the effects of the periods of True 
Dharma, Semblance Dharma and Final Dharma. 
 
 
The context here leaves little doubt as to the use of modai, as it is 
juxtaposed to the terms zheng[fa] and xiang[fa]. 
In Śubhakarasimha’s (Ch. Shanwuwei 善無畏, 635-735) 208 Da 
piluzhena chengfo jing shu 大毘盧遮那成佛經疏 (Commentary on the 
Sūtra on Mahāvairocana’s Attaining Buddhahood, T.1796), written down 
by his disciple Yixing 一行 (683-727),209
                                                 
205 For more on the relationship between Emperor Yang and Zhiyi, see Xiong, 2006: 162-165. 
 we find the following passage: 
206 See Orzech, 1998: 122-123; Swanson, 1989: 38-56. 
207  Weimo jing lüeshu 維摩經略疏 (Summary of [Zhiyi’s] Commentary on the 
Vimalakīrtinirdeśasūtra) T.1778.563b16-17.  
208 Śubhakarasimha was one of the three eighth-century “Tantric masters (Ch. asheli 阿闍
梨, Skt. ācārya)” who were said to have brought Tantric Buddhism to China. The other two 
were Vajrabodhi (Ch. Jin’gangzhi 金剛智, 671-741) and Amoghavajra, who, as we have seen, 
made a new translation of the Renwang jing. 
209 Yixing, who was a Chan monk before he became Śubhakarasimha’s disciple, was very 
influential at the Tang court during the last ten years of his life. As a gifted mathematician and 
astronomer, he was charged with revising the faulty calendar. He built a water-powered 

78 
 
 
然此妙法。如來在世猶多怨疾。何況末代惡世之中。210
But even at the time when Buddha was still alive, this 
wonderful Dharma (saddharma) was much hated and 
despised. How much more is this the case in this evil world of 
the final period! 
 
 
Once again it is not completely certain if modai is to be interpreted as the 
final period of the declining Dharma, or merely as the ‘later period’, i.e. the 
period following Buddha’s death. Two factors plead the case of the former: 
first of all, the period following Buddha’s death is mostly referred to with 
the term houshi 後世/時.211
An edict issued by Emperor Taizong 太宗 (r. 626-649) of the Tang 
dynasty (618-907) in 644 opens with the following statement: 
 And second, the period following Buddha’s 
parinirvāṇ a was originally not referred to in pejorative terms. The additional 
designation of this period as evil in the example above, suggests that a 
specific period, namely the final period of the existence of the Dharma in 
this world, is intended. 
 
如來滅度以末代澆浮付囑國王大臣護持佛法。212
                                                                                                                
armillary sphere (celestial globe) to observe the movements of the sun, the moon, and the 
five known planets. Yixing also organised an expedition to the Southern Seas to chart the 
stars in the southern skies, which were not discernable in China, and is reportedly the first 
man in the world to have calculated the length of a meridian degree. See Ch’en, 1964: 481-
482. 
 
210 T.1796.787b27-28. 
211 The possible difference between the two terms modai and houshi can be seen in 
Narendrayaśas’ translation of the Samādhirājasūtra, where it says: 若於後世末代時 
(T.639.590a2). Here modai is probably to be seen as a subdivision of houshi. In other words, 
the translation is most likely: “In the last period of the later age [following Buddha’s death]”. 
212 Shishi jigu lüe 釋氏稽古略 (Brief Study of Buddhist History, compiled by Jue’an 覺岸in 
1354) T.2037.815c3. 

79 
 
After the Tathāgata’s extinction [into nirvāna], because of 
the decadent ways [of the samgha] during the final period, 
the kings of states and the great officers were entrusted with 
protecting and maintaining the Buddhadharma. 
 
This initial sentence is most likely based on the fifth-century version of the 
Renwang jing,213 which Emperor Taizong probably knew fairly well. In 630 
he had ordered all the monks of the capital to recite the Renwang jing on 
the twenty-seventh day of each month in order to secure blessings for the 
state. 214
To conclude our search for usage of the term modai, let us turn to 
the writings of Daoxuan, author of the Xu gaoseng zhuan biography of 
Zhizang, whose discussion with Emperor Wu of the Liang was the reason 
for our search, and Daoshi, a close collaborator of Daoxuan at the Ximing 
monastery 西明寺. In the Zhujing yaoji 諸經要集 (Essentials of the Sūtras, 
T.2123), Daoshi explains the provenance of the term triratna (Ch. Sanbao 
三寶, “Three Jewels”, i.e. Buddha, Dharma, and Samgha): 
 Considering the nature of the Renwang jing, with its explicit 
allusions to the decline of the Dharma, there is little doubt as to the use of 
modai here. 
 
不為世間八法所改。故名為寶。又具六意。故須敬也。一佛能
誨示。法是良藥。僧能傳通。皆利益於我。報恩故敬。二末代
惡時。傳法不易。請威加護。故須致敬。[…] 215
As they are not changed by the eight influences of passion,
 
216
                                                 
213 Cf. T.245.833b13-16. He simply replaces the lengthy “In the eighty, eight-hundred, eight-
thousand years [after my extinction], when there is no Buddha, no Dharma, no Saṃgha, no 
male believers and no female believers 八十年八百年八千年中，無佛無法無僧，無信男無信
女時” with the term modai. 
 
they are called “jewels”. They also embody six ideas for which 
214 Fozu tongji, T.2035.363b28-29. 
215 Zhujing yaoji, T.2123.1c16-19. 

80 
 
they should be revered. First, Buddha is good at teaching, the 
Dharma is a good medicine, and the Samgha is good at 
passing on knowledge. They all benefit me, and in 
acknowledgement I revere them. Second, in the evil age of 
the final period, it is not easy to transmit the Dharma. I call on 
[the Three Jewels] for strength and protection, and therefore 
should extend them my reverence. […] 
 
In the Fayuan zhulin 法苑珠林 (Forest of Gems in the Garden of the Law, 
T.2122; compiled in 668), Daoshi devotes an entire section to the 
“extinction of the Law (famie 法滅),217” which he opens with the assertion: 
“The True [Dharma] and Semblence [Dharma] have come to pass, and the 
Teaching has drifted into the final period [of decline] 正像推移教流末代.218” 
Further references to the mofa period can be found in passages in the 
Fayuan zhulin discussing Daoxuan’s visionary experience, in which the 
gods came to him in a dream to instruct him. 219
                                                                                                                
216 Bafa 八法 (Eight dharmas) is here a synonym for bafeng 八風 (Eight winds, or influences 
which stir up the passions, namely gain-loss, defamation-eulogy, praise-ridicule, sorrow-joy). 
 As a vinaya master, 
217 Fayuan zhulin, T.2122.1005a5-1013a3. 
218 Ibid., p.1005a10. 
219 In the second month of the year 667, only eight months before his death, Daoxuan 
claimed to have had a vision in which the Four Heavenly Kings appeared to him and 
instructed him. References to the divine instruction appear in several writings of Daoxuan’s 
own hand, and in the Fayuan zhulin (for references to relevant passages, see Shinohara, 
2000: 301-302, 304). The quotations take the form of newly revealed sermons of the Buddha 
and tell the stories about various objects used by the Buddha during his life time. In the story 
about Buddha’s robe (Ch. sengjiali 僧伽梨, Sk. samghātī), which had previously belonged 
to Buddha Kāśyapa and was given to him by a tree deity at the beginning of his search for 
enlightenment, it is told that, before entering nirvāna, Buddha circled the ordination platform 
(jietan 戒壇) at Jetavana three times, wearing his robe, and then “entrusted it to the sentient 
beings who uphold my Teaching during the Final Period of the Dharma 付我住持末法眾生 
(T.2122.560c8, paraphrased from the translation of this passage by Shinohara, 2000: 309-
313).” In another passage, it is said that the Buddha’s robe will be placed at the monks’ 
ordination platform for six years and then at the nuns’ ordination platform for another six 

81 
 
Daoxuan not only sought to remedy the lack of discipline so rampant 
among members of the monastic community, but, like so many others, 
wanted to explain the reason behind it. And, like so many others, he got 
caught up in the concept of the declining Dharma. Apparently Daoxuan 
believed that the world had entered the fourth of five stages in the decline 
of the Dharma, and that its existence could be prolonged for a maximum of 
two hundred years through the rigorous practice of the monastic 
discipline.220
 
 In the Sifen lü shanfan buque xingshi chao 四分律刪繁補闕行
事鈔 (A Transcription of Abridged Revisions in the Four-Part Vinaya, 
T.1804; compiled in 626), Daoxuan’s most prominent commentary on the 
Dharmaguptaka vinaya, he uses both the terms modai and mofa in a 
comparable context: 
今末法中善根淺薄不感聖人示導。221
In this final period of the Dharma (mofa), the roots of 
goodness are very thin and people are not receptive to the 
guidance of the sages. 
 
 
今時末法造寺唯有處所事得受用。222
Nowadays, in the final period of the Dharma (mofa), when 
people build a monastery, it is merely a dwelling place, 
designed for comfort. 
 
 
末代之中此法殆盡。223
                                                                                                                
years to guard against the rise of evil monks and nuns during the age of decline, and to serve 
as a relic of the True Dharma (T.2122.589b26-29). Shinohara (2000: 339) hints at a possible 
connection between this “revealed” sermon and Daoxuan’s efforts towards the end of his life 
to establish a renewed Mahāyāna ordination platform. For more on Daoxuan’s efforts to 
revive Buddhist monasticism, see Chen Huaiyu, 2005 (pp. 114-158 in particular). 
 
220 See Takao, 1937a: 12-16. 
221 Sifen lü shanfan buque xingshi chao, T.1804.141b7. 
222 Ibid., p.134c23. 

82 
 
In the final period (modai) this Dharma is all but gone. 
 
In the biography of Tanyan 曇延 (516-588)224
 
, included in Daoxuan’s Xu 
gaoseng zhuan (T.2060.488a3-489c25), we also find a letter that Tanyan 
left to Emperor Wen of the Sui close to his death: 
春秋七十有三矣。臨終遺啟文帝曰。延逢法王御世偏荷深恩。
[…]但末代凡僧雖不如法。簡善度之自招勝福。225
 
 
At age 73, when close to his death, [Tanyan] wrote to 
Emperor Wen in a bequeathed letter: “I, Yan, having [lived at 
a time] when a Dharma-king ruled the world, am, from my 
side, grateful for your great kindness. […] However, during 
this final period (modai), not all monks act in accordance with 
the Dharma. You should select those who are good and 
save/examine them (deliver them), so you will bring 
unsurpassed blessings upon yourself.” 
 
And in the Guang Hongming ji 廣弘明集 (An Expansion of the Collection 
for the Dissemination and Clarification [of Buddhism], T.2103; compiled in 
664), as a final example, is the following passage: 
 
末代門學師心者多。不思被忍辱之衣示福田之相。縱恣饕餮以酒
肉為身先。226
                                                                                                                
223 T.1804.17b17. 
 
224 Tanyan was held in high esteem by Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty, who built a temple 
for Tanyan and his disciples and named it after him. He also named two gates of the new 
capital after Tanyan (Yanxing gate 延興門 and Yanping gate 延平門), an honour, Daoxuan 
comments, that was without precedent among Buddhist monks in China (T.2060.489a8-12). 
See Chen Jinhua, 2002: 36-37. 
225 T.2060.489b16-19. 
226 T.2103.292b18-21. 

83 
 
 
In the final period (modai) there are many of the disciples who 
follow their impulses. They do not think about covering 
themselves in the robe of forbearance (Ch. renru 忍辱, Skt. 
kṣānti) and projecting the appearance of a field of merit. They 
give free rein to there passions, they are greedy, and they 
consider wine and meat as the basic requirements for their 
bodies. 
 
 
From all these examples it is clear that both the terms jidai 季代 and 
modai 末代 were, at the time of Liang Wudi and after, often used to refer to 
an advanced stage in the decline of the Buddhist dharma when monks and 
nuns no longer follow the precepts and the True Teaching is difficult, or 
even impossible to practise. Emperor Wu incorporated this notion of 
decline into his world vision, because the moral laxity of the monks 
described in the Buddhist scriptures themselves, rather than by the 
opponents of Buddhism, provided him with the ideological justification for 
assuming the role of head of the monastic community without debunking 
his image of Buddhist patron. Even though Emperor Wu was not the first 
Chinese emperor to attempt to impose restrictions on the conduct of the 
members of the clergy,227
 
 he was the first one, to my knowledge, who 
motivated his proposed action through the use of mofa, and thus Buddhist, 
ideology, rather than to hinge on his secular authority. In other words, he 
took a popular Buddhist concept, and tried to use it to his advantage. 
                                                 
227 In 493, Emperor Xiaowen 孝文 (r. 471-500) of the Northern Wei 北魏 (386-534) issued an 
edict calling for the compilation of a clerical code (sengzhi 僧制) in 49 articles (Wei Shou, Wei 
shu 114: Vol. 8, 3039). Since this compilation is not extant, we cannot know for certain 
whether these regulations were part of the secular law or merely a selection of monastic rules 
compiled by imperial decree to entice monks and nuns to follow the monastic discipline more 
strictly.  

84 
 
 
 
 
II.2.3. Emperor Wu and his application of mofa thought 
 
So what exactly did Emperor Wu want to achieve by referring to the 
decline of Buddhism? First of all, I wish to draw attention to the fact that 
Emperor Wu did not, in his discussion with the monk Zhizang, mention the 
age of decline directly, only as a comment on Zhizang’s refusal to sign his 
proposal. However, the imagery he uses in the debate is that of 
undisciplined monks who clearly need to be chastised. Although this 
theme in itself is not exclusive to mofa ideology, the way in which Emperor 
Wu shrugs off Zhizang’s refusal to ratify his proposal to become lay 
Rectifier of Monks as just another example of a monk who in the final age 
opposes and disrespects the emperor,228 together with Zhizang’s use of 
mofa imagery in his rebuttals,229
                                                 
228 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.466b16. 
 strongly suggests that this was a key 
element in Emperor Wu’s justification for appointing himself as (disciplinary) 
head of the monastic community. Since the circular in which Emperor Wu 
asked the monks for their opinion regarding his plans is not extant, we 
cannot be sure whether he definitely referred to the final period of the 
Dharma in such clear terms. Fortunately, the discussion between Emperor 
Wu and Zhizang contains some additional elements which give a glimpse 
into the broader picture. Besides making use of the, at that time, widely 
popular notion of the decline of the Buddhist teaching to rationalise his 
decision to take over responsibility for governing the Buddhist monastic 
community, Emperor Wu also seems to seek some scriptural basis to 
229 Zhizang grants that the emperor’s personal supervision of monastic affairs would help to 
revitalize the True Dharma (zhengfa) (T.2060.466b23-24), but warns that in the final age 
(modai) it is all but impossible for all monks to act according to the vinaya (T.2060.466b28). 

85 
 
further support his claim. Twice in the discussion he can be quoted as 
saying that the Buddha has entrusted the ruler of the country with the duty 
of governing the saṃgha: 
 
此雖是法師之事。然佛亦復付囑國王。230
Even though this is the duty of a Master of the Dharma, the 
Buddha also entrusted it to the king of state (fuzhu guowang). 
 
 
帝曰。惟見付囑國王治之。231
Emperor [Wu] said: “I have only seen [in the scriptures] that 
[Buddha] entrusted the king of state (fuzhu guowang) to 
govern them (i.e. the saṃgha).” 
 
 
Emperor Wu repeats this same statement in the beginning of his 
prohibition on meat and alcohol.232 To my knowledge there is only one 
scripture that so emphatically places the care for the Buddha’s legacy in 
the hands of secular rulers, and that is the Scripture of Humane Kings.233
 
 
In fact, the wording used by Emperor Wu seems to be drawn directly from 
this scripture, for in the “Entrustment (zhulei 囑累)” chapter, Buddha tells 
King Prasenajit (Ch. Bosini 波斯匿): 
我誡敕汝等，吾滅度後，八十年八百年八千年中，無佛無法無
僧，無信男無信女時，此經三寶，付囑諸國王。234
                                                 
230 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.466b21-22. 
 
231 Ibid., p.466c2. 
232 See further. 
233 With Scripture of Humane Kings, I refer to the fifth and eighth century versions of the 
Renwang  jing 仁王經(T.245 and T.246), an indigenous Chinese scripture which passed itself 
off as an Indian original of the Prajñāpāramitā genre (see note 93). For a study and 
translation of this scripture, see Orzech, 1998. 
234 T.245.833b17. 

86 
 
Now let me caution you and the others. In the eighty, eight 
hundred, and eight thousand years after my extinction, when 
there will [eventually] be no more Buddha, Dharma and 
Community, nor any male or female believers (upāsaka and 
upāsikā), this scripture, together with the Three Jewels, will 
be entrusted to all the kings of states (fuzhu zhu guowang). 
 
But if Emperor Wu draws from the Scripture of Humane Kings for scriptural 
authority, then why does he not mention it by title? What is more, in the 
preface to his commentary on the Mahāprajñapāramitā-sūtra,235 Emperor 
Wu even rejected the Scripture of Humane Kings as a suspect scripture (yi 
jing 疑經).236
                                                 
235 Emperor Wu’s commentary on the Mahāprajñapāramitā-sūtra is not extant, but its preface 
is preserved in the Chu sanzang jiji (T.2145.53b28-54c11), which gives the title of Emperor 
Wu’s commentary as Dapin zhujing 大品注經 (T.2145.52a19). Later catalogues, such as Da 
Tang neidian lu (T 2149.55.266c21) and Lidai sanbao ji (T 2034.49.99b25) listed it under the 
title Mohe banruo boluomi zi zhujing 摩訶般若波羅蜜子注經. Elsewhere we can find further 
evidence that the commentary is based on the Dapin [bore] jing 大品[ 般若] 經 
(T.2060.426c27), which is an alternative title for the extended, 27 fascicle edition of the Mohe 
banruo boluomi jing 摩訶般若波羅蜜經 (Mahāprajñapāramitā-sūtra), translated by Kumārajīva 
in 404 (T.223). Emperor Wu attached a great deal of importance to this sūtra, because he 
believed that copying and reciting this text would confer blessings upon his deceased parents 
and protect the empire from ill fortune. See Yan Shangwen, 1998: 101. 
 It is clear that Emperor Wu, on the one hand, could have 
wished for no better scripture to quote than the Scripture for Humane 
Kings as an authoritative source for proclaiming his duty as a ruler to 
uphold the Buddhadharma in the age of decline (in this case by correcting 
the behaviour of the monks and nuns). On the other hand he must have 
deemed the nature of the text incompatible with his goals. Orzech has 
shown how the Scripture for Humane Kings, as an apocryphal text, was 
the product of the social and political climate in North China during the 
236 T.2145.54b20. Sengyou himself seems to give the Scripture for Humane Kings the benefit 
of the doubt, as he merely lists it under the category “translator’s [name] lost (shi yi 失譯)” 
(T.2145.29c19). 

87 
 
Northern Wei 北魏 (386-534), in particular the growing state control over 
Buddhism promoted by the likes of Tanyao 曇曜 (fifth century)237 in the 
aftermath of the great persecution of 445. 238 In essence, the scripture 
attempted to break away from the relationship between Buddhism and the 
state as it existed in the Northern Wei, where the emperor was identified 
with the Buddha239 and monastic institutions were made dependant on 
state institutions for administration. It therefore ambiguously equated the 
ruler with a cakravartin and a bodhisattva (promising him divine protection 
for his state and for his own person), while at the same blaming the 
ultimate demise of the Buddhist Dharma on the overregulation of the 
samgha by the state. As we have seen, the decline of Buddhism was a 
popular theme at this time, and the scenes described in the Scripture for 
Humane Kings are packed with eschatological material popular during the 
Six Dynasties, such as, for instance, the figure of “Prince Moonlight 
(Yueguang)”. The Scripture for Humane Kings is, however, the only text 
that explicitly blames the disappearance of Buddhism on the restrictive 
measures decreed by temporal rulers.240
                                                 
237 Tanyao, who secretly continued to wear his monastic robe during the persecution of 
Emperor Taiwu 太武 (r. 424-452), was later appointed “Superintendent of Monks (shamen 
tong 沙門統)” by Emperor Wencheng 文成 (r. 452-456), and is seen as the architect of state 
Buddhism during the Wei dynasty. One of his more well-known measures is the 
establishment of the Saṃgha (sengqihu 僧祇戶) and Buddha Households (fotuhu 佛圖戶), 
which is one of the things the Scripture of Humane Kings reacted against (Orzech, 1998: 120). 
For more on Tanyao and the Saṃgha and Buddha Households, see Tsukamoto, 1937 (a 
portion of this work concerning Tanyao has been translated into English by Sargent, 1957); 
Ch’en, 1964: 153-158; Gernet, 1995: 100-105; Orzech, 1998: 113-115, 120-121. 
 
131 See Orzech, 1998: 107-121. 
132 The Superintendent of Monks (then still called daoren tong 道人統) Faguo 法果 (d. 419) 
stated that the emperor was a present-day Tathāgata whom should be honoured in the 
highest by all śramaṇas. He always saluted the emperor with his palms pressed together, 
explaining his actions to other people (monks) by saying: “能鴻道者人王也, 我非拜天子, 乃是
禮佛耳The person best able to spread the doctrine, is the ruler of men. Therefore it is not the 
Son of Heaven that I salute, but I am actually worshipping the Buddha.” (Wei shu 114: 3031) 
240 Nattier, 1991: 128. 

88 
 
This would explain why Emperor Wu does not mention the Scripture 
for Humane Kings by title. Even though he was attracted to this text 
because of its portrayal of a king as the preserver of the Buddhist Dharma 
in the time of decline, he still had to reject it officially, as it is the only 
Chinese scripture which openly blames the downfall of Buddhism on too 
much government control, an issue which was more pressing in the North, 
but could also be stretched to incorporate Emperor Wu’s attempted control 
over the monastic community by imposing laws upon them and assuming 
the role of head of the monastic community.241 Perhaps this is the reason 
why, in his discussion with Zhizang, Emperor Wu twice emphasises that 
he will rely on the vinaya (yi lü 依律) to rectify the monks, 242 thus 
distancing himself from the practices described in the Scripture for 
Humane Kings, where it says that “in future eras the kings of states […] 
will register, regulate, and restrict the Buddhist disciples, comparable to 
the laws for commoners/laymen (baiyi fa 白衣法) and the laws for soldiers 
and slaves (bingnu fa兵奴法).” 243
With the Renwang jing off limits, Emperor Wu’s authoritative 
scriptural basis for his claim on the right to rectify the monk’s behaviour 
became very thin. There was another scripture which had become very 
popular by the sixth century, and which – lucky for him – also speaks of 
corrupted monks in a time after the Buddha’s death, namely the 
Mahāparinirvāṇ asūtra, which we have discussed above. Already in 508 
Emperor Wu had ordered an extensive commentary to be written on the 
  
                                                 
241 The concerns Emperor Wu had in regards to the passages describing the causes for the 
decline of the Buddhist Dharma did not keep the Scripture for Humane Kings from becoming 
immensely popular with subsequent rulers. By the time of Bukong’s eighth century version of 
the text, however, many of the passages that strongly emphasise the opposition to 
government control had been omitted or modified. Also had the text been cleared of all 
reference to the apocalyptic figure of Yueguang, thus making it more suitable for adoption by 
the rulers of state. See Orzech, 1998: 287-288. 
242 T.2060.466b21 and b26. 
243 T.245.833c16. 

89 
 
Mahāparinirvāṇ asūtra by the monk Falang 法朗 (d.u.).244 This was the Da 
banniepanzi zhujing 大般涅槃子注經 (Annotated Mahāparinirvāṇ asūtra), 
which in not extant. 245 Only four years later, in 512, he commissioned 
Baoliang 寶亮 (444-509) to make another commentary, the Da banniepan 
jing 
jijie 大般涅槃經集解 (Collected Explanations on the 
Mahāparinirvāṇ asūtra, T.1763) in 71 fascicles.246
 
 Clearly this sūtra was 
important to him. Emperor Wu’s use of mofa imagery in his discussion with 
Zhizang makes one wonder if his interest in the Mahāparinirvāṇ asūtra was 
not only prompted by its potent concept of universal Buddha-nature, but 
also by the opportunity it created to assume a guiding role for the 
shepherdless monks and nuns. Luckily for emperor Wu, Zhizang did not 
attack the assumption that the Buddhist teaching was in a final stage of 
decline, only that it was at all possible for a ruler to do anything about it. 
Still, the lack of a scriptural basis that was not rife with eschatological 
undertones, coupled with Zhizang’s attack, must have made Wudi 
insecure, and in the end caused him to abandon this course. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
244 Not much is known about this monk. His secular name was  Chen 沉 and he was originally 
from Wu. He died somewhere during the Tianjian reign period (502-520). He did not get a 
biography of his own, but some subordinate biographical information is provided in the 
biography of the monk Sengshao 僧韶 in the Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.460b5-11). He is 
not to be confused with the famous master of the Sanlun school, who had the same name, 
but lived from 507 to 581.  
245 See Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.426c11. The Da Tang neidian lu (Great Tang Dynasty 
Catalogue of Buddhist Scriptures, compiled by Daoxuan in 664) says only that this 
commentary was written at the beginning of the Tianjian reign period (see T.2149.266c18-20). 
246 Fozu lidai tongzai, T.2036.545b26. 

90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
APPLICATION OF THE NEW BUDDHIST IMPERIAL IDEOLOGY IN 
SOCIETY: KARMIC RETRIBUTION 
 
 
In the traditional Confucian concept of emperorship, politics were 
highly intertwined with rituals, which were often regarded as representative 
of a dynasty’s legitimacy and essential to its survival.247 An emperor thus 
had many ritual duties to perform, but these were essentially a court matter. 
None but a privileged few were allowed to attend the state and court rituals, 
which meant that the impact of these rituals was rather limited. The 
relationship between an emperor and his people was equally distant and 
impersonal. In an age of extreme political and social instability, Emperor 
Wu recognised this as a major weakness, because nobody really seemed 
to care about who was on the throne, only about how to survive in such 
volatile times. In order to make his relationship to the people more involved 
and personal, Emperor Wu turned to Buddhism, which he attempted to use 
as a glue to tie his empire together into a coherent and caring 
community.248
                                                 
247 McDermott, 1999: 2. 
 An important component of this glue was the concept of 
248 Apparently Emperor Wu was not the first monarch to realise the potential of Buddhist 
morals to bring peace, unity and order to society. Emperor Wen 文 (r. 424-454) of the Liu 
Song dynasty (420-478) is quoted as having said: “If only the people of Our realm all were 
purified by the transforming influence (of Buddhism), We would be able to realize Great 
Peace (taiping 太平) without any effort – what more would there be to do?” (T.2103.100a27; 
translation by Zürcher, 2002: 29). Of course we have to be careful with taking such 

91 
 
karmic retribution, which allowed him to impact the lives of his religious 
subjects more directly. If he could convince people of the reality of karmic 
cause and consequence, then he could devise and stage elaborate rituals 
to intervene in this process directly, thus turning himself into a saviour 
figure on which his people might rely. Emperor Wu’s efforts to valorize the 
doctrine of karmic retribution are evident from his vehement attack on Fan 
Zhen’s treatise on the destruction of the shen 神. Once the concept of an 
enduring self had been defended – in his eyes successfully so – against its 
objectors, Emperor Wu could turn his attention to working out the practical 
application of karmic retribution in imperial ritual. Emperor Wu’s efforts 
concentrated mainly on the accumulation of merit through the performance 
of meritorious work, making large donations to the saṃgha, and personally 
striving for a virtuous, almost ascetic lifestyle. The accumulated merit he 
then distributed among all beings in the world to bring them blessings. 
 
III.1. The theory of karmic retribution 
 
The belief in karmic retribution was one of the most identifiable 
characteristics of Buddhism as it started to spread throughout China from 
the beginning of our common era. The idea that a person reaped the 
consequences of actions in former lives (be they good or bad) helped the 
Chinese to explain the seeming discrepancies between a person’s moral 
behaviour and the good or bad fortune that befell him. For this reason, the 
doctrine of karmic retribution became very popular, and in the course of 
time even influenced the native Chinese concepts of destiny and fate. By 
the time that Xiao Yan, the future Emperor Wu of the Liang, frequented the 
                                                                                                                
utterances at face value, especially since this one is from the apologetic Guang Hongming ji. 
Since Emperor Wen is also on record for taking several restrictive measures against 
Buddhism, it can be questioned if he really considered Buddhism to be so beneficial to his 
rule. See Zürcher, 2002: 29. 

92 
 
Western Villa of Xiao Ziliang, the doctrine of karmic retribution had evolved 
into a tool in the hands of the literati elite to explain their privileged social 
status and the inequality in society.249
 
 Xiao Yan, as a member of the clique 
around Prince Xiao Ziliang, had witnessed the debates between the 
proponents of the native concept of destiny on one side and the Buddhist 
doctrine of karmic retribution on the other side. Noticing the existence of 
strong opposition to the Buddhist literati’s view on social inequality and its 
potentially disruptive effect on the stability of society, he took this concept 
and lifted it to another level. Instead of making it into a mere tool for 
justifying the privileged position of the influential literati families, he turned 
the concept of karmic retribution into an instrument of imperial legitimation. 
Since, in the Buddhist view, all beings were essentially determined in their 
personal development by the workings of karman, Emperor Wu sought to 
relieve the karmic burden of his subjects in order to acquire the profile of 
bodhisattva saviour. He set out to accumulate merit on an unprecedented 
scale through a wide variety of meritorious works, and then went on to 
distribute this merit during large orchestrated events. Before we examine 
Emperor Wu’s methodology, we shall first explore its theoretic background. 
III.1.1 Transfer of merit in Buddhist thought 
 
In the Buddhist doctrine of karmic retribution, merit (Skt. puṇya, Ch. 
gongde 功德) is the result of a good moral act that will bear positive effect 
for the doer in a later life.250
                                                 
249 I shall return to this further on in this chapter. 
 Every good deed adds to the “credit” of the 
doer and aids him or her to eventually attain final liberation from the fetters 
of saṃsāric existence. In early Hīnayāna Buddhism, the accumulated 
250 This process is often described in terms of agriculture: by performing a morally good action, 
one plants a seed in the “field of blessing” (futian 福田) of which at some point in the future 
one will harvest the “fruits” (guo 果). 

93 
 
merits (or demerits) were considered to be strictly personal. No one could 
protect another from the bad consequences of his or her deeds, nor could 
one share in the good fortune that would result from another person’s good 
deeds.251 However, despite the fact that it ran counter to the original theory 
of karman, Buddhist religious practice saw the development of the idea 
that merit could be transferred.252 Although it is mostly associated with 
Mahāyāna Buddhism and the benevolence of bodhisattvas, transfer of 
merit was also incorporated into the practices of Theravāda Buddhism 
through the incorporation of existing popular notions among lay Buddhists. 
Joseph McDermott argues that the idea of merit transference arose first in 
lay Buddhist circles out of popular beliefs and other Indian religions. This 
idea was then taken up by the monastic community when it realised that it 
could be used to its advantage as a means to encourage donations to the 
saṃgha.253 This explains why many Pāli texts examined by McDermott 
describe a process whereby a gift made in name of a preta 254 is donated 
to members of the monastic order so that the merit obtained by this act 
could help to redeem the preta from its pitiful state.255
                                                 
251 For some representative quotations from the Pāli canon, see McDermott, 1974: 385 and 
1980: 190-191. 
 The idea of merit 
transference is already attested in Indian stūpa inscriptions dating from 
252 For more on concept of merit transference, see Hara, 1968-1969; Holt, 1981; Gombrich, 
1971; McDermott, 1971: 79-94, 1974, 1977, 1980; Malalasekera, 1967, Lehtonen, 2000: 193-
197; Bechert, 1992; Schopen, 1985 (reprinted in Schopen, 1997: 23-55). 
253 Joseph McDermott cites the Sādhīna Jātaka to demonstrate that the notion of merit 
transference was not incorporated into canonical practice without opposition. See McDermott, 
1971: 92-93 and 1974. 
254 A preta or “ghost” is one of the five paths of rebirth, where one is reborn to suffer from 
human deprivations such as cold, heat, hunger and thirst. It was especially the latter two 
features that were emphasised in Chinese and Japanses Buddhism, influenced by the 
descriptions in Mahāyāna scriptures. This led to the Chinese translation of the term as egui 
餓鬼 (Jap. gaki), “hungry ghost”. 
255 McDermott, 1971: 92. Also see Holt, 1981: 23; Gombrich, 1971: 204; Schopen, 1997: 36-
38. 

94 
 
around the second century BCE,256 but Joseph McDermott sees in the 
Milindapañha (Questions of [King] Menandros, compiled in the first century 
CE) a first clear textual step from the original belief in the possibility of 
ascribing charitable acts to others,257 to the actual sharing of the merit that 
resulted from these good deeds.258 The idea was that the merit earned by 
performing some meritorious deed could be accrued to someone else in 
particular (often a deceased relative) or to all living beings in general. The 
ingenuity of this concept was that by giving away one’s earned merit, it 
was not depleted, but in fact increased, since the transference of merit to 
someone else was a good deed in itself. So by giving away one’s merit, it 
actually increases, causing the giver to have access to an unlimited supply 
of merit.259
                                                 
256 Schopen, 1997: 7, 42. 
 In the Milindapañha, when king Menandros asks Nāgasena if 
demerits resulting from bloody deeds can be shared in the same way as 
merits can be shared, Nāgasena answers negatively. In other words, the 
transfer of merit only goes one way, although the explanation given by 
Nāgasena is tentative at best. He starts by saying that the question of why 
demerits cannot be shared is as pointless as asking why the Ganges does 
not flow upstream or why birds and men have two legs. The nature of merit, 
257 For an example of the practice of making donations in someone else’s name (in this case 
a preta), see McDermott, 1971: 82. 
258  McDermott, 1977: 462-463. The Milindapañha contains the supposed philosophical 
discussions between the Greek-Bactrian king Menandros and the Buddhist monk Nāgasena. 
The answers given by Nāgasena generally follow the Sarvāstivāda tradition of Buddhism, 
though not exclusively. There are also signs of influence from folk religious ideas. See 
McDermott, 1977: 460 and 1971: 201-224. For a study on the Chinese versions of the 
Milindapañha, see Demiéville, 1924. For a full translation of the Milindapañha into English, 
see Rhys Davids, 1890-1894 and Horner, 1963-1964. 
259 McDermott, 1977: 463. Also see Malalasekera, 1967: 85-86; Lehtonen, 2000: 196. 
Andreas Janousch compares the transfer of merit to a monetary transaction: “If merit, thus, to 
the Buddhist lends itself to accumulation and exchange like money, then directing one’s 
accruing merit to benefit others is like paying money into a high-interest account. By giving it 
away, it will in fact increase.” Janousch, 1998: 205. 

95 
 
he asserts, is simply very different from that of demerit. Nāgasena uses 
the following metaphor to illustrate his point: a single drop of water that 
falls into the sand is quickly absorbed and thus only affects the spot on 
which it fell. A rainstorm, however, would saturate the ground, causing the 
water to eventually spread around for several miles. The reason, then, that 
merit is so much greater than demerit is because, as we have said before, 
the act of giving away merit is a meritorious act in itself, which causes the 
goodness in a person to increase. By giving away merit, it continually 
increases, saturating a man with goodness until it overflows to others. 
When a person commits a bad act, he will come to regret this act 
(according to Nāgasena that is) and consequently turn away from his evil. 
As a result of this the evil will not increase.260 In other words, Nāgasena’s 
explanation for why demerit cannot be shared with others hinges on the 
theory that merit is much more significant than demerit, a point he also 
makes elsewhere.261
In the Theravāda tradition, the transfer of merit played its role 
predominantly in funeral rites and memorial services for the dead. In the 
Mahāyāna tradition it had a much bigger role to play, as it was the driving 
force behind one of its important concepts, the bodhisattva ideal. A 
bodhisattva is a “being on the path to full enlightenment”. Driven by their 
infinite compassion for those still trapped in the endless cycle of rebirth, 
they postpone entering into nirvāṇ a and work for the salvation of all 
sentient beings instead. The career of a bodhisattva starts with the arising 
of the aspiration to strive for Buddhahood (Skt. bodhicitta, Ch. putixin 菩提
心), and involves the development of the six perfections (Skt. pāramitā, Ch. 
liu du 六度or boluomiduo 波羅蜜多). These are: generosity (Skt. dāna, Ch. 
bushi 布施), moral virtue (Skt. śīla, Ch. chijie 持戒), forbearance (Skt. 
kṣānti, Ch. renru 忍辱), fervour in religious practice (Skt. vīrya, Ch. jingjin 
精進), meditation (Skt. dhyāna, Ch. chanding 禪定), and insight into the 
 
                                                 
260 McDermott, 1977: 463. See Rhys Davids, 1890-1894, vol. 2: 152-157. 
261 See Rhys Davids, 1890-1894, vol. 1: 123-124 and 128-129. 

96 
 
true nature of things (Skt. prajñā, Ch. zhihui 智慧).262 While the last five 
pāramitās are mainly intended for the bodhisattva himself to attain 
Buddhahood, it is the first pāramitā of giving that invokes the bodhisattva 
to share his knowledge with others and help those in need. Giving to 
others is considered to be a great source of merit, and could take on 
extreme forms. There are countless anecdotes in the jātakas and sūtras of 
animals, humans and bodhisattvas who sacrifice their own lives for the 
sake of others. But although the biographies of Buddhist monks include 
several anecdotes of monks who allow themselves to be devoured by wild 
animals, give their flesh to the starving, or offer their blood to mosquitoes 
and leeches,263 the most common form of giving, by far, was of a material 
kind. As the monastic community had always depended on donations from 
pious laymen, it should come as no surprise that the act of giving to the 
saṃgha was promoted as one of the most meritorious acts to be 
undertaken by a lay Buddhist. Among the wealthy laymen, donating money 
and goods was not only done for the merit accrued, but also often served 
as a showcase for one’s wealth, increasing a donator’s prestige.264
                                                 
262 These six pāramitās are sometimes extended with an additional four to correspond to the 
ten bodhisattva stages. These four pāramitās are: skilful means (Skt. upāya, Ch. fangbian 方
便), religious aspirations or vows (Skt. praṇidhāna, Ch. yuan 願), the power to fulfil these 
aspirations (Skt. bala, Ch. li 力), and spiritual wisdom (Skt. jñāna, Ch. zhi 智). For more on the 
bodhisattva doctrine, see Kawamura, 1981 and Harvey, 1990: 170-191. 
 This is 
also the case for kings or emperors, who sometimes made extremely large 
donations to the Buddhist monks and nuns so as not to be outdone by 
other members of the elite and thus risk having their prestige 
overshadowed by that of others. In this regard, Emperor Wu of the Liang, 
who is infamous for his massive donations to the monastic community, 
263 For references, see Kieschnick, 1997: 39-40. Also see Gernet, 1995: 242. 
264 This is attested, for example, in the Weishu (114: 3038), where it says that in their efforts 
to build stūpas and monasteries “無知之徒, 各相高尚, 貧富相競, 費竭財產, 務存高廣people 
mindlessly assert their pride in surpassing one another. Poor and rich compete with each 
other in exhausting their resources, bent on [building ever] higher and bigger.” (Translated by 
Gernet, 1995: 234) 

97 
 
was not unique. What was unique, was how he transformed these 
donations into an instrument of imperial legitimation. Emperor Wu sought 
out new ways to donate to the Buddhist monastic community to 
accumulate merit, and in large orchestrated events distributed this merit to 
his subjects and to all sentient beings in the world. 
 
III.1.2. The debates on the existence of the soul and karmic retribution 
 
One of the well-known idiosyncrasies of medieval Chinese 
Buddhism is the Chinese thinkers’ belief in an enduring ‘self’, an absolute 
spiritual identity that transcends physical existence and travels through 
time and space in a continuous cycle of rebirth. Indian Buddhists denied 
that there was such a thing as an ātman, a permanent identity that 
travelled from one form to the next through the process of reincarnation. 
This is the doctrine of no-self (Skt. anātman, Ch. wuwo 無我). Samsāra, 
the endless cycle of death and rebirth, to them was an impersonal process 
regulated by cause and effect, in which consciousness was no more than 
a temporary interaction of the five aggregates (skandha), which have no 
physical reality of their own. Even though this mode of thinking resembles 
the existential nihilism of xuanxue 玄學materialist thinking, early Chinese 
Buddhists found this abstract interpretation of saṃsāra difficult to conceive. 
For them, the process of rebirth and karman implied that something like a 
personal identity had to be reborn to reap the rewards or bad 
consequences of actions in a previous existence. They interpreted rebirth 
as a reincarnation or transmigration of the spirit. This is where we tread on 
dangerous terminological ground. In most of the literature on this subject, 
the personal identity that travelled from one existence to the next is 
conventionally designated as a “soul” or “spirit” (often deliberately placed 

98 
 
between quotation marks to indicate its conceptual character).265 However, 
despite the authors’ awareness of the dangers inherent in designating a 
particular Chinese concept with an English term, a precise definition of this 
conventional label is seldom spelled out. As Lo has shown in his study on 
the Chinese concept of shen 神, which he deliberately leaves untranslated, 
this term is multivalent. It can mean anything from an external 
phenomenon such as “god”, “spirits”, and “supernatural” to an 
individualized concept such as “spirit”, “soul” and so on.266 In the context of 
the early medieval debates on the nature of shen, Lo says that it is often 
justifiable to translate shen as “soul” or “spirit”. However, he warns that, in 
these debates, the way in which the disputants used the term could be 
very different. 267
 
 A precise definition of shen, as it was used by the 
debater, was never formulated at the beginning of the discussion. As a 
consequence, Lo says, it is common to find two debaters arguing without 
actually communicating with each other, as they each start from their own 
conception of shen and focus only on the formulation of their propositions. 
Specifically, this means that the debates were focussed on the analogies 
used and their logical implications, rather than the nature of shen itself. 
Speculations on the nature of shen 
 
There had been much speculation on the nature of a person’s 
enduring self long before the introduction of Buddhism into China, and in 
the wake of these speculations were left a plethora of terms that all refer to 
                                                 
265 For more on the Chinese concept of the “soul”, see Smith, H., 1958; Yu, 1964-65, 1981, 
1987; Harrell, 1979; Liebenthal, 1952; Pachow, 1978; Lai, 1981b; Overmyer, 1974; Brashier, 
1996. For more on the debates on the immortality of the “soul”, see Lai, 1981a; Liu M.-W., 
1987, Tang, 1983: 303-306. The most comprehensive study of the Chinese concept of shen 
神 as “spirit” or “soul” is Lo, 1991.  
266 Lo, 1991: 4. 
267 Ibid., 5. 

99 
 
something that can loosely be called a “human soul”.268 Before the sixth 
century BCE in northern China, the concept of po 魄was used for the 
principle of life that animated corporeal being with thought and action.269 
Etymologically, po refers to the growing light of the new moon.270 No later 
than the sixth century BCE the image of the changing phases of po, the 
moon’s essence (light), was, by analogy, associated with the destiny of a 
person’s essence (spirit).271 Around the same time in southern China we 
find the concept of hun 魂, which was equivalent in meaning to po, but had 
a different etymological root. Hun seems to be related to “mist” or “cloud”, 
which means that, like po, it equates the essence of a human being to 
some evanescent natural phenomenon.272 Lo draws the conclusion that 
“the early Chinese did not believe in a permanent soul since hun would 
evaporate like a mist and po would phase out like the light of the 
moon.” 273 By the sixth century BCE the two concepts of po and hun 
merged into the idea that a human was endowed with a dual soul, 
although at first it was probably not very clear in precisely what way the po 
and hun were related to each other. As time went by, this relationship 
became better defined, and, according to Yu, it reached its definitive 
formulation by the second century BCE at the latest.274
                                                 
268 For a discussion of these terminologies, see Lo, 1991: 19-28. 
 The duality of hun 
and po was linked to several other dualities: hun was linked to qi 氣, 
heaven and the yang 陽principle, while po was linked to xing 形, earth and 
the yin 陰principle. Thus hun and po became part of the belief that a 
human life consists of a bodily part and a spiritual part. The physical form 
269 For a study on the po and hun 魂 concepts, see Yu, 1987: 369-378. Also see Hu, 1945-
1946. 
270 The earliest occurrence of this character is on a Zhou oracle bone that is dateable to the 
eleventh century BCE. See Yu, 1987: 370. 
271 Hu, 1945-1946: 30; Yu, 1987: 370. 
272 Lo, 1991: 24. 
273 Ibid., 25. 
274 Yu, 1987: 374. 

100 
 
(xing) depends on the produce of earth for its survival, while the spirit 
relies on the invisible life force (qi) that comes from heaven. The physical 
form and the spirit are each governed by an animating force, namely the 
po and hun. Hun was classified in the yang category, and was hence an 
active and heavenly substance. Po was classified in the yin category, and 
was as such a passive and earthly substance.275 When a person died, it 
was believed that his po returned to the earth while his hun ascended to 
heaven. The po was thought to linger in the decaying body of the 
deceased until it had completely decomposed. If the po was not properly 
cared for by its surviving relatives through the performance of sacrifice, or 
if it had met with a violent death, it was believed that it could roam around 
as a ghost (gui 鬼), causing all sorts of trouble.276 The term gui is much 
older than po or hun. It was originally used in conjunction with shen 神, 
where shen designated the spirits that dwelled above, in heaven, where as 
gui referred to the spirits that dwelled below, on earth. The concept of 
guishen is as early as the second millennium BCE, and towards the end of 
the Zhou dynasty, it was incorporated into the dualistic hunpo concept. 
When the hun ascended to heaven, it could linger there for some time as a 
shen (supernatural being), just as the po could linger on earth as a gui. It is 
important to note that neither po nor hun, gui nor shen were thought to be 
eternal: "When the bones decay the p'o is also destroyed. There are cases 
in which the p'o has not been dissipated for a hundred years. No hun can 
exist for more than five generations."277
                                                 
275 Ibid., 374-375. 
 In the course of time, the concept 
hun would gain in importance at the expense of po. By the second century 
CE, the Han philosopher Zheng Xuan鄭玄 (127-200) described hun as the 
276 For more on the concept of gui, see Poo, 2004 and H. Smith, 1958. Also see Lo, 1991: 22. 
277 H. Smith, 1958: 175. Translation from Wieger, 1930 : 346. Cf. Overmyer (1974: 213), who 
says that the consensus seemed to be that the gui (i.e. the po that has returned to the earth) 
remained until the body had completely decayed and the shen (i.e. the hun that had 
ascended into heaven) lingered for no more than six or seven generations, as long as 
sacrifices were performed at the ancestral temple. 

101 
 
basis of a man’s consciousness and intelligence whereas he limited the 
function of po to “hearing distinctly and seeing clearly” (ermu congming 耳
目聰明).278 Po had lost its eschatological features and was reduced to 
governing only bodily functions such as the senses. From the Jin up to the 
Liang dynasty, po eventually was interpreted as the physical body itself, as 
opposed to hun, which then came to be understood as both the sensory 
and spiritual functions of the body.279
A detailed discussion of the intermediary phases of the Chinese 
notion of the “spirit” would lead us too far astray from the issue at hand. 
Suffice it to say that by the late fifth and early sixth century, under 
influence of Daoist philosophy, the compound jingshen 精神 (“essence-
spirit”) had become a predominant lexical variation of shen, which was 
meant to elucidate the perception of shen as the ultimate, unchanging 
principle of life, the realisation of the Dao within an entity.
 As a result of the dualistic nature of 
the hunpo concept, the redefinition of one term inevitably had its impact on 
the fortunes of the other. Other terms emerged besides hun to refer to the 
spiritual essence of the human body. 
280 Since the Dao 
is constant, the jingshen, as a sublimation of the Dao within the myriad 
things, is immortal in a certain sense as well. However, this immortality 
does not entail the survival of a personal identity, characterized by memory 
and character, as jingshen itself is not imbued with personal identity. The 
jingshen, defined as the essence of the Dao that is present in all things, 
ultimately aims at being reunited with the impersonal Dao from which it 
originates.281 As Zong Bing 宗炳 (375-443)282 explains in his Mingfo lun 明
佛論 (An Exposition of Buddhism)283
                                                 
278 As cited by Yu, 1987: 376. 
: 
279 For references, see Lo, 1991: 210n22. 
280 See Lo, 1991: 21-26. 
281 Ibid., 23. 
282 Zong Bing, courtesy name Shaowen 少文, descended from a family of high officials, and 
was considered a great painter, calligrapher, musician and qingtan adept. As was the vogue 
of the time, he never took office, but chose to dedicate his life to the pursuit of self-realisation. 

102 
 
 
自道而降便入精神。常有於陰陽之表。非二儀所究。284
From the Dao, it descends and enters into the [individual] 
souls. It always remains outside the cycle of yin and yang and 
is not affected by them. 
 
 
In his efforts to expound and defend the Buddhist principle of rebirth, Zong 
Bing resorts to the neo-Daoist concept of jingshen to demonstrate that a 
person’s spiritual essence does not perish (bumie 不滅) upon the death of 
the physical body, as it is impervious to the transformations of yin and 
yang. Under the influence of its conditioning causes (Skt. pratyaya, Ch. 
yuan 緣) the jingshen shifts to form individual perceptions (Skt. vijñāna, Ch. 
shi 識, i.e. conceptual consciousness that arises from causes and 
conditioning factors).285 What governs these individual perceptions is often 
called an individual’s “spiritual intelligence (shenming 神明)”,286
                                                                                                                
He became a student of the Buddhist monk Huiyuan 慧遠 (334-417), and actively defended 
Buddhism against its assailants. See Zürcher, 1972: 218-219. Also see Liebenthal, 1952: 
378n175. For Zong Bing’s biography, see Song shu, 93: 2278-2279 and Nan shi, 75: 1860-
1863. 
 which is 
the self-conscious sublimation of the jingshen, the spiritual component of a 
person pervaded with a sense of self. But it is clear from the terminology 
used, that at this point we have already shifted to the Buddhist angle of the 
debates on the immortality of the shen. If we return briefly to the state of 
affairs in pre-Buddhist China, we can conclude that, before the impact of 
283 The Mingfo lun was written by Zong Bing ca. 433. It is an essay in defence of Buddhism, in 
which he tries to explain away what he considered to be misconceptions of the Buddhist faith 
on the part of its opponents. Zong Bing’s treatise is preserved in its entirety in the Hongming ji 
(T.2102.9b5-16a24). See Zürcher, 1972: 15. For a full translation of the Mingfo lun in English, 
see Liebenthal, 1952: 378-394. 
284 Hongming ji, T.2102.9c29-10a1. 
285 Ibid., p. 10a3-4. 
286 For a discussion of the how the term shenming was interpreted during the late Warring 
States period, see Szabó, 2003.  

103 
 
Buddhism on Chinese thinking, shen was considered to be the principle of 
life, thought and action in a person. As such, it was no more than the 
spiritual counterpart of the physical body, on which it relied for its existence. 
Thus, the disintegration of the physical body also meant the end for the 
shen that resided within.287 This belief is reflected in the Daoist quest for 
physical immortality, which was so popular in Han times. Since the shen 
was dependant on the body for its survival, those who strove to achieve 
immortality developed techniques to prolong the existence of the mortal 
body or to replace it during the course of life with an immortal and 
incorruptible body.288
The arrival of Buddhism in China signified a turning point in the 
Chinese perception of shen. The Buddhist doctrine of rebirth pushed the 
boundaries of shen from a psychophysical element of life to a 
metaphysical element that could survive the destruction of the body and be 
reborn into another host. However, as we have remarked before, the 
Chinese Buddhist converts’ ontological spin on shen originated in a 
distorted view on the process of karman and rebirth. Despite the Buddha’s 
denial of the existence of an enduring spiritual identity (ātman), the 
Chinese had difficulty making sense of karmic retribution through rebirth 
without relying on something like an enduring self that reaps the benefit or 
detriment of actions in a former existence. If one keeps to the view that 
there is no enduring self that will undergo the consequences of its actions 
in a later life, this opens the way to immorality and nihilism. Therefore a 
continuous element in the cycle of rebirth was introduced. This perceived 
 In a way this meant that, although the relationship 
between shen and body was congruent, the physical body was of 
paramount importance. All this would change as Buddhism began to 
began to spread more widely between the third and fifth centuries CE. 
                                                 
287 Lo, 1991: 144. 
288 H. Smith, 1958: 177. For a study on the pursuit of physical immortality during the Han, see 
Yu, 1964-1965. For a study on what was understood by immortality of the body (shen 身) in 
Daoism, see Kohn, 1990. 

104 
 
transmigrating entity was identified with the native concept shen.289 As a 
result, the materialist conception of shen acquired a deeper ontological 
interpretation. Since a person’s shen was conceived to leave the body 
upon death only to be reborn in a new body, it transcended physical 
existence and was, to a Buddhist believer, effectively immortal. 290 This 
claim was fiercely disputed by the non-Buddhist, Chinese materialist 
thinkers, who kept to the view that the shen perishes together with the 
body. Both proponents and opponents of the immortal shen theory 
resorted to the use of analogies to prove their point. A well-known analogy 
that was used to illustrate the mortality of shen, was the so-called fire-and-
firewood analogy (or its variant the candle-and-light analogy), which says 
that one’s shen is like fire (light), and one’s body is like firewood (candle): 
as long as there is fuel, the fire will burn. When the fuel is spent, the fire 
extinguishes and nothing of it remains.291 The Buddhist monk Huiyuan 慧
遠 (334-417) 292
                                                 
289 Liebenthal, 1952: 336; Holcombe, 1994: 111. 
 used this same analogy to prove exactly the opposite 
290 Mather, 1955: 28. The assertion that the shen, which was essentially a product of the five 
aggregates (which have no ultimate physical reality of their own), could be immortal and thus 
somehow stood outside of the chain of interdependent causation, created some difficulty for 
the early Chinese Buddhists. In the end, this problem was solved by the proposition of the 
metaphysical doctrine that shen is formless (wuxing 無形) and transcends the physical realm, 
a concept which owes much to xuanxue philosophy. For a detailed discussion on the solution 
of this issue, see Lo, 1991: 146-194. 
291 The candle-and-light analogy, which is basically the same as the fire-and-firewood analogy, 
is already used in the Huainanzi 淮南子 (compiled under the patronage of Liu An 劉安 (ca. 
177-122 BCE) in the second century BCE). For references, see Lo, 1991: 97. 
292 Huiyuan is a very important representative of early Chinese gentry Buddhism. As a 
descendent of a literati family, he enjoyed a traditional Confucian education and became a 
student at the Imperial University (Taixue 太學). He also studied the main scriptures of 
xuanxue philosophy (Laozi, Zhuangzi and Yijing) from an early age, and was deemed an 
expert on them. Later in life his interests shifted to Buddhism, and when he was 21 years old 
he became the disciple of Dao’an 道安 (312-385). Huiyuan’s family background allowed him 
to circulate in the higher social class of the literati, to which he belonged by birth, and his 
proficiency in secular scholarship gave him the opportunity to proclaim Buddhist ideas in a 

105 
 
position. In his influential treatise Shamen bujing wangzhe lun 沙門不敬王
者論 (A śramaṇ a does not pay homage to a king)293, Huiyuan says that the 
passing of the shen from one incarnation into the next is like fire that 
travels from one piece of firewood (xin 薪) to the next. When the first piece 
of firewood burns up, the flame can pass on to another piece of firewood. 
Although the first piece of firewood is different from the second one (just 
like the first body is different from the second one) the flame itself does not 
change.294
                                                                                                                
language that the literati could understand. A biography of Huiyuan is included in the 
Gaoseng zhuan (T.2059.357c23-361b13), and Chu sanzang jiji (T.2145.109b10-110c9). For 
a translation of this biography, see Zürcher, 1972: 240-253. For more on Huiyuan and his 
activities, see Zürcher, 1972: 204-239; Liebenthal, 1950, Ch’en, 1964: 103-112; Tang, 1983: 
341-373; Tsukamoto, 1985: 759-898.  
 At first glance it might seem odd to find a theoretical discussion 
of the survival of shen in a treatise that was essentially aimed at proving 
the autonomous status of the monastic community. However, upon closer 
inspection, it turns out that the theory of the immortal shen is the ultimate 
basis of Huiyuan’s entire line of reasoning. In the preceding parts of the 
treatise, Huiyuan starts building his case with a socio-political analysis of 
293 This treatise is preserved in the Hongming ji, T.2102.29c19-32b11. Huiyuan wrote this 
treatise in response to the anti-clerical measures taken by Huan Xuan 桓玄 (369-404) 
between 402 and 404. Huan Xuan was a powerful governor and military commander of the 
Eastern Jin 東晉 (317-420) who had taken advantage of the Sun En 孫恩rebellion (399-402) 
to enter the capital in 402 as a “liberator” and proceeded to take control of the government in 
the following years until finally, in 404, he declared himself emperor of his own dynasty, which 
he called Chu 楚. His reign would last but a few months. Huan Xuan was not opposed to 
Buddhism on a doctrinal level, but he was wary of the influence of the metropolitan clergy in 
political intrigues at the court. He therefore took some measures in an attempt to curb the 
autonomous status of the clergy and reopened the debate about whether or not a śramaṇ a 
should submit to secular authority. Huiyuan was allowed to present his case as 
representative of the Buddhist clergy, and the outlines of this argument are preserved in his 
Shamen bujing wangzhe lun. See Zürcher, 1972: 231-239. Also see Schmidt-Glintzer, 1976: 
60-70. For a full translation and discussion of the Shamen bujing wangzhe lun, see Hurvitz, 
1957. 
294 Hongming ji, T.2102.32a2-4. 

106 
 
the difference between lay devotees (zaijia 在家)295 and monks (chujia 出
家)296. The former lives in the world and therefore remains subject to 
secular authority, but the latter has severed all ties to this world and 
therefore is no longer subjected to a worldly authority. The efforts of the 
monk, however, benefit the empire by virtue of his exemplary conduct, 
despite his living outside the world. In the following part, Huiyuan 
elaborates on the way in which the shen gets trapped into the cycle of 
rebirth because of its desires and emotions (qinggan 情感)297. The only 
way for a living being to reach the state of nirvāṇ a, is to end the desires 
that bind him or her to life. “Heaven and Earth,” he says, “can give life to 
the living beings, but can not cause them not to transform (i.e. die). The 
ruler can sustain his subjects [by good government], but can not prevent 
catastrophes from happening to them.” 298 What Huiyuan is saying, is that 
no ruler can help his subjects to achieve deliverance from samsāra, 
therefore he can not expect to have sway over those who sever their ties 
to the world in an attempt to cut off their passions. In part four of the 
treatise, Huiyuan counters the objections made by his imaginary 
opponent299
                                                 
295 Ibid., p.30a10-b4. 
 that there is nothing outside of what can be perceived with the 
senses, and that the there can only be one interpretation of the principles 
underlying the physical world, and that is the version provided by the 
296 Ibid., p.30b5-23. 
297 Ibid., p.30c10. Liebenthal (1950: 248-249) translates qing 情 as “the will to live”, i.e. 
clinging to life. 
298 Ibid., p.30c18-19. 
299 Part three, four, and five of the treatise are written in the typical oratory style of qingtan 
(Pure Conversation), where the author, who acts as the “host (zhu 主)”, answers the 
questions of an imaginary opponent, designated as a “guest (bin 賓)”, and counters his 
following objections. Although it is by no means certain that the treatises written in this style 
are records of actual oral debates, the arguments given by the imaginary opponent would 
have to be reflections of the general arguments given in the polemic for the treatise to be a 
relevant contribution to the discussion. 

107 
 
ancient sages. 300 In his reply, Huiyuan discloses his theory that the 
Chinese sages are merely manifestations of the Buddha, and their 
teachings are ultimately variations on a theme. This theory presupposes 
the existence of an immortal shen that can be reborn into other beings, 
and this is where we return to the issue we started from. In the fifth and 
final part of the Shamen bujing wangzhe lun, Huiyuan’s opponent explicitly 
states his belief that “the endowment of qi 氣 is limited to one life,”301 
repeating some of the same arguments that we have seen above, 
including the fire-and-firewood analogy. As we have seen, Huiyuan 
reinterpreted the fire-and-firewood analogy to illustrate how the shen could 
go from one body to another without a change in its essence.302  According 
to Lo, it is with this reply that Huiyuan ushered in a new phase in the early 
medieval debate about the shen, because he effectively argued for the 
indestructibility of the shen on the assumption of karmic rebirth, a concept 
which up to that point the Eastern Jin thinkers had not bothered to 
examine.303 In other documents of Huiyuan’s hand he further elaborates 
on the nature and significance of karmic retribution,304
                                                 
300 Hongming ji, T.2102.30c29-31a1. 
 and in doing so, he 
shifted the focus from the ontological discussion of shen to the practical 
and moral considerations of the destiny of shen after death. One’s shen 
was effected by the process of karman and rebirth, and only through 
cultivation of one’s shen could nirvāṇ a ultimately be reached. Of course, 
Huiyuan was by no means the first to explain the process of karmic 
301 Ibid., p.31b15. 
302 Huiyuan even claimed that the fire-and-firewood analogy was derived from a Buddhist text, 
but he failed to specify which one that was. For a discussion of three possible Buddhist 
sources, see Lo, 1991: 298-304. 
303 For a detailed discussion of Huiyuan’s view on shen and the shift in focus in the debates 
from this time on, see Lo, 1991: 157-169. 
304 Ming baoying lun 明報應論 (Explaining Karmic Retribution; T.2102.33b9-34b2), and 
Sanbao lun 三報論 (On the Three Retributions [in the Present Life, the Next Life, and Later 
Future Lives]; T.2102.34b3-c25). 

108 
 
retribution, as this was one of the distinguishing features of Buddhism. 
However, the validity of the doctrine of karmic retribution had not been part 
of the debate around the nature of shen among Chinese thinkers before 
Huiyuan wrote this treatise, nor had there been much speculation about 
what exactly it was that traveled through the endless cycle of rebirth. In 
reaction to Huiyuan’s advocacy of an enduring shen in relation to karmic 
retribution, rival thinkers took recourse to the concept of “destiny (ming 命)” 
to invalidate the Buddhist point of view. 
 
Karmic retribution versus destiny 
 
After the publication of Huiyuan’s treatise, the debates about the 
immortality of the shen continued unabated until the time of Emperor Wu 
of the Liang, 305 but ever since this theme was invariably linked to the 
concept of karmic retribution and rebirth. This combination did not facilitate 
the debates, and one’s stance towards the shen question came to be 
dominated by one’s belief in either destiny or retribution.306
As is the case with countless Chinese concepts, the notion of ming 
has many interpretations, depending on the time in which and on the 
person by whom it is used.
 Let us first take 
a look at what is meant with the two terms “destiny” and “karmic 
retribution”. 
307
                                                 
305 In the postscript to his Hongming ji, which was compiled ca. 515, Sengyou pointed out six 
major issues which were still the object of debate at his time. These “six doubts (liuyi 六疑)”, 
as he calls it, were the main points of confusion that made people attack Buddhism. The 
second of these doubts, he still identified as “the false belief that when people die their shen 
is extinguished, and therefore there is no such thing as the Three Periods, i.e. past, present, 
and future (ren si shen mie wuyou sanshi 人死神滅無有三世; T.2102.95a18).” 
 A detailed sketching of the varying 
306 Liu M.-W., 1987: 404. For a study of the polemic between destiny and retribution, see Lo, 
1991: 29-85. 
307 For a study of the semantic field of ming in pre-Buddhist China, see Raphals, 2003. For a 
discussion of the concept ming in early Confucian thought, see Slingerland, 1996. 

109 
 
interpretations of ming throughout time is beyond the scope of the present 
research, but in order to understand what the debates between the 
proponents of destiny and karmic retribution were about, it is necessary to 
point out some general characteristics of this term. Generally speaking, 
modern scholars discern two categories of interpretations, namely 
“descriptive” and “normative”. 308 At the extreme end of the scale, the 
descriptive interpretation of ming refers to an impersonal force outside of 
individual human control that determines the course of events on earth. In 
this sense, ming is often translatable as “blind fate” or “fixed fate”. This 
ming is predestined and not tied to an ethical or moral principle, which 
means that it does not punish immoral behaviour with misfortune or reward 
moral behaviour with good fortune. As such it is entirely impossible to 
predict one’s fixed fate or to alter it by changes in behaviour.309 For this 
reason, it is designated as a fatalistic ming. On the other end of the 
spectrum is the normative interpretation of ming, which takes ming as 
“decree (from Heaven)” and links it with yi 義 (morality, righteousness)  to 
mean something like “moral duty”.310
                                                 
308 Slingerland, 1996: 567. 
 In other words it is one’s assigned 
function in the order of things. This does not mean a fatalistic surrender to 
the “will of Heaven”, but rather it is carrying out the decree of Heaven from 
a personal motivation to do the right thing. In between these two extreme 
interpretations of ming, there is a whole range of interpretations with 
varying degrees of determinism. The most well known of these is probably 
the concept of tianming 天命 (Decree from Heaven), which is to a degree 
normative because it states that a ruler receives his mandate to rule from 
Heaven (ming in the literal sense of “decree”, but with an undertone of 
inherent “moral duty” that goes with it), but is also to a degree descriptive 
as the bad execution of this mandate will lead to inescapable punishment, 
309 Ning, 1997: 495. 
310 Slingerland, 1996: 567; Raphals, 2003: 547. 

110 
 
which can be interpreted as a form of moral determinism.311 The early 
Confucian belief that there was a supreme moral judge (Heaven) that 
rewarded or punished human behaviour in respect of its moral nature, was 
in a way also a teleological belief in retribution within one life.312 However, 
this belief created problems very early on, as it failed to explain why, if 
Heaven was benevolent, did good people meet misfortune and bad people 
prosper? This is probably why subsequent Confucian philosophers 
stepped away from the notion of Heaven as moral judge and controller of 
fate, and adopted a more naturalistic view of Heaven as “Nature”.313
                                                 
311 Ning, 1997: 496. Also see Overmyer, 1974: 211. 
 The 
question about the justification of personal fortune and misfortune, 
however, kept burning in the minds of Chinese thinkers. The philosopher 
Wang Chong 王充 (27- ca. 100 CE), author of the Lunheng 論衡 (Critical 
Essays), addressed this problematic relationship between behaviour and 
destiny. He asserted that an individual’s nature (xing 性) and destiny (ming) 
were in no way related. A good person could encounter bad luck and a 
bad person could have good luck. Heaven, he said, does not act (wuwei 無
為), but everything happens of its own accord. This is the principle of ziran 
自然 (naturalness), on which we shall elaborate further on. To Wang 
Chong, destiny is predetermined, and it can not be influenced by man. It 
312 The belief that those who do good will encounter good fortune while those who do bad will 
encounter misfortune can be found in several of the Confucian classics: in the Analects we 
find that “the virtuous will live long lives (Analects, VI. 21; see Lau, 1979: 84)” and that “life 
and death are the decree of Heaven; wealth and honor depend on Heaven (Analects, XII. 5; 
see Lau, 1979: 112).” In Mencius it says that “those who are obedient to Heaven are 
preserved; those who go against Heaven are annihilated (Mencius, IVa.7; see Lau, 2003: 
79).” See Lo, 1991: 32.   
313 This interpretation is adopted by Xunzi (see Fung, 1952: 31). For a more detailed 
discussion of the concept tian in the Xunzi (with further references), see Lee J., 2005: 20-24.  

111 
 
simply is what it is.314 This fatalistic stance toward destiny would grow in 
popularity as the Han dynasty continued to decay.315
From around the beginning of our common era, another notion of 
destiny had started to develop, mainly in religious Daoist circles, and that 
was the notion of chengfu 承負. Chengfu had the meaning of “received 
burden”, which basically meant that a person could be punished for the 
bad behaviour of one of his ancestors, or could place a burden on his 
descendants by doing something immoral.
 
316 A record of good and bad 
deeds was entered into the Register of Destiny (minglu 命祿) by the gods, 
along with a person’s date of birth and death even before they had been 
born.317 On the up-side, it was deemed possible to change one’s inherited 
destiny through virtuous behaviour, although this obviously conflicted with 
the fatalistic view on destiny that claimed that one’s life was predetermined 
at birth.318 The fatalistic view on destiny was also expounded in xuanxue 
philosophy, where it was linked to the concept ziran 自然 (“being thus of 
itself”, naturalness).319 Guo Xiang 郭象 (d. 312) denied that there was a 
metaphysical essence or source of things. In his view, there is nothing that 
creates other things, but instead all things create themselves. They are the 
way they are by themselves, and there is no deliberate intention behind 
their creation.320
                                                 
314 For more on Wang Chong’s views on destiny, see Fung, 1953: 162- 167. Also see 
Raphals, 2003: 547-551. For a translation of the Lunheng, see Forke, 1962. 
 Ziran thus referred to the inborn physical nature of a thing, 
which randomly arose of itself, but consequently predetermined the course 
315 Lo, 1991: 30. 
316 On the concept chengfu, see Hendrischke, 1991; Maeda, 2006: Lo, 1991: 39-57. Cf. 
Seiwert, 2003: 39. 
317 Lo, 1991: 50. 
318 Lo (1991: 48-57) points out some contradictory passages in Daoist religious scriptures 
such as the Taiping jing 太平經 (Scripture of Heavenly Peace), which seem to contain both 
deterministic and non-deterministic attitudes towards destiny. This contradiction remained 
either unnoticed or unresolved, for no theoretical writing on the subject is extant. 
319 See Lo, 1991: 58-65.  
320 For more on the concept ziran in the thought of Guo Xiang, see Ziporyn, 1993. 

112 
 
of development of that thing. This idea was conveyed to the notion of ming, 
which came to be understood as random fate. Whether someone is born 
with good luck or bad luck is simply a matter of chance. If a person was 
born unlucky, no matter what he did, he would always be unlucky, because 
that was his randomly assigned nature. As xuanxue was enormously 
popular with the early medieval literati, it is not surprising that most of them 
shared the fatalistic view on destiny, based on the concept ziran. 
Nevertheless, the contradictory belief that one’s destiny was also 
connected to one’s moral behaviour had a large following as well, and it 
was not uncommon for the literati to adopt both stances at the same 
time. 321
It is unnecessary in the context of the present research to explain in 
detail the origin and development of the Buddhist doctrine of karman and 
retribution, because in the debates between its proponents and opponents, 
it was mostly used in a polemical and pragmatic way. In a nutshell, the 
basic idea of karmic retribution is this: all deliberate actions of an individual 
generate karman. Good actions are rewarded with good karman (also 
labelled “merit”) and evil actions are punished with bad karman. The good 
karman causes good fortune to befall a person, while the bad karman 
causes bad fortune. The retribution of karman is an automatic process of 
cause and effect, so there is no ultimate moral judge.
 It was this faith in the possibility to influence destiny through 
personal action, and a lingering feeling of dissatisfaction with the apparent 
randomness of one’s fortune in relation to one’s moral behaviour that 
would ensure the swift co-option of the Buddhist doctrine of karman in 
China. 
322
                                                 
321 Ibid.: 65. 
 Karman passes 
322 Huiyuan, for instance, explains that there is no ultimate judge to decide what is good or 
bad, but that the process of karmic retribution is automatic and natural (for which he uses the 
term ziran, which, as we have seen, was used in the xuanxue conception of destiny). He 
compares this natural relationship between an action and its retribution to that between a 
form and its shadow (xing 形 – ying 影), a sound and its echo (sheng 聲 – xiang 響). See 
T.2102.33c20-24. 

113 
 
out of existence when the appropriate reward or punishment is received, 
although this does not necessarily happen within one and the same 
lifespan. Karman that has not yet produced result is transferred from one 
life to the next, so a person can enjoy or suffer the consequence of an 
action from a former life, as well as from the present life. Likewise, the 
retribution of an action can be carried over into a subsequent existence.323 
The karmic process thus exists of an individual’s actions by which karman 
is accumulated, and by the good or bad events that happen to that 
individual whereby karman is dissipated. When this doctrine of karman 
entered China, it resolved many of the questions that the Chinese had 
been struggling with, most importantly the question of why good things 
happen to bad people and vice versa. The Buddhist notion of retribution 
gave the Chinese a plausible model for explaining the apparent 
discrepancies between an individual’s actions in this life and the good or 
bad fortune that befell him or her.324
Despite the fact that the idea of karmic retribution got assimilated 
into Chinese culture,
 Furthermore, this Buddhist doctrine 
reminded of the concept ziran (as karmic retribution happened naturally, 
without any external instigator), but did not share its fatalistic origin in 
randomness. 
325
                                                 
323 In his short essay Sanbao lun 三報論 (On the Three [Types] of Retribution, included in the 
Hongming ji, T.2102.34b3-c25) Huiyuan identified three kinds of retribution, namely in the 
present life for deeds now done (xianbao 現報), in the next rebirth for deeds now done 
(shengbao 生報), and in subsequent lives (houbao 後報). For a translation of this treatise, see 
Liebenthal, 1952: 362-365. 
 it still got dragged into the polemic between the 
opponents and defenders of Buddhism, not because it was fundamentally 
unacceptable or incompatible with indigenous Chinese beliefs, but 
324 Lo, 1991: 71. 
325 As we have seen, many people held on to their fatalistic view of destiny, while at the same 
time reaching out for the possibility to change one’s fate through moral behaviour. It is this 
belief in retribution as the basis for morality that clearly underwent the influence of the 
Buddhist karman doctrine. Lo, 1991: 84. 

114 
 
because Buddhism as a whole was rejected as a foreign doctrine for which 
the superior literati elite (who saw themselves as the bearers of Chinese 
culture) saw no use, and which they feared could disrupt the social order. 
As we have seen, with Huiyuan’s participation in the debates about 
Buddhism in general, and the immortality of shen in particular, karmic 
retribution became part of the polemic. Huiyuan started his defence of an 
enduring self from the assumed reality of karmic retribution, thereby tying 
both concepts together in these debates. Opponents of Buddhism felt that 
they could not debunk the logic that something like an enduring self had to 
travel from one existence to another to reap the retribution of his karman 
(which, as noted earlier, was a typical Chinese interpretation that went 
contrary to the Buddha’s original teaching of no-self), so they turned to 
their indigenous Chinese concepts of destiny (the fatalistic worldview 
based on ziran) to debunk the Buddhist doctrine of karmic retribution. If 
karmic retribution could be proven to be invalid, the need for an immortal 
shen would disappear with it. The debates about the immortality of the 
shen from then until the time of Emperor Wu of the Liang became 
invariably linked to one’s belief in either hard destiny or karmic retribution. 
 
Fan Zhen on the destructibility of the shen 
 
The debates about the immortality of the shen reached their zenith 
around the end of the 5th and the beginning of the 6th century AD, with 
Fan Zhen 范縝 (ca. 450-ca. 515)326 as the most vehement of the attackers. 
The first of these debates took place at the court of Xiao Ziliang 蕭子良 
around 489,327
                                                 
326 For a biography of Fan Zhen, see Liang shu, 48: 664-671 (translated by Jansen, 2000: 
232-246). A second, shorter biography is included in the Nan shi, 57: 1420-1422. 
 and after a short lull they flared up again under the reign of 
327 Jansen, 2000: 172, 260. 

115 
 
Emperor Wu of the Liang around 507.328 A lot of ink has flowed over the 
philosophical contents of these discussions.329 However, what is relevant 
to this thesis, is finding clues about Emperor Wu’s motivation to counter 
them so carefully. But first, let us take a look at Fan Zhen and his famous 
treatise Shenmie lun 神滅論 (Treatise on the Destructibility of the Shen).330
Fan Zhen was born into a literati family of some importance. Due to 
the untimely death of his father, however, he grew up in poverty as the 
status of his family declined. When he was about twenty years old, he 
became the student of Liu Huan 劉瓛 (434-489)
 
331 with whom he studied 
for many years . Fan Zhen is characterized by Thomas Jansen as a 
conservative member of the traditional landowning literati, who were often 
critical of the metropolitan, court-based literati.332
                                                 
328 Hongming ji, T.2102.60b-68c. 
 While the landowning 
literati in the provinces relied on their large estates for revenue and local 
authority, the court-appointed literati in the capital relied on their salaries 
and, foremost, on their prestige as court officials. The latter spent a lot of 
their time indulging in leisurely activities such as poetry and philosophical 
discussion in literary salons, while their duties were either neglected or 
carried out by their subordinates. In protest of this decadent court lifestyle, 
Fan Zhen wore straw sandals and simple garments. He was very upfront 
and loved to make provocative statements, which did not always go down 
well with his literati friends. None the less, he was admired for his succinct 
phrasing.  
329 Balazs, 1932 and 1964: 262-265: Liu M.-W., 1987; Lai, 1981b: 146-148; Pachow, 1978: 
33-35; Chang, 1973; Tang, 1983: 470-473; Lo, 1991: 195-217. 
330 Fan Zhen’s treatise is reproduced in his biography in the Liang shu, 48: 665-670. It is also 
incorporated, with slight textual variations, in the rebuttal of Xiao Chen 蕭琛 (478-529), which 
is recorded in the Hongming ji (T.2102.55a9-57c4). For a translation of the Shenmie lun, see 
Balazs, 1932: 220-234; Makita, 1973-1975, vol. 3: 482-499; Ren, 1973: 335-353; Jansen, 
2000: 235-246. 
331 Biography in Nan Qi shu, 39: 677-680; Nan shi, 50: 1235-1238. 
332 Jansen, 2000: 154. 

116 
 
Fan Zhen frequented the Western Villa of the Qi prince Xiao Ziliang, 
but unlike his host, he did not believe in Buddhism, which he perceived as 
a threat to national stability due to its disruptive effect on society. Fan 
Zhen’s biography describes the following discussion between Xiao Ziliang 
and himself: 
 
子 良 問 曰。 君 不 信 因 果。 世 間 何 得 有 富 貴。 何 得 有 
賤 貧。 縝 答 曰。人 之 生 譬 如 一 樹 花。 同 發 一 枝 俱 開 
一 蔕。 隨 風 而 墮。 自 有 拂 簾 幌 墜 於 茵 席 之 上。 自 有 
關 籬 牆 落 於 糞 溷 之 側。墜 茵 蓆 者 殿 下 是 也。 落 糞 溷 
者 下 官 是 也。貴 賤 雖 復 殊 途。因 果 竟 在 何 處。 
Ziliang asked: “If you, Sir, do not believe in cause and effect 
(Ch.: yin因 guo果; Skt.: hetuphala), then how [do you explain 
that] there are wealth and eminence, and poverty and 
lowliness in the world?” Zhen answered: “Human life is like 
the blossoms of a tree. They all come from the same branch, 
and they all spring from a single stem. When they fall, they 
get carried off by the wind. Some of them brush against 
hanging-screens or curtains and land on cushions or mats. 
Others collide with bamboo fences or walls and fall alongside 
a cesspool. Those who land on cushions and mats are 
[eminent nobles such as] your Highness, the Heir-Apparent. 
Those who fall by the cesspool are [lowly commoners such as] 
your humble servant. Even though eminence and lowliness 
follow very different paths, where does cause and effect come 
into it?333
 
 
This anecdote is presented to the reader of the biography as the direct 
cause leading up to the composition of the Shenmie lun, however, as Hu 
                                                 
333 Liang shu 48: 665. Translated by Schmidt-Glintzer 1976, 121-122; Liu M.W., 1987: 404; 
Jansen, 2000: 234-235. 

117 
 
Shi argues, the transmitted text of the treatise probably dates from the time 
of the second round of debates at the court of Emperor Wu of the Liang in 
507.334 Nevertheless, it is clear that at the time of Xiao Ziliang’s salon in 
the Western Villa, the debate concerning the mortality of the shen had 
resurged with Fan Zhen on centre stage, and the conversation between 
Fan Zhen and Xiao Ziliang cited above gives away important clues to Fan 
Zhen’s motivations. Xiao Ziliang apparently subscribed to the doctrine of 
karman, which he applied to justify the differences in social hierarchy.335
                                                 
334 Hu, 1984. Cf. Jansen, 2000: 268-269.  
 
Fan Zhen from his part followed the xuanxue view on destiny when he 
stated that one’s social status comes about all by itself (ziran) and is 
dependent solely on the luck of the draw. So in essence, the debate that 
ensued was one between karmic retribution and hard destiny, and the 
composition of the Shenmie lun is to be seen in that context. When Fan 
Zhen wrote that the physical body (xing 形) and shen are one, and that the 
335 The idea that karman was responsible for social inequality was attested in many Buddhist 
scriptures. The Milindapañha (believed to date from the first century CE) for instance, has the 
following passage: 
 
The king said: “Why is it, Nāgasena, that all men are not alike, but some are 
short-lived and some long-lived, some sickly and some healthy, some ugly 
and some beautiful, some without influence and some of great power, some 
poor and some wealthy, some low born and some high born, some stupid 
and some wise?” The Elder replied: “Why is it that all vegetables are not alike, 
but some sour, and some salt, and some pungent, and some acid, and some 
astringent, and some sweet?” “I fancy, Sir, it is because they come from 
different kinds of seeds.” “And just so, great king, are the differences you 
have mentioned among men to be explained. For it has been said by the 
Blessed One: ‘Beings, O brahmin, have each their own Karma, are inheritors 
of Karma, belong to the tribe of their Karma, are relatives by Karma, have 
each their Karma as their protecting overlord. It is Karma that divides them up 
into low and high and the like divisions.’” 
 
Rhys Davids, 1890-1894, vol. 1: 100-101. 

118 
 
shen can not survive the death of the physical body, he essentially wanted 
to disprove the theory of karmic retribution, for how could there be a 
transfer of karman if there was no enduring self to carry it along from one 
life to the next? 336 With his attacks on the concept of an eternal shen and 
the karmic proces, Fan Zhen did not merely wish to contest a Chinese 
Buddhist point of doctrine for the purpose of philosophical discussion. 
There was also a political dimension to his treatise, as is evident from his 
concluding chapter. 337
 
 In the popular style of qingtan, an imaginary 
opponent asks: “What advantage is there to knowing that the shen 
perishes [at death]?” Fan Zhen answers: 
浮 屠 害 政。桑 門 蠹 俗。風 驚 霧 起。馳 蕩 不 休。吾 哀 其 
弊。思 拯 其 溺。338
The [teaching of] Buddha is harmful to government, and the 
Buddhist monks corrupt the Chinese customs. Like stormy 
winds and rising mist it spreads [across the nation] without 
interruption. As I am deeply troubled by the abuses [of the 
Buddhist faith], I pondered on a way to save those that have 
been swept away by it. 
 
 
He then goes on to give some examples of the detrimental effect that 
Buddhism had on society in his opinion. Many of the arguments raised by 
Fan Zhen are representative of those typically used by the anti-Buddhist 
disputers throughout early medieval times.339
                                                 
336 I will not repeat the arguments and analogies used by Fan Zhen, nor the ensuing rebuttals 
by pro-Buddhist scholars, as this has been the object of many detailed studies in the past. 
For the literature, see footnote 83. 
 He says, for instance, that 
the Buddhist monks are unfilial; that they waste the state’s valuable 
337 Liang shu, 48: 670. 
338 Ibid. 
339 For an overview of the most common arguments against Buddhism in early medieval 
China, see Zürcher, 1972: 254-285. 

119 
 
resources; that they are unproductive; that they deplete the army of 
conscripted soldiers and keep men from assuming official posts etc. And 
the reason that people turn to Buddhism, he explains, is that it “confuses 
people with vague words, scares them with the sufferings of Avīci hell (abi  
阿鼻)340, lures them in with empty statements
, and elates them with the 
joys of Tuṣita heaven (doushuai  兜率)341.” The concluding paragraph of 
the Shenmie lun thus exposes the real motivation for its composition. The 
attack on the concept of an eternal shen is meant to invalidate the theory 
of karmic retribution, which Fan Zhen saw as an instrument of legitimation 
in the hands of those in authority, and as a way through which the ruling 
elite kept the general populace docile and obtuse.342
Fan Zhen was certainly not the first ‘conservative’ to utter his 
criticism of the Buddhist doctrine of retribution, nor was he the only one of 
his time. It is known from correspondence between Shen Yue 沈約 and 
Tao Hongjing 陶弘景, the acknowledged leader of the Mao Shan 茅山 
school of Taoism, that the latter too was appalled by this idea that suffering 
and good fortune were the results of one’s own actions in past lives.
 He also urged his 
readers to stop sponsoring Buddhism, because he felt that the Buddhist 
emphasis on personal liberation endangered the moral fabric of society by 
turning the focus away from the good of the collective towards a search for 
personal benefit. 
343
                                                 
340 This is the last and deepest of the eight hells, where the misfortunate are subjected to 
cruel torturing, die, and are instantly reborn to suffer again. 
 
However, as much as Fan Zhen wished to free the people from the 
perceived dangers of karmic retribution, he never formulated a satisfactory 
explanation of his own for the imbalance between people’s moral 
behaviour and competence on the one hand, and their social status and 
341 This is the fourth heaven in the realm of desire (yujie 欲界), where all future Buddha’s are 
reborn before descending to earth as the next Buddha. It is the abode of Maitreya Buddha. 
342 Jansen, 2000: 154, 169. 
343 Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.122b-123a. For more on the relation between Shen Yue and 
Tao Hongjing, see Mather 1988, 115-120, 138-140. 

120 
 
official rank on the other hand. In the end he remained stuck in the 
fatalistic view that all was decided by chance at the moment of birth. 
 
 
 
 
Emperor Wu and the debates about the destiny of the shen 
 
As Emperor Wu developed his new Buddhist ideology for 
legitimation purposes, this fatalistic idea of destiny clashed with the goals 
he tried to achieve. After all, how would he be able to portray himself as a 
bodhisattva-emperor, a universal saviour who did all he could to relieve the 
karmic burden of his subjects, if his people’s fates were predetermined 
anyhow? Therefore, at the time of Liang Wudi, the debates began anew in 
earnest. Fan Zhen and Emperor Wu were, according to Fan Zhen’s 
biography, old friends from the time of Xiao Ziliang’s Western Villa, and 
Emperor Wu was always delighted to see him. 344 This is not surprising, as 
they shared some similar values, most importantly the idea that the 
monopolization of the higher offices by the high ranking literati families had 
to stop, and that the ranks of office had to be reopened to people of 
competence, rather than to scions of influential families who were often 
incapable and negligent in their duties. However, their views on what 
measures had to be taken to achieve this were very different. Fan Zhen 
recognized the abuses that had corrupted the Nine Ranks system, but he 
still believed the system to be viable in its original form. He wanted to 
return to the recommendation of suitable candidates from the local level up, 
based on a candidate’s capabilities and personality, rather than the 
ranking of the family to which he belonged.345
                                                 
344 Liang shu, 48: 665. 
 Even before he had been 
345 For more on Fan Zhen’s views on the Nine Ranks system, see Jansen, 2000: 154-155, 
164-165. 

121 
 
declared emperor of the Liang dynasty, Xiao Yan formulated his view on 
the matter in a memorial addressed to the Qi throne.346
In 507, only five years after Xiao Yan became emperor, Fan Zhen 
systematized his polemic against Buddhism in general, and the existence 
of the soul in particular, in the form of his treatise Shen mie lun 神滅論 (On 
the Extinction of the Spirit).
 In this memorial he 
criticized the abuses of the Nine Ranks system as well, but unlike Fan 
Zhen (who advocated a decentralized recruitment of officials) he pleaded 
for a stronger centralization of the selection process.  
347 His motivation behind this was probably the 
thought that, if he could undermine one of the basic principles that 
Emperor Wu’s world vision was based on (namely the existence of an 
eternal soul which undergoes the process of death and rebirth), he might 
succeed in completely debunking Emperor Wu’s image as a Buddhist 
saviour, and put an end to the politization of this non-Chinese religion.348 
Emperor Wu wanted to settle the debate for once and for all. In an attempt 
to be thorough about it, he formulated a twofold rebuttal of Fan Zhen’s 
treatise: one on Confucian grounds,349 and one on Buddhist grounds.350
                                                 
346 For this memorial, see Liang shu, 1: 22-23. Translated by Jansen, 2000: 160-162. 
 
347 The Shen mie lun 神滅論 as an independent work is no longer extant. It has been 
preserved in the form of quotations in the Nan shen mie lun 難神滅論 (T.2102.55a9-57c4), a 
refutation of the Shen mie lun, written by Xiao Chen 蕭琛 (478-529), who was one of the so-
called ‘Eight Friends of the Prince of Jingling (Jingling bayou 竟陵八友)’ and a cousin to Fan 
Zhen. It is also repeated, with small deviations, in Fan Zhen’s biography in the Liang shu, 48: 
665-670 For a brief summery of the question about the dating of the Shen mie lun, see 
Jansen 2000, 268-269. For a full translation of the Shen mie lun, see Balasz, 1964: 266-276. 
Also see Lo, 1991: 195-217; Liu M.-W., 1987; Jansen, 2000: 172-193; Hu, 1984; Schmidt-
Glintzer, 1976: 119-123. 
348 Jansen 2000, 216. 
349 See Da Liang huangdi chi da chenxia shenmie lun 大梁皇帝敕答臣下神滅論 (The Emperor 
of the Great Liang Orders [His Officials] to Respond to [Fan Zhen’s] Shenmie lun), in 
Hongming ji, T.2102.60b5-18. For a translation, see Jansen, 2000: 216-217. 
350 Emperor Wu wrote a treatise titled Li shenming chengfo yiji 立神明成佛義記 (Substantiated 
Essay On establishing the Shenming as That Which Attains Enlightenment, T.2102.54a8-c20) 

122 
 
As most arguments for or against the existence of the shen had already 
been formulated at one time or another during the last round of debates at 
the court of Xiao Ziliang, Emperor Wu’s rebuttal on Confucian grounds 
brings little news to the table. More interesting is the tactic he uses to 
settle the debate. Rather than letting the issue drag out in an endless 
polemic that ultimately might make him seem ineffectual in the art of 
discussion, Emperor Wu calls on his officials to take sides. Though it is not 
exactly sophisticated debating technique, his drastic move seems not to 
have missed its mark. Once sixty-two of Emperor Wu’s highest officials 
have answered either in agreement (which fifty-eight of them do) or 
disagreement, there is no more record of debates taking place after that. 
By exposing the debates for what they (also) were, Emperor Wu draws the 
card of numbers. It is to be expected that the people who had been placed 
in high ranking jobs by the emperor would not dissent him. Still, it must 
have sent a powerful message to any potential opponents of Emperor 
Wu’s Buddhist reforms that he had great support from the people he often 
knew from the days at Western Villa of Xiao Ziliang. 
Emperor Wu’s treatise “On Establishing the Shenming as That 
Which Attains Enlightenment” actually seems far removed from the actual 
debates with Fan Zhen and his possible backers. In this treatise, Emperor 
Wu grapples with the notion of universal Buddha-nature, and how to rhyme 
it with the concept of the shen. In the course of his philosophising he turns 
to the term shenming to express the idea of an enduring, never changing 
self which is destined for enlightenment. Emperor Wu’s efforts in applying 
the concept of shen, which he had been defending against Fan Zhen, to 
the Buddhist theory of universal Buddha-nature is to be seen as 
groundwork for the practical application of his Buddhist vision in society. If 
he could prove that there was not only an enduring self which 
transmigrated from one existence to another, but that this enduring self 
                                                                                                                
in which he comes to define the shen in terms of a permanent Buddha nature. For an 
analysis of the philosophical intricacies of this treatise, see Lai, 1981a; Lo, 1991: 218ff. 

123 
 
was endowed with Buddha-nature that could be attained by all, then he 
could offer his people salvation from the troubles of life. The next logical 
step was to put this notion of enduring self into practice by letting it interact 
with the concept of karmic retribution. After the theoretical stage was set, it 
was time for Emperor Wu to let it all play out in practice.  
III.1.3. Merit as ideology 
 
Accumulating merit 
 
Since the time of the Buddha, the most common way in which a lay 
person could accrue merit besides observing the lay precepts (Skt. 
pañcaśīla, Ch. wujie 五戒) 351 – which in the sixth century were more or 
less overshadowed by the immensely popular, more extensive bodhisattva 
precepts – was by making donations to the monastic community.352
                                                 
351 The five lay precepts prohibit (1) killing, (2) stealing, (3) sexual conduct, (4) lying, and (5) 
the consumption of intoxicating substances (usually alcohol). These moral precepts were 
sometimes expanded with three additional precepts that focussed more on ascetic practice: 
(6) no eating after noon, (7) no singing, dancing, playing music (or attending such 
performances) or wearing perfume and decorative accessories, and (8) no sleeping on 
luxurious beds. These eight precepts (bajie 八戒) were not expected to be observed in 
everyday life, but they were usually followed during the upoṣadha days, the regularly held 
assembly of both saṃgha and laity for ritual purification. The frequency and dates of these 
assemblies were variable over time. See Vande Walle, 1976: 123-126. Also see Kuo, 1994: 
19, 21-22; Zürcher, 1972: 164-165, 374; Forte – May, 1979. 
 These 
donations could take many forms, and every type of donation yielded a 
relative degree of merit. In the Ekottarāgama (Ch. Zengyi ahan jing 增一阿
含經, T.125), for example, the Buddha specifies seven meritorious acts of 
giving: (1) building monasteries; (2) providing furnishings for these 
monasteries (beds and seating); (3) providing monks and nuns with food; 
supplying them with (4) clothing and (5) medicine; (6) constructing wells 
352 For a study on the concept of merit as it relates to material donations, see Kieschnick, 
2003: 157-219. 

124 
 
with drinkable water; and (7) building hostels for travelling [monks and 
nuns].353 Thus, it should come as no surprise that one important manner in 
which Emperor Wu sought to accumulate merit was by making lavish 
donations to the monastic community. This in itself is nothing remarkable, 
as both emperors from the past as well as emperors of the contemporary 
Northern dynasties often sponsored the construction and maintenance of 
monasteries.354 What distinguished Emperor Wu’s efforts from those of his 
peers was the methodological approach to and ideological scope of his 
sponsorship. The opponents of Buddhism had often raised objections 
against what they considered to be a disruptive foreign religion on the 
account of its negative impact on the Chinese economy.355
 
 A commonly 
heard argument in this polemic was that the building of lavish monasteries 
and the casting of huge bronze statues was paid for by high levies 
imposed on the common people, while the construction itself was often 
carried out by corvée labourers, which put an additional strain on the 
peasant population. The Guang Hongmingji  has the following entry about 
the construction of an extravagant monastery under the Liu Song emperor 
Ming 明 (r. 465-472): 
勞役之苦百姓筋力。販妻貨子呼嗟滿路。佛若有知。念其有
罪。佛若無知。作之何益。356
                                                 
353 Zengyi ahan jing (Ekottarāgama sūtra), T.125.741c6-19. See Kieschnick, 2003: 158. 
 
354 Emperor Xuanwu 宣武 (r. 500-516) of the Northern Wei, for example, is described in 
Buddhist sources as being inclined towards Buddhism. He personally wrote down the 
translation of several sūtras and recited them in the imperial temple. He also ordered the 
construction of several notable temples. Among these was the Yongming 永明 temple, which 
was intended to house the foreign monks that arrived in the capital (Fozu tongji, 
T.2035.355b19-27).  
355 For a short overview of the most common arguments of anti-Buddhists before the sixth 
century, see Zürcher, 1972: 256-262. For a study on the impact of Buddhism on the Chinese 
economy from the fifth century onward, see Gernet, 1995. Also see Ch’en, 1973: 125-178. 
356 Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.127c14-16. 

125 
 
The hardships of corvée labour left the common people 
exhausted, [forcing them] to sell their wives and children, who 
filled the streets with their sobbing wails. If the Buddha knows 
about this, then he will certainly consider it sinful. If he does 
not know about it, then what is the benefit of constructing [this 
monastery]?  
 
Even if this account is blown out of proportion for polemic reasons, the 
main reason for bringing it up – which is the use of corvée labour, normally 
intended for the realisation of state projects, in the construction of Buddhist 
monasteries – is most probably based on facts. 
If Emperor Wu was to accumulate merit by making large material 
donations to the monastic community, then it was clear that he had to 
avoid arousing the resentment of those who thought it wrong to 
misappropriate state resources for this purpose, which could cause his 
donations to be regarded as ‘sinful’ (youzui 有罪). In 545, towards the end 
of Emperor Wu’s reign, one of his most trusted officials, He Chen 賀琛 
(481-549), made an earnest plea to address four major problems of the 
time: (1) the corruption of officials (caused by the emperor’s overly lenient 
attitude towards them); (2) the extravagant, wasteful lifestyle of the officials; 
(3) the harshness of the penal laws; and (4) the overspending on 
construction projects, by which he probably hinted at the construction of 
Buddhist monasteries.357 Emperor Wu was furious and wrote a rebuttal to 
He Chen’s critique.358
                                                 
357 For the biography of He Chen, see Liang shu, 38: 540-550. He Chen’s petition can be 
found on pp. 543-546. 
 On the charge of overspending, he emphasised that 
his projects do not cause the people to be wanting in food and drink. More 
than that, these projects are not at all expensive, when taking into account 
the merit (gongde) they generate for the entire nation. To use a metaphor, 
Emperor Wu says that spending money on construction [of monasteries] is 
358 Liang shu, 38: 546-550. 

126 
 
like turning one melon into several dozen [by planting its seeds] (bian yi 
gua wei shu shi zhong 變一瓜為數十種). The initial investment is largely 
compensated for by the beneficial results. From an account in the Guang 
Hongming ji, it becomes clear that it was a continuing concern of Emperor 
Wu to underscore that his Buddhist projects were not completed at the 
expense of the common people. On the occasion of a great gathering in 
the Tongtai 同泰 monastery 359 in 533, the historian Xiao Zixian蕭子顯 
(489-537)360
 
 wrote: 
所造寺塔及諸齋會。不藉子來之民。[…] 一役之勞計限傭賚。
故能構製等於天宮。361
For the construction of monasteries and stūpas, down to [the 
organisation of] vegetarian feasts, [the emperor] does not 
take advantage of the people that come to him like children. 
[…] The work of one corvée labourer is calculated and wages 
are bestowed accordingly. Therefore, one can construct 
things on a scale equal to the imperial palace.
 
362
 
 
                                                 
359 The Tongtai 同泰 monastery (located on the palace grounds, just north of the inner palace 
walls) served as the centre of Emperor Wu’s Buddhist activities, both public and private. 
According to the Lidai sanbao ji (T.2034.49.45a12-18 and 99c9-11), construction on this 
monastery started in the second year of Putong 普通 (521) and was finally completed in the 
eighth year of Putong (527). Upon its completion, Emperor Wu ordered a gate to be made in 
the north side of the palace walls, opposite the monastery, to serve as his personal access. 
He called this gate Datong 大通, and on the day of its inauguration, he changed the title of the 
reign period to Datong (527-528) as well (Cf. Nan shi, 7: 205). The Liangjing siji 梁京寺記 (A 
Record of the Monasteries in the Capital of the Liang, T.2094; author unknown) states that 
starting from the beginning of the Datong period, not a year went by that Emperor Wu did not 
visit the Tongtai monastery (T.2094.1024b1). For a study on the religious and political 
importance of the Tongtai monastery for Emperor Wu, see Yamada, 1975. 
360 Xiao Zixian is the author of the (Nan) Qi shu (南)齊書. He was himself a descendent of the 
former imperial family of Qi. 
361 Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.237c6-8. 
362 Cf. Janousch, 1998: 164. 

127 
 
Once again it is emphasized that the people were not the victims of some 
crazed emperor with delusions of grandeur. The corvée labourers recruited 
to work on the construction of Buddhist monasteries were apparently paid 
like hired labourers, which had to ensure that they did not fall into financial 
ruin caused by months of unpaid work, such as had happened under the 
rule of Emperor Ming of the Liu Song dynasty. 
Xiao Zixian’s account reveals some other important elements in 
relation to Emperor Wu’s campaign of merit accumulation, such as the 
organisation of vegetarian feasts (zhaihui 齋會). The origin of these 
vegetarian feasts can be traced back to the traditional upoṣadha days, the 
regularly held gatherings of both saṃgha and laity for ritual purification. On 
these days, the Buddhist lay people observed the eight lay precepts, which 
included the rule against eating after noon.363 As described in the Fengfa 
yao 奉法要 (Essentials of [Buddhist] Religious Practice; a basic manual for 
the practicing Buddhist (lay) devotee, compiled by Xi Chao郗超 (336-377) 
and preserved in the Hongming ji, T.2102.86a23-89b2), no fish or meat 
was supposed to be served on these days.364
                                                 
363 The frequency and dates of these assemblies were variable over time, but in general there 
were six fast-days in each month and three months of fasting each year (see Vande Walle, 
1976: 123-126; Kuo, 1994: 19, 21-22;Zürcher, 1972: 164-165; Forte – May, 1979). During the 
upoṣadha days, the regular five lay precepts were expanded with three additional precepts 
that focussed on ascetic practice: (6) no eating after noon; (7) no singing, dancing, playing 
music (or attending such performances) or wearing perfume and decorative accessories; and 
(8) no making use of high beds or seats. As the observance of these eight precepts (bajie 八
戒) was closely linked with the fast-days, the latter are therefore are also called baguan zhai 
八關齋 “Fast-days with [observance of] the Eight Precepts” (see Kuo, 1994: 51). For a study 
on the baguan zhai as perceived during the Qi and Liang dynasties, see Martin, 2002. During 
the Liang, these baguan zhai were regulated, as we can see from the preface of such a 
regulation (Baguan zhai zhi xu 八關齋制序), written by the crown prince Xiao Gang, and 
preserved in the Guang Hongming ji, T.2102.324c4-26. Penalties for falling asleep during the 
assembly, leaving without permission or failing to return before the lecture of three sūtras has 
finished, for example, comprised of ten prostrations. 
 It became customary on the 
upoṣadha days for wealthy lay patrons to organize vegetarian banquets to 
364 Hongming ji, T.2102.86b12. 

128 
 
which they invited monks, nuns and lay people to collectively enjoy a 
vegetarian meal. The donation of food to the saṃgha thus provided the 
laity with an opportunity to cast themselves in the role of dānapati 
(almsgiver) and accrue merit.365 Over time, vegetarian feasts were also 
held on special occasions, such as on the commemoration days of 
deceased relatives etc.366
The organisation of vegetarian feasts, mentioned in Zixian’s account, 
is not unique to Emperor Wu’s reign. This popular practice had already 
received imperial sponsorship from the fifth century onward.
  
367 Zixian does 
emphasise, once again, that these feasts were not paid for with state 
money, but that they were financed by donations made by lay people 
“without the need for issuing orders or collecting taxes (bu dai haoling bu 
xu keshuai 不待號令不須課率). 368” “For this reason,” he says, “one knows 
that the emperor’s power of transformation (huali 化力) has arrived, and 
that the good roots 369 of the people have been perfected (suoyi zhi shi 
huangshang huali zhi suodao baixing shangen zhi youcheng 所以知是皇上
化力之所到百姓善根之有成). 370
                                                 
365 According to Shen Yue, the vegetarian feasts were a simulation of the ancient Indian 
tradition of the monk’s begging rounds. This Indian custom never caught on in China due to 
the negative view on mendicancy there. However, as the monks in China did not beg for their 
food, they essentially deprived the Buddhist laity of an important opportunity to accrue merit 
for themselves. This opportunity was reintroduced with the organization of vegetarian 
banquets. For Shen Yue’s views on the vegetarian feasts, see T.2103.273b10-c4, translated 
by Mather, 1988: 154-156. Also see Mather, 1981. Cf. Janousch, 1998: 166. 
 ” Although the custom of organizing 
vegetarian feasts was not instigated by Emperor Wu, the widespread scale 
on which these vegetarian feasts were organised by lay Buddhists 
communities during his reign is represented by Xiao Zixian as proof of the 
366 See Janousch, 1998: 165-167. 
367 Janousch, 1998: 165-166. 
368 T.2103.237c13. 
369 These roots of goodness (shan’gen 善根) are generosity (shi 施), kindness (ci 慈), and 
moral wisdom (hui 慧). 
370 T.2103.237c15. Translated by Janousch, 1998: 164. 

129 
 
emperor’s “power of transformation”, which means that he reckoned that 
the people were inspired to develop good morals in response to the 
powerful example of the emperor’s virtuous conduct.371
 
 In underscoring 
time and again that the resources for Emperor Wu’s sponsoring of 
monastic institutions were not taken out of the state budget, Zixian 
tantalizingly mentions the creation of an institution whose task it seems to 
have been to collect and redistribute donations made by lay people: 
初上造十三種無盡藏。有放生布施二科。此藏利益已為無限。
而每月齋會。復於諸寺施財施食。372
Before, 
the 
emperor 
had 
created 
thirteen 
types 
of 
Inexhaustible Treasuries (wujin zang), which have two 
divisions: one for releasing living beings, and another for alms 
giving. The blessings of these Treasuries are already limitless, 
but on top of this, riches and food are donated to all 
monasteries during the monthly vegetarian feasts.
 
373
 
 
Other than the mention that some of the resources of these Inexhaustible 
Treasuries were used for buying and releasing caged animals (fangsheng 
放生), and for making donations (Ch. bushi 布施, Skt. dāna), there are no 
other clues to tell us what else these Treasuries were used for, or how 
they were funded and organised. Thus it is unknown if these Inexhaustible 
Treasuries are related in function and organisation to the homonymic 
institution of the Three Stages Sect (Sanjie jiao 三階教), which reached the 
zenith of its popularity only a century later.374
                                                 
371 For the development of Buddhist religious communities during the sixth and seventh 
centuries, see Gernet, 1995: 259-277. Also see Ch’en, 1973: 281-294. 
 Xiao Zixian does include the 
372 Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.237c17-19. 
373 Cf. Janousch, 1998: 164. Also see Chen, 2006: 85. 
374 In the Three Stages Sect, the Inexhaustible Treasuries functioned as institutions of social 
welfare that simultaneously secured the financial independence of the monastic community 
and provided for the continuous accumulation of merit as a result of religious donation. For 

130 
 
name and background of the man responsible for the fangsheng branch of 
the Inexhaustible Treasuries: Zhang Wenxiu 張文休, who is otherwise 
unknown, made a daily tour of the butcher shops in the capital and 
rescued countless animals from being killed by “paying a ransom (shu 贖)” 
for their release.375 Prior to that, Wenxiu had been the official in charge of 
food transportation to the capital, but when he started distributing some of 
the gain (intended for the palace) to the poor, he was brought up on 
charges and faced the death penalty. Emperor Wu, however, was so 
greatly moved by this act in the spirit of the bodhisattva precepts, that he 
refused to give permission for the execution and pardoned him instead. 
Out of gratitude for the emperor’s magnanimous forgiveness, Wenxiu 
performed his new task with such dedication that “while running around the 
capital, he sometimes forgot to eat or rest, his feet almost not touching the 
ground.” It was said that of all the animals, domesticated or wild, there was 
none that did not get set free by him.376
The Inexhaustible Treasuries have the characteristic that, by their 
nature, they double the merit accrued. In a first phase, merit is earned by 
the person making the donation. In a second phase, merit is generated 
when this money is used to perform meritorious acts. There is evidence to 
suggest that Emperor Wu’s Inexhaustible Treasuries were established 
long before Xiao Zixian’s account of the 533 assembly was written. The 
Chu sanzang jiji 出三藏記集 (Collection of Records Concerning the 
Publication of the Tripiṭaka , compiled by Sengyou ca. 515 ) mentions the 
existence of a record of Emperor Wu’s founding of the ‘Ten Inexhaustible 
Treasuries’ (Huangdi zao shi wujinzang ji 皇帝造十無盡藏記).
  
377
                                                                                                                
more on the Three Stages Sect and the function of their Inexhaustible Treasuries, see Ch’en, 
1973: 158-171; Hubbard, 2001: 153-188; Gernet, 1995: 210-217. Also see Lewis, 1990. 
 This not 
375 The term “ransom” was also used in Emperor Wu’s ceremonies of self-renunciation 
(sheshen), where he would give himself as slave to a monastery only to be ransomed by his 
ministers for a large sum of cash. We shall examine this custom further on in this chapter. 
376 See Guang Hongmingji, T.2103.237c19-27. 
377 Chu sanzang jiji, T.2145.93b9. 

131 
 
only means that the institution of the Inexhaustible Treasuries was created 
before 515, but – barring typographical errors – more branches were 
added to it over the years, increasing the initial number of divisions from 
ten to thirteen. 378 This attests to its success as an instrument to sensitize 
the people to the Buddhist virtue of giving. At the end of his report on the 
533 assembly at the Tongtai monastery, Xiao Zixian draws up the final 
balance of what the assembly has yielded in donations: court officials and 
commoners gave a total of 11,140,000 cash, 379  in addition to the 
3,430,000 cash from the heir apparent, and 2,700,000 cash from the 
empress and the imperial concubines.380 As expected, Emperor Wu comes 
out of this report as the biggest dānapati of all, with more than two hundred 
and one varieties of donations, ranging from precious metals and cash to 
silk and utensils, totalling over 10,960,000 cash in value.381
 
 
Great Assemblies 
 
The 533 assembly, which was referred to as a “Great Unrestricted 
Assembly for Clergy and Lay People (daosu wuzhe dahui 道俗無遮大
                                                 
378 A possible early example of the Inexhaustible Treasury (or a precursor thereof) at work 
can be found in the biography of the monk Fayue 法悅 (d. after 509) in the Gaoseng zhuan 
(T.2059.412b17-413a9). When a gigantic statue was being cast for the Zhuangyan 莊嚴 
monastery in the fifth year of Tianjian (509), the artisans had miscalculated the amount of 
copper needed for its construction and subsequently ran out of source material before the 
statue could be completed. Even the donations of lay devotees were not sufficient to 
accomplish the job, so the emperor ordered three thousand pounds of “meritorious copper 
(gongde tong 功德銅)” to be supplied to the artisans to finish the statue (see T.2059.412c12-
15). From this anecdote, we may assume that this “meritorious copper” was a stock of copper 
from the state treasury reserved to make contributions to the construction of statues for 
Buddhist monasteries with the aim of accumulating merit for the nation. 
379 Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.237c29. 
380 Ibid., 237b22-24. 
381 Ibid., 237b20-21. 

132 
 
會)”, 382  was certainly not an isolated event. Almost twenty similar 
gatherings are recorded to have taken place during the reign of Emperor 
Wu, although the names given to them may vary.383 While the translation 
of the term daosu wuzhe dahui (and its variants) might seem 
straightforward, its interpretation needs some consideration. Max Deeg 
sees wuzhe hui 無遮會 as  a rendering of the Sanskrit term 
pañcavārṣika. 384 The pañcavārṣika – as practiced by Aśoka and other 
early Buddhist monarchs – was a large celebration, traditionally said to be 
convened every five years, at which the ruler publicly made lavish 
donations to the Buddhist monastic community to show his commitment to 
the Buddhist faith.385 As Max Deeg has demonstrated, wuzhe 無遮 is not a 
transcription of the Sanskrit word mokṣa (liberation),386
                                                 
382 Ibid., 236c19. 
 neither does he 
deem it likely that wuzhe is a semantic interpretation of that term in the 
sense of “[being] without hindrances”. It probably represents a translation 
of the term nirargaḍa, which refers to the ‘donations without restriction’ that 
383 Other terms used to refer to these assemblies include wuzhe dahui 無遮大會, wuzhe 
dazhai 無遮大齋, pingdeng hui 平等會, pingdeng fahui 平等法會, sibu dahui 四部大會, wu’ai 
hui 無礙會, wu’ai dahui 無礙大會, wu’ai fahui 無礙法會, wu’ai faxishi 無礙法喜食, or simply 
fahui 法會or dahui 大會. For a complete list of the assemblies and their sources, see Suwa, 
1997: 59-76. In the biography of Sengyou 僧祐 (445-518), contained in the Gaoseng zhuan 
(T.2059.402c3-403a2), its author Huijiao claims that this practice of organizing large 
gatherings (which he designates as wuzhe daji 無遮大集) goes back to this illustrious monk, 
who was an important ally of Emperor Wu on Buddhist matters (T.2059.402c16). For a 
detailed study on the figure of Sengyou, plus a complete translation of the Gaoseng zhuan 
biography, see Link, 1960. 
384 For his exhaustive study on the origin of the pañcavārṣika in India and China, see Deeg, 
1995 and 1997. 
385 For the aspect of donations made during the pañcavārṣ ika, see Strong, 1983: 91-96. 
Etienne Lamotte (1958: 66) asserts that the five year gap to be observed between two 
pañcavārṣ ika was not absolute, but rather referred to the distribution of wealth accumulated 
in the state’s treasuries over the course of five years. 
386 Cf. Lévi-Chavannes, 1916: 42, note 41. 

133 
 
featured in an originally Brahminic ceremony called viśvajit. 387 In this 
Brahminic sacrificial ceremony, which took place every five years, the 
householder donated large portions of his possessions or even everything 
he owned. In one version of this ceremony, the sacrificer would walk out of 
his house, leaving his door open for the poor and the needy to take away 
everything they could use, and then re-enter his empty house to start his 
life afresh.388 This feature of exhaustive giving, which was a huge part of 
the pañcavārṣika, would later be singled out in translation of the term into 
Chinese, rendering pañcavārṣika as wuzhe hui, where the wuzhe referred 
to the magnitude of the donation as “limitless” rather than to the social 
scope in the sense of “free for all to attend, regardless of one’s social 
status.” 389
 
 This interpretation of the term wuzhe hui seems to fit in with its 
usage in the Fayuan zhulin, for example, where we find specific categories 
of assemblies, according to their purpose: 
為四方僧設大施會。或設五年無遮施會。或慶寺慶像慶經幡等
施設大會。或延請僧至所住處設大福會。390
[In order to accrue merit], set up an Assembly of Great Giving 
(dashi hui) for the monks from all over the country, or set up a 
Quinquennial Assembly of Unlimited Giving (wunian wuzhe 
shihui). In celebrating a monastery, a [Buddha] statue, [scrolls 
of] sūtra, or other [kinds of] donations, set up a Great 
Assembly (dahui). When inviting monks to come to your place 
of residence, set up an Assembly of Great Blessing (dafu hui). 
 
 
                                                 
387 Deeg, 1997: 66. 
388 Agrawala, 1966: 73. 
389 Deeg, 1997: 65-66. 
390 Fayuan zhulin, T.2122.512b8-10. Same as Xuanzang’s 玄奘 (602-664) Da Aluohan 
nantimiduoluo suoshuo fazhu ji 大阿羅漢難提蜜多羅所說法住記 (Nandimitrāvadāna / 
Nandimitra's Record of the Abiding Dharma Explained to the Great Arhats; translated in 654), 
T.2030.13b18-20. 

134 
 
Here the term wuzhe is clearly linked to giving (shi 施), which corroborates 
its interpretation as “unlimited giving”. In the case of Emperor Wu, however, 
it appears that the wuzhe does not refer to the massive size of the 
donations alone, but certainly does express the idea of universal equality 
in these assemblies. This can be deduced from the fact that some of the 
variant terms used to describe Wudi’s assemblies clearly define the 
participants, such as pingdeng hui 平等會 (Assembly of Equals), 391 
pingdeng fahui 平等法會 (Dharma-assembly of Equals),392 and sibu dahui 
四部大會 (Great Assembly for the Four Disciples, i.e. monks, nuns, laymen 
and lay women).393
In a recent paper, Chen Jinhua argues that these assemblies, 
organised by Emperor Wu, were meant as pañcavārṣika in emulation of 
the Indian Buddhist king Aśoka.
 The typical large donations were probably part of all 
these assemblies, but Emperor Wu obviously had a broader interpretation 
of the term. One should thus ask the question if we can rightfully call 
Emperor Wu’s assemblies pañcavārṣika. 
394 The question of whether or not Emperor 
Wu strove to imitate Aśoka in this and other matters is complex, and 
scholars have often jumped the gun without any real evidence.395 Yan 
Shangwen devotes an entire chapter to the alleged Aśokan influence on 
Emperor Wu, but the evidence presented in support of his theory is rather 
circumstantial.396
                                                 
391 Assembly held in 530. See Nan shi, 7: 207. 
 Yan’s main arguments are: (1) the new translation of the 
Aśokāvadāna made in 512 by the monk Sengjiapoluo 僧伽婆羅 (* 
392 Assembly held in 536. See Nan shi, 7: 212. 
393 Assembly held in 533. See Liang shu, 3: 77 and 42: 600; Nan shi, 7: 210 and 18: 512.  
394 See Chen, 2006, pp. 77-78 in particular. On king Asoka, see Strong, 1983; Thapar, 1961; 
Smith, 1990. 
395 The assertion that Emperor Wu mirrored himself on king Aśoka can be found in many 
secondary sources, mostly without motivation or references to primary sources. See, for 
example, Tang, 1983: 342; Ch’en, 1964: 125; Zürcher, 1989: 230; Faure, 2002: 27-28; 
Overmeyer, 1976: 153; Strickman, 1996: 380; Smith, 1990 [1901]: 36-37. 
396 See Yan Shangwen, 1999: 286-303. 

135 
 
Saṃghavara?/ Saṃghabhara?, 460-524)397, which Emperor Wu personally 
wrote down;398 (2) the frequent quotations from the Aśokāvadāna in the 
Buddhist encyclopædia Jinglü yixiang 經律異相 (Different [Entries] on 
Sūtra and Vinaya, T.2121; compiled by Sengmin 僧旻 (467-527), 
Baochang 寶唱 (466 - ?) and others between 508 and 516 on the order of 
Emperor Wu); and (3) the commitment of resources to the restoration of 
several Aśoka temples. With respect to the first argument, one can point 
out that an earlier translation of Aśoka’s life history already existed at the 
time of Emperor Wu. This is the still extant Ayuwang zhuan 阿育王傳 
(T.2042), translated by An Faqin 安法欽 (d.u.) around 300 CE.399 It is not 
so remarkable that more than one translation of the same scripture was 
produced over the course of time, as this happened frequently. The fact 
that a second translation of the Aśokāvadāna was made during the Liang 
dynasty by the foreign monk Sengjiapoluo (a native of Funan 扶南), might 
simply mean that this text was part of the repertoire that this well-
respected monk had memorised and was asked to translate into Chinese, 
along with ten other texts he translated over the seventeen years he spent 
in the Liang capital. 400
                                                 
397 Demiéville et al, 1978: 281. Sengjiapoluo’s name is also reconstructed into Sanskrit as 
Saṃghapāla (e.g. Chen, 2002a: 35) or Saṃghabhadra (e.g. Faure, 2002: 26, note 4). His 
biography is contained in Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.426a3-b12. 
 It certainly does not imply that Emperor Wu 
specifically asked for this text to be translated for propagandistic reasons. 
After all, if this were the case, Emperor Wu would not have allowed six 
years to pass between the time of Sengjiapoluo’s arrival in the capital and 
his translation of the Aśokāvadāna. Also, the emphasis that Yan places on 
the fact that Emperor Wu personally wrote down the translation of the 
398 This is the Ayuwang jing 阿育王經 (T.2043). 
399 This text has been translated into French by Przyluski, 1923.  
400 The Xu Gaoseng zhuan says that Sengjiapoluo arrived at the capital of the Liang in 506, 
after being invited by the emperor to participate in the translation efforts. He remained there 
until his death in 524. By that time he had translated eleven texts, for a grand total of forty-
eight fascicles, of which the Aśokāvadāna took up seven (T.2060.426a12-15). 

136 
 
Aśokāvadāna seems a bit precipitous,401 as this piece of information can 
only be found in the Lidai sanbao ji  歷代三寶記 (Record of the Three 
Treasures throughout History, T.2034; compiled by Fei Changfang 費長房
in 597),402 a catalogue that is notoriously unreliable due to its author’s 
ulterior motives in trying to prove the superiority of Buddhism over Daoism, 
even if it meant conscientiously altering facts and dates.403 It is possible 
that Fei Changfang extrapolated this claim from the biography of 
Sengjiapoluo in the Xu Gaoseng zhuan, which simply says that the first 
time Sengjiapoluo translated a sūtra, Emperor Wu personally received his 
words in writing.404 Considering Sengjiapoluo’s date of arrival – which was 
506 – it is doubtful that this sūtra was the Aśokāvadāna, translated in 512. 
Neither is it clearly stated if Emperor Wu personally wrote down all of 
Sengjiapoluo’s other translations. Therefore it is not tenable to maintain 
that Emperor Wu personally wrote down the translation of the 
Aśokāvadāna, let alone that he would have done so because of the great 
importance he attributed to it as a model for emulation. Considering the 
great respect Emperor Wu seemed to have had for Sengjiapoluo’s 
knowledge and skill, as evidenced by the fact that the latter was invited to 
become one of Emperor Wu’s “family monks (jiaseng 家僧)405”, it would be 
more prudent to assume that Emperor Wu personally attended the 
translations as a sign of respect towards this monk, rather than towards a 
specific scripture.406
                                                 
401 Yan, 1999: 289. 
 As for Yan’s second argument that the Jinglü yixiang 
borrows heavily from the Ayuwang jing, this too needs to be brought down 
into perspective. Yan gives a listing per fascicle of the number of times the 
402 Lidai sanbao ji, T.2034.98b9. 
403 Mizuno, 1982: 104-106. 
404 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.426a16. 
405 We shall take a closer look at this institution initiated by Emperor Wu in chapter four. 
406 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.426a19. 

137 
 
Jinglü yixiang records the Ayuwang jing as the source of an entry.407 The 
total number of references, by his count, comes to twenty-one.408 Although 
this might seem a lot, a random test with any other scripture used as a 
source for the Jinglü yixiang reveals that this number is anything but 
exceptional. For example, the number of entries in the Jinglü yixiang that 
identify the Xianyu jing 賢愚經 (Sūtra of the Wise and the Ignorant, T.202; 
said to have been translated by Huijue 慧覺 in the first half of the fifth 
century)409 as a source is thirty-nine.410 The Ayuwang jing and Xianyu jing 
do not share a mutual theme, so it is unlikely that both source texts would 
have been selected to serve the same purpose in the Jinglü yixiang, 
namely that of glorifying the Aśoka-as-cakravartin (Ch. Zhuanlun wang 轉
輪王, “Wheel-turning King”) ideal, as Yan claims. 411
                                                 
407 Yan, 1999: 292. Yan apparently missed a reference to the Ayuwang jing in fascicle forty-
seven (T.2121.252a24), because he does not include it in his list. 
 As it is, the 
408 If we include the reference he missed, this would bring the total to twenty-two. 
409 Cf. Demiéville et al, 1978: 31, 245. 
410 Jinglü yixiang, T.2121: 12b15, 25b25, 66b28, 66c22, 73a28, 89c18, 93b24, 95a20, 95c4, 
95c22, 96a12, 96c21, 116b24, 119a8, 119b13, 121a15, 122c11, 131c21, 136c19, 137a3, 
139a14, 140a13, 145a27, 146b19, 163a25, 174a21, 189b27, 191c4, 191c17, 195b5, 197c28, 
203a22, 203c11, 205a27, 215c15, 217a15, 254b5, 256c27, 257c5. 
411 Yan, 1999: 293. The cakravartin ideal is an ancient Indian myth of kingship that goes back 
to at least the tenth century BCE. The imagery is that of a benevolent universal monarch who 
rules over the entire universe according to the Dharma, through moral example and wisdom. 
The reign of a cakravartin ushers in a Golden Age of prosperity and peace. This ideal was 
present not only in Buddhism, but in other Indian religions, such as Jainism, as well. In 
Buddhism, the cakravartin was the secular equivalent of the Buddha, sharing with the latter 
the thirty-two bodily markings of a Great Man (Skt. Mahāpuruṣ alakṣaṇa, Ch. sanshi’er daren 
xiang 三十二大人相). However, the cakravartin concept was originally too ideal, too “mythical” 
to be adopted by any real-life king, as it was pretty inflexible: either a king possessed the 
thirty-two marks of the Great Man (in which case he was a cakravartin) or he did not. Either 
he ruled over the entire universe perfectly according to the Dharma, or he did not. Either his 
reign was a Golden Age (in which crops sprouted out of the ground of their own accord, 
without the need for agricultural activity), or it was an age of cosmic degradation. This is 
where, according to John Strong, the Aśokāvadāna provides a sort of middle ground, by 
creating a subdivision of a type of cakravartin, namely that of one who “rules one fourth [of 

138 
 
encyclopædic entry on cakravartin takes up only one fascicle out of the 
fifty that make up the Jinglü yixiang, and of that fascicle, the paragraph on 
king Aśoka is only one of the twelve that make up this entry.412 It therefore 
seems a bit bold to claim, as Yan does, that the cakravartin ideal, as 
exemplified by king Aśoka, makes up the core of the Jinglü yixiang.413 In 
addressing Yan’s third and final argument, which is that Emperor Wu 
invested a lot of money in the restoration of Aśoka temples, 414
                                                                                                                
the universe (i.e. only one of the four continents of Indian cosmology)] (Skt. caturbhāga 
cakravartin, Ch. sifen zhuanlun wang 四分轉輪王),” or, alternatively designated as a 
“cakravartin who relies on armed force to rule the cosmos (Skt. balacakravartin)”. This 
classification of cakravartins was further developed over time. The most systematic 
presentation 
of 
the 
cakravartin 
categorisation 
can 
be 
found 
in 
Vasubandhu’s 
Abhidharmakośa, which divides them into four categories according to the material used to 
make there wheel, the number of continents they ruled, and the way they achieve the 
conquest of their territory. These four types of cakravartin are: (1) the King of the Golden 
Wheel (Skt. suvarṇacakravartin, Ch. jinlun wang 金輪王), who rules all four continents of 
Buddhist cosmology (namely Uttarakuru in the North, Pūrvavideha in the East, Apara 
Godanīya in the West, and the human continent of Jambudvīpa in the South) and who 
conquers them by simply his personal presence, causing all minor kings to submit to his 
virtue; (2) the King of the Silver Wheel (Skt. rūpyacakravartin, Ch. yinlun wang 銀輪王), who 
rules three continents (all the above except Uttarakuru) and who conquers them after some 
sort of non-violent “encounter” with the petty kings; (3) the King of the Copper Wheel (Skt. 
tāmracakravartin, Ch. tonglun wang 銅 輪王) who rules two continents (Pūrvavideha and 
Jambudvīpa) and who conquers these after a “quarrelsome confrontation” without the (large 
scale) use of weapons; and (4) the King of the Iron Wheel (Skt. ayaścakravartin, Ch. tielun 
wang 鐵輪王) who rules only Jambudvīpa and conquers it by means of the sword (though the 
mere threat of his army is often enough to make the minor kings submit to him without the 
need for all-out war). For a more detailed discussion on the cakravartin ideal, plus references, 
see Strong, 1983: 44-56. 
 this too 
seems to receive more focus than it is worth, for several reasons. First, the 
keyword in all of this is indeed “restoration (gaizao 改造)”. To my 
412 The chapter on the cakravartin ideal can be found in fascicle twenty-four of the Jinglü 
yixiang (T.2121.128c16-136b9). The paragraph on king Aśoka is the last of the chapter 
(Jinglü yixiang, T.2121.135a23-136b8). 
413 Yan, 1999: 293. 
414 Yan, 1999: 302. 

139 
 
knowledge, Emperor Wu did not build a new Aśoka temple during his reign, 
but merely restored existing ones. 415
                                                 
415 Yan (1999: 300-301) lists three sources on the restoration of existing Aśoka temples: (1) 
The Liang shu (54: 790) speaks of the restoration of the relic pagoda in the Aśoka temple 
(Ayuwang si 阿育王寺) in the third year of the Datong 大同period (537). A careful reading of 
the subsequent background story seems to indicate that this was the pagoda of the 
Changgan 長干monastery in Danyang 丹陽 (located only five miles south of the capital 
Jiankang, cf. T.2094.1024b23-b26), which according to legend was one of the 84,000 
pagodas containing Buddha relics that king Aśoka had constructed all over the world in a 
single night, with the help of supernatural beings. The Changgan monastery itself had been 
founded by emperor Jianwen 简文 (r. 371-373) of the Eastern Jin 晉dynasty (see Faure, 
2002: 36). (2) The Liang shu (54: 792) also speaks of the renovation of the (Aśoka) pagoda in 
the Mao 鄮district of Kuaiji 會稽 (in present day Zhejiang) in 536. (3) The Guang Hongming ji 
(T.2103.203c10-204a9) contains an edict issued by Emperor Wu ordering the excavation and 
reburial of the Buddha relics stored in the Aśoka pagoda of the Changgan monastery due to 
its renovation in 538. Although the dates given in the Liang shu and the Guang Hongming ji 
vary, it is likely that both sources are talking about one and the same restoration project, 
stretched out over several years, but focussing on different events during that process. The 
Fozu tongji (T.2035.350a22) also mentions the restoration of the Aśoka temple in the Mao 
district, but places it in 522. This can only mean that either one of the two sources is flawed 
(in which case the preference would go to the Liang shu, since the Fozu tongji was compiled 
in the thirteenth century, which leaves a lot of time for errors to creep into historical records), 
or that the Aśoka temple was renovated in 522, but had to be restored once more in 536 due 
to some disasterous occurrence, such as a fire or flood. However, there is nothing in the 
historical records to support this second theory, so until some new evidence shows up, the 
first theory seems to be the most plausible. 
 The fact that the Aśoka pagodas 
were believed to date back to the time of king Aśoka himself actually 
The discovery of these and other Aśoka pagodas in China is credited to a man named Liu 
Sahe 劉薩何 (fl. second half of the fourth century CE), who is the protagonist of a miracle 
story that has him enter into hell upon his death, only to be resurrected by the bodhisattva 
Guanyin after being told to go on a pilgrimage to the (then lost) Aśoka pagodas. For a study 
on the figure of Liu Sahe and the different versions of the story, see Vetch, 1981: 137-148 
and 1984: 61-78. For a study on the Aśoka relic pagodas in China, see Faure, 2002. Also see 
Strong: 2004: 124-149. 

140 
 
precluded the option of founding new ones.416 The only alternative would 
have been to “discover” new sites, but Emperor Wu, cautious as always 
not to contradict scriptural data, seems not to have gone down that road, 
as no sources speak of this. 417 Second, the two restoration projects 
reported in historical sources both occurred in a time span of 2 years, 
between 536 and 538 CE. The fact that these undertakings took off when 
Emperor Wu was already on the throne for several decades, lends little 
credence to the notion that these Aśoka temples were somehow 
exceptionally vital for the ideological foundation of Emperor Wu’s rule.418
                                                 
416 According to the Chinese Buddhist tradition, this miraculous, worldwide, simultaneous 
construction of 84,000 stūpas had taken place during the reign of king Jing 敬 (r. 519-476 
BCE) of the Zhou 周 dynasty (see Gaoseng zhuan, T.2059.409b27). 
 
417 Emperor Wen of the Sui dynasty did try to build on the Aśoka legend in order to transform 
Buddhism into a state ideology with the purpose of unifying his empire after so many 
centuries of division. A major propaganda tool for achieving this, was the arranging of a 
massive relic distribution campaign all of his own, in emulation of king Aśoka. On several 
occasions during the Renshou 仁壽period (601-604) he sent envoys to every corner of his 
empire with what he claimed were genuine Buddha relics and orders to construct a pagoda to 
preserve them in. The ultimate goal of Sui Wendi was to prove that he was some sort of 
bodhisattva reborn in China as future emperor to rescue Buddhism from being eradicated by 
secular rulers who were hostile to that religion, as had been the case in the past. To that end, 
an elaborate legend was created around the circumstances of his birth and his upbringing by 
the “divine” nun Zhixian 智仙 (d. after 574). For emperor Wen’s Aśoka-like relic distribution 
campaign, see Chen, 2002a: 51-87. There was also possibly an imperial relic-distribution 
campaign during the Tang, but this centered around so-called dharma-relics, i.e. printed 
sūtras. See Barrett, 2005. 
418 In his article on Liang Wudi’s Buddhist assemblies, Chen Jinhua (2006: 77-78) more or 
less rehashes Yan Shangwen’s first and last argument without providing any new evidence. 
Thomas Jansen (2000: 212, footnote 50) rightfully points out that there are no known sources 
in which Emperor Wu explicitly identifies himself with king Aśoka, but he nonetheless 
chooses to lend credence to the theory, primarily on the grounds of archaeological data first 
presented by Teng Gu (1935), and revisited by Annette Kieser (2002: 147-148). The pillars 
that Wu ordered to be erected at his father’s grave mound had no precedent in China, but 
their form showed many resemblances to the pillars that had been put up by king Aśoka in 
the third century BCE. Though it is likely true that Emperor Wu introduced this non-traditional 
style of grave design to break with the customary representation of emperorhood and reflect 

141 
 
Perhaps more important were the festivities surrounding the restoration of 
these pagodas, as on the occasion of the exhumation and reburial of the 
Buddha relics in the Ayuwang pagoda of the Changgan monastery, 
Emperor Wu held at least three of his “Great Unrestricted Assemblies” 
there. 419  The Liang shu (54: 791-792) tells of a “Great Unrestricted 
Assembly, wu’ai dahui 無礙 (written in its variant form 日+寸) 大會” held on 
the twenty-seventh day of the eighth month of the third year of the Datong 
period (September 17, 537). On this day the exhumed relics (a strand of 
hair and a tooth) were washed in a golden alms bowl while Emperor Wu 
did obeisance to them several dozen times. In response, a radiant beam of 
light burst from the relics. Emperor Wu was so affected by this occurrence, 
that he asked the Great Rectifier of Monks Huiling 慧令 (d.u.) 420
                                                                                                                
the Buddhist ideological basis for his rule (Buddhist imagery could already be found on the 
traditional steles, but the form had hitherto remained pretty much the same), the connection 
with Aśoka was not necessarily intentional. Annette Kieser (2002: 148) speculates that the 
design for these pillars had been brought back by the pilgrim monk Faxian 法顯 (? - 422), 
who described them (and possibly drew them) in his Gaoseng Faxian zhuan 高僧法顯傳 
(Biography of the Eminent monk Faxian, T.2085.859c23-c27 and 862b27-c3), a text also 
referred to as Foguo ji 佛國記 (A Record of Buddhist Countries; see Deeg, 2005). It is also 
possible that this Buddhist style of pillars was introduced by foreign monks and merchants 
from countries of the Indian cultural sphere who entered China through the ports in the 
South – such as Guangzhou 廣州 – and often made their way to the capital. The point is that 
the pillars used by Emperor Wu could simply have been used for their distinctly Buddhist 
appearance, rather than their affiliation with king Aśoka.  
 if he 
could take one of the relics back to his palace for a while for veneration. 
On the fifth day of the ninth month (September 24, 537), Emperor Wu held 
another Great Assembly to honour the relics. With a crowd of over one 
million onlookers, Emperor Wu donated gold and silver to the Changgan 
monastery for a total value in the order of ten million cash. Upon the 
reburial of the relics on the fifteenth day of the ninth month of the fourth 
419 The choice of the Changgan monastery as the location for these three Great Assemblies 
was clearly motivated by the occasion, but appears to have been rather the exception than 
the rule. Most of Liang Wudi’s Great Assemblies were held in the Tongtai 同泰 monastery. 
420 In the Liang shu mistakenly written as Huinian 慧念. See Forte, 2003: 1062. 

142 
 
year of Datong (October 23, 538), Emperor Wu set up another Great 
Assemby to raise donations of gold, silver, necklaces, bracelets and other 
precious items from the aristocracy and wealthy families to be buried along 
with the relics.421
This brings us back to our original question of whether or not 
Emperor Wu conceived his massive assemblies as pañcavārṣika in 
emulation of king Aśoka. To find an answer, we should return to the 
terminology used. The Aśokāvadāna translation of 512 clearly refers to the 
pañcavārṣika held by king Aśoka with the term wunian dahui  五年大會 
“Great Quinquennial Assembly”,
 
422 which is a literal translation of the 
Sanskrit word. Another term used is wunian gongde dahui  五年功德大會 
“Great Quinquennial Meritorious Assembly.” 423 Not once is an assembly of 
Emperor Wu referred to like this in the sources.424 The term was surely 
known to him, because it also features in the Jinglü yixiang, the Buddhist 
encyclopædia compiled on his order.425
                                                 
421 The Guang Hongming ji (T.2103.203c24) also mentions the Great Unrestricted Assembly 
of 538, but provides no details. It does add that on the occasion, Emperor Wu declared a 
great amnesty (T.2103.204a7-8). 
 What might we conclude from this? 
Perhaps Emperor Wu was inspired by the example of Aśoka, but 
purposely chose not to call his assemblies “wunian dahui (pañcavārṣika)”, 
simply because of the fact that he held them much more often. A greater 
motivation for avoiding the term, however, might have been the fact that a 
direct link between himself and the figure of king Aśoka would have run 
counter to what he was trying to achieve, as it would limit the view on his 
person to that of a secular leader, when in fact he wanted to create a 
perception of the imperial persona as spiritual leader of the Buddhist 
422 T.2043.163a9, 163a12, 163a15, 163b9, and 163c10. 
423 T.2043.154b15. 
424 Incidentally, the Jin dynasty version of the Aśokāvadāna does not have this term either, 
but uses banzheyuse 般遮于瑟 to transcribe the word pañcavārṣ ika. See T.2042.105a19, 
105c12, 105c22, 106a16, and 106a18. 
425 See T.2121.89c19-90b4. 

143 
 
community (both clergy and lay people), as a bodhisattva-emperor rather 
than as a cakravartin.426 As such, his assemblies were to be a reflection of 
this bodhisattva image. Hence the reason that Emperor Wu is reported to 
regularly have lectured on the Buddhist sūtras at the beginning of the 
festivities. One report on an assembly in the Chongyun Hall 重雲殿427
 
 held 
in 541 takes on propaganda-like characteristics when it describes how 
Emperor Wu, through his lecture, was able to solve the audience’s doubts 
or ignorance: 
於是操持慧刃解除疑網。示之迷方歸以正轍。莫不渙然冰釋欣
然頂戴。若蓮華之漸開。譬月初而增長。428
Thus [His Majesty] wielded the blade of wisdom and freed 
them from the snares of doubt. By showing them where they 
had gone astray, he brought them back to the right track. For 
each and every one, doubts melted like ice in springtime, and 
joyfully they all bowed [to His Majesty’s instructions]. As a 
lotus flower opens and the crescent moon waxes, so their 
understanding grew.
 
429
 
 
Turning so many people on the right path to enlightenment was a very 
meritorious deed in itself, and the wording used to describe Emperor Wu’s 
                                                 
426 To be more precise, if Emperor Wu had wanted to mirror himself on king Aśoka, this would 
have made him a cakravartin of the Iron Wheel. As Forte (1976: 141) remarks: “frankly, no 
Chinese sovereign would ever have accepted such a vulgar instrument of government as a 
wheel of iron. If this was all that Buddhism had to offer, then it was worth-while holding on to 
China’s own theory of the T’ien-hsia.” 
427 As Chen (2006: 47-72) demonstrates, this hall served as a sort of palace chapel (nei 
daochang 內道場). Though not dedicated to Buddhism exclusively (Chen, 2006: 57), 
according to Daoxuan Emperor Wu organised monthly lecture assemblies here, which a 
thousand monks could attend at one time (T.2060.548b7). Emperor Wu himself often lectured 
on the Prajñāpāramitā sūtra. Cf. Chen, 2006: 53-54. 
428 Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.236a1-3. 
429 Translation by Chen, 2006: 65. 

144 
 
skill at lecturing clearly reflect his bodhisattva qualities. The personal 
lecturing of Emperor Wu at the Great Assemblies was therefore equally 
important as the large display of donations. 
 
Sheshen 
 
Another way in which Emperor Wu sought to accumulate merit and 
reflect his bodhisattva qualities, is the practice of sheshen 捨身, meaning 
“to relinquish the body/the self”. In using the word sheshen one has to bear 
in mind that, even at the time of Emperor Wu, this term referred to two 
distinct devotional practices, as it could mean both an act of physical self-
sacrifice (not necessarily resulting in death) and the symbolic gift of one’s 
property and personal services to the saṃgha (the latter was usually of a 
temporary nature).430 Although both practices had the same objective of 
living up to the ultimate bodhisattva ideal of exhaustive giving, one was 
clearly more extreme than the other. This naturally meant that the more 
“civilised” symbolic donation of oneself was more widely practised by 
(wealthy) lay devotees than the acts of self-immolation, which would surely 
still have borne a social stigma among the tradition-minded elite who, 
despite the lofty religious motive for doing so, might regard the purposeful 
mutilation of one’s own body as unfilial.431
                                                 
430 Cf. Gernet (1995: 244-247), who theorises that the donation of property and services to 
the monastic community is an economic mechanism within a religious context, whereby 
someone repays his karmic debts through the donation of goods. 
 Since both practices of sheshen 
431 Although James Benn (2007: 104-131) discusses the debates about the permissibility of 
self-immolation among Buddhist scholars, he does not treat the question of how this practice 
was perceived from the traditional Chinese perspective on filial piety, nor am I aware of any 
such study on the subject. John Kieschnick does cite some interesting examples from the 
dynastic histories of lay Buddhist officials who mutilated themselves as a display of filial 
devotion towards a deceased parent, and surprisingly these acts were favourably received by 
the authors of these histories. In many cases, the mourner cut himself in the finger (or even 
severed it) to copy out a Buddhist sūtra in his own blood to earn merit for his dead father or 
mother. See Kieschnick, 1997: 49-50; ibid., 2001. 

145 
 
have been the subject of previous studies, I shall limit myself to exploring 
some elements that are relevant to this thesis.432
 
 First of all, as much as 
he wanted to reflect the bodhisattva image, Emperor Wu never physically 
sacrificed himself, but limited himself to symbolically donating all of his 
possessions to the monastic community and offering himself as a slave to 
the Tongtai monastery for a limited period of time, only to be ransomed by 
his ministers for a huge sum of money. One source suggests that Emperor 
Wu effectively disapproved of the physical form of self-sacrifice, at least 
the variant of auto-cremation, which had become something of a popular 
custom by the sixth century. The Hongzan fahua zhuan 弘贊法花傳 
(Biographies of [Masters who] Expounded and Praised the Lotus Sūtra, 
T.2067; compiled by Huixiang 慧詳 (d. after 706) during the early Tang 
Dynasty) renders a conversation between Emperor Wu and the monk 
Daodu 道度 (462-527), in which the latter makes his intention known that 
he wants to burn himself to be rid of his physical form. To this Emperor Wu 
replies: 
必欲利益蒼生。自可隨緣修道。若身命無常。棄尸陀林。施以
鳥獸。於檀度成滿。亦為善業。八萬戶蟲。不容燒燼。非所勸
也。433
If you really desire to create merit for beings, you ought to 
follow conditions in order to cultivate the Way. When your 
body and life become impermanent, then you should have 
your corpse cast into the forest. By donating it to the birds and 
beasts one completely perfects dānapāramitā and also makes 
good karma. Because of the eighty thousand worms it is not 
 
                                                 
432 On the origins of Buddhist self-immolation in India, see Ohnuma, 1997 and 1998; Lamotte, 
1987. On the practice of auto-cremation and other forms of self-sacrifice in Chinese 
Buddhism, see Benn, 2007, 2006, 1998; Gernet, 1960; Jan, 1965; Funayama, 2002. Also see 
Kieschnick, 1997: 35-50. On the symbolic self-sacrifice as practiced by Liang Wudi, see 
Janousch, 1998: 213-220. Also see Yan, 1999: 264-285. 
433 Hongzan fahua zhuan, T.2067.24c22-24. Cf. Fayuan zhulin, T.2122.992c16-20. 

146 
 
appropriate to burn yourself. It is not something to be 
encouraged.434
 
 
From this fragment it seems that Emperor Wu wanted to discourage the 
custom of auto-cremation as a form of self-sacrifice, though several cases 
of self-immolation are recorded to have taken place at Emperor Wu’s 
Great Assemblies. 435 Emperor Wu’s personal conviction against literal 
“abandonment of the body” might have stemmed from his well-
documented concern for the proper display of filial piety towards his 
deceased parents.436
 
 Daoxuan describes Emperor Wu’s continued pain 
over the death of his parents and his efforts in perpetuating their memories: 
                                                 
434 Translation by Benn, 2007: 4. The argument about how the eighty thousand worms 
(parasites) that inhabit a human body would be destroyed together with the person that burns 
himself (thus effectively committing the offence of killing) is repeated by Huijiao in his 
comment on the category of self-immolators in his Gaoseng zhuan (T.2059.406a26-28). 
435 See Nan shi, 7: 225 and Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.236a17-18. Cf. Chen, 2006: 67, 71-
72, 84. In his report on the Great Assembly of 533, Xiao Zixian divides the donations into ten 
categories in accordance with the purposes designated to them by the donors. Categories 
eight and nine are related to self-sacrifice. Zixian distinguishes “those who renounced 
(sheshen) and gave themselves to the masses [in service] (或捨身施大眾者)” and “those who 
burned their finger(s) as offerings to the Three Jewels (燒指供養三寶者)” (T.2103.238a3-4). 
This too suggests that self-immolation of both the symbolic and the physical kind were a fixed 
part of Emperor Wu’s assemblies, no doubt intended to stir up the religious fervour of the 
crowd to increase their generosity. 
436 In the very beginning of the Xiaojing 孝經 (Classic of Filial Piety), Confucius says to his 
disciples: “Our bodies – to every hair and bit of skin – are received by us from our parents, 
and we must not presume to injure or wound them: this is the beginning of filial piety.” (Legge, 
1879: 466) For this reason it was highly offensive to one’s parents to commit acts of self-
mutilation. This argument had often been used in early anti-Buddhist polemics to demonstrate 
the “evils” committed by those who entered into the monastery and mutilated or degraded 
their bodies by shaving their heads and exposing their naked shoulders. It was, of course, 
also considered unfilial for a man not to continue the paternal lineage and to abandon his 
original surname. Cf. Zürcher, 1972: 281-285. Also see Ch’en, 1968 and 1973: 14-50. 

147 
 
頻代二皇。捨身為僧給使。洗濯煩穢仰資冥福。每一捨時地為
之震。相繼齋講不斷法輪。為太祖文皇。於鍾山北澗。建大愛
敬寺。[…] 千有餘僧四事供給。[…] 帝又於寺中龍淵別殿。造
金銅像舉高丈八。躬伸供養每入頂禮。歔欷哽噎不能自勝。預
從左右無不下泣。又為獻太后。於青溪西岸建陽城門路東。起
大智度寺。[…] 以申追福。五百諸尼四時講誦。寺成之日。帝
顧謂群后曰。建斯兩寺。奉福二皇。用表罔極之情。以達追遠
之思。而不能遣蓼莪之哀。復於中宮起至敬殿景陽臺。立七廟
室。[…] 設二皇座。具備諸禮冠蘊奩篋。舉目興慕晨昏如在。
衣服輕暖隨時代易。新奇芳旨應時日薦。帝又曰。雖竭工匠之
巧。殫世俗之奇。水石周流華樹雜沓。限以國務不獲朝夕侍
食。惟有朔望親奉饋奠。而無所瞻仰。內心崩潰如焚如灼。又
作聯珠五十首。以明孝道。又制孝思賦。廣統孝本。至於安上
治民移風易俗。度越終古無德而稱。437
[Emperor Wu] repeatedly gave himself (sheshen) [to a 
monastery] on behalf of his deceased parents as a servant to 
the monks [in order to] cleanse [his parents] from obstructions 
and defilements, and to entreat good fortune for their next life. 
Every time he gave himself [to a monastery], the earth 
trembled for him. He would successively fast and recite [from 
the scriptures], and incessantly [turned] the Dharma wheel.
 
438
For [his deceased father] Taizu 太祖 Wenhuang 文皇
 
439, [the 
emperor] constructed the Da'aijing 大愛敬 monastery440
                                                 
437 T.2060.427a06-b14. I have left out the descriptions of the monasteries, temples and 
Buddha statues, since they are not relevant to the theme of Emperor Wu’s concern for filial 
piety.  
 near 
438 The Wheel of the Dharma (falun 法輪) is a symbol for the Buddhist teaching. It has eight 
spokes, representing the Noble Eightfold Path to enlightenment. “Turning the Wheel” means 
to propagate the teaching. 
439 These are the posthumous title and temple name of Emperor Wu's father, Xiao Shunzhi 蕭
順之 (444-494). 

148 
 
the creek north of Mount Zhong,441 […] [There were] more 
than a thousand monks [present], who were supplied with the 
four necessities.442 […] The emperor also had an eighteen 
feet high gilded bronze [Buddha] statue constructed in 
another temple building of the monastery, named Longyuan 
龍淵 (Dragon Abyss). He personally made offerings [to his 
late father there], and every time he entered [the temple], he 
would kneel down and touch the statue's feet with his 
forehead. Sobbing and choking with emotion, he could not 
constrain himself. Of his following there were none who did 
not shed a tear [in sympathy for his grief]. [Emperor Wu] also 
founded the Dazhidu 大智度 convent on the western bank of 
the Qingxi 青溪 river,443 east of the road [to] Jianyang 建陽 
city gate, in dedication to [his deceased mother], the Empress 
Xian獻太后.444 […] All five hundred [resident] nuns recited and 
chanted [from the scriptures] all year round to transfer 
blessings to the deceased (zhuifu 追福).445
                                                                                                                
440 The Shishi ji gulüe  釋氏稽古略 (Brief Historical Survey of Buddhism, compiled by Jue’an 
覺安 in 1354; T.2037.49.795b1) says that it was built in the ninth year of Tianjian (510), but 
this date is not mentioned in any other source. The Liangjing siji (T.2094.1024a16-b26) says 
that the Da'aijing monastery was built in the first year of Putong (520) on the northern peak of 
mount Jiang 蔣 (an alternate name for mount Zhong). 
 On the day that 
the convent was finished, the emperor looked back over his 
441 Mount Zhong 鐘 was located just east of the capital Jiankang. 
442 The four necessities of a Buddhist monk are: clothing, shelter, medication and food. 
443 This river had its source southwest of Mount Zhong. It flowed through Jiankang and into 
the river Qinhuai 秦淮, a tributary of the Yangtze river, over a distance of approximately 10 
Chinese miles. It has dried up and no longer exists today. 
444 His mother Zhang Zhirou 張至柔 (d. 469) died when Wu was only six years old (Liang shu, 
3: 95). When he had ascended the throne, Emperor Wu confered on her the posthumous title 
of Emperor-Mother Xian 獻太后. According to the Sishi ji gulüe, the Dazhidu convent was 
built in the same year as the Da'aijing monastery, namely 510 (T.2037.795b2). 
445 On the notion of sending blessings after the deceased in relation to the building of state 
monasteries, see Forte, 1983: 685-686. 

149 
 
shoulder and said to his consorts: “By building these two 
monasteries, I offer merit to my deceased parents. Through it, 
I express my boundless affection [for them], and through it, I 
realise my thoughts off perpetuating their memory [with the 
performance of the proper sacrifices]. But still I cannot dispel 
the grief of Liao'e 蓼莪.446” So again he erected the Zhijing 至
敬 temple and Jingyang 景陽 terrace in the Central Palace 
[grounds], 447
                                                 
446 Name of a poem in the “Minor Odes (Xiaoya 小雅)” chapter of the Shijing 詩經 (Book of 
Odes). In this poem a son expresses his grief over the fact that he can no longer serve his 
deceased parents and thus repay the huge debt he feels he owes them for bringing him into 
this world and loving and nurturing him. Phrases from this poem are often quoted in 
utterances of filial piety. See Legge, 1970 [1893-1895]: 352. 
 and established seven shrines. […] When 
setting up the altars for his deceased parents, [the emperor] 
furnished them with all the ceremonial [items], [such as] the 
official's cap [for the male ancestor] and small boxes 
containing make-up and grooming items [for the female 
ancestor]. When gazing up [to these shrines] with exalted, 
affectionate thoughts, it was like they were present there, 
morning and evening. [The offered] clothes were light or warm 
according to the changing of the seasons. New and unusual 
fragrances were offered daily and in accordance with the time 
of year. The emperor said: “Even though I use the skills of the 
craftsmen to the fullest extent and exhaust all worldly 
wonders, still [puddles of] water and rocks are scattered 
around everywhere and the vegetation is growing rank. I am 
restricted [in my time] by state affairs and therefore I am 
unable to pledge food [to my deceased parents] morning and 
evening. Only on new moon and full moon (i.e. the first and 
447 This is the palace where the emperor and empress live. It is called the Central Palace, to 
differentiate it from the Eastern Palace (also called Spring Palace, the residence of the heir 
apparent) and the Western Palace (where the emperor's concubines live). 

150 
 
fifteenth day of the lunar month respectively) can I personally 
make offerings of food and drink to them. I have nothing to 
look up to with reverence. It is killing me inside. It is like I am 
being consumed by fire.” So he wrote fifty “linked verse” style 
poems (lianzhu 聯珠)448 to illustrate the principles of filial piety, 
and made the Xiaosi fu 孝思賦 (Narrative Verse on Filial 
Sentiments) 449
 
 in which he extensively gathered all the 
essentials of filial piety. When it comes to regulating the 
higher social ranks, governing the people, and changing 
[people's] customs and common practices, it surpasses 
anything in the past. One can not praise it enough. 
With the building of two large state-sponsored monasteries in 
commemoration of his deceased parents, Emperor Wu clearly wanted to 
integrate a Buddhist element into the traditional ancestral worship, which 
was a vital cornerstone for the legitimacy of any Chinese dynasty.450
                                                 
448 This was a genre of poetry characterised by the linking of one's own verse with an extant 
one. This genre has a history that goes back to the early Han dynasty, but really came to 
bloom during the Liang. Xiao Gang 蕭綱(503-551), the later emperor Jianwen 简文 (r. 549-
551), was a very skilled poet and wrote several of this type of verses. On “linked verse” and 
Xiao Gang's literary activities, see Marney, 1976: 76-117. 
 One 
cannot underestimate the impact of Wu’s example, since it became a 
common practice from the seventh century onward to build Buddhist 
449 Emperor Wu’s Xiaosi fu (whose preface likely served as a source for this account) is 
contained in the Guang Hongming ji (T.2103.336c26-338a3). 
450 As we have seen, Emperor Wu continued to perform the ritual sacrifices in the imperial 
ancestral temples, but had the live victims replaced by dough effigies. The Sui shu (7: 134), in 
discussing Emperor Wu’s vegetarian reforms in state sacrifice, mentions the construction of 
the Zhijing temple and Jingyang terrace as well, and says that Emperor Wu offered “pure 
food (jingzhuan 凈饌)” there twice a month. “From then onward until the destruction of the 
capital, no bloody food was [offered] in any of the ancestral temples [ever again] (自是訖於臺
城破 ，諸廟遂不血食 ．).” 

151 
 
temples for imperial ancestors.451 In relation to the subject of sheshen, the 
very first line of the account above jumps out for the bold claim it makes, 
namely that Emperor Wu performed his acts of self-sacrifice for the 
purpose of transferring the resulting merit to his deceased parents 
posthumously. This is probably an overstatement on the part of Daoxuan, 
as deeper investigation into the matter reveals that Emperor Wu’s sheshen 
ceremonies served a purpose that largely transcended his personal desire 
to express his feelings of filial piety. There are records of four sheshen 
ceremonies held by Emperor Wu during his reign, which took place in the 
years 527, 529, 546 and 547.452
 
 It is worth mentioning that only the first 
sheshen ceremony of 527 is brought up in the Buddhist sources, while all 
other references are drawn from the official dynastic histories. The 
description of the sheshen in 527 in the Liang shu says: 
三 月 辛 未 ， 輿 駕 幸 同 泰 寺 捨 身。 甲 戌 ， 還 宮 ， 赦 
天 下 ， 改 元。453
On April 24, [the emperor] visited the Tongtai monastery in 
[His] imperial carriage and He renounced himself there. On 
April 27, He returned to the palace, where He announced a 
nation-wide amnesty and changed the reign-title [to Datong 大
通]. 
 
 
                                                 
451 See Forte, 1983. 
452 For 527, see Liang shu, 3: 71; Nan shi, 7: 205; Jiankang shilu, 17: 478; Fozu tongji 
T.2035.350b2-3; Fozu lidai tongzai, T.2036.547c7; Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.427b17-19. 
For 529, see Liang shu, 3: 73; Nan shi, 7: 206-207; Jiankang shilu, 17: 478-479. For 546 and 
547, see Liang shu, 3: 92; Nan shi, 7: 218-219; Jiankang shilu, 17: 483. According to the Sui 
shu, two independent records of these sheshen ceremonies were made, namely the Liang 
Wu huangdi dashe 梁 武 皇 帝 大 捨  (The great renunciations of Emperor Wu of the Liang) in 
3 fascicles, written by Yan Jing 嚴暠 , and the Huangdi pusa qingjing dashe ji 皇 帝 菩 薩 清 
淨 大 捨 記  (The great Pure Renunciations of the Emperor-Bodhisattva) in 3 fascicles, written 
by Xie Wu 謝吳, but neither text is extant. See Sui shu, 33: 979 and 34: 1010 respectively. 
453 Liang shu, 3: 71. 

152 
 
The Nanshi provides more details: 
 
初 ， 帝 創 同 泰 寺 ， 至 是 開 大 通 門 以 對 寺 之 南 門。
[…] 自 是 晨 夕 講 義 ， 多 由 此 門。三 月 辛 未 ， 幸 寺 捨 
身。 甲 戌 還 宮 ， 大 赦 ， 改 元 大 通 ， 以 符 寺 及 門 
名。454
Earlier, the emperor had [ordered] the construction of the 
Tongtai monastery, and to make it [more] accessible he 
[ordered] the Datong gate to be opened [in the palace walls] 
opposite the monastery’s southern gate. […] From then on, 
lectures [on the Buddhist teaching] were given morning and 
evening, and [the emperor] passed through that gate 
frequently. On April 24, [the emperor] visited the monastery 
and renounced himself there. On April 27, He returned to the 
palace, announced a great amnesty and changed the reign-
title to Datong to tally with the monastery’s and gate’s name. 
 
 
The Nanshi account directly links the emperor’s first sheshen to the 
completion of the Tongtai monastery and the opening of the Datong gate 
that provided a direct access to the monastery from the palace. It seems 
that the construction of the Tongtai monastery signalled a milestone in the 
development of a Buddhist imperial ritual, because for the first time since 
starting out on his Buddhist reforms, Emperor Wu now had a state 
monastery under his control which could serve as the venue for all of his 
subsequent Buddhist ceremonies – including most of the Great 
Assemblies and his three other self-renunciations – without having to make 
an appeal to the mediation of the monastic community. Aside from its 
function as a venue for Emperor Wu’s Buddhist ceremonies, the Tongtai 
monastery seems to have played an important part in the collection, and 
                                                 
454 Nan shi, 7: 205. 

153 
 
therefore also probably the distribution, of donations.455
 
 We have already 
discussed the huge sums of money that were raised during Wudi’s Great 
Assemblies in the Tongtai monastery, but the sheshen ceremony in 527 
too was coupled with the donation of huge sums of cash, as the Fozu 
tongji reports: 
駕幸同泰寺舍身。群臣以錢一億萬奉贖。皇帝歸宮。456
[In the first year of Datong, Emperor Wu] went to visit the 
Tongtai monastery in His imperial carriage and He renounced 
himself there. His ministers offered an astronomical amount 
[to the monastery] as ransom for the emperor, who 
[subsequently] returned to the palace. 
 
 
Thus, not only did Emperor Wu’s personal self-renunciation generate merit, 
but the large donation paid by the ministers generated merit of its own as 
well. What remains unclear in all this is where exactly the money for this 
ransom came from. As we have seen in Xiao Zixian’s report on the Great 
Assembly of 533, every effort was made to stress that the funds for 
Emperor Wu’s Buddhist activities were not taken from the state treasury. If 
we take this assertion seriously, then that leaves the court officials as the 
ones saddled with the bill.457
                                                 
455 Although there is no record on the distribution of money, materials, or commodities from 
the Tongtai monastery, it is plausible that, in its function as imperially supervised monastery, 
it was involved in the organisation of the Inexhaustible Treasuries, which have otherwise left 
no mark in the official imperial bureaucracy. Since most of the fundraising activities in the 
wake of the Buddhist ceremonies took place on the premises of the Tongtai monastery, it 
would be reasonable to assume that the gathered donations were stored somewhere on its 
grounds as well, to be distributed from there on out. 
 
456 Fozu tongji, T.2035.350b2-3. 
457 The Liang shu (3: 73) identifies the reluctant payers as “all from the highest nobility and 
highest officials on down” (gongqing yixia 公卿以下). One cannot help but get the feeling that 
these involuntary donations, extracted from the political elite to further Emperor Wu’s 
Buddhist cause, had a more sinister and pragmatic purpose as well, and that was to bleed his 

154 
 
While the sheshen of 527 appears to have stood on its own as a 
solitary event, the following sheshen of 529, 546 and 547 were integrated 
into more elaborate ceremonies, centred on a Great Assembly. In addition, 
they were fringed with much more ceremonial procedures: when entering 
the Tongtai monastery to attend the Great Assembly, Emperor Wu first 
took off his imperial robes and donned a monk’s frock (釋御服 披法衣). 
After that he made his abode in a small monastery cell where he lived in 
frugal conditions while carrying out menial tasks. The following day(s), 
Emperor Wu lectured on the Buddhist teaching to an audience of monks 
and lay people. After several days the court officials would come to the 
monastery to offer a huge ransom for the emperor’s release, to which the 
monks would agree in silence. 458  Two days later, the court officials 
submitted a memorandum at the eastern gate of the monastery in which 
they requested Wu to return to the palace and take up his duties as 
emperor once again. Only after repeating this request two more times, 
does Wu finally accede to return. Three days later, Emperor Wu organised 
a second Great Assembly attended by over fifty-thousand people, after 
which he went to the Taiji 太極Hall (the place where he had first declared 
the reign-title Tianjian 天監upon his official enthronement ceremony) to 
declare a nation-wide amnesty and a change of reign-title.459
                                                                                                                
potential political adversaries financially in order to weaken their position. As we have seen 
above, the officials were expected to make large donations as a sign of their loyalty and 
vigour, which ultimately caused them to impose higher taxes on the people to cover their 
financial losses. 
 In fact, all 
four sheshen ceremonies had resulted in a change of reign-title, an 
element that, together with the prior discarding of imperial regalia and 
subsequent petitions to reinstate his status as emperor, is very reminiscent 
of the imperial ascension ritual, whereby it was customary for the emperor-
458 The number of days which the emperor spent in the monastery as a servant was not fixed, 
and became steadily longer over time: four days in 527, fifteen days in 529, thirty-seven days 
in 546, and forty-four days in 547. 
459 Nan shi, 7: 206-207. The accounts of the 546 and 547 sheshen are very similar. 

155 
 
to-be to refuse the throne that was offered to him three times before 
accepting it. Once a new emperor had been inaugurated, a new reign-title 
was proclaimed. Emperor Wu had gone through these motions as well 
when he had ascended the throne, refusing the formal request by the 
abdicating heir to the Qi throne to take his place, only to accept after two 
more pleads by his entourage. 460  As such, the elaborate sheshen 
ceremonies had two layers: not only did they function as a means for the 
emperor to demonstrate his bodhisattva qualities by selflessly giving 
himself in service to the saṃgha (and by substitution to the Buddha), of 
which the resulting merit could then be used for the benefit of the entire 
nation, but at the same time they had all the trappings of a ceremony for 
the renewal of his emperhood. The latter is corroborated by the fact that 
Emperor Wu turned to the Vice Director of the Department of State 
(shangshu puye 尚書僕射) Xu Mian徐勉 (466-535)461 to draw up a set of 
ritual regulations (yizhu 儀注) for his sheshen ceremony.462 Xu Mian had 
already supervised the compilation of the Liang Ritual Code, and his 
involvement indicates that “the 529 sheshen and the later ones were 
official imperial rituals, sanctioned by scriptural sources and codified in 
writing.463
Emperor Wu’s sheshen ceremonies were the object of criticism, not 
only by official historians, but by Buddhist scholars as well.
” 
464
                                                 
460 Liang shu, 1: 28-29. For a chronology of the fulfilment of the ceremonial requirements for 
Emperor Wu’s accession, see Buttars, 1998: 210-257.   
 The Sanlun 
三論 (Three Treatises, i.e. Madhyamaka) master Jizang 吉藏 (549-623), 
who had already criticised Liang Wudi’s erroneous understanding of the 
461 Biography in Liang shu, 25: 377-387. 
462 See Janousch, 1998: 216. 
463 Ibid. 216. For the compilation of the Liang Ritual Code, see ibid. 47-53. 
464 For some examples of criticism on Emperor Wu’s sheshen in the dynastic histories, see 
Janousch, 1998: 217, note 93. 

156 
 
Two Truths (erdi 二諦) concept,465
 
 felt compelled to set the records straight 
about the proper meaning of the term sheshen. First of all, Jizang says 
that when it comes to the virtue of giving (Ch. shi 施, Skt. dāna) 
施有內外。捨身是內。捨餘是外。外易內難。466
there are [two kinds, namely] inner and outer. The 
renunciation of the body (sheshen) is inner [giving], the 
renunciation of everything else (sheyu) is outer [giving]. Outer 
[giving] is easy. Inner [giving] is hard. 
 
 
He goes on to elucidate his analysis of the term sheshen with some 
examples: 
 
問。捨身命財何異。答。若捨身為奴。則不開捨命。又捨頭目
支節施人為捨身。為人取死為捨命。又釋。捨身即是捨命。但
本意不同。故成兩別。如投身救虎。命雖不存。以肉施彼。意
在施身也。他不耐我在。須得我死。於彼事乃辦。菩薩為茲殞
命。身雖不存。是只捨命。自身命外。國城妻子。悉以施人。
為捨財。梁武別釋此為一小科義。467
Question: What is the difference between renouncing oneself, 
one’s life and one’s wealth? 
 
Answer: If sheshen would be to become a slave, then this 
does not explain the giving of one’s life. [If on the other hand] 
one gives up one’s head, eyes and limbs, then the dānapati is 
[in fact] performing [an act of] sheshen. When a person 
[allows himself] to be killed, then this is renouncing one’s life. I 
shall explain this further. Although renouncing oneself is also 
                                                 
465 See Erti yi (Meaning of the Two Truths), T.1854.108b11-13. Cf. Lai, 1978 and 1980 in 
passim. 
466 Shenman baoku (Treasury of the Śrīmālā Sūtra), T.1744.34b27. 
467 Ibid., 36b23-c2. 

157 
 
a renunciation of one’s life, the original intention [behind the 
action] is not the same. That is why we distinguish between 
the two. If I should renounce myself in order to save a tiger, 
then, although my life would come to an end, [the purpose 
was] to feed the tiger with my flesh. [Thus] the intention lies in 
the renunciation of the self [for the benefit of another being, 
not in losing one’s life]. If [the tiger] does not tolerate my 
presence and absolutely wants me dead, and then acts on 
this, then the bodhisattva will lay down his life for this [rather 
than to kill the tiger in self-defence]. Though the self would 
come to an end, this is only giving up one’s life [since the 
initiative did not come from oneself]. Now aside from oneself 
and one’s life, if one gives everything [one owns] from country, 
cities, wives and children, then this is to renounce one’s 
wealth. Now, Emperor Wu of the Liang interpreted this 
differently, and only performed [renunciation] in its most 
narrow sense. 
 
Jizang, the theoretician, approaches the issue of sheshen from a semantic 
angle, and concludes that Emperor Wu misused the term sheshen in the 
context of his renunciation ceremonies. He does not condemn Emperor 
Wu’s sheshen ceremonies as such, only the vocabulary used to describe 
them, and the exaggerated hype created around what he deemed to be 
“an easy” virtue. The way Jizang sees it, the act of sheshen involves the 
loss of one’s life, though that is not the ultimate intention behind it. The real 
meaning of sheshen is to selflessly help other beings with complete 
disregard for oneself, even unto the end of life. As such, Emperor Wu 
should have called his ceremonies shecai 捨財 “renouncing one’s wealth”. 
Though Jizang accuses Wu of interpreting sheshen in a narrow sense, in 
practice it appears to be Jizang who held on to a restricted view, as by his 
time the term had long been established for all forms of renunciation, be it 

158 
 
in the literal or figurative sense, and would continue to be used thereafter. 
Another critic of Wudi’s sheshen ceremony was emperor Taizu 太祖 
(r.960-976) of the Song  宋dynasty (960-1273). When visiting a monastery 
in 972, he rattles on about how profoundly he understands the essence of 
the Buddhist teaching and therefore grasps its potential benefits to the 
state and its people, but prefers to pacify the nation by virtue of his exalted 
example. Unlike Liang Wudi, he says, who “in an act of self-renunciation 
gave himself as slave [to the monastic community], which is a one-sided, 
Hīnayānistic way of looking at it, and is thus not something that ought to be 
imitated by following generations  (捨身為奴。此小乘偏見。非後代所宜法
也).468
It has already been suggested that Emperor Wu’s inspiration for his 
sheshen ceremony came from the Aśokāvadāna.
” Emperor Taizu, reproaches Emperor Wu for clinging to, what he 
calls, a Hīnayānistic way of interpreting the ideal of sheshen. He ostensibly 
alludes to the perceived insincerity inherent in giving oneself up as slave to 
the saṃgha, only to be ransomed a few days later. This is indeed rather 
far removed from a Mahāyānistic understanding of the sheshen ideal, with 
its emphasis on altruistic self-sacrifice without a second thought for one’s 
own life. The Hīnayānistic characteristic of Emperor Wu’s sheshen can 
perhaps be explained by the possible origin of this custom, which leads us 
back to king Aśoka once again. 
469 Both Chinese versions 
of this text contain the story about Aśoka’s pañcavārṣika, though they 
differ in detail. 470
                                                 
468 Fozu tongji, T.2035.399a10-11. 
 In broad outlines, the story tells how during a 
pañcavārṣika a playful bidding match ensues between king Aśoka and his 
son Kuṇāla, who try to outstrip each other in their donations to the saṃgha. 
In a final bid to outdo his son, Aśoka presents all of his possessions (from 
469 Tang, 1983: 320-322. 
470 See T.2042.105c8-106a19 and T.2043.140c9-141b5. For an English version of this story 
(which is a translation from the Sanskrit original, but it closely follows the Ayuwang jing), see 
Strong, 1983: 265-268.  

159 
 
which he excludes the contents of the state treasury) to the monks, 
including his kingdom, his harem, his palace attendants , himself, and his 
son Kuṇāla .471 After personally serving the monks and throwing in some 
extra donations in the form of monastic clothing, he pays a huge ransom to 
redeem all he had given before. One cannot deny that Emperor Wu’s 
sheshen ceremony shows some remarkable similarities to that of Aśoka, 
as they share almost all of the same elements, namely the gift of his 
person to the saṃgha during a pañcavārṣika / Great assembly, the 
personal serving of the monks, and the payment of a huge ransom. The 
only difference is that Wu offered only himself, and not his country, 
concubines, palace attendants or children. As we have seen, the donation 
of material goods and service to the monastic community was perceived 
by some as a limited, Hīnayānistic interpretation of sheshen. In the case of 
Aśoka it was only normal for him to act in a Hīnayānistic way, for the 
idealised view on the bodhisattva as it would be expounded in the 
Mahāyāna literature did not yet exist.472
                                                 
471 The Ayuwang jing (translated in 512) has Aśoka emphatically exclude the state treasury 
from his donation (我今唯除七寶庫藏 一切 […] 施眾僧, T.2043.140c24-25). The Ayuwang 
zhuan (translated ca. 300) could be interpreted as saying that Aśoka gave the whole content 
of the state treasury to the monks, along with everything mentioned above (我盡庫藏 一切 […] 
施僧, T.2042.105c21-22). It is unclear whether this difference is due to a mistranslation or 
ambiguous choice of words on the part of An Faqin, or if the story of king Aśoka had 
undergone this small, but vital change in the centuries that separated the two versions. The 
Sanskrit version translated by John Strong has Aśoka excluding the state treasury as well, 
but since it is an edition based on a large number of original manuscripts, it is unclear where 
we have to place it in history. Cf. Strong, 1983: 169. 
  Still stuck on the offside of the 
472 Generally speaking, the concept of the bodhisattva was interpreted differently in the 
Hīnayāna and Mahāyāna branches of Buddhism. In Hīnayāna a bodhisattva was a being 
destined to reach enlightenment, and as this was considered to be relatively rare, it was 
thought that only one bodhisattva would exist at any given time. The attainment of 
bodhisattvahood, like Buddhahood, was reserved for the exceptional person. In Mahāyāna 
the ideal of the bodhisattva was expanded in its application. Here, a bodhisattva transformed 
into a being that is on the verge of full Buddhahood, but for altruistic reasons chooses not to 
do so in order to save as many people as possible from suffering. Many bodhisattvas were 

160 
 
rigid boundary between those who lived outside this world in pursuit of 
religious goals (the monks and nuns), and those who lived in this world, 
ensnared in all of its impediments (the laity), king Aśoka was limited to 
making donations to display his religious fervour and sincerity. Being king 
allowed him to make a donation that could not be surpassed by anyone in 
the world, not even his own son. Thus by giving all, Aśoka reached the 
pinnacle of what a lay dānapati could achieve. When the bodhisattva ideal 
underwent a reinterpretation in Mahāyāna Buddhism, so did the concept of 
sheshen. As it was now deemed possible for all to attain bodhisattvahood, 
emulation of the selfless forms of self-sacrifice performed by the 
bodhisattva took on more extreme forms such as found in the sūtras and in 
the jātaka literature. Nevertheless, the original practice whereby one 
donated as much as one could to the saṃgha, even up to one’s own 
freedom (to serve as a menial in the monastery), continued to exist side by 
side with the more idealised, “Mahāyānistic” practice of total self-
renunciation. 
The sources contain several references to such materialistic 
sheshen performed before those of Emperor Wu. The NanQi shu, for 
example, contains the following anecdote: 
 
                                                                                                                
believed to be active at the same time (which sparked a large-scale devotional movement 
within Buddhism), and in addition it was now said to be possible for everyone to aspire to 
bodhisattvahood. In other words not only monks and nuns could make progress towards 
enlightenment, but the laity, who in Hīnayāna had been reduced to mere supporters of the 
saṃgha, could achieve enlightenment as well by following the bodhisattva path. This path 
centred around the development of the six virtues (pāramitā), of which giving (dāna) – in 
Hīnayāna virtually the only way for lay people to accrue merit – was one. Though Jeffrey 
Samuels (1997) has demonstrated that many of the so-called Mahāyānistic elements of the 
bodhisattva ideal were already present in Hīnayāna scriptures, and thus underwent no major 
doctrinal development in early Mahāyāna, he maintains that there is a big difference in its 
application, as described above. For a collection of studies on the bodhisattva ideal in East 
Asia, see Kawamura, 1981. 

161 
 
世 祖 在 東 宮 ， 專 斷 用 事 ， 頗 不 如 法 ． 任 左 右 張 景 
真 ， 使 領 東 宮 主 衣 食 官 穀 帛 ， 賞 賜 什 物 ， 皆 御 所 
服 用 ． 景 真 於 南 澗 寺 捨 身 齋 ，  有 元 徽 紫 皮 袴褶 ， 
餘 物 稱 是 ．於 樂 遊 設 會 ， 伎 人 皆 著 御 衣 ．473
When Emperor Wu 武 (r. 483-493) still resided in the Eastern 
Palace (i.e. was still crown prince) there was sometimes an 
appropriation of supplies that was not entirely legal. When 
Zhang Jingzhen 張景真 (d. 479) was appointed as Head of 
the Office for Clothes and Food for the Eastern Palace, he 
was given miscellaneous items in reward, all of which were 
items of imperial clothing. [When] Jingzhen set up a 
vegetarian feast in the Nanjian南澗 temple and renounced 
himself, he borrowed purple leather [shoes],
 
474 trousers, court 
dresses and other things [from the Office for Clothes and 
Food] dating back to the Yuanhui 元徽 era [of the Liu Song 
dynasty].475 When [later] an assembly was set up in Yueyou 
樂遊, all the craftsmen [who worked on the monastery there] 
wore imperial robes.476
 
 
                                                 
473 NanQi shu, 31: 573. 
474 According to the NanQi shu (2: 39) the imperial concubines wore purple leather shoes, 
therefore I add “shoes” in the translation. 
475 The Yuanwei era coincides with the reign of child-emperor Houfei 後廢 (r. 473-477) of the 
Liu Song dynasty (420-479), who ascended the throne at the tender age of nine (ten by the 
Chinese way of counting age). His reign, however, was anything but tender, as the historical 
records speak of the many cruelties committed by the unmanageable, spoiled child. 
476 As one can imagine, this unlawful appropriation of imperial items did not go down well with 
the ruling emperor, Gaodi 高帝 (r. 479-482). In the beginning of the Jianyuan 建元 era (479-
482) he ordered the execution of Zhang Jingzhen. Emperor Wu, then still crown-prince, sent 
someone over to his father to plead for Zhang Jingzhen’s life. Gaodi became so enraged, that 
the messenger quickly backed down and withdrew. Although it is not specified for what 
reason Zhang Jingzhen was executed, it is very likely that it was for this unlawful 
appropriation of imperial goods. See NanQi shu, 24: 745; Nan shi, 41: 1051. 

162 
 
Although Zhang Jingzhen does not give himself as a servant to the 
monastery – which, considering the questionable origin of his donation 
need not be surprising – his act of renunciation does take place during an 
assembly of some sort, namely a vegetarian feast, and it does involve the 
donation of what should, in the spirit of the ceremony, be personal 
belongings. The motive for entering only this single, negative example of a 
sheshen ceremony in the official history is a bit puzzling. At first glance, 
one might suspect that the scandalous undertone of the anecdote betrays 
the most likely reason for its inclusion in the official dynastic history, and 
that is to demonstrate that the devotional practice of Buddhism and state 
administration do not mix. If we keep into account that the author of the 
Nan Qi shu is Xiao Zixian, this motivation seems less likely, as it was Xiao 
Zixian who wrote the laudation of Emperor Wu’s Great Assembly of 533. 
Why then would the same author praise the use of Buddhism in politics in 
one report, and condemn it in another? Perhaps the reason for bringing up 
the case of Zhang Jingzhen was to contrast it to the sheshen of Emperor 
Wu, who unlike Jingzhen did not take items belonging to the state to offer 
to the Buddhist monastic community, but only made use of his own 
personal wealth or of donations made by others. By citing this negative 
example, Emperor Wu’s virtues would shine through all the brighter. 
Jacques Gernet provides three further examples of symbolic acts of 
self-renunciation.477 The first example is of a seventy-year-old woman of 
the Northern Wei 北魏 (386-534) who in 515 gave herself up as a slave to 
the triratna (以身自施三寶為婢). Her three sons all put on slave garments 
and went to the monastery, weeping for their mother. As the monks were 
moved by their display of affection, they allowed them to ransom their 
mother with reels of cloth. After that, she took the vows and became a 
nun.478
                                                 
477 Gernet, 1995: 244-245. 
 The second example is taken from the colophon to a copy of the 
478 See Weishu, 71: 1571; T.2035.355c3-5. 

163 
 
Prajñāpāramitā-sūtra from Dunhuang, translated by Lionel Giles.479 This 
colophon states that, in 531, person so-and-so from the Northern Wei gave 
himself, his wife, children, servants and domestic animals to the saṃgha. 
He then paid several thousand cash to ransom them, and wished the 
money to be used on copying sūtras so that the resulting merit would bring 
him and his family the blessing of long life, the attainment of enlightenment, 
and a chance to return to the capital, from which they had been forced to 
flee. These two examples show that the practice of sheshen was also well 
known in the North, and thus not exclusive to the Southern dynasties. The 
second example is also interesting, because it demonstrates that the merit 
accrued by the act of sheshen could be transferred to other people and 
could be dedicated to a specific goal by the donator. Gernet’s third 
example comes from the Guang Hongming ji, which contains a 
dedicational text to accompany the sheshen ceremony performed by the 
Prince of Nanjun 南郡王from the Southern Qi, written by Shen Yue.480
To the examples provided by Gernet we can add the case of Shen 
Yue, who besides writing the dedicational text for the Prince of Nanjun 
performed a sheshen ceremony of his own in 509, for which the 
dedicational text is also preserved in the Guang Hongming ji.
 In 
this text, the prince vows to donate one-hundred-and-eighteen personal 
items. 
481
                                                 
479 For references, see Gernet, 1995: 373, note 44. 
 In this text, 
Shen Yue regrets that by enriching himself he has injured others. To make 
amends, he vows to set up a (vegetarian) feast for one hundred people, 
and to make a donation of himself (sheshen) and of one-hundred-
seventeen items of clothing. Instead of serving as a menial in a monastery, 
he vows to “go forth from home just like the Buddha, for one day and one 
night (一日一夜同佛出家).” 
480 Nan Qi Nanjun wang sheshen shu 南齊南郡王捨身疏(T.2103.323c26-324a14). 
481 Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.323b14-c25. For a translation of this text, see Mather, 1988: 
157-159. 

164 
 
One final case leads us to the monk Zhizang, who we have already 
encountered in a fierce debate with Emperor Wu on the latter’s wish to 
instate himself as leader of the monastic community. In spring of the final 
year of the Tianjian period (519): 
 
捨身大懺。招集道俗。并自講金剛般若以為極悔。惟留衣缽。
餘者傾盡一無遺餘。陳郡謝幾卿。指掛衣竹戲曰。猶留此物尚
有意耶。藏曰。身猶未滅意何由盡。而尚懷靖處託意山林。還
居開善因不履世。482
[Zhizang] renounced himself in a in a display of utter 
repentance. He invited monks and lay people over for an 
assembly and personally recited the Jin’gang banruo金剛般
若,
 
483
                                                 
482 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.466c27-467a3. 
 which he considered to be the ultimate [act of] 
483 Jin’gang banruo 金剛般若 is short for Jin’gang banruo boluomi jing 金剛般若波羅蜜經, 
which is the Vajracchedikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra (The Sūtra of the Perfection of Wisdom of 
the Diamond that Cuts Through Illusion, or Diamond Sūtra for short). Many translations into 
Western languages have been made over the years. One of the standard translations 
remains that of Price-Wong, 1969. Zhizang probably recited the earliest translation of the text, 
made by Kumārajīva ca. 401 (T.235). The Diamond Sūtra plays the leading role in an 
important episode of Zhizang’s life: 
 
There was once an old woman from the countryside who was a skilled 
physiognomist. She had reckoned a hundred good and ill fortunes and not 
once had she been wrong [in her predictions]. She said to Zhizang: “Your 
clever argumentation is unparalleled and your reputation is widely known in 
the world. However, your life will, unfortunately, not be a long one, possibly 
only reaching thirty-one years of age.” He was at that time already twenty-
nine years old and was very startled by this report. He used up all his 
strength to develop his religious activities and made a solemn vow not to go 
through the door again [to remain inside for study]. He was reciting the 
Diamond Sūtra while waiting for death to come claim him, when suddenly he 
heard a voice, speaking from the void, saying: “My good son, you are about 
to turn thirty-one. You were told that your time would run out at this moment, 
but due to the powers of the Diamond Sūtra, you have come to double your 

165 
 
repentance. He only kept his monk’s robe and begging bowl 
and everything else he gave away to the last thing. Xie Jiqing 
謝幾卿 (d. after 525)484 of the Chen-district pointed to his robe 
and bamboo [begging bowl] and said in jest: “Since you hold 
on to these items after all, it seems you still have a mind that 
clings to this world?” Zhizang said: “As my body has not yet 
perished, how can my intentions completely end? Yet I 
harbour the intention of pacifying my senses (chu 處), 485
                                                                                                                
lifespan!” After this, Zhizang went to the physiognomist, who stood up in great 
surprise, saying: “How is it you are still among the living? When I last saw you, 
you had the physiognomy of someone who did not have long to live, but now 
this is completely gone! You, śramaṇ a, are truly unfathomable.” Zhizang 
asked: “How old do you think I will get now?” She replied: “According to your 
complexion and bone-structure, I would say more than sixty years old.” 
Zhizang said: “Fifty is already a full life, it is not dying young. The 
circumstances have changed.” And he then informed her of the reason for all 
of this. The physiognomist gladly accepted his explanation and when finally, 
at the end of his life he passed away, all had transpired the way the 
physiognomist had predicted. Thereupon, the monks and laymen from west 
of the Yangtze all competed with each other in reciting the Diamond Sūtra 
[which had saved Zhizang’s life]. There were many acknowledged miracles 
[that occurred in response to these recitations]. (Xu Gaoseng zhuan, 
T.2060.466a23-b8) 
 
committing my intentions to [a life] in reclusion, and also to 
 
At the time of his sheshen ceremony in 519, Zhizang was sixty-two years old, exactly double 
of the originally predicted thirty-one year lifespan. This, together with the fact that he recited 
the Diamond Sūtra again, which had saved his life the previous time, suggests that maybe his 
act self-renunciation was an attempt to postpone his death again. If so, he was moderately 
successful, as he lived another three years before death caught up with him. This case 
demonstrates that the performance of a symbolic self-renunciation was often inspired by 
motives of personal gain, rather than altruism.  
484 Biography in Liang shu, 50: 708-710. 
485 This term refers to the six senses and the sensations that come from them (Skt. āyatana). 
Paired up, they are: (1) eyes-seeing, (2) ears-hearing, (3) nose-smelling, (4) tongue-tasting, 
(5) skin-feeling, and (6) mind-thought process. 

166 
 
apply myself to the [development of] benevolence. For this 
reason I no longer dwell in this world [and have effectively 
renounced myself].” 
 
This anecdote is interesting, because it renders a limited, but informative 
discussion on the value of a sheshen as executed by Zhizang. Xie Jiqing 
pertinently makes the observation that there is a blatant incongruity in 
purporting to renounce oneself, but subsequently holding on to material 
things meant to support that self. The irony of the symbolic sheshen 
ceremony, picked up on by Jiqing, must surely not have been lost on other 
critics either, and if he wanted to lend any credibility to the sincerity of his 
self-renunciation (and to the custom as a whole), Zhizang had to formulate 
a coherent retort. Zhizang clarifies to his critic that the ultimate goal of the 
sheshen is to signal one’s intent to break the chain of interdependent 
causation by purifying the six senses which cause the mind to cling to 
existence and to create the delusion of a self.486
                                                 
486 When the six senses come into contact with external objects (sparśa), the resulting 
perception (vedanā) will cause the senses to crave for more (tṛṣṇā). This in turn gives rise to 
attachment (upādāna) to the elements of life, which cause new actions to arise, which in turn 
result in a new existence (bhava). Existence leads to (re)birth (jāti), which leads to old age 
and death (jarāmaraṇ a), thus starting a new cycle. 
 As such, the sheshen is 
effectively a renunciation of the self, but as long as the body lives, it needs 
certain things to survive. Holding on to some items in order to nurture the 
body, does not mean that one clings to the self. It is simply out of necessity, 
for without the body there can be no mental practice to shut out the six 
senses. One will never be able to reach enlightenment by allowing the 
body to die, as this will prevent the necessary spiritual practice from being 
performed. This explanation feels somewhat “Hīnayānistic” as it stresses 
individual effort in spiritual training. Zhizang might just as well have 
retorted in a “Mahāyānistic” fashion by saying that the gift of one’s 
personal belongings earns that person merit, and therefore sets him 

167 
 
further on the road to enlightenment. And merit is what it was all about for 
Emperor Wu, so perhaps this too is a point on which Zhizang and Wu 
would not have seen eye to eye, if ever they should have discussed the 
issue. 
The examples above show that by the time of Liang Wudi first 
sheshen ceremony, this custom was already widespread in China and had 
assumed many different forms. It is therefore hard to say whether or not 
Emperor Wu drew inspiration for his sheshen ceremonies from the 
retranslated Aśokavadāna or simply build on an existing custom. 
Throughout all of his Buddhist (and Confucian) endeavours, Emperor Wu 
strove to have sound scriptural authority. Perhaps this is the reason for the 
retranslation of the Aśokavadāna: not because he had never heard of the 
practice and sought inspiration for a ceremony of his own, but because he 
wanted a strong historic precedent for his actions in the form of 
authoritative scripture. As the older version of the Aśokāvadāna was 
ambiguous as to the donation of state property and the payment of ransom, 
he opted for a retranslation which would clarify these items. 
 
III.2. The promotion of vegetarianism 
 
An important feature linked to the doctrine of rebirth and karmic 
retribution is the promotion of a vegetarian diet. Emperor Wu’s name 
inevitably pops up in studies on the development of vegetarianism in 
Chinese Buddhism, as his reign signified a period of intense propagation 
of vegetarianism among Buddhist laymen as well as monks. 487
                                                 
487 For more on vegetarianism in Chinese Buddhism, see Lavoix, 2002; Kieschnick, 2005; 
Heirman – De Rauw, 2006; Mather, 1981 (especially pp. 421- 423); Suwa, 1988. Also see 
Forte – May, 1979. Two studies that focus directly on Emperor Wu’s promotion of a 
vegetarian diet in the context of his political reforms are provided by Janousch (1998: 105-
172) and Yan Shangwen (1999: 228-261). 
 
Vegetarianism was not a trait unique to Buddhism. In the Confucian 

168 
 
tradition it was customary to abstain from meat during the period of 
mourning after the death of a relative.488 Nor was vegetarianism a defining 
feature of Buddhism, as the consumption of meat had initially not been a 
problem for monks, provided they had not seen or heard the slaughter, or 
did not suspect that the animal had been killed especially for them.489
                                                 
488 In premodern China, eating (certain types of) meat had for a large part always been a 
class privilege, limited to those who could afford the luxury. Hence the existence of the term 
“meat-eaters” (roushizhe 肉食者) applied to the ruling class. The adoption of a sober diet 
(excluding meat) was therefore not only interpreted as the ascetic practice of someone 
aspiring to become a sage, but also as a silent protest against the gluttony and decadence of 
those in power. See Sabban, 1993: 86; Kieschnick, 2005: 193. 
 
However, as more Mahāyāna scriptures were translated into Chinese, 
important Mahāyānistic concepts such as compassion (ci 慈) and the 
bodhisattva ideal infiltrated the thoughts of Chinese Buddhists. The 
emphasis on universal compassion for all living beings, be they humans or 
animals, added a new, moral layer to the question of whether or not it was 
permitted to eat meat, because the focus now shifted from the possible 
social or physical consequences for the individual who consumed the meat 
to the suffering of the living being on the receiving end of the butcher’s 
knife. This increased moralisation of monastic regulation meant that one 
need not have butchered the animal with his or her own hands in order to 
be deemed responsible for its death. Consuming its meat is exactly the 
same as killing it, so the next logical step for a compassionate Buddhist to 
take, is to adopt a vegetarian diet. The three most influential scriptures that 
explicitly call on all disciples of the Buddha to stop eating meat are the 
489 All vinayas permit the consumption of meat if these three conditions are met, but some 
enumerate certain kinds of meat that are to be avoided. These are, for example, meat of 
elephants, horses, dogs, human beings, etc. The reasons for this are mostly practical. Some 
animals, such as elephants or horses, belong to the king’s army, and are therefore too ‘high 
class’ to be consumed. Other animals, like dogs, are eaten by low class people, so eating 
them could offend the rich, upper class benefactors. Still other animals posses magical 
powers, or might attack the monk. For references to the relevant vinayas, see Heirman – De 
Rauw, 2006: 60. 

169 
 
(Mahāyāna) Mahāparinirvānasūtra, Laṅkāvatārasūtra, 490 and Fanwang 
jing 梵網經. The first two scriptures are important in the development of the 
Tathāgathagarbha thought, the assertion that all sentient beings are 
destined to become Buddhas one day. This idea that all living beings are 
endowed with the essence of Buddhahood softened the “ontological and 
moral distinctions between humans and other beings”, 491  and thus 
highlighted the universalistic aspect in the theory of rebirth and karmic 
retribution, namely that animals and humans are all connected through 
time and space in the endless cycle of rebirth, and that the animals we eat 
today could very well have been our relatives in a past life. The Fanwang 
jing was seen as a kind of Mahāyāna supplement to the vinaya, a 
guideline of moral precepts to help both lay people and monks and nuns 
on the right path to enlightenment. By the early sixth century, these so-
called bodhisattva precepts had became very popular among lay people, 
and from there infiltrated the life of monks and nuns until they were finally 
introduced into the ordination ceremony. 492
                                                 
490 There are three extant translations into Chinese. The earliest translation was made by 
Guṇabhadra (Qiunabatuoluo 求那跋陀羅, 394-468) around the middle of the fifth century 
under the title Lengjia abaduoluobao jing 楞伽阿跋多羅寶經 (T.670). About a century later, 
Bodhiruci (Putiliuzhi 菩提流支, fl. early sixth century) made a new translation, the Rulengjia 
jing 入楞伽經 (T.671). A final translation was made by Śikṣānanda (Shicha’nantuo 實叉難陀, 
652-710) during the reign of Empress Wu (r. 684-705). This is the Dacheng rulengjia jing 大乘
入楞伽經 (T.672). For a translation (based on the Sanskrit version of this scripture) and study 
of this text, see Suzuki, 1956 and 1930.  
 The Fanwang jing repeats 
many of the same arguments in favour of vegetarianism that were posed in 
the Mahāparinirvānasūtra and Laṅkāvatārasūtra, so we can assert that a 
lot of the scriptural basis and ‘vocabulary’ of the discourse on 
vegetarianism had been presented by the time that Emperor Wu ascended 
the throne. 
491 Campany, 1996: 390. 
492 See Heirman – De Rauw, 2006: 63. 

170 
 
It is clear that Emperor Wu did not invent the vegetarian movement 
he was so vehemently to defend and propagate. He more or less grew up 
with it, so in some respect he was merely a product of the times. Prince 
Xiao Ziliang had been a strong proponent of the vegetarian diet, something 
which no doubt had been a major inspiration to Emperor Wu in the 
expression of his faith.493 Shen Yue, a devout lay Buddhist who had been 
an important member of the clique around Prince Xiao Ziliang and who 
later served as one of Emperor Wu’s chief advisors on ritual matters during 
the formative years of the Liang dynasty, in the final years of his life had 
written a pamphlet to promote compassion for all living beings. This essay, 
titled Jiujing cibei lun 究竟慈悲論 (On Ultimate Compassion) 494  is 
essentially an appeal for vegetarianism in the extreme, as he even 
condemns the fabrication of silk, which inevitably requires the killing of the 
silk worm. It is unclear if this passionate plea by Shen Yue was a 
contributing factor to Emperor Wu’s decision to commence his vegetarian 
campaign, but it stands on its own as an example of some of the 
contemporary ideas about the subject amongst Buddhist laymen. A first 
motive behind Emperor Wu’s efforts to promote vegetarianism among his 
subjects might thus be described as sincere religious fervour. When 
abolishing the use of live animals in the Confucian ritual sacrifices at the 
ancestral temple and the altars dedicated to Heaven and Earth in 517, he 
might simply have acted on personal religious feelings, inspired by his 
illustrious forerunners. However, a document contained in Daoxuan’s 
Guang Hongming ji suggests that deeper motives underlay the vegetarian 
reforms. This document, titled Duan jiurou wen 斷酒肉文 (On the 
abstinence from alcohol and meat)495
                                                 
493 Lavoix, 2002: 116-117.  
, records the events that took place at 
494 His essay is preserved in Daoxuan’s Guang Hongmingji, T.2103.292c8-293a27. For a 
discussion and translation of this essay, see Mather, 1988: 161-166. Also see Mather, 1981: 
422-423; Lavoix, 2002: 115-116. 
495 Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.294b16-303c5. 

171 
 
a large assembly of monks, convened by Emperor Wu in the Hualin 華林
palace around the year 522 CE with the purpose of generalising the 
vegetarian diet for monks and nuns.496
 
 The opening address, given by 
Emperor Wu at this occasion, starts off with the telling phrase: 
夫匡正佛法是黑衣人事。迺非弟子白衣所急。但經教亦云。佛
法寄囑人王。是以弟子不得無言。497
Although correcting the [practice of the] Buddhist teaching is a 
monastic affair that I, as a lay disciple should not concern 
myself with, the scriptural teachings also say that “the 
Buddha’s Law is entrusted to the kings of men.” Therefore I 
can not but speak up. 
 
 
This is not the only time that Emperor Wu is on record using this 
justification for meddling in the internal affairs of the monastic community. 
Almost a decade before, this same argument had popped up in the 
discussion between Zhizang and Emperor Wu when the latter wished to 
inaugurate himself as ‘Lay Rectifier of Monks’ (baiyi sengzheng 白衣僧正). 
As we have seen, this idea that the preservation of the proper Buddhist 
teaching was entrusted to the secular authorities was closely linked to 
mofa beliefs, and for that reason it was another of Emperor Wu’s key 
concepts. 498
                                                 
496 The precise date of these events is uncertain. Suwa Gijun (1978) suggests that the 
assembly took place between 518 (after the sacrifice of animals in the ancestral temple had 
been abolished) and 523 (since one of the participants identified by name died in 524). 
Valérie Lavoix (2002: 120, note 76) proposes the year 522, based on the title used to 
introduce a man named Zhou She 周捨 (469-524, biography in Liang shu, 25: 375-377). 
 This very first sentence of Emperor Wu’s opening address 
leaves no doubt for the reader that the objective of this great assembly 
was not merely religious, but also political in nature. Since his previous 
attempt to become the de-facto bureaucratic head of the monastic 
497 Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.294b18-20. 
498 See previous chapter on mofa. 

172 
 
community had failed, he could not coerce the monks and nuns to adopt a 
vegetarian diet by the promulgation of a law to that effect, since it would 
not be considered binding by the saṃgha, which enjoyed a relatively 
autonomous status when it came to imperial bureaucratic control. Thus, 
the only option left to Emperor Wu was to pressure them into it by doctrinal 
argument, peer pressure, shame tactics, and a display of imperial might. 
Most of Emperor Wu’s doctrinal arguments can be traced back to 
the 
established 
authoritative 
scriptures 
on 
the 
subject, 
namely 
Mahāparinirvānasūtra, Laṅkāvatārasūtra, and Fanwang jing. The starting 
point of his plea is ‘compassion’ for all living beings, but above all, he 
emphasises the workings of karmic retribution as it is linked to the endless 
cycle of rebirth. In the Duan jiurou wen, he says that: 
 
一切親緣遍一切處。直以經生歷死神明隔障。是諸眷屬不復相
識。今日眾生或經是父母。或經是師長。或經是兄弟。或經是
姊妹。或經是兒孫。或經是朋友。而今日無有道眼。不能分
別。還相噉食不自覺知。噉食之時。此物有靈。即生忿恨還成
怨對。向者至親還成至怨。如是之事豈可不思。暫爭舌端一時
少味。永與宿親長為怨對。可為痛心難以言說。白衣居家未可
適道。出家學人被如來衣習菩薩行。宜應深思。499
All family relationships are represented in every station [in the 
cycle of rebirth]. Continuously passing through life and death, 
the ‘spirits’ (shenming) [of kinsmen] are separated from each 
other. Because of this, family members do not recognize each 
other [in another form]. Of all the sentient beings today, some 
were once our father and mother, some were once our 
teachers and respected elders, some were once our brothers 
and sisters, some were once our children and grandchildren, 
some were once our friends. But now we have no truth-
discerning eye and do not recognize them. Consequently, we 
 
                                                 
499 Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.297a24-b4. 

173 
 
eat each other without ever being personally aware of it. At 
the moment we eat them, these things have supernatural 
powers, and they will grow resentment towards us and 
become spiteful enemies. Those who were once our closest 
kin will become our ultimate doom. This being so, how can 
one not contemplate these matters?! For a momentary 
wriggle of the tongue and a short instant of taste, we bring 
about eternal wrath from our loved ones and elders. It is 
difficult to express in words how utterly deplorable this is. 
Laymen can not yet conform to this dao, but you, learned 
monks, wearing the Tathāgata’s garments and practicing the 
bodhisattva way should deeply contemplate this. 
 
The horrific image of devouring one’s own relatives is clearly used as a 
karmic deterrent against eating meat. Not only does this act bring about 
bad things for the one who does the eating, one also has to face the 
possibility of being devoured oneself in a future existence. The use of this 
imagery also brings a deep-rooted Confucian value into play, namely that 
of filial piety. If the threat of bad karmic consequence was not enough to 
convince people to stop eating meat, the fear of committing the ultimate 
unfilial act certainly would be. By linking every living being in this world 
together in the karmic process, a universal community is created where it 
is everyone’s responsibility and duty to look after every other living being. 
After all, if you did not, you might be harming a loved one, or next time it 
might be you. The reason for Emperor Wu to emphasise the need for a 
vegetarian diet on karmic grounds is thus to portray himself as a guardian 
of all living beings, looking out for his subjects in whatever form by 
inspiring laymen by example and coercing the monastic community to live 
up to the standards expected of them. In the quote we also see why 
Emperor found it necessary to counter Fan Zhen’s Treatise on the 
Destructibility of the Shen and establish the existence of a lasting entity 

174 
 
(which he designated shenming) that has the essence of Buddhahood, 
and travels from one life to the next until its final return to nirvāṇa. In the 
debates about the nature of the ‘soul’, the existence of an enduring entity, 
such as the shenming, was conceived to be a prerequisite for the validity 
of the doctrine of karmic retribution. How could there be karmic retribution 
if there was no agent to transfer the karmic burden to a new entity? If there 
were no enduring self, how could one claim that it is possible to devour 
one’s relatives? In other words, if there were no enduring self, the process 
of karmic retribution would lose all of its individualistic appeal. This in turn 
would debunk Emperor Wu’s efforts to portray himself as a universal 
saviour to his people. After all, if there was no enduring self, what was 
there to be saved from a miserable future existence? If Emperor Wu 
wanted to assert that all life is determined by the workings of karmic 
retribution (and not by random fate, as many xuanxue thinkers believed) 
and that he could save people from their plights, he simply needed 
consensus on the existence of an enduring entity. 
Emperor Wu’s emphasis on the karmic process can be found 
throughout his opening speech. Monks and nuns who eat meat and drink 
alcohol are accused of being worse than followers of other teachings, 
since 
 
今佛弟子酣酒嗜肉。不畏罪因不畏苦果。即是不信因不信果。
與無施無報者復何以異。500
nowadays, Buddhist disciples drink themselves into a stupor 
and eat meat. They do not fear [actions that produce] a bad 
cause and they do not fear its bitter consequence, which 
means they do not believe in cause and effect. How do they 
differ from those who do not give and do not receive a reward 
(i.e. those who do not live by the Buddhist doctrine of karmic 
retribution)? 
 
                                                 
500 Ibid., p.294b28-29. 

175 
 
 
The belief in the truth value of the doctrine of karmic retribution is singled 
out by Emperor Wu as a defining feature of what makes a good Buddhist. 
 
凡出家人所以異於外道者。正以信因信果信經。501
That by which a monk differs from the followers of other 
teachings, is exactly his belief in cause and consequence, 
and [the contents of] the sūtras. 
 
 
However, this line of reasoning was not followed by the monks and nuns 
themselves. Although none of them questioned the validity of the doctrine 
of karman, many of them remained unconvinced that they were not 
allowed to eat meat, as the vinayas did not mention such a prohibition. The 
vinayas merely restricted the consumption of certain kinds of meat that 
could have harmful social or personal consequences, and specify that the 
meat could not have been killed by them or especially for them. The core 
problem with scriptural arguments for or against vegetarianism, is that 
there are two types of scriptural authorities that contradict each other. On 
the one hand there are the vinayas, and on the other hand there are the 
Mahāyāna sūtras such as those mentioned before, that quote the Buddha 
as saying that eating meat is wrong. On a doctrinal level, these 
discrepancies were easily explained away by the standard explanation that 
the Buddha’s teachings were adapted to the intellectual capacities of his 
audience and in time revealed an increasingly complex teaching that was 
ever closer to the ‘truth’. On a practical level, however, the problem for the 
monastic community remained unresolved: in matters of monastic 
regulation, should one regard the vinayas as ultimate authority, or are the 
sūtras equally authorative as the word of the Buddha. And what rule 
should the monastic community follow when these two sources are 
conflicting? As John Kieschnick concludes, the monks who were asked if 
                                                 
501 Ibid., p.294b22. 

176 
 
quotes from the sūtras could be granted the status of monastic regulation 
did not dare to make such a bold conclusion, as this would mean that one 
of the sources would have to be discarded as spurious.502
  
 Emperor Wu, 
from his side, seemed convinced that the sūtras were the ultimate 
reference in case of doubt, if not because he looked at this matter from the 
perspective of a laymen, then surely because he knew he had to make this 
call if his intended aim of converting the monastic community to 
vegetarianism was to succeed. Immediately after singling out the doctrine 
of cause and effect as a defining point of belief for a Buddhist monk or nun, 
he says that 
所明信是佛說經言。503
that which they put their faith in, are the words of the sūtras 
as spoken by the Buddha. 
 
 
Despite Emperor Wu’s efforts to settle the vegetarian question in his mass 
conference, the debates based on the scriptures, in the end, remained 
inconclusive. 
In drawing on Buddhist imagery for the purpose of reinventing 
imperial ideology, Emperor Wu generally ensured that he had a solid 
scriptural foundation, as was also the case with his propagation of 
vegetarianism. However, this alone was obviously not going to be enough 
to persuade the great bulk of the monastic community, so Emperor Wu 
also drew on other methods to change their minds, or at least to coerce 
them into behaving in the way he would like them to. A powerful tool for 
doing this was to apply peer pressure. At one point during the 522 
assemblies, Emperor Wu asks three monks if they have ever eaten meat. 
Two of them claim never to have eaten meat, while the third respondent 
reluctantly confesses that, though he never ate meat when he was 
                                                 
502 Kieschnick, 2005: 200. 
503 Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.294b23. 

177 
 
younger, he now, in his old age, occasionally makes an exception to this 
rule when ill. 504 These three monks were most likely singled out for 
questioning on the basis of their exemplary behaviour, or perhaps they did 
not dare to acknowledge any ‘inappropriate’ behaviour when addressed on 
a personal level. It is interesting to note that the third respondent, a monk 
named Baodu 寶度 (d.u.), emphasises that no meat was ever served in the 
Dinglin 定林505 and Guangzhai 光宅monasteries during his stay there, not 
even in case of illness. These two monasteries were state-sponsored 
monasteries,506
                                                 
504 Ibid., p. 299b13-18. 
 which made it all the more important to stress that they 
505 There were actually two Dinglin monasteries, both located on Mount Zhong  鍾山 (just NE 
of the capital Jiankang  建康) The original monastery was built in 424 by Huijue 慧覺 (d.u.). 
When the monk Dharmamitra (Tanmomiduo 曇摩蜜多, 355-442) came to this temple in 433, 
he made such an impression that he was allowed to build a second monastery on the West 
flank of Mount Zhong. This was called the Upper Dinglin 定林上monastery and the original 
was renamed Lower Dinglin (下) monastery. 
506 The Guangzhai monastery was founded by Emperor Wu shortly after he ascended the 
throne in 502. It was his former residence which by his order had been converted into a 
monastery (Liang shu, 49: 698 and Nan shi, 72: 1780). The monk Fayun 法雲 (467-529), who 
was an important advisor to the emperor on Buddhist matters, was made abbot of this 
monastery by imperial edict (T.2060.464b5). The Dinglin (shang) monastery was the scene of 
great translation and compilation activity at the time of Emperor Wu. In 508, for example, 
Sengmin 僧旻 (467-527), who was revered together with Zhizang and Fayun as one of the 
three great Dharma masters of the Liang (T.1779.716b13-15, T.2060.548b12), was detached 
from the Zhuangyan 莊嚴 monastery to the Dinglinshang monastery to start work on a 
monumental compilation of essential passages from the sūtras, titled Zhongjing Yaochao 眾
經要抄 (Most Essential Copies of the Collected Scriptures, not extant) in eighty-eight scrolls 
(T.2060.426c8-9). More than thirty people were involved in this project alone (see Da Tang 
neidian lu, T.2149.266b20-24), and apparently the people involved in these kinds of projects 
were not only Buddhist monks. Lay scholars were assigned to them as well, such as Liu Xie, 
author of the Wenxin diaolong and the Buddhist apologetic treatise Miehuo lun (see Liang 
shu, 50: 712). 
The fact that the abbot of the Guangzhai monastery was appointed by imperial edict, and that 
monks and laymen could be assigned to the Dinglinshang monastery to work on imperially 
sponsored projects concerning the Buddhist scriptures, suggests that these monasteries 

178 
 
were entirely meat-free. After all, if the state-sponsored monasteries did 
not abide by Emperor Wu’s wishes, what were the chances of other 
monasteries falling in line? It is clear that, aside from doctrinal arguments, 
the non-conforming monks and nuns were also exposed to peer pressure 
in the form of the extolled exemplary behaviour of those monks and nuns 
who lived up to the increasingly popular vegetarian ideal.  
Another tactic used by Emperor Wu in his quest to convert the 
monastic community to a vegetarian diet was to appeal to their sense of 
shame. In his opening address, he compares meat-eating and wine-
drinking monks both to followers of other teachings and to lay Buddhists, 
and they come up short in every detail.507
                                                                                                                
were state-sponsored. On the various functions and designations of these state-sponsored 
monasteries (the so-called “Great Monasteries,” dasi 大寺), see Forte, 1983. 
 He says, for example, that even 
though the non-Buddhists eat meat and drink wine, at least they are not 
hypocrites. And even though the laymen eat meat and drink wine, at least 
they are not desecrating monasteries and temples by doing it on the 
premises, nor do they cause others to think badly of the Buddhist teaching 
on the basis of their lousy example. A layman who eats meat and drinks 
wine is not violating any monastic vows, unlike a monk who does so 
(although, as we have seen, this is strictly speaking not true when it comes 
to eating meat). It is quite rare to see Emperor Wu openly fulminating 
against undesirable elements of the monastic community like this, as he is 
basically repeating many arguments in the polemic of the opponents of 
Buddhism. On the other hand, from early on in his reign, he had felt the 
need to ‘rectify’ the conduct of the Buddhist monks and nuns, hence the 
creation of the office of sengzheng and his later attempt to become a lay 
sengzheng himself. It is difficult to ascertain if Emperor Wu’s critique made 
enough of an impact to compel the monastic community to conform to his 
wishes. After all, if the monks themselves did not believe they were doing 
507 Emperor Wu lists nine points of comparison with non-Buddhists and nine with regards to 
Buddhist lay people. Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.294b22-295c13. 

179 
 
anything wrong, what was the Emperor going on about? However, the 
reminder that their behaviour was thoroughly scrutinized by the non-
Buddhists, the Buddhist laymen in general and Emperor Wu in particular, 
might have been enough to persuade some of them to clean up their act. 
After all, the monastic community was to a degree still dependant on 
donations from wealthy lay people, and if these benefactors – of which 
Emperor Wu no doubt was the most important one in the capital area – 
had developed higher expectations of what a monk was supposed to 
behave like, then offending these patrons was probably not such a good 
idea, lest you wanted to risk losing out on donations. Perhaps this was the 
real pressure mechanism behind Emperor Wu’s ventilation of discontent. 
As a final instrument of persuasion, Emperor Wu turned to old-
fashioned threats. Having turned up the pressure on the attending monks 
and nuns by dazzling them with the impressive staging of the assembly 
and a large arsenal of assistants (both eminent members of the Buddhist 
clergy as well as influential lay Buddhist supporters) who defended his 
point of view, Emperor Wu leaves nothing to the imagination when he 
warns: 
 
今日僧眾還寺已後。各各檢勒使依佛教。若復飲酒噉肉不如法
者。弟子當依王法治問。諸僧尼若被如來衣不行如來行。是假
名僧。與賊盜不異。如是行者猶是弟子國中編戶一民。[…] 不
問年時老少。不問門徒多少。弟子當令寺官集僧眾[…]捨戒還
俗著在家服。508
From now on, after you have returned to your monasteries, 
each and every one of you shall restrain themselves in 
accordance with the Buddha’s teachings. Should you still 
drink wine and eat meat, and act contradictory to the Dharma, 
I shall have you punished according to state law. All those 
monks and nuns who wear the Tathāgata robes but do not act 
 
                                                 
508 Guang Hongming ji, T.2103.297c7-14. 

180 
 
according to the Tathāgata path are falsely assuming the title 
of monk and differ not from thieves or brigands. Those who 
act like that shall be looked upon as someone listed in the 
state population register.509
 
 […] Irrespective of a monk’s age 
or number of disciples, I will order the monastery officials to 
assemble the community of monks and […] excommunicate 
them and make them dress in lay garments. 
Here we see the end stage in an evolution towards an ever more 
outspoken challenge to the independent status of the saṃgha. In 508, still 
in the early years of his reign, Wu had ordered Fayun to compile a set of 
Rules for Monks (sengzhi 僧制), which, according to Daoxuan, became a 
norm for all who came after him.510
                                                 
509 When someone was ordained as a monk or nun, that person was effectively struck from 
the population registers, thus exempting him or her from taxes and corvée labour. When 
Emperor Wu says that he will look upon the misbehaving clergy as people on the population 
registers, he means that he will deal with them as normal subjects. 
 It is unclear what these “rules” implied 
and to what degree they were ever implemented, as further evidence is 
lacking. Still, they must have missed their intended goal, since several 
years later Emperor Wu set his sights on becoming a Lay Rectifier of 
Monks himself. This meant that he aspired to work his way into the existing 
monastic hierarchy and assume the role of leader of the monastic 
community, complementary to his role as head of state. When announcing 
a proposal to this effect, soliciting the approval of the monastic leaders, he 
chose his words carefully to avoid bringing on the clerical elite’s 
disgruntlement. By stressing that he would adhere to the vinaya rules, he, 
to all intents and purposes, humbled his imperial authority in the hope of 
gaining much more in return, namely some form of effective control over 
the monastic community and a new, potentially more powerful ritual and 
political role as spiritual leader of his empire. When his efforts were 
510 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.608a14-16. 

181 
 
thwarted by Zhizang’s rebuttal, Emperor Wu set out on a different course, 
and shifted his focus back to developing the bodhisattva ideal. In 519 he 
had reinvented the bodhisattva ordination ceremony and in a large 
orchestrated ceremony became the first to take these renewed bodhisattva 
vows. As Andreas Janousch argues, he sought to become spiritual leader 
of both the lay people and the monastic community at once.511
Having discussed Emperor Wu’s methods of converting the 
monastic community to a vegetarian diet, we still have to answer the 
question of why it was apparently so important to Emperor Wu that the 
 When his 
attempts at controlling the saṃgha through institutional supervision had 
failed, Emperor Wu renewed his attempts to assert some desperately 
needed control over the Buddhist saṃgha on the basis of his spiritual 
predominance as bodhisattva emperor. In seeking to force upon them the 
vegetarian diet as the expression of a quintessential feature of the 
bodhisattva ideal, he once again delivered a scriptural basis for his claims, 
though he had to convince his audience that the sūtras had ultimate 
authority on the subject of monastic discipline. Hardened by his previous 
failure to become Lay Rectifier of Monks, Emperor Wu emphasised his 
resolve by threatening to do exactly the opposite of what he had intended 
to do before, and that was to punish those who did not follow the new rule 
against eating meat according to state law. One can wonder if Emperor 
Wu actually had sufficient power or influence to implement these threats, 
as there is to my knowledge no record of any monk or nun being stripped 
of his or her monastic robe for breaking any of the vinaya or bodhisattva 
regulations. Nonetheless, a few years after his bodhisattva ordination, 
Emperor Wu must have felt secure enough in his position as spiritual 
leader of the Buddhist community that he no longer saw the need to solicit 
support from the entire monastic community, but could now reversely put 
pressure on them with the backing of the many lay people who had been 
won over by the appeal of the emperor’s reinvented religious community. 
                                                 
511 See Janousch, 1998: 173-227; 1999. 

182 
 
monks and nuns stopped eating meat. As is often the case, one must be 
careful not to draw any oversimplified conclusions, as there are always 
various factors to consider. As said before, Emperor Wu was a product of 
his time, which means that he was certainly influenced by the general 
historical trend toward vegetarianism, especially the example of his former 
patron Xiao Ziliang and his entourage. A sincere personal wish to sensitize 
the monastic and lay communities to these moral issues he felt so strongly 
about might certainly have been an underlying motive for the 522 
assembly. However, the fact that Emperor Wu did not adopt a vegetarian 
diet until several years after his enthronement and public conversion to 
Buddhism,512
                                                 
512 The first record of Emperor Wu’s rejection of worldly pleasures, including a renunciation of 
meat and fish, dates from 513 (Liang shu, 3: 97; Nan shi, 7: 223) or 511 CE (T.2122.389a21-
24), depending on the source. 
 coupled with his sudden fanatic zeal in convincing others to 
do the same, hints at an ulterior motive. In his speeches, Wu invariably 
associates the consumption of meat with its disastrous karmic results, and 
urges his audience to act in agreement with the bodhisattva way (pusa 
xing 菩薩行). As we have see when we addressed some of Emperor Wu’s 
other measures, the promotion of vegetarianism was merely a component 
of a larger scheme that had as its focal point the doctrine of karmic 
retribution and transference of merit. After all, if Emperor Wu wanted to 
portray himself as a bodhisattva-king who directly impacted the lives of his 
subjects by accumulating merit and then distributing it to them in order to 
counterbalance any bad karman on their part, he could hardly go around 
eating meat. As Wu himself logically concludes, if our lives are conditioned 
by karmic retribution, we can, on account of the deeds in our former lives, 
be reborn as animals, and are thus potentially someone else’s lunch. 
Therefore, if you want to be a saviour to your people, you cannot devour 
them when they happen to have been reborn in animal form. On the same 
level, if Emperor Wu wanted to appear credible, it was imperative that the 
monks and nuns – who, as a pillar of the triratna, were supposed to be of 

183 
 
the highest moral conduct and wisdom – lived up to lay people’s 
expectations. No matter how meticulously Emperor Wu crafted an image 
of himself as a bodhisattva saviour, if the Buddhist monastic community 
did not reflect the aura of sanctity he relied on for spiritual and ritual 
authority, then it would all be an empty measure. The increasing popularity 
of vegetarianism among Buddhist lay people made it necessary for 
Emperor Wu to bring the monastic community up to this new moral level, if 
he was going to make it serve as an example of the transforming powers 
of his imperial virtue. 
As a final reflection on the issue of vegetarianism and the monastic 
community, we can quote from a petition that was presented to Emperor 
Wu by Guo Zushen 郭祖深 (fl. early 6th century): 
都 下 佛 寺 五 百 餘 所。窮 極 宏 麗。僧 尼 十 餘 萬。資 產 豐 
沃。所 在 郡 縣。不 可 勝 言。道 人 又 有 白 徒。尼 則 皆 畜 
養 女。皆 不 貫 人 籍。天 下 戶 口 幾 亡 其 半。而 僧 尼 多 非 
法。養 女 皆 服 羅 紈。其 蠹 俗 傷 法。[..]皆 使 還 俗 附 農。
罷 白 徒 養 女。聽 畜 奴 婢。婢 唯 著 青 布 衣。僧 尼 皆 令 蔬 
食。如 此。則 法 興 俗 盛。國 富 人 殷。不 然。恐 方 來 處 
處 成 寺。 家 家 剃 落。 尺 土 一 人。非 復 國 有。513
The number of Buddhist monasteries in the capital is over five 
hundred, and all of them are extremely lavishly decorated. 
The number of monks and nuns [that inhabit these 
monasteries] is more than one hundred thousand, and their 
income 
and 
properties 
are 
extensive. 
As 
for 
the 
commanderies and counties, I cannot even begin to put [the 
calculation of their numbers] into words. Furthermore, the 
monks have lay attendants and the nuns keep female 
servants, all of which are not registered. As a result, the 
 
                                                 
513 Nan shi, 70: 1721-1722. 

184 
 
census is reduced by half (and so is the tax revenue). A lot of 
monks and nuns violate the Dharma, and by dressing the 
female servants in white garments, these corrupt lay people 
bring harm to the Dharma [as well]. […] Let them all return to 
lay status and turn to farming. Put a stop to these lay 
attendants and female acolytes, and permit the possession of 
slaves. Make these slaves wear only garments made from 
black cloth, and force the monks and nuns to stick to a 
vegetable diet. Like this, the Dharma will flourish, the lay 
people will prosper, the country shall be rich and its people 
shall thrive. If these measures are not taken, I fear that 
monasteries shall [continue to] be founded everywhere and 
that one family after another shall take the tonsure until the 
empire will not even have a foot of land or a single subject 
[left].514
These objections raised against the conduct of Buddhist monks and nuns 
are not new, as they form a continuous part of the anti-Buddhist 
polemic.
 
515
                                                 
514 Translation based on Gernet, 1995: 115. 
 However, the suggestion of forcing monks and nuns to follow a 
vegetarian diet exclusively in order to put a halt to the growing number of 
monasteries and clergy members is quite innovative. Although the 
question of the rise of vegetarianism as a norm in Chinese Buddhism is far 
too complex to allow us to highlight a single determining cause, it is none 
the less intriguing to see that some people at least saw it as a means to 
deter undesirable elements from entering into the religious life. Emperor 
Wu’s tirade against the hypocritical and sacrilegious behaviour of Buddhist 
monks and nuns on the point of eating meat (and, let us not forget, 
drinking wine) certainly reflects some of these concerns about the large 
515 For an overview of the most common arguments of anti-Buddhists and the counter-
arguments of Buddhist apologists, see Zürcher, 1972: 254-285.  

185 
 
number of people who entered the monastic life for the sole reason of 
living an easy life, rather than living a life of austerity in pursuit of spiritual 
advancement. If he could enforce a vegetarian diet in the monastic 
community and show that the decision to take the tonsure was not without 
obligation, then maybe he could discourage unmotivated elements from 
taking the tonsure. In this way, mandatory vegetarianism might enable 
Emperor Wu to circumvent the dilemma he had created for himself: in 
order to appear as the greatest (Chinese) sponsor of Buddhism in history, 
he made donations to the monasteries on a massive scale. On the 
downside, the monasteries’ ensuing wealth allowed them to support many 
more monks and nuns, not all of whom were as motivated as they should 
be. Without having to give up on these large displays of imperial 
sponsorship, vegetarianism could act as a counterbalance to offset the 
growing decadence of the monasteries by keeping unmotivated elements 
out of the religious ranks and forcing a more becoming aura of sanctity on 
the remaining monks and nuns. In the end, it is unclear if Emperor Wu was 
ever able to enforce a vegetarian diet on the Buddhist clergy, although, 
perhaps his efforts to do so were as important as actually succeeding. 
After all, in the final period of the Dharma’s decline, when the monks and 
nuns are mostly corrupted, it was entrusted to a bodhisattva-king to rectify 
the saṃgha’s behaviour. Since the True Dharma would eventually 
disappear, it is not said that a king might actually succeed in doing so 
completely.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

186 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
WHERE SECULAR AND SACRED MEET: COOPERATION AND 
OPPOSITION WITHIN THE SAṂGHA 
 
 
In the previous chapters we have seen how in changing the ceremonial 
function of the emperor figure, Liang Wudi was careful to provide a sound 
scriptural foundation for his reforms. The reforms in traditional Confucian 
ceremony could be accomplished without much difficulty. After all, the 
bearers of that tradition were the learned literati, to which he belonged 
himself, and as emperor he had the prerogative to make changes in 
imperial ceremony. For the Buddhist reforms, things were not so 
straightforward. Here, Emperor Wu had to overcome the rift that existed 
between those that had left the family-life in the pursuit of unworldly goals 
and those that still dwelled in this world. As only the saṃgha was the 

187 
 
bearer of the Buddha’s teaching, it was they who had the spiritual authority 
to judge which interpretation was correct and which was not. Therefore it 
was important for Emperor Wu to ensure himself of the sanction of the 
Buddhist monastic community if his Buddhist reforms were to be 
believable. 
 
IV.1. Liang Wudi’s attempts to control the saṃgha 
 
Emperor Wu’s desire to assert his control over the saṃgha was 
spread over two levels, namely that of individual monks, and that of the 
saṃgha as a whole. For his theoretical, ideological needs, Wu appealed to 
influential, well-respected scholar-monks (so-called dharma-masters, fashi 
法師) on an individual level, rather than seek the scholarly sanction of the 
saṃgha as a whole. The latter would not only be unpractical, but getting 
the opinions of all monks in the capital aligned would in all likelihood prove 
to be impossible, as there were not only doctrinal disagreements among 
the monks and nuns, but political ones as well. As we shall see, not 
everyone was happy with the emperor’s meddling in monastic affairs and 
some brave individuals confronted Wudi head on in heated debates.  
 
IV.1.1. Personal advisors 
 
Several of Wudi’s advisor monks have been the object of previous 
studies, so I shall only mention them in passing here, and add a few 
comments as it is relevant for this thesis. The first monk to deserve 
mentioning is Baozhi 寶誌 (418?-514). 516
                                                 
516 Baozhi’s biography, contained in the Gaoseng zhuan (T.2059.394a15-395a3) says that he 
died in the winter of the thirteenth year of Tianjian, which is late 514 or even januari 515. 
Nobody knew his age, but it was believed that he had stopped aging around his fifties. A man 
who claimed to be Baozhi’s maternal uncle said that he was four years younger than him, 
 Baozhi was a stereotypical 

188 
 
“miracle worker” whose erratic behaviour made people believe that his 
wisdom exceeded the conventional. Baozhi did not shave his head like a 
monk should, and reportedly washed his hear with urine. He could go 
without food for weeks on end and was able to project his body at three 
places at once. Baozhi constantly spoke in conundrums that often proved 
to be prophetic. In fact, when Emperor Wu’s third son, Xiao Gang, was 
born in 503, Baozhi said to the emperor: 
 
皇子誕育幸甚。然冤家亦生。517
The birth of your progeny is auspicious indeed, but [today] 
your nemesis has also been born. 
 
 
As it later turned out, Hou Jing, the rebel that ended Emperor Wu’s reign, 
had been born on the same day as Xiao Gang. From other reported 
occurrences, it seems that Baozhi was respected by Wu for his 
supernatural abilities, more than for his exegetical knowledge. However, in 
a time when people believed in the reality of supernatural abilities, having 
such a powerful and revered monk by his side would certainly have added 
prestige to Emperor Wu’s Buddhist programme. When Baozhi died, he 
was buried with full honours, and Emperor Wu had portraits of him 
distributed all over the realm for veneration.518
Another ally of Emperor Wu was the respected vinaya master 
Sengyou, author of the Chu sanzang jiji and Hongming ji.
 
519
                                                                                                                
which meant that Baozhi would have been ninety-six years old at his time of death. For a 
translation of the biography with a short introduction, see Berkowitz, 1995. 
 As his 
biography says, Sengyou had cordial ties with the emperor, up to the point 
that his dealings with the court raised suspicions with the other monks. On 
517  Shenseng zhuan 神僧傳 (Biographies of Supernatural Monks, author unknown), 
T.2064.970b17-18. 
518 T.2059.394c28. 
519 For a translation and discussion of Sengyou’s biography (Gaoseng zhuan, T.2059.402c3-
403a2), see Link, 1960. 

189 
 
the emperor’s order both parties came together to settle this matter.520 
Unfortunately nothing more is said about this incident, but it does 
demonstrate Sengyou’s intimate connection with Wudi. Sengyou’s 
biography is interesting for other clues it provides as well. Reading the 
biography, we learn that Sengyou was a regular lecturer at the court of 
Xiao Ziliang, of which we know that Emperor Wu was a guest as well.521 It 
is probable that the two met there before there was even thought of Xiao 
Yan overturning the Qi dynasty. Sometime between 483 and 493, 
Sengyou received an order (probably from prince Xiao Ziliang) to go to the 
area of Wu 吳 (present day Suzhou) to lecture on the vinaya, and also to 
“set up pañcavārṣika  (wuzhe daji), sheshen ceremonies, and vegetarian 
feasts”.522 It is interesting to see that three major components of Emperor 
Wu’s Buddhist ritual programme were already being disseminated by 
Sengyou on orders from the Qi court, where they most likely came from 
Xiao Ziliang, given the latter’s well-known religious zeal in conversion. If 
the chronology in the biography is correct, and there is no indication to the 
contrary, then this proves that Emperor Wu was not the inventor of all 
these Buddhist ceremonies, but that he built on the ideas that were already 
present at the court of Xiao Ziliang. Sengyou was also an important ally to 
Emperor Wu for the reason we already mentioned at the beginning, and 
that is the compilation of the Hongming ji and Chu sanzang jiji. Both works 
are the product of an intense surge in the collecting and cataloguing of 
scriptures, which took off in earnest under the rule of Liang Wudi.523
                                                 
520 T.2059.402c21. 
 It is 
most likely Emperor Wu's continued concern for scriptural authority that 
triggered these huge collection and cataloguing efforts. The Hongming ji 
521 Ibid., p.402c13. 
522 Ibid., p.402c16. 
523 Drège (1991: 24-37) provides numbers for the quantity of fascicles stored in the Palace 
library during any given dynasty. It is striking to see that in the first half of the sixth century, 
the number of fascicles in the imperial collection almost doubled in comparison to the 
preceding Southern Dynasties. 

190 
 
was a collection of apologetic writings ranging in date from around the 
fourth century to the early years of Emperor Wu’s reign.524 This last aspect 
is significant, because it suggests that the Hongming ji was not meant 
merely as an historical overview of the polemical discussions on Buddhism 
throughout its early history in China, but was also intended to be used as a 
propaganda tool at the time of completion. The most notable example of 
this is the extensive and detailed report on the debates about the 
existence of the shen. Two out of the Hongming ji ’s total number of 
fourteen fascicles are dedicated to these debates. 525 The documents 
preserved are not only philosophical treatises and discussions. Once the 
arguments had been laid out, sixty-two high officials were asked to take 
sides, and the letters they wrote in reply are added in closing. These 
letters add little to the debate about the existence of an enduring self, but 
in general merely praise the Emperor’s theory in the loftiest words, and 
occasionally rehash his arguments for emphasis. Interestingly enough, 
although the circular itself was written by the monk Fayun法雲 (467-
529),526
Sengyou’s Chu sanzang jiji is a catalogue of Buddhist scriptures 
(jinglu 經錄), expanded with a selection of prefaces to translations of 
sūtras (jingxu 經序) and biographies of monks (sengzhuan 僧傳). The 
importance of a catalogue to Emperor Wu’s efforts in searching for useful 
 no monks are among the sixty-two respondents. This suggests 
that this circular was highly politically charged, and served as no less than 
a role call for Emperor Wu’s political allies. Among the sixty-two 
respondents, we also find the five Erudites of the Five Classics (Wujing 
boshi 五經博士), who were teachers at the School of Five Halls (Wuguan 
五官), which was dedicated to the study of the Five Classics exclusively. It 
is clear that no one in Emperor Wu’s bureaucracy could escape the 
increased Buddhification of his administration. 
                                                 
524 For an overview of the contents of the Hongming ji, see Schmidt-Glintzer, 1976. 
525 These are fascicles nine and ten, T.2102.54a1-68c15. 
526 Ibid., p.60b21-28. 

191 
 
scriptures is quite clear. Something which set Sengyou’s catalogue apart 
from its predecessors, was the incorporation of new sections in which to 
list “suspect (yi 疑)” scriptures and “forgeries (wei 偽)”.527
IV.1.2. Monks of the [Imperial] Family (jiaseng 家僧) 
 This is another 
logical result from a preoccupation with legitimacy and authoritative 
scripture. In order to be authoritative, it was important for a scripture to be 
proven authentic beyond doubt. As we have seen, Emperor Wu rejected 
the Renwang jing (Scripture of Humane Kings) as a spurious text on the 
grounds of its dubious origin and content. Heaving a catalogue that told its 
reader what was genuine (thus authoritative) and what was not, was an 
important step towards creating a canon of officially approved scriptures. 
 
Advisers like Baozhi and Sengyou obviously endorsed Emperor 
Wu’s Buddhist agenda, but it seems they still maintained their independent 
status throughout their voluntary association with him. Early on in the reign 
of Wudi, however, we see the emergence of an institution called jiaseng 家
僧 “Household-monks”. This term appears for the first time during the 
Liang dynasty, and did not last much beyond it either. Of the thirteen 
biographies in Buddhist sources to identify their subjects as jiaseng, eight 
held the title during the Liang, three (possibly four) during the Sui, and one 
during the early Tang.528
                                                 
527 Strickman, 1990: 102. 
 The biographies of some of these jiaseng provide 
528 The eight jiaseng of the Liang were: (1) Fachong 法寵 (451-524), Xu Gaoseng zhuan 
T.2060.461b23; (2) Sengqian 僧遷 (465-523), ibid. 461c15; (3) Sengmin 僧旻 (467-527), ibid. 
462c12; (4) Fayun 法雲 (467-529), ibid. 464b4; (5) Huichao 慧超 (?-526), ibid. 468b2; (6) 
Mingche 明徹 ( ? -522), ibid. 473b25; (7) Sengqian 僧遷 (495-573), ibid. 476a4; (8) 
Sengjiapoluo 僧伽婆羅 (* Saṃghavara?/ Saṃghabhara?, 460-524), ibid. 426a19, Kaiyuan 
shijiao lu T.2154.537c23. Notice that numbers two and seven are two different monks with 
the same name. The second Sengqian was jiaseng to Liang Wudi, but later became Rectifier 
of Monks for the Later Liang 後梁 (555-587). The jiaseng of the Sui were: (1) Tanxie 曇瑎 (ca. 
536-618), T.2060.670a27; (2) Zhiwen 智文 (509-599), ibid. 609c27; (3) Huijing 慧淨(d.u.), Da 
Tang neidian lu T.2149.281c20; (4) possibly also Huisheng 慧乘 (d.u., Sui-early Tang), 

192 
 
some very interesting information about the nature of this title. Fachong’s 
biography starts off stereotypically with saying that he wanted to become a 
monk at a very early age. However his parents did not give their 
permission, as they wanted him to marry. Fachong agreed to marry on the 
condition that he would afterwards be free to join the saṃgha (which 
means after he had secured a male heir to continue the family line). Like 
Sengyou, he was a popular lecturer at the Western Villa (Xidi 西邸) of Xiao 
Ziliang, which might be where he met the later Emperor Wu. In 508, 
Fachong was invited by the latter to become a Monk of the [Imperial] 
Family, and this is where the story gets interesting. Once Fachong had 
been made jiaseng 
 
敕施車牛人力衣服飲食。四時不絕。寺本陜小。帝為宣武王修
福。下敕王人繕改張飾以待寵焉。因立名為宣武寺也。529
[Emperor Wu] ordered carts, oxen, labour service, clothes 
and food to be provided to him all year round. And as his 
monastery was initially rather small and the emperor wished 
to confer blessings on [his deceased older brother], the prince 
of Xuanwu,
 
530
 
 he ordered the [former] prince’s attendants to 
expand and embellish [his old monastery] and treat him like 
an honoured guest there. Thereupon the name of the 
monastery was changed to Xuanwu si. 
This passage leaves little to the imagination as to what lavish rewards 
were bestowed upon those who became Emperor Wu’s personal monk. A 
first glance, it might seem that a jiaseng was invited by the emperor only to 
                                                                                                                
T.2060.633b25 (chronology unclear). Wuji 無跡 (846-925) is mentioned as jiaseng for the 
Tang (Song Gaoseng zhuan, T.2061.898a12). 
529 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.461b24-26. 
530 Prince of Xuanwu is the posthumous title conferred by Emperor Wu on his older brother, 
Xiao Yi 蕭懿, whose murder in 500 had been the reason for launching his campaign against 
the Qi. 

193 
 
become a sort of personal “field of blessing (futian 福田)” that allowed him 
or his relatives to accrue personal merit by making donations. Yet it 
appears that this sumptuous funding came with strings attached. Fayun 
was appointed as jiaseng by imperial decree in 508, for which he was 
given a very generous stipend (ziji youhou資給優厚).531 Here there is no 
more mention of any religious motives for making Fayun a Household 
Monk. On the contrary, the wording used suggests that it was more like he 
was recruited for an important job. If so, Fayun was put to work to earn his 
rewards, because he appears all over the Buddhist sources in some form 
or function. Already in 508, just before or after his appointment, Fayun was 
ordered to make a commentary on the Dapin jing 大品經, but when some 
eminent courtiers asked him to lecture on this commentary, he feigned an 
illness and did not go. Emperor Wu ordered him to do it anyway. Also in 
that same year, Fayun was appointed as abbot of the Guangzhai 光宅 
monastery, and was given as first duty the task to compile a set of Rules 
for Monks (sengzhi 僧制), which was to become “a norm for all who came 
after him”.532 These rules are not extant, so we cannot really be sure what 
was in them, but these were probably rules of conduct for monks and nuns 
taken from the vinaya, meant to be inforced. Here we see Fayun for the 
first time as the propagator of Liang Wudi’s interests, and it would not be 
the last time. Around the same time, Fayun had sent a circular to the high 
officials to ask them for their approval of Emperor Wu’s views on the 
existence of the shen, and his name pops up in relation to the bodhisattva 
ordination ceremony of 519 and the debates about the vegetarianisation of 
the saṃgha in 522.533
                                                 
531 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.464b4. 
 In 525, Fayun was appointed as da sengzheng 
(Head Rectifier of Monks), making him responsible for the conduct of all 
monks and nuns in the empire. In short, Fayun was active in just about 
532 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.464b5. 
533 Fayun was a bit reluctant to take the bodhisattva ordination himself, as Janousch (1999: 
133-135) has shown, but in the end he was ordered by the emperor to do it. 

194 
 
every aspect of Emperor Wu’s Buddhist reforms, and can therefore be 
seen as one of his most important allies. One might wonder just how much 
his “generous stipend” had anything to do with this. Upon his death, Fayun 
was buried with full imperial honours at the Dinglin 定林 monastery (at the 
foot of Mount Zhong), where two other jiaseng were buried as well.534
Huichao had also, like Fayun, combined the functions of (da) 
sengzheng and jiaseng. Other than the fact that this biography also 
mentions a sizeable remuneration for his job as sengzheng (and probably 
jiaseng as well), not much more details are provided.
 
535 The same can be 
said for Sengmin, whom, it was said, was provided with the four 
necessities (i.e. clothing, shelter, medication and food),536 and for Mingche, 
who received personal financial support all year long without fail. 537 
However unfortunate this lack of information is, it puts all the more focus 
on the great financial compensation given to these monks, which was 
apparently deemed such an important feature, that is was repeated in the 
biography of every jiaseng to have held the title during the Liang. This 
close (financial) relationship with the emperor went at the cost of much of 
the monks’ independence, and was therefore frowned upon by those 
within 
the 
monastic 
community 
who 
wanted 
to 
preserve 
their 
independence and focus on spiritual, rather than worldly goals.538
                                                 
534 Fachong and Mingche were also buried at the Dinglin monastery. 
 Perhaps 
this is why our next jiaseng, Sengjiapoluo, chose to publicly redistribute the 
money that was given to him. 
535 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.468a21. 
536 Ibid. 462c13. 
537 Ibid. 473b25. 
538 In his preface to the Gaoseng zhuan, Huijiao criticises the worldly and sycophantic clergy 
that surrounded Emperor Wu. He says that in judging the worthiness of a particular monk, 
one should not be blinded by worldly success: “If men of real achievement conceal their 
brilliance, then they are eminent (高gao) but not famous (名 ming); when men of slight virtue 
happen to be in accord with their times, then they are famous but not eminent.” Translation by 
Wright, 1954: 392-395. 

195 
 
 
婆羅不畜私財。以為嚫施成立住寺。539
[Sengjia]poluo did not accumulate personal wealth, but gave it 
away [to finance] the construction of a monastery to live in. 
 
 
By giving away all the wealth he was given as jiaseng, Sengjiapoluo 
showed either true virtue or a sensitivity to the problem of accumulating 
wealth as a monk. His solution, however, is rather creative, as it can be 
understood that he donated this wealth for the construction of a monastery 
of his own. In this way the money he gave away in a public display of piety 
would in the end flow back to his monastery. That the money served to 
finance his personal projects instead of disappearing in his own pocket is 
just a minor difference. 
The biography of our last jiaseng paints a colourful picture of how 
monks in the capital sometimes clashed in competition over imperial 
favour. Sengqian’s (465-523) biography is almost taken up completely by 
the following anecdote: 
 
天監十六年夏。帝嘗夜見沙門慧詡。他日因計法會。遷問詡
曰。御前夜何所道。詡曰。卿何忽問此。而言氣甚厲。遷抗聲
曰。我與卿同出西州俱為沙門。卿一時邀逢天接。便欲陵駕儕
黨。我惟事佛。視卿輩蔑如也。眾人滿坐詡有慚忒。540
In the summer of the sixteenth year of Tianjian (517), 
Emperor Wu spent a whole night talking with the śramaṇ a 
Huixu, and they planned to set up a Dharma-assembly on 
another day. [Seng]qian asked [Hui]xu: “What did you and the 
emperor talk about last night?” “Why do you ask me this, so 
out of the blue?” [Hui]xu barked back in an aggressive tone. 
[Seng]qian, now raising his voice as well, said: “You and I 
 
                                                 
539 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.426a20. 
540 Ibid., p.461c16-22. 

196 
 
both hail from Xizhou, and we are both śramaṇ as. You have 
only met with the emperor once, and already you want to 
shove aside someone from your own kind to better yourself. I 
serve only the Buddha. When I look at people of your sort, I 
have nothing but disdain.” As the seats were completely filled 
with people, [Hui]xu felt extremely humiliated. 
 
It is perhaps a little ironic that Sengqian accuses Huixu of putting his own 
interests before those of a fellow monk, and by extension the monastic 
community, when he himself is a personal advisor to the emperor. 
Especially the remark that he serves only the Buddha seems ill-considered, 
to say the least.  One cannot help but feel that Sengqian felt jealous and 
threatened by the fact that another monk had managed to keep the 
emperor interested for a whole night while talking about a something he 
was not meant to know. Or at least that is how he interpreted Huixu’s 
reluctance to reveal the topic of his conversation with Emperor Wu. This 
anecdote is a nice example of how Emperor Wu’s large-scale sponsoring 
of Buddhism was not all positive for this religion. His attempts to gain 
control over the saṃgha by forging alliances with individual monks brought 
out feelings of rivalry and suspicion within the monastic community. Many 
of the metropolitan clergy were formerly members of low-ranking, 
impoverished literati families who saw the tonsure as a means to gain 
access to the higher social strata that were blocked off to them by the 
powerful families. As metropolitan monks they could either live a leisurely 
life of luxury or they could rekindle their frustrated ambitions by trying to 
incur the favour of the emperor. Jiaseng like the monks discussed above 
would not necessarily have shared in political power, but their immense 
prestige would have certainly gained them lots of influence in the society of 
the time, not to mention financial gain. If it was cooperation Emperor Wu 
needed from the monks to give his Buddhist reforms legitimacy, then there 
was no shortage of men who were more than happy to oblige. Still, as 

197 
 
always, there were those who refused to be controlled, which only widened 
the cracks in the monastic community. Not only was there rivalry between 
the ambitious ones, but also between the opponents and proponents of 
Emperor Wu’s political agenda. In the following section I shall discuss 
Emperor Wu’s attempts to control the saṃgha further by presenting two 
case studies in which all these elements are represented. 
 
 
IV.2. Cooperation and opposition: two case studies 
 
IV.2.1. Baochang 寶唱 541
 
 
The biography of Baochang寶唱 (ca. 466- ?)542 is interesting to this 
thesis for two reasons: (1) The biography of Baochang gives us quite a bit 
of information about the interests and Buddhist activities of Emperor Wu 
and his son Xiao Gang, the future emperor Jianwen, in the form of 
subordinate biographical information (called fu 附). 543
                                                 
541 Biography contained in the Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.426b13-427c20. For a study on 
Baochang and his relation to the Mingseng zhuan 名僧傳 (Biographies of Famous Monks) 
and Biqiuni zhuan 比丘尼傳 (Biographies of Nuns, T.2063)), see De Rauw, 2005. 
  (2) As an 
542 In his biography there is mention of the death of his father “close to his thirtieth birthday” 
(T.2060.50.426b24). In order to observe the proper rites of mourning, he then temporarily 
“puts his constant practice on the side, leaves the capital and restricts himself exclusively to 
listening.” All this happened in the second year of Jianwu 建武 (495), so (keeping in mind the 
traditional Chinese way of counting age, where one is considered to be one year old at the 
time of birth) we can place his date of birth around 466. 
543The use of subordinate biographies, appended to a main biography, has its origins in 
secular historiography. In secular biographies, these subordinate biographies mostly 
described the lives of sons, grandsons or other relatives of the principal subject. In Buddhist 
biographies, these subordinate biographies are mostly linked to the principal subject by a 
master-disciple relationship, by a common activity or interest, or by the adherence to the 
same temple. In this case, we might say that the relationship between Baochang (principal 

198 
 
accomplished scholar and writer, Baochang was an important ally to 
Emperor Wu in building a foundation of scriptural authority for his Buddhist 
reforms.  
Not much attention has previously been given to the monk 
Baochang in the literature, other than a few stray lines about his 
authorship of the Mingseng zhuan 名僧傳 (Biographies of Famous 
Monks)544 and the Biqiuni zhuan  比丘尼傳 (Biographies of Nuns, T 2063). 
He is credited with being the first one to systematically create an organised 
body of biographies of Buddhist monks, but beyond that, not much is said 
about him. However, Baochang’s biography reveals that there is a lot more 
to Baochang than meets the eye. He appears to have been an important 
figure in the monastic community of Jiankang and he was very much 
favoured by Emperor Wu and Xiao Gang. Baochang participated in a 
number of translation and cataloguing projects under imperial patronage, 
and for a while he was appointed as abbot of the Xin’an 新安monastery545
                                                                                                                
subject) and Emperor Wu (subordinate biographical information) is one between protégé and 
sponsor. 
 
544 Although this biographical collection is no longer extant, fragments of it are preserved in 
the Meisōden shō 名僧傳抄, which is a selective summary of a Mingseng zhuan manuscript 
then in the possession of the Tōdaiji at Nara, made by the Japanese monk Shūshō 宗性 in 
1235. He copied out the table of contents, portions of thirty-six biographies and a topical 
finding list of items that interested him (mainly evidences of the working of the grace of the 
Bodhisattvas). The Meisōden shō is included in the XZJ.134.1a-34a. Two quotations from the 
preface to the Mingseng zhuan are contained in Baochang’s biography (T 2060.50.427b29-c9 
and 427c18). 
545 This monastery, situated in the capital, was build by emperor Xiao Wu 孝武 (r. 453-464) of 
the (Liu) Song(劉)宋 Dynasty (420-479) in memory of his favourite concubine. Her son, Ziluan
子鸞, at that time held the title of “Prince of Xin’an”, and the monastery was named after him. 
When Ziluan was killed by his jealous older brother, the so-called “First Deposed Emperor”, at 
the age of ten, the latter also destroyed the Xin’an temple, named after his younger brother, 
whom he hated so vehemently. The succeeding emperor Ming 明 (r .466-472) ordered the 
monastery to be restored (Nan shi, 78: 1963; Gaoseng zhuan, T.2059.377c23-24). The 
Xin’an monastery is mentioned left and right in the Buddhist chronicles, but appears to have 
been of rather modest importance. 

199 
 
and as head of the first Imperial Buddhist Library in history. Like many of 
the advisor monks we have seen above, Baochang was plagued by 
controversy too, in life as well as in death. As a member of the clerical elite 
of the capital, he became the object of verbal attacks by Huijiao, who, as 
we have seen, in the preface to his Gaoseng zhuan criticized the worldly 
and sycophantic metropolitan clergy who surrounded the pious emperor 
Wu in general, but also the emphasis Baochang placed on “fame (ming 
名)” over “eminence (gao 高)” in his selection of biographies in particular. 
Even among his peers in the capital, there were rumours that his true 
intentions did not lie in the practice of Buddhism, but in the pursuit of 
worldly goals.546
 
  
Life and times of Baochang 
 
According to the biography, Baochang came from a poor family and 
had to work hard in the fields to provide for himself and his parents. 
Because the plot of land they owned was too small to provide ample 
means of living, he looked around for other jobs on the side. Thus he 
found work as a copyist and was able to make some extra money. The 
question that now arises is if this means that Baochang did in fact come 
from a poor family of peasants, as a reading of his biography seems to 
suggest. As Zürcher has pointed out, many among the famous monks 
whose biographies are included in the Biographies of Eminent Monks are 
said to have lived in poor and difficult circumstances before entering the 
monastic order. Poverty is one of the virtues of the Buddhist monk, and 
from that perspective, the Buddhist biographical collections show a 
tendency to standardize the lives of its heroes according to a set of fixed 
patterns.547
                                                 
546 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.426b22-23. 
 A clue to Baochang’s origins can be found in the choice of 
words in his biography. Daoxuan writes: 
547 Zürcher, 1972: 6-9. 

200 
 
 
至於傍求。傭書取濟。寓目流略便能強識。548
Looking for some extras on the side, he took up a job as a 
copyist to obtain a little financial help. [While] checking for 
inaccuracies [in the texts], he could thus strengthen (jiang) his 
knowledge [at the same time]. 
 
 
From this passage we know that Baochang was able to read and write 
characters. At the same time, the use of the word “strengthen” 
presupposes a prior education. Both these elements point in the direction 
that Baochang was not the son of peasants, but rather a descendant of a 
low ranking literati family that had lately fallen on hard time. As a member 
of such a family, he would have enjoyed a more or less standard classical 
literary education, comprising the study of the Confucian classics, with the 
intention of preparing him for a possible career as a government official. 
As the higher ranks of magistracy were at this time still monopolized by the 
so-called “Great Families (menfa 門閥)”, Baochang, as so many like him, 
would have been excluded from the higher circles of political, economical 
and intellectual life. When in 483 Sengyou was ordered to go to Wu, the 
region where Baochang was born and raised, the latter immediately left 
the family life to become his disciple. At the time Baochang was already 
eighteen years old, rather late in comparison to the age of other novice 
monks mentioned in the biographical literature.549
                                                 
548 T.2060.426b15-16. 
 This element, in addition 
to the fact that Baochang came from an impoverished literati family, could 
lead one to speculate that it is not unlikely that, with his career options in 
549 The age at which a monk becomes a novice is not always given. However, a great deal of 
biographies contained in the Buddhist biographical collections mention that the monk in 
question “left family life at an early age (shao chujia  少出家)”. In the Xu Gaoseng zhuan 
nearly a hundred biographies specify the age at an individual entered the monastic order. Of 
these, almost eighty percent were (considerably) younger than Baochang was. Most (sixty-
nine percent) were between 7 and 15 years old. 

201 
 
the civil service limited by his background, Baochang made a conscious 
decision to try Buddhism as a ticket to fame and an easier life. 
In Baochang’s biography there is mention of the fact that, after 
studying under Sengyou for an undetermined number of years:550
 
 
又惟開悟土俗。要以通濟為先。乃從處士。551
[Baochang] becomes aware of the importance of non-
Buddhist scholarship, and made it his priority to become 
knowledgeable about them. To that end, he started studying 
non-Buddhist writings under the guidance of several “retired 
gentlemen (chushi 處士)”.  
 
 
To a Buddhist monk moving in the circles of the literate upper class, being 
knowledgeable about non-Buddhist scholarship (most noticeably Xuanxue 
玄學) was not merely a tool for propagating Buddhism in terms that their 
target audience could understand, nor just a prerequisite for being able to 
demonstrate the superiority of Buddhism over these Chinese teachings. 
Knowledge of Chinese history, poetry and philosophical writings was 
admired in and of itself, and could in itself propel a monk to great fame.552
                                                 
550 John Kieschnick gives a brief description of what the education of a young novice must 
have looked like. See Kieschnick, 1997: 118-123. 
 
Many Buddhist scholar-monks studied the Chinese classics, so in this 
respect Baochang’s interest in them is nothing out of the ordinary. It is 
striking however that the biography describes how, as a consequence of 
his frequent involvement in worldly affairs, people started to suspect that 
Baochang had worldly ambitions. When he went to visit his family, people 
551 T.2060.50.426b20-21. These “retired gentlemen” were literati who, by their own choice, 
kept clear of an official career to devote themselves to a life of private study and self-
cultivation modelled on the ideal of the hermit, untroubled by the rigid framework of Confucian 
scholarship and safe from the dangers of politics. For more on the eremitic ideal, see 
Berkowitz (2000). 
552 Kieschnick, 1997: 112-118. 

202 
 
even said that he would probably not return to the monastery to live as a 
Buddhist monk, but perhaps choose to pursue a civil career. 
Although one can certainly not exclude a certain level of Buddhist 
piety from the part of Baochang, it is not unlikely that his motives for 
becoming a Buddhist monk were probably not all of a spiritual nature. If 
indeed it was his intention to use Buddhism as a means to enhance his 
position in society, then his plans were far from fruitless. After fleeing east 
from the chaos that accompanied the fall of the Southern Qi, he was 
summoned by Emperor Wu of the Liang to take up the position as abbot of 
the Xin'an monastery in 505 AD. This monastery does not appear to have 
been a particularly important one, but to become an abbot by imperial 
appointment is no small feat in itself. After this, Baochang was ordered to 
oversee the compilation of a whole series of books that were to contain a 
listing of all the Buddha’s, bodhisattva’s and important deities mentioned in 
the Buddhist scriptures, and the proper rituals described in these 
scriptures to implore their protection and benefaction. The edict of 
Emperor Wu, ordering the compilation of these books, is partly preserved 
in the biography of Baochang: 
 
時會雲雷遠近清晏。風雨調暢百穀年登。豈非上資三寶中賴四
天下藉神龍。幽靈協贊方乃福被黔黎歆茲厚德。但文散群部難
可備尋。553
The seasonal storms have abated far and near, and the 
weather [is now so favourable that] it causes the harvest of 
the hundred grains to increase. How could it be that [for this] 
we do not rely first, on [the protection of the] Three Jewels,
 
554
                                                 
553 T 2060.50.426b28-c2. 
 
554 The “Three Jewels (Ch. sanbao 三寶, Skt. Triratna)” of Buddhism are Buddha, Dharma 
(the Teaching) and Saṃ ̣ gha (the community of monks and nuns). 

203 
 
second on the Four Deva's555
 
, and third on the devas and 
nāgas ! When the supernatural beings provide us with 
assistance, only then can prosperity cover the people and can 
they rejoice in their virtue. However, since the writings [about 
these issues] are scattered over a host of books, it is difficult 
to research it to the fullest extent. 
From this edict it is clear that Emperor Wu placed great importance in 
these books, since they would make it clear to him on which supernatural 
beings he could call for aid in the ruling of his empire. This adds a new 
dimension to Emperor Wu’s zeal in collecting and cataloguing Buddhist 
scriptures. Though we have until now always approached this issue from a 
systematic point of view (which was certainly important for the calculating 
Wu), we must not forget that in era under review, people genuinely 
believed in the power of reciting and copying scriptures. Not only the 
information they contained was thus important for Wu to build his 
ideological framework, but the pious part of Wu must certainly also have 
believed in the power of Buddhism to protect his state and his imperial 
family. Belief alone would never have been enough to build an entirely new 
Buddhist state ideology on, but it played its part nevertheless. According to 
the biography, Emperor Wu was constantly worried that his house would 
come to an untimely end and that his dynasty would fall without the 
protection of the powers of Buddhism.556
                                                 
555 These are the Four Deva-kings who guard the compass points of the Buddhist continent 
Jambudvīpa. In the East there's Dḥrtarāṣ ṭra (Chiguo tian 持國天 ), who is also associated with 
the colour white. In the South there's Virūdhaka (Zengchang tian 增長天 ), associated with the 
colour blue. In the West there's Virūpākṣ a (Guangmu tian 廣目天), associated with the colour 
red. In the North, finally, there's Vaiśravaṇ a (Duowen tian 多聞天), associated with the colour 
yellow. 
 The books that Baochang was 
ordered to make, played an important role in Emperor Wu’s scheme of 
ruling through the wielding of Buddhist forces, and the fact that Baochang 
556 T 2060.426c28-427a3. 

204 
 
was entrusted with this task is a clear sign of his close relationship with the 
emperor, for the latter would not have given this vital task to someone he 
did not trust completely. Daoxuan mimics Emperor Wu’s line of reasoning 
when he says that the performing of the rituals described in these books is 
the reason that for almost fifty years the realm of the Liang was relatively 
peaceful.557
The compilation of these important books did not come about 
without a hitch, however. In 510, Baochang became very ill. Fearing the 
worst, he started praying, and uttered the two vows that, should he recover, 
he would search around for Buddhist scriptures everywhere to make sure 
nothing would get lost, and along the way search for records of monks of 
past generations to honour and perpetuate their memories. The 
chronology of subsequent events is not all clear, but it is probably at this 
point that Baochang abandoned his post as abbot of the Xin’an monastery 
without asking for or receiving the approval of the emperor, with the 
intention of going East to recuperate from his illness and start fulfilling his 
vows. The emperor, displeased, sent someone after Baochang. As 
punishment for his offence, Baochang was banished to Yuezhou 越州 in 
the far south (in present day Guangdong). Emperor Wu’s reaction is quite 
understandable, considering that not only did Baochang walk away from 
his duties as abbot of the Xin’an monastery, but, more importantly, his 
disappearance also meant a delay in the production of the books 
necessary for the protection of the empire. Baochang requested that the 
Rectifier of Monks (sengzheng) Huichao adjudicate the case according to 
  
                                                 
557 T.2060.426c6-7. Cf. Da Tang neidian lu, T.2149.266c9-17. It is in fact notable that the rule 
of Emperor Wu was one of the longest in Chinese history, and certainly long in comparison to 
the many short-lived reigns of other emperors during the Nanbei chao period. Daoxuan, 
looking back on this, could not help himself but to link this historical fact to the fervent 
promotion of Buddhism by Emperor Wu and the workings of the forces of Buddhism, as 
harnessed in these books of Baochang’s. 

205 
 
the “codex established on the basis of the vinaya”.558 As we have seen in 
the discussion between Emperor Wu and the monk Zhizang, the emperor 
was trying to assert state control over the conduct of the Buddhist monks 
and nuns by developing a form of state law, based on the vinaya rules 
(attaching punishments from secular law to the transgressions described in 
the vinaya) and by pronouncing himself “Lay Rectifier of Monks (Baiyi 
sengzheng 白衣僧正)”. Zhizang, when asked for his opinion by Emperor 
Wu, severely criticised him for these plans, after which the emperor 
abandoned them. 559 The fact that Baochang actually requested to be 
sentenced according to Emperor Wu’s proposed laws, is another clear 
indication that he was more concerned with his relationship with the 
emperor than with what was in the best interest of the Buddhist monastic 
community as a whole. In spite of his display of submission to the emperor, 
Huichao sentenced Baochang to exile with penal servitude (tu 徒) in 
Guangzhou 廣州 (present day Canton).560
                                                 
558 T 2060.427c11. The sentence “yi lü yi fa 依律以法” as it is written in the biography is 
difficult to interpret. In the biography of Zhizang we read of the discussion that took place 
between Emperor Wu and Zhizang about whether to implement a set of laws for monks and 
nuns, based on the vinaya rules. There the description yi lü li fa 依律立法 “the codex that was 
established on the basis of the vinaya rules” is used (T.2060.466b21). I therefore emend 以 to 
立 in this phrase in Baochang’s biography. 
 Exile does not occur anywhere 
in the vinaya literature as a form of punishment. However, it is a common 
form of punishment in secular law, which seems to implicate that at least 
559 Emperor Xiao Wen 孝文 (r. 471-500) of the Northern Wei 北魏 Dynasty (386-534) had also 
imposed a set of state laws on the community of monks, the sengzhi 僧制 or “laws for monks”, 
in 492 (Wei Shu, 114: 3039). During the Tang Dynasty the community of monks was once 
again restricted by state laws around 637, with the implementation of the “Rules for Buddhist 
and Daoist clergy (dao seng ge 道僧格)”. See Heirman-De Rauw, 2006; Ch’en, 1973: 95; 
Tokuno, 1990: 65, note 34. 
560 This was at the time a centre of Buddhist activity in the South as a result of the arrival of 
foreign monks by the sea routes, so even though Huichao sent him farther away than his 
previous location of banishment, it is not entirely clear to me whether Huichao wanted to 
make Baochang’s punishment lighter of worse. 

206 
 
for a while (or perhaps even for this one particular case, since Baochang 
requested it himself) Emperor Wu’s codex based on vinaya was in effect. 
Whatever the case, Baochang would remain in Guangzhou for 
about four years and in that time he kept working on his collection of 
biographies of monks. All the while, pressure was being placed on him 
officially to finish his collection.561 Was he told that since he departed in 
search of records of monks' lives, he could only return upon completion of 
his collection? This is of course mere speculation. What is certain, is that a 
request for pardon was addressed to the throne upon completion of his 
rough draft, and the emperor lifted the ban in 514. Soon after, Baochang’s 
Mingseng zhuan was revised and prepared for publication in its definitive 
form.562
From this moment onward Baochang would be back on Emperor 
Wu’s side. When Sengshao 僧紹 (d.u.), an otherwise unknown monk from 
the Anle 安樂 monastery, was ordered to make a catalogue of Buddhist 
scriptures in 515, it did not meet the high standard expected of it, and 
Baochang was ordered to make it anew. His catalogue was very well 
  
                                                 
561 T.2060.427c14-15. Perhaps his literary activities were part of his penal servitude as monk. 
562 Contrary to what Arthur Wright (1954: 409) concludes on the basis of the entry in the Lidai 
sanbao ji (T.2034.45a10) I do not take the year 519 as the date of completion. The biography 
mentions that on the day the Mingseng zhuan was to be published, the emperor gave the 
order to end Baochang's banishment after which 此僧史方將刊定 “this history of monks would 
soon be emended and [published in its] definitive edition” (T.2060.427c16-17). I do not think 
that it would take Baochang only four years to write his biographical collection, but five years 
to emend it. In the preface to his Mingseng zhuan (of which an extract is reproduced in the 
biography) Baochang says that Sengyou’s writing of the Chu sanzang jiji had exerted great 
influence on him. Since the Chu sanzang jiji was first published in 515, Baochang probably 
also wrote the preface to his Mingseng zhuan around 515, when it too was published for the 
first time. In the preface Baochang also states that he had to drop some material from his 
finished version and would continue to correct these omissions in his spare time 
(T.2060.427c7-9). In that light the date of 519, given to the Mingseng zhuan in the Lidai 
sanbao ji, might be the date of a second, revised and enlarged edition of the Mingseng zhuan, 
but this is by no means certain, and in any case is not the date of completion of the Mingseng 
zhuan proper. For a more detailed discussion on this, see De Rauw, 2005: 212-215. 

207 
 
received and, following this, he was ordered to take charge of the 
Hualinyuan baoyun jingzang 華林園寶雲經藏. 563 This was the private 
library where Emperor Wu stored his collection of Buddhist scriptures.564
Baochang’s date of death is not known. However, certain facts help us to 
venture an educated guess. The great literary activity of Baochang after 
his return to the capital suddenly stops around 518. There are repeated 
references in his biography to serious illness,
 
As Drège (1991: 177) points out, this was the first time in history that an 
emperor had established a Buddhist library that was not part of the 
Imperial Library, but stood completely independent from it. Baochang thus 
in fact became the emperor’s personal librarian on all matters of Buddhism. 
Along with this position came the major responsibility to collect, catalogue 
and safeguard the Buddhist scriptures, which were considered so crucial 
by the emperor. In the years following, Baochang also completed the other 
projects he had begun while he was abbot of the Xin'an monastery.  
565 which together with his 
age of 52 at the time may lead us to surmise that Baochang died not too 
long after 518.566
                                                 
563 T 2060.426c21-25. 
 
564 The Hualin yuan was originally a hunting-park of the rulers of Wu, situated in the northern 
outskirts of the capital. Since the late fifth century it had housed a court-sponsored Buddhist 
temple and was probably no longer used for hunting (Zürcher [1982: 175, note 8]). This park 
was the site where Emperor Wu constructed a (or expanded the previous) monastery in 527, 
which he called Tongtai 同泰 monastery. This is the place where he often gave himself to the 
community of monks as menial (sheshen 捨身) and organised lavish Buddhist rituals and 
preaching sessions, in which he himself took part. 
565 In his biography, two periods of serious and prolonged illness are recorded. One time, at 
the end of the Qi Dynasty, he suffered from a “wind-disease” for a period of five years (T 
2060.50.426b25). The second time he had a bad case of beri-beri disease, and abandoned 
his post as abbot of the Xin’an monastery to seek a remedy for his illness (T 2060.50.427c10). 
566 The fact that Baochang’s biography is not included in Huijiao's Biographies of Eminent 
Monks does not mean, as Wright (1954: 400) thought, that he must have died after the 
completion of this work ca. 530. Rather this absence is to be seen in light of Huijiao's feelings 
towards Baochang. Huijiao did not approve of Baochang’s collection of biographies, because 
he thought they placed more emphasis on the fame of a monk than on one’s moral virtues. 

208 
 
 
 
 
 
Baochang’s literary achievements 
 
Since 
Baochang’s 
biography 
is 
included 
in 
the 
category 
“translators,” it is not surprising that Daoxuan emphasized Baochang’s 
literary achievements when compiling his biography. The following are 
mentioned by title in his biography as writings of Baochang’s own hand:  
 
(1) Xu falun lun  續法輪論 (Further Treatise on the Dharma Wheel; not 
extant)567
(2) Fa ji  法集 (Dharma Collection ; not extant)
 
568
(3) (Liangdai) Zhongjing mulu  (粱代)眾經目錄 ([Liang dynasty] Catalogue 
of [Buddhist] Scriptures; not extant)
 
569
                                                                                                                
He also deemed the structuring and writing style sub-standard. Moreover, Huijiao had a 
thorough disliking of the metropolitan clergy, thinking them too involved in worldly matters and 
court politics. As we have seen above, Baochang was a prime example of such a monk. That 
must have been reason enough for Huijiao to exclude this “famous” monk from his collection 
of “eminent” monks. A century later, Daoxuan came to a different conclusion, and made a 
place for him in his Further Biographies. In fact, he placed Baochang’s biography second in 
his collection. This suggests that Daoxuan considered Baochang’s role in history to have 
been short-changed by Huijiao. 
 
567 There is no mention of this work in any of the Buddhist or non-Buddhist catalogues. 
According to the biography, Baochang departed on a short missionary journey through the 
eastern regions of the Liang Empire in order to discuss Buddhist principles with Daoists and 
laymen. He wrote down the broad outlines of these debates in a book titled Xu falun lun 續法
輪論 (T.2060.426c16-18). 
568 The Fa ji is not mentioned in any Buddhist catalogue as the work of Baochang. However, 
the Sui shu (35: 1089) mentions a Fa ji in 107 scrolls as the work of Baochang. 
569 This is Baochang's remake of Sengshao's Hualin fodian zhongjing mulu 華林佛典眾經目錄 
(not extant). It listed 1433 titles, totalling 3741 scrolls (T.2149.337b14-16). The Lidai sanbao ji 
lists the categories into which this catalogue was divided (T.2034.126b6-26). Baochang's 

209 
 
(4) Jinglü yixiang  經律異相 (Different Forms of Sūtra and Vinaya ; extant, 
T.2121)570
(5) Zhongjing fangong shengseng fa  眾經飯供聖僧法 (Manual for Offering 
Food to Sagacious Monks [according to] the Scriptures ; not extant) 
 
(6) Mingseng zhuan  名僧傳 (Biographies of Famous Monks; not extant) 
 
Five other works are described but are not mentioned by title in 
Baochang's biography. By comparing these descriptions571
 
 with the titles 
attributed to Baochang in later Buddhist catalogues, it is possible to supply 
the likely titles: 
(7) Zhongjing yonghu guotu zhu longwang ming lu  眾經擁護國土諸龍王
名錄 (Catalogue of Names of all the Nāga Kings who Protect the 
Empire [as identified in] the Scriptures ; not extant)  
(8) Zhongjing hu guo guishen ming lu  眾經護國鬼神名錄 (Catalogue of 
Names of Demons and Spirits who Protect the Empire [as identified 
in] the Scriptures ; not extant) 
                                                                                                                
catalogue was used as a base of reference by compilers of subsequent bibliographical 
collections. Since it is no longer extant, it is impossible to make comparisons. However, the 
frequent use of the phrase “jian Baochang lu 見寶唱錄 (see Baochang's catalogue)” in those 
subsequent catalogues strongly indicates the indebtedness of those later authors to 
Baochang. 
570 This work is an anthology of the Buddhist scriptures. The Jinglü yixiang and the Biqiuni 
zhuan are the only two complete works of Baochang that are extant (not counting the 
fragments of the Mingseng zhuan that survive in the Meisōden shō). The preface to the Jinglü 
yixiang explains that Sengmin 僧旻(467-527) was ordered to compile a collection of essential 
copies of Buddhist scriptures in 508. This was the Zhongjing yaochao 眾經要抄in 88 scrolls. 
Since there were still some things that were unclear, the emperor ordered Baochang in 516 to 
copy some essential information from the body of scriptures to help clarify these confusing 
passages. The resulting work was the Jinglü yixiang in 50 scrolls (Jinglü yixiang, 
T.2121.53.1a). 
571 T.2060.426b20 and 426c3-4. 

210 
 
(9) Zhongjing zhu foming  眾經諸佛名 (Names of All the Different 
Buddha's [as they appear in] the Scriptures ; not extant) 
(10) Zhongjing chanhui miezui fa  眾經懺悔滅罪法 (Manual for 
Confession and Eradication of Sin ; not extant)572
(11) Chuyao lüyi  出要律儀 (Essentials of the Vinaya Rules ; not 
extant)
 
573
 
 
Besides the eleven works discussed above, the biography also mentions 
two projects that Baochang helped with, but for which he is not credited as 
                                                 
572 These four books might first have been part of a large compilation of unknown title, 
counting close to a hundred scrolls. In Baochang’s biography we read: “[the emperor] ordered 
[Bao]chang to summarily compile a collection of records in order to determine the priorities of 
the time, [namely,] establishing good fortune and warding off disaster (ill fortune), [fulfilling] 
Buddhist rituals of confession and removal of obstacles [in the path to enlightenment], 
[executing] sacrificial offerings to spirits and demons, or [making] sacrificial offerings to the 
nāga-kings, the gods of rain and water. The book was divided into categories (sections) and 
counted close to a hundred scrolls” (T.2060.426c3-4). This compilation probably did not 
survive as a whole in Daoxuan's time, but certain chapters from it seem to have been 
preserved as separate books. Titles seven to nine in our list are catalogues with the names of 
all the water spirits, demons and ghosts, and Buddha's respectively, as they are mentioned in 
the scriptures. These catalogues probably also contained sacrifices, magical spells and 
prayers associated with each divinity, used to implore their protection. Title ten is a manual of 
Buddhist rites of confession. It seems that Emperor Wu had great interest in this subject, for 
he also commissioned the compilation of other confession manuals. For a detailed study of 
these Buddhist rites of confession, see Kuo, 1994. 
573 This work is not extant today and although mentioned in the Da Tang neidian lu 大唐內典
錄 (T 2149.55.266c8; compiled by Daoxuan in 664), it is not listed in any other catalogue, 
Buddhist or non-Buddhist. Looking at the title and reading the biography, it is possible that 
this work contained extracts of the collected sayings of Baochang's master Sengyou 
concerning matters of vinaya. This doesn't seem so far fetched, considering that Sengyou 
was most famous for his study of vinaya (in fact his biography is included in Huijiao's 
Gaoseng zhuan under the heading “minglü  明律, (disciplinarians)”). Daoxuan himself was 
also a master of vinaya, so it does not seem unlikely that in the course of his studies he 
stumbled across this forgotten work of Baochang, and is therefore the only catalographer to 
mention it. 

211 
 
author in the catalogues, namely: (1) structuring Falang's 法朗 (d.u.)574 Da 
banniepanzi zhujing 大般涅槃子注經, a commentary on the 
Mahāparinirvāṇ asūtra,575 and (2) editing emperor Jianwen's Fabao lianbi 
法寶聯璧.576
From these lists we may conclude that Baochang was involved in 
just about all aspects of scripture, from manuals to catalogues and 
everything in between. Most of these books were ordered early on in 
Emperor Wu’s reign, and have to be seen as part of a large enterprise that 
involved both Buddhist and non-Buddhist scriptures. Emperor Wu relied on 
Baochang as his chief librarian to collect, catalogue and safeguard all the 
vital material needed for the formation of his ideology. Therefore it is no 
exaggeration to designate Baochang as one of the most important allies of 
Emperor Wu. 
 
 
                                                 
574 Not much is known about this monk, except that his secular name was Chen 沉 and he 
was originally from Wu. He left the family life in 463 and died somewhere during the Tianjian 
reign period (502-520). There is no independent biography of this monk, but some 
subordinate biographical information is provided in the biography of the monk Sengshao 僧韶 
in the Xu Gaoseng zhuan (T.2060.460b5-11). Not to be confused with the famous master of 
the Sanlun school, who had the same name (lived 507-581).  
575 Not extant. The Da Tang neidian lu says that this commentary was written at the beginning 
of the Tianjian reign period (T.2149.266c18-20). The Mahāparinirvāṇ asūtra, which teaches 
that all sentient beings possess the Buddha-nature and therefore the potential for attaining 
Buddhahood, had become very popular at this point in time, as it was considered to be the 
ultimate teaching of the Buddha. In fact, there were so many commentaries on the 
Mahāparinirvāṇ asūtra that Emperor Wu of the Liang commissioned Baoliang 寶亮 (444-509) 
and others to collect all of the existing commentaries in a collection called Da banniepan jing 
jijie 大般涅槃經集解 in 71 scrolls (T.1763). 
576  In catalogues also called Fa(bao) ji 法( 寶) 集(T.2034.100a9-13, T.2147.172b15, 
T.2148.207a23, T.2149.263c28). This work is not extant. Xiao Gang wrote quite a lot on 
Buddhism. The Nanshi 7 (Vol. 1: 233) lists 4 works, namely: Fabao lianbi (Linked Jade of the 
Dharma Jewel) in 300 scrolls, Yujian 玉簡 (The Jade Tablets) in 50 scrolls, Guangming fu 光
明符 (The Brilliant Tally) in 12 scrolls, and Muyu jing 沐浴經 (Sutra on the Bathing [of the 
Buddha on his birthday]) in 3 scrolls. All four works are lost. 

212 
 
IV.2.2. Zhizang智藏 (458-522)577
 
 
 Zhizang is known together with Fayun 法雲 and Sengmin 僧旻 as the 
“Three Great Dharma Masters of the Liang Dynasty”.578 While the latter 
two served as Household Monks (jiaseng) to Emperor Wu, Zhizang did not. 
At first glance this might seem odd. Why would these three Satyasiddhi 
masters be placed under one joint header of “Great Dharma Masters”, but 
not all serve as personal advisors to the emperor? A reading of Zhizang’s 
biography makes clear that he was anything but an advisor to Wudi. In a 
time when the monastic community had to stand by and watch how its 
autonomy was slowly being taken away, Zhizang was not afraid to utter his 
criticisms to the emperor directly. Up until now, Zhizang’s name has been 
almost exclusively mentioned in the context of the fierce debate between 
him and Emperor Wu concerning the emperor’s plans to become a lay 
“Rectifier of Monks”. This is not only true for this dissertation, but for many 
other studies as well.579
                                                 
577 Biography contained in the Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.465c7-4467b27. 
 Zhizang’s biography, however, deserves a much 
closer look, as it provides invaluable information on how some scholar 
monks tried to resist the emperor on an ideological level. In this way, his 
biography paints a colourful picture of court Buddhism in the Southern 
Dynasties and of the tense relationship between the monastic community, 
fighting to maintain its independent status, and the secular powers, trying 
to assert government control over the actions of the Buddhist monks and 
nuns. 
578 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.548b12. All three were masters of the Satyasiddhi (Ch. 
Chengshi 成實) school of Buddhism, which was the predominant philosophical school during 
the Southern Qi and most of the Liang. It is said that Emperor Wu later shifted his interest to 
Madhyamaka (Ch. Sanlun 三論), but did not correctly interpret its concept the Two Truths 
(conventional and absolute). See Ch’en, 1964: 129-134. Cf. Jizang’s Weimojing yishu 維摩經
義疏, T.1781.912a. 
579 See, for example, Janousch, 1999: 136-140; Ch’en, 1964: 126; Tang, 1983: 342; Yan, 
1999: 139. 

213 
 
 
Zhizang, defender of the faith 
 
Who was the “troublemaker” Zhizang? Exactly how did he protest 
Emperor Wu’s encroachment on the monastic community, and avoid being 
disciplined? There are not that many sources that can tell us something 
useful about Zhizang. By far the most information can be extracted from 
Zhizang’s biography in the Xu Gaoseng zhuan. Most biographies included 
in this compilation start off by giving a short account of the family roots 
(when known) of the monk in question. Zhizang’s biography is no 
exception. It does stand out a little for the amount of information provided 
on his family background. Before he became a monk, his secular name 
was Gu Jingzang 顧淨藏. The Gu family was one of the traditional families 
from the area of Wu 吳 (present day Suzhou), and enjoyed a certain level 
of prestige. In Zhizang’s biography we read that he was an eighth 
generation descendant of a rank one official and a lady of the imperial 
family. The biography then goes on to list the offices held by his ancestors, 
from his great-great-grandfather down to his father. Even though a monk 
was supposed to sever all ties with his family upon entering the monastic 
community, it is clear that a monk’s family background remained a very 
crucial factor in determining his religious career. Just how important these 
family ties were, becomes clear from an incident at the palace, featuring 
Zhizang. At the time of Emperor Wu, the biography says, monks were free 
to wander in and out of the palace as they pleased. The only thing that 
was off-limits was the seat-of-honour in the lecture hall, which was 
exclusively reserved for the emperor. When Zhizang heard about this 
arrangement, he became infuriated. He stormed into the palace, climbed 
the stairs to the lecture hall, crouched down on the seat reserved for the 
emperor, and said in a defiant voice: 
 

214 
 
貧道昔為吳中顧郎。尚不慚御榻。況復迺祖定光。金輪釋子
也。檀越若殺貧道即殺。不慮無受生之處。若付在尚方。獄中
不妨行道。580
This poor monk was formerly a member of the Gu family of 
Wu, and as such I am not beneath the imperial seat. 
Furthermore, I am a descendant of Buddha Dīpamkara and 
a son of the Śākya of the Golden Cakra. If our dānapati 
wishes to kill me, then so be it. I am not worried about not 
being reborn. And should he wish to hand me to the 
authorities [for punishment], well, being in prison does not 
hinder one’s striving for enlightenment. 
 
 
When this incident was brought to Emperor Wu’s attention, he did not 
punish Zhizang for this blatant show of disrespect, but on the contrary 
abolished the honorary seating arrangement. In Zhizang’s action, we find 
not only a criticism of Emperor Wu’s Buddhist policy, but of his secular 
policy as well, or rather of the contradiction Zhizang saw between Emperor 
Wu’s words and deeds. Through the use of Buddhist ritual, Emperor Wu 
wanted to bridge the gap which normally existed between the Son of 
Heaven and his subjects. For example in the ritual of sheshen, in which he 
offered himself to the monastery to serve as a menial, or in the 
performance of the Bodhisattva ordination ritual in 519, Emperor Wu very 
consciously humbled himself by stripping himself of his imperial regalia. 
The purpose of this was to demonstrate that, as a bodhisattva emperor, he 
was willing to sacrifice himself for the benefit of his people, and for the 
benefit of all living beings in his realm and beyond. This universal call for 
unity, expressed in the regular organisation of Great Assemblies, extended 
his power to all people in the world. But if indeed Emperor Wu wanted to 
humble and sacrifice himself for the salvation of others, why then, did 
Zhizang ask, should he assume such a prestigious position in the lecture 
                                                 
580 Xu Gaoseng zhuan, T.2060.466a19-21. 

215 
 
hall, distancing himself so clearly from the other attendants and taking on a 
leading role? By identifying himself as a member of a literati family of 
standing, Zhizang also criticizes the contradiction between Emperor Wu’s 
self-projected image of saviour and the new social hierarchy he wished to 
establish. If Emperor Wu were true to his word, then in his world of 
universal compassion and equality Zhizang, as a member of the Gu-family, 
should have as much right to sit on that seat in the lecture hall as Emperor 
Wu. As a monk, Zhizang stresses that he is a descendant of Buddha 
Dīpaṃ kara, which is a rebellious reference to Emperor Wu’s bodhisattva 
ordination ritual. By creating a new bodhisattva ordination ritual, Zhizang 
claims, the emperor has broken the line of transmission for authoritative 
bodhisattva ordination. According to the Pusa dichi jing 菩薩地持經 
(Bodhisattvabhūmi sūtra, T.1581; translated by Dharmakṣema (385-433) 
in 418) a lawful tradition of bodhisattva ordinations had been started by the 
Buddha Dīpaṃ kara when he had conferred these precept on the 
Śākyamuni Buddha in a previous existence. Once that line is broken (as is 
the case with regular ordinations as monk or nun as well) all subsequent 
ordinations become invalid until the line of transmission can be restored. 
Here, as in his other altercations with Emperor Wu, Zhizang succeeds in 
thwarting the emperor’s plans by finding a base that had not been covered 
by the emperor’s ideologues. Though the emperor could claim to have 
relied on sound scriptural foundation in creating his bodhisattva ordination 
ceremony, Zhizang asserts that all this scriptural basis does the emperor 
no good, because he cannot reforge that link back to the instigator of the 
ritual, the Buddha Dīpaṃ kara . Emperor Wu’s ordinations are therefore 
invalid in Zhizang’s eyes. 
If we take another look at the discussion between Wudi and Zhizang 
on his intention to become Lay Rectifier of monks, we see the same clever 
use of words. For the sake of convenience I shall reproduce the relevant 
parts of the debate here: 
 

216 
 
Later, in a written demand, [Emperor Wu] asked Zhizang [for 
his opinion]. Zhizang crossed out the letter with a brush and 
said: “The vast sea of the Dharma (dharmasamudra) is not 
something a layman can understand.” The emperor, upon 
inspecting [the reply], did not think it was something he had to 
take seriously. This was, to him, just another monk who in the 
age of decline (jidai) opposed and belittled the emperor. In 
any case, his mind had been made up to put this measure 
into effect, even if Zhizang would disagree to the end. So a 
decree had been issued to arrange an assembly at the 
Huaguang Hall that evening. The monastic community had 
already assembled in great numbers, and only later did 
Zhizang arrive. The emperor said: “If we scrutinize the monks 
and nuns, [we find] that there are many who are not well 
versed [in the Buddhist teaching]. If a lay Rectifier of Monks 
should not understand the regulations [of the vinaya], and 
should want to control them through the use of secular law, 
they would be harmed by excessive strictness. I, the 
Buddha’s disciple, will in my spare time assume the role of lay 
Rectifier of Monks, and shall establish a law codex [for monks 
and nuns], based on the vinaya. Even though this is [normally] 
the duty of a Dharma master, the Buddha also entrusted it to 
the king of state. I have hitherto discussed this matter with 
[members of] the saṃ ̣ gha, and they all expressed the same 
[support for my plan]. Dharma master, what is your opinion?” 
Zhizang replied: “Your Majesty wishes to personally supervise 
the affairs of the monastic community, and this will truly bring 
splendour to the True Dharma. But even though many monks 
and nuns do not act in accordance to the vinaya, the vows 
you made to be compassionate and forgiving are more 
important than this matter [of punishing them for their 

217 
 
wrongdoings]. The emperor said: “How could it be my 
intention as the Buddha’s disciple to wish hardship on the 
saṃgha? As I just said, excessive strictness is [an attribute] of 
ignorant laymen. I [on the other hand] can personally bring 
[the samgha] to order by relying on the vinaya regulations. 
When 
you, 
Dharma 
master, 
commanded 
to 
be 
compassionate and forgiving, what did you mean by this?” 
Zhizang answered: “Your Majesty truly wishes to stop being 
severe and rather be lenient. However, during the final period 
[of the Dharma] (modai) it is nearly impossible for all 
members of the saṃgha to act according to the vinaya. 
Therefore, I dare to beg you to be compassionate and 
forgiving.” The emperor asked: “I venture to ask: if a monk 
commits a crime, should he be punished according to the 
Buddhist Law or not?” Zhizang answered: “[…] You have to 
do both, punish him and not punish him.” The emperor said: 
“We have only read that it is said that the ruler is entrusted 
with governing the saṃgha. Where did you read that one 
should not punish them?” Zhizang answered: “Devadatta is 
an example of this matter. The Tathāgata ignored him and did 
not punish.” 
 
After this the emperor sought to reverse his orders and abandoned the 
idea. 
In order to justify his proposition to become a lay ‘Rectifier of Monks’, 
Emperor Wu argued that he saw it has his right and even his duty as a 
ruler living in the age of the decline (modai 末代) to see to it that the 
behaviour of the monks and nuns was in accordance with the vinaya 
regulations. To this end he even proposed to submit the monastic 
community to a set of secular laws, based on the vinaya. It is clear that it 
was not merely the intention of Emperor Wu to safeguard the purity of the 

218 
 
saṃgha in the age of decline, but also to bring the monastic community 
under his direct control. Since Emperor Wu had already asked many 
influential monks, who had been afraid to challenge him, to sign the decree 
for approval, Zhizang realised that any unfounded objection from his part 
would make him look like an insurgent. Therefore he attacks the internal 
logic of Emperor Wu’s ideological construction. He opposes Emperor Wu’s 
will to punish monks to the bodhisattva-vows he had taken earlier, which 
forced him to be forbearing and lenient. To illustrate his point, Zhizang 
refers to the case of Devadatta, Buddha’s wicked cousin, who was not 
punished by Buddha, despite all his wrongdoings. To his shame, Emperor 
Wu admits that he does not know who Devadatta is, but this seems 
unlikely in light of his extensive knowledge of the Buddhist scriptures. It is 
more likely that at this point in the debate, Emperor Wu realised that the 
debate was lost, feigning ignorance as a last defence against Zhizang’s 
winning argument. 
After he was forced to admit his defeat, the sycophantic monks who 
were present during this debate starting to apologise to the Emperor for 
Zhizang’s behaviour. Emperor Wu, however, silenced them and said: 
 
藏法師是大丈夫心。謂是則道是。言非則道非。致詞宏大。不
以形命相累。諸法師非大丈夫。意實不同言則不異。弟子向與
藏法師碩諍。而諸法師默然無見助者。豈非意在不同耳。事遂
獲寢。581
Master Zhizang is truly a great man! If he says it is so, then it 
is so. If he says it is not so, then it is not so. He does not twist 
his words to accord to the vogue of the times. All you Dharma 
masters are not great men. Even though your thoughts are 
really different, your words are all the same. When I was 
being severely admonished by master Zhizang, I was not 
 
                                                 
581 Ibid., p. 466c8-13. 

219 
 
helped by any of you. Then that must mean that in actual fact 
you all agree with him! This matter is closed. 
 
From this sneer at the attending monks we can draw two conclusions: (1) 
Emperor Wu greatly respected Zhizang for his insight in the Buddhist 
doctrine. (2) Emperor Wu felt as if he had been let down by his advisors, 
who in his eyes were obviously mere ‘yes-men’ who had done nothing to 
prevent him losing face, thus forcing him to abandon his plan to become 
lay ‘Rectifier of Monks’. After this, Wudi took a different course in trying to 
get the monastic community as a whole in line with his ideology. This is 
where the debates about the vegetarian diet of monks and nuns comes 
back into play, but since we have already treated this in chapter three, we 
shall not go into it again. 
  
Emperor Wu built his new Buddhist state ideology by using notions 
and concepts drawn from the Buddhist scriptures themselves. Thus, the 
more knowledge he could acquire, the better his chances would be of 
countering any possible opposition. To this end, Emperor Wu ordered the 
compilation of catalogues, compendia, translations, and commentaries on 
a large scale. This is where we can place Baochang as an invaluable ally 
to the emperor. Wudi’s tactic of using Buddhist notions to assume control 
over the Buddhist community was a rather effective one (at least for 
controlling the Buddhist community in the metropolitan area). After all, how 
could the clergy object to such a pious ruler, who seemed only to have 
their best interests at heart? Emperor Wu’s tactic, however, did have one 
major, inherent weakness: in order to be effective, the information he 
extracted from the Buddhist writings, with which he sought to justify his 
leading role as emperor in Buddhist matters, had to be brought together 
into a coherent structure with its own internal logic. And this is exactly 
where Zhizang (and others beside him) choose to attack, in their attempts 
to maintain the saṃgha’s autonomy. 

220 
 
In the end, Emperor Wu’s Buddhist reforms turned him into the 
saṃgha’s “best enemy” or “worst friend”: his lavish sponsorship heralded a 
golden age for the Buddhist monasteries and temples in the South, but at 
the same time it made the monastic community lose some of its self-
determination. Under the guise of best intentions, Emperor Wu slowly but 
surely nibbled at the autonomous position of the Buddhist clergy so he 
could recruit them into his scheme, willingly or otherwise. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
 
In this dissertation we have examined how Liang Wudi used Buddhism to 
reinvent his role as emperor in an attempt to restore power to the throne, if 
not politically, then at least ideologically. When he ascended the throne as 
founder of his own dynasty, he was faced not only with a personal problem 
of legitimacy, but with huge social and political problems as well. At the 
time, neither wealth nor political power was concentrated in the throne. 
Rather, it was a small number of powerful literati families that manipulated 
the imperial court, monopolised the higher offices and collected great 
wealth. While the lower rank families were left behind in frustration, the 
rest of the population was trying to survive in a country torn apart by the 
endemic wars of the time. Emperor Wu set out to make reforms in 
administration to counter some of the political and social fragmentation 
that had resulted from a centuries-long devolution of imperial power. He 

221 
 
reorganised the educational system in such a way as to allow members of 
the lower ranking literati families to gain access to an official career, in the 
hope of alleviating their frustrations and circumventing the influence of the 
powerful aristocratic families. He also ordered a review of the genealogies, 
which served as de-facto registers of social rank. Nevertheless, in reality 
Emperor Wu’s political position was too weak to effectively break the high 
ranking families’ position of power this way. Especially in the early years of 
his reign, he relied on their sanction to stay firmly on the throne.582
It was clear from the very start that Buddhism was going to play the 
leading role in Emperor Wu’s reforms. For his inauguration as founding 
emperor of the Liang dynasty, he chose the eighth day of the fourth month, 
a date that by the early sixth century was already widely recognized 
among Buddhists as the birthday of Śākyamuni Buddha. But since 
Buddhism could not provide an alternative for the practical administration 
and legislation of the empire, Emperor Wu had no choice but to continue 
his role as Confucian head of state as well. Just as the foreign invaders in 
the North had understood the need to maintain the Confucian state 
structure as the proven way to administer such a vast empire, so did 
Emperor Wu realise the unfeasibility of totally restructuring the existing 
system. But he also realised that to continue in his role as Confucian head 
 On the 
other hand it was so that the literati families needed the emperor figure too. 
The legitimacy of their claim to rule society came from the traditional 
Confucian state, which relied on an emperor figure to carry out the 
Mandate of Heaven and preserve cosmic order. Not possessing the 
necessary authority to centralise political power around the throne, it was 
this ritual aspect of emperorship in which Emperor Wu decided to make 
the difference. 
                                                 
582 A time-honoured strategy followed by Southern Dynasty emperors to ensure the support of 
the traditional powerful families was by forging marriage alliances to them. The Liang crown 
prince, Xiao Gang, for example, was married off to a woman from the influential Wang 王 clan. 
See Liangshu, 1: 158. Cf. Buttars, 1998: 90. Also see Mather, 1990. 

222 
 
of state would for ever leave him in a vulnerable position, as it essentially 
left him dependant on the Confucian tradition, dominated by the literati 
families, for his prestige as emperor. For this reason he set out to rebuild 
the ritual role of an emperor with Buddhist concepts, with the purpose of 
creating his own legitimacy as a ruler. Fully realising the precariousness of 
his position, Emperor Wu made the first steps towards independent 
legitimacy in the field of Confucian ritual. He ordered the compilation of a 
ritual code that would link him directly to the idealized rituals of the Zhou, 
and return the prerogative of determining proper conduct and ceremony to 
the imperial figure. Once this cape had successfully been rounded, he 
could start to inject the traditional state ritual with Buddhist elements until it 
had unrecognisably been transformed to reflect an entirely new vision of 
society and emperorship. Important elements in Liang Wudi’s Buddhist 
reforms were the bodhisattva ideal, karmic retribution, and the concept of 
mofa. The first two concepts were used to re-envision the view on society 
and the role of an emperor therein, while the third concept was mainly 
used to legitimize Emperor Wu’s predominance over the saṃgha. 
In 519, Emperor Wu took the bodhisattva vows in a huge public 
ceremony of his own making. Before undergoing the bodhisattva 
ordination, he removed all symbols of emperorship and put on a monk’s 
robe. By stripping himself of his imperial regalia and giving up his supreme 
position of secular ruler (at least symbolically), he sought to get something 
more potent in return: the image of spiritual mentor to his people, who 
ruled through his superior virtue in walking the bodhisattva path and was 
therefore a leader to be loved, worshiped and emulated. In a time when 
emperors were often no more than pawns in the power struggle between 
powerful political factions who did not really fear or revere whoever was on 
the throne, this newfound religious prestige was much more potent than 
the diluted imperial prestige of old, as it would for the first time since long 
make people care about who was actually on the throne. By assuming the 
role of a bodhisattva who would gladly sacrifice all he has for the sake of 

223 
 
his people, he lifted the perception of the emperor figure to a higher level. 
No longer was the emperor this unreachable man, highly elevated above 
the common people, and somewhat oblivious to their hopes and fears. He 
had become a personal saviour to them all. By creating this direct spiritual 
link between him and his subjects – many of whom followed in Wu’s 
footsteps in taking the bodhisattva vows – he circumvented the traditional 
mediation of the literati in the performance of state ritual. On top of that, it 
created an entirely new vision on society, where the emphasis was on 
universal equality between all living beings. This was a huge turnaround 
from the traditional social model, which was highly hierarchic. To 
strengthen his bodhisattva image, Emperor Wu adopted an almost ascetic 
lifestyle, denouncing all pleasures in life, and drastically cutting back the 
expenditure of his court. 
The notion of karmic retribution was a powerful instrument for giving 
people hope, a sense of purpose, and for tying them all together in a 
universal community wherein everyone looked out for everyone else. Even 
more important, it gave the emperor a means to personally intervene in the 
karmic destiny of his subjects, reinforcing his saviour image. As imperial 
bodhisattva, Wu developed an elaborate program for collecting merit, 
which could then be distributed to everyone in the world to improve their 
present and future lives. Key ceremonies in this merit accumulation 
programme were Emperor Wu’s Great Assemblies. These assemblies, 
which in keeping with notion of universal equality were open for all to 
attend, were all about the accumulation and distribution of merit. Merit was 
mostly accrued from reciting sūtras and making donations, though there 
were also occasional acts of self-immolation by zealous guests. As 
bodhisattva emperor, he took it upon himself to personally lecture on the 
scriptures to help his subjects on the right path to enlightenment, and in a 
display of ultimate giving, he would make a donation of himself to the 
monastic community, only to be ransomed by his ministers for exuberant 
amounts of money. These so-called acts of sheshen (self-renunciation) not 

224 
 
only functioned as fundraisers, but as ceremonies of imperial renewal as 
well, designed to reaffirm Wudi’s image as bodhisattva-emperor. The 
donations raised during the Great Assemblies were deposited in a large 
fund, called the Inexhaustible Treasuries. Money from this fund was used 
to finance Emperor Wu’s Buddhist ritual programme, which had the 
important advantage that no resources had to be arrogated from the state 
treasury. This meant that possible critics of Emperor Wu’s endeavours had 
one less argument to fight his imperial Buddhist programme. Money from 
the Inexhaustible Treasuries was used, among other things, for 
constructing and renovating buildings and statues, supplying monasteries 
with necessities, and buying and releasing animals from butcher shops. As 
such, these Inexhaustible Treasuries had the added advantage of doubling 
the merit earned, as first merit is earned by the person making the 
donation, and then merit is generated again when the money from the 
Treasuries is used to perform meritorious acts. 
  
In changing the ceremonial function of the emperor figure, Liang 
Wudi was careful to provide a sound scriptural foundation for his reforms. 
He realised that, in order for his reforms to be effective and to have a 
lasting effect, he could not simply make changes as he saw fit, for this 
would never be accepted without the backing of solid historical or scriptural 
precedent. The reforms in traditional Confucian ceremony could be 
accomplished without much difficulty. The bearers of that tradition were the 
learned literati families, to which he belonged himself, and as emperor he 
had the prerogative to make changes in imperial ceremony. While the 
literati families held much of the real political power, the still relied on the 
imperial institution for their titles, salary and ideological justification. In that 
respect, it was perceptive of Emperor Wu to set out on his quest to regain 
imperial control in the one area where the literati families stood weak. 
When starting out on the reform of imperial ceremony in 502, he 
surrounded himself with competent and trusted scholars, who would 

225 
 
meticulously comb the Classics in search historical precedents to justify 
his reforms. 
For the Buddhist reforms, things were not so straightforward. Here, 
Emperor Wu had to overcome the rift that existed between those that had 
left the family-life in the pursuit of unworldly goals and those that still 
dwelled in this world. As only the saṃgha was the bearer of the Buddha’s 
teaching, it was they who had the spiritual authority to judge which 
interpretation was correct and which was not. Therefore it was important 
for Emperor Wu to ensure himself of the sanction of the Buddhist monastic 
community if his Buddhist reforms were to be believable. For his 
theoretical, ideological needs, Wu would appeal to influential, well-
respected scholar-monks (so-called dharma-masters, fashi 法師) on an 
individual level, rather than seek the scholarly sanction of the saṃgha as a 
whole. For this purpose he created the institution of jiaseng 家僧 
“Household-monks”. While it might have been enough to receive the 
approval of only a few accomplished scholar-monks on doctrinal issues, 
Emperor Wu still needed the support of the monastic community as a 
whole if his reign was to successfully project the appearance of sanctity. 
He could hardly claim to be a virtuous and effective bodhisattva-leader, if 
the most direct descendants of the Buddha did not support him or behaved 
contrary to the values he propagandised. This part proved to be trickier, as 
after several centuries of being pushed on the defensive by opponents of 
Buddhism, the Buddhist monastic elite had become weary of any sort of 
interference in what they considered to be their own internal affairs. As 
they were no longer a part of this world, the monks and nuns felt that they 
should not subjected to secular rules. In an attempt to assert some form of 
control over the saṃgha without making it look like an outright 
encroachment on their self-proclaimed autonomy, Emperor Wu tried to 
manoeuvre himself into the position of head of the monastic community 
(baiyi sengzheng) with the promise of weighing their actions off according 
to the vinaya, not the regular state laws. He thus promised them freedom 

226 
 
from state control, but under the strict condition that they hold rigorously to 
the vinaya rules, something he would personally see to. This, he claimed, 
was a task appointed to him by the Buddha himself, who had warned that 
in the ages after his parinirvāṇ a, his teaching would gradually be distorted 
until finally it was lost completely while at the same time the monks and 
nuns would become ever more corrupt. At the time of Emperor Wu, a sūtra 
that could lend scriptural authority to this claim already circulated, namely 
the Renwang jing (Scripture of Humane Kings). But probably due to the 
fact that this scripture explicitly blamed the downfall of the Buddhist 
teaching on too much government control, Liang Wudi chose to reject it as 
a spurious scripture (which indeed it was). Nonetheless, it seems that no 
one really objected to the premise that the saṃgha had gone off the rails 
due to the degeneration of the Buddhist teaching, not even members of 
the monastic community itself, at least not those monks whose prestige 
was high enough for their opinions to be valued). When the emperor 
passed around a circular in which he asked the addressed monks to ratify 
his proposal to become a Lay Rectifier of Monks (baiyi sengzheng), it 
seemed that none of the eminent monks dared to oppose, safe for Zhizang. 
Zhizang realised that he stood relatively isolated in his conflict with 
Emperor Wu, because although most of the other monks did not 
necessarily agree with Emperor Wu’s proposal, they were either too 
intimidated by him or had too much personal interest in staying on Wudi’s 
good side to take an opposing stand. Therefore, Zhizang took on Emperor 
Wu in a polemic discussion on the premise that it was impossible for 
anyone, even the emperor to reverse the devolution of the monastic 
community. What won Zhizang the debate in the end, was his ability to 
single out the contradictions in Emperor Wu’s newly crafted Buddhist world 
vision. If the emperor was genuinely a bodhisattva – which is what he 
claimed to be after his bodhisattva ordination several years before – then 
his vows of compassion would actually prohibit him from punishing those 
who committed an offence. When the emperor, grasping at straws, 

227 
 
retorted that it was said that the ruler is entrusted with governing the 
saṃgha and not that he should not punish them, Zhizang cites the 
example of Devadatta, the Buddha’s wicked cousin, who was not 
disciplined by the Buddha despite of his many sins. When Emperor Wu 
has to admit with shame that he has never heard of Devadatta, he is 
furious with his advisers, who have failed to foresee this argument. This is 
a good example of how much Emperor Wu relied on scriptural authority to 
make his claims stand. Since he was unable to scrutinize all the Buddhist 
scriptures personally, he had to rely on scholar monks to assist him. And 
when they failed to cover all their bases, the consequences could be bad, 
as Emperor Wu was forced to abandon his plan to become de-facto head 
of the monastic community. Once Emperor Wu realised that institutional 
control was no longer a viable option, he chose to pursue a different 
strategy. Instead of personally taking control of the saṃgha as a secular 
ruler, he shifted his focus back to developing the bodhisattva ideal in order 
to put pressure on the saṃgha to change its ways from within. In 519 Wudi 
had taken the bodhisattva vows in an elaborate public ordination ceremony. 
The idea of taking the bodhisattva vows itself was not new, but Emperor 
Wu had redrafted the existing scriptures on the subject to come up with 
two separate ceremonies for monks and laymen. As the first to be 
ordained according to the new bodhisattva ordination ceremony, Emperor 
Wu enjoyed of spiritual seniority over those who followed in his footsteps 
(as per the Fanwang jing), but at the same time he stood on a par with all 
other members of this new religious community, bound together in equality 
to all strive for the salvation of others. The immense popularity of the 
bodhisattva ordination among the laity (which, as we have seen, was 
probably artificially heightened by incentive and pressure mechanisms 
such as registries) put an increased pressure on the saṃgha to live up to 
the standards expected of it. When so many lay people vowed to live by 
the bodhisattva precepts, it was only natural for them to expect of those 
who had left the family life to devote themselves to unhindered spiritual 

228 
 
practice to exhibit an even more highly developed sense of propriety. This 
is how we have to understand Emperor Wu’s pressure on the monastic 
community to adopt a vegetarian diet. Since he wanted to create a new 
kind of universal community, wherein everyone looked out for everyone 
else, he emphatically integrated the Buddhist concept of karmic retribution 
with the Confucian concept of filial piety. After having defended the 
existence of a transmigrating self (shen), Emperor Wu, in his address 
called Duan jiurou wen, pointed out to the people that these shen were 
represented in all stages of the cycle of life and death, including animals 
and insects. Thus by eating meat, one could effectively be devouring a 
deceased relative who had been reborn in animal form. By sensitizing his 
subjects to the issue of eating meat, Emperor Wu extended his cosmic 
community beyond the living and into the realm of the afterlife. It also 
superseded the traditional concepts of filial piety and ancestor worship by 
adding a universal dimension to them. Filial piety was no longer the 
highest virtue to aspire to, but through the concept of karmic retribution, 
one’s duty to one’s ancestors came to be extended to all living beings. 
 
Though it is difficult to assess how successful Emperor Wu’s 
Buddhist reforms were in restoring power to the throne, there are signs 
that they did at least have an impact on the relation between the emperor 
and the literati families. The Mingbao ji 冥報記 (Records of Miraculous 
Retribution, T.2082)583
 
 tells the following anecdote: 
梁武帝微時。識一寒士。及即位。遊於苑中。見牽舟。帝問
之。尚貧賤如故。敕曰。明日可上謁。吾當與汝縣令。此人奉
敕而往。會故不得見。頻往遇有事。終不得通。自怪之以問沙
門寶誌。誌方為大眾講經。聽者數千人。寒士不得進。寶誌
謂。眾曰。有人欲來見問。請開道內之。眾人乃為開。此人進
                                                 
583 The Mingbao ji is a collection of fifty-seven Buddhist miracle tales, collected by the 
Buddhist layman Tang Lin 唐臨 (ca. 600 - ?) in the mid-seventh century. 

229 
 
未至。寶誌迎謂曰。君為不得縣令來問耶。終不得矣。但受虛
恩耳。過去。帝為齋主。君其疏許施錢五百。而竟不與。是故
今日但蒙許官。終不得也。此人聞之終去。帝亦更不求之。584
When Emperor Wu of the Liang was young, he was 
acquainted with a poor scholar.
 
585
                                                 
584 T.2082.790b4-15. 
 Later, after he ascended 
the throne, while enjoying himself in his [imperial] park the 
emperor saw the same poor scholar towing a boat. The 
emperor questioned him and found out that he was still poor 
and humble as before. “Tomorrow you may come for an 
audience,” the emperor commanded, “and We shall give you 
a position as district magistrate.” The poor scholar received 
the command and went for the audience, but something came 
up and he was unable to see [the emperor]. He often returned 
but something always happened and he never obtained an 
audience. Thinking this odd, he went to aks the śramaṇ a Pao-
chih 寶誌about it. Pao-chih was at that time lecturing on a 
sutra to a large crowd. There were several thousand in the 
audience, and the poor scholar could not gain entry. “There is 
someone who wants to come ask me a question,” said Pao-
chih to the crowd. “Please open a way and let him in.” The 
crowd then opened a path for him, and the poor scholar came 
forward. Before he reached the front, Pao-chih greeted him 
and said, “Is it not because you have failed to obtain the 
position of district magistrate that you come to question me? 
You will never get the position, it is only an empty promise. 
Previously, when the emperor held a vegetarian feast, you 
585 Hanshi 寒士 refers to a member of one of the low ranking literati families that had been 
shut out from higher offices by the powerful families. As we have seen, Emperor Wu actively 
recruited officials from these families, because he hoped they would be more loyal and 
efficient than those from the powerful families, who often did nothing more than to cash their 
paycheques and leave the work to others. See Grafflin, 1990; Holcombe, 1994: 135-136. 

230 
 
wrote out a statement promising five-hundred cash, but you 
never paid up. So now, even though you have been promised 
a position, you will never obtain it.” When the poor scholar 
heard this, he stopped going to court, and the emperor never 
sought him out again.586
 
 
Since the name of the “poor scholar” is not mentioned, there is no way of 
knowing whether this story is true or not. Yet it reflects the social climate of 
the time in a twofold way. First, the story confirms that the assemblies 
organised by Emperor Wu were accessible to people from the lower social 
strata, which reflects that the theory of equality propounded by the 
emperor was applied in practice as well. Second, the story demonstrates 
that the balance of power had tipped slightly in favour of the emperor. 
Wudi was known for attracting officials from low ranking literati families to 
streamline his bureaucratic system, but the protagonist of this story is not 
so lucky. He is promised a job by Emperor Wu, only to learn that the latter 
never intended to keep his word. The reason for this, he is explained, is 
that during one of Emperor Wu’s vegetarian feasts (perhaps a Great 
Assembly?) he had promised to donate five-hundred cash, but had never 
made good on it. As a result, his future career options are completely cut 
off. Although it is significant that the story speaks of a poor scholar, and 
not a member of the high ranking families being blocked from an official 
position due to his stinginess during a Buddhist assembly, it is still a sign 
that Emperor Wu had regained the initiative from the literati families. 
Where before the literati and the emperor were co-dependant on each 
other for their legitimacy to rule society, Emperor Wu seems to have 
succeeded in creating his own Buddhist legitimacy independently from the 
literati families, who due to its success, now had to subject themselves to 
this new imperial legitimacy in order to hold on to theirs. This does not 
mean that the co-dependence had seized to exist all together, but rather 
                                                 
586 Translation by Gjertson, 1989: 169-170. 

231 
 
that the nature of that co-dependence had shifted. Though Buddhism, not 
Confucianism, now legitimised Emperor Wu’s claim on the throne, he still 
needed the support of the powerful literati families, for it was to a large 
degree their wealth which financed his Buddhist imperial programme. Both 
parties, it seems, had come to a silent understanding that an elaborate 
sponsoring of Buddhism, combined with the advocating of a new Buddhist 
vision on society, could serve both sides for the better. On the one hand it 
provided Emperor Wu with a new form of legitimacy in an unstable time 
when emperors followed each other in a rapid succession through murder 
and intrigue and had a hard time justifying their claim on the throne. On the 
other hand, it allowed the literati families to maintain their prestige, but now 
more as magnanimous sponsors of Buddhism, rather than as 
representatives of the Confucian state. Emperor Wu’s reforms turned out 
to be, in the end, a system of mutual advantage and benefit. Perhaps this 
restored balance between the two centrifugal forces of emperor and literati 
is what allowed Emperor Wu to rule for as long as he did, and to turn his 
reign into the golden age of the Southern Dynasties. His creative use of 
Buddhism to restore a certain measure of authority to the imperial 
institution shows that Emperor Wu might perhaps not necessarily have 
been a powerful emperor, but he certainly was a skilled politician and 
ideologue. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

232 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS USED 
 
 
T. 
Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō 大正新修大藏經 (A New Buddhist Canon 
Compiled in the Taishō Reign-era [1912-26]). Edited by Takakusu 
Junijirō 高楠順次郎, Watanabe Kaigyoku 渡邊海旭. 100 vols. 
Tokyo: Taishō issaikyō kankōtai, 1924-1932. Texts are indicated 
by “T.” followed by the text number, and, when appropriate, the 
page, register (a, b, or c) and line number(s). 
 
XZJ. 
(Wan) xu zangjing (卍) 續藏經. 150 vols. Taipei: Xin wenfeng 
chuban gongsi 新文豐出版公司, 1968-70 (Reprint of the Dai 
Nippon zokuzōkyō 大日本續藏經. Edited by Nakano Tatsue 中野達
慧. 120 cases. Kyoto: Zōkyō shoin 藏經書院 , 1905-1912.) Texts 

233 
 
are indicated by “XZJ.” Followed by the volume, page, register (a 
or b) and line number(s). 
 
HY 
Harvard-Yenching Index to the Daoist Canon 
Weng Dujian 翁獨健 (ed.), Daozang zimu yinde 道藏子目引得: 
Combined Indices to the Authors and Titles of Books in Two 
Collections of Taoist Literature, Beijing: Yenching University 
(Harvard-Yenching Institute Sinological Index Series, no. 25.), 
1935. Repr. Taipei: Chengwen, 1966. 
 
 
 
 
PRIMARY SOURCES 
 
 
Ayuwang jing 阿育王經 (Aśokāvadāna), translated by Sengjiapoluo僧伽婆
羅 (*Saṃghavara?/ Saṃghabhara?, 460-524) in 512; T.2043. 
Ayuwang zhuan 阿育王傳 (Aśokavadāna), translated by An Faqin 安法欽 
(d.u.) around 300; T.2042. 
Beishan lu 北山錄 (Record of North Mountain), compiled by Shenqing 神清 
(d. 814); T.2113. 
Bianzheng lun 辯正論 (Treatise on Discerning what is Correct), compiled 
by Falin 法琳 (d. 640) in 626; T.2110. 
Biqiuni zhuan 比丘尼傳 (Biographies of Nuns), compiled by Baochang 寶
唱 (); T.2063. 
Chu sanzang jiji 出三藏記集 (Collection of Records Concerning the 
Translation of the Tripitaka), compiled by Sengyou 僧祐 (445-518) 
ca. 515; T.2145. 
Da Aluohan nantimiduoluo suoshuo fazhu ji 大阿羅漢難提蜜多羅所說法住
記 (Nandimitrāvadāna / Nandimitra's Record of the Dharma 

234 
 
Abodes Explained to the Great Arhats), translated by Xuanzang 玄
奘 (602-664) in 654; T.2030. 
Da banniepan jing jijie 大般涅槃經集解 (Collected Explanations on the 
Mahāparinirvāṇ asūtra), compiled by Baoliang 寶亮 (444-509) in 
512; T.1763. 
Da piluzhe’na chengfo jing shu 大毘盧遮那成佛經疏 (Commentary on the 
Sūtra on Mahāvairocana’s Attaining Buddhahood), translated by 
Śubhakarasimha (Ch. Shanwuwei 善無畏, 635-735); T.1796. 
Da Tang neidian lu 大唐內典錄 (Tang Dynasty Catalogue of the Buddhist 
Scriptures), compiled by Daoxuan 道宣 (596-667) in 664; T.2149. 
Daozang 道藏 : Sanjia ben 三家本 (Daoist Canon: Three Publishing 
Houses Edition). 36 vols. Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin: Wenwu 
chubanshe, Shanghai shudian, and Tianjin guji chuban she, 1988. 
Dazhidu lun 大智度論 (Treatise on the Great Perfection of Wisdom, Skt. 
Mahāprajñāpāramitāśāstra 
), 
attributed 
to 
Nāgārjuna 
and 
translated into Chinese by Kumārajīva (344-413) between 402 and 
405; T.1509. 
Fanwang jing 梵網經 (Brahmajālasūtra), traditionally said to have been 
translated by Kumārajīva in 406, but composed in China, probably 
around the middle of the fifth century; T.1484. 
Fayuan zhulin  法苑珠林 (Forest of Gems in the Garden of the Law), 
compiled by Daoshi 道世 ( ? - 668) in 668; T.2122. 
Fozu lidai tongzai 佛祖歷代通載 (Comprehensive Record of the History of 
the Buddhas and Patriarchs), compiled by Nianchang 念常 (1282-
1344); T.2036. 
Fozu tongji 佛祖統紀 (Comprehensive Records of Buddhism), compiled by 
Zhipan 志磐 (d.u.) between 1258-1269; T.2035. 
Gaoseng zhuan 高僧傳 (Biographies of Eminent Monks), compiled by 
Huijiao (497-554) ca. 530; T.2059. 

235 
 
Guang Hongming ji 廣弘明集 (Further Collection for the Propagation and 
Clarification [of Buddhism]), compiled by Daoxuan 道宣 (596-667) 
in 664; T.2103. 
Guanxi foxingxiang jing 灌洗佛形象經 (Scripture on Bathing the Buddha 
Image), translated by Faju 法炬 (fl. 290-306) around the turn of the 
third century; T.695. 
Han shu 漢書 (History of the Han Dynasty), compiled by Ban Gu 班固 (CE 
32-92) between 58 and 76; Beijing: Zhonghua shuju, 1962. 
Hongming ji 弘明集 (Collection [of Texts] for the Propagation and 
Clarification [of Buddhism]), compiled by Sengyou’s 僧祐 (445-
518); T.2102. 
Hongzan fahua zhuan 弘贊法花傳 (Biographies of [Masters who] 
Expounded and Praised the Lotus Sūtra), compiled by Huixiang 慧
詳 (d. after 706); T.2067. 
Ji gujin fodao lunheng 集古今佛道論衡 (A Collection of Discussions 
concerning the Buddhist Teaching in Past and Present), compiled 
by Daoxuan in 664; T.2104. 
Jiankang shilu 建康實錄 (True records of Jiankang), compiled by Xu Song 
許嵩 ca. 756; colla. & annot. by Zhang Chenshi 張忱石, Shanghai: 
Shanghai guji chubanshe, 1987. 
Jinlou zi 金樓子 (The Master of the Golden Tower), compiled by Xiao Yi 蕭
繹 (508-554; the later Liang Yuandi 梁元帝, r. 552-554); Taibei: 
Shijie shuju, 1962. 
Jinglü yixiang  經律異相 (Different Characteristics of sūtra and vinaya), 
compiled by Baochang and others between 508 and 516; T.2121. 
Jiu Tang shu  舊唐書 (Old History of the Tang Dynasty), compiled by Liu 
Xun 劉咰 between 940 and 945; Beijing: Zhonghua shuju, 1975. 
Kaiyuan shijiao lu  開元釋教錄 (Kaiyuan Era Buddhist Catalogue), 
compiled by Zhisheng 智昇 (658-740) in 730; T.2154. 

236 
 
Liang shu  梁書 (History of the Liang Dynasty), compiled by Wei Zheng 魏
徵 and Yao Silian 姚思廉 between 626 and 636; Beijing: Zhonghua 
shuju, 1973. 
Liangjing siji 梁京寺記 (A Record of the Monasteries in the Capital of the 
Liang), author unknown; T.2094. 
Lidai sanbao ji  歷代三寶集 (Record on the Three Treasures throughout 
History), compiled by Fei Changfang 費長房 (d. after 597) in 597; 
T.2034. 
Meisōden shō 名僧傳抄 (Extracts from the Mingseng zhuan), compiled by 
Shūshō 宗性 (1202-1292) in 1235; XZJ.134.1-34. 
Mingseng zhuan 名僧傳 (Biographies of Famous Monks), compiled by 
Baochang between 510 and 515; some portions preserved in the 
Meisōden shō. 
Mohe banruo boluomi jing 摩訶般若波羅蜜經 (Mahāprajñāpāramitā-sūtra), 
translated by Kumārajīva in 404; T.223. 
Nan shi  南史 (History of the Southern Dynasties), compiled by Li Yanshou 
李延壽 between 627 and 649; Beijing: Zhonghua shuju, 1975. 
Nan Qi shu 南齊書 (History of the Southern Qi Dynasty), compiled by Xiao 
Zixian 蕭子顯 during the Liang Dynasty; Beijing: Zhonghua sjuju, 
1973. 
Quan Sui wen 全隋文 (Complete Writings from the Sui Dynasty); in Yan 
Kejun (ed.), Quan Shanggu Sandai Qin Han Sanguo Liuchao wen 
全上古三代秦漢三國六朝文. Reprint; Kyoto: Chūbun shuppansha, 
1981. 
Renwang banruo boluomi jing 仁王般若波羅蜜經 (Transcendent Wisdom 
Scripture of Humane Kings), attributed to Kumārajīva, but written 
ca. 470-490; T.245. 
Renwang huguo banruo boluomiduo jing 仁王護國般若波羅蜜多經 
(Transcendent Wisdom Scripture of Humane Kings Who Protect 
Their States), “retranslated” by Bukong 不空 (Skt. Amoghavajra; 
705-774) around the middle of the eighth century; T.246. 

237 
 
Shishi jigu lüe  釋氏稽古略 (A Concise History of the Śākya-clan), 
compiled by Jue'an 覺岸 in the Yuan 元 dynasty (1279-1368); 
T.2037. 
Sifen lü shanfan buque xingshi chao 四分律刪繁補闕行事鈔 (A 
Transcription of Abridged Revisions in the Four-Part Vinaya), 
compiled by Daoxuan in 626; T.1804. 
Songshi  宋史 (History of the Song Dynasty), compiled by Tuotuo 脫脫; 
Beijing: Zhonghua shuju, 1977. 
Sui shu 隋書 (History of the Sui Dynasty), compiled by Wei Zheng 魏徵 
between 629 and 636; Beijing: Zhonghua shuju, 1973. 
Wei shu 魏書 (History of the Wei Dynasty), compiled by Wei Shou 魏 收 
between 551 and 554; Beijing: Zhonghua shuju, 1974. 
Weimo jing xuanshu 維摩經玄疏 (Profound Commentary on the 
Vimalakīrtinirdeśasūtra), written by Zhiyi 智顗 (538-597) shortly 
before his death; T.1777. 
Xin Tang shu 新唐書 (New History of the Tang Dynasty), compiled by 
Ouyang Xiu  歐陽修 between 1044 and 1060; Beijing: Zhonghua 
shuju, 1975. 
Xiuxing benqi jing 修行本起經 (Scripture on the Origin of the Self-
Cultivation [of the Buddha]), translated by Zhu Dali 竺大力 (d.u.) 
and Kang Mengxiang 康孟詳 (d.u.) at the end of the second 
century; T.184. 
Xu Gaoseng zhuan  續高僧傳 (Further Biographies of Eminent Monks), 
compiled by Daoxuan in 664 (shortly after his death in 667 an 
expanded edition of his collection of monk biographies was 
published); T.2060. 
Yuedeng sanmei jing 月燈三眛經 (Samādhirājasūtra), translated by 
Narendrayaśas (Ch. Naliantiyeshe 那連提耶舍, 490?-589) in 557; 
T.639. 

238 
 
Zhenzheng lun 甄正論 (Treatise on Determining the Truth), compiled by 
Du Yi 杜乂 (d.u.) during the reign of Empress Wu, sometime after 
690; T.2112. 
Zhenyuan xinding shijiao mulu 貞元新定釋教目錄 (Zhenyuan Era Updated 
Buddhist Catalogue), compiled by Yuanzhao 圓照 in 800; T.2157. 
Zhongjing mulu  眾經目錄 (Catalogue of all Scriptures), compiled by Fajing 
法經 in 594; T.2146. 
Zizhi tongjian 資治通鋻 (Comprehensive Mirror for Aid in Government), 
compiled by Sima Guang司馬光 (1019-1086) and finished in 1084. 
Beijing: Zhonghua shuju, 1956. 
Zhujing yaoji 諸經要集 (Essentials of the Sūtras), compiled by Daoshi 道世 
(?-683); T.2123. 
 
 
SECONDARY SOURCES 
 
 
Agrawala, V.S. (1966), “Some Obscure Words in the Divyāvadāna,” 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 86: 2, pp. 67-75. 
Arndt, Theresia (1994), Meister Lius Traktate zur Erneuerung in 
Krisenzeiten (Liuzi xin-lun): Ein Herrscherspiegel aus Chinas 6. 
Jhd., Frankfurt am Main: Lang. 
Balazs, Etienne (1932), “Buddhistische Studien. Der Philosoph Fan 
Dschen und sein Traktat gegen den Buddhismus”, Sinica 7, pp. 
220-234. 
-------- (1964), Chinese Civilization and Bureaucracy, translated by H. M. 
Wright, New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Barrett, T. H. (2005), “Was there an imperial distribution of Buddha relics in 
ninth-century China?” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African 
Studies 68.3, pp. 451-454. 

239 
 
Bechert, Heinz (1992), “Buddha-field and Transfer of Merit in a Theravāda 
Source”, Indo-Iranian Journal 35.2-3, pp. 95-108. 
Benn, James Alexander (1998), “Where Text meets Flesh: Burning the 
Body as an ‘Apocryphal Practice’ in Chinese Buddhism”, History of 
Religions 37.4, pp. 295-322. 
-------- (2006), “Written in Flames: Self-immolation in Sixth-century 
Sichuan”, T’oung Pao 92.4-5, pp. 117-172. 
-------- (2007), Burning for the Buddha: Self-immolation in Chinese 
Buddhism, Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Berkowitz, Alan J. (1989), Patterns of Reclusion in Early and Early 
Medieval China, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Washington. 
-------- (1995), “Account of the Buddhist Thaumaturge Baozhi”, in Donald S. 
Lopze (ed.), Buddhism in Practice, Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, pp. 578-585. 
-------- (2002), Patterns of Disengagement: The Practice and Portrayal of 
Reclusion in Early Medieval China, Stanford: Stanford University 
Press. 
Bielenstein, Hans (1996), “The Six Dynasties, Volume 1,” Bulletin of the 
Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities 68.  
Bodde, Derk (1956), “Feudalism in China”, in Rushton Coulborn (ed.), 
Feudalism in History, Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp. 
49-92. 
Bokenkamp, Stephen R. (1996-1997), “The Yao Boduo Stele as Evidence 
for the “Dao-Buddhism” of the early Lingbao Scripturs,” Cahiers 
d'Extrême-Asie 9.2, pp. 55-67. 
-------- (1994), “Time after Time: Taoist Apocalyptic History and the 
Founding of the T’ang Dynasty”, in Asia Major 3rd ser., 7.1, pp. 76-
87. 
Brashier, K. (1996), “Han Thanatology and the Division of ‘Souls’”, Early 
China 21: 125-158. 

240 
 
Buswell, Robert E. (ed.) (1990), Chinese Buddhist Apocrypha, Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press. 
Buttars, Ian Bailie (1998),The Formation and Demise of Royal Houses in 
the Period of the Southern Dynasties: A History of the Xiao Family 
During the Song, Southern Qi and Liang (and Later Liang) 
Dynasties (420--581), Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Toronto. 
Cai, Zongqi (ed.) (2001), A Chinese Literary Mind: Culture, Creativity, and 
Rhetoric in Wenxin Diaolong, Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Campany, Robert (1991), “Notes on the Devotional Uses and Symbolic 
Functions of Sutra Texts as Depicted in Early Chinese Buddhist 
Miracle Tales and Hagiographies”, in Journal of the International 
Association of Buddhist Studies 14.1, pp. 28-72. 
-------- (1993), “Buddhist Revelation and Taoist Translation in Early 
Medieval China”, Taoist Resources 4.1, pp. 1-29. 
-------- (1996), Strange Writing: Anomaly Accounts in Early Medieval China, 
Albany: State University of New York Press. 
Chang, Aloysius (1973), “Fan Chen and His ‘Treatise on the Destruction of 
the Soul’”, Chinese Culture 14.4, pp. 1-8. 
Chang, Kang-i Sun (1986), Six Dynasties Poetry, Princeton: Princeton 
University Press. 
Chappell, David W. (1980), “Early Forebodings of the Death of Buddhism”, 
Numen 27.1, pp. 122-154. 
-------- (ed.) (1987), Buddhist and Taoist Practice in Medieval Chinese 
Society, Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press. 
-------- (2005), “The Precious Scroll of the Liang Emperor: Buddhist and 
Daoist Repentance to Save the Dead”, in William Bodiford (ed.), 
Going Forth: Visions of Buddhist Vinaya, Honolulu: University of 
Hawai’i Press, pp. 40-67. 
Chen, Jinhua (1999), Making and Remaking History: A Study of Tiantai 
Sectarian Historiography, Tokyo: The International Institute for 
Buddhist Studies. 

241 
 
-------- (2001), “Holy Alliance: The Court-Appointed ‘Monks of Great Virtue’ 
and Their Religious and Political Role under the Sui Dynasty (581-
617)”, Tang Yanjiu 7, pp. 17-39. 
-------- (2002a), Monks and Monarchs, Kinship and Kingship: Tanqian in 
Sui Buddhism and Politics, Kyoto: Scuola Italiana di Studi sull’Asia 
Orientale. 
-------- (2002b), “Śarīra and Scepter: Empress Wu’s Political Use of 
Buddhist Relics”, Journal of the International Association of 
Buddhist Studies 25.1-2, pp. 33-150. 
-------- (2004), “The Tang Buddhist Palace Chapels”, Journal of Chinese 
Religions 32, pp. 101-175. 
-------- (2006), “Pañcavārṣ ika Assemblies in Liang Wudi’s Buddhist Palace 
Chapel”, Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 66.1, pp. 43-104. 
-------- (2007), “Buddhist Establishments within Liang Wudi’s (r. 502-549) 
Imperial Park”, in Mu-chu Hsu, Jinhua Chen & Lori Meeks (eds.), 
Development 
and 
Practice 
of 
Humanitarian 
Buddhism: 
Interdisciplinary Perspectives, Hua-lien: Tzu-chi University Press, :  
pp. 13-29. 
Ch'en, Kenneth (1952), “Anti-Buddhist Propaganda during the Nan-ch'ao”, 
Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 15, pp. 166-192. 
-------- (1954) “On some factors responsible for anti-Buddhist persecution 
under the Pei-ch'ao”, Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 17.1-2, pp. 
261-273. 
-------- (1963), “A Propos the ‘Feng-fa-yao’ of Hsi Ch'ao,” T'oung Pao 50, 
pp. 79-92. 
-------- (1964), Buddhism in China. A Historical Survey, Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 
-------- (1968), “Filial Piety in Chinese Buddhism,” Harvard Journal of 
Asiatic Studies 28, pp. 81-97. 
-------- (1973), The Chinese Transformation of Buddhism, Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 

242 
 
Ciyi 慈 怡 (ed.) (19894 [1988]), Foguang Da Cidian 佛 光 大 辭 典, 
Gaoxiong, Foguang Chubanshe, 3 Vols. + Index. 
Cook, Constance (2006), Death in Ancient China, Leiden: Brill. 
Corless, Roger J. (1987), “T’an-luan: Taoist Sage and Buddhist 
Bodhisattva”, in David W. Chappell (ed.), Buddhist and Taoist 
Practice in Medieval Chinese Society, Honolulu: University of 
Hawai’i Press, pp. 36-45. 
Chou, Yiliang (1945), “Tantrism in China”, in Harvard Journal of Asiatic 
Studies  8, pp. 241-332. 
Crowell, William G. (1983), “Social Unrest and Rebellion in Jiangnan 
during the Six Dynasties”, Modern China 9, pp. 319-354. 
------- (1990), “Northern Émigrés and the Problems of Census Registration 
under the Eastern Jin and Southern Dynasties”, in Albert Dien 
(ed.), State and Society in Early Medieval China, Hong Kong: 
Hong Kong University Press, pp. 171-210. 
Dalia, Albert (1987), “The ‘political career’ of the Buddhist historian Tsan-
ning”, in David Chappell (ed.), Buddhist and Taoist Practice in 
Medieval Chinese Society, Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 
pp. 146-180. 
Dayal, Har (19992 [1932]), The Bodhisattva doctrine in Buddhist Sanskrit 
literature, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
De Bary, William Theodore, Wing-Tsit Chan, and Chester Tan (eds.) 
(1960), Sources of Chinese Tradition, vol. 1, New York: Columbia 
University Press. 
De Crespigny, Rafe (1990), Generals of the South: The Foundation and 
Early History of the Three Kingdoms State of Wu, Canberra: 
Australian National University. 
De Groot, J.J.M. (1893), Le code du Mahāyāna en Chine , Son influence 
sur la vie monacale et sur le monde laïque, Amsterdam: Johannes 
Müller. 

243 
 
de Jong, J. W. (1979), Buddhist Studies (ed. Gregory Schopen), Berkeley: 
Asian Humanities Press. 
De Rauw, Tom (2005), “Baochang: Sixth-Century Biographer of Buddhist 
Monks… and Nuns?” Journal of the American Oriental Society 
125.1, pp. 203-218. 
-------- (forthcoming), “Zhizang, Defender of the Faith”  
Deeg, Max (1995), “Origins and Development of the Buddhist 
Pañcavārṣ ika – Part 1: India and Central Asia”, Nagoya Studies in 
Indian Culture and Buddhism - Saṃbhāṣā 16, pp. 67-90. 
------- (1997), “Origins and Development of the Buddhist Pañcavārṣ ika – 
Part 2: China”, Nagoya Studies in Indian Culture and Buddhism - 
Saṃbhāṣā 18, pp. 63-96. 
------- (1999), “Das Ende des Dharma und die Ankunft des Maitreya. 
Endzeit- und Neue-Zeit-Vorstellungen im Buddhismus mit einem 
Exkurs 
zur 
Kāśyapa-Legende“, 
Zeitschrift 
für 
Religionswissenschaft 7, pp. 145-169. 
------- (2001), “Der religiöse ‘Synkretismus’ der chinesischen Kaiserin Wu 
Zetian – Versuch einer Staatsreligion?” in Peter Schalk, et. al. (ed.), 
Zwischen Säkularismus und Hierokratie. Studien zum Verhältnis 
von Religion und Staat in Süd- und Ostasien, Uppsala: Uppsala 
University Library, pp. 119-142. 
------- (2005), Das Gaoseng-Faxian-zhuan als religionsgeschichtliche 
Quelle. Der älteste Bericht eines chinesischen buddhistischen 
Pilgermönchs über seine Reise nach Indien mit Übersetzung des 
Textes, Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 
Demiéville, Paul (1924), “Les versions chinoises du Milindapañha,” Bulletin 
de l’École Française d’Extrême-0rient  24.1-2, pp. 1-258. 
-------  (ed.) (1930) : “Bosatsukai 菩薩戒 ,” in Hōbōgirin – Dictionnaire 
encyclopédique du bouddhisme d’après les sources chinoises et 
japonaises. Deuxième fascicule: Bombai – Bussokuseki, Tōkyō: 
Maison Franco-Japonaise, pp. 142-146. 

244 
 
------- (1956-1957) “La pénétration du Bouddhisme dans la tradition 
philosophique chinoise”, Cahiers d'histoire Mondiale 3.1, p. 19-38. 
------- (1986), “Philosophy and Religion from Han to Sui”, in Denis Twitchett 
and Michael Loewe (eds.), The Cambridge History of China, vol. 1: 
The Ch’in and Han Empires, 221 B.C. – A.D. 220, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, pp. 808-872. 
Demiéville, P. – Durt, H. – Seidel, A., 1978, Répertoire du canon 
bouddhique sino-japonais, édition de Taishō (Taishō Shinshū 
Daizōkyō), Paris : Librairie d’Amérique et d’Orient, Tokyo: Maison 
Franco-Japonaise. 
Despeux, Catherine (ed.) (2002), Bouddhisme et lettrés dans la Chine 
médiévale, Paris: Éditions Peeters. 
Dien, Albert E. (1962a), “Yen Chih-T’ui (531-591): A Buddho-Confucian”, 
in Twitchett, D. and A.F. Wright (eds.), Confucian Personalities, 
Stanford: Stanford UP. 
------- (1962b), “The Sa-pao Problem Re-examined”, Journal of the 
American Oriental Society 82.3, pp. 335-346. 
------- (1975), “Elite Lineages and the T’o-pa Accomodation: A Study of the 
Edict of 495”, Journal of the Economic and Social History of the 
Orient 29, pp. 61-88. 
------- (ed.) (1990), State and Society in Early Medieval China, Stanford: 
Stanford University Press. 
Doniger-O’Flaherty, Wendy (ed.) (1980), Karma and Rebirth in Classical 
Indian Traditions, Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Drège, Jean-Pierre (1991), Les Bibliothèques en Chine au Temps des 
Manuscrits 
(jusqu’au 
Xe 
siècle), 
Paris : 
École 
Française 
d’Extrême-Orient. 
Eberhard, Wolfram (1949), Das Toba-Reich Nord Chinas, Leiden: E.J. Brill. 
-------- (1955), “Additional notes on Chinese ‘Gentry Society’”, Bulletin of 
the School of Oriental and African Studies 17, pp. 371-377. 
-------- (1962), Social Mobility in Traditional China, Leiden: E.J. Brill. 

245 
 
-------- (1970), Conquerors and Rulers. Social Forces in Medieval China 
(Second, Revised Edition of 1952), Leiden: E.J. Brill. 
Ebrey, Patricia (1978), The Aristocratic Families of Early lmperial China: A 
Case Study of the Po-ling Ts’ui Family, Cambridge University 
Press. 
-------- (1990), “Towards a Better Understanding of the Late Han Upper 
Class,” in Albert E. Dien (ed.), State and Society in Early Medieval 
China, Stanford: Stanford University Press, pp. 49-72.  
Eccles, Lance (1989), “The seizure of the mandate: establishment of the 
legitimacy of the Liang dynasty”, Journal of Asian History 23.2, pp. 
169-180. 
Farquhar, David, “Emperor as Bodhisattva in the Governance of the Ch’ing 
Empire”, in Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies  38.1, pp. 5-34. 
Faure, Bernard (1991), The Rhetoric of Immediacy: A Cultural Critique of 
Chan/Zen Buddhism, Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
-------- (2002), “Les cloches de la terre,” in Catherine Despeux (ed.), 
Bouddhisme et lettrés dans la Chine médiévale, Paris : Éditions 
Peeters, pp. 25-44. 
Forke, Alfred (1962 [second edition]), Lun-heng: Philosophical Essays of 
Wang Ch’ung, New York: Paragon. 2 vols. 
Forte, Antonino (1976), Political Propaganda and Ideology in China at the 
end of the Seventh Century, Naples : Istituto Universitario 
Orientale. 
--------- (1983), “Daiji 大寺” in Hōbōgirin – Dictionnaire encyclopédique du 
bouddhisme d’après les sources chinoises et japonaises. Sixième 
fascicule: Da – Daijizaiten, Paris: Adrien-Maisonneuve. 
--------- (1990), “The Relativity of the Concept of Orthodoxy in Chinese 
Buddhism”, in Robert E. Buswell (ed.), Chinese Buddhist 
Apocrypha, Honolulu: University of Hawai’I Press, pp. 239-249. 
--------- (2003), “Daisōjō 大僧正” in Hōbōgirin – Dictionnaire 
encyclopédique du bouddhisme d’après les sources chinoises et 

246 
 
japonaises. Huitième Volume: Daishō Kongō – Den’e, Paris: 
Adrien-Maisonneuve, pp. 1043-70. 
Forte, A. – May, J. (1979) : “Chōsai 長齋”, in Hōbōgirin – Dictionnaire 
encyclopédique du bouddhisme d’après les sources chinoises et 
japonaises. Cinquième fascicule: Chootsusho-Chuu, Paris: Adrien-
Maisonneuve, pp. 392a-407a. 
Funayama Tōru 船山徹 (2002), “Shashin no shisō – Rikuchō bukkyō shi no 
ichi danmen 捨身の思想: 六朝仏教史の一断面“, Tōhōgakuhō 74, 
pp. 311-358. 
Fung, Yu-lan (1952), A History of Chinese Philosophy, translated by Derk 
Bodde, Princeton : Princeton University Press, 2 vols. 
-------- (1953), A History of Chinese Philosophy, volume II: The period of 
Classical Learning (From the Second Century B.C. to the 
Twentieth Century A.D.), translated by Derk Bodde, Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 
Fukui, Fumimasa-Bunga (1969), “Buddhism and the Structure of Ch’ing-
t’an (‘Pure Discourses’) – A Note on Sino-Indian Intercourse”, 
Chinese Culture 10.2, pp. 21-45. 
Garrett, Mary M. (1997), “Chinese Buddhist Religious Disputation”, 
Argumentation 11.2, pp. 195-209. 
Gernet, Jaques (1960), “Les suicides par le feu chez les bouddhistes 
chinois de Ve au Xe siècle”, Mélanges Publiés par l’Institute des 
Hautes Études Chinoises 2, pp. 527-558. 
-------- (1995), Buddhism in Chinese Society : an economic history from the 
fifth to the tenth centuries, (translated by Franciscus Verellen) New 
York : Columbia University Press. 
-------- (1996), A History of Chinese Civilization (second edition; translated 
by J.R. Foster and Charles Hartman), Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Gibbs, Donald A. (1970-1971), “Liu Hsieh, Author of the Wen-hsin tiao-
lung”, Monumenta Serica 29, pp.117-141. 

247 
 
Gjertson, Donald E. (1989), Miraculous Retribution. A Study and 
Translation of T’ang Lin’s Ming-pao chi, Berkeley : University of 
California. 
Gombrich, Richard (1971), “’Merit Transference’ in Sinhalese Buddhism: A 
Case Study of the Interaction between Doctrine and Practice”, 
History of Religions 11.2, pp. 203-219. 
Gómez, Luis O. (1996), The Land of Bliss: The Paradise of the Buddha of 
Measureless Light, Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Goossaert, Vincent & Valentine Zuber, “La Chine a-t-elle connu 
l’anticléricalisme ?“, Extrême Orient-Extrême Occident 24, pp. 5-
16.  
Grafflin, Dennis (1981) „The Great Family in Medieval South China“, in 
Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 41, pp. 65-74. 
-------- (1983), “The Onomastics of Medieval South China: Patterned 
Naming in the Lang-yeh and T’ai-yüan Wang”, Journal of the 
American Oriental Society 103.2, pp. 383-398. 
-------- (1990) “Reinventing China: Pseudobureaucracy in the Early 
Southern Dynasties”, in Albert Dien (ed.), State and Society in  
Early Medieval China, Stanford: Stanford University Press, pp. 
139-170. 
Graham, A. C. (1959), “ ‘Being’ in Western Philosophy Compared with 
Shih/Fei and Yu/Wu in Chinese Philosophy”, Asia Major, new 
series 7.1-2, pp. 79-112. Reprinted, with revisions, in Studies in 
Chinese Philosophy and Philosophical Literature, Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 1990. 
Granoff, Phyllis and Koichi Shinohara (eds.) (1988), Monks and Magicians: 
Religious Biographies in Asia, Oakville: Mosaic Press. 
Gregory, Peter (1991), Tsung-mi and the Sinification of Buddhism, 
Princeton: Princeton UP. 
Grönbold, Günter (1984), Der Buddhistischen Kanon: eine Bibliographie, 
Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. 

248 
 
Groner, Paul, 1990a, “The Fan-wang ching and Monastic Discipline in 
Japanese Tendai: A Study of Annen’s Futsū jubosatsukai 
kōshaku”, in Buswell, R. (ed.), Chinese Buddhist Apocrypha, 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, pp. 251-290. 
-------- (1990b), “The Ordination Ritual in the Platform Sūtra within the 
Context of the East Asian Buddhist Vinaya Tradition”, in Fo Kuang 
Shan Report of the International Conference on Ch’an Buddhism, 
Kaohsiung: Fo-kuang shan, pp. 220-250. 
Guisso, Richard W.L. (1978), Wu Tse-t’ien and the Politics of Legitimation 
in T’ang China, Bellingham: Western Washington University. 
Han Guopan 韓國磐(1963), Nanchao jingji shilüe 南朝經濟史略, Shanghai: 
Renmin chubanshe. 
Han Sheng 韓昇 (1998), Sui Wendi 隋文帝, Beijing: Renmin chubanshe. 
Hara, Minoru, 1968-1969, “Transfer of Merit”, Adyar Library Bulletin 31-32, 
pp. 384-411. 
Harrell, Steven (1979), “The concept of soul in Chinese folk religion”, 
Journal of Asian Studies 38.3, pp. 519-528. 
Harvey, Peter (1990), An Introduction to Buddhism: Teachings, History 
and Practices, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Heirman, Ann (2001), “Chinese Nuns and Their Ordination in Fifth Century 
China,” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist 
Studies 24.2, pp. 275-304. 
Heirman, Ann & Tom De Rauw (2006), “Offenders, Sinners and Criminals: 
the Consumption of Forbidden Food,” Acta Orientalia 59.1, pp. 57-
83. 
Hendrischke, Barbara, 1991, “The Concept of Inherited Evil in the Taiping 
jing,” East Asian History 2, pp. 1-30. 
Ho Ziquan 何茲全編 (1986), Wushi nianlai Han Tang fojiao siyuan jingji 
yanjiu 五十年來漢唐佛教寺院經濟研究, Beijing: Beijing shifan 
daxue chubanshe. 

249 
 
Holcombe, Charles (1989), “The Exemplar State: Ideology, Self-Cultivation, 
and Power in Fourth-Century China”, in Harvard Journal of Asiatic 
Studies 49.1, pp. 93-139. 
-------- (1994), In the Shadow of the Han: Literati Thought and Society at 
the Beginning of the Southern Dynasties, Honolulu: University of 
Hawai’i Press. 
-------- (1995), “Re-imagining China: the Chinese Identity Crisis at the Start 
of the Southern Dynasties”, in Journal of the American Oriental 
Society 115.1, pp. 1-14. 
Holmes, Welch & Anna Seidel (eds.) (1979), Facets of Taoism: essays in 
Chinese Religion, New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Holmgren, Jennifer (1995), Marriage, Kinship and Power in Northern China, 
Aldershot: Variorum. 
Holt, John C. (1981), “Assisting the Dead by Venerating the Living: Merit 
Transfer in the Early Buddhist Tradition”, Numen 28.1, pp. 1-28. 
Holzman, Donald (1957), “Les débuts du système medieval de choix et de 
classement des fonctionnaires: Les neuf categories et l’impartial et 
juste”, Mélanges Publiés par l’Institut des Hautes Études 
Chinoises, vol. 1, Paris : College de France, pp. 387-414. 
-------- (1956), “Les sept sages de la forêt des bambous et la société de 
leur temps”, T’oung Pao 44.4-5, pp. 317-346. 
Horner, Isaline B. (1963-1964), Milinda’s Questions, Oxford : Pali Text 
Society, 2 vols. 
Hsiao, Bea-hui (1995), Two Images of Maitreya: Fu Hsi and Pu-tai Ho-
shang, Ph.D. Dissertation, School of Oriental and African Studies, 
University of Londen. 
Hu, Shih 胡適 (1945-1946), “The Concept of Immortality in Chinese 
Thought,” Harvard Divinity School Bulletin, pp. 23-43. 
-------- (1984), “Kao Fan Zhen fabiao <Shenmie lun> zai Liang Tianjian liu 
nian 考范縝發表 <神滅論> 在梁天監六年,” in Hu Songping 胡頌平 
(ed.), Hu Shizhi xiansheng nianpu changbian chugao 胡適之先生

250 
 
年譜長編初稿 (10 vols.), Taibei: Lianjing chuban shiye gongsi. Vol. 
5, pp. 1902-1906.  
Huang, Chi-chiang (1998), “Consecrating the Buddha: Legend, Lore, and 
History of the Imperial Relic-Veneration Ritual in the T’ang 
Dynasty”, Zhonghua Journal of Buddhist Studies 11, pp. 483-533. 
Hubbard, Jamie (1993), “Review of Jan Nattier’s Once Upon a Future 
Time”, Eastern Buddhist n.s. 26.1, pp. 138-146. 
-------- 1999, “A Tale of Two Times: Preaching in the Latter Age of the 
Dharma”, Numen 46.2, pp. 186-210. 
-------- (2001), Absolute Delusion, Perfect Buddhahood: The Rise and Fall 
of a Buddhist Heresy, Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Hucker, Charles O. (1985), A Dictionary of Official Titles in Imperial China, 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Hureau, Sylvie (2002), “L'apparition de thèmes anticléricaux dans la 
polémique anti-bouddhique médiévale”, Extrême Orient-Extrême 
Occident 24, p. 17-29. 
Hurvitz, Leon (1957), “’Render unto Ceaser’ in Early Chinese Buddhism: 
Hui-yuan's Treatise on the Exemption of the Buddhist Clergy from 
the Requirements of Civil Etiquette”, Sino-Indian Studies 5.3-4, pp. 
80-114. 
---------, “The first systematizations of Buddhist thought in China”, Journal 
of Chinese Philosophy 2.4, pp. 361-388 
--------- (1956a), “Wei shu on Buddhism and Taoism”, Zimbun Kagaku 
Kenkyushyo, Kyoto, pp. 25-103. 
--------- (1956b), Wei Shou: Treatise on Buddhism and Taoism, in Mizuno, 
S. and Nagahiro, T. (eds.), Yün-kang: The Buddhist Cave-temples, 
Kyoto: Jinbun kagaku kenkyujo. 
Jan, Yün-hua (1965), “Buddhist Self-Immolation in Medieval China,” 
History of Religions 4.2, pp. 243-265. 

251 
 
Janousch, Andreas (1998), The reform of imperial ritual during the reign of 
Emperor Wu of the Liang Dyansty (502-549), Ph.D. Dissertation, 
University of Cambridge. 
-------- (1999), “The emperor as bodhisattva: the bodhisattva ordination and 
ritual assemblies of Emperor Wu of the Liang dynasty”, in J.P. 
McDermott (ed.), State and Court Ritual in China, Cambridge: 
University of Cambridge Press. 
Jansen, Thomas (2000) Höfische Öffentlichkeit im frühmittelalterlichen 
China: Debatten im Salon des Prinzen Xiao Ziliang, Freibrug: 
Rombach Verlag. 
--------, (2001) “Der chinesische Kaiser Liang Wudi (reg. 502-549) und der 
Buddhismus”, in Peter Schalk et.al. (ed.), Zwischen Säkularismus 
und Hierokratie: Studien zum Verhältnis von Religion und Staat in 
Süd- und Ostasien, Stockholm: Uppsala. 
Jao, Tsong-yi (1984), “Le ‘Vœu de la capitale de l’Est’ de l’empereur Wu 
des Liang,” in Michel Soymié (ed.), Contributions aux Etudes de 
Touen-huang, Volume 3, Paris : École Française d’Extrême-Orient, 
pp. 143-154. 
Johnson, David G. (1977), The Medieval Chinese Oligarchy, Boulder, Col.: 
Westview Press. 
Jones, Charles B. (2001), “Apologetic Strategies in Late Imperial Chinese 
Pure Land Buddhism”, Journal of Chinese Religions 29, pp. 69-90. 
Kawakatsu Yoshio (1971), “La décadence de l’aristocratie chinoise sous 
les Dynasties du Sud”, Acta Asiatica 21, pp. 13-38. 
Kawamura, L. (ed.), 1981, The Bodhisattva Doctrine in Buddhism, Ontario: 
Wilfred Laurier University Press. 
Keenan, John P. (1994), How Master Mou Removes our Doubts: a reader 
response study and translation of the Mou-tzu Li-huo lun, Albany: 
State University of New York Press. 

252 
 
Kern, Martin (1997), Die Hymnen der chinesischen Staatsopfer: Literatur 
und Ritual in der politischen Repräsentation von der Han-Zeit bis 
zu den Sechs Dynastien, Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag. 
Kieschnick, John (1997), The Eminent Monk: Buddhist Ideals in Medieval 
Chinese Hagiography, Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
--------- (2001), “Blood Writing in Chinese Buddhism”, Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist Studies 23.2, pp. 177-194. 
--------- (2003), The impact of Buddhism on Chinese material culture, 
Princeton: Princeton UP 
--------- (2005), “Buddhist Vegetarianism in China”, in Roel Sterckx (ed.), Of 
Tripod and Palate. Food, Politics, and Religion in Traditional China, 
New York: MacMillan, pp. 186-212. 
Kieser, Annette (2002), Landadel – Emigranten – Emporkömmlinge: 
Familienfriedhöfe des 3.–6. Jahrhunderts n.Chr. in Südchina, 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag. 
-------- (2004), Grabanlagen der Herrscherhäuser der südlichen Dynastien 
in China (420 -589): Geisterwege und Gräber im Spiegel der 
Geschichte, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag. 
Knechtges, David R. (1982), Wen Xuan or Selections of Refined Literature, 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Kohn, Livia (1990), “Eternal Life in Taoist Mysticism,” Journal of the 
American Oriental Society 110.4, pp. 622-640. 
-------- (1995), Laughing at the Tao: Debates among Buddhists and Taoists 
in Medieval China, Princeton: Princeton UP. 
Kubozoe, Yoshifumi (1991), “Japanese Research in Recent Years on the 
History of Wei, Chin, and the Northern and Southern Dynasties”, in 
Acta Asiatica 60, pp. 104-134. 
Kuhn, Philip (1991),  
Kuo, Li-ying (1994), Confession et contrition dans le bouddhisme chinois 
du Ve au Xe siècle, Paris: Publications de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient. 

253 
 
Lai, Whalen (1978), “Sinitic Understanding of the Two Truths Theory in the 
Liang Dynasty (502-557): Ontological Gnosticism in the Thoughts 
of Prince Chao-ming”, Philosophy East and West 28.3, pp. 339-
351. 
-------- (1980), “Further Developments of the Two Truths Theory in China: 
The "Ch'eng-shih-lun" Tradition and Chou Yung's "San-tsung-lun", 
Philosophy East and West 30.2, pp. 139-161  
-------- (1981a), “Emperor Wu of Liang on the Immortal Soul, Shen Pu 
Mieh,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 101: 2, pp. 167-
175. 
-------- (1981b), “Beyond the debate on 'The Immortality of the Soul': 
recovering an essay by Shen Yue”, Journal of Oriental Studies 
19.2, pp. 138-157. 
--------- (1983), “The early Prajñ
ā schools, especially "Hsin
-wu," 
reconsidered”, Philosophy East and West 33.1, pp. 31-77. 
-------- (1987), “The Earliest Folk Buddhist Religion in China: T’i-wei Po-li 
Ching and its Historical Significance”, in David W. Chappell (ed.), 
Buddhist and Taoist Practice in Medieval Chinese Society 
(Buddhist and Taoist Studies II), Honolulu: University of Hawai’i 
Press, pp. 11-35. 
Lamotte, Etienne (1958), Histoire du bouddhisme indien, Louvain : Institut 
Orientaliste. 
-------- (1962), L’Enseignement de Vimalakirti, Louvain: Bibliothèque du 
Muséon. 
-------- (1987), “Religious Suicide in Early Buddhism”, Buddhist Studies 
Review 4, pp. 105-126. 
Lau, D.C. (1979), The Analects (Lun Yü), London: Penguin Books. 
-------- (2003 [revised edition from 1970]), Mencius, London: Penguin 
Books. 
Lavoix, Valérie (2002), “La contribution des laïcs au végétarisme: 
Croisades et polémiques en Chine du Sud autour de l’an 500”, in 

254 
 
Catherine Despeux (ed.), Bouddhisme et lettrés dans la Chine 
médiévale, Paris: Éditions Peeters, pp. 103-143. 
Lee, Janghee (2005), Xunzi and Early Chinese Naturalism, Albany: State 
University of New York Press. 
Lee, Thomas H.C. (2000), Education in Traditional China. A History, 
Leiden: Brill. 
Legge, James (1879), The Sacred Books of China. The Texts of 
Confucianism, Part One: The Shu King, The Religious Portion of 
the Shih King, The Hsiao King, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
-------- (1885), The Sacred Books of China. The Texts of Confucianism, 
Part Three: The Li Ki, Oxford: Clarendon Press, fasc. repr. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass, 1966. 
-------- (19652 [1886]), A Record of Buddhist Kingdoms, New York: 
Paragon Books. 
-------- (19702 [1960]), The Chinese Classics. 5 vols. Hong Kong: Hong 
Kong University Press [corrected reprint of 1895, Oxford, 
Clarendon Press]. 
Lehtonen, Tommi (2000), “The Notion of Merit in Indian Religions”, Asian 
Philosophy 10.3, pp. 189-204. 
Lévi, S. & É. Chavannes (1916), “Les Seize Arhat Protecteurs de la Loi”, 
Journal Asiatique 8, pp. 5-50, 189-304. 
Lewis, Mark E. (1990), “The Suppression of the Three Stages Sect: 
Apocrypha as a Political Issue,” in Robert E. Buswell (ed.), 
Chinese Buddhist Apocrypha, Chinese Buddhist Apocrypha, 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, pp. 207-238. 
Li Wansheng 李萬生 (2003), Hou Jing zhi luan yu Beichao zheng ju 侯景之
亂與北朝政局, Beijing: Zhongguo shehui chubanshe. 
Liebenthal, Walter. (1950), “Shih Hui-yüan's Buddhism as Set Forth in His 
Writings”, Journal of the American Oriental Society 70, pp. 243-
259. 

255 
 
--------- (1952), “The Immortality of the Soul in Chinese Thought,” 
Monumenta Nipponica 8, pp. 327-396. 
--------- (1955), “Chinese Buddhism during the Fourth and Fifth Centuries”, 
Monumenta Nipponica 11.1, pp. 44-83. 
Link, Arthur E., “Sun Ch'o's Yü-tao-lun: a clarification of the Way”, 
Monumenta Serica 25, pp.169-169. 
-------- (1961), “Cheng-wu lun: The Rectification of Unjustified Criticism,” 
Oriens Extremus 8, pp. 136-165. 
-------- 
(1957a), 
"Shyh 
Daw-an's 
preface 
to 
Samgharaksa's 
Yogacarabhumisutra 
and 
the 
problem 
of 
Buddho-Taoist 
terminology in early Chinese Buddhism", Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 77, pp. 1-14. 
-------- (1957b), “Remarks on Shih Seng-yu’s Ch’u san-tsang chi-chi as a 
source for Hui-chiao’s Kao-seng chuan as evidenced in two 
versions of the biography of Tao-an”, Oriens 10, pp.292-295. 
-------- (1960), “Shih Seng-yu and his writings”, Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 80.1, pp. 17-43. 
-------- (1969-70), “The Taoist Antecedents of Tao-an’s Prajna Ontology,” 
History of Religions 9.2-3, pp.181-215. 
Liu Jiahe & Shao Dongfang (1992), “Early Buddhism and Taoism in China 
(AD 65-420),” Buddhist-Christian Studies 12, pp. 35-41. 
Liu, Shufen (1997), “Art, Ritual and Society: Buddhist Practice in Rural 
China during the Northern Dynasties”, Asia Major 8:1, pp. 19-46. 
Liu, Yanchi (1988), The Essential Book of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Volume 1: Theory, New York: Columbia University Press. 
Liu, Ming-Wood (1987), “Fan Chen's “Treatise on the Destructibility of the 
Spirit” and its Buddhist Critics”, Philosophy East and West 37.4, pp. 
402-428. 
-------- (1989), “Early development of Buddha-nature doctrine in China,” 
Journal of Chinese Philosophy 16.1, pp. 1-36. 

256 
 
Lo, Yuet Keung (1991), The Destiny of the ‘Shen’ (Soul) and the Genesis 
of Early Medieval Confucian Metaphysics (221-587 AD), Ph.D. 
dissertation, University of Michigan. 
Loewe, Michael (1979), Ways to paradise: Chinese quest for immortality, 
Boston: Allen & Unwin. 
-------- (1982), Chinese ideas of life and death: faith, myth and reason in 
the Han period, Londen: George, Allan, and Unwin. 
Maeda Shigeki, 2006, “Between Karmic Retribution and Entwining 
Infusion”, in Benjamin Penny (ed.), Daoism in History. Essays in 
Honour of Liu Ts’un-yan, London: Routledge, pp. 101-120. 
Magnin, Paul (1979), La vie et l’oeuvre de Huisi (515-577) : les origines de 
la secte bouddhique chinoise du Tiantai, Paris : École Française 
d’Extrême-Orient. 
Mair, Victor (2002), “Wenxin Diaolong and Buddhism,” in Antonino Forte 
and Federico Masini (eds.), A Life Journey to the East. Sinological 
Studies in Memory of Giuliano Bertuccioli (1923-2001), Kyoto: 
Italian School of East Asian Studies, pp. 45-76. 
Makita Tairyō 牧田諦亮 (1973), “Kōsōden no seiritsu (jō) 高僧傳の成立 
(上),” Tōhōgakuhō 44, pp. 101-125. 
--------- (1975), “Kōsōden no seiritsu (ka) 高僧傳の成立 (下),” Tōhōgakuhō 
48, pp. 229-225. 
-------- (1973-1975) (ed.), Kōmyōshū kenkyū 弘明集研究, Kyōto: Kyōto 
daigaku jinbun kagaku kenkyūsho, 3 vols. 
Malalasekera, G.P. (1967), “’Transference of Merit’ in Ceylonese 
Buddhism”, Philosophy East and West 17.1-4, pp. 85-90. 
Marney, John (1976), Liang Chienwen ti, Boston: Twayne. 
Martin, François (2002), “Les « Quatre Portes de la Ville » - Pratique 
bouddhique et jeu poétique sous les Six Dynasties”, in Catherine 
Despeux (ed.), Bouddhisme et lettrés dans la Chine médiévale, 
Paris: Éditions Peeters, pp. 67-102. 

257 
 
Mather, Richard B. (1955), “The Conflict of Buddhism with Native Chinese 
Ideologies”, The Review of Religion 20.1-2, pp. 25-37. 
-------- (1963), “Wang Chin’s ‘Dhūta Temple Stele Inscription’ as an 
Example of Buddhist Parallel Prose”, Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 83.3, pp. 338-359. 
-------- (1968), “Vimalakirti and Gentry Buddhism”, History of Religions 8.1, 
pp.60-73. 
-------- (1969-70), “The Controversy over Conformity and Naturalness 
during the Six Dynasties”, History of Religions 9.2-3, pp. 160-180. 
-------- (1976), Shih-shuo Hsin-yü: A New Account of Tales of the World, 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
-------- (1981), “The Bonze’s Begging Bowl: Eating Practices in Buddhist 
Monasteries of Medieval India and China”, Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 101.4, pp. 417-424. 
-------- (1987), “The Life of the Buddha and the Buddhist Life: Wang Jung’s 
(468-93) “Songs of Religious Joy” (Fa-le tz’u)”, Journal of the 
American Oriental Society 107.1, pp. 31-38. 
-------- (1988), The Poet Shen Yüeh (441-513): The Reticent Marquis, 
Princeton: Princeton UP. 
-------- (1990) “Intermarriage as a Gauge of Family Status in the Southern 
Dynasties”, in Albert E. Dien (ed.), State and Society in Early 
Medieval China, Stanford: Stanford UP, pp. 211-228. 
McDermott, J. P. (1971), Developments in the Early Buddhist Concept of 
Kamma/Karma, Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University. 
-------- (1974), “Sādhīna Jātaka: A Case against the Transfer of Merit”, 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 94.3, pp. 385-387. 
-------- (1977), “Kamma in the Milindapañha”, Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 97.4, pp. 460-468. 
-------- (1980), “Karma and Rebirth in Early Buddhism”, in Doniger-
O’Flaherty (ed.), Karma and Rebirth in Classical Indian Traditions, 
Berkeley: University of California Press, pp. 165-192. 

258 
 
-------- (ed.) (1999), State and Court Ritual in China, Cambridge: 
Cambridge U.P.. 
Meier, F. J. (1972), “Probleme der chinesischen Übersetzer des 
buddhistischen Kanons”, Oriens Extremus 19, pp. 41-46. 
Minoru Sunayama (1976), “On Yüeh-kuang t’ung-tzu: Liu Ching-hui’s 
Rebellion and Shou-luo-pi-ch’iu-ching 月光童子劉景丹暉の反乱と
首羅比丘経”, Tōhōgaku 51, pp. 55-71. 
Miščević, Dušanka (1993), “Oligarchy or Social Mobility: A Study of the 
Great Clans of Early Medieval China”, Bulletin of the Museum of 
Far Eastern Antiquities 65, pp. 4-256. 
Miyakawa, Hisayuki (1960), “The Confucianization of South China,” in 
Arthur F. Wright (ed.), The Confucian Persuasion, Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, pp.xx-xx. 
Miyazaki Ichisada 宫崎市定 (1956), Kyūhin kanjinhō no kenkyū: kakyo 
zenshi  九品官人法の研究: 科举前史, Kyoto: Tōyōshi Kenkyūkai. 
Mizuno, 
Kōgen 
(1982), 
Buddhist 
Sutras: 
Origin, 
Development, 
Transmission, Tokyo: Kōsei Publishing Co. 
Mollier, Christine (1990), Une apocalypse taoïste du Ve siècle: Le livre des 
incantations divines des grottes abyssales, Paris: Collège de 
France. 
Mori Mikisaburō 森三樹三郎 (1956), Ryō no Butei: Bukkyō ōchō no higeki 
梁の武帝: 仏教王朝の 悲劇, Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten. 
Nakamura Hajime 中村元 (19855 [1981]), Bukkyogo Daijiten 佛 教 語 大 
辞 典, Tokyo, Tokyo Shoseki Kabushikikaisha 
Nakamura Keiji 中村圭尔 (1987), Rikuchō kisokusei kenkyū 六朝研究, 
Tōkyō: Kazama shobō. 
Nattier, Jan (1991), Once Upon a Future Time: Studies in a Buddhist 
Prophecy of Decline, Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press. 
Neufeldt, Ronald (ed.) (1986), Karma and Rebirth. Post-Classical 
Developments, Albany: State University of New York Press. 

259 
 
Ning, Chen (1997), “The Concept of Fate in Mencius”, Philosophy East 
and west 47.4, pp. 495-520. 
Ohnuma, Reiko (1997), Dehadāna: The ‘Gift of the Body’ in Indian 
Buddhist Narrative Literature, Ph.D. dissertation, University of 
Michigan. 
-------- (1998), “The Gift of the Body and the Gift of the Dharma”, History of 
Religions 37.4, pp. 323-359. 
Orzech, Charles D. (1998), Politics and Transcendent Wisdom: The 
Scripture for Humane Kings in the Creation of Chinese Buddhism, 
Pennsylvania: The Pennsylvania State University Press. 
Ōta Teizō 太田悌蔵 (1964), “Ryō Butei no shadō hōbutsu ni tsuite utagau” 
梁武帝の捨道奉仏に ついて疑う, in Yūki Kyōju shōju kinen: 
Bukkyō shisōshi ronshū 結城教授頌寿記念：仏教思想史 論集 (ed. 
Yūki Kyōju Shōju Kinen Ronbunshū Kankōkai 結城教授頌寿記念論
文集刊行會), Tōkyō: Daizō Shuppan, pp. 417-432. 
Overmyer, Daniel (1974), “China”, in Frederick Holck (ed.), Death and 
Eastern Thought: Understanding Death in Eastern Religions and 
Philosophies, Nashville: Abingdon Press, pp. 198-225. 
-------- (1976), Folk Buddhist Religion: Dissenting Sects in Late Traditional 
China, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
-------- (1990), “Buddhism in the Trenches: Attitudes toward Popular 
Religion in Chinese Scriptures Found at Tun-huang”, in Harvard 
Journal of Asiatic Studies 50.1, pp. 197-222. 
Pachow, Wang (1978), “The controversy over the immortality of the soul in 
Chinese Buddhism,” Journal of Oriental Studies 16.1-2, pp. 21-38. 
--------- 
(1983), 
Chinese 
Buddhism: 
aspects 
of 
interaction 
and 
reinterpretation, Boston: University Press of America. 
Palumbo, Antonello (1997), “On the author and date of the Zhenzheng lun. 
An obscure page in the struggle between Buddhists and Taoists in 
Medieval China”, Annali del’Istituto Universitario Orientale, 57.3-4, 
pp. 305-322. 

260 
 
Payne, Richard K. and Kenneth K. Tanaka (eds.) (2004), Approaching the 
land of bliss : religious praxis in the cult of Amitābha, Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press. 
Pearce, Scott (1991), “Status, Labor, and Law: Special Service 
Households under the Northern Dynasties”, Harvard Journal of 
Asiatic Studies 51.1, pp. 89-131. 
-------- (2000), “Who, and What, was Hou Jing?" Early Medieval China 6, 
pp. 49-73. 
Poo, Mu-chou (2004), “The Concept of Ghost in Ancient Chinese Religion”, 
in John Lagerwey (ed.), Religion and Chinese Society, Volume 1: 
Ancient and Medieval China, Hong Kong: The Chinese University 
Press, pp. 173-191. 
Price, A.F. & Wong Mou-lam (trans.) (1969), The Diamond sutra and the 
Sutra of Hui Neng, Boston: Shambhala Publications. 
Przyluski, Jean (1923), La légende de l’empereur Açoka dans les Textes 
Indiens et Chinois, Paris: Paul Geuthner. 
Pulleyblank, Edwin G. (1953), “Gentry Society. Some Remarks on Recent 
Works by W. Eberhard”, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and 
African Studies 15, pp. 588-597. 
Ran Yun-hua, “The Chinese Understanding and Assimilation of Karma 
Doctrine”, in Ronald Neufeldt (ed.), Karma and Rebirth, pp. 158-
165. 
Raphals, Lisa (2003), “Fate, Fortune, Chance, and Luck in Chinese and 
Greek: A Comparative Semantic History”, Philosophy East and 
West 53.4, pp. 537-574. 
Reischauer, E.O. (1955), Ennin’s diary : a record of a pilgrimage to China 
in search of the Law, New York: The Ronald Press Company. 
Ren Jiyu 任繼愈 (1973), Han Tang fojiao sixiang lunji 漢唐佛教思想論集, 
Beijing: Renmin chubanshe. 
Rhys Davids, T.W. (1890-1894), The Questions of King Milinda, Sacred 
Books of the East vols. 35-36, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

261 
 
Rogers, Michael C. (1968), “The Myth of the Battle of the Fei River (A.D. 
383)”, T’oung Pao 54: 1-3, pp. 50-72. 
Sabban, Françoise (1993), “La viande en Chine: imaginaire et usages 
culinaires”, Anthropozoologica 18: 79-90. 
Samuels, Jeffrey (1997), “The Bodhisattva Ideal in Theravāda Buddhist 
Theory and Practice: A Reevaluation of the Bodhisattva-Śrāvaka 
Opposition”, Philosophy East and West 47.3, pp. 399-415. 
Sangren, P. Steven (1987), History and Magical Power in a Chinese 
Community, Stanford: Stanford UP. 
Sargent, Galen (1957), “Tan-yao and His Times,” Monumenta Serica 16, 
pp. 363-396. 
Schalk, Peter (ed.) (2001), Zwischen Säkularismus und Hierokratie. 
Studien zum Verhältnis von Religion und Staat in Süd- und 
Ostasien, Uppsala: Uppsala University Library. 
Schmidt-Glintzer, Helwig (1972), „Der Buddhismus im frühen chinesischen 
Mittelalter und der Wandel der Lebensführung bei der Gentry im 
Süden“, Saeculum 23, pp. 269-294. 
-------- (1976), Das Hung-Ming Chi und die Aufnahme des Buddhismus in 
China, Wiesbaden, Franz Steiner Verlag. 
--------- (1989) „Der Literatenbeamte und seine Gemeinde oder der 
Charakter der Aristokratie im chinesischen Mittelalter“, Zeitschrift 
der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 139.2, pp. 397-425. 
Schmidt-Glintzer, Helwig & Jansen, Thomas (1993), „Religionsdebatten 
und Machtkonflikte. Veränderungen in den Machtverhältnissen im 
chinesischen Mittelalter“, in Zeitschrift für Religionswissenschaft 2, 
pp. 50-90. 
Schmidt-Glintzer, Helwig; Achim Mittag and Jörn Rüsen (2005), Historical 
Truth, Historical Criticism, and Ideology: Chinese Historiography 
and Historical Culture from a New Comparative Perspective, 
Leiden: Brill. 

262 
 
Schopen, Gregory (1985), “Two Problems in the History of Indian 
Buddhism: The Layman/Monk Distinction and the Doctrines of the 
Transference of Merit,” Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 10, pp. 
9-47. 
-------- (1997), Bones, Stones, and Buddhist Monks. Collected Papers on 
the Archaeology, Epigraphy, and Texts of Monastic Buddhism in 
India, Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Seidel, Anna (1984a), “Le Sutra merveilleux du Ling-pao Suprême, traitant 
de Lao tseu qui converti les barbares (le manuscrit S. 2081),” in 
Michel Soymié (ed.), Contributions aux Etudes de Touen-huang, 
Volume 3, Paris : École Française d’Extrême-Orient, pp. 305-352. 
--------, 1984b, “Taoist Messianism”, Numen 31.2, pp. 161-174. 
Seiwert, Hubert (2000), “End of Time and New Time in Medieval Chinese 
Buddhism”, in Albert I. Baumgarten (ed.), Apocalyptic Time, 
Leiden: Brill, pp. 1-14. 
-------- (2003), Popular Religious Movements and Heterodox Sects in 
Chinese History, Leiden: Brill 
Sharf, Robert H. (1999), “On the 
Allure of Buddhist Relics”, 
Representations 66, pp. 75-99. 
-------- (2002), Coming to terms with Chinese Buddhism: A reading of the 
Treasure Store Treatise, Honolulu: Hawai’I University Press. 
Shen Fuwei 沈福伟 (2002), “Chitu Guo Lishi Tanyuan 赤土国历史探源”, 
Wenshi 文史61.4, pp. 84-100. 
Shih, Robert (1968), Biographies des moines éminentes (Kao seng 
tchouan) de Houei-kiao, Louvain: Université de Louvain, Institut 
Orientaliste. 
Shih, Vincent Yu-chung (trans.) (1959), The Literary Mind and the Carving 
of Dragons: A Study of Thought and Pattern in Chinese Literature, 
New York: Columbia University Press. 
Shinohara, Koichi , (1988), “Two sources of Chinese Buddhist biographies: 
stūpa inscriptions and miracle stories”, in P. Granoff and K. 

263 
 
Shinohara (eds.), Monks and Magicians: Religious Biographies in 
Asia, Oakville: Mosaic Press, pp. 119-229. 
--------- 
(1990), 
“Daoxuan’s 
Collection 
of 
Miracle 
Stories 
about 
‘Supernatural Monks’ (Shen-seng gan-tong lu): An analysis of its 
sources”, Zhonghua foxue xuebao 中華佛學學報 3, pp. 319-376. 
--------- (1994), “Biographies of Eminent Monks in a comparative 
Perspective: The Function of the Holy in Medieval Chinese 
Buddhism,”  Zhonghua foxue xuebao 中華佛學學報 7, pp. 479-498 
--------- (1998a), “Changing Roles for Miraculous Images in Medieval 
Chinese Buddhism: A Study of the Miracle Image Section in 
Daoxuan’s ‘Ji shenzhou sanbao gantonglu’”, in Richard H. Davis 
(ed.), Images, Miracles, and Authority in Asian Religious Traditions, 
Boulder: Westview Press, pp. 141-188. 
--------- (1998b), “Dynastic Politics and Miraculous Images: The Example of 
Zhuli of the Changlesi Temple in Yangzhou,” in Richard H. Davis 
(ed.), Images, Miracles, and Authority in Asian Religious Traditions, 
Boulder: Westview Press, pp. 189-206. 
--------- (1998c), "Gao Li's discovery of a miraculous image: the evolution of 
Ashoka Image stories in medieval China," The Flowering of a 
Foreign Faith: New Studies in Chinese Buddhist Art. Marg 
Publications, pp. 20-27. 
--------- (1998d), “Evolution of Chan Biographies of Eminent Monks”, 
Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient 85, pp. 305-324. 
-------- (2000), “The Kāṣāya Robe of the Past Buddha Kāśyapa in the 
Miraculous Instruction Given to the Vinaya Master Daoxuan 
(596~667)”, Zhonghua Journal of Buddhist Studies 13.2, pp. 299-
367. 
Skilton, Andrew (1999a), “Four Recensions of the Samādhirājasūtra”, 
Indo-Iranian Journal 42.4, pp. 335-356. 
-------- (1999b), “Dating the Samādhirājasūtra”, Journal of Indian 
Philosophy 27.6, pp. 635-652. 

264 
 
Slingerland, Ted (1996), “The Conception of Ming in Early Confucian 
Thought”, Philosophy East and West 46.4, pp. 567-581. 
Smith, A. (1990 [1901]), Asoka: The Buddhist Emperor of India, New Delhi: 
Low Price Publications. 
Smith, Howard D. (1958), “Chinese Concepts of the Soul”, Numen 5.3, pp. 
165-179. 
Somers, Robert M. (1978-79), “The Society of Early Imperial China: Three 
Recent Studies”, Journal of Asian Studies 38.1, pp. 127-142. 
Soper, Alexander C. (1960), “South Chinese Influence on the Buddhist Art 
of the Six Dynasties Period”, Bulletin of the Museum of Far 
Eastern Antiquities 32, pp. 47-112. 
Soymié, Michel (ed.) (1981), Nouvelles contributions aux études de 
Touen-houang, Genève : librairie Droz. 
-------- (ed.) (1984), Contributions aux études de Touen-houang, Volume 3, 
Paris : École Française d’Extrême-Orient. 
Spade, Beatrice (1979), “The Education of Women in China during the 
Southern Dynasties”, Journal of Asian History 13.1, pp. 15-41. 
Sponberg, Alan and Helen Hardacre (eds.) (1988), Maitreya, the Future 
Buddha, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Stein, Rolf A. (1979), “Religious Taoism and Popular Religion from the 
Second to Seventh Centuries”, in Holmes Welch and Anna Seidel 
(eds.), Facets of Taoism: Essays in Chinese Religion, New Haven: 
Yale University Press, pp. 53-81. 
Sterckx, Roel (ed.) (2005), Of Tripod and Palate. Food, Politics, and 
Religion in Traditional China, New York: Palgrave McMillan. 
Stevenson, Daniel (2001), “Text, Image, and Transformation in the History 
of the Shuilu fahui, the Buddhist Rite for Deliverance of Creatures 
of Water and Land”, in Marsha Weidner (ed.), Cultural 
Intersections in Later Chinese Buddhism, Honolulu: University of 
Hawai’i Press, pp. 30-70. 
Strickman, Michael (1977), “The Mao Shan Revelations: Taoism and the 

265 
 
Aristocracy”, T’oung Pao 63.1, pp. 1-64. 
-------- (1978), “A Taoist confirmation of Liang Wu Ti’s suppression of 
Taoism”, in Journal of the American Oriental Society 98.4, pp. 467-
475. 
-------- (1979), “On the Alchemy of T’ao Hung-ching”, in Holmes, Welch 
and Anna Seidel (eds.), Facets of Taoism: Essays in Chinese 
Religion, New Haven: Yale University Press, pp. 123-192. 
-------- (1996), Mantras et mandarins: le bouddhisme tantrique en Chine, 
Paris: Gallimard. 
Strong, John (1983), The legend of King Asoka: A Study and Translation 
of the Aśokāvadāna, Princeton: Princeton UP. 
-------- (2004), Relics of the Buddha, Princeton: Princeton UP. 
Sun, Zen E-tu and John De Francis (1972), 
Chinese 
Social 
History.Translations of Selected Studies, New York: Octagon 
Books. 
Suwa Gijun 諏訪義純 (1978), “Chūgoku Bukkyō ni okeru saishoku shugi 
shisō no keisei ni kansuru kanken - Bukkyō denrai yori Ryōsho ni 
itaru jiki 中國仏教における菜食主義思想の形成に関する管見 - 仏教
傳來より梁初にいたる時期”, Nihon Bukkyō gakkai nenpō 日本仏教
教学会年報 43, pp. 73-99. 
--------- (1988), “Chūgoku Bukkyōto no seikatsu rinri kihan no keisei josetsu: 
niku, konshin no kinki o chūshin toshite 中國仏教徒の生活倫理規範
の形成序說—肉.葷幸の禁忌を中心として”, in Chūgoku Chūsei 
bukkyōshi kenkyū 中國中世仏教史研究, Tokyo: Daitō shuppansha, 
pp. 39-201. 
--------- (1997), Chūgoku Nanchō Bukkyōshi no kenkyū 中国南朝仏教史の
研究, Kyoto: Hōzōkan. 
Suzuki, D.T. (1930), Studies in the Lankavatara Sutra, London: Routledge, 
Kegan Paul. 

266 
 
-------- (19562 [1932]), The Lankavatara Sutra, A Mahayana Text 
Translated for the First Time from the Original Sanskrit, London: 
Routledge, Kegan Paul. 
Swanson, Paul L. (1987), “Review of Hirai Shun'ei 平井俊榮, Hokke mongu 
no seiritsu ni kansuru kenkyū 法華文句の成立 に関する研究 
[Studies on the formation of the Fa hua wen chu], Tokyo: 
Shunjūsha, 1985,” Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 14: 2-3, 
pp. 271-273. 
-------- (1989), Foundations of T’ien-T’ai Philosophy. The Flowering of the 
Two Truths Theory in Chinese Buddhism, Berkeley: Asian 
Humanities Press. 
Szabó, S. (2003), “The Term Shenming - Its Meaning in the Ancient 
Chinese Thought and in a Recently Discovered Manuscript”, Acta 
Orientalia 56.2-4, pp. 251-274. 
Takao Giken 高雄義堅 (1937a), “Mappō shisō to Zui Tō shoka no taido 末
法思想と隋唐諸家の熊度”, Shina bukkyō shigaku 支那佛教史論 1.1, 
pp. 1-20. 
-------- (1937b), “Mappō shisō to Zui Tō shoka no taido 末法思想と隋唐諸
家の熊度”, Shina bukkyō shigaku 支那佛教史論1.3, pp. 47-70. 
Tang Yongtong 湯用彤 (1983 [1938]), Han Wei Liang-Jin Nanbei Chao 
Fojiao Shi 漢魏兩晉南北朝佛教史, Beijing: Zhonghua shuju. 
Tanigawa, Michio (1985), Medieval Chinese Society and the Local 
“Community”, translated by Joshua Fogel, Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 
Teiser, Stephen F. (1985), “T’ang Buddhist Encyclopedias: An introduction 
to Fa-yüan Chu-lin and Chu-ching Yao-chi”, in T’ang Studies 3, pp. 
109-128. 
-------- (1988), The Ghost Festival in Medieval China, Princeton: Princeton 
UP. 

267 
 
-------- (1994), The Scripture on the Ten Kings and the Making of Purgatory 
in Medieval Chinese Buddhism, Honolulu: University of Hawai’i 
Press. 
Teng Gu 滕固 (1935), “Liu Chao lingmu shiji shulüe 六朝陵墓石蹟述略”, in 
Zhu Xizu 朱希祖et al, Liu Chao lingmu diaocha baogao 六朝陵墓
調查報告, Nanjing: Zhongyang tushuguan. 
Teng Ssu-yü (transl.) (1968), Family Instructions for the Yen Clan: Yen-
shih chia-hsün by Yen Chih-t’ui, Leiden: E.J. Brill. 
Thapar, Romila (1961), Asoka and the Decline of the Mauryas, Delhi: 
Oxford University Press. 
Tian Yuqing 田余慶 (1989), Dong Jin Menfa Zhengzhi 東晉門閥政治, 
Beijing: Beijing Daxue Chubanshe. 
Tokuno, Kyoko (1990), “The Evaluation of Indigenous Scriptures in 
Chinese Buddhist Bibliographical Catalogues”, in Robert E. 
Buswell (ed.), Chinese Buddhist Apocrypha, Honolulu: University 
of Hawai’i Press, pp. 31-74. 
-------- (1995), “The Book of Resolving Doubts Concerning the Semblance 
Dharma”, in Donald S. Lopez (ed.), Buddhism in Practice, 
Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp. 257-271. 
Tsai, Kathryn Ann (1994), Lives of the Nuns: Biographies of Chinese 
Buddhist Nuns from the Fourth to Sixth Centuries, Honolulu: 
University of Hawai'i Press. 
Tsuchihashi Shinkō 土橋秀高 (1968), “Perio hon ‘Shukkenin ju Bosatsukai 
ho’ ni tsuite ぺりオ本「出家人受菩薩戒法」について”, 
Bukkyōgaku kenkyū 25-26, pp. 93-148. 
Tsukamoto Zenryū 塚本善隆 (1937), “Hokugi no sōgiko butsutoko 北魏の
僧祇戶佛圖戶”, Tōyōshi kenkyū 2.3, pp. 1-26. 
-------- (1985), A History of Early Chinese Buddhism. From Its Introduction 
to the Death of Hui-yüan, translated by Leon Hurvitz, Tokyo: 
Kodansha. 2 Vols. 

268 
 
Twitchett, Denis (1957), “The monastery and China’s Economy in 
Medieval Times”, in Bulletin of the School for Oriental and African 
Studies 19.3, pp. 526-549. 
Twitchett, Denis & Arthur F. Wright (eds.) (1962), Confucian Personalities, 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Vande Walle, W. (1975), “Emperor Wu of the Liang on the Practice of 
Abstinence", in SAMADHI - Cahiers d'Etudes Bouddhiques 9.3-4, 
pp. 102-143. 
--------- (1976), “Methode van Rein Gedrag voor de Volgelingen van het 
Reine Vertoeven: een Boeddhistisch Compendium over de 
Penitentie” door Hsiao Tzu-liang (460-494), Ph.D. Dissertation, 
Ghent University. 
--------- (1979), “Lay Buddhism among the Chinese Aristocracy during the 
Period of the Southern Dynasties: Hsiao Tzu-liang (460-494) and 
His Entourage”, Orientalia Lovaniensia Periodica 10, pp. 275-297. 
Verellen, Franciscus (2004), “The Illumination of Ritual: Lu Xiujing's 
Reflections on the Retreat," in Kyōto Daigaku Jinbun Kagaku 
Kenkyūjo Sōritsu 75-shūnen kinen 京都大學人文科學研究所創立
75 周年記念 (ed.), Chūgoku Shūkyō Bunken Kenkyū Kokusai 
Shinpojiumu 中國宗教文獻研究國際シンポジウム, Kyoto: Jinbun 
Kagaku Kenkyūjo, pp. 239-57. 
Vervoorn, Aat (1990), Men of the Cliffs and Caves: The Development of 
the Chinese Eremitic Tradition to the End of the Han Dynasty, 
Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press. 
Vetch, Hélène (1981), “Lieou Sa-ho et les grottes de Mo-kao”, in Michel 
Soymié (ed.) Nouvelles contributions aux études de Touen-
houang, Genève : librairie Droz, pp. 137-148. 
-------- (1984), “Liu Sahe, tradition et iconographie”, in Michel Soymié (ed.), 
Les Peintures murales et les manuscrits de Dunhuang, Paris: 
Éditions de la Fondation Singer-Polignac, pp. 61-78. 

269 
 
Wagner, Robin B. (1995), Buddhism, Biography, and Power: a Study of 
Daoxuan's 'Continued Lives of Eminent Monks', Ph.D. Dissertation, 
Harvard University. 
Wang, Yi-t’ung (1984), A Record of Buddhist Monasteries in Lo-yang, 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Wang-Toutain, Fr. (1994), “Le bol du Buddha: propagation du bouddhisme 
et légitimité politique”, Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême 
Orient 81, pp. 59-82. 
Wang Zhongluo 王仲荦 (1980), Wei Jin Nanbeichao shi 魏晉南北朝史, 
Shanghai: Shanghai Renmin Chubanshe. 
Watson, James L. (1982), “Chinese Kinship : Anthropological Perspectives 
on Historical Research”, China Quarterly 92, pp. 595-598. 
Watson-Andaya, Barbara & Leonard Y. Andaya (2002 [19822]), A History 
of Malaysia, Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Wechsler, Howard J. (1985), Offerings of Jade and Silk: Ritual and Symbol 
in the Legitimation of the T’ang Dynasty, New Haven: Yale 
University Press. 
Wei-ming Tu (1984), “Pain and Suffering in Confucian Self-Cultivation”, in 
Philosophy East and West 34.4, pp. 379-388. 
Weinstein, Stanley (1987), Buddhism under the T’ang, Cambridge : 
Cambridge University Press. 
--------- (1973), “Imperial patronage in the formation of T’ang Buddhism”, in 
A. Wright & Denis Twitchett (eds.),  Perspectives on the T’ang, 
New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Wieger, Léon (1930), Textes Philosophiques: Confuciisme, Taoisme, 
Buddhisme, Shanghai: Hien-hien. 
Wing-Tsit Chan (1969), A Source Book in Chinese Philosophy, Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 
Wogihara, Unrai 荻原 雲來 et al. (1974), Kan’yaku Taisho Bonwa 
Daijiten, 漢 訳 対 照 梵 和 大 辞 典, Tokyo, Suzuki Gakujutsu 
Zaidan.  

270 
 
Wolf, Margery (1970), “Child Training and the Chinese Family”, in Maurice 
Freedman (ed.), Family and Kinship in Chinese Society, Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, pp. 40-63. 
Wright, Arthur F. (1948), “Fo-t’u-teng 佛圖澄, A Biography”, Harvard 
Journal of Asiatic Studies 11.2-3, pp. 321-371. 
-------- (1954), “Biography and Hagiography: Hui-chiao’s Lives of Eminent 
Monk”, in Silver Jubilee Volume of the Jimbun Kagaku Kenkyusho, 
Kyoto: Kyoto University, pp. 383-432. 
-------- (1957), “The Formation of Sui Ideology, 581-604”, in John K. 
Fairbank (ed.), Chinese Thought and Institutions, Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, pp. 71-104. 
-------- (1959), Buddhism in Chinese History, Stanford: Stanford University 
Press. 
-------- (1978), The Sui Dynasty: The Unification of China, A.D. 581-617, 
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 
-------- (1990), Studies in Chinese Buddhism, New Haven: Yale University 
Press. 
Wu Jifei 吾季霏 (2000), “’Biqiuni zhuan’ yanjiu” <<比丘尼傳>>研究, 
Faguang xuetan 法光學壇 (Dharma Light Lyceum) 4, pp. 105-123. 
Wu, Pei-yi (1979), “Self-examination and Confession of Sins in Traditional 
China”, Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 39.1, pp. 5-38. 
Xiong, Victor Cuirui (2006), Emperor Yang of the Sui Dynasty: His Life, 
Times, and Legacy, Albany: State University of New York. 
Yamabe Nobuyoshi 山邊能宜 (1999), The Sūtra on the Ocean-like 
Samādhi of the Vizualisation of the Buddha: The Interfusion of the 
Chinese and Indian Cultures in Central Asia as Reflected in a Fifth 
Century Apocryphal Sūtra, Ph.D. Dissertation, Yale University 
Yamada Keiji 山田慶兒 (1975), “Ryōbu no gaiten-setsu 梁武の蓋天說”, 
Tōhō gakuhō 48, pp. 99-134. 
Yamada Ryūjō 山田龍城 (1956), “Mappō shisō ni tsuite 末法思想について”, 
Indogaku Bukkyōgaku kenkyū 4, pp. 361-370. 

271 
 
Yamamoto, K. (1973-1975), The Mahāyāna Mahāparinirvāna-Sūtra, A 
Complete Translation from the Classical Chinese Language in 3 
Volumes, Tōkyō, Karinbunko. 
Yamazaki Hiroshi 山崎宏 (1942), Shina chūsei bukkyō no tenkai 支那中世
佛教の展開, Tōkyō: Shimizu shoten. 
Yan Shangwen 顏尚文 (1989), “Liang Wudi ‘Huangdi pusa’ de linian ji 
zhengce zhi xingcheng jichu 梁武帝「皇帝菩薩」的理念及政策之
形成基礎”, Shida lishi xuebao 師大歷史學報 17, pp. 1-58. 
-------- (1990), “Liang Wudi shou pusa jie ji sheshen Tongtai si yu ‘Huangdi 
pusa’ diwei de jianli 梁武帝受菩薩戒及捨身同泰寺與「皇帝菩薩」
地位的建立”, Dongfang zongjiao yanjiu 東方宗教研究 1, p.41-90. 
-------- (1999), Liang Wudi 梁武帝, Taibei: Dongda tushu gongsi. 
Yan Yaozhong 嚴曜中 (2000), Jiangnan fojiao shi 江南佛教史, Shanghai: 
Shanghai renmin chubanshe. 
Yasuda Jiro (1991), “The changing aristocratic society of the Southern 
Dynasties and regional society: Particularly in the Hsiang-yang 
region”, Acta Asiatica 60, pp. 25-53. 
Yoshikawa Tadao 吉川忠夫 (1974), Kō Kei no ran shimatsu ki: Nanchō 
kizoku shakai no meiun 侯景の乱始末記－南朝貴族制社会の命運, 
Tōkyō: Chūō Kōronsha. 
Yu Ying-shih (1964-65), “Life and immortality in the mind of Han China”, 
Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 25, pp. 80-122. 
-------- (1981), “New Evidence on the Early Chinese Conception of Afterlife”, 
Journal of Asian Studies 41.1, pp. 81-85. 
-------- (1985), “Individualism and the Neo-Taoist Movement in Wei-Chin 
China”, in Donald Munro (ed.), Individualism and Holism: Studies 
in Confucian and Taoist Values, Ann Arbor: Center for Chinese 
Studies, University of Michigan, pp. 121-155. 
-------- (1987), “'O Soul, come back!' A study in the changing conceptions 
of the soul in pre-Buddhist China,” Harvard Journal of Asiatic 
Studies 47.2, pp. 363-395. 

272 
 
Zhou Yiliang 周一良 (1981), “Lun Liang Wudi jiqi shidai 論梁武帝及其時代”, 
in Zhonghua xueshu lunwen ji: Zhonghua shuju chengli qishi 
zhounian jinian 中華學術論文集:中華書局成立 七十週年紀念, 
Beijing: Zhonghua, pp. 123-154.  
Ziporyn, Brook (1993), “The Self-So and Its Traces in the Thought of Guo 
Xiang”, Philosophy East and West 43.3, pp. 511-539. 
Zong-Qi Cai (2001), A Chinese Literary Mind: culture, creativity and 
rethoric in Wenxin Diaolong, Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Zürcher, Erik (19722 [1959]), The Buddhist Conquest of China, The Spread 
and Adaption of Buddhism in Early Medieval China, Leiden: E.J. 
Brill, 2 vols. 
-------- (1980), “Buddhist Influence on Early Taoism”, in T’oung Pao 66 (1-
3), 84-147. 
-------- (1981), “Eschatology and Messianism in Early Chinese Buddhism,” 
in W.L. Idema (ed.), Leyden Studies in Sinology, Leiden: Brill, pp. 
34-56. 
-------- (1982a), “Perspectives in the Study of Chinese Buddhism,” Journal 
of the Royal Asiatic Society 2, pp. 161-176 
-------- (1982b), “Prince Moonlight: Messianism and Eschatology in Early 
Medieval Chinese Buddhism”, in T’oung Pao 68 (1-3), 1-75. 
-------- (1989), “Buddhismus in China, Korea und Vietnam,” in Bechert & 
Gombrich (eds.), Der Buddhismus: Geschichte und Gegenwart, 
München: Beck, pp. 215-251. 
-------- (1991), “A New Look at the Earliest Chinese Buddhist Texts” in 
Shinohara, Koichi & Gregory Shopen (eds.), From Benares to 
Beijing: In Honour of Professor Jan Yün-hua, Oakville: Mosaic 
Press, pp. 277-300. 
-------- (2002), “Tidings from the South: Chinese Court Buddhism and 
Overseas Relations in the Fifth Century AD”, in Forte, Antonino 
and Federico Masini (eds.), A life journey to the East: Sinological 

273 
 
Studies in Memory of Giuliano Bertuccioli (1923-2001), Kyoto: 
Italian School of East Asian Studies, pp. 21-43. 
 
 

