33
Equipment
3
3.	 EQUIPMENT 
This section deals with mandatory and optional equipment for 
your vehicle as well as suggestions for safer road use. 
3.1 Lights 
No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at nighttime or any 
other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly 
discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 
150 meters (500 feet) unless the vehicle is equipped with and 
displays lighted lamps and illuminating devices as required for the 
class of vehicle so driven. 
Headlamps 
Every motor vehicle, except a motorcycle 
or motor driven cycle, must have at least 
two headlights displaying white light. 
One must be attached to each side of the 
vehicle not more than 140 centimetres 
(55 inches) from the ground and not less 
than 60 centimetres (24 inches). They 
must have an upper beam that clearly 
shows ahead for 100 metres (330 feet) 
and a lower beam that shows 30 metres 
(100 feet).
Lights must be dimmed within 150 
metres (500 feet) of an approaching 
vehicle. When following another vehicle 
within 60 metres (200 feet) the lower 
beam must be used except when in the 
act of passing. It is permissible for a 
vehicle to be equipped and operated with 
an auxiliary lamp or spot lamp providing 
the total intensity does not exceed 300 
candle power.
High beams
Low beams
Low beams

34
Equipment
3
Motor Cycle Lamps
Every motorcycle must be equipped with at least one and not 
more than three head lamps displaying white light. The light must 
be strong enough to reveal a person or vehicle at 100 metres (330 
feet) when speed is 60 km (35 miles) per hour or more. The lamp 
or lamps must be aimed so that the high intensity portion does 
not project higher than the level of the centre of the lamp at a 
distance of 750 centimetres (25 feet).
Rear Lamps
Every motor vehicle, trailer, etc. and the last vehicle in a train of 
vehicles must have at least two red tail lights mounted one on 
either side of the rear of the vehicle at a height of not more than 
183 centimetres (72 inches) and not less than 38 centimetres (15 
inches). This light must be visible from a distance of 150 metres 
(500 feet) to the rear. Every vehicle must be equipped with a 
white light to illuminate the rear licence plate and make it clearly 
readable at a distance of 15 metres (50 feet).
Clearance Lamps and Reflectors
Every bus or truck must have on the rear two red reflectors and 
one stop light.
Every commercial vehicle, semi-trailer or trailer 2 metres (80 
inches) or more in width must have in addition to the above:
a)	 On the front, one amber clearance lamp on each side. 
b)	 On the rear and as high as practical a red clearance lamp on 
each side. 
c)	 On each side an amber reflector at or near the front and one 
red near the rear. 
d)	 Mud flaps mounted immediately behind the rear wheels. 
e)	 In the vehicle, three flares, electric lanterns or portable 
reflectors capable of reflecting red light for a distance of 150 
metres (500 feet) under normal nighttime conditions. They 
must also carry two red cloth flags at least 30 centimetres (12 
inches) square.

35
Equipment
3
Stop Lamps (Brake Lights) 
Motor vehicles operated on a highway must be equipped with 
a red stop lamp or lamps. This lamp must be plainly visible and 
understandable from a distance of 30 metres (100 feet) to the rear 
both during daylight and darkness.
Signal Devices
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with a lamp or lamps 
or mechanical signal devices capable of clearly indicating an 
intention to turn either to the right or to the left, such signal 
devices being visible both from the front and the rear.
A signal lamp or lamps indicating intention to turn must be visible 
during daylight and darkness from a distance of 30 metres (100 
feet) both to the front and to the rear.
Lamps on Parked Vehicles
Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or 
shoulder any time when there is not sufficient light to see persons 
and vehicles at a distance of 150 metres (500 feet), it must be 
equipped with one or more lighted lamps that exhibit white or 
amber light on the roadway side which can be seen for 150 metres 
(500 feet) to the front of the vehicle and a lighted lamp visible 
from a distance of 150 metres (500 feet) to the rear.
Daytime Running Lights
Beginning with the model year 1990 all new vehicles must 
be equipped with daytime running lights which activate 
automatically. A vehicle using these lights is more easily seen by 
other motorists, pedestrians and cyclists.
Older vehicles may be modified to produce automatic daytime 
running lights.
If your vehicle is not equipped with daytime running lights, it is 
suggested that you use your headlights at all times.

36
Equipment
3
Stop Lights
It is suggested that all motor vehicles be equipped with a “stop” 
light. This light must be so constructed and placed where it will 
give a red signal to the rear of the vehicle which is plainly visible in 
normal sunlight from a distance of 100 metres (330 feet). The stop 
light may or may not be the same as the rear lamp unit.
Flashing or Revolving Lights
The use of flashing or revolving lights on motor vehicles is 
restricted.
A flashing or revolving red light visible from the front and rear may 
only be used on: (1) ambulance; (2) a police or fire department 
vehicle; (3) a school bus while taking on or unloading passengers.
A school bus may be equipped with flashing amber lights. 
In addition, flashing amber lights may be used on a vehicle 
transporting explosives or a motor vehicle towing a wide trailer.
Four Way Flashers
When a vehicle is equipped with a switch permitting the parking 
and tail lights to flash, the flashing lights can be used when the 
vehicle is parked on the highway or any portion thereof due to 
an emergency or under circumstances beyond the control of the 
driver.
Spot Lamps
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one spot 
light but it must never be so aimed that it shines directly on or 
within 30 metres (100 feet) in front of an approaching vehicle.
Fog Lamps
Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two fog 
lamps and they can only be used when headlights of the vehicle 
are on low beam.

37
Equipment
3
3.2 Brakes
Every motor vehicle must be equipped with an adequate foot 
brake and an emergency brake in good working order.
3.3 Horn
Every motor vehicle must be equipped with a horn in good 
working order that can be heard for a distance of not less than 60 
metres (200 feet) but a horn must not emit an unreasonably loud 
or harsh sound or whistle. The horn should be sounded whenever 
it is necessary to ensure safe operation of a vehicle or to give 
warning of the approach of a vehicle.
Except for authorized emergency vehicles, no siren, whistle or bell 
is to be used.
3.4 Mirror
Every motor vehicle must be equipped with a mirror so located 
as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of 
at least 60 metres (200 feet) to the rear of such vehicle. Portable 
door or fender mirrors are illegal when not towing trailer or other 
vehicle.
3.5 Windshields and Windows
All windshields and windows must be kept clear of any signs, 
posters or other non-transparent material which obstruct the 
driver’s clear view of the highway or any intersecting highway.
3.6 Ornaments
No person is permitted to drive a motor vehicle on the highway 
having any ornaments or decorations, either inside or outside of 
the vehicle, located so that they obstruct the vision or distract the 
attention of the driver.

38
Equipment
3
3.7 Windshield Wipers
Windshield wipers shall be maintained in good 
working order.
3.8 Slow Moving Vehicle
Except when directly crossing the highway, every farm tractor 
and self-propelled implement of husbandry and any other type 
of vehicle prescribed by Regulation, when operated on a highway 
or any vehicle towed by them, shall have a slow moving vehicle 
emblem as prescribed by the Registrar attached to the rear thereof 
in accordance with the Regulations.
3.9 Mufflers
Every motor vehicle must be equipped with a muffler and exhaust 
pipes in good working order and in constant operation to prevent 
excessive or unusual noise. No person is allowed to use a muffler 
cut-out, 
by-pass or similar device, upon a motor vehicle on 
the highway.
3.10 Speedometer
Every motor vehicle must be equipped with a speedometer in 
good working condition so as to show the speed at which the 
vehicle is travelling.
3.11 Height, Width and Length of Vehicle
A vehicle without a special permit may not exceed a total outside 
width, including load, of 260 centimetres (102 inches), a height of 
415 centimetres (13 feet, 6 inches); in the case of a two or three 
axle vehicle which is 12.5 metres (40.6 feet) in length and in the 
case of a combination of vehicles coupled together, a length of 23 
metres (75.5 feet) limited to two trailers while being hauled by a 
truck-tractor.

39
Equipment
3
3.12 Studded Tires
It is permissible to use studded snow tires of a type approved by 
the Registrar at any time except during the period commencing on 
the first day of May and ending on the fifteenth day of October in 
every year. The use of studded tires may cause more of a skid in an 
emergency stop than rubber tires depending on road conditions.
3.13 Disabled Vehicles
Where a motor vehicle is disabled on a highway at nighttime, the 
operator shall forthwith place a portable reflector unit or standard 
at a distance of approximately 30 metres (100 feet) to the rear of 
the motor vehicle at or near the edge of the roadway. 
The driver of a truck over 2 metres (80 inches) wide, passenger 
bus, motor vehicle towing a house trailer or a truck tractor is 
required to display three reflector units, one beside the vehicle, 
one 30 metres (100 feet) to the rear and the third 30 metres 
(100 feet) ahead of the disabled vehicle. A Safety Red Triangle is 
recognized as a portable reflector unit.
3.14 Safety Chain
Trailers and other objects or devices drawn by a motor vehicle on 
a highway must have a secondary means of attachment to the 
towing vehicle in the form of a “safety chain”. The safety chain 
should not be attached to the hitch but to the frame/bumper 
portion of the vehicle.

