
DIAGRAMMATOLOGY

SYNTHESE LIBRARY
STUDIES IN EPISTEMOLOGY,
LOGIC, METHODOLOGY, AND PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE
Editor-in-Chief:
VINCENT F. HENDRICKS, Roskilde University, Roskilde, Denmark
JOHN SYMONS, University of Texas at El Paso, U.S.A.
Honorary Editor:
JAAKKO HINTIKKA, Boston University, U.S.A.
Editors:
DIRK VAN DALEN, University of Utrecht, The Netherlands
THEO A.F. KUIPERS, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
TEDDY SEIDENFELD, Carnegie Mellon University, U.S.A.
PATRICK SUPPES, Stanford University, California, U.S.A.
JAN WOLE ´NSKI, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland
VOLUME 336

DIAGRAMMATOLOGY
AN INVESTIGATION
ON THE BORDERLINES
OF PHENOMENOLOGY,
ONTOLOGY, AND SEMIOTICS
by
Frederik Stjernfelt
Learning Lab Denmark
The Danish University of Education
Copenhagen, Denmark

A C.I.P. Catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN 978-1-4020-5651-2 (HB)
ISBN 978-1-4020-5652-9 (e-book)
Published by Springer,
P.O. Box 17, 3300 AA Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
www.springer.com
Printed on acid-free paper
All Rights Reserved
© 2007 Springer
No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording
or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher, with the exception
of any material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered
and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
vii
Introduction
ix
PART I
DIAGRAMS – PEIRCE AND HUSSERL
1
1.
Let’s Stick Together
Peirce’s Conception of Continuity
3
2.
The Physiology of Arguments – Peirce’s Extreme Realism
The Continuum in Peirce’s Theory of Signs
23
3.
How to Learn More
An Apology for a Strong Concept of Iconicity
49
4.
Moving Pictures of Thought
Diagrams as Centerpiece of a Peircean Epistemology
89
5.
Everything is Transformed
Transformation in Semiotics
117
6.
Categories, Diagrams, Schemata
The Cognitive Grasping of Ideal Objects in Husserl and Peirce
141
7.
Mereology
Parts and Wholes in Phenomenology and Semiotics
161
8.
Diagrammatical Reasoning and the Synthetic A Priori
175
PART II
BIOSEMIOTICS, PICTURES, LITERATURE
195
9.
Biosemiotics as Material and Formal Ontology
197
10.
A Natural Symphony?
Von Uexküll’s Bedeutungslehre and its Actuality
225
v

vi
T A B L E O F C O N T E N T S
11.
Man the Abstract Animal
Diagrams, Abstraction, and the Semiotic Missing Link
241
12.
The Signifying Body
A Semiotic Concept of Embodiment
257
13.
Christ Levitating and the Vanishing Square
Diagrams in Picture Analysis
275
14.
Into the Picture
Husserl’s Picture Theories – and Two Types of Pictures
289
15.
Small Outline of a Theory of the Sketch
321
16.
Who is Michael Wo-Ling Ptah-Hotep Jerolomon?
Literary Interpretation as Thought Experiment
327
17.
Five Types of Schematic Iconicity in the Literary Text
– An Extension of the Ingardenian Viewpoint
345
18.
The Man Who Knew Too Much
Espionage in Reality and Fiction: Regional Ontology and Iconicity
365
Perspective
383
Appendix: Peirce’s Conception of Continuity between Mathematics and
Philosophy
385
Notes
425
Bibliography
483
Name Index
497
Subject Index
503

PREFACE
This treatise is the result of some years of work, not least because work on it was
several times disrupted for university reasons, personal reasons, but probably most
of all because my curiosity temporarily took me elsewhere.
Working on an interdisciplinary treatise as encompassing as the present volume
would be impossible without the support from my workplaces at the institutions
of the University of Copenhagen and of Learning Lab Denmark at the Danish
University of Education.
For different species of help and discussions, I am indebted to Rudolf Bernet,
Mikkel Bogh, Peter Borum, Mette Böll, Per Aage Brandt, Berit Brogaard, Peer
Bundgaard, Peder Voetmann Christiansen, Terrence Deacon, Anne Marie Dinesen,
Sten Ebbesen, Francis Edeline, Claus Emmeche, Anne Fastrup, Erik Fischer,
Michael Friedman, Frans Gregersen, Thor Grünbaum, Niels Hansen, Nils Gunder
Hansen, Thomas Illum Hansen, Peter Harder, Jaakko Hintikka, Michael Hoffmann,
Jesper Hoffmeyer, Isak Winkel Holm, Nathan Houser, Hans Siggaard Jensen, Jørgen
Dines Johansen, Keld Gall Jørgensen †, Søren Harnow Klausen, Simo Køppe, John
Michael Krois, Kalevi Kull, Michael May, W.J.T. Mitchell, Dieter Münch, Winfried
Nöth, Peter Øhrstrøm, Svend Østergaard, Stig Andur Pedersen, Jean Petitot, Roland
Posner, João Queiroz, Thomas Riese, Wolfgang Ruttkowski, Lucia Santaella, Sune
Schmidt-Madsen, Thomas Sebeok †, Martin Skov, Barry Smith, Jesper Sørensen,
Søren Ulrik Thomsen, André de Tienne, Ola Tunander, Mark Turner, Dan Zahavi –
as well as the library staff at the Peirce Edition Project in Indianapolis.
Thanks also to the Houghton Library, Harvard University, for permission to quote
from unpublished Peirce manuscripts, and to Garland Science/Taylor & Francis for
diagram reprint permission.
Thanks to Vincent Hendricks for native English advice and good suggestions, to
the anonymous referee for fertile ideas, and to my parents-in-law Jens and Gerda
Christoffersen for their generous placing their summer house at my disposition as
an ideal writing exile.
Special thanks to Mette Stjernfelt for life-long assistance, and more than thanks
to Agnete and our daughters Agnes and Karoline for never-ceasing support of any
conceivable sort.
Copenhagen, September 2006
vii

INTRODUCTION
This treatise deals with the sign types of icons and diagrams. Icons understood as those
signs whose function as signs is due to some sort of similarity between them and their
objects–anddiagramsasthatspecialsortoficonswhichrepresenttheinternalstructure
of those objects in terms of interrelated parts, facilitating reasoning possibilities. Thus,
the treatise develops the idea that signs cannot, in general, be understood after the
linguistic model of the Saussurean tradition as an arbitrary coding relation connecting
pre-established expression and content, but that, quite on the contrary, the sign in most
interesting cases is based on a structural similarity between signifier, signified, and the
sign’s object. A corollary to this idea is that signs should not, in general, be understood
with the isolated linguistic word as the prototype – rather, the prototypical sign is an
argument mirroring part of the structure of the states-of-affairs to which it refers.
This counterrevolution in semiotics holds important implications for the very
foundations of that discipline as well as for its relation to other domains. It immedi-
ately raises the question of the sign’s own foundation – which are the phenomeno-
logical prerequisites to sign use? This foundational task leads in two directions which
appear not to be so diverse as may seem at a first glance: one is towards a reinterpre-
tation of Charles Peirce’s semiotics and its relation to the phenomenology, logic, and
metaphysics as envisaged in his sketches of a philosophical architectonics;1 another
leads in the direction of Husserlian semiotics and phenomenology founded in the same
period. In Peirce’s philosophy it leads, more specifically, to an appreciation of the
central role played in his mature thought by the sign type of diagrams, connecting
the reasoning process, Peirce’s logical realism, and his metaphysical doctrine of the
primacyofcontinuity.InHusserl,itleads,morespecifically,toareinterpretationofhis
notions in and around Logische Untersuchungen of ‘categorial intuition’ and whole-
and-parts as well as the related ideas of ‘eidetic variation’ and ‘Wesenserschauung’.
The critical comparison of unnoticed parallels in these two classics of semiotics
and phenomenology leads to a semiotic realism, emancipating semiotics from the
anti-scientific tendencies inherent in the merely conventionalist sign approach and
its possible affiliations with all sorts of quasi-religious vitalisms to explain which
forces might be responsible for sign coding when no inner relation between sign
and object are presumed to be possible.
The fact that the diagram displays the interrelation between the parts of the object
it depicts is what facilitates its use in reasoning and thought processes, thus taking
the concept of sign far from the idea of simple coding and decoding and to the
epistemological issues of the acquisition of knowledge through signs.
Let us immediately take an example in order to illustrate this basic issue in diagram
reasoning. It is well known that Pythagoras already in the fifth century BC was able to
ix

x
I N T R O D U C T I O N
provetheinsightthatforright-angledtriangles,thesquareofthehypotenuseequalsthe
sum of the square of the two short legs, the so-called cathetes – algebraically expressed
as x2 + y2 = z2. It is interesting, however, that this proof may also be made with
diagrammatical means. A well-known illustration may serve to geometrically show
the size of the squares of the three sides of the triangle, respectively:
Figure 1.
The size of the large square upper right evidently corresponds to z squared, while
the two lesser squares left and bottom correspond to x and y squared, respectively.
Already at this stage of understanding, before any proof of the theorem is attempted, a
series of important diagramreadingconventionshavebeentacitlyobserved.Oneisthe
abstraction from arbitrary aspects of the figure given in order to focus upon the aspects
relevantforthequestiondiscussed–anactofabstractionsoingrainedandautomatized
that most readers perform it without thinking about it as a sort of tacit knowledge. This
involves, for instance, abstraction from the fact that the triangle presented consists
of ink on a sheet of paper. It goes without saying that the same relations as depicted
here hold for a continuum of other triangles with different material support. It also
involves the abstraction from the particular black-and-white color of the drawing –
the size issues discussed are evidently independent of color. Moreover, it includes the
abstraction from the fact that the drawing presented is made of lines with a physical
breadth – while the figure they represent is supposed to be composed of lines with
zero breadth. The same goes for the imprecision of the figure – given the granularity
of paper and ink, the lines of the figure only seem straight at a macrophysical level –
we know that not very strong magnification would suffice to reveal that the lines are
not, as a matter of fact, really straight lines. Abstracting from these contingent aspects
of the drawing in order to grasp an idealized figure, we also perform a generalization

I N T R O D U C T I O N
xi
of a stunning extension: we understand that the figure does not portray only a triangle
of the precise size shown, but also the same figure in all possible sizes. Even more so:
we understand that the continuous deformation of the two small angles of the triangle,
letting the right angle and the straight lines of its sides remain, will take it into an
infinity of other rectangular triangles. Thus, the very understanding of a diagram like
the given presupposes a whole series of cognitively complicated operations giving the
result of an idealized figure which is not exhausted by the diagram token on the page
but which involves a general continuum of other triangles satisfying the requirements
given. On that basis, we may construct the following diagram:
Figure 2.
The large square has as its side x + y, and the oblique square in the middle of
the larger square is, of course, still the area corresponding to the square of the
hypotenuse. The area of the total square is easy to calculate geometrically, because
it corresponds to the square of the hypotenuse plus four times the area of the
triangle. Now consider the next figure:
Figure 3.

xii
I N T R O D U C T I O N
The size of the large square remains the same, having the side x+y, and it also,
just like the former square, includes four copies of the triangle. But this implies
that, when comparing the two figures, we may subtract the four triangles in both
of them, and now the remaining area must, in the two cases, be the same. And
the two small squares remaining in the second diagram correspond exactly to the
squares of the two cathetes in the triangle which is obvious from the fact that
they have, each of them, one of the cathetes as their side. So, from this mental
calculation with diagrams, it is evident that the large inner square in the former
figure – equal to the square of the hypotenuse – must have the same area as the
sum of the two small squares in the latter – equal to the sum of the squares of
the hypotenuse. Thus, x2 + y2 = z2. As was the case in the first diagram of the
triangle, this diagrammatical proof also bases its generality on a possible continuous
experiment with the diagram. For why is it not the case that the proof given holds
only for the exact triangle represented in the drawing? This is because in the last
figure, we may let the meeting point between the two small squares slide along the
dotted diagonal of the large square, giving rise to a continuum of triangles with
gradually changing sizes of x, y, and z:
Figure 4.
With the changing of the meeting point between the two small squares, the
triangles will change shape and run through a continuum of different values of the
two small angles. By this means, we grasp the fact that the diagram experiment
holds not only for the specific triangle represented on the page, but for all other
triangles as well. If we let the meeting point approach one of the corners, the
triangle will become still thinner and the square of the larger cathete will converge
towards the square of the hypotenuse and indeed towards that of the whole larger
square, while at the same time the area of the triangle will converge towards zero.
If we let the meeting point hit the middle of the diagonal – approximately as in the
diagram above – then the triangles will become isosceles and the area of the two
squared cathetes will equal the area of four triangles, as can easily be seen from

I N T R O D U C T I O N
xiii
the figure. The continuous manipulation with the figure thus makes possible further
reasoning about special cases – but not the other way around: no sum of single
special cases will give us the general law which is only proved by holding for the
whole continuum of possible right-angled triangles.
I have tried to go slowly through these elementary diagram reasonings – thereby
boring some readers – in order to show a very important point about diagram
reasoning, namely that here the generality of the states-of-affairs represented is
depicted by the continuum of variations to which it is possible to subject the
diagram without essentially changing its conditions. We begin this introduction
with this example, thus, in order to grasp what is highlighted in Peirce’s close
connection between diagrams, continuity, and generality – a relation which is also
intended in a related way in Husserl’s idea that in order to grasp ideal objects, a
continuous deformation of the object must be performed in an ‘eidetic variation’
thought experiment. The visually supported proof may, of course, be given further
algebraical support: the area of the large square in Fig. 2 is evidently z2 +4xy/2 =
z2 +2xy. The area of the large square in Fig. 3 is x2 +y2 +4xy/2 = x2 +y2 +2xy.
But as the two large squares in Figs. 2 and 3 are equivalent, it follows that their
area is the same: z2 +2xy = x2 +y2 +2xy. But then z2 = x2 +y2. To Peirce, such
a proof is no less diagrammatical. Here, the generality of the proof is granted by
the fact that it holds for any values x, y determining a unique z. But a variable x
in an algebraic formula is so to speak a sign that a whole continuum of different
values may be inserted here. The seminal insight in Peirce is that diagrammatical
reasoning representing generality by continuous shapes provides the general form
of necessary and hypothetical inferences in thought. This gives the basic corollary
that logical understanding is not, as it might seem to be the case, deprived of
observation. It is, rather, the meticulous observation of general diagrams. As Peirce
puts it:
The first things I found out were that all mathematical reasoning is diagrammatic and that all necessary
reasoning is mathematical reasoning, no matter how simple it may be. By diagrammatic reasoning, I
mean reasoning which constructs a diagram according to a precept expressed in general terms, performs
experiments upon this diagram, notes their results, assures itself that similar experiments performed upon
any diagram constructed according to the same precept would have the same results, and expresses this
in general terms. This was a discovery of no little importance, showing, as it does, that all knowledge
without exception comes from observation. (MS CSP L75 C, 1902, 91–92)
We may add the psychological observation that many scientists use diagrams not
only in the process of justification of their results, but also in the process of
discovering them – see e.g. the classic investigations of Hadamard (1954).2 For
semiotics, this central role of the sign type of diagrams implies a basic realism. It is
indeed possible to acquire and develop knowledge about different subjects by the
construction and manipulation of diagrams charting those subjects – based on the
fact that the structure of these diagrams are, in some respects, similar to the structure
of their objects. This similarity does not have to be evident for a first glance – as the
difference between the geometrical and the algebraical diagrams of the Pythagorean
formula just presented shows. The recognition of the foundational role of diagrams

xiv
I N T R O D U C T I O N
in thinking thus immediately implies the recognition of the iconicity in thought and
signs – the similarity between sign and object which is especially developed and
constrained in the diagram case. The development of a semiotics based on iconical
realism is the issue of this book.
The first part of the treatise thus has as its aim to articulate the basic tenets of
such a semiotic realism. The central node of this part – and indeed of the whole
book – is the fourth chapter, on Peirce’s doctrine of diagrammatical reasoning. The
three chapters preceding it prepare the ground by discussing Peirce’s metaphysics
of continuity, the ‘extreme realism’ of his sign theory, and his general doctrine of
iconicity as prerequisites to his diagrammatology. The fourth chapter discusses the
central idea: diagrammatical reasoning as central to the study of thought processes –
encompassing far more than the usual scope of logic (as for instance represented
in Peirce’s logical graph systems). The four chapters following it discuss different
aspects of Peircean diagrams, comparing them to other semiotic traditions with
emphasis on the phenomenological tradition culminating in the early Husserl.
Peirce’s diagram concept is compared to Husserl’s idea of ‘categorial intuition’,
leading into a discussion of mereology – the doctrines of part and whole – in
semiotics as a natural consequence of the diagram being a sign analyzing its objects
in related parts. Husserl’s mereology is, at the same time, a doctrine of the synthetic
a priori which is discussed, based on the idea that diagrams form a major road of
access to a priori structures in Husserlian formal and material ontologies.
The second part of the treatise is, in comparison, applicative – although perhaps
in a special sense of the word. It consists of three major parts, one dealing with
biosemiotics, one with pictures, and one with literature – in all cases referring to
foundational issues with respect to these three domains. As to biology, thus, it aims
at participating in the rational foundation of the emerging science of sign use in
biology, the so-called ‘biosemiotics’. The basic observation here is that the basic
stock of concepts in biology never ceases – even in the most reductionist versions –
to involve a host of semiotic concepts (genetic information, DNA code, messenger-
RNA, etc.), the constant use of which can not be without any scientific reason. It
thus continues the basic semiotic realism outlined in the first half of the treatise
by investigating the ontological implications of this occurrence of biosemiotic
vocabulary – and thus, by the same token, contributing to a biological foundation
of semiotics. While the Peirco-Husserlian foundation of semotics envisaged in
the former half rests on a structural, a-temporal argument, what is investigated
here is the empirical and thus genetic, temporal foundation of semiotics, aiming
at understanding the gradual appearance of still more complicated sign types in
the course of biological evolution. In that sense, it attempts at understanding the
phylogenetic instantiation, within the regional ontology of biology, of the realist
semiotics developed at a principal level in the former half of the book.
To conclude, two more specific – but still general – applications follow. One
deals with pictures – given that the sign type of icons figures prominently in the
phenomenological as well as in the biological part, the basic iconicity of the sign
provides new insights in the diagrammatical understanding of pictures proper with

I N T R O D U C T I O N
xv
implication for the analysis of paintings and other pictures in art history. The
experimental approach to diagram reading is exemplified in analyses of figurative
and abstract art, a Husserlian picture theory is developed, and a theory of the
sketch is sketched. The last application deals with literature and interpretation –
the continuist and diagrammatic understanding of semiotics maintained is seen to
be ripe with consequences for the understanding of the interpretation process and
for the schematic aspects of the very notion of ‘literary work’. The very process of
literary interpretation is analyzed in terms of Peirce’s abduction-deduction-induction
cycle, the basic types of iconicity in the literary work are discerned on the basis
of a Peircean interpretation of Ingarden’s theory of literature, and finally, the spy
novel is investigated as an exemplary case.
The title ‘Diagrammatology’ thus refers to two issues: one specific and one more
general. The former deals with diagrammatical reasoning and Peirce’s central idea
that diagram manipulation forms the prototype of a wide class of thought processes
which has not earlier been recognized as such. The latter deals with the more
general status of iconicity – of which diagrams, in turn, form a central case – in
sign use, which is exemplified in the three applied sections in the second part of
the book, thus connecting the philosophical discussions of the first part with the
special sciences of biology, of art history, and of literary theory. Let us present the
overall course of the book in a little more detail to clarify the relation of the broad
field discussed to the central issue of diagrammatology.
Chapter 1 briefly presents the mature Peirce’s intense involvement with continuity
which is taken to be the basic idea underlying his whole attempt at a philosophical
architecture in the years around the turn of the century (a more thorough presen-
tation of the detail of his mathematical and metaphysical arguments may be found
in the Appendix). Thus, the chapter ends by introducing and discussing Peirce’s
three fundamental phenomenological categories, First-, Second-, and Thirdness, on
the basis of his continuum metaphysics. Chapter 2 discusses Peirce’s sign theory
with reference to this continuum metaphysics which gives his semiotics its ‘extreme
realism’. The basic outline of Peirce’s sign theory – the ‘three trichotomies’ –
is presented with constant reference to continuity, and the Scotist inspiration
for Peirce’s realism is discussed. Metaphysically, Peirce’s realism involves the
existence of ‘real possibilities’, which are here compared to actual discussions of
‘dispositions’ and ‘powers’ – they form the ontological connecting link between
his continuity doctrine on the one hand and diagrammatical iconicity in his episte-
mology and pragmatic theory of science on the other. Chapter 3 presents Peirce’s
theory of iconicity. In recent semiotics, a controversy on iconicity has raged, and
two main anti-icon proponents, Nelson Goodman and the early Umberto Eco, are
presented as contrast, while the later Eco’s hesitating acceptance of basic iconicity
is taken as a step in the right direction, even if still marred with culturalism. The
different aspects of iconicity in Peirce are discussed – in addition to the ordinary
definition of iconicity by similarity, Peirce’s overlooked but non-trivial, operational
icon definition is discussed: icons as signs it is possible to manipulate in order to
learn more about their object than what is explicitly present in the sign – a property

xvi
I N T R O D U C T I O N
which may be purified for explicit and controlled use in the diagram. Chapter 4
forms the key chapter of the book. Here, Peirce’s general diagram doctrine is
analyzed in detail from a long quote from an overlooked 1906 paper, ‘PAP’. A
bouquet of central themes are discussed: the diagram as type; the diagram as the heir
in Peirce’s system to Kant’s notion of ‘schematism’; the diagram as a skeleton-like
icon of parts interconnected by relations; the diagram as a vehicle for thought exper-
iments; the diagram’s connection to deduction and mathematics; the wide extension
of a Peircean diagram notion, comprising algebra, logic, grammar, graphs, etc.;
maps as a diagram example; a comparison of a Peircean diagrammatical reasoning
process with Hilbert’s superficially wholly different idea of a ‘formale Redeweise’,
a formal reading mode; Hintikka’s discussion of Peirce’s distinction between two
kinds of diagram reasoning, simple ‘corollarial’ reasoning versus more complex
‘theorematical’ reasoning involving auxiliary constructions not mentioned in the
formulation of the theorem proved; the connection of diagrams to the pragmatic
maxim, synthetic a priori structures, and ‘real possibilities’.
Chapter 5 takes its departure in the idea that diagram transformations form
the core of diagram use and takes an overview over types of transformations
in some existing semiotic theories, taken in a broad sense. Lévi-Strauss’ and
Greimas’ semiotics, D’Arcy Thompson’s morphological biology having inspired
Lévi-Strauss, Klein’s Erlangen program as a deeper inspiration with its interde-
pendent concepts of transformations and invariants, cognitive semantics, recent
picture semiotics, leading up to the introduction of the Peirce-Husserl comparison.
Chapter 6 introduces this comparison by making an overview of the two’s mutual
knowledge of each other, concluding that each of them mistook the other for falling
prey to psychologism in logic, and that Peirce probably inherited his intense use of
‘phenomenology’ in the fertile years 1902–04 from Husserl. Husserl’s doctrine of
‘kategoriale Anschauung’ – categorial intuition – from Logische Untersuchungen
claims that grammar, syntax, and other ideal, categorial stuff may in some sense
be directly observed in analogy to perception – evolving later into his doctrine of
‘Wesensschau’ – and this idea is compared to Peircean diagrammatology which in
many respects are parallel, even if Peirce’s favorite example, that of construction in
geometrical diagrams, differs widely from Husserl’s favorite example, syncategore-
matical expressions in language. Chapter 7 extends the comparison to mereology –
doctrines of parts and wholes – where the two are seen in wider semiotic perspective
by comparing them also to Jakobson’s and Hjelmslev’s semiotic mereologies. The
foundational role of Husserl’s mereology of the third investigation, also (explicitly)
for Jakobsonian structuralism and maybe even (implicitly) for Hjelmslevian struc-
turalism is discussed. The restriction to discrete dependency relations in Husserl’s
and especially Hjelmslev’s mereologies is criticized in favor of Peirce’s more
generous acceptance of what may appear as diagram wholes and be experimentally
used as such by the manipulation of their parts. Chapter 8 concludes the first part of
the book with the placing of Husserl’s mereology and its redefinition of the concept
of the synthetic a priori within a larger framework, that of Austrian philosophy.
Barry Smith’s charting of this tradition, including the a priori concept in Austrian

I N T R O D U C T I O N
xvii
economics, is introduced as a prerequisite to Smith’s own ‘fallibilist apriorism’. The
investigation of the interpretation of synthetic a priori propositions by Wojciech
Zelaniec of the same tradition is presented, and these ontological a priori theories
are compared to Michael Friedman’s Neo-Kantian attempt at redefining the a priori
from studies in recent history of science. The chapter concludes by discussing
Peirce’s position which is explicitly enmical towards a Kantian a priori, but the
conclusion opts for diagrammatical reasoning to be a royal road to a Peircean
synthetic a priori along Husserlian lines, supposedly comprising the metaphysical
bases of the special sciences along with the ‘theorematical’ parts of mathematics.
So, the chapter sets the scene for the three different regional ontologies selected for
investigation in part two: biosemiotics, picture theory, and literature theory.
Chapter 9 introduces biosemiotics as a recent brand of semiotics (Thomas Sebeok,
Jesper Hoffmeyer, etc.) taking the involvement of semiotic expressions (genetic infor-
mation, DNA code, etc.) in biology at face value. An interpretation of Kant’s critique
of teleological judgment from his third Critique leads to an idea of the role of such
expressions: they are indispensable, but not quantitatively formalizable. The neo-
Kantian Cassirer’s idea of necessary ‘mediate concepts’ in the special sciences are
taken as an extrapolation of that idea, and the middle part of the chapter attempts
at isolating a whole cluster of such ‘mediate concepts’, interpreted in an Austrian a
priori framework – beginning with the analysis of an example, the bacterium E. coli’s
semioticabilitytodetectsugarandactaccordingly,pointingto‘categoricalperception’
as a primitive semiotic process in biology. The last part of the chapter discusses the
extension of this biosemiotic material ontology and concludes that it may serve, also,
as a formal ontology for higher domains than biosemiotics, thus giving rise to a subty-
pology of the ontological ‘niche’ concept proposed by Barry Smith. Chapter 10 inves-
tigates the basic assumptions in one of the central ‘rediscoveries’ of biosemiotics, the
theoretical biology of the German-Estonian father of ethology Jakob von Uexküll. His
theory about the ‘functional circle’ defining a species correlatively to the ‘Umwelt’
constituted by its schematic sign use in shape of perceptions and actions, is built on
the idea of extrapolating Kant in two directions: towards the body, towards the animal
world. This naturalized Kantianism, it is argued, implies a tension between naturalized
subjectsandtheconstitutivepowersupposedlyinherentintranscendentalsubjects:you
cannot preserve both. Uexküll’s attempt at doing so leads him to exaggerate the perfect
fit between animal and Umwelt as well as between different species – and leads him,
moreover, to a pessimist idea of human culture as having broken with such perfection.
Other currents in Uexküll – such as his idea that higher animals have ‘neutral’ objects,
not exhaustively defined by their functional circle, point in sounder directions, as does
the categorization idea inherent in his musical metaphor of nature as a symphony.
Such categorization is proposed as a basic semiotic process in nature, supported by
the notion of ‘categorical perception’ originating in phonetics. Chapter 11 introduces
Terrence Deacon’s idea that the Peircean symbol forms the main semiotic transition
between animal and man. Deacon’s idea, however, redefines Peircean symbols as
more specific and complex than they are, and a more restricted version of Deacon’s
hypothesis is proposed: that the decisive semiotic ‘missing link’ is rather the special

xviii
I N T R O D U C T I O N
symbolsubtypenamedbyPeirce‘hypostaticabstraction’.Peirce’sabstractiontheories
are introduced and discussed: while ‘prescission’, corresponding to Scotus’ ‘formal
distinction’, allows for isolating aspects of a phenomenon, ‘hypostatic abstraction’
allows for making such isolated aspects into thought objects in their own right to
be investigated. These abstraction types are intimately connected to diagrammatical
reasoningandtheabilitytoconstructdiagramsaswellasmeta-diagramstakingsimpler
diagrams as their object. Chapter 12 takes up the alamodic notion of ‘embodiment’
in recent cognitive semantics and cognitive linguistics and charts the role of it in
variousactualsemioticcurrents.Husserl’sinfluenceonMerleau-Pontyiswell-known:
in his late notes on nature, the functional circle is definitely opened, and Uexküll
is phenomenologically interpreted alongside Lorenz and other contemporary biolo-
gists. Stuart Kauffman’s complexity theory interpretation of the origin of life involves
a diagrammatical notion of a network of catalyzing chemicals which form the first,
simple biological metabolism – his theory even makes biology itself an example of
how such ontologies come in packets of interrelated concepts. The chapter ends the
biosemiotic section by proposing a task for biosemiotics to construct an evolutionary
ladderofstillmorecomplexsigntypescorrelatedwithstillmoredevelopedbodytypes.
Chapter 13 argues that diagrammatical experiment is ubiquitous, also in picture
viewing, both in the ordinary sense of the word and in the art historian’s and picture
theorists sense of the word. The chapter takes two examples, the Danish ‘Golden
Age’ painter Eckersberg’s altarpiece in Frederiksberg Church and Malevich’s well-
known white square on white – in order to show diagrams at work in figurative as
well as in abstract art. Diagram experiment in Eckersberg reveals an intricate use of
triple perspective in an apparently normal realist painting – connected to the biblical
references of the depicted Last Supper scene. In Malevich, on the other hand, it
is argued that even the understanding and interpretation of a work as seemingly
‘empty‘ and simple as this, necessitates diagram experimentation. Chapter 14 returns
to Husserl, now in a presentation of his picture theory as it appears in the many
scattered papers and notes on fantasy, memory, and pictures from around 1900–20.
Husserl’s development is outlined, and the many connections between Husserl’s
picture concept and Peircean iconicity are discussed. Husserl provides, inter alia,
for a foundation of picture consciousness already as a limit case within ordinary
perception, and taking its point of departure in this observation, a new distinction
between two picture types, accessible and non-accessible, respectively, is proposed –
a distinction independent of that between figurative and abstract. The interplay
between these two distinctions is illustrated by ten commented pictures. Chapter 15
is a short discussion on the notion of ‘sketch’, taking its point of departure in the
Belgian semiotician gang ‘Groupe ’ and their concept of transformation and the
correlative concept of a pure visual type – as against the linguistic imperialism of
French picture semiotics. The sketch is seen as a special sort of diagram, supporting
certain transformation types.
Chapter 16 takes literary interpretation as a basic process taken as prerequisite by all
the many competing sorts of more or less irrational ‘theory’ dominating the contem-
porary comparative literature domain. This process is seen as a special case of general

I N T R O D U C T I O N
xix
Peircean interpretation leading from abduction over diagrammatical deduction and
to induction, and, via trial-and-error, back again. The place for the introduction of
theory in that interpretation process is argued to be restricted to the diagrammatical
phase, and the literary specificity of the process is argued to lie in the closedness of the
literary artwork text as opposed to ordinary prose. Finally, a home-made interpretation
example from Peirce’s unpublished papers is discussed. Chapter 17 makes a reinter-
pretation of a classic piece of literary theory, Roman Ingarden’s Husserlian doctrine
of the four strata of the literary work. Special attention is given to the diagrammatical
level of ‘schematized aspects’ showing the represented objectivities of the work as
seen with respect to selected aspects, in turn allowing for completion because of the
unsatiated character of schemata. Ingarden’s doctrine is extrapolated to the extent that
such ‘schematized aspects’ need not be restricted to structures close to perception but
may also comprise many sorts of more abstract diagrammatical structures. Thus, this
extension of Ingarden gives rise to the distinction between no fewer than five different
sorts of schematic iconicity in the literary work – one of them being the fulfilling of
certain regional ontological structures in the literary work. Chapter 18, finally, finds a
specific example of this mirroring of regional ontology in the literary subgenre of the
spy novel. On the basis of Greimas’ semiotics, an ontological molecule of espionage
is outlined, and with background in some observations in Carl Schmitt’s controversial
brand of political science, different regularities in spy novels are attempted explained.
Drawing in a host of material from the world of espionage and spy novels, this chapter
forms an example of how the charting of diagrammatical structure necessitates the
involvement of both semantic presuppositions and structure abstracted from the body
of empirical knowledge of the domain in question.
An Appendix presents in more detail Peirce’s complicated discussion of the
continuum involving both mathematical and metaphysical argumentation. It sets
out from a discussion of his 1892 ‘Monist’ papers, and leads into a discussion
of Peirce’s own – in some aspects fallacious – version of set theory around the
turn of the century. Peirce’s set theoretic formalization attempts are seen as deep
down metaphysically rather than mathematically motivated: his main idea is that the
continuum must be taken as a primitive, transgressing any formalization attempts.
Peirce’s continuum notion is compared to a series of actual philosophical and
mathematical positions, to some extent supporting his idea of the inexhaustibility
of the continuum. The Appendix may be read, thus, as a further substantiation of
the more immediate presentation of the first chapter.
Thus, the overall course of the 18 chapters of the book leads from the more to
the less general. As is evident, this book goes a long way from Peirce’s continuum
doctrine and to the spy novel, and along the line it involves many different conti-
nents of phenomenology, ontology, and semiotics as well as results from several
different special sciences. Still, the book constantly focuses on the main topics
of diagrammatical schemata and access to regional ontologies and thus attempts a
synthesis of domains most often widely separated. The central notions of diagrams
and diagrammatical reasoning are taken to integrate a whole series of ‘schema’
concepts in current philosophy, linguistics, biology, literary studies and elsewhere:

xx
I N T R O D U C T I O N
diagrammatic schemata seem to form a basic and economical tool for understanding
and thought experimentation.
Figure 5.
The overall disposition of the book may be outlined in the diagram over the
content structure (Fig. 5).
I have, for the title of the book, chosen the rarely used and maybe somewhat
strange notion of ‘Diagrammatology’.3 It may seem slightly misleading, as the
book is not only about diagrams. Still, diagrams form the core of the various

I N T R O D U C T I O N
xxi
issues covered by the book. The term ‘Diagrammatology’ is taken to refer to the
investigation into the general status of diagrams in reasoning, in logic, theory of
science, and in heuristics, on the one hand, and into the basis of diagrams in
metaphysics and ontology, on the other. The notion is chosen with reference to
the central role played by diagrams in Peirce’s semiotics where it covers all kinds
of deductive reasoning with the emphasis on the ‘creative’, experimental, so to
speak strategic aspect of such reasoning. Peirce’s idea is that the manipulation of
diagrams forms the prototypical core of these areas rather than being a marginal
phenomenon on its fringe – and thus goes against a strong tendency in the sciences
as well as the humanities in the last 150 years for skepticism against the role of
iconic representations. Thus, the central reasoning process in all these areas – as
well as in the special sciences – is taken not to be best represented, necessarily,
by means of formal, symbolic languages, but rather by means of diagrammatical
representations governed by more or less explicit rules (of which formal, symbolic
languages turn out to form a special subset). Thus, the idea is not to oppose
symbolical and iconical representation with a preference for the latter – the idea is
rather to reinstate iconical presentation and representation in its proper, more general
position of which symbolic representations form a rich and important species.4 If
the notion of ‘diagrammatology’ is opposed to anything, then, it is not formal,
symbolical representations, but rather ‘grammatology’ as a headline for all sorts
of deconstructivist, vitalist, social-constructivist skepticisms against the possible
reliability of iconically represented information.
As a substitute for the neologism of ‘diagrammatology’, the title might equally
well had been ‘diagrammatical reasoning’. But two things argued against such a
choice: (1) a book with that title already exists (Glasgow et al. 1995, on the reemer-
gence of diagrammatical representations in computer science), and, consequently,
(2) the close association of that title with diagrams in computer science specifically.
My aim here is more general. It is an attempt at reconstructing Peirce’s original
idea in his last large burst of philosophical creation almost exactly a hundred years
ago, with its pinnacle in the years 1905–06, to appreciate and develop the many
fertile parallels of that explosion in the birth of European phenomenology in the
very same period – and trace the actual implications of this idea in ontology and
epistemology as well as in biosemiotics, picture theory, and literary theory.

PART I
DIAGRAMS – PEIRCE AND HUSSERL

C H A P T E R 1
LET’S STICK TOGETHER
Peirce’s Conception of Continuity
The entelechy and soul of the work, from which every
part of its contents manifestly flows, is the principle of
continuity, which has been the guiding star of exact science
from the beginning, but of which novel and unexpected
applications are now made.
Peirce, 18935
The concept of continuity is so central and basic to Peirce that it is not too
much to say that he built the whole final version of his philosophy around it. Thus,
the mature version of his phenomenological categories, the detailed semiotics he
developed in the years after 1900 – and, a fortiori, his doctrine of icons and of
diagrams – rest on a philosophy of continuity.6 This chapter seeks to elucidate the
basic reasons for the importance accorded to continuity by the mature Peirce in the
years around the turn of the century.
Already in the 1880s, Peirce took part in the mathematical development
concerning the continuum. Dedekind’s formalization of the real numbers by means
of the so-called ‘Dedekind cut’ only later came to Peirce’s knowledge, but Cantor’s
foundation of set theory during that period gained Peirce’s enthusiastic support and
prompted his attempts to improve that theory. Most of Peirce’s efforts, despite letters
to the two internationally known mathematicians, were not published, and what was
published only appeared later, so the mathematical side of Peirce’s struggle with
continuity remained with little influence on the scientific development. Dedekind
had discovered that infinite sets could be described as sets containing subsets which
have the same size as the sets themselves (like the even numbers are as infinite as
the whole numbers, even if constituting a mere part of them), and Cantor, in his set
theory, constructed a hierarchy of different infinities with increasing size, giving
rise to his ‘transfinite numbers’ measuring them. An important step in that research
was his ability to prove that one such class may be represented by the integers,
while a larger class may be represented by the real numbers, that is, all numbers
on the arithmetic line, defined, each of them, by an infinite decimal expansion.
Cantor’s proof, the famous ‘diagonal’ proof, showed that the former class could be
represented in a list (like 1, 2, 3, 4, ), while the latter class could not. Even if the
latter forms a linear series to the extent that any two given numbers can be ordered
after size, they may not be listed nor counted one by one. The latter class can be
3

4
C H A P T E R 1
described as containing all subsets of the former (each decimal expansion is written
with integers and so can be seen as an infinite subset of integers). This provided
a procedure for constructing ever higher such sets, by taking the set of subsets of
the former set – the so-called power set. Seemingly large sets, like the set of all
rational fractions, could be shown also to be contained in the former, countable
class – which naturally gave rise to the question of whether there were any set size
‘in between’ these two sets. Cantor’s immediate idea was that there were not –
which is equivalent to the so-called continuum hypothesis (CH), claiming that the
real numbers, the continuum, constitute the next transfinite number after that of the
integers. As is well-known, it turned out not to be possible to prove the CH, and it
was only in the twentieth century proved consistent with (Gödel) and independent
of (Cohen) set theory, thus being undecidable. To our day, research continues,
trying to enlarge set theory by new axioms making CH decidable.
This was the context in which Peirce intervened. Peirce subscribed to the CH to
the extent that it claimed that the real numbers were in fact Aleph-1, the second
transfinite number after the Aleph-0 of the integers. But he did not subscribe to the
implicit addition that the real numbers, in turn, corresponded to the continuum. This
forms the core of Peirce’s repeated attempts to rearticulate Cantorian set theory:
Peirce wanted a version of set theory which made evident that the continuum trans-
gressed any attempt at formalizing it as a line built up from points, a set consisting
of individual numbers. As Cantor’s whole series of Alephs, each of them, are sets
consisting of individual numbers, Peirce’s claim was that the continuum must lie
beyond the whole series of Alephs. This implied a distinction between the arith-
metical line and the geometrical line. While the former is defined by being the linear
arrangement of real numbers, the latter is most often, since Descartes’ analytical
geometry, identified with it. This caused Peirce’s protest: the geometrical line was a
true continuum, thus being larger than any point set, including the arithmetical line.
This basic idea formed the reason behind Peirce’s repeated attempts at defining the
geometrical line and constructing a revised set theory which could prove that this
real continuum exceeded all sets. Potter and Shields (1977) have given an overview
over Peirce’s development from a Pre-Cantorian through a Cantorian to a Kantistic
and finally (maybe) a post-Kantistic period in his understanding of the continuum.
In the former, he naively accepted one of Kant’s attempts at describing continuity
as infinite divisibility (but this also holds already for the rational numbers), but
from the mid-eighties far into the nineties, he struggled with his reformulations of
Cantor, adding to infinite divisibility (now nicknamed ‘Kanticity’) the notion that
all infinite series in a continuum contain their limit (‘Aristotelicity’). In the last
years of the nineties, he embraced an alternative, recursive idea in Kant, the idea
that the continuum was defined by having parts which had parts of the same kind.
During the Cantorian and Kantistic periods, Peirce’s set theoretical attempts pointed
in one direction: to prove that the continuum, considered as a set, differed from all
other sets in consisting of indistinct elements only. The parts of a continuum being
‘welded’ or ‘merged’ together into a homogeneous mass, they may not be treated
as if made up of determinate individuals. True, such individuals may be selected in

L E T ’ S S T I C K T O G E T H E R
5
any number from a continuum, but this does not mean it consists of them. Peirce
over and over attempted to find this indistinctive ‘merging’ which he supposed to
appear gradually already within Cantor’s transfinite hierarchy of Alephs, probably
because he felt the transition from discontinuous sets to continuity should itself
be continuous, so that in large transfinite numbers, indistinctness should somehow
gradually emerge.
A recurrent way of stating Peirce’s point is that the geometrical line may contain
as large multiplicities of points as one may want – but that it, in no way, consists
of those points. The continuum is a primitive concept of its own, and if anything,
it is rather composed by infinitesimal line segments (the problem with this idea,
of course, being that such segments are harder to identify or locate than points).
Peirce’s conception immediately entails a series of differences from the ordinary
set theoretical conception of a line. In that conception, if you take away the end
point of a line, what remains is an open interval without its limit point. That can not
(‘Aristotelicity’) be allowed in Peirce’s account which is why he would say that the
point removed does not diminish the continuum at all. Rather, as many points as
you wish (even transfinite sets of points) may ‘fly off’ the end of the line, leaving
the original continuum unaffected. The explanation behind this idea is that the
continuum ‘sticks together’, that points are only potentially parts of the continuum,
and, as potential points only, they are indistinct. Only when, by some procedure,
a point is singled out within a continuum, it gains actual existence and now forms
a discontinuity within the continuum. If the continuum is broken, is crossed by
another continuum, is composed by two adjoined continua, or if points by some
function or other are selected within it, point sets accessible for set theoretical
descriptions are actualized within it. But those points or point sets are invariably
‘small’ in comparison to the continuum, to the extent that they tend to vanish, or
in any case, lose importance, in the overall continuous object:
A continuum cannot be disarranged except to an insignificant extent. An instant cannot be removed.
You can no more, by any decree, shorten a legal holiday by transferring its last instant to the work-day
that follows that feast, than you can take away intensity from light, and keep the intensity on exhibition
while the light is thrown into the ash-barrel. A limited line AB may be cut into two, AC and C’B, and
its ends joined, C’ to A and C to B. That is to say, all this may be done in the imagination.
(‘The Logic of Mathematics: An Attempt to Develop my Categories From Within’, c. 1896, 1.499)
Such an idea of the geometrical continuum obviously breaks with Dedekind’s
description of the real numbers by means of Dedekind cuts: if the real line is
broken in two parts, one of the parts will constitute a closed interval containing its
limit point, the other part will constitute an open interval because its limit point
is left at the former part. Not so in Peirce’s conception which satisfies a comment
by Gödel claiming that the geometrical line, if broken in two, ought to give two
symmetrical parts as a result. In Peirce’s account, of course, the two parts form, both
of them, closed intervals, each of them containing a limit point which before the
breaking was one and the same point, and which, if the two parts were put together
again, would merge to one point again. Ken Ketner and Hilary Putnam have (1992)
attempted, in a preface to Peirce’s Harvard lectures (RLOT), to articulate Peirce’s

6
C H A P T E R 1
point of view within non-standard analysis as developed since the 1960s. In this
account, the line consists of standard points, each of which spans an infinitesimal
‘monad’ of further non-standard points around itself. Using non-standard analysis
vocabulary, Peirce’s seemingly inconsistent talk of points having points as parts,
gives more sense, even if Peirce would not agree in the distinction between standard
points and points belonging to their monads. Yet, in Peirce’s discussion of the
continuity of time, he takes care to distinguish infinitesimal ‘moments’ as opposed
to purely punctual ‘instants’ where the latter may form parts of the former, so the
distinction between monads and points would not be alien to him. I refer to the
Appendix for a deeper discussion of these issues and their relation to philosophy of
mathematics.
Here, it is important to emphasize the roots of Peirce’s constant interest in the
mathematics of the continuum. It stems from Peirce’s metaphysical concept of
continuity, and his mathematical interest is an attempt to construe a consistent
vocabulary in which to reason about metaphysical continuity. The need for conti-
nuity in metaphysics has a whole series of related reasons, and to begin with
Peirce’s theory of perception, the basic status of continuity is suitably summed up
in Peirce’s argument against the idea that continuity may be dissolved as an illusion
(as he believed it would be in a Cantorian set theory):
My notion is that we directly perceive the continuity of consciousness; and if anybody objects, that
which is not really continuous may seem so, I reply, ‘Aye, but it could not seem so, if there were not
some consciousness that is so.’ I should like to see a good criticism of that reply.
(‘A Sketch of Logical Critic,’ c. 1911, 6.182)
Essentially the same argument has been made independently by René Thom,
claiming that as part of our experience, the continuum has an objective existence
which, like all other experiences, may be subject to illusions (cf. the 24 discon-
tinuous pictures per second giving a continuous time flow illusion in cinema), but
if no real continuity is possible within neural physiology, how then could such an
illusion be explained? (Thom 1992, 140). This argument for the ineradicability of
continuity in experience might be nicknamed the Peirce-Thom argument.
This argument, however, only involves the phenomenological aspects of a whole
related bunch of issues. Continuity is deemed metaphysically necessary to explain:
(1) the intensional meaning of general concepts (the inexhaustibility of continuous
extension); (2) the embeddedness of actually existing objects and occurring events
within a horizon continuum of potentiality; (3) realism as to general tendencies
(as opposed to the powder of unconnected singular events without continuity);
(4) continuity of research – from its infinitesimal beginnings long before science
and to its converging end point in truth; (5) fallibilism as implied by the vagueness
inherent in continuity; and finally: (6) diagram manipulation as basically continuous
and hence able to mirror real continuity. Let us run through these main points of
Peirce’s continuum metaphysics.
(1) Continuity is first and foremost important, because it provides an account for
the generality of concepts. Concepts with real reference are seen by Peirce as
abbreviated propositions without any specific subject. ‘Heavy’ is an abbreviation of

L E T ’ S S T I C K T O G E T H E R
7
‘X is heavy’ where X may be filled in with any subject that satisfies the proposition.
The law of gravitation, one of Peirce’s favourite examples of a real force functioning
in Nature, may not be reduced to any finite number of heavy objects subject to
attraction. This implies that the collection of subjects potentially referred to by the
proposition ‘X is heavy’ exceeds any extension made up of recorded, actual, or
even imagined single cases of gravitation attraction. It is continuous. Herein lies,
Peirce argues, the reality of gravity: it has worked, and will continue to work, in
a number of cases which are so vast as to be beyond the reach of any possible
charting – that is, they remain vague and indistinct. The vagueness and indistinctness
of extensional reference is thus, according to Peirce, a necessary flip side of that
reference involving real, general forces, tendencies or patterns in reality:
True generality is, in fact, nothing but a rudimentary form of true continuity. Continuity is nothing but
perfect generality of a law of relationship. (‘Synechism’, Baldwin’s Dictionary, 1902, 6.172)
Therefore, no positivist reduction of such laws or relationships to mutually similar
aspects of single cases is possible. It might indeed be the way such laws are
discovered or recorded by induction, but this does not imply that the relation at
work may be reduced to such cases:
At any rate, it is plain that no possible collection of single occasions of conduct can be, or adequately
represent all conceivable occasions. For there is no collection of individuals of any general description
which we could not conceive to receive the addition of other individuals of the same description
aggregated to it. The generality of the possible, the only true generality, is distributive, not collective.
(‘Consequences of Critical Common-Sensism’, 1902, 5.532)
The distinction made here between distributivity and collectivity corresponds to
the normal terminology of intension and extension. The latter may give rise to
probabilistic investigations, the former, however, to apodictic, universal results:
To say that the probability that a calf will not have more than six legs is 1, is to say that in the long
run, taking calves as they present themselves in experience, the ratio of the number of those with not
more than six legs to the total number is 1. But this does not prevent there being any finite number of
calves with more legs than six, provided that in the long run, that is, in an endless course of experience,
their number remains finite, and does not increase indefinitely. A universal proposition, on the other
hand, asserts, for example, that any calf which may exist, without exception, is a vertebrate animal. The
universal proposition speaks of experience distributively; the probable, or statistical proposition, speaks
of experience collectively. (‘Predicate’, Baldwin’s Dictionary, 1902, 2.358)
(2) Due to the reality of (certain) concepts, these claims of semantics immedi-
ately lead into ontology. The finite number of cases recorded by any extensional
investigation thus refers to actual events selected from a continuum of potential,
interrrelated events. The rule, law, tendency, or pattern governing that continuum
hence has the character of potentiality:
Since Kant it has been a very wide-spread idea that it is time and space which introduce continuity
into nature. But this is an anacoluthon. Time and space are continuous because they embody conditions
of possibility, and the possible is general, and continuity and generality are two names for the same
absence of distinction of individuals. (‘Multitude and Number’, 1897, 4.172)

8
C H A P T E R 1
Such possibilities do not possess the actual individuality of realized cases, but they
are still real – from around 1897 Peirce begins to term them ‘real possibilities’ (to
which we shall return in the next chapter on Peirce’s ‘extreme realism’):
A true continuum is something whose possibilities of determination no multitude of individuals can
exhaust. (‘Synechism’, Baldwin’s Dictionary, 1902, 6.170)
(3) Continuity thus forms the central feature of Peirce’s realism with respect to
such ‘real possibilities’:
That which is possible is in so far general and, as general, it ceases to be individual. Hence, remembering
that the word ‘potential’ means indeterminate yet capable of determination in any special case, there
may be a potential aggregate of all the possibilities that are consistent with certain general conditions;
and this may be such that given any collection of distinct individuals whatsoever, out of that potential
aggregate there may be actualized a more multitudinous collection than the given collection. Thus the
potential aggregate is, with the strictest exactitude, greater in multitude than any possible multitude
of individuals. But being a potential aggregate only, it does not contain any individuals at all. It only
contains general conditions which permit the determination of individuals.
(‘The Logic of Continuity’, 1898, 6.185)
Generality, real possibility, and indistinctness are thus connected in metaphysical
continuity. It should be added that the continuity doctrine is also intimately
connected to Peirce’s evolutionism which extends Darwinism from biology to cover
the whole of the physical evolution in a strange cosmology, taking its beginning in
pure continuous, chaotic (Peirce does not quite agree with himself how ordered or
unordered pure possibility is) possibility which, via a growing amount of actual-
ization, lets still more laws and tendencies introduce in the actual world which is
thus aimed at continuous perfection in a remote future  We shall not go into these
cosmological areas of Peirce’s metaphysics in this book which focuses upon the
basic relation between continuous realism and diagrams.
(4) Given that law- or rule-governed aspects of reality are thus continuous, the
very process of acquiring knowledge must – as it is in itself such a process – be
continuous. Peirce’s epistemology, in which diagrams play center stage, thus rests
upon an ontology of knowledge acquisition. Knowledge creation being continuous,
it can never really begin nor end – in both cases continuity replaces any discon-
tinuous beginning or halting of knowledge:
If it is objected that there must be a first thing learned, I reply that this is like saying that there must be
a first rational fraction, in the order of magnitudes, greater than zero.
(‘Some Logical Prolegomena’, undated, 7.536)
Science thus is continuous with everyday knowledge which is, in turn, continuous
with animal cognition and so on indefinitely down the scale of evolution. Knowledge
is always already in the process of being constructed – even if this idea causes
trouble for Peirce’s definition of logical thought as explicitly self-controlled: already
perception, entrance gate of raw knowledge, is not thus controlled, and even less so
biological forms of knowledge gathering. We shall return to this. In the other end,
of course, continuity defines Peirce’s famous pragmatist notion of truth as that to
which the scientific community will converge in the long run:7

L E T ’ S S T I C K T O G E T H E R
9
But a scientific proposition is merely something you take up provisionally as being the proper hypothesis
to try first and endeavor to refute. The only belief you – as a purely scientific man – have about it is
that it is adopted in accordance with a method which must lead to the truth in the long run.
(‘Logic of Events’, 1898, 6.216)
As in many rule-bound, continuous processes, there are considerable fluctuations
in science, but they even out in the continuity of the long run, making necessarily
science an unending, collective process involving generation after generation of
scientists:
As we go on drawing inference after inference of the given kind, during the first ten or hundred cases
the ratio of successes may be expected to show considerable fluctuations; but when we come into the
thousands and millions, these fluctuations become less and less; and if we continue long enough, the
ratio will approximate toward a fixed limit. (‘The Doctrine of Chances’, 1878, EPI, 146; 2.650)
(5) The continuity of knowledge thus also implies the pragmatist’s fallibilism due
to the ineradicable imprecision inherent in continuity:
The principle of continuity is the idea of fallibilism objectified. For fallibilism is the doctrine that
our knowledge is never absolute but always swims, as it were, in a continuum of uncertainty and of
indeterminacy. Now the doctrine of continuity is that all things so swim in continua.
(Untitled manus., c. 1897, 1.171)
This does not, as might be expected, wed Peirce to any irrational skepticism against
the possibilities of science, quite on the contrary. General, continuous processes
occur with many degrees of fluctuations, and the only minimally fluctuating parts
of those may be charted with a high degree of precision.
(6) As indicated in the Introduction, continuity plays a central role for the possi-
bility of reading off general regularities of a diagram. Diagrams may chart ideal
relationships – as in the Pythagoras example of the Introduction – or they may map
idealized aspects of empirical states-of-affairs of many varied sorts. In all cases,
however, they involve a moment of observation. To Peirce, observation is also a
process necessarily infused with continuity. There is no such thing as an observation
of a completely unique event or entity: already in ordinary perception, generality
and continuity play a central role – e.g. in our spontaneous recognition that this or
that aspect of perception is an instantiation of some general type or process. This
reliance of perception and knowledge on continuous generality is now highlighted
and made an issue of explicit control in diagrams. This is why the very continuity of
the sheet upon which a diagram is drawn becomes a matter of central importance:
Let the clean blackboard be a sort of diagram of the original vague potentiality, or at any rate of some
early stage of its determination. This is something more than a figure of speech; for after all continuity
is generality. This blackboard is a continuum of two dimensions, while that which it stands for is a
continuum of some indefinite multitude of dimensions. This blackboard is a continuum of possible
points; while that is a continuum of possible dimensions of quality, or is a continuum of possible
dimensions of a continuum of possible dimensions of quality, or something of that sort. There are no
points on this blackboard. There are no dimensions in that continuum. I draw a chalk line on the board.
This discontinuity is one of those brute acts by which alone the original vagueness could have made a
step towards definiteness. There is a certain element of continuity in this line. Where did this continuity
come from? It is nothing but the original continuity of the blackboard which makes everything upon it

10
C H A P T E R 1
continuous. What I have really drawn there is an oval line. For this white chalk-mark is not a line, it is
a plane figure in Euclid’s sense – a surface, and the only line there, is the line which forms the limit
between the black surface and the white surface. Thus the discontinuity can only be produced upon that
blackboard by the reaction between two continuous surfaces into which it is separated, the white surface
and the black surface. The whiteness is a Firstness – a springing up of something new. But the boundary
between the black and white is neither black, nor white, nor neither, nor both. It is the pairedness of the
two. It is for the white the active Secondness of the black; for the black the active Secondness of the
white.
Now the clue, that I mentioned, consists in making our thought diagrammatic and mathematical, by
treating generality from the point of view of geometrical continuity, and by experimenting upon the
diagram. (‘The Logic of Continuity’, 1898, 6.203–4)
Diagrams may, of course, use discontinuity, but it is only possible to represent
discontinuity as a break of a presented continuity – like the triangle drawn on the
geometer’s blank slate. The continuity of the sheet is crucial, furthermore, because it
is what allows us to perform the thought (or real) experiments continuously varying
the diagram so as to ensure that the state-of-affairs recorded therein hold not only
for the one case drawn, but for a continuum of similar cases. Which continuum of
cases are in fact envisioned of course depends on the (most often) written or tacitly
implied instructions relevant for the specific diagram in question – but the important
thing is that the diagram always inherits the spatiotemporal continuity of the sheet
in some specified respects. So, the continuity of diagrams is no accidental feature of
representation, rather, it is what makes thought representing real relations possible
in diagrams. Thus, diagram continuity is intimately connected to the continuity
tying together semantics, realism, epistemology, and fallibilism in Peirce’s mature
doctrine. It goes without saying that the sketches of a philosophical architectonics
which we have here briefly introduced do not form a coherent doctrine. Many
obscure points indeed remain, and we shall address some of them in the chapters to
come. Still, the continuity doctrine forms the basis of the most impressive results of
Peirce’s final endeavor. It comes as little surprise, then, that the continuum also lies
beneath Peirce’s mature version of his categories after the turn of the century, now
considered under the headline of ‘phenomenology’ or ‘phaneroscopy’ (see Chap. 6).
Peirce’s categories belong to the earliest of his preoccupations, already presented,
of course, in ‘A New List of Categories’ (1867). The continuity metaphysics of the
later Peirce, however, permits him to cast them in a new light, integrating them at
the basis of his thought.
C O N T I N U I T Y A S M E T A P H Y S I C A L G L U E I N P E I R C E ’ S S Y S T E M
Continuity has wide implications in the different parts of Peirce’s architectonics of
theories. Time and time again, Peirce refers to his ‘principle of continuity’ which has
not immediately anything to do with Poncelet’s famous such principle in geometry
(Chap. 5).8 It is, rather, a metaphysical implication taken to follow from fallibilism:
if all more or less distinct phenomena swim in a vague sea of continuity then it is no
wonder that fallibilism must be accepted. And if the world is basically continuous,
we should not expect conceptual borders to be definitive but rather conceive of

L E T ’ S S T I C K T O G E T H E R
11
terminological distinctions as relative to an underlying, monist continuity. We shall
not go far into these ideas, but rather depict the role of continuity in Peirce’s
efforts to build a system. In this system, mathematics is first science. Thereafter
follows philosophy which is distinguished form purely hypothetical mathematics by
having an empirical basis.9 Philosophy, in turn, has three parts, phenomenology, the
normative sciences, and metaphysics. The first investigates solely ‘the Phaneron’
which is all what could be imagined to appear as an object for experience: ‘ by
the word phaneron I mean the collective total of all that is in any way or in any
sense present to the mind, quite regardless whether it corresponds to any real thing
or not.’ (‘Adirondack Lectures’, 1905, CP 1.284) As is evident, this definition of
Peirce’s ‘phenomenology’ is parallel to Husserl’s phenomenological reduction in
bracketing the issue of the existence of the phenomenon in question (see Chap. 6).
Even if it thus is built on introspection and general experience, it is – analogous to
Husserl and other Brentano disciples at the same time – conceived in a completely
antipsychological manner: ‘It religiously abstains from all speculation as to any
relations between its categories and physiological facts, cerebral or other.’ (‘Logic
viewed as Semeiotics’, 1904, 1.287) and ‘ I abstain from psychology which has
nothing to do with ideoscopy.’ (Letter to Lady Welby, Oct 12, 1904, 8.330). The
normative sciences fall in three: aesthetics, ethics, logic, in that order (and hence
decreasing generality), among which Peirce does not spend very much time on the
former two. Aesthetics is the investigation of which possible goals it is possible
to aim at (Good, Truth, Beauty, etc.), and ethics how they may be reached. Logic
is concerned with the grasping and conservation of Truth and takes up the larger
part of Peirce’s interest among the normative sciences. As it deals with how truth
can be obtained by means of signs, it is also called semiotics (‘logic is formal
semiotics’) which is thus coextensive with theory of science – logic in this broad
sense contains all parts of philosophy of science, including contexts of discovery as
well as contexts of justification. Semiotics has, in turn, three branches: grammatica
speculativa (or stekheiotics), critical logic, and methodeutic (inspired by mediaeval
trivium: grammar, logic, and rhetoric). The middle one of these three lies closest to
our days’ conception of logic; it is concerned with the formal conditions for truth
in symbols – that is, propositions, arguments, their validity and how to calculate
them, including Peirce’s many developments of the logic of his time: quantifiers,
logic of relations, ab-, de-, and induction, logic notation systems, etc. All of these,
however, presuppose the existence of simple signs which are investigated by what
is often seen as semiotics proper, the grammatica speculativa;10 it may also be
called formal grammar. It investigates the formal condition for symbols having
meaning, and it is here we find Peirce’s definition of signs and his trichotomies
of different types of sign aspects. Methodeutic or formal rhetorics, on the other
hand, concerns the pragmatical use of the former two branches, that is, the study
of how to use logic in a fertile way in research, the formal conditions for the
‘power’ of symbols, that is, their reference to their interpretants; here can be found,
e.g., Peirce’s famous definitions of pragmati(ci)sm and his directions for scientific
investigation. To phenomenology – again in analogy to Husserl – logic adds the

12
C H A P T E R 1
interest in signs and their truth. After logic, metaphysics follows in Peirce’s system,
concerning the inventarium of existing objects, conceived in general – and strongly
influenced by logic in the Kantian tradition for seeing metaphysics mirroring logic.
Also here, Peirce has several proposals for subtypologies, even if none of them
seem stable, and under this headline classical metaphysical issues mix freely with
generalizations of scientific results and cosmological speculations.
Peirce himself saw this classification in an almost sociological manner, so that
the criteria of distinction do not stem directly from the implied objects’ natural
kinds, but after which groups of persons study which objects: ‘ the only natural
lines of demarcation between nearly related sciences are the divisions between
the social groups of devotees of those sciences ’ (CP 8.342). Science collects
scientists into bundles, because they are defined by their causa finalis, a teleologial
intention demanding of them to solve a central problem.11
Measured on this definition, one has to say that Peirce himself was not modest,
not only does he continuously transgress such boundaries in his production, he
frequently does so even within the scope of single papers. There is always, in his
writings, a brief distance only from mathematics to metaphysics – or between any
other two issues in mathematics and philosophy, and this implies, first, that the
investigation of continuity and generality in Peirce’s system is more systematic
than any actually existing exposition of these issues in Peirce’s texts, second, that
the discussion must constantly rely on cross-references. This has the structural
motivation that as soon as you are below the level of mathematics in Peirce’s
system, inspired by the Comtean system, the single science receives determinations
from three different directions, each science consisting of material and formal
aspects alike. First, it receives formal directives ‘from above’, from those more
general sciences which stand above it, providing the general frameworks in which
it must unfold. Second, it receives material determinations from its own object,
requiring it to make certain choices in its use of formal insights from the higher
sciences. The cosmological issue of the character of empirical space, for instance,
can take from mathematics the different (non-)Euclidean geometries and investigate
which of these are fit to describe spatial aspects of our universe, but it does not,
in itself, provide the formal tools. Finally, the single sciences receive in practice
determinations ‘from below’, from more specific sciences, when their results by
means of abstraction, prescission, induction, and other procedures provide insights
on its more general, material level. Even if cosmology is, for instance, part of
metaphysics, it receives influences from the empirical results of physics (or biology,
from where Peirce takes the generalized principle of evolution). The distinction
between formal and material is thus level specific: what is material on one level is
a formal bundle of possibilities for the level below; what is formal on one level is
material on the level above.12
For these reasons, the single step on the ladder of sciences is only partially
independent in Peirce, hence also the tendency of his own investigations to zigzag
between the levels. His architecture of theories thus forms a sort of phenomeno-
logical theory of aspects: the hierarchy of sciences is an architecture of more and less

L E T ’ S S T I C K T O G E T H E R
13
general aspects of the phenomena, not completely independent domains. Finally,
Peirce’s realism has as a result a somewhat disturbing style of thinking: many
of his central concepts receive many, often highly different determinations which
has often led interpreters to assume inconsistencies or theoretical developments in
Peirce where none necessarily exist (this does not imply, of course, that there are
no developments or inconsistencies at all in Peirce; there are indeed many). When
Peirce, for instance, determines the icon as the sign possessing a similarity to its
object, and elsewhere determines it as the sign by the contemplation of which it
is possible to learn more about its object, then they are not conflicting definitions.
Peirce’s determinations of concepts are rarely definitions at all in the sense that
they provide necessary and sufficient conditions exhausting the phenomenon in
question. His determinations should rather be seen as descriptions from different
perspectives of a real (and maybe ideal) object – without these descriptions neces-
sarily conflicting. This style of thinking can, however, be seen as motivated by
metaphysical continuity. When continuous grading between concepts is the rule,
definitions in terms of necessary and sufficient conditions should not be expected
to be exhaustive.
A recurring skeleton on all levels, however, is provided by Peirce’s famous
‘triadomania’, as he himself calls it, which lets most of his decisive distinctions
appear in threes, following the tripartition of his list of categories, the famous triad
of First, Second, and Third, or Quality, Reaction, Representation, or Possibility,
Actuality, Reality – or any other of the manifold of descriptions of this triad which
he gives through his work.
The probably most concise – but also very self-referential – description is found
in one of the letters to Lady Welby (CP 8.327) from 1904:
Firstness is the mode of being of that which is such as it is, positively and without reference to
anything else.
Secondness is the mode of being of that which is such as it is, with respect to a second but regardless
of any third.
Thirdness is the mode of being of that which is such as it is, in bringing a second and third into
relation to each other.
The justification for this triad of possible experience can be stated briefly as
follows: Firstness constitutes the quality of experience: in order for something to
appear at all, it must do so due to a certain constellation of qualitative properties.
Peirce often uses sensory qualities as examples, but it is important for the under-
standing of his thought that the examples may refer to phenomena very far from
our standard conception of ‘sensory data’, e.g. forms or the ‘feeling’ of a whole
melody or of a whole mathematical proof, not to be taken in a subjective sense
but as a concept for the continuity of melody or proof as a whole, apart from the
analytical steps and sequences in which it may be, subsequently, subdivided. In
short, all sorts of simple and complex Gestalt qualities also qualify as Firstnesses.
Firstness tend to form continua of possibilities such as the continua of shape, color,
tone, etc. These qualities, however, are, taken in themselves, pure possibilities and
must necessarily be incarnated in phenomena in order to appear. Secondness is

14
C H A P T E R 1
the phenomenological category of ‘incarnation’ which makes this possible: it is
the insistency, then, with which the individuated, actualized, existent phenomenon
appears. Thus, Secondness necessarily forms discontinuous breaks in Firstness,
allowing for particular qualities to enter into existence. The mind may imagine
anything whatever in all sorts of quality combinations, but something appears
with an irrefutable insisting power, reacting, actively, yielding resistance. Peirce’s
favorite example is the resistance of the closed door – which might be imagined
reduced to the quality of resistance feeling and thus degenerate to pure Firstness
so that his theory imploded into a Hume-like solipsism – but to Peirce this resis-
tance, surprise, event, this thisness, ‘haecceity’ as he calls it with a Scotist term,
remains irreducible in the description of the phenomenon (a Kantian idea, at bottom:
existence is no predicate).13 About Thirdness, Peirce may directly state that conti-
nuity represents it perfectly (1.337): ‘ continuity and generality are two names
of the same absence of distinction of individuals’ (‘Multitude and Number’, 1897,
4.173). As against Secondness, Thirdness is general; it mediates between First and
Second. The events of Secondness are never completely unique, such an event
would be inexperiencable, but relates (3) to other events (2) due to certain features
(1) in them; Thirdness is thus what facilitates understanding as well as pragmatic
action, due to its continuous generality. With a famous example (‘Thirdness’, c.
1895, 1.341): if you dream about an apple pie, then the very qualities of that dream
(taste, smell, warmth, crustiness, etc.) are pure Firstnesses, while the act of baking
is composed of a series of actual Secondnesses. But their coordination is governed
by a Thirdness: the recipe, being general, can never specify all properties in the
individual apple pie, it has a schematic frame-character and subsumes an indefinite
series – a whole continuum – of possible apple pies. Thirdness is thus necessarily
general and vague. Of course, the recipe may be more or less precise, but no recipe
exists which is able to determine each and every property in the cake, including
date, hour, place, which tree the apples stem from, etc. – any recipe is necessarily
general. In this case, the recipe (3) mediates between dream (1) and fulfilment (2) –
its generality, symbolicity, relationality and future orientation are all characteristic
for Thirdness. An important aspect of Peirce’s realism is that continuous generality
may be experienced directly in perceptual judgments: ‘Generality, Thirdness, pours
in upon us in our very perceptual judgments ’ (‘The Three Normative Sciences’,
1902, EPII, 207; 5.150).14
All these determinations remain purely phenomenological, even if the later
semiotic and metaphysical interpretations15 clearly shine through. In a more general,
non-Peircean terminology, his phenomenology can be seen as the description of
minimum aspects inherent in any imaginable possible world – for this reason it
is imaginability which is the main argument, and this might point in the direction
that Peirce could be open to critique for subjectivism, so often aimed at Husserl’s
project, in some respects analogous. The concept of consciousness is invoked as
the basis of imaginability: phenomenology is the study of invariant properties in
any phenomenon appearing for a mind. Peirce’s answer would here be, on the
one hand, the research community which according to him defines reality – an

L E T ’ S S T I C K T O G E T H E R
15
argument which structurally corresponds to Husserl’s reference to intersubjectivity
as a necessary ingredient in objectivity (an object is a phenomenon which is inter-
subjectively accessible). Peirce, however, has a further argument here, namely his
consequent refusal to delimit his concept of mind exclusively to human subjects
(a category the use of which he obviously tries to minimize), mind-like processes
may take place in nature without any subject being responsible. Peirce will, for
continuity reasons, never accept any hard distinction between subject and object
and remains extremely parsimonious in his use of such terms.16 Without calling
him naturalist through and through, we may at this stage claim that he tries to
let the antinomy between naturalism and idealism form a circle17 which hinders
scepticist critiques of idealism as well as subjectivist critiques of naturalism to gain
foothold.
The place of continuity in Peirce’s category doctrine has already been hinted at
by its appearance as a central predicates for Thirdness, but all has not been said
here. Secondness evidently has discontinuity as one of its properties, but what about
Firstness? The fact that sensory qualities – prototypical examples of Firsts – as a
rule form continua, suggests that continuity is also a crucial property in Firstness.
Peirce is not unanimous here: a basic idea in Firstness is that each quality appears
independently of anything else, and so Firstness seems a powder of infinitesimal
quality bits. But still they have a tendency to form continua, and the different quality
continua may even meet in a higher dimension continuous space: ‘At one end of
the sequence all the qualities come together in a zero. But they are separate from
one another as they separate from zero’ (‘Abstracts of 8 lectures’, undated, NEM
IV, 12818).
In the text quoted here, Peirce indulges in a larger investigation of whether the
space of qualities is ‘perissid’ or ‘artiad’ – depending on whether a Hegelian-like
transformation from a maximal intensity of one quality is allowed to pass directly
into a maximal intensity of the opposed quality. This is refused by Peirce, and he
consequently envisages the continuum of possible qualities mirror itself in a zero
point where two half continua meet. The decisive idea here, however, is that qualities
constitute a continuum of many dimensions, and that one type of qualities – cf. the
point zero argument – may pass continuously into another. The existent sensory
and other qualities of experience are thus, to Peirce, only remaining, actualized
fragments of a original, basic continuum of possibility, uniting all possible qualia
in one continuous manifold19 (and thus making visual, auditory, olfactory, etc.
qualities parts of the same continuum).
But now to return to the continuum of possible quality. Every complexus of qualities is a quality, and as
such, considered by itself, is all that it is in and for itself. Not only every complex of qualities but every
generalization of such complexes is a possible quality. But in this way, the dimensions of the continuum
ought to exceed every discrete multitude. In short, they should form a continuum of dimensions. It is
impossible. Hence these dimensions of complex qualities are only abstractly possible. They cannot have
simultaneous being in the world of potentialities. (‘Abstract of 8 lectures’, undated, NEM IV, 135)
It is not completely evident why a quality continuum with a continuous number
of dimensions should not be possible – but the decisive issue here is the idea that

16
C H A P T E R 1
Firstness appears as a multidimensional continuum, in which the single quality yet
‘ in itself is absolutely severed from every other’ (ibid. 133).20
This implies that the reaction events of Secondness may be conceived on the
background of this vast space of possibilities:
But just as the qualities, which as they are for themselves, are equally unrelated to one other, each
being mere nothing for any other, yet form a continuum in which and because of their situation in
which they acquire more or less resemblance and contrast with one another; and then this continuum is
amplified in the continuum of possible feelings of quality, so the accidents of reaction, which are waking
consciousnesses of pairs of qualities, may be expected to join themselves into a continuum. (137)
Secondness is now taken to actualize these quality possibilities based on an idea
that any actual event involves a clash of qualities – in the ensuing argumentation
Peirce underlines that the qualities involved in actualization need not be restrained
to two but may be many, if they may only be ‘dissolved’ into pairs and hence do
not break into the domain of Thirdness. This appearance of actuality, hence, has
the property of singularities, spontaneously popping up in the space of possibilities
and actualizing pairs of points in it:
Since, then an accidental reaction is a combination or bringing into special connection of two qualities,
and since further it is accidental and antigeneral or discontinuous, such an accidental reaction ought to
be regarded as an adventitious singularity of the continuum of possible quality, just as two points of a
sheet of paper might come into contact. (137)
This transition from First to Second is conceived of along Aristotelian lines: as an
actualization of a possibility – and this is expressed in the picture of a discontinuous
singularity in the quality continuum. The topological fact that singularities must
in general be defined with respect to the neighborhood of the manifold in which
they appear, now becomes the argument for the fact that Secondness can never be
completely discontinuous but still ‘inherits’ a certain small measure of continuity
from the continuum of Firstness:
But although singularities are discontinuous, they may be continuous to a certain extent. Thus the sheet
instead of touching itself in the union of two points may cut itself all along a line. Here there is a
continuous line of singularity. In like manner, accidental reactions though they are breaches of generality
may come to be generalized to a certain extent. (137)
Singularities, being discontinuous along certain dimensions, may be continuous
in others, which provides the condition of possibility for Thirdness to exist as a
tendency for Secondness to conform to a general law or regularity. As is evident,
a completely pure Secondness is impossible in this continuous metaphysics – it
remains a conceivable but unrealizable limit case, because a completely discon-
tinuous event would amount to nothing. Thirdness already lies as a germ in the
non-discontinuous aspects of the singularity. The occurrences of Secondness seem
to be infinitesimal, then, rather than completely extensionless points.
The continuity of Thirdness is, in contrast to Firstness, real – the recipe does in
fact refer to a continuum of apple pies which gradually, to greater or lesser extent,
are actualized. We are now well into Peirce’s metaphysics – while the quality
continuum of Firstness is perfect, complete, but purely potential (and thus neither

L E T ’ S S T I C K T O G E T H E R
17
universal nor particular), then that of Thirdness is imperfect and fractioned, but
real – realized via the swarm of Secondness actualizations, but still transgressing
these in scope, as a finite number of events may never exhaust the universal law
that governs them. From the reservoir of possibility in First, still larger doses of
continuity seek through the slits of actual events in Secondness out into the growing
reality of Thirdness – to sum up the three categories’ relation to continuity in a
metaphor which Peirce does not himself use. First is potential, Second actual, and
Third real, and Peirce occasionally hints at the idea that the reality of Thirdness
constitutes a consistent conception of a third Aristotelian notion: entelechy.21
V A G U E N E S S , D E T E R M I N A T E N E S S , G E N E R A L I T Y
Continuity thus appears in two different forms in Firstness and Thirdness,
respectively:
Perhaps a more scientific pair of definitions would be that anything is general in so far as the principle
of excluded middle does not apply to it and is vague in so far as the principle of contradiction does not
apply to it. (“Issues of Pragmaticism”, 1905, EPII, 351; 5.448)
Elsewhere, Peirce connects vagueness and generality to Firstness and Thirdness,
respectively. In the former, continuity thus appears as vagueness, implying that a
quality in the Firstness quality continua can never be identified with full exactitude
and constitutes an infinitesimal variation of the quality dimension in question. In
the latter, continuity appears as generality which is underspecified in comparison
to its incarnations in particular, actual events. Peirce’s brief definition of these two
modes of indeterminateness by means of the logical principles of excluded middle
(PEM) and contradiction (PC) requires some clarifications.
When claiming that the vagueness of Firstness does not follow the principle of
contradiction, Peirce’s idea does not refer to the standard PC in modern propositional
logic (the principle that for a proposition p, not both p and non-p hold).22 Thus he
does not mean that propositions relating to Firstness in general can have several
truth values (as would be the case when referring to the normal PC being false.
Peirce’s non-standard PC focuses on properties in predicate logic – it is the claim
that for all properties P, no subject has both of the properties P and non-P (not both
“S is P” and “S is non-P”) – and it explicitly applies for definite subjects only. But
firstnesses are possibilities and hence not such subjects. Their metaphysical status
is thus in a typical Peircean move defined by the an ontological interpretation of
logical principles. They are ontologically may-bes, and a may-be does not exclude
the correlated may-not-be: whether any single subject instantiates a given may-be
or not can not be decided on the basis of the may-be. The fact that PC does not
apply thus refers to the modal character of the entities of Firstness, and its logical
expression is that “S may be P” and “S may be non-P” may both be true – Peirce’s
own example is that “It may rain tomorrow” and “It may not rain tomorrow” are
both true.
The generality of Thirdness, similarly, is claimed not to follow the principle of
the excluded middle (or, the excluded Third). This should not be understood as

18
C H A P T E R 1
referring to the modern standard PEM (that for a proposition p, either p or non-
p hold). claiming that propositions referring to Thirdnesses (general necessities)
admit a third truth-value such as would be the case if standard logical PEM does
not apply. Peirce’s non-standard PEM is the idea that for all properties P, any
subject has either the property P or the property non-P (either “S is P” or “S is
non-P”), and it explicitly applies to individuals only. Claiming that PEM does not
apply to Thirdnesses thus refers to the ontological status of Thirdness would-bes
– they are not such subjects as required by PEM. Here, the logical expression is
that both “S must be P” and “S must be non-P” may both be false (in Peirce’s
example: “It must rain tomorrow” and “It must not rain tomorrow” may both
be false.23 And even if a specific would-be holds, the general failure of PEM to
apply refers to the fact that the single objects of would-bes remain undetermined
as to all aspects not covered by the would-be real possibility in question – they
are thus objects with lots of indeterminate aspects.24 The following exemplifies
this idea:
The general may be defined as that to which the principle of excluded middle does not apply. A
triangle in general is not isosceles nor equilateral; nor is a triangle in general scalene. The vague
might be defined as that to which the principle of contradiction does not apply. For it is false neither
that an animal (in a vague sense) is male, nor that an animal is female. (Pragmaticism, Prag. [4],
1905; 5.505)
In generals, further equally possible specifications are indeterminate (different kinds
of triangles), while in vaguenesses, contradictory properties may appear (genderless
or hermaphroditic animals).
The actual individual existence of Secondness, by contrast, may then be defined
by its adherence to both of the principles of contradiction and excluded middle,
because individuality taken as complete determination of all properties must
obey both principles. The determinateness of Secondness thus forms the third
member of the triad vagueness-determinateness-generality. A completely deter-
minate individual must possess the property P or its contradictory non-P (PEM),
but not both (PC):
Although the principles of contradiction and excluded middle may be regarded as together constituting
the definition of the relation expressed by “not”, yet they also imply that whatever exists consists of
individuals. (Baldwin’s Dictionary, 1911, 537–38; 3.612)
Peirce hesitates, though, to accept full determinacy of all properties as a definition
of the existence mode of actual, individual objects or events. His continuist reason
for hesitating is that this would make the relation between the possibilities of
Firstness and its subsets, the real possibilities of Thirdness, on the one hand, and
individual Secondness, on the other, too discontinuous and insurmountable – and
he points to the large and vain efforts of the Scholastics to explain the relation
between general concepts and individual objects in terms of “contraction” etc.
Vagueness and generality are supposed to inhere also in individual existence, albeit
only infinitesimally in contrast to the two continuous possibility categories. This is
why an alternative definition by reactivity is proposed for individuality:

L E T ’ S S T I C K T O G E T H E R
19
Another definition which avoids the above difficulties is that an individual is something which reacts.
That is to say, it does react against some things, and is of such a nature that it might react, or have
reacted, against my will. (Baldwin’s Dictionary, 1911, 537–38; 3.612)
Full adherence to both PC and PEM, according to this idea, is taken to pertain
to the ideal of fully determinate objects or events only, an ideal which actual
existing individuals can never completely satisfy. Individuals may be singled out
on all levels of reality and discourse without the ontological requirement of full
determinateness, if reactivity is what grants their basic haecceity (thisness, see next
chapter).
Peirce also describes the difference between the two indeterminacies, vague conti-
nuity and general continuity, in semiotic terms, based upon a dialogical notion of
semiotics nowadays identified as a version of game-theoretical semantics (Pietarinen
2006). In vague signs, the possible further selection and specification of the object
is left to the same source as uttered the first sign (The fortune-teller: “I see a great
event . . .” “What is it?” “Some tall, dark man . . .”). In generality, the possible further
selection and specification of the object is handed over to the dialogue partner (The
logician: “Any man is mortal” “Which man?” “Any man you like!”).25 The normal
situation being that the utterer commands the scope of signification of signs, general
signs form a special, restricted subset of vague signs – a special subset where the
utterer permits the dialogue partner to select examples (real generals supposedly
not admitting (but few) counterexamples).
While the vagueness of Firstness has its metaphysical expression in the reality of
(relative) indeterminism, the generality of Thirdness has its metaphysical expression
in the real existence of laws and tendencies. The relation between the three
categories and the two principles in Peirce’s version may be summed up as follows
(with the proviso that Secondness as defined by adherence to both principles forms
an ideal limit case only).
Principle of
Contradiction
Principle of
Excluded Middle
1
vagueness, possibility
−
+
2
determinateness actuality
+
+
3
generality necessity
+
−
Metaphysically speaking, the continuities of Firstness and Thirdness thus refer to
the real existence of indeterminateness and laws, respectively, in addition to the
reactive actuality of Secondness. Logically speaking, Peirce initiates the devel-
opment of logic formalisms covering different indeterminate cases, such as modal
logic, intuitionistic logic and fuzzy logic26 – in his unfinished Gamma graphs he
attempted to extend his logic representation systems to cover such cases.
This presentation of the role of continuity in Peirce’s phenomenology has until
now been merely reconstruction of his position and does not in any way present an
argument for its validity. What is the motivation for this crucial role of continuity

20
C H A P T E R 1
in his category doctrine? In the case of Firstness, continuity serves the aim of
describing the infinite density of possible predicates: phenomenologically spoken
it corresponds to the experience of the infinite and continuous variability of qualia.
Furthermore, the ‘composition’ of the continuum from parts, infinitesimals, of
which the single infinitesimal is but vague and escapes the law of contradiction,
serves to underline a conception of the possible quality itself as vague, because
only the discontinuity of Secondness makes the precise quality evident. But it is
especially the rule of continuity as central to Thirdness which is controversial.
Continuity here serves the phenomenological purpose of accounting for experienced,
realistically conceived regularities in the phenomenon: the fact that processes are
more or less rule-bound. Continuity in Thirdness thus supports the idea of ‘real
possibilities’ or ‘would-be’s which Peirce introduces in his mature theory from
around 1896–97.27 Whether this is a necessary implication of the identification of
Thirdness with real continuity is, however, an open question to which we shall
return.
An even more basic critical question will ask for the legitimacy of the three
categories. In our days, the legitimacy of Secondness and its ontology of particular
events will probably give rise to least controversy; the actually existing world
of particular entities appears to most metaphysicians as beyond any reasonable
doubt. The fact that this actual world realizes certain possibilities we may conceive
makes some version of Firstness easily digestible if bracketing Peirce’s further
metaphysical implications such as the continuity of all possible qualities. Thirdness
is obviously the most problematic category, gathering in one bundle a whole set of
philosophical issues in one grand solution proposal:
Real possibilities; reality of tendencies, relations, and patterns; rule-following; the iconic structure of
propositions; intensional meanings
An obvious conclusion might seem the positivist reaction: regularities found in
certain processes do not have any further substance and do not require their
own basic phenomenological category – they are in the last account reducible
to psychological or logical organizations of what is empirically given in atomist
data. Such explanations, however, loosens a psychological or logical level from
the phenomenon itself – in the former case with the result that phenomenology
is re-psychologized and based on a preliminary subject-object distinction with all
the well-known lamentable consequences – in the latter case with the result that
the validity and role of logic remains unexplained, with the result that it may be
conceived of as mere formal tautologies whose contribution to the organization
of experience seems trivial. From a logical point of view, this argument against
Thirdness (and its ensuing universalist realism) targets Peirce’s so-called reduction
thesis claiming that all many-sided relations may be reduced to a combination of
three-sided relations, but that one- and two-sided relations may not, on the other
hand, combine to form genuine three-sided relations which consequently gets a
fundamental role.

L E T ’ S S T I C K T O G E T H E R
21
T H E T H R E E C A T E G O R I E S I N D I A G R A M S
We already commented upon the continuous sheet as basic for diagrams. The three
categories also, however, inform the signs further used as constituents of diagrams.
Let us as an example take Peirce’s ‘existential graphs’ of which the Alpha version
charts propositional logic, the Beta part first order predicate logic, and the unfinished
Gamma part different aspects of modal logic, temporal logic, speech act logic, etc.
In the Beta Graphs, the continuous sheet admits the following sign types: predicates
(typically in verbal form) may be directly written on the sheet. They form propositions
by being attached to subjects which are indicated by identity lines, at the other end(s)
of which an index for the subject involved may appear. The end of an identity line
merely states that such a subject exists, and the line may branch and connect to various
predicates.Predicateshavinguptothreeplacesmayalsoconnecttootheridentitylines.
Propositions occurring side by side on the sheet are linked with a conjunction. The
last sign type is the cut, a connecting line severing part of the sheet from the rest. The
diagrampartsinsidethatcutarenegated.28 Twocuts,oneappearinginsidetheother,are
calledaScrollwhichformsamaterialimplication.Certainrulesgovernthegraphs:itis
allowed to write a truepropositioneverywhereontheblanksheetorinevenlyenclosed
cuts, while it is allowed to add any proposition in unevenly enclosed cuts. Graphs not
transcending cuts may be iterated or deleted. Double cuts with nothing in between
may be deleted or inserted.29 The basics of the Beta Graphs are most easily understood
from an example (‘Prolegomena to an Apology for Pragmaticism’, 1906, 4.569):
Figure 6.
This graph says that there exists a millionaire who is not unfortunate. The
outermost end of the identity line functions as a quantifier claiming the existence of
an object, the label identifies it as a millionaire. The innermost end of the identity
line connects this subject to the predicate ‘unfortunate’, while the cut denies that
predication. What interests us here is Peirce’s category motivation for the inventory
of signs used in the Graphs. In his 1898 lectures, not long after the invention of the
Graphs, he says:
In the system of graphs may be remarked three kinds of signs of very different natures. First, there are
the verbs, of endless variety. Among these is the line signifying identity. But second the ends of the

22
C H A P T E R 1
line of identity (and every verb ought to [be] conceived as having such loose ends) are signs of a totally
different kind. They are demonstrative pronouns, indicating existing objects, not necessarily material
things, for they may be events, or even qualities, but still objects, merely designated as this or that. In
the third place, the writing of verbs side by side, and the ovals enclosing graphs not asserted but subjects
of assertion, which last is continually used in mathematics and makes one of the great difficulties of
mathematics, constitute a third, entirely different kind of sign. Signs of the first kind represent objects
in their Firstness, and give the significations of the terms. Signs of the second kind represent objects as
existing, – and therefore as reacting, – and also in their reactions. They contribute the assertive character
to the graph. Signs of the third kind represent objects as representative, that is in their Thirdness, and
upon them turn all the inferential processes. In point of fact, it was considerations about the categories
which taught me how to construct the system of graphs. (‘Detached Ideas Continued’, NEM IV, 339)
The three categories here permits Peirce to distinguish signs (1) referring to
qualities and verbs, that is, polyvalent predicates, (2) referring to subjects related
to those predicates, and (3) referring to logical relations like the operators of
conjunction and negation, and, more implicitly, quantifiers which appear in the
system due to the system of cuts modifying a basic existential quantification of the
sheet. The three sign types given here relate to the term-proposition-argument triad
in the way that the former are simply terms or rhemes, while the two latter are
what may be added to rhemes in order to constitute propositions and arguments,
respectively. We should thus expect these sign types to appear as typical instruments
of different diagrams, representing qualities, subjects, and the relations between
those, respectively.
To Peirce, it was an ideal to use signs representing these phenomena as iconically
as possible.30 He thus saw his logic graphs with their continuous depiction of
continuous states-of-affairs as superior to his own earlier algebra of logic (which
through Schröder and Peano developed into actual symbolic logic notation): all
diagrams are based on the continuum, but still, the more continuous a diagram, the
better.

C H A P T E R 2
THE PHYSIOLOGY OF ARGUMENTS
–
PEIRCE’S
EXTREME REALISM
The Continuum in Peirce’s Theory of Signs
Peirce’s mature theory of signs consists of a long series of argued distinctions
between types of signs (or rather, between types of aspects of signs) – based on the
three phenomenological categories, in turn described with reference to continuity as
presented in Chap. 1. In this chapter, we shall discuss the realist bases of Peirce’s
sign theory with continuous reference to continuity.
Let us begin with the definition of the sign. A variety of hundreds of sign
definitions are disseminated all over Peirce’s work, but a certain agreement among
Peirce scholars seem to focus on a few of them, among those the following: ‘A Sign,
or Representamen, is a First which stands in such a genuine triadic relation to
a Second, called its Object, as to be capable of determining a Third, called its
Interpretant, to assume the same triadic relation to its Object in which it stands
itself to the same Object’ (‘Syllabus’, 1902, EPII, 272–73; 2.274).
This sign definition from 1902 involves explicit reference to the three phenomeno-
logical categories. The sign relates a quality (1) to an actual object (2) and, by
doing so, involves a more or less general regularity (3). This regularity now stands
in the same relation to the object as did the initial First, that is, it is to the same
degree a sign of the object. Thus, Peirce’s sign definition is recursive; the fact that
the interpretant is in itself a sign implies that it has its own interpretant and so on ad
infinitum. In this recursivity of the sign definition lies Peirce’s famous ‘unlimited
semiosis’. It is not determined how much more general the interpretant is than the
initial representamen (which NB qua First is in itself general). The sign may so to
speak ‘run idle’ when the interpretant does not express any more than the represen-
tamen; this will be the limit case of ‘perfect communication’ where the intended
meaning is decoded identically. Both misunderstandings and more-understandings,
so to speak, let the interpretant deviate from the representamen, and it is thus no
necessary implication of the sign definition itself that unlimited semiosis converges
towards the perfect representation of the object (this idea is added, to be sure,
in Peirce’s philosophy of science). Given Peirce’s sign definition, it is perfectly
possible to imagine unlimited semiosis circling around the object without getting
neither closer nor farther away (something like what deconstruction has made out of
unlimited semiosis), or, indeed, a pessimistic philosophy of culture where semiosis
would gradually dwindle farther and farther away from the object and tend asymp-
totically towards pure nonsense; a sort of Heideggerian Peirce-interpretation could
23

24
C H A P T E R 2
lead to such a somber Seinsgeschichte. Let us thus – even if the positive asymptote
of knowledge indeed has certain connections to continuity – bracket Peirce’s reasons
for assuming it until further notice. Another very important and often highlighted
property in the sign definition is its lack of reference to (human) subjectivity. Of
course, it is possible to find expressions like ‘mind’, or ‘ Thirdness is the triadic
relation existing between a sign, its object and the interpreting thought, itself a
sign ’ (Letter to Lady Welby, Oct 12, 1904, 8.332, our italics), but they refer to
the real existence of ideas in Peirce’s objective idealism, never to any necessary
role of active subjectivity only.31 The irreducible connection of the sign to the three
phenomenological categories may, according to the definition mentioned, take place
without any subjective or conscious intermediary – the presence in the real world of
regularities are, in fact, according to this description already signs – because they
connect objects with properties in a stable and general way. Natural regularities –
‘habits’ in Peirce’s lingo – determine that the world is no everchanging, ungras-
pable chaos, and they are thus signs, stably connecting objects and properties. This
consequence lies – given phaneroscopy – at the surface of Peirce’s general sign
definitions and becomes the condition of possibility for Peirce’s ‘extreme realism’:
the possibility that general signs created by cognizing beings (e.g., humans) may
correspond to naturally occurring general signs.32
Peirce’s logic is as mentioned triadic, and its first branch, grammatica speculativa,
takes the form of distinctions between sign types, while the second formalizes
inference structures and the third reflects upon the use of them, to put it briefly. The
argument is thus the fundamental type of sign, it is the generic, full-blown sign,
and it is defined as ‘ a sign which separately signifies its interpretant.’ (Carnegie
Application, 1902, NEM IV, 22 (1902)). The argument makes explicit – in contrast
to more primitive signs – how it should be interpreted, this interpretation being
normally known as its conclusion. As Peirce’s definition of signs lets signs appear
in nature and mind alike, there must, consequently, also exist arguments in nature:
‘We all think of nature as syllogizing. Even the mechanical philosopher, who is as
nominalistic as a scientific man can be, does that.’ (1898, RLOT, 161) What we are
supposed to understand by this seemingly radical claim, that nature not only involves
processes structurally analogous to inferences, but also makes their conclusions
explicit, is not immediately evident.33 We must suppose that explicit arguments
may, in some cases, mirror natural processes but without these latter having the
explicit, self-controlled character of the former. Such claims belong, of course, to
philosophy of nature and thus under the more special science of cosmology (see
the discussion of ‘real possibilities’ later in this chapter) – but it is important to
emphasize that the conditions of possibility for the radical claims of the latter lies
already in the more general definition of signs. Whether cosmology might be better
interpreted in another way is not immediately a problem for Peirce’s semiotics.
Thus continuity in the form of generality is a direct consequence of Peirce’s
definition of signs: complicated signs imply the assumption of a continuum of
possible objects as their reference as the foundation of meaning as such. The fact that
the argument is the basic sign in Peirce does by no means imply that it is primitive

T H E P H Y S I O L O G Y O F A R G U M E N T S
25
or without internal parts; it is rather the fully developed sign, and all of Peirce’s
semiotics may, in fact, be seen as a physiology of arguments which investigates
how the argument is composed of more primitive signs and sign aspects. But these
simpler signs are not, according to Peirce, fundamental, true to his definition of
sciences by their causa finalis, it is the definition of logic from the exploitation of
its truth-preserving properties which makes him privilege the argument, because it
is the kind of sign facilitating explicit truth-preservation. The more primitive sign
types are thus to be seen as ‘degenerate’ arguments,34 arguments not completed, sign
types dependent on their possible role in argumentation. In presentations of Peirce it
is more the rule than the exception that these radically teleological aspects of the sign
are understated, so the presentation tends to suppose that Peirce sees the argument
as composed ‘from below’ of independent primitives. But with our knowledge of
the role of continuity in Peirce we can grasp how Peirce rejects the idea of building
anything up from below of independent, discontinuous building blocks – in this
respect, he is a sort of holist, because the simpler sign types are to be grasped
as parts of the argument and the unlimited semiosis’ growth towards truth. In the
following presentation we shall bracket this teleology beyond the argument level
with the deliberate purpose to let the question of any cosmological striving towards
truth and generality remain open. We will not however, assume the opposite either,
amounting to something like a sort of neo-Darwinist Peirce-interpretation taking
the argument to be the result of an arbitrary concatenation of simpler signs subject
to selection. We will envisage the argument and its parts as a physiologist taking
the body of the argument as the upper limit of investigation until further notice.
T O K E N A N D T Y P E
Peirce’s First Trichotomy35
As the sign consists of three components it comes hardly as a surprise that it may
be analyzed in nine aspects – every one of the sign’s three components may be
viewed under each of the three fundamental phenomenological categories.36 The
least discussed of these so-called trichotomies is probably the first, concerning
which property in the sign it is that functions, in fact, to make it a sign. It gives rise
to the trichotomy qualisign, sinsign, legisign, or, in a little more sexy terminology,
tone, token, type.37 The latter will be preferred here, also because it makes evident
the heritage philosophy has taken from it – the dichotomy token/type which stems
from Peirce’s terminology without its tone basis is made explicit.
The oftenmost quoted definition is from ‘Syllabus’ (1903, EPII, 291; 2.244):
According to the first division, a Sign may be termed a Qualisign, a Sinsign, or a Legisign.
A Qualisign is a quality which is a Sign. It cannot actually act as a sign until it is embodied; but the
embodiment has nothing to do with its character as a sign.
A Sinsign (where the syllable sin is taken as meaning ‘being only once’, as in single, simple, Latin
semel, etc.) is an actual existent thing or event which is a sign. It can only be so through its qualities;
so that it involves a qualisign, or rather, several qualisigns. But these qualisigns are of a peculiar kind
and only form a sign through being actually embodied.

26
C H A P T E R 2
A Legisign is a law that is a Sign. This law is usually [sic] established by men. Every conventional sign
is a legisign. It is not a single object, but a general type which, it has been agreed, shall be significant.
Every legisign signifies through an instance of its application, which may be termed a Replica of it.
Thus, the word ‘the’ will usually occur from fifteen to twenty-five times on a page. It is in all these
occurrences one and the same word, the same legisign. Each single instance of it is a Replica. The
Replica is a Sinsign. Thus, every Legisign requires Sinsigns. But these are not ordinary Sinsigns, such
as are peculiar occurrences that are regarded as significant. Nor would the Replica be significant if it
were not for the law which renders it so.
In some sense, it is a strange fact that this first and basic trichotomy has not been
widely discussed in relation to the continuity concept in Peirce, because it is crucial.
It is evident from the second noticeable locus where this trichotomy is discussed,
the letters to Lady Welby – here Peirce continues (after an introduction which
brings less news):
The difference between a legisign and a qualisign, neither of which is an individual thing, is that a
legisign has a definite identity, though usually admitting a great variety of appearances. Thus, &, and,
and the sound are all one word. The qualisign, on the other hand, has no identity. It is the mere quality
of an appearance and is not exactly the same throughout a second. Instead of identity, it has great
similarity, and cannot differ much without being called quite another qualisign.
(Letter to Lady Welby, Oct 12, 1904, 8.334)
The legisign or type is distinguished as being general which is, in turn, defined
by continuity: the type has a ‘great variety of appearances’; as a matter of fact,
a continuous variation of appearances. In many cases even several continua of
appearances (as &, and, and the spoken sound of ‘and’). Each continuity of
appearances is gathered into one identity thanks to the type, making possible the
repetition of identical signs. Reference is not yet discussed (it concerns the sign’s
relation to its object), nor is meaning (referring to its relation to its interpretant) –
what is at stake is merely the possibility for a type to incarnate a continuum of
possible actualizations, however this be possible, and so repeatedly appear as one
and the same sign despite other differences. Thus the reality of the type is the very
foundation for Peirce’s ‘extreme realism’, and this for two reasons. First, seen from
the side of the sign, the type provides the possibility of stable, repeatable signs:
the type may – opposed to qualisigns and those sinsigns not being replicas of a
type – be repeated as a self-identical occurrence, and this is what in the first place
provides the stability which renders repeated sign use possible. Second, seen from
the side of reality: because types, legisigns, are realized without reference to human
subjectivity, the existence of types is the condition of possibility for a sign, in turn,
to stably refer to stably occurring entities and objects. Here, the importance of the
irreducible continuity in philosophy of mathematics appears for semiotics: it is that
which grants the possibility of collecting a continuum in one identity, the special
characteristic of the type concept.38 The opposition to the type is the qualisign or
tone lacking the stability of the type – they are not self-identical even through a
second, as Peirce says – they have, of course, the character of being infinitesimal
entities, about which the principle of contradiction does not hold. The transfor-
mation from tone to type is thus the transformation from unstable pre-logic to stable
logic – it covers, to phrase it in a Husserlian way, the phenomenology of logic. The

T H E P H Y S I O L O G Y O F A R G U M E N T S
27
legisign thus exerts its law over specific qualisigns and sinsigns – like in all Peirce’s
trichotomies the higher sign types contain and govern specific instances of the lower
types. The legisign is incarnated in singular, actual sinsigns representing the type
– they are tokens of the type – and what they have in common are certain sets of
qualities or qualisigns – tones – selected from continua delimited by the legisign.
The amount of possible sinsigns, tokens, are summed up by a type, a stable and self-
identical sign. Peirce’s despised nominalists would to some degree agree here: the
universal as a type is indeed a ‘mere word’ – but the strong counterargument which
Peirce’s position makes possible says that if ‘mere words’ may possess universality,
then the world must contain it as well, because words are worldly phenomena like
everything else.39 Here, nominalists will typically exclude words from the world
and make them privileges of the subject, but for Peirce’s welding of idealism and
naturalism nothing can be truly separated from the world – all what basically is in
the mind must also exist in the world. Thus the synthetical continuum, which may,
in some respects, be treated as one entity, becomes the very condition of possibility
for the existence of types.40
Whether some types or legisigns now refer to existing general objects or not is
not a matter for the first trichotomy to decide; legisigns may be part of any number
of false or nonsensical propositions, and not all legisigns are symbols, just like
arguments, in turn, are only a subset of symbols – but all of them are legisigns
because they must in themselves be general in order to provide the condition of
possibility of identical repetition, of reference to general objects and of signifying
general interpretants.
A C O N T I N U U M O F S I M I L A R I T Y
Peirce’s Second Trichotomy
The second trichotomy is probably the most well-known piece of Peirce’s semiotics:
it distinguishes three possible relations between the sign and its (dynamical) object.41
This relation may be motivated by similarity, by actual connection, or by general
habit – giving rise to the sign classes icon, index, and symbol, respectively. The
implications of continuity for these sign classes are particularly vast. Let us as an
introduction take a look at the classical locus of description of these classes:
According to the second trichotomy, a Sign may be termed an Icon, an Index, or a Symbol.
An Icon is a sign which refers to the Obect that it denotes merely by virtue of characters of its own,
and which it possesses, just the same, whether any such Object actually exists or not. It is true that
unless there really is such an Object, the Icon does not act as a sign; but this has nothing to do with its
character as a sign. Anything whatever, be it quality, existent individual, or law, is an Icon of anything,
in so far as it is like that thing and used as a sign of it.
An Index is a sign which refers to the Object that it denotes by virtue of being really affected by that
Object. It cannot, therefore, be a Qualisign, because qualities are whatever they are independently of
anything else. In so far as the Index is affected by the Object, it necessarily has some Quality in common
with the Object, and it is in respect to these that it refers to the Object. It does, therefore, involve a sort
of Icon, although an Icon of a peculiar kind; and it is not the mere resemblance of its Object, even in
these respects which makes it a sign, but it is the actual modification of it by the Object.

28
C H A P T E R 2
A Symbol is a sign which refers to the Object that it denotes by virtue of a law, usually an association
of general ideas, which operates to cause the Symbol to be interpreted as referring to that Object. It is
thus itself a general type or law, that is, a Legisign. As such it acts through a Replica. Not only is it
general in itself, but the Object to which it refers is of general nature. Now that which is general has its
being in the instances it will determine. There must, therefore, be existent instances of what the Symbol
denotes, although we must here understand by ‘existent’, existent in the possibly imaginary universe to
which the Symbol refers. The Symbol will indirectly, through the association or other law, be affected
by those instances; and thus the Symbol will involve a sort of Index, although an Index of a peculiar
kind. It will not, however, be by any means true that the slight effect upon the Symbol of those instances
accounts for the significant character of the Symbol. (‘Syllabus’, 1903, EPII, 291–2; 2.247)
Let us begin with the icon. As it appears from the definition, the icon refers to its
object solely by means of its own properties. This implies that an icon potentially
refers to an indefinite class of objects, namely all those objects which have, in
some respect, a relation of similarity to it. In recent semiotics, it has often been
remarked (Nelson Goodman, cf. below) that any phenomenon can be said to be
like any other phenomenon in some respect, if the criterion of similarity is chosen
sufficiently general, just like the establishment of any convention immediately
implies a similarity relation. If Nelson Goodman picks out two otherwise very
different objects, then they are immediately similar to the extent that they now have
the same relation to Nelson Goodman. Goodman and others have for this reason
deemed the similarity relation insignificant – and consequently put the whole burden
of semiotics on the shoulders of conventional signs only. But the counterargument
against this rejection of the relevance of the icon lies close at hand. Given a tertium
comparationis, a measuring stick, it is no longer possible to make anything be like
anything else. This lies in Peirce’s observation that ‘It is true that unless there really
is such an Object, the Icon does not act as a sign ’ The icon only functions as
a sign to the extent that it is, in fact, used to refer to some object – and when it
does that, some criterion for similarity, a measuring stick (or, at least, a delimited
bundle of possible measuring sticks) are given in and with the comparison. In the
quote just given, it is of course the immediate object Peirce refers to – it is no claim
that there should in fact exist such an object as the icon refers to. Goodman and
others are of course right in claiming that as ‘Anything whatever () is an Icon of
anything ’, then the universe is pervaded by a continuum of possible similarity
relations back and forth, but as soon as some phenomenon is in fact used as an icon
for an object, then a specific bundle of similarity relations are picked out: ‘ in so
far as it is like that thing.’
Just like the qualisign, the icon is a limit category. ‘A possibility alone is an
Icon purely by virtue of its quality; and its object can only be a Firstness.’ (from
‘Syllabus’, c. 1902, EPII, 273; 2.276). Strictly speaking, a pure icon may only
refer one possible Firstness to another. The pure icon would be an identity relation
between possibilities. Consequently, the icon must, as soon as it functions as a sign,
be more than iconic. The icon is typically an aspect of a more complicated sign,
even if very often a most important aspect, because providing the predicative aspect
of that sign. This Peirce records by his notion of ‘hypoicon’: ‘But a sign may be
iconic, that is, may represent its object mainly by its similarity, no matter what its

T H E P H Y S I O L O G Y O F A R G U M E N T S
29
mode of being. If a substantive is wanted, an iconic representamen may be termed a
hypoicon’ (ibid.). Hypoicons are signs which to a large extent makes use of iconical
means as meaning-givers: images, paintings, photos, diagrams, etc. But the iconic
meaning realized in hypoicons have an immensely fundamental role in Peirce’s
semiotics. As icons are the only signs that look-like, then they are at the same time
the only signs realizing meaning. Thus any higher sign, index and symbol alike,
must contain, or, by association or inference terminate in, an icon. If a symbol
can not give an iconic interpretant as a result, it is empty. In that respect, Peirce’s
doctrine parallels that of Husserl where merely signitive acts require fulfillment by
intuitive (‘anschauliche’) acts. As we shall consider later, this is actually Peirce’s
continuation of Kant’s famous claim that intuitions without concepts are blind,
while concepts without intuitions are empty. When Peirce observes that ‘With the
exception of knowledge, in the present instant, of the contents of consciousness in
that instant (the existence of which knowledge is open to doubt) all our thought
and knowledge is by signs’ (Letter to Lady Welby, Oct 12, 1904, 8.332), then these
signs necessarily involve iconic components. Peirce has often been attacked for his
tendency towards a pan-semiotism which lets all mental and physical processes take
place via signs – in the quote just given he, analogous to Husserl, claims there must
be a basic evidence anterior to the sign – just like Husserl this evidence before the
sign must be based on a ‘metaphysics of presence’ – the ‘present instant’ provides
what is not yet mediated by signs. But icons provide the connection of signs, logic
and science to this foundation for Peirce’s phenomenology: the icon is the only sign
providing evidence (PAP, 1906, in NEM IV, 317). The icon is, through its timeless
similarity, apt to communicate aspects of an experience ‘in the present instant’.
Thus, the typical index contains an icon (more or less elaborated, it is true): the
footstep on the beach as the prototypical index is an evident example of this: we
are able to recognize it as a footprint only because it looks like a foot, because it
is an icon of a foot. And thus any symbol intends an iconic interpretant.
Continuity is at stake in relation to the icon to the extent that the icon, while not
in itself general, is the bearer of a potential generality. The footprint on the beach
refers (potentially) iconically to all feet of approximately (give and take a certain
margin dependent on the granularity and wetness of the sand) this shape and size,
as well as to all artificial feet, etc. of the same shape and size – that is, in turn, to a
continuum of possible feet. This infinitesimal generality is decisive for the higher
sign types’ possibility to give rise to thought: the symbol thus contains a bundle
of general icons defining its meaning. A special icon providing the condition of
possibility for general and rigorous thought is, of course, the diagram.
The index connects the sign directly with its object via connection in space and
time; as an actual sign connected to its object, the index is turned towards the past:
the action which has left the index as a mark must be located in time earlier than
the sign, so that the index presupposes, at least, the continuity of time and space
without which an index might occur spontaneously and without any connection to
a preceding action. Maybe surprisingly, in the Peircean doctrine, the index falls in
two subtypes: designators vs. reagents. Reagents are the simplest – here the sign is

30
C H A P T E R 2
caused by its object in one way or another: the footprint on the beach or smoke signi-
fying fire as arch examples. Designators, on the other hand, are more complex: the
index finger as pointing to an object or the demonstrative pronoun as the subject of
a proposition are prototypical examples. Here, the index presupposes an intention –
the will to point out the object for some receiver. Designators, it must be argued,
presuppose reagents: it is only possible to designate an object if you have already
been in reagent contact (simulated or not) with it (this forming the rational kernel of
causal reference theories of meaning). The closer determination of the object of an
index, however, invariably involves selection on the background of continuities: did
I mean the object as it is today, this year, this century; did I mean smoke as a sign of
fire or as a sign of a pyroman or as a sign of the pyroman’s sad childhood? Even the
determination of the object depends on the local delimitation of a continuum.42
On the level of the symbol, continuity and generality play a main role – as always
when approaching issues defined by Thirdness. The symbol is, as we noted, in
itself a legisign, that is, it is a general object which exists only due to its actual
instantiations. The symbol itself is a real and general recipe for the production
of similar instantiations in the future. But apart from thus being a legisign, it is
connected to its object thanks to a habit, or regularity. Sometimes, this is taken to
mean ‘due to a convention’ – in an attempt to distinguish conventional as opposed
to motivated sign types. This, however, rests on a misunderstanding of Peirce’s
doctrine in which the trichotomies record aspects of sign, not mutually exclusive,
independent classes of signs: symbols and icons do not form opposed, autonomous
sign classes; rather, the content of the symbol is constructed from indices and
general icons. The habit realized by a symbol connects it, as a legisign, to an
object which is also general – an object which just like the symbol itself exists in
instantiations, be they real or imagined. The symbol is thus a connection between
two general objects, each of them being actualized through replicas, tokens – a
connection between two continua, that is:
Definition 1. Any Blank is a symbol which could not be vaguer than it is (although it may be so
connected with a definite symbol as to form with it, a part of another partially definite symbol), yet
which has a purpose.
Axiom 1. It is the nature of every symbol to blank in part. []
Definition 2. Any Sheet would be that element of an entire symbol which is the subject of whatever
definiteness it may have, and any such element of an entire symbol would be a Sheet.
(‘Sketch of Dichotomic Mathematics’ (c. 1903?), NEM IV, 292)
The symbol’s generality can be described as it having always blanks having the
character of being indefinite parts of its continuous sheet. Thus, the continuity
of its blank parts is what grants its generality. The symbol determines its object
according to some rule, granting the object satisfies that rule – but leaving the
object indeterminate in all other respects.
The connection between symbol and object can take place ‘by association or
other law’, that is, it may have natural as well as human causes. When we call
a horse ‘a horse’, to take a semiotic arch example, the coupling between these
two continua (a continuum of different pronunciations or written instances of the

T H E P H Y S I O L O G Y O F A R G U M E N T S
31
signifier ‘horse’, and a continuum of hoofed animals of a certain description), is a
purely human convention. The very fact, however, that a real continuum of horses
exist – however difficult it may be to describe, define, or delimit it – which is
possible to connect to a continuum of spoken sounds or written letters, is not created
by the word.
It is tempting to take the typical symbol to be a word, but it should rather be taken
as the argument – the predicate and the proposition being degenerate versions of
arguments with further continuous blanks inserted by erasure, so to speak, forming
the third trichotomy of term, proposition, argument.
T H E G E N E R A L I T Y O F P R E D I C A T E S
Peirce’s Third Trichotomy
The decisive logical role is played by continuity in the third trichotomy which
is Peirce’s generalization of the old distinction between term, proposition and
argument in logic. In him, the technical notions are rhema, dicent and argument,43
and all of them may be represented by symbols. A crucial step in Peirce’s logic
of relations (parallel to Frege) is the extension of the predicate from having only
one possible subject in a proposition – to the possibility for a predicate to take
potentially infinitely many subjects. Predicates so complicated may be reduced,
however, to combination of (at most) three-subject predicates, according to Peirce’s
reduction hypothesis. Let us consider the definitions from ‘Syllabus’ in continuation
of the earlier trichotomies:
According to the third trichotomy, a Sign may be termed a Rheme, a Dicisign or Dicent Sign (that is, a
proposition or quasi-proposition), or an Argument.
A Rheme is a Sign which, for its Interpretant, is a Sign of qualitative possibility, that is, is understood as
representing such and such a kind of possible Object. Any Rheme, perhaps, will afford some information;
but it is not interpreted as doing so.
A Dicent Sign is a Sign, which, for its Interpretant, is a Sign of actual existence. It cannot, therefore,
be an Icon, which affords no ground for an interpretation of it as referring to actual existence. A Dicisign
necessarily involves, as a part of it, a Rheme, to describe the fact which it is interpreted as indicating. But
this is a peculiar kind of Rheme; and while it is essential to the Dicisign, it by no means constitutes it.
An Argument is a Sign which, for its Interpretant, is a Sign of a law. Or we may say that a Rheme
is a sign which is understood to represent its object in its characters merely; that a Dicisign is a sign
which is understood to represent its object in respect to actual existence; and that an Argument is a Sign
which is understood to represent its Object in its character as Sign. () The proposition need not be
asserted or judged. It may be contemplated as a sign capable of being asserted or denied. This sign itself
retains its full meaning whether it be actually asserted or not. () The proposition professes to be really
affected by the actual existent or real law to which it refers. The argument makes the same pretension,
but that is not the principal pretension of the argument. The rheme makes no such pretension.
The interpretant of the Argument represents it as an instance of a general class of Arguments, which
class on the whole will always tend to the truth. It is this law, in some shape, which the argument urges;
and this ‘urging’ is the mode of representation proper to Arguments.
(‘Syllabus’, 1903, EPII, 292–93; 2.250)
Predicates being general is of course a standard logical notion; in Peirce’s version
this generality is further emphasized by the fact that the simple predicate is seen

32
C H A P T E R 2
as relational and containing up to three subject slots to be filled in; each of them
may be occupied by a continuum of possible subjects. The predicate itself refers
to a possible property, a possible relation between subjects; the empty – or partly
satiated – predicate does not in itself constitute any claim that this relation does
in fact hold. The information it contains is potential, because no single or general
indication has yet been chosen to indicate which subjects among the continuum of
possible subjects it refers to. The proposition, on the contrary, the dicisign, is a
predicate where some of the empty slots have been filled in with indices (proper
names, demonstrative pronomina, deixis, gesture, etc.), and is, in fact, asserted. It
thus consists of an indexical part and an iconical part, corresponding to the usual
distinction between subject and predicate, with its indexical part connecting it to
some level of reference reality.44 This reality needs not, of course, be actual reality;
the subject slots may be filled in with general subjects thus importing pieces of
continuity into it – but the reality status of such subjects may vary, so it may equally
be filled in with fictitious references of all sorts. Even if the dicisign, the proposition,
is not an icon, it contains, via its rhematic core, iconical properties. Elsewhere,
Peirce simply defines the dicisign as a sign making explicit its reference.45 Thus a
portrait equipped with a sign indicating the portraitee will be a dicisign, just like
a charicature draft with a pointing gesture towards the person it depicts will be a
dicisign. Even such dicisigns may be general; the pointing gesture could single out a
group or a representative for a whole class of objects. While the dicisign specifies its
object, the argument is a sign specifying its interpretant – which is what is normally
called the conclusion. The argument thus consists of two dicisigns, a premiss (which
may be, in turn, composed of several dicisigns and is traditionally seen as consisting
of two dicisigns) and a conclusion – a dicisign represented as ensuing from the
premiss due to the power of some law. The argument is thus – just like the other
thirdness signs in the trichotomies – in itself general. It is a legisign and a symbol –
but adds to them the explicit specification of a general, lawlike interpretant. In
the full-blown sign, the argument, the more primitive degenerate sign types are
orchestrated together in a threefold generality where no less than three continua are
evoked: first, the argument itself is a legisign with a halo of possible instantions of
itself as a sign; second, it is a symbol referring to a general object, in turn with a
halo of possible instantiations around it; third, the argument implies a general law
which is represented by one instantiation (the premiss and the rule of inference)
but which has a halo of other, related inferences as possible instantiations.46 As
Peirce says, the argument persuades us that this lawlike connection holds for all
other cases being of the same type.
Scholastic Realism and Real Possibilities
Continuity is thus in play in all corners of Peirce’s sign doctrine where generality
plays any role. This geometrical metaphor is thus constitutive for the relation
between sign theory and metaphysics: general signs are general due to the real
existence of continua which may never be exhausted by any number of actual

T H E P H Y S I O L O G Y O F A R G U M E N T S
33
events or objects. The existence of such real continua is decisive for the ‘scholastic
realism’ of the mature Peirce after around 1896–97.
‘I am myself a scholastic realist of a somewhat extreme stripe’ (5.470) says
Peirce, not only in ‘A Survey of Pragmaticism’ from 1906; often he declares himself
a radicalizing heir to especially the realist position of John Duns Scotus. In a very
early version (1868), he sums up the position as follows:
There is a real difference between man irrespective of what the other determinations may be, and man
with this or that particular series of determinations, although undoubtedly this difference is only relative
to the mind and not in re. Such is the position of Scotus. Occam’s great objection is, there can be no
real distinction which is not in re, in the thing-in-itself; but this begs the question for it is itself based
only on the notion that reality is something independent of representative relation.
(‘Some Consequences of Four Incapacities’, EPI, 53; 5.312)
As we shall see, Peirce develops his view in between these two quotes, but already
in this ultra-short resume of the medieval fight over universals it is evident why
Peirce must chose the side of Scotus against William of Ockham. If you claim that
the distinction between universals – the human being – and single objects – one
human being – is a logical distinction only, which are constructed by us, then no
‘real generals’ exist, and Thirdness evaporates as metaphysical-phenomenological
category to leave only psychology of categorization behind. The opposite point of
view is of course not tenable either, the point of view against which Ockham directs
his critique – the idea that this distinction should be in re, interpreted as claiming
that generals should possess the same mode of being as the existing particulars
(which both sides agreed were the only existing objects). This would imply that
universals were things on a par with particulars, and Scotus perfectly realizes this
position is untenable: the distinction is ‘relative to the mind’, as Peirce says – but it
is still a real difference, as he adds. This is Peirce’s version of the Subtle Doctor’s
famous ‘formal distinction’ which teaches that the distinction between universals
and particulars is neither real taken in the sense that universals exist like particulars
nor merely logical in the sense that they are only man-made entia rationis. The
distinction is ‘formal’, that is to say it is more than logical, but less than real.47
Boler (1963) is a thorough presentation of Peirce’s relation to Scotus. Let us
run through his presentation in order to place Peirce’s extreme realism in relation
to continuity, a relation Boler hardly takes into consideration (apart from Peirce’s
identification of generality with continuity).
Boler begins with the observation that Peirce’s references are in general to the
‘accepted’ works of Scotus, but since Boler (1963), critical philology has progressed
and now ascribes the crucial Grammatica Speculativa not to Scotus, but to Thomas
of Erfurt. Boler (2004) recognizes this, but argues that the fact that Peirce never
quotes from the Grammatica Speculativa may indicate that he was hardly very
influenced by that work (64). The Scholastics generally assumed that only individual
objects, ‘supposita’, could have existence – on the other hand, they possessed
an understandable structure, a ‘nature’ which was common to several different
particulars, consequently having a ‘common nature’ or essence. By abstraction, the
single particular’s essence could be recognized – and the crucial question now is

34
C H A P T E R 2
which status these abstractions have. Are they only shorthands constructed by the
mind or do they (or at least some of them) have real correlates, and if so, which
reality status do these correlates possess? One solution, inherited from Aristotle,
would say that the common nature is ‘individuated’ in the particular, but what is
this more precisely supposed to mean? When things’ nature or essence is referred
to in a proposition, nature is often referred to as ‘universalium’, hence the name
‘the fight over universals’: which status do such universals have?
In this common conceptual frame, Scotus sought a middle way. He presented it
as against two extreme positions, one claiming that universals as such existed in the
particulars, another which found them only in the human mind (Boler 1963, 41).
He took as premiss the Aristotelian definition of the universal as that which is in
multis et de multis – that which is in many and can be said of many – a definition,
of course, containing the problem rather than solving it: the two extremes which
Scotus outlines can be said to lay the emphasis on each their part of that dictum. In
a particular, there exists no correlate to the predicate, but we may make predications
about particulars, such is the credo of nominalism. In the particular, the universal
inheres in the property giving rise to the predicate, such is the corresponding credo
of realism. The universal is ascribed, in these two competing interpretations, two
different modes of being which lie as possibilities in Scholastic doctrine: esse extra
anima versus esse in anima, being outside of the mind versus being in the mind.
The corresponding objects having these forms of being are consequently ens reale
and ens rationis, respectively. Particulars possess the former and may achieve the
latter – if they are recognized; the fight over universals can now be expressed as
the disagreement whether universals have any other mode of existence than the
latter. Among entia rationis, Scholasticism distinguishes between two levels, grossly
corresponding to our days’ distinction between object language and metalanguage –
first and second intentions, respectively. They both belong to the mind, but the
former refers to real objects, the other refers to first-intention objects, that is, to
other propositions. The basic question can thus, in turn, be rephrased as follows:
are universals first or second intentions? (43).
Scotus opens his solution by distinguishing two uses of the concept of universal: in
one sense, the universal is a second intention, in so far as it is predicated about a
series of particular entia rationis. This goes for the ‘predicabilia’ of Scholasticism,
inherited from Aristotle: the five canonised ways in which a predicate could be
used about a subject: as genus, species, accidens, property, and differentia specifica.
The subject for these logical universals is the type of relation between predicate
and subject, and they are, in themselves, of course entia rationis. But the concept
of universal may also be used in another sense, namely as that which provides the
basis for the common predicability of several particulars – the common nature. The
distinction here runs between universals as de multis and in multis, and the latter is
first-intentional and refers to real common properties in nature. This distinction of
course pertains to the fact that it does not follow from the existence of a universal
predicate (the universal in the first sense) that there is in fact any common nature (the
universal in the second sense) which corresponds to it (45). To Peirce, it is this ‘real

T H E P H Y S I O L O G Y O F A R G U M E N T S
35
commonness’ which constitutes Scholastic realism: ‘The nature of the fundamentum
universalitatis distinguishes the mediaeval realist from the nominalist’ (‘Unity and
Plurality’, Baldwin’s Dictionary 1901, 6.377), cf. his concept of ‘ground’ in some of
the sign definitions. With this distinction between the universal as a logical device
and as a common nature, Scotus wants to insist that the question of universals can
not be a merely logical issue, for then our knowledge about the world will dissolve
into singular objects on the one hand and logic on the other – the equivalence
between this position and twentieth century logical positivism is no coincidence.
The question to Scotus is now: which unity does this common nature possess?
The question of unity is important here, because the nominalists – here Henry of
Ghent who according to Alain de Libera played the same role as an opponent
to Scotus, as he himself a generation later played for Ockham – maintained that
only quantitative differences existed. If two particulars are numerically distinct,
their common nature must have a ‘less than numerical unity’ (Boler, 47). That
existing particulars are characterized by being numerically distinct does not pertain
to their direct countability (of course, diffuse particulars exist), but it refers to the
metaphysical fact that they are individuals. And the common nature is not unique,
it is no suppositum. Which kind of unity may be ascribed to it, then? Common
natures are possible without having to exist in any particular at all: unicorns also
have a common nature. This idea, that the common nature is not in itself neither one
nor many is inherited by Scotus from Avicenna’s famous dictum ‘Horseness is just
horseness, it is not in itself one or many, universal or particular.’ (50, cf. de Libera).
The relation between the common nature and the particular is consequently critical,
but much points to the fact that the Scotist solution was built on the introduction of
the term ‘haecceitas’ (which Peirce inherits after his Scotus interpretation) – thisness
as a privilege of the particular – and the idea of an operation of ‘contraction’ which
allows the common nature to individuate itself in the particular.
The universal, understood as a logical predicate, is through and through a product
of the mind, but this creation has, in certain cases, a basis – a condition of possibility,
as de Libera proposes in Kantian slang – which is the common essence. Haecceity,
thisness, incarnating the common nature in the particular is no further property (cf.
Kant: existence is no property): this is important in order not to get the idea that
it is in reality distinct from the common nature. Haecceity and common nature are
so not separate in reality; they are formally distinct, as Scotus puts it, and this is
what constitutes Scotus’s famous ‘formal distinction’. According to de Libera, this
‘formal distinction’ distinguishes three aspects in the object: the common nature,
the haecceity or existence, and the singularity (the fully determined single object) to
which only heavenly beings have direct access. Even if these three aspects may not
be separated as parts of the object – not even by divine force, as Scotus says – then
they may be formally distinguished. Here, it is obvious to make a parallel to the
distinction in twenteith century phenomenology between Moments or Aspects on
the one hand and Genuine Parts or Pieces on the other hand – after Husserl’s 3rd
Logical Investigation: the nominalist viewpoint would be that the only existing
things are real ‘countable’ parts while moments (e.g. the surface, color, edges, etc.

36
C H A P T E R 2
of things) should be merely mental constructions on the basis of parts (we return
to this in Chap. 7). But just like Husserl, Scotus claims that there are aspects of
the object which are not really distinct in the sense that they are separable, but
‘formally distinct’ only. They are not distinguishable as res et res, but still being
more than ens rationis et ens rationis, Scotus nicknames them with what Peirce
would call a hypostatic abstraction: realitas et realitas – they are distinguishable
formalities, or (these two terms are acccording to Boler used interchangeably):
realities. This result of the formal distinction is, as is evident, not without parallels
in the Brentano tradition’s idea of Sachverhalte, states-of-affairs as the reference
of logical propositions. So the common nature might be rephrased as the general
state-of-affairs which the logical universals refer to or may refer to.
The argument of Ockham and his followers against this subtle distinction has
been, of course, to reject the possibility of a third position: either a distinction is
real or it is invented by the mind, no third possibility is at hand, and as the Scotists
themselves admit that the universals are not of the former kind, then there only the
latter possibility remains, and only ‘numerical’ differences exist in reality.
Boler now assumes that some of the difficulties in Scotus’s position may be
sorted out by interpreting him as an objective idealist – and de Libera’s hints at
Scotus as a sort of Kantian avant la lettre point in the same direction: the common
nature as a sort of condition of possibility. Boler envisages this possibility in the
fact that it is decisive for Scotus to prove the objective reality of common nature,
not to prove its non-mental character (56). The objectivity of understanding is his
aim, this is why he assumes metaphysical realities which grants him this – as against
the Thomist doctrine which does not admit a third position between reality and
logic. In de Libera’s more detailed discussion of Scotus’s position, the distinction
between the universal as a logical device, a second intention, on the one hand, and
the universal as that common nature referred to by this logical entity, is, like in
Boler, taken as basic. But de Libera adds a further distinction within the universal
as common nature (344–45). On the one hand primitive realism takes universals as
absolute beings, not particularized, but on the other, Scotus’s sophisticated realism
attacks this notion for not being ‘sufficiently indeterminate’, thereby lacking the
ability to individuate in particulars. Scotus’ own alternative, the ‘complete universal’
is in contrast to any possible determination, ‘thanks to which man is sufficiently
indeterminate to be, by a unique intellection, conceived quidditatively in all men.’48
We find a related indetermination in Peirce’s idea of the continuity of universals.
But what about the relation between the common essence and its representation
by means of logical universals? In the Aristotelian tradition it is, of course, the
task of abstraction to construct universals on the basis of particulars – science
only deals with what is general. Scotus turns against Thomas’s version of this
doctrine, according to which matter is a principle of individuation ‘constraining’
nature; then abstraction would face insurmountable problems when it shall restitute
something thus delimited or fragmented. The process of abstraction presupposes
that the common nature is not fragmentarily present, and it proceeds in two stages:
(1) common nature is distinguished from the thisness, and (2) it is given numerical

T H E P H Y S I O L O G Y O F A R G U M E N T S
37
unity and becomes a universal which may now be predicated of many particulars
(Boler, 60–61). This abstraction is second-intention, like the metalanguage of logic,
but to Scotus we are now in metaphysics: abstractions of this sort are not only
signs about signs, but refer to reality. Of course this difference is seminal to
Peirce.
Why, now, is Peirce’s continuity realism, as he himself claims, more ‘extreme’
than Scotus’ realism? One decisive Scotist idea rejected by Peirce is the contraction
hypothesis: ‘Even Duns Scotus is too nominalistic when he says that universals
are contracted to the mode of individuality in singulars, meaning as he does, by
singulars, ordinary existing things. The pragmaticist cannot admit that.’ (Letter to
Signor Calderoni, c. 1905, 8.208) Why not? We have no problems in recognizing
haecceity in Peirce’s concept of Secondness, even if Peirce’s version refers to
events rather than to objects; is it not possible to reconstruct Peirce’s theory in
a manner such that generality, Thirdness, is contracted in the concrete particulars
of Secondness? The reason is somewhat similar to what de Libera hints at in his
discussion of Scotus’s concept of common nature: it is too foreign to concretion.
To Peirce any property – except for haecceity which is no property – is general,
and for this reason also the property of being thinglike. Secondness and haecceity
to Peirce is only a matter of the individuality of particular events. But there is a
further reason of huge semiotic importance: the hypothesis of contraction allows
the individual objects to be, as Kant puts it, the substance of generalities. But as
individual objects are always numerical, they can never exhaust the continuity of a
universal which subsumes all possible instantiations and not only those which are
accidentally actualized in this world: ‘Now no collection of actual individual events
or other objects of any general description can amount to all possible events or
objects of that description; for it is possible that an addition should be made to that
collection.’ (‘New Elements’ 1904, EPII, 316; NEM IV, 253) To put it briefly: if this
were not the case, the road would be paved for an extensional semantics reducing
Thirdness, generality, and continuity to the set of objects in which the universal is
contracted and hence to the resurrection of nominalism. So to say that Thirdness is
contracted into Secondness makes the latter ‘larger’ and too important in comparison
to the former – in a Peircean view, it is rather the more comprehensive Thirdness
which – as continuous – contains the actual, discontinuous events of Secondness.
Finally, Peirce does not admit the real existence of the third entity distinguished
by the formal distinction according to de Libera: the fully determined object. From
early on in his carreer, Peirce maintained that this is an idea only and that particular
objects or events are not fully determined, e.g. with respect to future states. It is
not determined who my actual process of writing will influence or not. Thus Peirce
does not identify the individuality of haecceity with full determinacy.
This version of scholastic realism has direct consequences for Peirce’s semiotics:
‘But all the realists agree in reversing the order of Aristotle’s evolution by making
the form come first, and the individuation of that form come later’ (Lowell Lectures,
1903, 1.22). Peirce sophisticates, as we have seen, this idea by splitting the form
in two: form as mere possibility in Firstness, anterior to anything actual, and form

38
C H A P T E R 2
as realized possibility in Thirdness, where it governs Secondness in the shape of
habits. In some of his sign definitions this becomes obvious:
[A] Sign may be defined as a Medium for the communication of a Form. It is not logically necessary
that anything possessing consciousness, that is, feeling of the peculiar common quality of all our feeling
should be concerned. But it is necessary that there should be two, if not three, quasi-minds, meaning
things capable of varied determination as to the forms communicated. As a medium, the Sign is essentially
in a triadic relation, to its Object which determines it, and to its Interpretant which it determines []
That which is communicated from the Object through the Sign to the Interpretant is a Form; that is
to say, it is nothing like an existent, but is a power, is the fact that something would happen under
certain conditions. This Form is really embodied in the object, meaning that the conditional relation
which constitutes the form is true of the form as it is in the Object. In the Sign it is embodied only
in a representative sense, meaning that whether by virtue of some real modification of the Sign, or
otherwise, the Sign becomes endowed with the power of communicating it to an interpretant.
(MS CSP 793, 1–3, c. 1905)
Here, the form – the universal – is connected to Peirce’s pragmatic maxim requiring
concepts to be explained conditionally: a form is equivalent to ‘the fact that
something would happen under certain conditions’. Under the concept hides a condi-
tional proposition (What is a ‘diamond’? – it is a very hard gemstone composed of
carbon – ‘hard’ meaning it would hurt other items if scratched on their surface).
This form is present in the object and represented in the sign. Thus the Scholastic
universal is directly connected to the pragmatic concept definition and its ties to
scientific experiments (investigating such ‘would-be’s) and the general laws and
regularities they aim at mapping – and thereby also the prerequisite for the use of
diagrams to investigate the behavior of such would-bes.
Would-Bes, or Real Possibilities
When Susan Haack discusses Peirce’s scholastic realism (Haack 1992, 37–39),
she makes the observation that Quine’s commitment to similarity, natural kinds,
dispositions, causal statements, etc. takes him close to Peirce’s conception of
Thirdness – even if Quine in an utopian vision imagines that all such concepts
in a remote future will dissolve and vanish in favor of purely microstructural
descriptions.
A crucial difference remains, however, which becomes evident when you look
at Quine’s brief formula for ontological commitment, the famous idea that ‘to be
is to be the value of a bound variable’. For even if this motto is stated exactly to
avoid commitment to several different types of being, it immediately prompts the
question: the equation, in which the variable is presumably bound, which status
does it have? Governing the behavior of existing variable values, is that not in some
sense being real?
This will be Peirce’s realist idea – that regularities, tendencies, dispositions,
patterns, may possess real existence, independent of any observer. In Peirce, this
description of Thirdness is concentrated in the expression ‘real possibility’, and even
it may sound exceedingly metaphysical at a first glance, it amounts, at a closer look,
to what Haack calls a modest claim – namely that regularities charted by science are
not mere shorthands for collections of single events but do possess reality status. In

T H E P H Y S I O L O G Y O F A R G U M E N T S
39
Peirce, the idea of real possibilities thus springs (around 1897) from his philosophy
of science – he observes that science, contrary to philosophy, is spontaneously
realist, and is right in being so. Real possibilities are thus counterposed to mere
subjective possibilities due to lack of knowledge on the part of the subject speaking:
the possibility of ‘not known not to be true’.
In a famous piece of self-critique from his late, realist period, Peirce attacks his
earlier arguments (from ‘How to Make Our Ideas Clear’, 1878, in the late 1890s
considered by himself the birth certificate of pragmatism after James’s reference to
Peirce as pragmatism’s inventor). Then, he wrote
 let us ask what we mean by calling a thing hard. Evidently that it will not be scratched by many
other substances. The whole conception of this quality, as of every other, lies in its conceived effects.
There is absolutely no difference between a hard thing and a soft thing so long as they are not brought
to the test. Suppose, then, that a diamond could be crystallized in the midst of a cushion of soft cotton,
and should remain there until it was finally burned up. Would it be false to say that that diamond was
soft? [] Reflection will show that the reply is this: there would be no falsity in such modes of speech.
(EPI, 132; 5.403)
More than twenty-five years later, however, he attacks this argument as bearing
witness to the nominalism of his youth. Now instead he supports the
 scholastic doctrine of realism. This is usually defined as the opinion that there are real objects
that are general, among the number being the modes of determination of existent singulars, if, indeed,
these be not the only such objects. But the belief in this can hardly escape being accompanied by the
acknowledgment that there are, besides, real vagues, and especially real possibilities. For possibility
being the denial of a necessity, which is a kind of generality, is vague like any other contradiction of
a general. Indeed, it is the reality of some possibilities that pragmaticism is most concerned to insist
upon. The article of January 1878 endeavored to gloze over this point as unsuited to the exoteric public
addressed; or perhaps the writer wavered in his own mind. He said that if a diamond were to be formed
in a bed of cotton-wool, and were to be consumed there without ever having been pressed upon by any
hard edge or point, it would be merely a question of nomenclature whether that diamond should be
said to have been hard or not. No doubt this is true, except for the abominable falsehood in the word
MERELY, implying that symbols are unreal. Nomenclature involves classification; and classification is
true or false, and the generals to which it refers are either reals in the one case, or figments in the other.
For if the reader will turn to the original maxim of pragmaticism at the beginning of this article, he will
see that the question is, not what did happen, but whether it would have been well to engage in any
line of conduct whose successful issue depended upon whether that diamond would resist an attempt to
scratch it, or whether all other logical means of determining how it ought to be classed would lead to
the conclusion which, to quote the very words of that article, would be ‘the belief which alone could be
the result of investigation carried sufficiently far.’ Pragmaticism makes the ultimate intellectual purport
of what you please to consist in conceived conditional resolutions, or their substance; and therefore, the
conditional propositions, with their hypothetical antecedents, in which such resolutions consist, being of
the ultimate nature of meaning, must be capable of being true, that is, of expressing whatever there be
which is such as the proposition expresses, independently of being thought to be so in any judgment,
or being represented to be so in any other symbol of any man or men. But that amounts to saying that
possibility is sometimes of a real kind.
(‘Issues of Pragmatism’, 1905, EPII, 354; 5. 453)
In the same year, he states, in a letter to the Italian pragmatist Signor Calderoni:
I myself went too far in the direction of nominalism when I said that it was a mere question of the
convenience of speech whether we say that a diamond is hard when it is not pressed upon, or whether

40
C H A P T E R 2
we say that it is soft until it is pressed upon. I now say that experiment will prove that the diamond is
hard, as a positive fact. That is, it is a real fact that it would resist pressure, which amounts to extreme
scholastic realism. I deny that pragmaticism as originally defined by me made the intellectual purport
of symbols to consist in our conduct. On the contrary, I was most careful to say that it consists in our
concept of what our conduct would be upon conceivable occasions. For I had long before declared that
absolute individuals were entia rationis, and not realities. A concept determinate in all respects is as
fictitious as a concept definite in all respects. I do not think we can ever have a logical right to infer,
even as probable, the existence of anything entirely contrary in its nature to all that we can experience
or imagine. (8.208)
Here lies the core of Peirce’s metaphysical insistence on the reality of ‘would-be’s.
Real possibilities, or would-bes, are vague to the extent that they describe certain
tendential, conditional behaviors only, while they do not prescribe any other aspect
of the single objects they subsume. They are, furthermore, represented in rationally
interrelated clusters of concepts: the fact that the diamond is in fact hard, no matter
if it scratches anything or not, lies in the fact that the diamond’s carbon structure
displays a certain spatial arrangement – so it is an aspect of the very concept of
diamond. And this is why the old pragmatic maxim of 1878 may not work without
real possibilities: it is they that the very maxim rests upon, because it is they that
provide us with the ‘conceived consequences’ of accepting a concept. The maxim
remains a test to weed out empty concepts with no conceived consequences – that
is, empty a priori reasoning and superfluous metaphysical assumptions. But what
remains after the maxim has been put to use, is real possibilities. Real possibilities
thus connect epistemology, expressed in the pragmatic maxim, to ontology: real
possibilities are what science may grasp in conditional hypotheses.
A serious discussion in Peirce scholarship attacks the question whether Peirce’s
1905 revision of his old ‘nominalist’ beliefs form part of a more general development
in Peirce from nominalism to realism. The locus classicus of this idea is Fisch
(1967) where Fisch outlines a development from an initial nominalism (albeit of a
strange kind, refusing, as always in Peirce, the existence of individuals determinate
in all respects) in 1867–68 via a series of steps towards realism, culminating after
the turn of the century. Fisch’s first step is then Peirce’s theory of the real as that
which reasoning would finally have as its result (1868); the second step his Berkeley
review with its anti-nominalism and the idea that the real is what is unaffected by
what we may think of it (1871); the third step is his pragmatist idea that beliefs are
conceived habits of action, even if he here clings to the idea that the conditionals
in which habits are expressed are material implications only – like the definition
of ‘hard’ (1878); the fourth step his reading of Abbott’s realist Scientific Theism
(which later influenced his conception of scientific universals) and his introduction
of the index in his theory of signs (1885); the fifth step his acceptance of the reality
of continuity (in 1891–93, the Monist series, the ‘Grand Logic’); the sixth the
introduction of real possibilities in January 1897, accompanied by the development
of existential graphs, topology and Peirce’s changing view of Hegelianism; the
seventh, as we have seen, the identification of pragmatism with realism (1905); the
eighth ‘his last stronghold, that of Philonian or material implication’ the same year
(Fisch, 196). A further realist development exchanging Peirce’s early frequentist

T H E P H Y S I O L O G Y O F A R G U M E N T S
41
idea of probability for a dispositional theory of probability was, according to Fisch,
never finished. Even if accounts such as Houser’s introduction to EPII and Short’s
sign theory development paper in Misak (2004) support large parts of Fisch’s
sketch, there are also dissenting voices. Especially the ‘last stronghold’ of material
implication has given rise to some controversy, e.g. Zeman (1997), and it has certain
bearings on how to conceptualize real possibilities.
The issue of implication concerns the old discussion quoted by Cicero between
the Hellenistic logicians Philo and Diodorus.49 The former formulated what we
know today as material implication, while the latter objected on common-sense
ground that material implication does not capture implication in everyday language
and thought and another implication type should be sought. As is well known,
material implication says that p ⇒q is equivalent to the claim that either p is false
or q is true – so that p ⇒q is false only when p is true and q is false. The problems
arise when p is false, for any false p makes the implication true, and this leads
to strange possibilities of true inferences: ‘If lions live in South America, Elvis is
still alive’. This appears unsatisfactory for two reasons: not only are both p and q
false, but if a lion was found in South America, common sense would say that the
implication then would make Elvis living. The two parts of the implication have
no connection with each other at all, such as would be the spontaneous idea in
everyday thought. It is true that Peirce as a logician generally supports material
(‘Philonian’) implication – but it is also true that he does express some second
thoughts at around the same time as the afterthoughts on the diamond example:
Some years ago [1903 is suggested by the editors of the CP] when  I was led to revise [the] doctrine
[that a mere possibility is an absolute nullity], in which I had already found difficulties. I soon discovered,
upon a critical analysis, that it was absolutely necessary to insist upon and bring to the front, the truth
that a mere possibility may be quite real. That admitted, it can no longer be granted that every conditional
proposition whose antecedent does not happen to be realized is true, and the whole reasoning just given
breaks down.
(1906, 4.580, quoted with Zeman’s abbreviatons and additions, Zeman 1997, 416)
Zeman convincingly argues on the basis that Peirce has, as early as 1885, when
talking about hypothetical statements of what would happen, said that when p is
false, then ‘it is a matter of indifference whether the hypothetical be understood
to be true or not, since it is useless’ (3.374, quoted from Zeman 1997, 406).
Thus, to Zeman, material implication was long since a second in relation to the
third of hypotheticals, taking Peirce close to possible world semantics. This is
probably correct, but still Zeman fails to quote what Peirce wrote shortly before the
introduction of real possibilities:
Although the Philonian views lead to such inconveniences as that it is true, as a consequence de inesse,
that if the Devil were elected president of the United States, it would prove highly conducive to the
spiritual welfare of the people (because he will not be elected), yet both Professor Schröder and I prefer
to build the algebra of relatives upon this conception of the conditional proposition. The inconvenience,
after all, ceases to seem important, when we reflect that, no matter what the conditional proposition be
understood to mean, it can always be expressed by a complexus of Philonian conditionals and denials
of conditionals. It may, however, be suspected that the Diodoran view has suffered from incompetent
advocacy, and that if it were modified somewhat, it might prove the preferable one. (1896, 3.443)50

42
C H A P T E R 2
In such claims, Peirce is a forerunner of the attempts to construct alternatives
such as strict implication, and the reason why is, of course, that real possibilities
are not adequately depicted by material implication.51 Peirce is in need of an
implication which may somehow picture the causal dependency of q on p. The
diamond example in fact derives from Peirce’s implicit use of material implication
in his 1878 paper: ‘If x scratches all other things, then x is a diamond’. Here,
if we do not know whether x scratches all other things, p may be false – but x
may still be a soft diamond. Peirce’s later criticism of this idea implies that the
case when x does not scratch other objects must somehow be discounted. It is, of
course, the interpretation of real possibilities as existing dispositions, would-bes,
that makes mere material implication appear nominalist to the mature Peirce. The
problem is that real possibilities can not be mapped by any merely formal logical
notation, because it invariably requires certain semantic connections between p
and q,52 and real possibilities would require something like David Lewis’ modeling
of counterfactuals in possible world semantics to be expressed.
The basic reason for the mature Peirce’s problems with the representation of real
possibilities is not primarily logical, however. It is scientific. Peirce realizes that
the scientific charting of anything but singular, actual events necessitates the real
existence of tendencies and relations connecting singular events. Now, what kinds
are those tendencies and relations? The hard diamond example seems to emphasize
causality, but this probably depends on the point of view chosen. The ‘conceived
consequences’ of the pragmatic maxim may be causal indeed: if we accept gravity
as a real concept, then masses will attract one another – but they may all the same
be structural: if we accept horse riders as a real concept, then we should expect
horses, persons, the taming of horses, etc. to exist, or they may be teleological:
if I am baking a cake, I am probably going to use an oven. In any case, the
interpretation of the pragmatic maxim in terms of real possibilities paves the way
for a distinction between empty a priori suppositions and real a priori structures to
which we return later.
Real Possibilities and Absolute Idealism
Peirce’s doctrine of would-bes nevertheless contains numerous problems. Being
prime examples of Thirdness, they embody real existent continuity – but by the
same token there is a tendency in Peirce to let real possibilities incarnate all the very
different metaphysical issues which the category of Thirdness is expected to solve.
This includes no less than habit, symbols, teleology, mind, purpose, evolution, life;
sometimes even personality, love, God, etc. We should take care here to ‘cleanse’
the notion of real possibility as existing worldly dispositions from these other issues
grouped together in Thirdness by Peirce’s sometimes extravagant cosmology. The
reason why real possibilities or habits involve teleology is Peirce’s inclusion of all
kinds of tendencies in the concept – including the goal-oriented actions of human
beings or other animals, such as the example with the apple pie whose recipe forms
a habit subsuming a continuity of possible singular apple pies. The inclusion of such
teleological processes in the concept of real possibilities alongside the hardness of

T H E P H Y S I O L O G Y O F A R G U M E N T S
43
a diamond and the gravity pulling a stone is unproblematic, was it not for Peirce’s
tendency to claim that the most complex properties of a category should hold for all
cases subsumed by that category. This is motivated, of course, by his ‘synechism’,
the continuity doctrine excluding any sharp limits, but even given this doctrine,
it is hard to swallow that gravity, e.g. should in any sense possess a teleological
cosmological purpose. The error here seems to lie in Peirce’s cosmology where
notions like teleology are taken in a global meaning and predicated on the process
of evolution as a whole and the universe as such. It is not, however, necessary to
subscribe to the whole of this cosmology in order to embrace Peirce’s notion of real
possibility. Rather, we can see where his cosmology goes wrong: in its Hegelian
tendency to globalize notions like mind, teleology, even personality onto the whole
of cosmic evolution and the whole of the universe. Similarly with the notion of
‘mind’. Peirce’s un-psychological rendering of ‘mind’ as pertaining to all that is
able to process signs forms a welcome divorce of mind from the more specific
notion of consciousness – and even gives an first idea of how the latter might have
evolved out of complex versions of the former – but still the Hegelian error enters
when Peirce concludes that even atoms have mind or that all of the universe consists
of signs. Here, Peirce’s objective idealism of real possibilities tends to fall into the
trap of absolute idealism. Even worse with the concept of personality – go to the
Appendix to see how the idea emerges in Peirce’s first cosmological sketches in the
Monist papers of 1892: the real possibility inherent in the real referent of a symbol
all of a sudden becomes a personality developing in its own right. We recognize
the argumentative pattern taking Peirce to such conclusions: personality is taken to
be the synthesizing force in the thought process – but when similar syntheses go
on in nature, a corresponding personality must be at stake there as well 
Thus, it is extremely important to keep the notion of real possibilities apart from
the quasi-religious extravaganzas of Peircean cosmology.53 If we take final causes
to be local and if we take mind to be the ability,54 not necessarily conscious, of sign
processing, we can easily include them as special cases in real possibilities – but we
should not let absolute idealism lead us astray into assuming all real possibilities
to be significant finalities, connected in any overarching, supersensible whole.
Peirce’s Hegelian aberrations aside, real possibilities are continuous for the reason
that they are would-bes, they have the form of ‘Any state of things in which A is
true would be a state in which B is true’ (Noble 1989) – as he quotes Peirce, it
‘ consists in what would be the case under certain circumstances if they should
remain unchanged throughout an endless series of actual occurrences’ (Draft of a
letter to Paul Carus, c. 1910, 8.226). As referring to a continuum of possibilities
among which only particular instances may be actualized, real possibilities thus
embody real-world continuity.
Real Possibilities as Dispositions
If real possibilities, on the other hand, are purged from the vagaries of absolute
idealism, they form one of the first modern attempts at describing an ontology of
dispositions. As Susan Haack emphasizes (1992), real possibilities come with a

44
C H A P T E R 2
whole bundle of companion concepts: real generals – law – explanation – induction –
relations, etc. To that extent, they provide a virtual reservoir of thought for the
ongoing reflections on the ontology of powers (e.g. George Molnar) or dispositions
(e.g. Steven Mumford). The French Peircean Claudine Tiercelin presents in a recent
paper the development in actual metaphysics away from a strong tendency in early
analytical philosophy to reduce or even eliminate dispositions (Quine, Goodman,
Ryle) and to a tendency to reinstate or even inflate dispositions, beginning in
Karl Popper (‘propensities’) and continuing in Rom Harré, Ian Thompson, Nancy
Cartwright, Hugh Mellor and Simon Blackburn during the recent decades (Tiercelin
2002, 1). Molnar, Mumford, and David Armstrong may easily be added to that list.
The discussion about dispositions involves the issue whether dispositions should
be distinguished from other, structural properties, so-called categorical properties,
on which they are assumed to be dependent, or whether all properties in some sense
could be said to be dispositional. It seems like some properties could very well
be described as dispositional on one level (salt’s being able to dissolve in water)
while seeming categorical on other levels (salt’s molecular structure). Armstrong,
in a recent paper (undated), highlights the problems of both possibilities: property
dualism makes it hard to understand how non-dispositional properties (distance
between bodies) partake in the unfolding of dispositions (gravity), while the idea
that all properties are dispositions faces the problem that the difference between a
power and the manifestation of it gets lost: effects are then powers in their own right.
He himself ends up endorsing a middle way originally proposed by C.B. Martin:
all properties have two aspects, a qualitative and a dispositional. The problem
left, of course, is to account for the – presumably necessary – relation, maybe
even identity, between the two sides of the property. In that case, only a formal
distinction will be able to isolate each of them. But what about the relation between
the (universal) disposition in question and the particular incarnating it? Armstrong
long held the idea that this relation was contingent, but influenced by Don Baxter,
he now thinks otherwise: the universal and the particular are, by necessity, partially
identical. Particulars are principles of unity, collecting universals, while universals
are principles of unity across particulars, and a state-of-affairs is the intersection
between these two principles.
As to this issue, the metaphysical implications of Peirce’s pragmatic maxim seem
clear: all properties must be dispositional. That is, in fact, the very crux of the
pragmatic maxim: if a property does not, on some level, possess conceivable effects,
then it may be discarded as irrelevant. Ergo, all properties must be dispositions – or,
more cautiously, all properties must possess dispositional aspects. Concerning the
problems raised by Armstrong, Peircean real possibilities are embedded in the
three-category doctrine: the qualitative aspect of any real possibility is described by
its inherent firstness (which may be prescinded), and the potency-act difference is
described by the inherent secondnesses as act bundles. As to the ‘incarnation’ issue,
we have seen Peirce support an interpretation anticipating Armstrong’s: partic-
ulars are secondnesses which necessarily participate in universals via the continuity
doctrine: they are actual parts of the continuity of real possibilities This necessity,

T H E P H Y S I O L O G Y O F A R G U M E N T S
45
we would claim, belongs to ‘material necessities’ in the sense of Barry Smith (see
Chap. 8) and is investigated by material ontologies of the reality domain in question
(such necessities connect being hard with being a diamond with being this diamond).
The intersection hypothesis also seems supported by Peirce’s account: both
secondness and thirdness are principles of unity (referring to existence and reality,
respectively) and the single particular is then the intersection between the continuum
of haecceity and the continuum of real possibility, as in the idea of thisness as a
sort of crack through which real possibility leaks. Thus, Peirce’s real possibilities
doctrine may be formulated alongside contemporary conceptions of dispositions.
Another issue is the relation between laws and dispositions as discussed by
Tiercelin (2002). Is it the case that talking about dispositions instead of laws sort
of locates the causal powers in the single systems where the causal process takes
place – so that the relation between laws and dispositions mirrors that of universals
versus tropes? Are dispositions thus trope-like in being abstract particulars and can
they thus make laws superfluous or at least supervenient upon dispositions? Are
laws determined by particular events rather than the other way around? Such a point
of view will, of course, be much too actualist to Peirce: real possibilities transgress
any actual realization of them. On the other hand, the continuity principle entails that
real possibilities never govern particulars with full necessity, they remain tendencies,
weaker or stronger, even if some of them may be so close to necessities that it
is hard to tell the difference. On that issue, Peirce’s doctrine of real possibilities
will thus be inclusive: real possibility is a dispositional concept all right and thus
functions as a local force here and now, but it possesses the universality of a law at
the same time as it contains the single case where it holds (corresponding, in fact, to
the possibility of claiming the existence of both universals and tropes, rejected by
universal-supporter Armstrong for Ockham razor reasons). Real possibilities include
actual instantiations among its continuum of virtual events and so do not take sides
in the quarrel between universals and tropes which metaphysical Ockhamite ascetes
will be sure to hold against them. If, however, laws and dispositions are seen as to
interrelated aspects of real possibilities, the alleged ontological overkill might seem
bearable.
Dispositional essentialism faces, according to Tiercelin, among other things the
issue of substantial versus relational realism. As she argues (13), an important
issue is that real possibilities are inherently relational on Peirce’s account. And,
as Dipert (2004) argues, Peirce’s notion of deduction necessitates a metaphysics
of relations. Peirce’s relationalism is highlighted in his arguments against the
Scholastics’ tendency to see dispositions inhere in monadic predicates in thing-like
substances. As we have seen, he of course agrees with Scotus in the existence of
‘realitates’ – realities – (cf. Boler 2004) and real possibilities is his account for them,
but they are not identical to substances seen as monadic things. Rather, they involve
the lawlike relations between singulars and thus pertain to relational events rather
than objects. Being hard is a relation between scratching objects, gravity is a relation
between heavy bodies, apple pies are relations between bakers, ingredients, recipes,
and eaters, and so on. Dispositions as Peircean real possibilities are thus different

46
C H A P T E R 2
from object universals which should rather be taken as a sort of second intention
reified hypostatic abstractions from relational real possibilities. Real possibilities
in Peirce thus immediately involve an ontology of relations. But it is important to
note here that exactly the pragmatic maxim in Peirce makes the doctrine immune
against the standard regress argument against relational ontologies: the multipli-
cation of entities deriving from the need to posit the second order relation between
any relation and its relata, and so on ad nauseam et infinitum. The pragmatic maxim
immediately rules out such excesses.
As to the issue whether real possibilities are themselves contingent or necessary,
Tiercelin (15–16) adopts a prudent fallibilist stance (see Chap. 8): It is probably
wisest to refrain from trying to find any ultimate explanation of reality. She refers to
Peirce’s notion of ‘conditional necessity’ (‘Notes on the doctrine of chances’, 1910,
2.664) as more or less complex habits in nature in the context of Peirce’s attempt at
a dispositional theory of probability. Suffice it to refer to the ongoing discussions in
physics and philosophy of physics regarding whether the basic physical constants
are contingent (could the gravity constant have been different and what would the
universe have looked like), or are they interconnected by some deep necessity we
do not (yet) know? In single cases, we may discover that some dispositions are
contingent to the extent that they depend on other, simpler dispositions, but as to
any deepest level of dispositions we might be better off by biding our time and
restrict ourselves to the pertinent levels of observation for the time being. Real
possibilities may be located at any level of organization, and we do not need to
base them in the deepest level of microphysics in order to grant their reality.
A further issue we have touched upon already is the extension of real possibilities
as to causes and structural interconnectedness. In my view, it is a strength of
real possibilities to comprise both. Take the hard diamond as an example. One
aspect of it is immediately causal: the scratching which causes other objects to be
scratched. Another aspect of it is just as immediately structural: the hardness which
is conditioned by the special molecular structure of carbon in diamonds, just like
the case with salt’s solvability in water. Dispositions, hence, are by no means the
metaphysical ‘last word’ in the sense that they refer to any deepest, microstructural
level of reality. They may depend on structural topological systems of ever deeper
causes, and we have no reason to believe that the present knowledge of fermions
and bosons necessarily refers to the deepest level of physical reality. Rather, the
causal-structural descriptions are complementary and refer to timeless ontological
necessity on the one hand (the structural aspect) and concrete, developing tendencies
in events on the other (the causal aspect). The structural description of dispositions
implies that real possibilities involve what Barry Smith calls ‘material necessity’
(see Chap. 8), referring to the synthetic a priori necessities connecting together
different aspects of the ontological structure of a given, material domain – just
like hardness and molecular structure in physics. Thus, real possibilities necessarily
refer to ontological interconnectedness of a domain as well as the causes, tendencies
and currents characterizing that domain.

T H E P H Y S I O L O G Y O F A R G U M E N T S
47
Peirce’s would-bes thus cover relations, tendencies, patterns, laws, dispositions,
propensities, affordances55 – and they are motivated by the repeatability of scien-
tific experiment (the pragmatic maxim being so to speak a thought experiment
equivalent to an empirical laboratory experiment). Thus, they exemplify continuity.
Real possibilities are Peircean continuities, and on Peirce’s account they often even
appear as prototypical representatives of continuity: they are general because they
do not prescribe anything about the unmentioned, blank aspects of the objects they
subsume, and actual instantiations, however numerous, of them may never exhaust
them. Their continuity, on the other hand, determines the epistemological means
we may have at our disposal for gathering knowledge about them: diagrams.
Real possibilities are therefore seminal also for Peirce’s semiotics. It is they that
grant that signification is more than just any actual interpretation of a sign. Short’s
much-discussed account for the development of Peirce’s theory of signs (2004)
argues that Peirce’s introduction of real possibilities around 1896–97 inter alia serves
to mend this lacuna in his sign theory: that there inheres an intensional meaning
in (some) signs which may not be exhausted in any actual set of interpretations
(cf. also Dipert 1997 on Peirce’s intensional account for sets). Diagrams are the
proper epistemologial means to get to know about continuous, real possibilities,
because they are themselves continuous, iconic representations – they are drawn on
a continuous sheet, facilitating continuous experiments with them (thus mirroring
real laboratory experiment on a conceptual level), and they refer to a continuity of
possible instantiations of the processes referred to by the experiments, be they real
or imagined.56 This is why diagrams as ‘moving images of thought’ occupies center
field in the semiotic epistemology of the mature Peirce which we shall investigate
in the next two chapters.
Real possibilities are thus what furnishes the connecting link between Peirce’s
metaphysical continuity doctrine on the one hand and his diagram epistemology
on the other.57 Real possibilities are understood by the manipulation of applied
diagrams, and in Chap. 8 we shall argue diagrams thus furnish our access to the
synthetic a priori of regional ontologies underlying the different special sciences.

C H A P T E R 3
HOW TO LEARN MORE
An Apology for a Strong Concept of Iconicity
Iconicity is generally conceived of as the sign-relation making one phenomenon
signify another by similarity in some respects. Iconicity is hence based on similarity,
but it is not simply defined by it, for a very simple reason. Similarity is generally
symmetrical:58 if a is similar to b, then b is also similar to a; while sign-relations are
generally asymmetrical: if a signifies b, it does not follow that b signifies a. Iconicity
adds to similarity an intention aimed at b, using a as a means to this end.59 This
difference is acknowledged by most schools, for instance Peirce, who states that
An Icon is a sign which refers to the Object that it denotes merely by virtue of characters of its own,
and which it possesses, just the same, whether any such Object actually exists or not. It is true that
unless there really is such an object, the Icon does not act as a sign; but this has nothing to do with its
character as a sign. Anything whatever, be it quality, existent, individual, or law, is an Icon of anything,
in so far it is like that thing and used as a sign of it. (‘Syllabus’, 1903, EPII, 291; 2.247)
Here, similarity as well as its utilization in sign reference are necessary prerequisites
for the Icon, but only taken together do they become sufficient prerequisites. In
the other great phenomenologist Husserl, we find a similar distinction in the sixth
Logische Untersuchung:60
The sign has in general no community of content with the thing it signifies; it can stand as readily for
what is heterogeneous, as for what is homogeneous with itself. The likeness [Das Bild] on the other
hand is related to the thing by similarity: where there is no similarity, there can be no talk of a likeness,
an image. [] It would be a descriptively wrong notion of the matter, to think of the whole difference
as lying in the fact that the same intention which, in the one case is tied to the appearance of an object
like the object referred to, is in the other case tied to the appearance of an object unlike it. For the sign,
too, can be like what it signifies, even entirely like it: the sign-presentation is not thereby made into
a presentation by way of likeness. A photograph of the sign A is immediately taken to be a picture of
the sign. But when we use the sign A as a sign of the sign A, as when we write ‘A is a letter of the
Latin written alphabet’, we treat A, despite its representational similarity, as a sign, and not as a likeness
[Bild].
The objective fact of similarity between what appears and what is meant, is accordingly irrelevant: it is
not, however, irrelevant where something is presented by way of a likeness [Bildvorstellung]. This shows
itself in the possibility of fulfillment: it was only the recollection of this possibility which allowed us to
bring in ‘objective’ similarity in this context. The likeness-presentation [Die Bildvorstellung] plainly has
the peculiarity that, when it achieves fulfillment, the object which appears before it as likeness [‘Bild’]
gets identified through similarity with the object given in the fulfilling act. Having held this to be the
peculiarity of a presentation by way of likeness [Bildvorstellung], we have admitted that fulfillment of
like by like internally fixes the character of a synthesis of fulfillment as imaginative. (LI,711)
49

50
C H A P T E R 3
Similarity is not sufficient to define an icon – a Husserlian ‘Bild’ – for also mere
signs (Zeichen, which in Husserl do not possess any iconic content) may share
similarity with their object. In order to function as a Bild, similarity needs to
be invoked by a certain type of conscious act, imagination, which is defined by
addressing its object ‘durch ähnliches’. Thus, Peirce as well as Husserl agree in the
need for a further determination of the Icon than mere similarity. In Peirce, it is
the functioning of a phenomenon as a sign for a similar object; in Husserl it is the
notoriously asymmetrical concept of intentionality incarnated in a certain subtype
named Bildbewusstsein which introduces the asymmetry (more about Husserl’s
concept of Bild in Chap. 14). Thus, there is a seminal difference between exactly
which kind of support similarity needs in order to become an icon. In Peirce, the
sign character is carefully defined without any reference to consciousness; in the
still pre-egological Husserl of the Untersuchungen, similarity is defined objectively,
but not so imagination, which is seen as an intentional act with a certain kind of
‘Erfüllungssynthesis’, that is, defined by phenomenological consciousness (a not
yet transcendental consciousness, it must be admitted). The Peircean solution intro-
duces the asymmetry not by means of an intentionality-like concept, but through the
pragmatic concept of ‘use as a sign’, elsewhere ‘function as a sign’.61 Implicitly,
then, Peirce makes the concepts of ‘use’ and ‘function’ more broad than (human)
consciousness, true to his naturalized semiotics. For instance, the well-known
biological phenomena of mimicry would by his definition (but not so by Husserl’s)
be unproblematic instances of iconicity.62 To us, the Peircean solution is the one to
be preferred in order to avoid any dualism between man and nature or the like, and
it seems quite likely that Husserl’s idea may be reinterpreted in a Peircean frame
(so as to make intentionality a concept depending on the more general concept
of a (teleological) system). On the other hand, Husserl’s rendering of the special
character of the Bild makes apparent an important feature which is in Peirce (at
best) more implicitly present: similarity between two phenomena and the use of one
as a sign of the other are not sufficient if just added as two independent features.
To make up a Bild – or an icon, we could say – a sign must signify through its
similarity to its object. We shall return to this elsewhere to concentrate on that other
defining feature of iconicity, in addition to its intentionality/use/function part: its
similarity, whose objectivity both authors invariably stress.
It is probably not to say too much to state that similarity has had a bad press
during the last century or so. Many currents in recent philosophy, psychology,
linguistics, etc. have seen the objectivity of similarity as highly questionable and
has consequently sought to eliminate the concept as a piece of common-sense
ideology, of a simplistic folk theory of signification. The attack has come from
two principal sides. One is what could be called the Nietzschean side in general,
claiming that similarity is only a construct by a weak mind in order to control an
overwhelmingly non-self-similar ontological Being. In Nietzsche himself, we find
the prototype of this idea in his ontological concept of the world as werdende, as a
current of constant change, in which it is of course impossible to isolate stabilities
other than by means of artificially stiffening and controlling what fundamentally

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
51
cannot be controlled. This idea has been prominent in various existentialisms,
nihilisms, vitalisms, Lebensphilosophien, and the like throughout the 20th century
and one of its latest incarnations is of course the famed ‘philosophies of difference’
which teach that difference is always presupposed by any identity or similarity.
In this kind of thought, similarity is most often identified with identity as being
part of the despised ‘Identitätsphilosophie’; by this operation all the non-trivial
difficulties in the concept of similarity are concealed by reducing it to the trivial idea
that A = A.
In linguistics and phenomenology, two traditions closely related to the history of
semiotics, the anti-psychologism necessary for the very birth of these two traditions
as autonomous disciplines (in, for instance, Hjelmslev and Husserl) implied the
refusal of any attempt to account for semantic content by means of psychological
representations. This crucial idea has been central for the idea of semiotics as a
discipline, supported by the equally strong anti-psychologism in Peirce’s increas-
ingly influential semiotics. The interesting and often overlooked fact is that this
foundational and necessary antipsychologism has imbued semiotics with an anti-
iconic tendency throughout most of the twentieth century, in so far as iconicity
has very often been spontaneously identified with psychological imagery. The
surrounding scientific climate, moreover, served to underline this tendency: in
the philosophy of mathematics, in philosophy of science (logical positivism, for
instance), in quantum theory, and many other scientific currents, the abolition
of iconical intuition of the object became conceived of as a necessary prereq-
uisite for thought to become scientific. In semiotics, this anti-iconicity gave rise
to a thoroughgoing conventionalism. Strangely enough, this semiotic convention-
alism went hand in hand with the 60s reinterpretation of Saussure’s – psycho-
logical! – version of linguistic structuralism, so that anti-iconism’s roots in anti-
psychologism were forgotten and replaced with a conventionalism teaching that all
signs were due to ‘codes’ having the character of general social conventions and
instantiated in the single language user’s psychology. The whole critical impetus
hopefully connected to this structuralism was concentrated in its resistance to
iconicity interpreted as a resistance to ideology (to ‘imaginarity’, to ‘Western
metaphysics’, to ‘effects of reality’, etc.). Despite currents of dissent (Lévi-Strauss’
insistence on motivation in signs or Lyotard’s on iconism (‘figure’)), this particular
brand of anti-iconism was a commonplace of most variants of 60s structuralism
(Greimas, Barthes, Lacan) as well as so-called poststructuralism (Derrida, Deleuze,
Foucault).
Another line of attack on the notion of similarity has come from almost the
opposite side of philosophy, analytical philosophy. The idea of a purely symbolic
calculus as the ultimate aim of science and philosophy has been thriving at least
since Leibniz, but during the last century this idea has enjoyed greater prominence
than ever before. The history of this idea is long and cannot be mapped in detail
here, but some crucial points can be sketched out. A source for it is, of course,
the influential success of Newtonian mechanics which gave rise to a lot of philo-
sophical attempts at explaining the reasons for this success. One of the ideas was

52
C H A P T E R 3
the algebraic form of Newton’s laws. Taken together with Descartes’ analytical
geometry which made transformations between geometrical figurae and algebraic
expressions possible, this indicated that a formulation in terms of algebraic calculi
were the ultimate aim for a science to be successful. This – in itself, sound –
idea was sharpened through a series of developments in the nineteenth century.
First, the problem of formalizing imaginary and complex numbers gave rise to the
construction of autonomous algebra in the first half of the century: the insight that
algebraic structures may be investigated with no reference to what the algebraic
symbols might be used to symbolize, yielding the famous results of group theory.
Second, the development of non-Euclidean geometries by variations on the famous
parallel-axiom in Euclid’s system. Originally these geometries sprang from the
attempts at showing that the axiom might be proved as a theorem on the base of the
simpler Euclidean axioms; one way to show this would be to assume the contrary and
derive a contradiction. This procedure did not, in fact, result in contradictions, but
merely in new, consistent, formal systems which could now be interpreted to yield
Lobachevski and Riemann geometries, respectively. The crucial point now was that
in these new geometries, the symbols of the old Euclidean system were to be given
entirely new interpretations. What was in Euclid a straight line, for instance, became
in Riemann a great circle. Thus, the interpretation of algebraically expressed propo-
sitions tended to be marginalized, a tendency which developed in different versions
and degrees in the formal logic of Frege, Peirce, Schröder, Russell, etc. around the
turn of the century. The idea of a purely formal reading originated in Moritz Pasch’s
scepticism against intuition – and rose to metamatemathical fame in Hilbert’s
famous idea of the possibility of making mathematical proofs by a mere ‘formale
Redeweise’ – a formal mode of reading – in which the symbols involved were
treated as mere letters equipped with certain rules of transformations, bracketing
interpretation during symbol manipulation. It is necessary to emphasize that this
whole development is extraordinarily fertile and by no means contrary to the idea
of similarity in itself. The vast research in the autonomous regularities of algebra,
symbol systems, and formal logic is one of the richest developments in science
during the last centuries. But somehow two extreme versions of this ingenious idea
emerged. One was that formalization was purely logical in a very restricted use
of the word, as meaning consisting in a purely conventional, symbolical language,
equipped with a purely combinatorial syntax without any semantic implications.
Another was that formalization is not only crucial to science, but formalization is
science, so that the very interpretation of formal systems tended to be conceived of
as a source of error to be avoided. In Hilbert, it was still the case that the ‘formale
Redeweise’ was only to be maintained within proof theory – in the previous deter-
mination of definitions, of axioms, rules for the manipulation of symbols, etc., the
interpretation of the terms was ineradicable, as well in the subsequent understanding
of the conclusion proved.63 But in many heirs to his formalist program, this crucial
distinction was forgotten, and the ideology gradually spread that, in establishing a
formal calculus, the very aim was to exterminate intuition, not merely to control it.
In the humanities, this idea spread through logical variants on structuralism, cf. for

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
53
instance Hjelmslev’s formal rendering of Saussure, in which the mere algebraic
dependencies between terms was all linguistics might hope to map. All in all, it is
no wonder this overall tendency to privilege symbolic and algebraic calculi at the
expense of interpretation and intuitive presentation became hostile to iconicity and
its basis in similarity. Thus, we find in two major figures in analytical philosophy,
Quine and Goodman, attempts at reducing the notion of similarity completely –
just like we in psychological or logical structuralism, for instance Greimas or early
Eco, find analogous ideas.
In recent years, a new ‘morphological turn’ or even ‘iconic turn’ as a part of
the vast domain of cognitive science has changed the picture.64 Here, continuous
models not reducible to algebra are introduced alongside feature-preserving
mappings of such models between (mental) domains – in cognitive semantics,
cognitive linguistics, in the Peirce renaissance in semiotics, etc. But still the
anti-similarity movement is strong, both in its Nietzschean and its analytical
variants.65
G O O D M A N
Let us examinate the famous arguments of Goodman (1976) which have often,
in an American context, been conceived of as the definitive burial of similarity,
his ‘Seven Strictures of Similarity’ in which the harsh verdict goes as follows:
‘Similarity, ever ready to solve philosophical problems and overcome obstacles, is
a pretender, an impostor, a quack.’(437)
The first of the seven arguments runs as follows: ‘Similarity does not make
the difference between representations and descriptions, distinguish any symbols
as peculiarly ‘iconic’, or account for the grading of pictures as more or less
realistic or naturalistic.’ Here, Goodman’s idea is that the conviction of resem-
blance as ‘the necessary and sufficient condition for representation is so deeply
engrained that the evident and conclusive arguments to the contrary are seldom
considered’ (ibid.). Now, this conviction is at least not shared by any of the two great
phenomenologists Peirce and Husserl, as we have already seen: each of them makes
similarity a necessary but not sufficient condition for representation – and only for
certain aspects of representations, namely the iconic ones. Accordingly, Goodman’s
argument precisely presents examples of resemblance lacking the asymmetry of the
sign function: ‘Yet obviously one dime is not a picture of another’ etc. He realizes
that this only proves that resemblance is not sufficient to define representation,
and then turns to the idea that resemblance and reference should be sufficient.
His example here, curiously, has exactly the same character as Husserl’s with the
A above – it involves the suppositio materialis:
Consider a page of print that begins with ‘the final seven words on this page’ and ends with the same seven
words repeated. The first of these seven-word inscriptions surely refers to the second, and is as much like
it as can be, yet is no more a picture of it than is any printing of a word a picture of another
printing. (ibid.)

54
C H A P T E R 3
But Goodman draws completely different conclusions from the example than does
Husserl. He hastily concludes while continuing to the next issue:
Still, once pictures are somehow distinguished from other denotative symbols – and this must be by
some other means than similarity – does not comparative naturalism or realism among pictures depend
upon their degree of resemblance to what they represent? Not even this can be maintained. (438)
It is strange that an heir to the Frege tradition like Goodman does not see that it is
the oblique reference (‘When I say ‘A’ I am referring to A ’, etc.) so crucial to
the Fregean distinction between Sinn und Bedeutung which is invoked here – and
which is, of course, a type/token relationship, not an iconic relation. His argument
may be summed up as follows: neither similarity nor the sum of similarity and
reference is sufficient to define a picture. In this, he is perfectly right. But his
conclusion that icons do not involve similarity at all does not follow from this.
In both Peirce and Husserl, the defining feature is similarity in a signifying and
referring function, which is not the same as the mere aggregate of similarity and
reference. The reference of the picture is dependent on similarity; in Husserl’s
vocabulary the reference of a picture is an ‘unselbständige Inhalt’ because it depends
on the similarity. Of course this is not the case in all kinds of signs, for instance in
the suppositio materialis which both authors use as an example and where the icon
is merely mentioned (or, object of an act of Nennen) and thus does not function
as a sign. In these cases, the reference takes place as a result of deictic – or, in
Peirce’s wording, indexical – sign use. Thus, the failure of Goodman is here not to
recognize that there are several different ways of referring (iconically, indexically,
symbolically, at least). This fault is then, in Goodman’s hasty style, mixed up with
another in the argument already quoted. Similarity should be independent of the
degree of realism of a representation for reasons of cultural relativism: realism is
a function of culturally specific systems and hence similarity is an effect of such
systems and not the opposite way around. This crude argument overlooks that
the fact that similarity is ‘culture-dependent’ does not make it a mere effect of
cultural norms. Cultural norms require similarity in their description because culture
consists in people acting similarly in some respects; one could say that one culture
differs from another because it emphasizes other similarities. In that respect, the
similarities perceived are of course ‘culture-dependent’, but this is merely because
the very notion of culture involves systems of similarities. The very concept of
a norm presupposes similarity to the extent that it requires that similar cases be
judged similarly. So to say that ‘similarity is relative, variable, culture-dependent’,
merely amounts to saying that any particular judgment of similarity is dependent
on the classes of similarities envisaged, which is a mere truism, more apt, in fact,
to dissolve the concept of culture than the concept of similarity.
Now, the ‘second stricture’: ‘Similarity does not pick out inscriptions that are
‘tokens of a common type’ or replicas of each other.’ Of course, the token-
type problem involves the problem of nominalism versus realism, and the very
terminology of token and type is a (probably unconscious) Peircean heritage. Here,
Goodman invokes various variants on written types, such as for instance a B, a B
where the middle horizontal line is not attached to the vertical bar, and an O - and,

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
55
Figure 8.
again hastily, concludes that the second B is topologically more like the O than the
B proper, because the first two both possess one interior part only, the second two:
Goodman simply fails to see here that more than one topology exists; for instance
a topology distinguishing singularities would not hesitate to identify the to Bs as
having similar (but not identical) systems of singularities, different from the O. In
fact, Goodman’s example does little more than say that a green circle and a red
circle are not similar, because one is green and the other is red. But both are still
round. The problem is, of course, to focus upon the right level of comparison, and
this is not always as easily done as in this deludingly simple example. In fact,
typefaces constitute a very complicated case of similarity, as argued by Douglas
Hofstadter (1985) and myself (1992) – but complexity is not an argument against
similarity either.66 Goodman’s topological deliberation permits him to conclude that
I suspect that the best we can do is to say that all inscriptions that are a’s must be alike in being a’s.
That has the solid ring of assured truth, but is hardly electrifying. Moreover, notice that to say that all
a’s are alike in being a’s amounts simply to saying that all a’s are a’s. The words ‘alike in being’ add
nothing: similarity becomes entirely superfluous. (439)
This conclusion displays an overall strategy found in similar versions in various anti-
similaritists: ‘similarity’ can be reduced to identity. But this short-circuit overlooks
the non-trivial fact that many propositions of the form ‘All A’s are A’s’ conceal
complex cognitive skills used to detect objective similarities. ‘All A’s are A’s’ is
not trivial, because in this proposition, the first ‘A’ refers to tokens (which may
vary widely), the second ‘A’ to the type; and the question at stake is: which bundle
of (different, to be sure) similarity-preserving transformations connects the various
subtypes of A’s with each other? Or to put it differently: how do we recognize a
given token A as a type A when we have no access whatsoever to an extensional
definition of A-ness, that is, to the ‘set of all A’s’, the unproblematic existence of
which (and access to which) Goodman is much too quick to presuppose. This old
extensionalist trick of trying to define similarity by the set of individuals which is
said to possess the quality in question invariably fails, because this set can never
be defined without recourse to that very quality (did anybody ever investigate, for
instance, the set of all red objects in the world, before becoming able to use the
word ‘red’?) – that is, it does not escape a circulus vituosis.
The ‘third stricture’ says: ‘Similarity does not provide the grounds for accounting
two occurrences performances of the same work, or repetitions of the same behavior
or experiment.’ The structure of the argument is the same as in the first stricture, as
supposed by our italicization of ‘the grounds’. Of course similarity is not sufficient,
it takes a supplementary indexical indication of which aspects of similarity are

56
C H A P T E R 3
relevant. ‘Repetitions of the same behavior, such as hitting a tennis ball against a
barn door, may involve widely varying sequences of motion’ (439). Actually, in
this stricture Goodman does not draw any distinction between two issues involved:
kind of similarity and indexical reference. When he sums up ‘In each of these
cases, the grouping of occurrences under a work or an experiment or an activity
depends not upon a high degree of similarity but upon the possession of certain
characteristics. In the case of performances of a Beethoven symphony, the score
determines what those requisite characteristics are ’, he overlooks the fact that
the score in this example actually performs two tasks: it determines ‘requisite
characteristics’ which we must still suppose can be instantiated in a host of variants
which consequently will be similar with respect to a subset of those characteristics –
and it codifies this set of characteristics by making them explicit and indexically
attaching a stabilizing name (‘Beethoven’s xth’) to them. Thus, all in all, this ‘third
stricture’ is no argument against similarity at all; the fact that ‘ the principle of
classification varies with our purposes and interests’ does not imply that there is
no similarity at stake in each one of such cases, and the similarity then will be
relevant to a standard selected by the purpose or interest in question (notice these
categories and their relatedness to Peirce’s sign function or Husserl’s intentional
Bildbewusstsein).
The fourth stricture is more controversial: ‘Similarity does not explain metaphor
or metaphorical truth’ (440). Here, we find Goodman’s most famous denial of
similarity: ‘Anything is in some way like anything else’. This leads him to conclude,
like in the second stricture, that similarity is the result of a process, be it similarity
between tokens or the parts of a metaphor, rather than its prerequisite: ‘In both
cases a reversal in order of explanation might be appropriate: the fact that a term
applies, literally or metaphorically, to certain objects may itself constitute rather
than arise from a particular similarity among those objects’ (440). There is an
interesting tension here between the two parts of Goodman’s argument. The first
is actually a statement of a stunning extension: ‘Anything is in some way like
anything else’. Of course, Goodman intends by this statement to reduce similarity to
insignificance because of its omnipresence, but if we take his words at face value, it
is a statement of enormous a priori breadth. It is of course impossible empirically to
undertake the task of actually comparing all known phenomena two and two; how
then is it possible confidently to state this amazing theory? The idea is probably
that if the tertium comparationis is chosen sufficiently general, some property will
show up shared by both. Yet, we cannot presuppose that this property will in
all cases be an empirical property (given one phenomenon, we can simply define
another phenomenon by giving it another empirical property, for each property
of the first one – a property chosen beyond the limits of any chosen similarity
function). Consequently, the property shared must in this extreme case be of an a
priori character, having no opposite. For instance: both are phenomena. Both have
a certain form (the formless being also a form type). Etc. Given this deliberation,
we can surely subscribe to Goodman’s a priori law: anything is in some way like
anything else. But then this is in flagrant contradiction with his consequence: that

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
57
metaphorical use should constitute similarities rather than being constituted by
them. If similarities between anything always already exist, then metaphor must be
constituted by the selection of certain among these similarities at the expense of
others. This discussion is still relevant today when for instance Lakoff’s cognitive
semantics claims that similarities are not preexisting but are created by metaphorical
mappings from one domain onto another. But if Goodman’s a priori law is really
correct, this cannot be the case: the similarity chosen must in some sense of the word
exist beforehand, as a potentiality. This would, of course, be Peirce’s solution and
it seems evident that it is pertinent for most everyday judgments of similarity. The
fact that it has never before been asserted that this orange on the table before me is
similar in shape to the moon (given a certain granularity of similarity classes), might
cause sensible souls to see me as a genius for creating metaphors, but, modestly,
it seems strange that this similarity should be something created by me. I merely
discover (no great effort) this similarity by applying a certain tertium comparationis
(a circle, give or take a certain rate of deformation). In rare cases, of course, it
may take great pains to establish a new complicated tertium comparationis to see
a similarity (Newton discovering the similarity between the movement of the apple
and of the heavenly bodies, Eliot discovering the similarity between cruelty and the
growth of April flowers) but this hardly implies that the similarity was not there
before. Of course, artists will rage against this conclusion, for does it not imply
that the work of art is not their creation, was it already in some sense a possibility
before their effort? This is probably – if we for a moment allow ourselves the
Nietzschean pleasure of getting personal – one of the reasons why it is so hard
for many to give up the idea of similarities as something constructed: by doing so,
one also gives up the self-flattering romantic-nihilist idea of the subject as artist, as
genius, as creative Übermensch.
The fifth stricture deals with similarity in science: ‘Similarity does not account
for our predictive, or more generally, our inductive practice’ (441). Goodman sets
out by stating that the fact that the future will be like the past is often regarded
as highly dubious – but contradicts this idea: ‘ while I am sure the future will
be like the past, I am not sure in just what way it will be like the past. No matter
what happens, the future will be in some way like the past.’ This idea Goodman
illustrates by drawing a curve plotting the relationship between two sets of variables.
Now, there will exist a curve covering any possible extrapolation of the sets of
data already given, he argues.67 The idea seems to be that curves are our means for
retroactively assuming a similarity, which was we were not able to see during the
process, and of course it is mathematically correct that any amount of points in the
plane (if we leave out the possibility of several points with same x value) can be
connected with one line with increasing x-variable. But this argument proceeds as
if science had never, in a large number of cases, established any laws delimiting
this infinite set of possible curves to a small class of related curves. ‘Along which,
among countless lines of similarity, do our predictions run?’, Goodman rhetorically
asks, and of course this question can only be answered in each specific case. When
letting go of a stone, I of course suppose it will behave similarly to the stone

58
C H A P T E R 3
I let go of yesterday, that is, according to the same law of gravity, – Peirce’s
favorite example – and hence will follow a parabolic trajectory. As a matter of fact,
Goodman’s fifth argument is highly anti-scientific, behaving as if no scientific laws
had ever been established.
The sixth argument: ‘Similarity between particulars does not suffice to define
qualities’. This is not the fact, Goodman argues, because it does not follow from the
fact that each two of several particulars are alike, that they are all alike. Objects may
pairwise have a color in common without all of them having any color in common.
Hence, ‘Dyadic likeness between particulars will not serve to define those classes
of particulars that have a common quality throughout.’ This is correct: similarity is
not transitive. Similarity cannot define quality, it is rather defined by it. Goodman’s
argument here assumes that it should be possible to judge two objects alike without
in any way stating in what the similarity consists – which is, of course, not the
case. Even in the cases in which it might be difficult to point out the precise
similar feature, as between parent and child, it is possible to reason about it and
gradually close in on it: ‘it is something about the form of the eyes’ etc. Even if
there thus might be cases in which the tertium is not obvious, it must exist as a
not-yet-fully-articulated tacit knowledge prerequisite to the similarity judgment.
The seventh and last stricture: ‘Similarity cannot be equated with, or measured
in terms of, possession of common characteristics.’ Even if it was precisely what
Goodman was about to do with the Beethoven œuvre in the third stricture, this is
proposed as the more general, conclusive argument, underlying some of the earlier
ones. The commonsense idea of similarity between two things – that they have at
least one property in common – is once again contrasted with the idea than any
two things have a property in common and that consequently this is insignificant.
An attempt to rescue similarity by saying that two things having more properties
in common are more alike than two things having less properties in common (443)
is counterargued by the idea that ‘any two things has exactly as many properties in
common as any other two’. Goodman gets this idea from the extensional definition
of property by class membership (a property simply being defined by a subset of
elements), and each element in a given universe of elements is a member of exactly
the same amount of universe subsets as any other. This set theory triviality is then
supposed to be the definitive argument, for
I have, indeed, been counting only first-order extensional properties.() The inevitable suggestion
that we must consider intensional properties seems to me especially fruitless here, for identifying and
distinguishing intensional properties is a notoriously slippery matter, and the idea of measuring similarity
or anything else in terms of number of intensional properties need hardly be taken seriously. (444)
Now, it is not necessary to maintain that the idea of similarity needs a quantitative
measure to be sustained, but it is comical that Goodman at this late point refuses
to concern himself with intensional similarity because of its slippery nature – of
course this is where the whole problem lies when extensionally defined properties,
as he rightly claims, make the concept trivial, just like it makes the whole idea of
properties trivial (because the property ‘red’ should then be defined by the set of
all red objects, and this, again, is a set like all other sets and nothing in particular

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
59
distinguishes it from any other set. Then, how do you zoom in on this set, knowing
nothing about redness before you know the set with all its elements ). Of course,
he adds, one could restrict oneself to counting the important properties – a solution
he discards rightaway because importance is a ‘volatile matter’. But of course
similarity is relative to what in a given case is considered ‘important’ – and this
of course lies in the Peircean and Husserlian framing of similarity in icons by
‘function’ and ‘intention’ respectively.
In a concluding remark, Goodman sums up his alleged results: similarity is
much like motion: ‘Clear enough when confined by context and circumstance in
ordinary discourse, but hopelessly ambiguous when turned loose’ (444). Similarity
like movement is meaningless taken per se: ‘Talking about motion is pointless if no
frame of reference is established. () We have to say what a thing is to the left of,
what it moves in relation to, and in what respects two things are similar.’ We could
not agree more. Yet, this is not sufficient for Goodman, because unlike motion,
similarity cannot be saved by recognizing its relativity: adding a specification
of the property in common, similarity is simply rendered superfluous (444). To
this, Goodman once more adds the superfluous argument that circumstances alter
similarities (of course they do), and concludes
Relativity, even volatility, is not a fatal fault. Physics does not stop talking of motion merely because
motion is not absolute. But similarity, as we have seen, is a much more slippery matter. As it occurs in
philosophy, similarity tends under analysis either to vanish entirely or to require for its explanation just
what it purports to explain. (445)
Now, one could argue that physics does not stop talking of matter either, even if
it be slippery. And Goodman has not, in fact, proved that similarity evaporates
under analysis. The idea is that the concept of common property makes it vanish.
But a central point is that common property is not enough to define similarity: this
property should be measured in relation to a certain granularity on the property
scale in question. I might say that two objects are similar because they are both red
(two traffic lights, for instance) even if it is not precisely the same red shade. But
the property in common thus depends on a certain topology on the quality scale in
question, in this case the color continuum. In some cases, this topology may divide
the relevant continuum in very few fields, for instance dark and light, in others,
it may require thousands of shades, in some cases the property classes overlap, in
others they do not. This still makes it correct to assume that similarity is a mere
shorthand for something else – but it is not a shorthand for something equally simple
(for instance common property), because a given judgment of similarity implies
a certain set of possible topologies on the property space (many different granu-
larities may make the two red colors ‘similar’). Thus ‘similar’ means ‘invariant
under certain transformations in quality space with a certain topology and granu-
larity’. But this is not trivial. And this is why similarity is not eradicable: it is the
phenomenological mode for such invariances to appear. In many cases the topology
and transformations in the property space in question are evident – and in these
cases the concept of similarity of course is trivial – but in other cases similarity is
a sign to be interpreted; the precise character of the property space in question and

60
C H A P T E R 3
its topology and transformations is a question to be investigated. Thus, similarity
calls for further explanation.68 In the easy cases, the explanation is of course, as are
any trivial questions, trivial.
T H E Y O U N G E C O
In the history of semiotics in our century, the preference for a purely symbolic
calculus at the expense of iconicity got a strong wind since the spread of formalism
in the interwar period. In the American context, the logical semantics taking its point
of departure in Carnap saw truth-conditions of expressions in purely formal systems
as the decisive feature of scientific endeavors in semantics, later to terminate in
Chomskianism. In the European context, the formalism of Hjelmslev, with its claim
that all language description should proceed in a simple algebra, was a forerunner
of what was to come in structuralism, both in linguistics and in the structurally
inspired humanities more broadly. This tendency had its heyday in the sixties
with French structuralism, generative grammar, and symbolic Artificial Intelligence,
supported by its biological counterpart in DNA-based neo-Darwinism, when all
of the world might seem to be one symbolic calculus – but the general tendency
seems to be that it has been slowly receding since then, allowing for a comeback
of an interest in iconicity. But still, the anti-iconic tendency remains strong, and
in semiotics it is necessary to respond to the arguments of the extreme formalists
in order not to fall prey to too naïve a concept of iconicity. Probably the most
extreme anti-similarity movement in general semiotics is Greimas’ theory, giving
rise to the so-called Paris School. Even if the overall architecture of the theory
includes a Merleau-Pontyan ‘sémiotique naturelle’, allegedly phenomenologically
functioning prior to the intervention of language, still the concept of iconicity
is relegated to a very superficial level of discourse. It is merely a secondary
adornment of established meaning in order to render it similar to a given (and
always ideological) conception of reality, that is, as promoting Barthesian ‘effects
of reality’.69 In this view, icons are simply seen as a secondary and necessarily
illusionary addition to basic conceptual (‘semio-narrative’) meaning already well-
established, and all of it supposedly describable in a Hjelmslevian meta-language
in which the denominations remain algebraic throughout and hence arbitrary. In
contrast to this consequent and untenable position, Umberto Eco’s famous attacks
on iconicity in the 60s and 70s (as collected in Eco 1976) are at the same time
much more multifaceted and much more unclear. It almost seems as if Eco is
steadfastedly determined at ‘getting rid of’ iconic signs, as he does not hesitate to
say, because he brings forth a whole series of widely varying arguments, often not
even mutually consistent. His ‘Critique of iconism’ forms a part of his ‘Theory
of Sign Production’ framed in a funny semi-Marxist language of production and
labor, and even if it does not figure explicitly as an argument, this overall ontology
is probably crucial to his critique of iconism: iconicity, or natural, motivated,
analogical signs of any kind seem to come into being ‘without work’ so to speak.
But in Marxism, there must be no free lunch, and consequently these apparently

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
61
spontaneous signs must have their basis in the human production of codes and
conventions revealed: they are bourgeois signs whose apparent freedom is built
upon ideological suppression of underlying, more hardworking signs. It might seem
like kicking a more than dead horse to counterargue claims like these nowadays,
but it still has relevance because of the underlying idea that human subjectivity is
responsible for all semiotic activity. This idea is not a privilege for Marxism, and
one finds it in various disguises in existentialisms, (de)constructivisms and other
heirs to the subjectivist strand in German Idealism on the one hand as well as
in extreme formalists like Hjelmslev on the other70 – and this is probably a very
widespread reason for skepticism against iconicity that the acknowledgment of it
invariably forms part of a Copernican revolution depriving the human subject of
some of its privileges.
Within this overall frame, Eco’s arguments are, as mentioned, various, to say
the least. One argument goes against similarity as ‘shared properties’ by attacking
Morris’ simplified version of Peirce including the fairly reasonable statement that
icons resemble their objects ‘in some respects’ so that ‘Iconicity is thus a matter
of degree’ (Morris, quote from Eco, 192). Instead of understanding the strength of
this claim, Eco sees it as a weakness because when stretched to onomatopoieas it
includes ‘completely conventional’ expressions. Here Eco, in a Hjelmslevian craze,
compares various linguistic expressions for a cock’s crowing; English /cock-a-
doodle-doo/, French /cocquerico/, and Italian /chicchiricchi/; the iconic relationship
of these to the cock’s crowing is ‘very weak’ (192). In fact, this positive statement is
not very plausible; the onomatopoeias mentioned are all close to possible phonetic
transcription of the actual sound, and they even display a large amount of similarity
in between them: all of them are four-syllable words with the same prosodic
structure with a long and stressed last syllable; in all of them the two first syllables
begin with /k/ and finally the first and last syllable contains the same vowel (all
this goes as well for Danish /kykeliky/, by the way). Eco undertakes this – very
weak – analysis in order to counterargue ‘shared properties’, and his other example
is not much more convincing. In this, he compares the photo of a glass of beer
in an advertisement with an actual glass of beer. The fact that the photo contains
neither glass nor beer nor vapor nor coldness is not a very convincing argument
against shared properties when the icon in question is actually based on a visual
rendering of the object. Eco does, at least, admit the existence of ‘visual stimuli’,
but his explanation of their role in the sign process minimizes their importance to
the extreme:
I feel certain visual stimuli, colors, spacial relationships, incidences of light and I coordinate them into a
given perceptual structure. The same thing [sic] happens when I look at an actual glass of beer; I connect
together some stimuli coming from an as yet unstructured field and I produce a perceptum based on a
previously acquired experience. (193)
He later questions even the notion of ‘the “same” perceptual effect’ and asks if it
is not better to assume that ‘previous learning’ is responsible for my viewing two
different perceptual results as the same. Even if it is the ‘same’ thing that happens
in the two cases, the sameness is relegated from the sign and made the product of

62
C H A P T E R 3
the I which in turn is made a product of previous learning, that is, culture. That is,
an empirically easily verified similarity in form, color, texture, etc. is replaced with
a completely unverifiable piece of ‘previous learning’. Furthermore, this pseudo-
explanation does not account for why ‘the same thing’ does not happen when I
am faced with other ‘yet unstructured’ stimuli; if Eco’s idea were correct I might
see beer glasses all around me. Maybe he does. This analysis shows how extreme
formalism and its idea of the forming of a ‘yet unstructured field’ (cf. the structuralist
arch-idea of language’s partition of an amorphous substance, standard in Saussure
as well as Hjelmslev) can be coupled unproblematically with subjectivism and,
in turn, culturalism. His further examples are similarly unconvincing: the iconic
rendering of a horse by means of its contour is explained by a ‘graphic convention’
instead of a geometrical transformation of 3-D objective properties of form onto a
2-D surface, coupled with knowledge of the animal as being one concluded object,
and the sweetness of saccharine and sugar is allegedly ‘not a property of the two
compounds, but the result of their interaction with our taste buds’. Still, recent
research in the physiology of gustation shows that it is a molecular property which
is responsible for this similarity in function, namely the presence on the periphery
of both macromolecules of morphologically similar ‘active sites’ (even if this were
not the case, the two tastes would still be phenomenologically similar, i.e. lie close
to each other in taste space). The fact that various cultures prefer various tastes –
which he adds as a culturalist argument – does not change these biochemical and
phenomenological facts and cultural tastes still require similarity functions making
it possible to recognize what is considered tasty in the given culture. All in all,
his rejection of the shared property idea builds on a construction unluckily uniting
subjectivism, culturalism, and extreme formalism.
A geometrical case is now made against the notion of similarity (which he surpris-
ingly finds a more scientific notion than shared properties – presumably because
similitude has a use in geometry defined by invariance in certain transformations71).
Here, Eco’s argument is even more coarse, to put it bluntly. A Lockean tabula rasa
is invoked in the shape of a ‘naive interlocutor’ or ‘non-trained informant’ who
is not able to perform the transformations required (and so unable to compare the
Cheops pyramid with a small model of it, for instance). That transformations such
as these should be completely conventional is now argued with the presentation of
some simple graph theoretical figurae (Figure 9) which are topologically similar to
the extent that they connect the same set of points with the same set of lines (but
where the points do not inhabit the same places in the plane and the lines do not
have the same shape).
These graphs are of course not similar in the sense that their line shapes are invariant
in scalar transformation – and this is for Eco an argument that they are not ‘spatially
(and therefore geometrically)“similar”’(196). Ecoprobablyfeelsthedangeroftrying
to drive out one kind of similarity with another, for he instantaneously adds: ‘This
kind of isomorphism may be called a form of similarity but it would be very difficult
to assert that it is a geometric similitude. To call such a relationship ‘iconic’ is a
mere metaphor’ (197). Now ‘mere’ metaphor may in many cases contain genuine

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
63
Figure 9.
insight, and such is the case here. Of course isomorphism is iconic; the question
is why Eco refuses to admit it. A positive answer could be that he fears a concept
of iconicity which is spontaneous and substantial, maintaining a similarity without
a tertium comparationis – this would explain the strange fact that he considers it
an argument against iconicity to reveal in each case the underlying principle of
similarity. Of course, Eco’s later work has shown a rationalist and well-placed fight
precisely against unfounded similarity claims in various occult practices where no
tertium comparationis and no correlative invariants under transformation are to be
isolated.72 But the fear of such ‘similarities’ should be no argument against well-
founded similarities, and it seems that Eco in general mistakes the transformations
guaranteeing the single types of similarities for being mere cultural conventions. Thus,
in addition to the earlier arguments which pointed to large constructive competences
on the part of the ego, this Lockean construction makes of the I a mere tabula rasa.
But more arguments follow. Eco confronts himself with a version of Peirce’s
iconicity and criticizes Peirce for not abandoning his reference to objects in his
definition of it, because it makes iconism an ‘umbrella-term that covers many
different phenomena such as a mental image, a graph, a painting’ (199). This
argument is very strange; it is precisely the reference to similarity with the object
which gives the unity of Peirce’s definition and which allows it to include the various
phenomena mentioned. There are two points in this: one is what we have already
touched on and what Eco emphasizes over and over again: that a transformation
between sign and object ‘ does not suggest the idea of natural correspondence;
it is rather the consequence of rules and artifice’ and hence remains a ‘mere’
convention. But rules can never be the causes of similarity, for they presuppose
it in so far as their general formulation is of the type ‘Do the same as what
is prescribed here ’. The same goes for his emphatic conclusion ‘Similitude is
produced and must be learned’ – it would be impossible to teach anybody anything
if one were not allowed to say ‘Now, do like I do ’ and thereby presuppose

64
C H A P T E R 3
similarity.73 This argument, of course, is also valid against Goodman’s similar
claims. Another point is not stated explicitly, but it might seem as if Eco’s implicit
contrast to Peirce’s alleged ‘umbrella’ term is a rather narrow idea of iconicity
restricted to the domain of vision only. This of course brings him in conflict with
the culturalism stated so far, because vision and the possession of eyes can hardly
be interpreted as a cultural convention which must be learned. This comes to the
fore in his next argument which is aimed against the symmetry of certain similarity
phenomena which must consequently be excluded from the concept of iconicity:
mirror images, doubles, tokens of the same type74 and expressive signs. This
argument is of course perfectly valid, cf. the central phenomenological distinction
between symmetrical similarity and asymmetrical iconicity; yet it is no argument
against the latter that it depends on the former from which it must be distin-
guished. But in this almost sound argument totally new criteria all of a sudden
sneak in: ‘Secondly the presumed ‘iconism’ that should govern the correspondence
of a token to its type is not a theorem that semiotics could demonstrate; it is
one of its postulates [] The rules of this recognition are deeply rooted in the
mechanisms of human perception and must be assumed as already given in any
semiotic enquiry’ (203). Here, semiotics is all of a sudden presented as a deductive
doctrine with postulates, axioms, proofs, theorems etc., and token-type relations
are wholesale reduced to physiology, that is, biology. But why should it not be
important to guarantee the soundness of the postulates of one’s science – which
in this case are empirical matter from other sciences (cognitive psychology)? This
sudden naturalist tendency, hastily forgetting the tabula rasa ideas, culminates in
the refusal of iconicity in the so-called ‘expressive’ signs – Kandinskyan lines
signifying emotions and the like: ‘We may consider all these cases of empathy as
mere stimulations that should be studied by the physiology of the nervous system.’
(203) – as if they were not semiotic phenomena at all. A strange theory: seeing
a picture of a beer as referring to a beer is a complicated cultural phenomenon,
while seeing a drawn line as referring to a complicated psychological emotion is
something perfectly natural and automatic. Just like some icons are thus ‘mere’
conventions for a completely blank Lockean culturalized subject, other icons are
‘mere’ neurological phenomena in a naturalized physiological subject brimming
with innate semiotic competence. It is a wonder that these two subjects may thrive
in one and the same head. The problem of cutting the cake and dividing the iconic
signs amongst these two ‘mere’ categories is of course the numerous cases in which
both are active and hard to distinguish. Eco elaborates on conventionality at length,
making clear his contention that this is the semiotically interesting field (the natural
‘signs’ not being signs but something even simpler than Pavlovian conditioned
reflexes), but finally embarks on still another type of argument by stating that
measured on very general (we would call them formal ontological) terms, similarity
becomes ubiquitous: ‘ on the level of very elementary formal phenomena such
as high-low, right-left, or long-wide – everything resembles everything else’ (212).
Perfectly correct as this is, Eco takes it strangely enough as yet another argument
for ‘arbitrary underlying codifications’ and is close to concluding with a complete

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
65
conventionalism. Crude as it is, he finally offers a totally different classification
between grammar-oriented and text-oriented procedures, in which iconicity must
fall on the text-oriented side because of its lack of distinct elements and composi-
tionality. Here, he suddenly admits that ‘the drawing of a horse can be understood
even by those who are not acquainted with visual conventions ’ (214) because it
is ‘not further analyzable either into signs or into figurae’ (215). Now, the equiv-
alent of an iconic sign is not a word or a phrase but a text (why not a phrase in many
cases, actually, cf. traffic signs?) whose units ‘are established – if at all – by the
context’ (216). It is difficult to see how this analysis at one and the same time can
save iconic signs and reject their iconicity; the idea is probably that the context here
is supposed to do the work which codes, conventions or physiology cannot do. But
how does one recognize similar contexts if not by means of similarity (remember
we are beyond conventionality now, so we must not posit codes for recognizing
contexts )
Eco’s conclusion, under the witty heading of ‘Getting rid of the “iconic signs” ’,
repeats the umbrella idea and adds a final stroke: it is not only the idea of iconicity,
but also the idea of a sign which must be discarded in favor of the notion of
sign-function, an in itself sound Hjelmslevian notion here diversified into various
semi-Marxist modes of sign production. This idea should finally dissolve the ‘iconic
signs’ because they are arguably produced by different procedures, interchangeably
with other signs.
This final fallacy – to believe the product may be exhaustingly explained by
the production – is as absurd as to claim that cars are not cars because some
of them are produced by Germans, others by Japanese, but it permits us to
conclude Eco’s critique. His umbrella term thesis rests on this mode-of-production
theory – and then the wildly differing critiques of iconicity might be understandable
(to himself) as pertaining to different modes of production (even if they were not
presented in this lingo). Conventionality, culture, and subjectivity constitute one
source for apparent ‘iconicity’, the physiology of the nervous system is another,
formal ontology is a third, and the context of signs constitutes a fourth. Even if a
wedding of some of these positions into a culturally formed subject strangely and
completely independent of its own natural, physiological bases can be constructed
and is indeed typical for the period, then no construction can involve all of them:
where should the formal ontological constraints intrude: in the subject? – this would
attack culturalism – in the nervous system – this would attack the independence
of nature and culture. Where would ‘context’ come in? – not in culture which is
conventional through and through, not in the physiology of perception since no
semiotics is possible here  Eco’s iconic cleansing project is doomed to fail, not
only because he attempts to dissolve a category phenomenologically well-defined,
but also because his umbrella argument ends up umbrellaing his own implied
ontology into a complete quagmire of a crude nature-culture dualism equipped with
self-contradictory annexes. What can more generally be learnt from Eco’s failures
is that mode-of-production explanations in semiotics, be it of semi-Marxist brand as
is the case here, be it of Nietzschean brand in various types of Lebensphilosophie

66
C H A P T E R 3
and deconstructionism, or be it of neurophysiological or any other brand, can never
stand alone but must be based on a prior phenomenological descriptive rendering
of the field making coherent the objects, distinctions, and in general phenomena
involved.
U M B E R C E P T I O N A N D E C O N I C I T Y
–
T H E C O N V E R S I O N
O F A N I C O N O C L A S T
Eco thus formed an anti-iconic front figure in the ‘debate on iconism’ taking place in
semiotics in the 60s and 70s. In a recent book, Kant and the Platypus, however, Eco
explicitly changes his basic conceptions on the issue. The main tenet of the book is
the integration of a whole series of issues left out of consideration alongside with
iconicity in Eco’s early work: reference, cognition, truth, prelinguistic perception –
rather serious and far-reaching questions, it must be admitted. In the present book’s
last chapter, Eco recounts an outline of his and his compatriots’ position at the
time, and I think it is fair to say that he to some extent misrepresents the scope and
the radicality of the anti-iconism of the period, probably out of the same embar-
rassment that makes him characterize conversions from this semio-structuralism
and to Peircean iconicity in some of his fellow-travellers as the result of confessions
in a Stalinist show trial (341). This somewhat shrill description should probably be
read as a testimony of the malaise inherent in the revision of one’s own viewpoints,
for it is, in fact, exactly the same conversion confession that is Eco’s own purpose
with this book: the admirable task of revising his 1976 position on iconicity. It is
evident, furthermore, that a strong influence in this revision is what must be counted
as one of the major developments in the semiotics of the turn of the millennium:
the American ‘cognitive semantics’ tradition (involving Rosch, Lakoff, Johnson,
Turner, Sweetser, Talmy, Fauconnier, etc.). Even if only rarely using the term
‘semiotics’, this tradition has strongly vitalized the development of a bouquet of
core semiotics issues (general semantics and its relation to perception, to thought,
to biology, etc.) by connecting them to the general cognitive science project. From
an early point, Eco was one of the European contacts to this tradition, and he has
done much to introduce it in Europe. Thus, Kant and the Platypus can also be read
as his contribution to this development, involving a welcome revision of his own
earlier viewpoints.
Even if this self-criticism gives rise to a whole series of really interesting ideas,
the book is explicitly not intended as a systematic rejoinder to the (intended)
systematical Theory of Semiotics of the book thus titled. The six essays in Kant
and the Platypus come in seemingly arbitrary order and with sparse internal refer-
ences, even if they circle around the same central set of issues. The first is a
general (ontological, in fact) meditation on being as a positive issue – in contradis-
tinction to semio-structuralism’s preference for negative determinations and its
resulting hesitations towards any ontological commitments – and it concludes with a
discussion of structural semiotics’ arch occupation with an amorphous continuum of
being to be segmented by semiotic systems. The fact that this continuum possesses

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
67
a ‘grain’, contains ‘lines of resistance’ as given before semiosis and to some extent
governing it, is the anti-conventionalist point of the still rather weak ontology
(references to Vattimo are weak but not missing, consequently) of this chapter. The
second essay tackles the main problem head on: the explanation of the semantics of
everyday empirical concepts (like ‘dog’, or, more conspicuously, ‘platypus’) cannot
do without the (iconic) notion of ‘schema’ like in Kant’s epistemology. The ideas
from this chapter are taken further in the third essay where the Kantian impetus
is reinterpreted in the light of actual cognitive science. Here, Eco constructs his
own theory of the semantics of empirical concepts: they build on the prelinguistic
perceptual generalization (in Peirce’s terminology: perceptual judgment) giving rise
to ‘cognitive types’ (CT) making recognition and identification of a phenomenon
possible. This stability in perception seems to form the core of semantic content
of the concept, the so-called ‘nuclear content’ (NC) involving a fuzzy spectrum of
core knowledge attached to the CT. Finally, following Putnam’s idea of a linguistic
division of labor, various expert bodies of knowledge about the phenomenon in
question may be elaborated with the NC as point of departure (and possibly contra-
dicting it); they form elaborated corpuses of ‘molar content’ (MC). In the platypus
example, the CT will be the perceptual type of the animal, making recognition
of it possible; the NC will involve central pieces of knowledge about it (it has a
beak, lays eggs, gives milk, etc.); and the MC will involve different sets of elabo-
rated representations of it (the aboriginals’ mythological ideas of the animal’s role
in cosmology, the scientific description and classification of it, etc.) – the latter
possibly being subject to ongoing discussions and negotative reinterpretations. The
fourth chapter recounts the polemic around the classification of the platypus raging
in biology during most of the nineteenth century and draws some general conclu-
sions as to the indispensability of both of Eco’s well-known semantic description
types of dictionary vs. encyclopedia in the forming of empirical concepts, permitting
the revision and the integration into the new CT/NC/MC framework of these two
terms. The fifth essay turns towards the question of reference and takes up Kripke’s
famous ‘ontological’ theory of reference: the idea of proper nouns as rigid desig-
nators devoid of any descriptive value whatsoever. Kripke’s theory is relativized to
become a regulative idea only in a more pragmatic theory of reference as subject
to the same ongoing contractual negotiation between language users as content is
subjected to. The final essay on iconism and hypoicons is somewhat disappointing
in relation to the strong chapters in the middle of the book; we do not get the
integration of the book’s insights in a broader theory of iconicity, such as might
be expected from its title. Still, the essay contains a interesting distinction between
two forms of icons, alpha- and beta-, respectively, so that the alpha signs are
perceived as signs irrespectively of any explicit intention of sign reading in the
receiver (the dog seen as ‘a dog’, supposedly), while the beta signs presumes to
be read as expressions of a sign function (the dog seen as a sign for a nearby
kennel); this distinction apparently gives rise to the distinctions between primary
and secondary icons equivalent to the distinction between ‘perception surrogates’
and more proper signs.

68
C H A P T E R 3
Let us begin by the reintroduction of iconicity in a central role (and it probably
goes without saying that I perfectly agree with Eco on that central point). The
question leading to the recognition of iconicity in Eco is: ‘How do we assign names
to things?’ Simple versions of the scholastic (by essences) and the empiricist (by
complexes of ideas) answers are both refuted in favor of the Kantian notion of
schema. The schema is a type and hence no mere association of particular ideas
(which would be impossible for the strong reason that empirical objects have an
infinity of properties (Kant)), but it is on the other hand a result of construction and
is thus no pregiven essence ready to be picked up. Eco runs through the Kantian
doctrine of the reflective judgment in Kritik der Urteilskraft in order to underline
the schema’s constructed character: the reflective judgment seeks to constitute a
general concept to subsume a particular phenomenon (and it is thus a precursor
to Peirce’s notion of abduction, cf. Chap. 16), and in so doing, it conceives of
the thing as if it was a part of something general. In order to do so, furthermore,
it conceives of the thing as if it was teleologically organized.75 In any case, this
teleological and generalizing feature of reflective judgment commits it to proceed
by trial-and-error – that is, in a construction of a schema which will be able to
subsume the phenomenon in question. In so far, the schema becomes the general
type which permits the recognition of tokens of it. This is explicitly posed as a
general prerequisite of signs: well before anything can stably stand for something
else (the Stoic sign definition), a type must be able to stand for a token of itself.
This sound theory is, it must be added, nothing new in semiotics; it is central in
Peirce (the first trichotomy) but it also is inherent in e.g. Hjelmslev’s version of
‘semiostructuralism’ – but still it is good to emphasize it as against the widespread
and fateful superstition that signs begin with physical marks referring to something
else. This primary iconicity is taken as a primitive: it defines similarity rather than
the opposite way around. Primary iconicity thus satisfies Eco’s old ambition of
finding the ‘lower threshold of semiotics’ and is described in several ways: one
is the psychological description as the adequate representation of a stimulus by a
sensation. The prerequisite for this is a pure ‘predisposition to correspond’ (110).
This last description corresponds to Peirce’s idea that the icon is at the same time
objective and vague, but there is an unnoticed tension between this objective and
hence pre-subjective description of iconicity on the one hand and the just mentioned
identification of iconicity with psychological and perceptual processes on the other.
A mild conclusion here could be that this difference is not further elaborated in
this book where the focus on the genesis of empirical concepts implies a natural
bias towards psychology; a stronger conclusion could be that there is a problem
in the fact that Eco’s reintroduction of iconicity is so tightly intertwined with a
reintroduction of psychological terms (which is strange, moreover, because Eco in
general takes the cautious stance of seeing the mind as a black box which he, as a
semiotician, abstains from peeping into). I shall return to this problem.
The schema thus satisfies the Husserlian requirement that there should be strong
ties between linguistic and perceptual meaning. As is evident, this rendering
of schema and iconicity lays a heavy burden on perception. Peirce’s theory of

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
69
perception – to which Eco returns over and over without tackling it head-on – is
taken as the means to fill this gap: the relation between percept (a limit case with no
autonomous mental existence in Peirce’s account) and the consecutive perceptual
judgment is quickly taken as a general description of the token-type relation in
primary iconism.
This is taken up in the third essay where Eco outlines the most elaborated and
original consequences of his iconic turn. The schema is an unsolved problem for
truthfunctional semantics on the one hand just as it is for structural semiotics on the
other, and the flora of schema-like concepts flowering in the cognitive semantics
tradition these years (schema, prototype, stereotype, model, pattern, script, frame )
testifies to the indispensability of schematic concepts. In so far, a schematic turn can
be said to be underway, but, as Eco points out, without its proponents knowing much
about the philosophical debts or depths in the concept. The main problem, according
to Eco (here I only partially agree) – in continuation with the preceding chapter – is
that Kant’s schematism does not account for empirical concepts (the dog, the
platypus, etc.). Accordingly, he takes up the development process of such concepts –
Montezuma’s and the Aztecs’ gradually forming a sort of horse concept after the first
meetings with the Spaniards and the polemic over the zoological classification of the
platypus being his two main examples. In accordance with the central role accorded
to perception, he supposes that the first stable structure formed is a ‘cognitive type’
(nicknamed CT) which is a perceptual schema, integrating a multimodal range of
senses (including for instance the horse’s general outline, neighing, smell, etc.).
The CT, even if subject to ongoing trial-and-error negotiations, has the property
of being a perceptual type, hence prelinguistic, and hence safe from all semiotic
doubt, cultural relativism, etc. True, different cultures will form different CTs, but
as a rule not entirely different – they will still be constrained by certain ‘lines of
resistance’ as it is called in Eco’s weak ontology. Its main function is to facilitate
the recognition of yet-unseen tokens of its type. The important step here is that
Eco succumbs to Peirce’s insistence that the generality of the symbol is not the
only generality in semiotics; it is preceded by – and conditioned by – typicality,
the fact that phenomena tokens are organized in types before symbolicity and
linguistic categorization further organize them. However, the CT is, due to its
perceptual status, private, so how do we guarantee that a CT is in fact present? – only
by the intersubjectively controllable detour of successful referring. If speakers
pragmatically agree in referring to a phenomenon this must count as a proof of
shared (or, in any case, sufficiently similar) CTs. This brings the next term in
play, Eco’s concept for the meaning (or better, the content) of empirical terms, the
Nuclear Content (nickname: NC). It is defined as a set of public interpretants of
a CT (and must be supposed to feed back onto the ongoing shaping of the CT)
and becomes the possibility of the attaching of a substantive expression making
the content communicable. The relation between CT and NC is conceived so that
CT acts as disposition for the formation of a NC, while the presence of a NC,
conversely, counts as proof of the existence of a CT. (There are problems in
this claim: everyday substantives abound which have NC but hardly CTs – for

70
C H A P T E R 3
instance ‘furniture’ – but this may probably be mended by a suitable theory of
generalization and abstraction). The NC gives instructions for the identification of
tokens of the type (its so to speak iconic side) as well as instructions for retrieval
of tokens of the type (its so to speak indexical side). So it adds a considerable
amount of knowledge to the perceptual CT of for instance a horse: where do we
find horses, to what use are they typically put etc. The NC is still a common-
sense-close notion, being subject to continuous negotiation and not necessarily
internally consistent, being motivated by competing tacit folk theories, etc. The
MC forms the third concept of this triad and constitutes some stable corpus of
complex knowledge of the object (it contains more than is demanded for perceptual
recognition) and is typically parceled out in different, sophisticated practical and
theoretical discourses on the object, also subject to continuous negotiation in smaller
subcultures but with stronger consistency constraints added. In this analysis, the very
concept of ‘concept’ is left to unemployment, to the extent that everyday empirical
concepts are CTs, expressed by NCs, while scientific and other special language
concepts are defined by various MCs. It is evident that Eco’s CT-NC complexes
display close relationship to Eleanor Rosch’s ‘basic-level-categories’: he is happy
to state that they are interpretable even if primitives – and on the Kantian hand he
maintains they act as general pictures acting as rules for the construction of specific
pictures.
The more precise definition and description of CTs take up many efforts. CTs
seem also to include qualia, basic acts (walking, jumping), basic opposition pairs
(husband/wife), frames governing events, they must contain Gibsonian ‘affordances’
(what may be done with the phenomenon in question), they include face recognition,
recognition of musical styles, fictive persons and artworks; we often use truncated
CTs completely separated from NCs. One and the same CT may emphasize iconic,
propositional and narrative meanings. CTs governing empirical concepts are juxta-
posed ‘cultural’ concepts including abstract concepts, cultural relations, events, etc.
CTs are compared to cognitive semantics concepts like stereotype and prototype
and it is proposed that CTs have maximum extension and minimum intension, while
the opposite is the case for prototypes.
These sketchy extrapolations of the CT concept display some weaknesses. First,
CTs now seem to include a whole series of semantic phenomena traditionally seen
as farther from perception: frames, opposition pairs, functional properties etc. The
fact that phenomena like these in fact do form CTs leaves little doubt; but the
idea that they spring almost automatically from perception seems a lot weaker in
these more conceptual cases. The basic tie between CT and perception thus seems
to be loosened without it being explained how CTs of these traditionally more
‘conceptual’ content types are formed. Moreover, the opposition between empirical
CTs and cultural CTs seems very hard to uphold on the proposed basis which
makes the latter farther removed from perception than the former: a very wide range
of cultural objects (from Coca Cola bottles to saints) are recognized by means of
simple perceptual schemata, while on the other hand it is an extremely doubtful
claim that abstract concepts should in general be culturally specific through and
through. As to the alleged opposition between CTs and prototypes, the idea that CTs

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
71
should have minimum intension fits badly with the earlier claim that they include
multimodal representations for object recognition (including smells, sounds, etc.).
While the basic layout of the CT/NC/MC theory thus seems a very promising
idea, its elaboration suffers from serious lacks, supposedly because of their ties to
(too) simple concepts of empirical phenomena, psychology, and culture inhibit their
extrapolation. It is almost as if Peirce’s much-quoted (also by Eco) remark – that
if Kant had taken the consequences inherent in his draft of schematism, it would
have overgrown his whole work – has a bearing on Eco’s reflections as well.
The fourth essay recounts the platypus strife of the nineteenth century with the aim
of reconciling the CT/NC/MC theory with Eco’s earlier discussions of dictionary
vs. encyclopaedia semantics, the former being characterized by hierarchical organi-
zation, linguistic determination, a limited inventory of semantic features, proceeding
by definition (corresponding to structuralist analyses of meaning), the latter being
characterized by an uncoordinated and indefinite mass of extralinguistic knowledge,
proceeding by classification (corresponding to an empirical, everyday conception
of meaning). In relation to the NC/MC distinction, a first glance might suggest
that NC/MC correspond to Encyclopaedia/Dictionary, respectively (by the common
feature unordered/ordered), but in the opposite direction points the fact that NCs
are supposed to be simpler than MCs, and any precise correlation between the two
concept pairs is given up. Eco after long deliberation places ‘wild’ categorization
in NC while systematic categorization belongs to the MCs. Dictionary semantics is
characterized – in both MC and NC – by limiting itself to register that a concept is
located on a certain node in a classificatory tree, while encyclopaedic knowledge
includes both locations of concepts in classifications as well as their further content.
The conclusion by the platypus example is that an interaction between dictionary
and encyclopaedia knowledge is necessary in the ongoing negotiation leading to
from wild to less wild classification; it takes its point of departure in one and the
same CT/NC which is impossible to doubt as a whole (the existence of such a
strange creature as the platypus is beyond doubt, even if certain single properties
(its laying eggs, its giving milk, etc.) may long be doubted), while the interpretation
of this core in terms of MC is highly variable and subject to possible systematical
doubt (is the platypus bird, mammal, reptile, etc. ) giving possibility for scientific
progress.
A further possibility of development in this chapter is to elaborate on the
distinction between CTs and NCs, prelinguistic categories and linguistic categories,
respectively. Rita Nolan has in a strong paper proposed that the distinction between
perceptual and conceptual categories may be drawn according to whether the
category is contrasted to other categories.76 This would point to the idea that the
role of CTs – perceptual categories – is to facilitate identification (as a type), while
the role of the NCs developed out of them is to facilitate classification. Identifi-
cation and classification have much too often been identified in semiotics, but an
extrapolation of Eco’s proposal may lead to a theory where the latter is seen as a
more complicated process presupposing the former.77

72
C H A P T E R 3
The fifth essay on reference is one of the book’s best and takes the negotiation-
semantics-idea from the field of icon and content to the field of index and reference.
Kripke’s well-known rigid-designator theory of proper names and their ontological
reference is criticized with an Italian comical sketch as an example. Eco’s argument
is convincing: a completely naked reference without any descriptive content is only
possible as a limit case, and rigid designation must be reinterpreted in a Kantian
fashion as a regulative idea governing the ongoing research process rather than
being the normal reference relation in ordinary language where pragmatic reference
by negotiation is the rule: ‘When people listen to acts of reference, they usually ask
lots of questions’.
The reintroduction of primary iconism is nothing less than a semiotic necessity,
and the discussion of Kant’s schematism is highly relevant for the development of a
semiotics between truthfunctional reduction of meaning on the one hand and various
irrationalist claims of the ineffability of meaning on the other. The CT/NC/MC
theory is a valuable outline for a theory of content between abstract concepts on
the one hand and the multiplicity of perception on the other, and the negotiation
theory of reference continues the valuable insight in Kripke reference theory in a
pragmatic setting.78
T H E S C H E M A T I C T U R N
Still, the lack of systematic disposition and conclusions in the book is highly
regrettable. It contributes to the list of unanswered questions and problems in the
position it puts forward. Let me name a few.
First of all, the delimitation of iconicity and schemata to empirical concepts with
a close connection to the psychology of perception is very hard to understand. Of
course, the understanding of empirical concepts is a spectacular problem, but if we
should avoid the pitfalls of empiricism and psychologism making their re-entry in
semiotics alongside the reintroduction of iconicity, it is crucial to see the problem
of empirical concepts in a close relation to abstract concepts – just like it is the
case already in Kant where schemata are seen to account for empirical concepts
as well as a priori concepts. This idea in Kant is continued in Peirce’s theory
of diagrams – see next chapter – where we learn that empirical concepts are
schematic only to the extent that they are built from pure diagrams invested with
empirical constraints and references. This implies that Eco’s account for schemata
overlooks the crucial connection between observation and generality in schemata,
to which we shall return in the next chapter (to some extent Peirce’s version of
the synthetic a priori). In diagrams, it is possible directly to observe generality,
Peirce claims; Husserl had an analogous insight in his theory of categorial intuition
in the sixth of the Logische Untersuchungen where he claims that in order for
categories to be understood there must exist a kind of perception allowing us to
grasp them (see Chap. 6). It is the observability of general, ‘abstract’ properties
which is the crux of schemata. Here, all reference to human psychology is bracketed,
and the corresponding extension of the icon category makes it cover anything

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
73
from photos to algebra, from perceptions to graphs, in so far as these signs allow
for the crucial operations to be performed, leading to more information about
their object. As Eco fails to see this, his reintroduction of iconicity threatens to
become the reintroduction of a culturalized variant of (psycho-)logical positivism
(without his intention, no doubt) in semiotics. This becomes evident, when he
(253) summarizes the contributions to the determination of the platypus in the
following two currents: one body of perceptual observation sentences based on
the intrinsic characteristic of the environment, and, on the other hand, one holist
(in a Quinean sense), structural system of propositions which performs a ‘cultural
segmentation of the content’ (corresponding to the strange subsumption of abstract
meanings under cultural CTs). Protocol sentences, on the one hand, and on the
other the means to organize them, be they logical or psychological of origin – the
old couple so well-known from psychological or logical empiricism – with the one
difference that the (psycho-) logical apparatus here is supposed to be culturally
variable. It is well known that in all positivist ways of cutting the cake, what is
deliberately left out is any reference to the synthetic a priori; no a priori is left but
analytical tautologies. In Eco, this corresponds exactly to the underestimation of
the general content of schemata, and it becomes very difficult to see which device
should be able to mediate between the cultural concept systems on the one hand
and the observation sentences on the other. Even if a huge step foward, Eco’s
newfound iconicity thus inherits some of the culturalist problems of his earlier
position. The whole a priori set of concepts yielding the basic schemata of each
of the single special sciences falls away – ironically in a period where analytically
minded philosophers reintroduce the synthetic a priori (cf. the idea of ‘fallabilistic
apriorism’, Chap. 8). Of course, the reason why the cultural reference is included
here is in order to answer an important question of fundamental semiotics: how are
cultural differences possible – but the answer to this question must not beforehand
exclude the answer to an equally important question: how is scientific knowledge
possibe? This disappearance of an autonomous account for abstract concepts in
Eco’s theory is indirectly apparent in the rather generous amount of information
supposed to be present in the observation-close CTs. Here, it is for instance a pre-
linguistic presupposition that a dog is an animal (in no scientific sense, it is true,
but still supposed as a pre-cultural knowledge impossible to delete). But is it really
appropriate to describe so complicated information as inherent in perception – even
if admitting Peircean generality inherent in perception? – in any case it presupposes a
very developed concept of perception. We can easily subscribe to Eco’s observation
that the idea that dogs are animals is culture- and language-independent – but is
this fact not more satisfactorily described when we say that an a priori concept
of animal is involved here – one that we might even be able to schematize (as
something like a self-propelled metabolism looking for nutrition, cf. Chap. 9)?
The admittance of abstract relations as crucial to the construction of schemata
would yield a whole series of further consequences: the variation of schemata, the
experimentation with schemata, the fallibilistic reinterpretation of a priori schemata,
the distinction between the icon and the psychological conditions for the processing

74
C H A P T E R 3
of it. Let me conclude with arguing for this further list of steps to be taken in order
to complete the schematic turn of semiotics.
There is a crucial variation procedure connected to schemata linking type and
tokens, and this goes for empirical and a priori schemata alike. The general picture
of the schema must be varied in order to yield subtypes and tokens of the typical
schema. But not all schemata allow for the same formal kinds of variation nor
the same scope of variation procedures. In dogs, e.g. the variation of the type
must be rather extensive in order to cover races like Great Dane and Chihuahua,
respectively, while the variation allowed in platypuses, presumably, is somewhat
more restricted. In the concepts of animals, continuous variations (within a whole
set of further Bauplan constraints) are relevant, while in the concept of chess games,
discontinuous variations prevail. A huge issue is suggested by these remarks; suffice
it to say that the types and scope of variation thus forms a part of the very concept
of schema itself and the specification of the variation’s type and scope forms an
indispensable part of the content associated with each specific schema.
Eco touches upon this important idea in Gibson’s concept of ‘affordance’, the
fact that schematic content in some respects indicates ‘what may be done’ with
the phenomenon in question. In addition to the variation linking type with token,
this forms an even more extensive field of schematic research: which rule-bound
manipulations may be undertaken on a schema in order to map which corresponding
changes may take place in the object it depicts? Peirce’s schema concept, that
of a diagram, makes explicit this dimension of experimenting or manipulating
in every diagram – in the animal schema it will be the manipulation of it to
simulate animal behavior; in more abstract schemata – like logical or algebraical
expressions – it will be the possibility of proving theorems or solving equations. This
property is what makes schemata fit for Gedankenexperimente of every kind, cf. next
chapter.
If we apply this experimenter’s stance to abstract schemata we may get a crucial
corollary as to the notion of a priori. In Kant, the notion covers knowledge which
is valid without regard to empirical facts and hence pre-given for the transcen-
dental subject. What diagrams make clear is that these two properties are not
in any way synonymous. What is valid regardless of empirical facts is not for
this reason self-evident for us (which the history of mathematics should suffice
to convince us). This implies that a priori knowledge is exactly as fallibilistic
as empirical knowledge and our access to it takes place via experimentation on
schemata (see Chap. 8). This idea even fits very well into Eco’s idea of a negotiation
semantics which may easily be enlarged so as to encompass the evolution of abstract
knowledge.
Having asserted the central place of abstract relations in schematism, we may
propose a distinction between iconism as such (cf. Eco’s ‘disposition to correspond’)
which needs no human or other psychology to be realized, on the one hand, and the
psychological means at human disposal for recognizing iconicity, on the other. The
former, iconicity as such, may be studied without reference to the latter. In doing
so, semiotics will remain faithful to its anti-psychological and phenomenological

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
75
foundations. Equipped with these means, semiotics should be able to take further
the schematic turn which Eco so fruitfully proposes, and to build a semiotics which
is iconic and thereby enlightened rationalist in the best sense of the word.
This repudiation of more and less consequent anti-iconists takes us back to the
Peircean definiton of the icon. Nowadays, everybody seems to know and love the
Peircean tripartition of signs into Icons, Indices, and Symbols, referring to their
objects by means of similarity, contiguity, and habit, respectively. Yet, there is
more to the Peircean notion of Iconicity than meets the eye in this deceptively
simple definition. Let us run through some of the central descriptions of Iconicity
in Peirce. It must here, as mentioned above, be borne in mind that Peirce, being
a realist, rarely proceeds by defining his notions. Icons are to Peirce real existent
phenomena, and they may be described in a series of different ways; no simple
definition will exhaust them. In fact, as it will be clear, this feature of his realism
is closely connected to the very notion of iconicity itself.
Let us present a range of his different descriptions of icons and discuss the crucial
implications involved therein.
S I M I L A R I T Y A N D Q U A L I T Y
First of all, as is well-known, iconicity is dependent upon similarity: icons are
‘signs whose significant virtue is due simply to its Quality’ (‘Minute Logic’, 1902,
2.92).79 This quality amounts to shared characters between sign and object:
An Icon is a sign which refers to the object that it denotes merely by virtue of characters of its own,
and which is possesses, just the same, whether any such Objects actually exists or not. It is true that
unless there really is such an object, the Icon does not act as a sign; but this has nothing to do with its
character as a sign. Anything whatever, be it quality, existent individual, or law, is an Icon of anything,
in so far as it is like that thing and used as a sign of it. (‘Syllabus’, 1903, EPII, 291; 2.247)
Here, similarity is simply equal to shared qualities. As already mentioned, a
complete Icon would stand in a relation of identity to its object except for its
existence which in Peirce’s Kantian tradition is of course no predicate, no quality.
Hence, Peirce does not subscribe to Leibniz’ principle of the Identity of Indiscern-
abilities: two objects may be perfectly alike except for their existence in time and
space which is not counted as a quality but as a haecceity. An icon which shares
only some qualities with its object has so to speak a general side in so far as it
is blank with respect to the aspects not partaking in the Icon; these are bracketed
by prescission in the Icon. Even if the very Icon in itself is not, as mentioned,
general, one could say that any Hypoicon (Peirce’s notion for any sign which
primarily functions by means of iconicity) thus involves a germ of generality. This
becomes the possibility of various more or less strict stylizations of Icons, rendering
certain qualities important, others not so, often exaggerating the qualities taken to
be important, whereby the Icon acquires a certain degree of typicality, being able
to subsume tokens under it. Thus, an Icon may be a type, a Legisign, without any
intervention of Symbols; in fact, this forms the very basis of Peirce’s realism.

76
C H A P T E R 3
P R E D I C A T E S
Because Icons are the means of representing qualities, they generally constitute the
predicative side of more complicated signs:
The only way of directly communicating an idea is by means of an icon; and every indirect method of
communicating an idea must depend for its establishment upon the use of an icon. Hence, every assertion
must contain an icon or set of icons, or else must contain signs whose meaning is only explicable by
icons. The idea which the set of icons (or the equivalent of a set of icons) contained in an assertion
signifies may be termed the predicate of the assertion.
(‘That Categorical and Hypothetical Propositions are one in essence, with some connected matters,’
c. 1895, 2.278)
Thus, the predicate in logic as well as ordinary language is essentially iconic. It
is important to remember here Peirce’s generalization of the predicate from the
traditional subject-copula-predicate structure. Predicates exist with more than one
subject slot; this is the basis for Peirce’s logic of relatives and permits at the
same time enlarging the scope of logic considerably and approaching it to ordinary
language where several-slot-predicates prevail, for instance in all verbs with a
valency larger than one. In his definition of these predicates by means of valency,
that is, number of empty slots in which subjects or more generally indices may
be inserted, Peirce is actually the founder of valency grammar in the tradition of
Tesnière. So, for instance, the structure ‘_ gives _ to _’ where the underlinings refer
to slots, is a trivalent predicate. Thus, the word classes associated with predicates are
not only adjectives, but verbs and common nouns; in short all descriptive features
in language are predicative.
This entails the fact that the similarity charted in icons covers more complicated
cases than does the ordinary use of the word. Thus,
 where ordinary logic considers only a single, special kind of relation, that of similarity, – a relation,
too, of a particularly featureless and insignificant kind, the logic of relatives imagines a relation in
general to be placed. Consequently, in place of the class, which is composed of a number of individual
objects or facts brought together by means of their relation of similarity, the logic of relatives considers
the system, which is composed of objects brought together by any kind of relations whatsoever.
(‘Detached Ideas Continued’, 1898, NEM IV, 339)
This allows for abstract similarity because one phenomenon may be similar to
another in so far as both of them partake in the same relation, or more generally,
in the same system – relations and systems being complicated predicates. In this
respect, a father is similar not only to other fathers, but to sons; the father-son
relation is similar to the mother-daughter relation, etc.
But not only more abstract features may thus act as the qualities invoked in an
icon; these qualities may be of widely varying generality (just like Eco noticed in
the passing):
But instead of a single icon, or sign by resemblance of a familiar image or ‘dream’, evocable at will,
there may be a complexus of such icons, forming a composite image of which the whole is not familiar.
But though the whole is not familiar, yet not only are the parts familiar images, but there will also be a
familiar image in its mode of composition. () The sort of idea which an icon embodies, if it be such
that it can convey any positive information, being applicable to some things but not to others, is called

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
77
a first intention. The idea embodied by an icon, which cannot of itself convey any information, being
applicable to everything or nothing, but which may, nevertheless, be useful in modifying other icons, is
called a second intention. (‘The Regenerated Logic’, 1896, 3.433).
What Peirce distinguishes in these scholastic standard notions borrowed from
Aquinas via Scotus, is, in fact, the difference between Husserlian formal and material
ontology. Formal qualities like genus, species, dependencies, quantities, spatial and
temporal extension, and so on are of course attributable to any phenomenon and
do not as such, in themselves, convey any information in so far as they are always
instantiated in and thus, like other Second Intentions, in the Husserlian manner
dependent upon First Intentions, but they are nevertheless indispensable in the
composition of first intentional descriptions. The fact that a certain phenomenon
is composed of parts, has a form, belongs to a species, has an extension, has
been mentioned in a sentence etc. does not convey the slightest information of
it until it by means of first intentional icons is specified which parts in which
composition, which species, which form, etc. Thus, here Peirce makes a hierarchy
of icons which we could call material and formal, respectively, in which the
latter are dependent on the former. One may note in passing that the distinctions
in Peirce’s semiotics are themselves built upon such Second Intentions; thus it
is no wonder that every sign must possess some Iconic element. Furthermore,
the very anatomy of the proposition becomes just like in Husserlian rational
grammar (of the forth Untersuchung) a question of formal, synthetic a priori
regularities.
I C O N S I N A B D U C T I O N A N D I N R E A S O N I N G I N G E N E R A L
Among Peirce’s forms of inference, similarity plays a certain role within abduction,
his notion for a ‘qualified guess’ in which a particular fact gives rise to the formation
of a hypothesis which would have the fact in question as a consequence. Many such
different hypotheses are of course possible for a given fact, and this inference is
not necessary, but merely possible, suggestive. Precisely for this reason, similarity
plays a seminal role here: an
 originary Argument, or Abduction, is an argument which presents facts in its Premiss which presents
a similarity to the fact stated in the conclusion but which could perfectly be true without the latter being
so. (‘Minute Logic’, 1902, 2.96, our italics)
The hypothesis proposed is abducted by some sort of iconic relation to the fact
to be explained. Thus, similarity is the very source of new ideas – which must
subsequently be controlled deductively and inductively, to be sure (cf. Chap. 16).
But iconicity does not only play this role in the contents of abductive inference,
it plays an even more important role in the very form of logical inference
in general:
Given a conventional or other general sign of an object, to deduce any other truth than that which it
explicitly signifies, it is necessary, in all cases, to replace that sign by an icon. This capacity of revealing
unexpected truth is precisely that wherein the utility of algebraic formulae consists, so that the iconic

78
C H A P T E R 3
character is the prevailing one. (‘That Categorical and Hypothetical Propositions are one in essence,
with some connected matters,’ c. 1895, 2.279)
The very form of inferences depends on it being an icon; thus for Peirce the
syllogistic schema inherent in reasoning has an iconic character: ‘Whenever one
thing suggests another, both are together in the mind for an instant. [] every
proposition like the premiss, that is having an icon like it, would involve [] a
proposition related to it as the conclusion []’ (‘Short Logic,’ c. 1893, EPII, 24;
2.444) Thus, first and foremost deduction is an icon: ‘I suppose it would be the
general opinion of logicians, as it certainly was long mine, that the Syllogism is a
Symbol, because of its Generality.’ (PAP, c. 1906, NEM IV, 317) – but instead it
is an icon, because the icon is the only type of signs that shows (318):
The truth, however, appears to be that all deductive reasoning, even simple syllogism, involves an
element of observation; namely deduction consists in constructing an icon or diagram the relation of
whose parts shall present a complete analogy with those of the parts of the objects of reasoning, of
experimenting upon this image in the imagination, and of observing the result so as to discover unnoticed
and hidden relations among the parts. (‘On the Algebra of Logic’, 1885, W5, 164; 3.363)
In this light, it is no wonder that synthetic a priori truths exist – even if Peirce
prefers notions like ‘observable, universal truths’ – the result of a deduction may
contain more than what is immediately present in the premises, due to the iconic
quality of the inference.
T O L E A R N M O R E
This leads us to what is probably the most decisive feature in icons at all: the fact
that they are the only signs through the contemplation of which it is possible to
learn more: ‘For a great distinguishing property of the icon is that by the direct
observation of it other truths concerning its object can be discovered than those
which suffice to determine its construction.’ (‘That Categorical and Hypothetical
Propositions are one in essence, with some connected matters’, c. 1895, 2.279) But
this epistemologically crucial property is nothing but an elaboration on the concept
of similarity. It is not only the only type of sign involving a direct presentation of
the qualities of its object, it is also a sign through the contemplation of which one
can learn more than lies in the directions for its construction. If one imagines the
limit case of a pure, icon-less index, then it would have a quality-deprived character
of being-now, of mere insistence, about which we would never be able to learn
anything except if it became possible to form some kind of icon of it. And if one
imagines a purely symbolic sign, say for instance the variable x, we cannot learn
anything about it except when it is placed in some iconical, that is, predicative,
context or other. This implies that iconicity also covers what we for formalistic
reasons have been used to seeing as ‘purely symbolic formalisms’, algebras, and
symbolic calculi of various sorts. They are not deprived of iconicity; the very fact
that we can learn more about their object from them is proof of their iconicity.
Thus, the ‘learn more’ clause prevents Peirce’s definition of similarity from being
circular like most usual definitions are; similarity always involves the possibility

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
79
of learning more than what is at present obvious. In this respect, icons play the
central role in Peirce’s evolutionary epistemology and his idea of science as a
transpersonal endeavor of the infinite community of researchers: it is a steady growth
in complicated predicates, in iconicity which characterizes science and guarantees
its asymptotic movement towards ultimate truth, provided the pragmatistic maxims
are followed. The diagrammatical implications of this operational icon definition
are traced in Chap. 4.
I C O N S , A L G E B R A , A N D S Y N T A X
As just mentioned, this vision of iconicity implies that it includes all kinds of
algebraical systems (at least to the extent it is possible to manipulate them in order
to gain further information): ‘As for algebra, the very idea of the art is that it
presents formulae which can be manipulated, and that by observing the effects of
such manipulations we find properties not to be otherwise discerned.’ (‘On the
Algebra of Logic’, 1885, W5, 165; 3.363). Many years before his development of
existential graphs, while he was still working on algebraical logic representations,
Peirce thus realizes that algebra is even ‘icons par excellence [] no application
should be made of such an abstract statement without translating it into a sensible
image’ (ibid.). The sensible image in question here refers to the fact that we are
able to synthesize an abstract statement into an expression, for instance an equation
which we can thereafter manipulate according to certain rules which are adequate
to die Sachen selbst in question. The manipulation of an equation or of an algebraic
statement is, in this respect, perfectly equal to the manipulation of a picture or a text
or any other icon in order to make it reveal some more similarities than immediately
observable. This might sound like an offensive idea – that symbolic calculi should
now count as prototypes for iconicity – but the arguments for it are very strong, and
what is more, it provides a critical tool for distinguishing between fertile – that is,
iconic – and less fertile formalization. A formalization in this optics is namely sterile
to the extent that it does not permit any interesting possibilities of manipulation.
Mere formalization without motivated syntactical, generative possibilities is in this
view a blind alley. Of course, it may not always be told beforehand whether a certain
formalization is fertile, and the relevant experimentation might be very mediate: to
write down a fifth grade equation might seem hopeless in so far as we now know it
has no canonical solution, but the very fact that it is formulated in the same language
as solvable polynomia of lesser grade ultimately permitted the proof that it in fact
has no solution – which is an even more impressive manipulation of it. But the mere
substitution for some objects or object categories by letters or the like makes no
manipulable icon, and this is why so many algebraic attempts in the humanities have
proved sterile: they have merely exchanged some concepts with letters and have
not furnished a motivated (that is, iconic), formal set of rules for their manipulation
(cf. Chap. 4). An iconic syntax is invariably needed, and this is found already
in language: ‘That icons of the algebraic kind, though usually very simple ones,
exist in all ordinary grammatical propositions is one of the philosophical truths

80
C H A P T E R 3
Boolean logic brings to light.’ (‘That Categorical and Hypothetical Propositions are
one in essence, with some connected matters,’ c. 1895, 2.280). We have already
found icons in predicates, but the very syntax of language is in itself an algebra
of partially iconic kind, because it is built in accordance with the crucial second
intention distinctions in the object described: the distinctions between various kinds
of predicates, various kinds of subjects, various kinds of copulas. In this respect,
Peirce’s idea of an iconic grammar may meet Husserl’s reine Grammatik of the
forth Untersuchung; both are formal, general calculi in partial accordance with
aspects of the mereological structure of the object described. Thus, ‘Every assertion
is an assertion that two different signs have the same object.’ (‘Short Logic’, 1895,
EPII, 20; 2.437) – namely an iconic sign pertaining to a certain quality and an
indexical sign pointing out the object in question in some frame of reference.
These two in themselves, taken separately, assert nothing; it is only their being
integrated in iconic syntax which makes an assertion: ‘Icons and indices assert
nothing. If an icon could be interpreted as a sentence, that sentence must be in a
‘potential mood’, that is, it would merely say ‘Suppose a figure has three sides ..’
etc. ‘(ibid. EPII, 16; 2.291). Here Peirce in fact discovers a logical category found
around the same time by the Austrian logician Meinong who coined it Annahme –
assumption – an assertion deprived of its assertive character and hence consisting
of nothing but icons and indices (or, of symbols of them, to be precise) in Peirce’s
terminology, a kind of weaker copula.80 In fact, his deliberation makes it possible
to distinguish two kinds of Annahmen, assumptions, the merely iconic and the
both iconic and indexical. ‘Suppose three sides ..’ would be an example of the
first, while ‘Suppose Socrates has three sides ’ would be the other. A purely
indexical assumption is probably impossible except as a limit case – or is at least
empty: ‘Suppose something is the case right now ’ In the Brentanian tradition,
to which Meinong also belongs, Husserl’s Bildbewusstsein would be an example
of the as if-character of assumption. This idea of an iconic grammar permits Peirce
to develop yet another iconic parallel to this Austrian tradition, namely Stumpf’s
famous coinage of Sachverhalt as a notion for the signification (in other Austrians:
the reference) of a proposition. In Peirce, we find a direct expression of this idea
when he states that ‘What we call a ‘fact’ is something having the structure of
a proposition, but supposed to be an element of the very universe itself’ (‘New
Elements’ 1904, NEM IV, 239). Of course, this definition explicitly deals with what
is supposed to be the case, that is, supposed reference and not signification, but it
is entirely consistent with Peirce’s intensional semantics to operate with ‘possible
facts’, phenomena supposed to be able to be the case, which would then be entirely
coextensive with Sachverhalte. Thus, in general it is the possible iconicity between
the structure of grammar and the structure of facts that permits sentences to be
understood:
The arrangement of words in sentences, for instance, must serve as Icons, in order that the sentence
may be understood. The chief need for the icon is in order to show the Forms of the synthesis of the
elements of thought. For in precision of speech, Icons can represent nothing but Forms and Feelings.
(‘Prolegomena to an Apology for Pragmaticism’, 1906, 4.544)

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
81
As a consequence, Peirce may of course reproach logicians which claim they do not
use icons but merely symbols; they must invariably involve iconicity as the basis
of their syntax of manipulation. The character of whole propositions in contrast to
mere icons is that a proposition, or, in Peirce’s coinage, a ‘Dicisign [] conveys
information, in contradistinction to a sign [such as an icon] from which information
may be derived’ (‘Syllabus’, c. 1902, 2.309). We have already seen that a mere
icon does not assert anything; still it is possible to derive information from it
by experimentation, which so to speak makes it speak, in using it as material
for a proposition. As opposed to this, a proposition already asserts something by
attributing icon qualities to an object or event singled out by an index. Looking back
on what is usually conceived as pure icons, they now differ on a scale between mere
icons and dicisigns. A proposition, Peirce says elsewhere, is a sign making explicit
the object to which it refers. A mere icon does nothing of the kind: a painting of
a man is an icon of many possible men, but as soon as an index of some object
is added, for instance ‘Portrait of Mr. P.’, the painting now becomes a proposition
saying something like ‘Mr. P. looks like this’. Of course the index needs not be
in the title, but may reside in some other information conveyed by the painting
itself.
All in all, the idea that algebraic, formal, and linguistic syntactic systems must
involve iconicity in order to be able to convey information is a remarkable conse-
quence of Peirce’s concept of iconicity.
M A T H E M A T I C S A N D D I A G R A M S
As an implication of this fact, icons get a very special relationship to mathe-
matics:
The reasoning of mathematicians will be found to turn chiefly upon the use of likeness, which are the
very hinges of the gates of their science. The utility of likenesses to mathematicians consists in their
suggesting in a very precise way, new aspects of supposed states of things. (‘The Art of Reasoning,’
1894, EPII, 6; 2.281)
Mathematics is merely hypothetical, all its statements are of the form if-then; given
such-and-such axioms, such-and-such symbols, such-and-such rules of transforma-
tions, this and that will be a consequence. This makes it a science of icons, in
so far as all this inference deals with iconic structures. Icons cannot deceive and
make you believe in something illogical (albeit of course in something unreal),
because they always portray something logically possible (you can not make an
icon of the round square etc., but easily of the bald king of France). Hence, ‘It
will be observed that the icon is very perfect in respect to signification, bringing
its interpreter face to face with the very character signified. For this reason, it
is the mathematical sign par excellence. But in denotation it is wanting. It gives
no assurance that any such object as it represents really exists.’ (‘New Elements’,
NEM IV 242–3). Mathematics is so to speak a mapping of the field of formal
iconic possibilities, and as Peirce conceives of the field of qualities to be – at

82
C H A P T E R 3
least potentially – one vast continuum, mathematics in fact ought to be able to
detect the hypothetical relations of all qualities (including even, in principle, sense
qualities). Mathematics does not assert anything about the world; it is more like a
vast repertoire of possible complicated quality interrelations to be used in descrip-
tions; for this reason every science depends on mathematics as a large stock of
hypothetical relation structures – even if it does not derive its actual truths from
there. It contains only perfect truths which Peirce in a play of words coins as
imperfect – that is, not actual: ‘A proposition is not a statement of perfectly pure
mathematics until it is devoid of all definite meaning, and comes to this – that a
property of a certain icon is pointed out and is declared to belong to anything like
it, of which instances are given. The perfect truth cannot be stated, except in a sense
that it confesses its imperfection. The pure mathematician deals exclusively with
hypothesis.’ (‘Truth and Falsity and Error,’ Baldwin’s Dictionary, 1901, 5.567) The
special kind of instrument used for deriving mathematical and other hypothetical
truths is to Peirce the subset of icons named ‘diagrams’. I shall not go into the
special problems of them here, to which I shall return later, but let me run through
the central features: ‘Remember it is by icons only that we really reason, and
abstract statements are valueless in reasoning except so far they aid us to construct
diagrams.’ (‘The Logic of Quantity’, 1893, 4.126) Diagrams are Peirce’s heirs to
Kant’s schemata; they make possible the inferring of synthetic a priori propositions,
or, in Peirce’s terms, they make it possible to infer iconically about general matters.
A diagram is an icon governed by a symbol such that it stands generally as a type
for a whole set of token instantiations like it - just like the premises of a general
syllogistic inference. This guarantees that the manipulation of the diagram holds
for all these token cases involved. Certain rules for manipulation are implied by
the structure of the icon itself, others are imposed by the symbol regulating it, and
the outcome of this is that it is not possible to predict beforehand what the results
of the transformations of it will be. This in turn becomes Peirce’s explanation of
the surprising fact that mathematics (as well as the special sciences using mathe-
matics) is still able to discover new regularities: all truths are not given in and by
the definition of a branch of mathematics, new truths may yet be discovered by
formal experimentation observations. Thus, this opens all of a sudden the way to
a ‘Geschichte der reinen Vernunft’: it is in fact possible to obtain a unforeseeable
growth in synthetic a priori knowledge – and at the same time it introduces in
a certain sense experiment and observation on the a priori level: the mapping of
this field is due to the experiments of imagination in the ‘reiner Anschauung’,
Kantianly spoken, or in the Husserlian Bildbewusstsein including the kategoriale
Anschauung.
It is hardly surprising in a continuistic theory like Peirce’s to find traces of
diagrammatic features in most icons. Still it must be possible – in a further synthetic
a priori research – to construct a typology of possible diagrams. Peirce himself gives
us the idea of such an endeavor when, in a description of diagrammatic reasoning,
he notes in the passing that

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
83
Modern exact logic shows that every operation of deductive reasoning consists of four steps as follows:
1st, a diagram, or visual image, whether composed of lines, like a geometrical figure, or an array of
signs, like an algebraical formula, or of a mixed picture, like a graph, is constructed, so as to embody
in iconic form, the state of things asserted in the premise (there will be but one premise, after all
that is known and is pertinent is collected into one copulative proposition). (‘On Quantity’, c. 1895,
NEM IV, 275)
The following three steps consist in scrutinizing the diagram and attempting an
experiment; in observing the results of this and trying to find a new relation between
the parts of it ‘not mentioned in the precept by which it was constructed ’ (276);
finally in repeating the experiment and inferring inductively that every diagram
constructed the same way would yield the same result. But the crucial point in
this context is the three subtypes of diagrams mentioned; Michael May and I have
preliminarily proposed to call them maps, algebra, and graphs, respectively. I shall
return to this idea later.
T H E I M A G I N A R Y M O M E N T
Now, at a certain moment in the diagrammatical procedure just mentioned, a
certain phase is reached, in which the icon performs its full impact, a moment of
imagination, one might call it. It lies already in the very description of its character
of pure quality: ‘The role of an icon consists in its exhibiting the features of a
state of things as if it were purely imaginary.’ (‘Logical Tracts, No. 2,’ c. 1903,
4.448); here we find in nuce how Peirce’s icon entails the idea of purely fictitious
Sachverhalte. In an early quote, Peirce describes it in more detail as follows:
Icons are so completely substitutions for their objects as hardly to be distinguished from them. Such are
the diagrams of geometry. A diagram, indeed, so far as it has a general signification, is not a mere icon;
but in the middle part of our reasonings we forget that abstractness in great measure and the diagram is
for us the very thing. So in contemplating a painting, there is a moment when we lose the consciousness
that it is not the thing, the distinction between the real and the copy disappears, and it is for the moment
a pure dream – not any particular existence, and yet not general. At that moment we are contemplating
an icon. (‘On the Algebra of Logic’, 1885; W5, 163; 3.362)
This moment of fiction is crucial to the possibility of thought, of imagination, or
of contemplation of pictures to approach the object intended. In many cases, of
course, this imaginary moment may be unrestricted as the notorious ‘free play of
imagination’; in others it is constrained by various, more or less severe, regulations
pertaining to the object, for practical, æsthetical, scientific, or other purposes. In all
cases, however, this moment of identification where the manipulation of the icon in
a certain sense is a manipulation of the object itself, is crucial to the possibilities of
solving the constraints and success of the experiment. One could counterargue here:
it is precisely to avoid the wildways of intuition in this imaginative moment that we
bind science to formal calculi – cf. Hilbert’s formalist idea of bracketing intiution
entirely while manipulating formal symbols. But here the Peircean will answer:
formal calculation also requires this imaginative moment; it may not disclose for
me a very large and sensuous picture of its object, but it still, thanks to the
syntax employed, can never be completely deprived of an – even if very highly

84
C H A P T E R 3
stylized – iconic link to its object. And, what is more, it permits us to interpret
Husserl’s version of the adequatio rei ac intellectus: the iconic ecstasy only lasts
for a moment, and after the experiment it becomes possible to check if the iconic
result is in fact pertinent for (some partial behavior of) the object it was supposed
to depict. If not, another diagram may be invoked, a modification of the diagram
present, maybe to construct a new subset for the object not entirely grasped  etc.
The movement through this imaginary moment alternates continuously between
on the one hand the icon-and-object-is-one supposition and on the other the split
consideration of diagram and the more or less spontaneously conceived object, the
Widerstreit of Husserlian Bildbewusstsein (see Chap. 14). The imaginary moment
is described in psychologically-sounding terms in Peirce, but given his pragmatist
conception of iconicity, psychology or the presence of consciousness form no
necessary aspect of the imaginary moment. When iconicity is described in terms
of manipulation and experiment possibilities, the condition of possibility for the
imaginary moment lies in the fact that actions are undertaken on the icon which
due to the structural similarity might as well be performed on the object. But the
structural homology of actions does not necessarily require psychology.
The aesthetic possibilities in the hypothetical character of this imaginary moment
are also suggested in Peirce. For even if all of mathematics is hypothetical, not all
hypotheses are (explicitly, anyway) mathematical:
It cannot be said that all framing of hypothesis is mathematics. For that would not distinguish between
the mathematician and the poet. But the mathematician is only interested in hypotheses for the forms
of inference from them. As for the poet, although much of the interest of a romance lies in tracing
out consequences, yet these consequences themselves are more interesting in point of view of the
resulting situations than in the way they are deducible. Thus, the poetical interest of a mental creation
is the creation itself, although as a part of this a mathematical interest may enter to a slight extent.
Detective stories and the like have an unmistakeable mathematical element. (‘On Quantity’, c. 1895,
NEM IV, 268)
Given this difference between mathematics and poetry, one could add that they
share a similarity to the extent that both, in fact, are interested in the result of
hypothetical reasoning, not the very steps leading there; this interest is rather the
matter for the logician and the literary critic (all or some of whom may of course
be incarnated in the same empirical person). As is evident, this rendering of the
imaginary moment in icon contemplation has its counterpoint in the Bildbewusstsein
of Husserl, whose eidetic variation to a large extent plays a role analogous to
diagrammatic experimentation here, and it is no meagre consequence of Peirce’s
concept of iconicity that it permits mathematics, logic, and art to be understood as
different practices all related to this imaginary moment of thought. Furthermore,
as a rendering of Bildbewusstsein or the more diffuse ‘imagination’ or Einbildung,
this is not conceived of as a separate and thereby ununderstandable faculty of mind
(‘fantasy’), but is seen as a specific phase in a well-described diagrammatic and
more generally iconic process of interpretation.
In the last chapter, we shall return to a genre related to the detective story, namely
that of spy novels.

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
85
T H E I S S U E O F E V I D E N C E
Still, a uncomfortable peculiarity remains. Is it not strange that icons so to speak
‘hide’ certain similarities whilst on the other hand they are supposed to be the very
source of evidence? As we saw, the most crucial property in them is their ability to
enclose hidden insights, making it possible for experiment to ‘discover unnoticed
and hidden relations among the parts’ (‘On the Algebra of Logic’, 1885, W5, 164;
3.363). It is possible to give a recipe for constructing an icon without revealing all
of its possible similarities. A most striking example of this is the simple process of
digitalizing a picture. Seeing the line of 1s and 0s of a computerized image does not
display the similarities inherent in the picture, even if the information in question
in some sense is available with the right system of transformations, the right means
of interpretation. Of course, in these wordings, a perceiver of some kind is implied,
a subject (albeit not necessarily a human being) for whom certain similarities may
be hidden. And even if we may not construct the icon digitally, there will in many
cases be more information in it than it is possible to exhaust. In some sense, the
information already lies in the digital sequence, but only if it can be processed, not
only by some instance processing the icon onto a screen, but also by some instance
able to, by some kind of Bildbewusstsein, to see the icon as an icon of some object.
In the most simple of icons, these hidden similarities are almost non-existent. If I
contemplate a patch of a certain shade of the color red, I contemplate an icon, but the
only experiment I may venture here is varying the color to see when it changes or
varying the form and size of the patch to see when it disappears. Not very promising,
but as soon as we reach an icon with the (still not very high) complexity of a circle,
it is ripe with hidden properties (just think of the issue of the exact relation between
its diameter and periphery). In mathematics, an object as simple and apparently
intuitive as the natural numbers are (after Gödel’s incompleteness theorem) ripe with
theorems (Goldbach’s conjecture, solutions to Diophantian equations, etc.) which
are hidden from immediate appreciation, and which may even in many cases be
formally undecidable. In a painting are concealed many enigmas which the painter
himself has never contemplated (and since the sheet of the painting is continuous,
the number of possible similarities is infinite which means that he would never
even be able to contemplate them all in finite time – so much for the biographical
method) – what is, for instance, the precise distance between the main characters,
which geometric figure do the persons describe if we draw lines between them,
what is the sum of the height of all the trees depicted. These examples go to show
that almost all of such ‘hidden informations’ are of course completely useless; the
trick of the analyst is to make his experiment find somehow significant information
among them. Take for instance a tour-de-force analysis by Erik Fischer of an altar
piece by Eckersberg, where he drew the perspective lines of Judas’ empty chair at
the last supper, only to find that this chair was skew – probably as a symbol for the
peculiarity of the missing person (see Chap. 13). Principally conceived, the reason
for these ‘hidden similarities’ in the icon has several sources. One is that the icon
does not have to be very complex, in order to be unable to be ‘perceived in a glance’.
This goes not only for very large paintings from which it is impossible to get at

86
C H A P T E R 3
a sufficient distance to be able to synthesize them in one gaze (a feature deliberately
used by the abstract expressionists as a means of calling forth awe in the viewer),
but also sufficiently complicated predicate structures in a text, in a mathematical
problem, in a building, etc. But even if a very competent observer (or hard work
on the part of a less competent one) makes it possible to ‘see it all in a glance’,
there’s still all the possible relations between the parts to be worked out, relations
between relations between the parts, etc. We need hardly stress that the amount
of relations between elements grows exponentially with the number of elements,
and that the higher order relations grow exponentially with order – amounts which
in turn must be multiplied with the set of possible interpretation systems for these
relations. Almost all of such higher order relations are meaningless, but in aesthetic
cases a few of them often miraculously ‘fit’ together in order to produce a striking,
provocative, pleasing, beautiful or otherwise noteworthy effect. Of course, this is
why analysis is necessary, an analysis which in all these cases consequently cannot
be anything but diagrammatical – including all the features mentioned above. Such
kinds of ‘hiddenness’ are of course due to the ‘finitude of man’, so central to the
critical tradition in epistemology. Yet, one might loosen this fact from mankind’s
special Dasein and its destiny by stating that any physically instantiated analytical
apparatus whatsoever will have to be finite and hence possess some limit or other
for the size and complexity of the iconic structures it may process. Human language
generally cuts any Sachverhalt into phrase pieces involving no more than three
or four actants (three being for Peirce the highest irreducible relation so it is an
advantage for us we are not biologically limited to two)81, but there seems to be
no principal reason for not admitting computers able to work with iconic syntaxes
with far higher valencies. Another more objective reason for iconic ‘hiddenness’
is that the icon in question may appear in various versions, not similarly difficult
to interpret. The obvious example is the sculpture Etant donnés by Duchamp to
be watched through a hole in a door, an artwork which may appear simple until
you discover the hole – but it is well known that the solvability of a problem in
general depends highly on how it is posed. Of course, this is also dependent upon
the means available for the interpreter, but not only so. Here, one might propose a
generalized use of Husserl’s idea of Abschattung; the icon may so to speak display
itself from several sides, and even if the same amount of information principally
may be available from all versions, it might take much more computation to derive
it from one icon than from another, analogous to Charles Bennett’s concept of
logical depth. An addition on page 3 saying ‘It was the butler’ of course requires
less computation than reading all of the following 399 pages, collecting evidence
all along. Another issue is the very structure of the icon, no matter how it is
presented – cf. the supposed distinction between P and NP problems in computer
science, requiring different computation time to be processed. Conceived of at
a great distance, in some way it remains an enigma why it is that icons exist
with this intriguing property of hiding similarities, luckily a prerequisite to art
as well as science; if gods exist, then they probably see everything directly –
not per speculum in aenigmate – and hence know neither icons nor indices nor

H O W T O L E A R N M O R E
87
symbols. In Peirce as in Kant, the plurality of faculties of the human mind is due
to the fact that we do not, maybe unlike the gods, possess immediate ‘intellectual
intuition’.
The special force of the icon, however, is its connection to possibility:
Each Icon partakes of some more or less overt character of its Object. They, one and all, partake of
the most overt character of all lies and deceptions – their Overtness. Yet they have more to do with
the living truth than have either Symbols or Indices. The Icon does not stand unequivocally for this
or that existing thing, as the Index does. Its Object may be a pure fiction, as to its existence. But
there is one assurance that the Icon does afford in the highest degree. Namely, that which is displayed
before the mind’s gaze – must be logically possible. (‘Prolegomena to an Apology of Pragmaticism’,
1906, 4.531)
The icon has the undeniable quality of showing something possible – it cannot,
unlike symbolic speculation, yield neither Husserlian Unsinn nor Widersinn, the
first being only possible through the breakup of iconic syntax, the other only by
constructing a contradictory predicate. We may talk and wonder about the xlypf,
the which are has, the round square, the rational square root of two, or the married
bachelor, etc., but no simple icon can display any of them. But when this principle
applies to the icons at stake in logical reasoning, it has very strong consequences:
Now necessary reasoning makes its conclusion evident. What is this ‘Evidence’? It consists in the fact
that the truth of the conclusion is perceived, in all its generality, and in the generality the how and
why of the truth is perceived. What sort of a Sign can communicate this Evidence? No index, surely,
can it be; since it is by brute force that the Index thrusts its Object into the Field of Interpretation, the
consciousness, as if disdaining gentle ‘evidence.’ No Symbol can do more than apply a ‘rule of thumb’
resting as it does entirely on Habit (including under this term natural disposition); and a Habit is no
evidence. I suppose it would be the general opinion of logicians, as it certainly was long mine, that the
Syllogism is a Symbol, because of its Generality. But there is an inaccurate analysis and confusion of
thought at the bottom of that view; for so understood it would fail to furnish Evidence. It is true that
ordinary Icons, – the only class of Signs that remains for necessary inference, – merely suggest the
possibility of that which they represent, being percepts minus the insistency and percussivity of percepts.
In themselves, they are mere Semes, predicating of nothing, not even so much as interrogatively. It
is, therefore, a very extraordinary feature of Diagrams that they show [] that a consequence does
follow . (‘PAP’, 1906. NEM IV, 318)
Evidence thus comprises the sensuous making overt a quality in the object as well
as the evidence that some proposition follows from certain premises; in both cases
icons are responsible. But this raises again the crucial question of how the same
figure may be responsible for evidence and for hidden similarities. There are two
reasons for this. The first lies in the process of iconic reasoning: evidence is what
takes place when the experimentation reveals new aspects of the icon. Of course,
the other parts of the predicate must – as icons – be evident themselves, but this
evidence is backgrounded while the newly revealed quality is foregrounded and
adds itself to the evidence already present. But this implies an important corollary
to the phenomenological category of evidence: the fact that something is evident
does not imply that it may not conceal further hidden aspects.82 A problem may
be perfectly clear to me without me knowing how to detect the solution. Or, the
motif of a painting may be clear without the single strokes of paint being evident.

88
C H A P T E R 3
To use a Husserlian metaphor which is not perfectly apt: the sight of one side of
the object does not tell us how the back side looks. The metaphor is deceptive, for
in the problem case, the front side does in fact in some scrambled way contain the
information necessary to reconstruct the back side. The other reason is that any icon
fails to portray its object with final precision; this possibility is only asymptotically
open for the community of researchers. This, of course, is Peirce’s answer by means
of continuity to Kant’s Ding-an-sich, it may be reached, but only in an indefinite
future. But this implies that given any present icon, it is always in principle possible
to find an even better icon which will then yield more evidence than the former.
Thus, as a consequence of both these reasons, iconic evidence is always relative.
But still, is it not a dubious idea to make icons the source of evidence? Husserl
would say that evidence is constituted by the act in which the object is given in
‘anschauliche Fülle’ – intuitive richness – be it sensuous objects or logical truths,
and that consequently evidence cannot be the product of any ‘Zeichenbewusstsein’
(Ideen); this would lead to an infinite regress, for in which Bewusstsein should the
Zeichen now be constituted? – and so on. Ergo, he argues, evidence must lie outside
of the Bild- and Zeichenbewusstsein. Is it not the case that the icon as evidence
locks us up in a Piranesian prison of icons of icons of icons of icons  from which
we are never able to escape in order to ascertain true evidence? It seems to me
that Peirce’s theory of evidence provides an answer to this objection: evidence
in the Husserlian anschauliche-Fülle-version actually has two sources: one is the
Peircean index-consciousness of something being given with the force of haecceity,
the evidence that something exists. The other is evidence that something is as it
is, and this part is always dependent on icons with the relativity just mentioned:
iconic evidence is dependent upon the continuous shift between icon-consciousness
(to construct a Peirco-Husserlian bastard) and meltdown between the two sides of
the iconic sign during the moment of imagination.83 It is this very process which
makes it possible to reflect upon the object and ascribe it still more qualities; it is
this process that makes possible that the object is given (seen from one side,84 it is
true) in evidence once and for all. This is a strong fallibilist consequence of Peirce’s
theory of the icon: evidence is always potentially problematic – which is not a
skeptical claim, for the contrary is true as well: problems are always potentially
evident.
The strength of the Peircean concept of iconicity is thus that it permits the
rational comparison of objects normally very far from each other: mathematics,
logic, diagrams on the one hand, epistemology, phenomenology and psychology of
perception on the other, and language, semiotics, and aesthetics on the third.

C H A P T E R 4
MOVING PICTURES OF THOUGHT
Diagrams as Centerpiece of a Peircean Epistemology
Recent developments in semiotics, semantics, and linguistics tend to give concepts
like ‘schema,’ ‘frame’, ‘gestalt,’ and the like a renaissance in the description of
signification processes. The actual cognitive semantics tradition (Lakoff, Johnson,
Talmy, Turner, Fauconnier, etc.), for instance, highlights the central role of schemata
and their mappings between conceptual spaces in the description of many levels in
linguistics. Another related development is the renewed interest in diagrammatic
calculi in the computer science and AI communities, documented in e.g. the influ-
ential Diagrammatic Reasoning volume (Glasgow et al. 1995) – where the diagram
category, however, is most often taken for its common sense value as an opposition
to the symbol category; little effort is spent on determining the general status of the
diagram as such.
This return of schematic iconicity in semiotics is probably the main event in
semiotic scholarship during the recent decades, but it has not, until now, received
a proper meta-theoretical treatment making clear the very concept of schema itself.
This is a strange fact; in Peirce we find drafts for precisely such a theory in his
general observations on the concept of diagram. While Peirce’s systems for logic
diagrams (his alpha-, beta-, and gamma-graphs implementing propositional logic,
first-order-predicate logic, and various types of modal logic and speech act logic,
respectively85) have received considerable attention in recent years because of their
indication that iconic representations of logic are possible and even to some extent
heuristically superior to symbolic logic systems, Peirce’s general notion of diagram
has passed much more unnoticed. This might be for editorial reasons – Peirce’s
central arguments concerning the general diagram category are not to be found
in the Collected Papers – but still the diagram concept plays a central, not to
say the central, role in the mature Peirce’s semiotics. In particular ‘PAP’, a paper
from 1906 (Robin 293, published in NEM IV), makes clear the crucial part played
by the diagram and diagrammatic reasoning in Peirce. The present schema and
diagram research would no doubt benefit from the knowledge of Peirce’s general
diagrammatic philosophy.
The aim in this chapter is twofold: firstly, to present and discuss Peirce’s general
diagram concept and its central role in his semiotics and in his philosophy as a
whole, and, secondly, to argue for the significance, beyond Peirce philology, of this
diagram concept for semiotics and epistemology of our day.
89

90
C H A P T E R 4
T H E D I A G R A M A S I C O N
The diagram is an icon. In the taxonomy of signs, thus, the diagram forms the
second subcategory among the three types of hypoicons86 – images, diagrams,
and metaphors, respectively (‘Syllabus’ 1903, EPII 274; 2.277) – even if Peirce
elsewhere notes that sharp distinctions among icons are not possible due to the
inherent vagueness of the concept. Being an icon, the diagram is characterized by
its similarity to its object – but while the image represents its object through simple
qualities and the metaphor represents it through a similarity found in something
else, the diagram represents it through a skeleton-like sketch of relations (mostly
dyadic, apparently in an attempt at justifying the three icon subtypes triadically).
Knowing the inclusive nature of Peirce’s triads in general, it follows that non-
degenerate diagrams will include images, while non-degenerate metaphors will
contain diagrams (and images).87 Still, this tripartition of icons is easy to overlook
as yet another detail in the tree of ever trifurcating triads in Peirce’s architectonic;
it does not reveal the crucial role played by diagrams in Peirce’s epistemology. To
grasp this, a further investigation of the very definition of the icon is necessary.
T H E N O N - T R I V I A L I C O N D E F I N I T I O N
The icon, of course, is defined as the sign referring to its object by virtue of
similarity. Now, Peirce himself admitted the deliberate vagueness of this definition:
an icon may refer to any object possessing the qualities in question – and as
discussed in the previous chapter, a strong tradition in twentieth century philosophy
has attacked such definitions for being so vague as to be completely meaningless.
The dangers in the similarity concept are many: the trivializing of it to identity; the
psychologizing of it to refer to subjective feelings or judgments of resemblance;
the lack of criteria for judging two phenomena similar. These traditional drawbacks
of similarity are overcome by Peirce’s non-trivial because operational account of
similarity. In 1895, it is stated as follows: ‘For a great distinguishing property of
the icon is that by the direct observation of it other truths concerning its object
can be discovered than those which suffice to determine its construction’ (‘That
Categorical and Hypothetical Propositions are one in essence, with some connected
matters,’ 2.279). This epistemologically crucial property of the icon is nothing but
an operational elaboration on the concept of similarity. The icon is not only the
only kind of sign involving a direct presentation of qualities pertaining to its object;
it is also – and this amounts to the same – the only sign by the contemplation
of which more can be learnt than lies in the directions for its construction. This
definition separates the icon from any psychologism: it does not matter whether
sign and object for a first (or second) glance seems or are experienced as similar;
the decisive test for its iconicity rests in whether it is possible to manipulate the
sign so that new information as to its object appears. This definition is non-trivial
because it avoids the circularity threat in most definitions of similarity. At the same
time, it connects the concept of icon intimately to the that of deduction. This is
because in order to discover these initially unknown pieces of information about

M O V I N G P I C T U R E S O F T H O U G H T
91
the object hidden in the icon, some deductive experiment on the icon must be
performed. The prototypical icon deduction is the manipulation of a geometrical
figure in order to observe a theorem – but the idea is quite general: an icon is
characterized by containing implicit information which in order to appear must
be made explicit by some more or less complicated procedure accompanied by
observation. As early as 1885, Peirce writes (‘On The Algebra of Logic’), discussing
the syllogism, but with evident implications for the icon category as a whole,
that ‘ all deductive reasoning, even simple syllogism, involves an element of
observation; namely, deduction consists in constructing an icon or diagram the
relations of whose parts shall present a complete analogy with those of the parts of
the object of reasoning, of experimenting upon this image in the imagination, and
of observing the result so as to discover unnoticed and hidden relations among the
parts’ (W5, 164; 3.363).88 This property clearly distinguishes it from pure indices
and symbols: If we imagine a pure, icon-less index (only possible as a limit case),
then it would have a character completely deprived of any quality, a pure here-now
of mere insistence, about which we would never be able to learn anything further,
except exactly by some kind of icon of it. And if we imagine a purely symbolic
sign (also a limit case), say e.g. the variable x, we could not learn anything about
it except when placing it in some relation, syntax, system, context or other, that
is, in some kind of iconical relationship. From this operational icon definition,
connection lines run to a bundle of Peircean themes: the abductive guess as the
suggestion of an icon as a general answer covering the particular question present;
icons as providing the predicative, descriptive side of any signification process; the
pragmatic maxim’s conditional definition of concepts described by an icon showing
which operations we could conceivably perform on an object subsumed under the
concept; the scientific community’s unlimited semiosis converging towards truth,
that is, an ever more elaborate icon possessing still more operational possibilities.
We shall touch upon some of these issues later during the discussion of the type of
icon making all this possible: the diagram.
T H E O P E R A T I O N A L C R I T E R I O N A N D T H E E X T E N S I O N O F T H E I C O N
C A T E G O R Y
It is a well-known fact that Peirce’s icon definition sets it apart from sponta-
neous tendencies to privilege visual icons. It is a more controversial fact that
the operational icon definition extends the icon category considerably, measured
against the spontaneous everyday conception of resemblance. Peirce’s logic graph
systems as iconic calculi already indicates this change: they demonstrate that
systems normally considered symbolic possess an ineradicable iconicity.89 Using
Peirce’s sign concepts, namely, it is no longer possible to speak about iconicity
and symbolicity as two concurrent modes of representation of the same content:
if the same logical calculus may be represented in two ways, this indicates that
the ‘symbolic’ representation did, in fact, already possess an iconic content: the
possibility of experimentation on the calculus resulting in new insight grants – due

92
C H A P T E R 4
to the operational icon criterion – that it is in fact an iconic calculus.90 Thus, when
the operational criterion is adopted, icons become everything that can be manip-
ulated in order to reveal more information about its object, and algebra, syntax,
formalizations of all kinds must be recognized as icons; in the ‘That Categorical
and Hypothetical Propositions ’, Peirce adds that these types of signs are even
icons par excellence due to their capacity for revealing unexpected truths: ‘Given
a conventional or other general sign of an object, to deduce any other truth than
that which it explicitly signifies, it is necessary, in all cases, to replace that sign by
an icon. This capacity of revealing unexpected truth is precisely that wherein the
utility of algebraical formulae consists, so that the iconic character is the prevailing
one’ (1895, 2.279). This, in turn, implies that we, in the operational icon definition,
find a useful criterion to distinguish fertile from less fertile formalization: the good
formalization is one which permits manipulation in order to reveal new truths about
its object; formalizations which only permit this to a small extent or not at all may
be discarded.91
T H E D I A G R A M ’ S S T A T U S I N I C O N I C I T Y
Given the operational icon criterion, we are now able to appreciate the central role
played by diagrams in the icon category as such. As soon as an icon is contemplated
as a whole consisting of interrelated parts whose relations are subject to experimental
change, we are operating on a diagram. Thus, the inclusion of algebra, syntax, and
the like in the icon category takes place thanks to their diagrammatic properties – but
the same goes for your average landscape painting as soon as you stop considering
its simple qualities, colors, forms etc. and move on to consider the relations between
any of these parts and aspects. As soon as you judge, for instance, fore-, middle-,
and background and estimate the distance between objects depicted in the pictorial
scene, or as soon as you imagine yourself wandering along the path into the
landscape, you are operating on the icon – but doing so in this way is possible only
by treating it as a diagram. You may have no explicit awareness,92 it is true, of
the rules which permit you to follow the imaginary track (the laws of perspective
permitting you to construct the scene, gravity keeping you on the ground etc.), but
still they are presupposed due to the organization of your perception apparatus93
and your tacit common sense knowledge. The principles could be made explicit,
and this is what counts. Thus, it is hard to take a closer look at any icon without
at least performing proto-diagrammatic experiments with it to reveal some of the
implicit truths inherent therein. Thus, the use of a sign as a pure image is more like
a limit case as when you enjoy the overall impression or Stimmung of a painting
without going into any details – or when you use the icon as a trigger for an
established code, such as the stylized woman figure on the door of a women’s
rest room. On the other hand, the appreciation of a metaphor may seem automatic,
but recent metaphor research supports what lies implicit in Peirce’s thought: that a
diagrammatic analysis – be it conscious or not – precedes any metaphor consisting
in the recognition of diagrammatic schemas in one phenomenon which may be used

M O V I N G P I C T U R E S O F T H O U G H T
93
in understanding another. The metaphor of an ‘ancestral tree’ thus presupposes that
the formal branching diagram is mapped from a tree onto family structure. Far from
all metaphorical mappings are so easy, of course, but it seems reasonable to assume
that the mapping of diagrammatic structure between conceptual spaces plays a
central role in metaphor in general.94 Thus, the diagrammatic way of interpreting an
icon seems central as soon as any part of the internal mereological structure of the
icon is taken into consideration. The diagram’s skeleton-like, relational, and highly
stylized picture of its object is at stake also when clothed in simple image qualities
and hidden in the metaphors’ import reference to other empirical phenomena.
Now, let us look closer at how Peirce dissects the single elements and phases
in the diagrammatic interpretation process. As already mentioned, one essay stands
out when it comes to detailed analysis of this process, namely one of the drafts for
‘Prolegomena to an Apology for Pragmaticism’ from 1906. The paper in question
is Robin catalogue number 293 and is also known as ‘PAP’ from Peirce’s own
abbreviation. The next passage will present the central quote from that paper,
describing the diagrammatic interpretation process in extenso.
To begin with, then, a Diagram is an Icon of a set of rationally related objects. By rationally related,
I mean that there is between them, not merely one of those relations which we know by experience,
but know not how to comprehend, but one of those relations which anybody who reasons at all must
have an inward acquaintance with. This is not a sufficient definition, but just now I will go no further,
except that I will say that the Diagram not only represents the related correlates, but also, and much
more definitely represents the relations between them, as so many objects of the Icon. Now necessary
reasoning makes its conclusion evident. What is this ‘Evidence’? It consists in the fact that the truth of
the conclusion is perceived, in all its generality, and in the generality of the how and the why of the truth
is perceived. What sort of a Sign can communicate this Evidence? No index, surely, can it be; since it
is by brute force that the Index thrusts its Object into the Field of Interpretation, the consciousness, as
if disdaining gentle ‘evidence’. No Symbol can do more than apply a ‘rule of thumb’ resting as it does
entirely on Habit (including under this term natural disposition); and a Habit is no evidence. I suppose it
would be the general opinion of logicians, as it certainly was long mine, that the Syllogism is a Symbol,
because of its Generality. But there is an inaccurate analysis and confusion of thought at the bottom of
that view; for so understood it would fail to furnish Evidence. It is true that ordinary Icons, – the only
class of Signs that remains for necessary inference, – merely suggest the possibility of that which they
represent, being percepts minus the insistency and percussivity of percepts. In themselves, they are mere
Semes, predicating of nothing, not even so much as interrogatively. It is, therefore, a very extraordinary
feature of Diagrams that they show, – as literally show as a Percept shows the Perceptual Judgment to be
true, – that a consequence does follow, and more marvelous yet, that it would follow under all varieties
of circumstances accompanying the premisses. It is not, however, the statical Diagram-icon that directly
shows this; but the Diagram-icon having been constructed with an Intention, involving a Symbol of which
it is the Interpretant (as Euclid, for example, first announces in general terms the proposition he intends
to prove, and then proceeds to draw a diagram, usually a figure, to exhibit the antecedent condition
thereof) which Intention, like every other, is General as to its Object, in the light of this Intention
determines an Initial Symbolic Interpretant. Meantime, the Diagram remains in the field of perception
and imagination; and so the Iconic Diagram and its Initial Symbolic Interpretant taken together constitute
what we shall not too much wrench Kant’s term in calling a Schema, which is on the one side an object
capable of being observed while on the other side it is General. (Of course, I always use ‘general’ in the
usual sense of general as to its object. If I wish to say that a sign is general as to its matter, I call it a
Type, or Typical.) Now, let us see how the Diagram entrains its consequence. The Diagram sufficiently
partakes of the percussivity of a Percept to determine, as its Dynamic, or Middle, Interpretant, a state
[of] activity in the Interpreter, mingled with curiosity. As usual, this mixture leads to Experimentation.

94
C H A P T E R 4
It is the normal Logical effect; that is to say, it not only happens in the cortex of the human brain,
but must plainly happen in every Quasi-Mind in which Signs of all kinds have a vitality of their own.
Now, sometimes in one way, sometimes in another, we need not pause to enumerate the ways, certain
modes of transformation of Diagrams of the system of diagrammatizaton used have become recognized
as permissible. Very likely the recognition descends from some former Induction, remarkably strong
owing to the cheapness of mere mental experimentation. some circumstance connected with the purpose
which first prompted the construction of the diagram contributes to the determination of the permissible
transformation that actually gets performed. The Schema sees, as we may say, that the transformate
Diagram is substantially contained in the transformand Diagram, and in the significant features to it,
regardless of the accidents, – as, for example, the Existential Graph that remains after a deletion from
the Phemic Sheet is contained in the Graph originally there, and would do so whatever colored ink
were employed. The transformate Diagram is the Eventual, or Rational, Interpretant of the transformand
Diagram, at the same time being a new Diagram of which the Initial Interpretant, or signification, is the
Symbolic statement, or statement in general terms, of the Conclusion. By this labyrinthine path, and no
other, is it possible to attain to Evidence; and Evidence belongs to every Necessary Conclusion.
(NEM IV, 316–19)
The remainder of this chapter tracks the implications of this passage, partly in terms
of its relation to Peirce’s thought, partly in terms of the actuality of its contents.
T H E D I A G R A M A S A N I C O N O F R A T I O N A L L Y R E L A T E D O B J E C T S
The diagram is a skeleton-like sketch of its object in terms of relations between its
parts, but what makes it apt to reason with, to experiment on, respectively, is the fact
that it is constructed from rational relations. In this requirement, Peirce explicitly
continues a Kantian requirement of the foundations of science: the schematism. In
Kant, the finitude of man entails that we have no access to ‘intellectual intuition’;
we can not – as may the gods – intuit the object in itself; we may only approach the
object in a pincer movement with two flanks: concepts and intuitions, respectively.
Concepts without intuitions are empty; intuitions without concepts are blind, as the
well-known Kantian doctrine goes. The two may meet only in schemata, a priori
as well as a posteriori, and the former constitute the condition of possibility for the
famous synthetic a priori judgments.95 Kant’s central examples are mathematical:
arithmetic is the schema rendering the concept of quantity intuitive, while the
schema of the triangle is what permits an unlimited series of empirical triangles to
be subsumed under the triangle concept. Peirce’s demand that the relations in the
diagram be rational is inherited from Kant’s synthetic a priori judgment notion, just
like his idea that rationality is tied to a generalized subject notion: rational relations
are those known by ‘anybody who reasons’. As is evident, Kant’s ‘transcendental
subject’ is pragmatized in this notion in Peirce, transcending any delimitation of
reason to the human mind: the ‘anybody’ is operational and refers to anything
which is able to undertake reasoning’s formal procedures. In the same way, Kant’s
synthetic a priori notion is pragmatized in Peirce’s account:
Kant declares that the question of his great work is ‘How are synthetical judgments a priori possible?’
By a priori he means universal; by synthetical, experiential (i.e., relating to experience, not necessarily
derived wholly from experience). The true question for him should have been, ‘How are universal
propositions relating to experience to be justified?’ But let me not be understood to speak with anything

M O V I N G P I C T U R E S O F T H O U G H T
95
less than profound and almost unparalleled admiration for that wonderful achievement, that indispensible
stepping-stone of philosophy. (‘The Logic of Quantity’, Chap. 17 of ‘Grand Logic’, 1893, 4.92)
Synthetic a priori is interpreted as experiential and universal, or, to put it another
way, observational and general – thus Peirce’s rationalism in demanding rational
relations of the diagram is connected to his scholastic realism posing the existence
of real universals. The relations which make up the diagram are observational and
universal at one and the same time, and they constitute the condition of possibility
for the diagram to exist as an icon (observationality) with respect to which it is
possible to entertain generally valid experiments (universality). The extension of
this concept of rational relations is only described negatively in Peirce’s account;
in a parallel version to the ‘PAP’ quotation above, he says:
But we do not make a diagram simply to represent the relation of killer to killed, though it would not
be impossible to represent this relation in a Graph-Instance; and the reason why we do not is that there
is little or nothing in that relation that is rationally comprehensible. It is known as a fact, and that is all.
I believe I may venture to affirm that an intelligible relation, that is, a relation of thought, is created only
by the act of representing it. I do not mean to say that if we should some day find out the metaphysical
nature of the relation of killing, that intelligible relation would thereby be created. [] No, for the
intelligible relation has been signified, though not read by man, since the first killing was done, if not
long before. (NEM IV, 316n)
Peirce’s pragmatizing Kant enables him to escape the threatening subjectivism:
rational relations are inherent in the universe and are not our inventions, but we
must know (some of) them in order to think.96 The relation of killer to killed, is
not, however, given our present knowledge, one of those rational relations, even
if we might later become able to produce a rational diagram of aspects of it. Yet,
such a relation is, as Peirce says, a mere fact. On the other hand, rational relations
are – even if inherent in the universe – not only facts. Their extension is rather that
of mathematics as such, which can be seen from the fact that the rational relations
are what make necessary reasoning in diagrams possible – at the same time as
Peirce subscribes to his father’s mathematics definition: Mathematics is the science
that draws necessary conclusions – with Peirce’s addendum that these conclusions
are always hypothetical. This conforms to Kant’s idea that the result of synthetic
a priori judgments comprised mathematics as well as the sciences built on applied
mathematics.97 Thus, in constructing diagrams, we have all the possible relations
in mathematics (which is inexhaustible, following Gödel’s 1931 incompleteness
theorem (Gödel 1986)) at our disposal. Moreover, the idea that we might later
learn about the rational relations involved in killing entails a historical, fallibilist
rendering of the a priori notion. Unlike the case in Kant, the a priori is thus removed
from a privileged connection to the knowing subject and its transcendental faculties.
Thus, Peirce rather anticipates a fallibilist notion of the a priori (cf. Chap. 8). In the
alternative PAP version, Peirce continues: ‘At any rate, a Diagram is clearly in every
case a sign of an ordered Collection or Plural, – or, more accurately, of the ordered
Plurality or Multitude, or of an Order in Plurality’ (ibid.). We can say that the
diagram is so to speak the redrawing of an icon in terms of a priori relations between

96
C H A P T E R 4
its parts. In contrast to the wider term icon, defined by its relation to the object, the
subcategory diagram is thus defined through its mode of rationally representing:
The Diagram represents a definite form of Relation. This Relation is usually one which actually exists,
as in a map, or is intended to exist, as in a Plan. But this is so far from being essential to the Diagram
as such, that if details are added to represent existential or experiential peculiarities, such additions
are distinctly of an undiagrammatic nature. The pure Diagram is designed to represent and to render
intelligible, the Form of Relation merely.’ (ibid.)98
Thus, it is possible in a diagram to dissociate the pure diagram, built from rational
relations, on the one hand, and its application: what the diagram may, in turn, be
used to signify (via symbols) or refer to (via indices) on the other. Thus, the pure
relational diagram forms a type.99
T H E D I A G R A M A S T Y P E
Taken separately from its signification and reference, a diagram is itself a type.
Consisting of rational relations, it is no wonder that the diagram as such is an
ideal entity which is, in turn, communicated through particular diagram tokens.
The diagram in itself is not the graphic figures on the sheet before us or before
our inner gaze, as we might spontaneously believe. The diagram-icon should not
be perceived as a particular figure: already before ascribing to the diagram any
content or reference whatsoever, there is a crucial process of abstraction (in Peirce’s
terminology, prescission, see Chap. 11) taking place, allowing the particular sinsign
to be interpreted as instantiation of a type by bracketing all accidental features of
the token at the profit of the type: ‘One contemplates the Diagram, and one at once
prescinds from the accidental characters that have no significance’ (NEM IV, 317).
When seeing a geometrical figure drawn on a blackboard, we immediately prescind
from the stripe of chalk having any breadth, from the line’s vacillating deviation
from linearity, from the particular color of the drawing, and so on. This type-reading
of a diagram token now depends on the set of rules, explicit or implicit, that is
selected to govern its typicality. Thus, one and the same diagram token may be
read as a type in widely differing ways according to the rules of interpretation used.
A line may be interpreted in one diagram as a borderline, in another as a line of
connection between two points, in yet another as a transport of some object between
two locations. This may be banal, but nevertheless it is an important feature in the
diagram’s iconicity: the type only becomes apparent in light of the use of certain
rules – long before the virtual application of the diagram on more specific meanings,
not to talk about empirical reference. This implies that already the pure diagram
is an icon governed by a rule, that is, by a symbol. For instance, the sinsign 
may be read as a token of the type circle, as a token of the type circular disc
(including its interior), of the type circular hole (excluding its interior), of the type
conic section (any other conic section, a point, an ellipse, a parabola, etc. would do
as well as token), of the type Jordan-curve (a closed curve; here any other closed
curve, e.g. a rectangle, would fulfill the purpose), of the type hole in a 2-D surface
(a hole of any other shape would do as well), of the type topological sphere in

M O V I N G P I C T U R E S O F T H O U G H T
97
two dimensions, of the type closed and connected manifold, etc., – each of these
choices, in turn, yield different possibilities of which content the diagram type may
be used to signify. In the language of Hjelmslevian semiotics, we could say that
the diagram token is a unit of the expression substance referring to different types
at the form-of-expression-level – all prerequisite to any reference to types in the
content plane. Thus, the diagram type consists of two parts: a diagram token and
a set of reading rules for the understanding of it as a type (which may, in many
cases, be implicit); thus on the level of pure diagram types, the Kantian intuition-
concept (talking Peircean: observation-universality) duality, is present in the very
construction of the diagram as sign.
T H E D I A G R A M A S T H E I N T E R P R E T A N T O F A S Y M B O L
In the next step, this diagram type only becomes a diagram in actu (recalling Peirce’s
basic dictum that signs are only signs in actu) when it becomes part of the inference
process. To this end, the diagram type needs to be endowed with a symbolic
signification – it must involve a ‘Symbol of which it is an Interpretant’. Of course, it
was only possible to construct the diagram type in the first place by precisely such a
symbol (the reading rules just referred to), but these were all on the purely rational,
pre-empirical level. The diagram being constructed as a type due to this symbol (the
circle above e.g. taken to mean totality in a Neurathian cake-diagram) may now, in
turn, act as the interpretant of another symbol (the population of Denmark, e.g.).
The symbol in question refers to a general object while the diagram in question –
being an iconic legisign, a type, – is in itself one. The condition of possibility for
this connection is thus the generality of both terms; the diagram being a type and
the symbol referring to it being general as to its object. This connection forms the
defining semiotic link of the diagram. As the symbol refers to a general object while
the iconic legisign, the diagram type, is in itself one, the possibility of the diagram
lies in letting the latter constitute the signification of the former and hence refer to
the same object. Of course, this is no merely arbitrary connection; what Peirce does
not explicitly emphasize in this context (but elsewhere) is the fact that any symbol
which is not a completely empty convention must always already refer to some
icon (or, at least, it must make possible a process of inference leading to an icon),
this icon being its initial interpretant before the symbol might be further elaborated
in a diagram. The construction of the diagram, then, amounts to substituting for the
initial interpretant of the symbol – the Vorverständnis of it, so to speak – a more
precise and relationally elaborate icon.
This is a crucial point in order to understand the diagram’s double determination –
iconic and symbolic, perceptive and general – in Peirce. The diagram is an icon, but
a special icon insofar as it is governed by a symbol, and in many cases doubly so,
governed both by the type of rational relations used and the empirical phenomenon
referred to (like the circle and the Danish population). But what does it imply to be
governed by a symbol, to be the signification of a symbol? A symbol is defined by
denoting a kind of thing, that is, an idea, not a particular thing (‘Art of Reasoning’,

98
C H A P T E R 4
1894, EPII, 9; 2.300); it does so by connecting a set of (possible) indices to an
icon (‘The Short Logic’, 1895, EPII, 17; 2.295); it is a law, or regularity of the
indefinite future (‘Syllabus’, 1903, EPII, 274; 2.293), and this implies that it is a
rule which will determine its interpretant (ibid. 2.292). It is, simply, a sign which
would lose its sign character if it had no interpretant (this in contradistinction to pure
icons and indices, respectively). It is a sign referring to all possible entities acting
according to some rule which is described by means of an icon: ‘It is applicable
to whatever may be found to realize the idea connected with the word ’ (‘The
Art of Reasoning’, 1894, EPII, 9; 2.298), and the habit or rule defining it links
together icons: ‘A Symbol is a sign which refers to the Object that it denotes by
virtue of a law, usually an association of general ideas, which operates to cause
the Symbol to be interpreted as referring to that Object’ (‘Syllabus’, 1903, EPII,
292; 2.249). But the symbol does not determine the particulars which fall under
it – except from precisely their falling under it. This is why it is necessarily general,
and thus vague as to its extension. But it may also be vague as to its intension
because being defined by a rule connecting icons: these need not be clearly defined,
as is most often not the case in non-scientific concepts. Thus, the concept ‘dog’
is vague because it is not possible to determine beforehand all single creatures it
may apply to now and in the indefinite future, but it is also vague for the reason
that there is no sharp borderline between it and the concept of wolf. But still, it is
defined by a rule-bound association of icons, constituting a general kind. Now, as
is evident from these deliberations, any symbol in itself always already constitutes
a proto-diagram, insofar as its predicative aspect is iconic. Peirce emphasizes this
in 1904 in ‘New Elements’: ‘A diagram is an icon or schematic image embodying
the meaning of a general predicate; and from the observation of this icon we are
supposed to construct a new general predicate’ (NEM IV, 238). The rule in it needs
not be explicit, as it is appropriately hinted at in the identification of rule with
habit in Peirce. The diagram, then, can be seen as the making explicit (some of)
the habits already inherent in a symbol.
Of course, it is important to keep in mind that the mode of existence of the
symbol’s object is here bracketed; it may refer to existent, future, past, imaginary,
fantasy, or any other objects. The symbol ‘unicorn’ is no less a symbol because
its object does not exist. It is perfectly possible to let a diagram make explicit the
content of a symbol whose referent is fictitious merely. On the other hand, it is an
important diagram property that it is beyond the reach of any diagrammatization
to picture inconsistent symbols; this constitutes the very strength of diagrammatic
formalization: every (correct, that is) diagram corresponds to a possibility.100 For
instance the grammatically correct symbol ‘round square’ which implies a rule
connecting the two iconic qualities ‘round’ and ‘square’ reveals itself as inconsistent
precisely when we try to construct a diagram to express these properties in one
and the same figure.101 The same goes for more complicated and less intuitive
cases, for instance ‘the rational square root of 2’; here a more complicated diagram
manipulation is needed in order to grasp that symbol’s inconsistency. Briefly, being
an icon, the diagram cannot be inconsistent. It may display non-existent entities, but

M O V I N G P I C T U R E S O F T H O U G H T
99
not logically inconsistent entities. Its object is necessarily possible102 – in contrast
to the object of a merely symbolic expression. This constitutes a motivation for
diagrammatic reasoning: it can make explicit (parts of) the signification of a symbol
and pragmatically weed out symbol inconsistencies.
Similarly, no distinction between more or less empirical symbols rules out expli-
cation by means of diagrams: both may give rise to diagrammatic explication. There
are, of course, prototypical cases of pure and empirical diagrams, respectively, cf.
for instance a diagram representing various parts of a population in a cake-diagram
vs. a drawing of a circle as a diagram for the concept circle.103 A pure diagram
will be purely mathematical (for instance a map with no reference to its empirical
interpretation but only referring to a 2-D surface with certain structures on it),
while an empirical diagram will be the interpretant of some empirical symbol in
the actual or some possible world (for instance, a topographical map of a country,
fictive or not). This must not be confused104 with the question of reference which is
the issue whether the diagram is used in a proposition (a Peircean ‘dicisign’), that
is, applied to objects referred to by indices (for instance, a map of England). Thus,
the empirical case covers two subcases: one where the diagram depicts relations of
a material ontology with no factual content, the other when empirical facts are also
represented in the diagram by means of indices.
Thus, the diagram may make explicit the consistent content of (parts of) both more
and less general symbols – and these may in turn be used as predicates in proposi-
tions about indexically identifiable subjects (which also may be general, to be sure).
T H E D I A G R A M A S A F O R M A L M A C H I N E
F O R G E D A N K E N E X P E R I M E N T E
Now, we reach the core point of Peircean diagrammatology: the diagram as vehicle
for mental experiment and manipulation. The operational definition of the icon is
intimately tied up with diagrammatic experimentation. Let us take a closer look
at these connections. The central phase of the diagrammatic reasoning process,
motivating the very construction of the diagram, is deduction: the demonstration
of the fact that a certain version of the diagram necessarily follows from another.
Thus, every deduction is diagrammatic of nature and the logic of diagrams is an
extension of the traditional concept of deduction (tied to truth-preserving operations
in symbolic logic) to cover a large range of phenomena not usually considered as
deduction (that is, unless translated into the symbolic form of a formal language) –
but describable as such in so far as they qualify as necessary movements of diagram-
matic thought. A constructive geometrical proof is probably the arch example of a
diagrammatic experiment – we have already in the Introduction discussed a simple
and often quoted example – the diagrammatic version of Pythagoras.105 The proofs
given in classical Euclidean geometry may serve as core examples as they indeed
were for Peirce who took them to be prototypical cases of diagrammatical reasoning.
Let us consider a couple of other examples. Diagrams play a huge role in both
the research and the teachings of mathematics.106 It is interesting that many proofs

100
C H A P T E R 4
can be given in almost pure diagram form (with little or no accompanying text),
such as the following proof of the angle sum of a star’s vertices being 180 degrees
(after Nelsen 1993):
Figure 10.
Here, the angles are indicated by numbers. By seeing that angles facing the
opposite way when a line crosses two parallel lines are equal, the sum of the angles
in the small triangle to the right (which we know to be 180 degrees) can be seen to
be equal to the sum of the star point angles. This, of course, involves the imaginary
and experimental transformation and adding of angles – here strongly guided by
the labeling of angles.
Another example can be taken from Peirce’s own Alpha graphs – the proof of
modus ponens in that system. The left side of the graph is a ‘scroll’ representing
Figure 11.

M O V I N G P I C T U R E S O F T H O U G H T
101
the implication P ⇒Q – while the right side represents ‘P is true’. The simple rules
of Peirce’s system now permit us to experiment with the diagram. The appearance
of a graph in an outerly area permits the erasing of it from a more innerly area,
so we are permitted to strike out the P in the implication, leaving us with Q in a
double cut. But another rule – basically corresponding to double negation equaling
assertion – permits us to erase the double cut, leaving Q alone on the basic sheet
which equals ‘Q is true’.
Perfectly simple – and somehow deludingly so – examples both of them, not
implying the ingenious invention of new diagram manipulations or the introduction
of new auxiliary objects into the diagram. The former is continuous, requiring
the imaginary translation of geometrical objects on the surface; the latter discon-
tinuous, involving the adding or erasing of whole discrete structures on the sheet.
Thus, diagrams comprise both continuous and discontinuous variants – the latter
traditionally experienced as more logical – but without any assumption of the latter
serving as deep structure of the former. In both cases, diagrams facilitate, that you,
thanks to the ‘typical’ idealization in the diagram, are able to work directly on the
ideal state-of-affairs in question.107
Another prototypical example is the solution of an equation during a series of
well-controlled steps according to the transformation syntax given by elementary
arithmetic – mirrored by the solution of the same equation given its graphical
representation thanks to analytical geometry.
These are experiments on pure diagrams – prior to indexical and (empirical)
symbolical reference, but once an empirical diagram is constructed, the experiment
follows the same formal procedure. A map permits you to find a route between
two given localities (there is no unique solution, but any line connecting the two is
necessarily one). An economic growth graph in a business magazine permits you
to determine the actual tendency. These experiments are very simple, indeed, but
the important thing is there is a continuum between such examples on the one hand
and very difficult, even yet unsolved, problems in mathematics, on the other.108 A
very crucial observation here is that empirical diagrams continuously shade into
ordinary icons. Take a photograph of a tree – it is an icon in so far as not previ-
ously explicit information may be gathered from it – say, e.g. the fact that the
crown of the tree amounts to two thirds of its overall height. This fact was remarked
nowhere earlier, neither by the photographer nor the camera nor the developer –
and by noticing it you performed a small experiment of diagrammatic nature: you
took the trunk of the tree and moved upward for your inner gaze in order to see it
cover the height of the crown twice, doing a bit of spontaneous metric geometry,
complete with the implicit use of axioms like the invariance of translation. Of
course, this is an ordinary icon in so far as nobody constructed it with a diagram-
matic intention. Nevertheless, you used it – in actu – that way. This continuum
between diagrams proper (be it pure or empirical) and diagrammatic use of ordinary
icons shows the centrality of the diagram for the icon category as such. It is with
diagrammatic means that the operational use of the icon proceeds. Still, a distinction
must be maintained between diagrams proper – that is, diagrams constructed with

102
C H A P T E R 4
the explicit intention of experimentation and endowed with an explicit or precise
syntax of transformation – on the one hand, and on the other, the more compre-
hensive class of diagrammatic unfolding of information from more ‘innocent’ icons.
In any case, this defining feature of the diagram – its possibility of being rule-
bound transformed in order to reveal new information – is what makes it the base of
Gedankenexperimente, ranging from routine everyday what-if to scientific invention.
A famous example is the German chemist August Kekulé’s discovery of the
stereochemical arrangement of the Carbon atoms in Benzene (C6H6), forming a
ring. The composition formula was well known, but it remained an enigma how six
Carbon atoms, Carbon having a valence of four, might form a molecule with only six
Hydrogen atoms. A normal Carbon chain would leave too many unsatiated connec-
tions in order for only six Hydrogen atoms to complete the molecule. According
to his description in his 1890 25 years celebration speech, the scientist sat in 1863
daydreaming before the fire, exhausted by speculation. He then saw one of the
flames assuming the figure of a snake which turned around and bit itself in the tail to
form a ring-like structure which wiggled contemptuously before his gaze – and all of
a sudden, Kekulé realized that the normally linear carbon chain in the Benzene case
turned around to form a circle.109 That discovery thus formed a spontaneous case of
diagrammatical reasoning, realized in the shape of metaphors. The flame was taken
as a metaphor of the snake which, in turn, was taken as a metaphor of the carbon
chain – a structure of metaphors held together by the common diagram of a piece
of line, able to bend. The spontaneous diagram experiment argued that the Carbon
chain, just like a snake, was able to form a ring, and subsequent chemical analysis
corroborated the idea, leading to a major breakthrough in organic chemistry.
T H E D I A G R A M M A T I C R E A S O N I N G P R O C E S S
Before the crucial diagrammatic transformation is undertaken, however, prelim-
inary steps take place in the overall picture of diagrammatic reasoning. The initial
diagrammatic intention is in itself an interpretant of a Symbol (Peirce here refers to
the Euclidean procedure of beginning with a statement of the general proposition
to be proved, and then drawing a figure to illustrate the premiss of the conclusion).
Thus, the reasoning process begins with the drawing of a diagram to exhibit the
antecedent condition of its object, determining an ‘Initial Symbolic Interpretant’.
These two, taken together, now form the Peircean equivalent to the Kantian schema:
the drawing constitutes its observable side; the initial interpretant its universal
signification. Take an example: the drawing of a bridge construction equipped with
the appropriate equations pertaining to its carrying ability. After this initial phase,
Peirce in the long quotation above (PAP) considers the middle phase, albeit in a
strange psychological tone alien to him: this initial schema determines ‘a state of
activity in the Interpreter, mingled with curiosity. As usual, this mixture leads to
Experimentation.’ Yet, he immediately admits that such a development must take
place in any semiotic Quasi-Mind; we may discern the phenomenological core in
the psychological shell: the central feature is the equipment of the initial diagram

M O V I N G P I C T U R E S O F T H O U G H T
103
with transformation possibilities. Peirce here considers the sources for the trans-
formation syntax: ‘ certain modes of transformation of Diagrams of the system
of diagrammatization used have become recognized as permissible. Very likely
the recognition descends from some former Induction, remarkably strong owing
to the cheapness of mere mental experimentation.’ One source for transformation
rules thus comes from the diagram itself, and their deductive status untold, Peirce
refers their recognition to ‘some former induction’ (say, the law of gravity involved
in the equation system for the bridge’s carrying ability has been corroborated by
induction). This ‘former induction’ must, in fact, be taken to refer to at least two
separate sources. First, what we introduced above as the symbol’s pre-diagrammatic
immediate interpretant; including the idea inherent in the symbol of certain devel-
opments being possible for its object, others not so. This signification is also iconic,
even if not explicitly diagrammatic; it constitutes so to speak our common-sense
Vorurteil as to the content of the Symbol which the diagram more rationally illus-
trates, in our example, the common-sense understanding of a bridge (implying that
we gauge the effect of normal, mesoscopic vehicles, not planets or atoms, on it).
But the vagueness here probably comes from the fact that the determination of
the possibilities of experimentation on the diagram is twofold and has yet another
source of transformation possibilities in addition to the vagueness inherent in the
symbol’s generality. Quite another comes, namely, from the very structure of the
diagrammatic figure as a legisign (without any reference to which possible symbols
it may be taken as an interpretant of): which purely formal possibilities does the
law governing the sign allow for varying upon the diagram’s arrows, amount of
entities, forms, structure, etc.; in the bridge case the set of equations with variables
taken separately, apart from their actual referent. The former has its source in the
generality of the symbol’s object, the latter in the generality of the diagrammatic
sign itself – what Peirce calls its being a type. Peirce identifies one more source
stemming from the diagram intention (the fact that we want to gauge our bridge’s
carrying ability) which makes us experiment in order to fulfill this intention (we
may vary the weight carried in order to find the point where the bridge can carry
no more, hopefully far above the average weight of expected vehicles).
After having performed the transformation, in any case, the transformate diagram
now displays the result at the same time as it is evident that the transformate
diagram was contained in the transformand diagram. The transformate diagram,
the eventual, rational interpretant of the transformand diagram, has in itself the
conclusion, expressed in symbolic terms, as its interpretant: the bridge may carry
vehicles up to 100 tons. Thus, the steps in diagrammatic reasoning lead from an
initial symbol through three consecutive phases of diagrams and to a final symbol.
We may envisage the possibility that the diagram transformation chosen does
not lead to the expected result so that a trial-and-error process undertakes a new
experiment on the same diagram. Say, if the bridge is shown to carry only 100
g vehicles, a new experiment changing the size or the material (or the diagram
construction) may give a better result. Michael May has presented this model for
the core processes of diagrammatical reasoning (May 1999, 186):

104
C H A P T E R 4
Figure 12. The diagrammatical reasoning process
Here, the short circuit leading from premiss over construction and observation to
conclusion corresponds to corollarial reasoning, while the longer process involving
one or several phases of manipulation and maybe even further construction corre-
sponds to theorematical reasoning.
But there are a lot of possible prerequisites to be added to this ideal-type diagram
transformation. First, the initial symbol already has its interpretant partly consisting
of iconic material. (In our example: data about the bridge). Thus, the diagram may be
said to be a rational analysis of parts of this pre-diagrammatic icon. But this entails
the possibility of fallacies, if a diagram not conforming to the initial interpretant is
chosen. Thus, experiments already in this phase may in some cases be expected; in
cases less simple or less well-known than bridge building we might resort to a trial-
and-error process here, experimenting with different formalisms in order to find
those fitting best the intention. In that case, the deductive diagram transformation
‘molecule’ just described becomes a phase in Peirce’s overall heuristics. An initial
abduction makes a guess about how to formalize a given phenomenon, the deductive
diagrammatic phase just described follows, and finally an inductive investigation
concludes the picture, in which the diagrammatic result is compared to the actual
empirical data: Does the diagram transformation actually, in some sense, correspond
to an evolution in the phenomenon mapped in the diagram?
We can sum up the steps of the process as follows:
a Symbol (1)
b having a rule-bound, initial, pre-diagrammatic, immediate iconic interpretant
c Initial interpretant
diagram-icon
(a + c) constituting the initial transformand
diagram, the ‘Schema’
d Middle interpretant: the symbol-governed diagram-icon equipped with possibil-
ities of transformation (with two sources, a as well as c)
e Transformate diagram. Eventual, rational interpretant
f Symbol (2) (Conclusion)
g having a post-diagrammatical interpretant differing from b. This interpretant
being an interpretant of a as well, the diagrammatic reasoning has now enriched
the total interpretant of the concept a.

M O V I N G P I C T U R E S O F T H O U G H T
105
Thus, the process begins with ‘some former induction’ having given rise to the initial
symbol’s pre-diagrammatic interpretant, an inductive generalization sedimented as
the meaning of the symbol. This meaning, of course, must be to some extent already
structured,110 and some of its rationally formalizable relations are now abductively
selected, yielding a guess of which invariant properties may be sufficient to account
for other central properties in the general object in question. Then, in the very
construction process of the initial diagram, a constant feed-back comparison must
take place between the general object as it is preliminarily and inductively grasped
on the one hand, and on the other, the abductive guesses trying to establish against
this background a more formalized diagram; in many cases this may take place
almost automatically, due to the existence of well-established diagrams. It goes
without saying that the fertility of the specific diagram chosen can only be fully
measured with regard also to the deductive experimentation taking place later in the
diagrammatic reasoning process which consequently also has a role in this constant
feed-back trial-and-error process. But the overall picture of the initial phase of
diagram construction is thus: the general knowledge contained iconically in the
symbol – no matter if it be an empirical symbol or a mathematical one – is interpreted
in relational terms so as to give (part of) the consistent general meaning an iconical
illustration able to be manipulated, an illustration which is, on its side, also general.
After few or many repeated transformations (subject to the three different sources
of transformation syntax mentioned above), a transformate diagram is reached – its
finality is of course only measured on how it accords with the initial intention. The
evaluation of an interpretant for a candidate for final diagram status is in itself an
abduction proposing a symbolic reading of that diagram, and this may, in turn, be
inductively compared with empirical information present in the initial interpretant.
To sum up, the overall picture of the diagrammatic reasoning process is that it
forms a formal deductive reasoning core, embedded, on each side, in the trial-and-
error of abductive trials and inductive tests.
C A R T O G R A P H Y A S A N E X A M P L E
Maps are no doubt a good candidate to a diagram subcategory: rule-bound depictions
of aspects of the shape of phenomena. The non-trivial icon definition is evident
here: the construction of a map, be it based on triangulation from a set of selected
measuring points in the landscape, or on the rational, stylized rendering of aerial
photography, does not explicitly contain all information held in the map. What types
of experiment which reveals this information may be performed with respect to a
map? We may, for instance (1) find a route between two localities, (2) determine a
distance or an area, (3) recognize landscape forms – and so on.
Of course, there is nothing very ‘experimental’ in a laboratory sense of the
word in these transformations; nevertheless their status as diagram transformations
are granted by their fulfilling the demand for revealing truths not stated in the
construction of the diagram. Take for instance the distance between two cities. To
measure the map distance with a ruler and figure out the approximate real distance

106
C H A P T E R 4
from the map’s scale is a typical map manipulation, depending on the fact that the
map we imagine here is endowed with a metric topology. In this case, a middle
interpretant will be the map with your route on it added; the transformate diagram
will be the map with the ruler – and the final conclusion will be of the form ‘The
distance between New York and Pittsburgh is so-and-so-many miles’, revealing a
number nowhere present in cartographic triangulation nor aerial photography. The
experiments possible of course depend on the type of map projection, some are
area preserving but not distance preserving, some vice versa, some are distance
preserving in some directions, not in other. Thus, different map types may be
described simply with reference to which types of experiments they allow. Other
maps do not even have a metric topology,111 take for e.g. your typical subway
map which does not keep invariant neither distance nor geometric form but which
merely keeps invariant certain connexity properties: the connexity of the single
subway lines – very often symbolized with one color for each – and the crossings
and touchings of several subway lines, highlighted by a circle or other closed curve
with another color indicating the weaker connection possibilities of changing line
at certain stations. Here, it is easy to find one’s localization and path relative to
fixed points: the stations – but it is no longer possible to gauge metric properties
(how far are we from the main station?) nor morphological properties (a curved
track may be represented by a straight line, and vice versa, even in the same map),
nor sub-area categorization.
Figure 13.
In the London Underground Map case, all track curves have been stylized by
the map admitting only four directions, north-south, east-west, northwest-southeast,

M O V I N G P I C T U R E S O F T H O U G H T
107
and northeast-southwest, respectively. In this case, the typical diagram reasoning
process will deduct a specific travel route from the combination of travel conditions
(departure, goal) with map structure. Initial schema will be the colored spaghetti
articulation interpreted as a diagram-icon by the symbol ‘London Underground’,
the middle interpretant will be your present position and the end of your travel,
and the transformate diagram will be the possible paths between the two tracked as
continuous lines on the spaghetti figure, and, again, the conclusion will be symbolic
statements of the type ‘We gotta change at Piccadilly’; ‘There’s no way there
without changing two times’, ‘It seems to be the shortest way to go via Victoria’
(shortest here referring to transport time measured by means of number of stations
passed, rather than to any metric property of the diagram). Even in as simple
diagrams as road maps, we can appreciate the distinction between two experiment
classes. One is the simple use of the diagram, following the transformation rules
more or less explicitly given. Another is experimental in a stronger sense of the
word: it experiments with the very layout of the diagram itself: the possibility of
building a new subway line in order to mend London’s traffic problems. These
more ambitious experiments, in turn, may involve two dimensions: one is further
information with respect to the object (or our ideas about it) making the extension of
diagram possibilities desirable. Another is the change in the very formal apparatus
of the diagram (these two may, of course, trigger each other), as for instance
the development of Venn diagrams out of Euler diagrams by the addition of a
rule (the shading of an area referring to an empty set), or the reinterpretation of
Euclid’s axioms in order to make non-Euclidean geometries. Already the first type
of experiment is unlimited as soon as the diagram in question is continuous (like
most maps), but in sufficiently complicated diagrams we must expect not to be able
to account for the possibilities of interesting experiments beforehand (cf. the Gödel
inexhaustibility of mathematics). On two different levels, these properties are what
constitute the well-known ‘depth’ of icons and diagrams. This inexhaustibility is
dryly remarked on by Peirce when he epigrammatically states about the content of
a diagram simply that ‘Everything is involved which can be evolved’ (‘Logic of
Quantity,’ from the ‘Grand Logic,’ 1893, 4.86).
T H E G E N E R A L I T Y O F D I A G R A M S
The strength of Peirce’s diagrammatology lies in the extraordinary breadth covered
by his diagram concept. In Jaakko Hintikka’s Peirce interpretation, the audacity of
Peirce’s conception lies in his generalization of structures in geometrical reasoning
to logic in general. To Hintikka, this generalization becomes evident in Peirce’s
distinction between ‘corollarial’ and ‘theorematical’ reasoning. Peirce himself called
this ‘My first real discovery about mathematical procedure’ (‘Parts of Carnegie
Application’, 1902, NEM IV, 49) – named of course after corollaries and theorems
in geometrical proofs. ‘Peirce’s brilliant insight is that this geometrical distinction
can be generalized to all deductive reasoning’ (Hintikka 1983, 109). Corollarial

108
C H A P T E R 4
reasoning refers to conclusions which may be read directly off the diagram, inter-
preted in the right generalized way – while theorematical reasoning, on the other
hand, requires the introduction of auxiliary constructions not explicitly referred to
in the premisses (in the initial diagram). In Euclid, such auxiliaries often have
the character of the construction of further figures in the diagram – and in the
geometrical tradition the distinction between corollarial conclusions and theore-
matic constructions is often spontaneously referred to as between logical and
geometrical consequences (ibid.). In the standard conception of logic referring to
formal languages, no such distinction is, of course, possible, all inferences being
simply shorter or longer cases of symbol manipulation. In Hintikka’s account,
however, Peirce’s distinction is not only due to superficial representation differ-
ences in geometry but refers to deep issues in logic. First, Hintikka emphasizes
that theorematical reasoning necessarily implies the introduction of new variables
in the inference process – often in the shape of a lemma in mathematical proofs.
This points to the non-triviality of theorematical reasoning as opposed to corollarial
reasoning. But then theorematical reasoning becomes a matter of degree – depending
on how many new individuals are introduced in the construction, and thus yielding
a ‘rough measure of the nontriviality of an argument’ (113). Thus we may imagine
a continuum between completely trivial corollarial reasoning in one end and still
more non-trivial theorematical reasoning in the other. Peirce’s concept of diagram
manipulation and diagram experiment thus refers to a whole range of theorematical
reasonings of various degrees of non-triviality. Second, Hintikka emphasizes that
Peirce’s distinction solves the age-old problem he nicknames ‘logical incontinence’
(114): how can anybody possibly miss the knowledge of all logical consequences
of one’s premisses? Corollarial conclusions are indeed evident to everybody who
is able, at all, to understand the diagram in question as a type. But theorematic
conclusions require both the introduction of the right auxiliary entities and the
right construction obtained from combining these entities with the initial diagram.
Theorematic reasoning thus may require huge skills on the part of the reasoner so it
is no wonder why such conclusions may be difficult to obtain. Third, Hintikka argues
that the distinction throws a new light on Kant’s analytic-synthetic distinction. It
is unclear whether Kant’s concept of analytic judgment covers corollarial deduc-
tions only, or both corollarial and theorematical deductions, simply because Kant
did not have a corresponding distinction at his disposal (115). Hintikka argues
that Kant’s concept of analytic inferences covers corollarial reasoning only, so
that theorematical inferences must be classified as synthetic – corresponding to
Peirce’s idea of diagrammatical reasoning as covering the synthetic a priori domain.
We shall return to this connection between diagrams and the synthetic a priori in
Chap. 8.
Hintikka’s appreciation of the corollarial-theorematic distinction forms part of
his overall charting of twenteith century logical thought in two main traditions,
inspired by van Heijenoort’s famous brief paper on logic as calculus versus logic as
language. Hintikka’s idea is that logic since the latter half of the nineteenth century
has followed two different currents depending on basic ideas often not clear to the

M O V I N G P I C T U R E S O F T H O U G H T
109
persons involved – currents involving huge parts of analytic and even continental
philosophy. He nicknames them ‘language as Lingua Universalis’ and ‘language
as Calculus Ratiocinator’ after Leibniz’s famous dreams of a universal language
and a reasoning machine, respectively.112 The main current in logic falls within the
former, comprising Frege, Russell, Wittgenstein, the younger Carnap, Quine. Here,
logic is a formalization of (parts of) language, and it is universal in so far as it is
impossible to address the world by any other means than this one language. This
has a series of corollaries. Logic refers to the one existing world only (hence the
hesitation to accept counterfactuals); semantics becomes ineffable and impossible
to formalize because it must be discussed in that same language which is the object
of the discussion; formal syntax becomes the only objective of logic; linguistic
relativism threatens because there is no possible corrective to the given linguistic
understanding of something; the relation between world and language is impossible
to attack outside the one universal language (Wittgenstein: the limits of my language
and the limits of my world coincide), and hence no truth definition may be given.113
Surprisingly, what might at first glance seem to be a strongly realist position (logic
as one, universal language) thus holds a series of antirealist or even relativist or
skepticist consequences – becoming evident e.g. in Quine’s linguistic holism and
his ideas of the impossibility of translation. The alternative tradition has rather been
an undercurrent running from Boole via Peirce, Schröder, Löwenheim to certain
aspects of Hilbert, Gödel, the later Carnap – and, of course, to Hintikka himself.
According to this tradition, logic is no universal language, but rather a calculus
aimed at problem-solving in a given domain of discourse.114 Thus, there is a possible
plurality of logics, and this tradition has given rise to modal logic, epistemic logic,
and model theory – very often, hence, Hintikka nicknames this tradition the model
theory tradition because of its obsession with semantics and the issue of which
formalisms fit best a given content. While this tradition might at a first glance
seem antirealist with its emphasis on many competing representation systems, its
corollaries are, quite on the contrary, realist. Semantics is possible, because one
fragment of logic or language may be unproblematically put to use in the discussion
of another such fragment; truth definitions may be given (even sometimes in the
same language as it refers to – Hintikka’s own ‘independence-friendly logics’ with
free combination of quantifiers as a logical example) and correspondence between
representations and world is not only possible but may be continuously refined
by the use of many different iconic representation systems for different domains
of reality, depending on their pragmatical purpose. Thus, possible-world-semantics
grows out of this tradition, just like the insistence of model theory that the semantics
of a logical expression must be charted by means of the variation of its possible
references. Both traditions embrace formalization, albeit for quite different reasons,
which has added to the difficulty in distinguishing them. The universalist tradition
embraces formalization because of the ineffability of semantics – which leaves
formal syntax as the only or central goal to achieve. The calculus tradition, on the
contrary, embraces formalization because of the clarity and efficiency of formal
representation and of calculation – and formalization here may range from very

110
C H A P T E R 4
general systems able to subsume highly different semantic interpretations (Hilbert
who, maybe surprisingly, holds a stock in both traditions) and to highly semantically
motivated formalizations in the other end, so to speak encompassing a continuum
covering far more possible worlds than universalism’s one-world claim in one end
and covering highly specific discourse domains within that world in the other end.
Hintikka’s daunting hypothesis no doubt throws a new light upon the history not
only of analytical philosophy of the twentieth century. The work of Martin Kusch
(1997) even points to the fact that also continental philosophy displays an exactly
analogous split, Husserl falling on the language-as-calculus side while Heidegger
falls on the universal-language side – thus placing Heidegger and Derrida along
with Frege and Quine while Husserl sides with Peirce and Hintikka, quite different
from standard history-of-ideas accounts. We shall return to this below. The anti-
iconicity traditions discussed in Chap. 3 thus appear in a new light given Hintikka’s
distinction – making it easier to understand how iconicity could possibly be attacked
from two otherwise completely opposed camps of philosophy.115
Hintikka’s account for Peirce’s special role in the calculus tradition (‘The Place
of C.S. Peirce in the history of logical theory’, in Hintikka 1997) resumes Peirce’s
obsession with interpreted logic, as opposed to axiomatized systems; his interest in
modal logic; his anticipation of Hintikka’s game-theoretical semantics in his ideas
of the dialogicity of logical inference, his lack of hesitation towards formalizing
logic by means of logic. Hintikka takes care to note that the plurality of possible
representations does, in fact, point towards realism rather than the opposite:
In general, like all believers in logic as calculus, Peirce was not only ready to provide an interpretation
for their calculi at the drop of a symbol. He could – or thought they could – discuss such changes
systematically in an explicit language. The very freedom of choosing a formalism differently on different
occasions was sometimes a consequence of their belief that it is the underlying representational realities
that really mattered, not the formalism. (Hintikka 1997, 150)
One could rather say that exactly the possibility of having competing represen-
tations of one and the same state-of-affairs is what grants realism – not unlike
Marvin Minsky’s old idea that intelligence requires at least two different repre-
sentations of the same thing. This idea does not, as Hintikka takes care to note,
in any way prevent Peirce, just like Hilbert, from being interested in a purely
mathematical definition of his logic notation – the important thing is the possibility
of explicitly discussing its interpretation. This points to the issue which is most
important in our general diagrammatological context: the iconicity of logic. To
Hintikka, Peirce’s notion of iconicity and its idea of the sign as a model of its object
is ‘not completely different’ from the ideas of model theory. To Peirce – as opposed
to the Fregean tradition’s emphasis on thought at the expense of intuition – logic is,
in itself, basically iconical. Hintikka here emphasizes Peirce’s idea that ‘The Icon
does not stand unequivocally for this or that existing thing, as the Index does ’
(‘Prolegomena to an Apology of Pragmaticism’, 1906, 4.531, quoted in Hintikka
1997, 153) – thus the icon necessitates interpretation and facilitates different uses
(albeit, of course, not any possible interpretation or use). Hintikka sharply contrasts
Peirce’s iconicity of logic to the early Wittgenstein’s picture theory of language:

M O V I N G P I C T U R E S O F T H O U G H T
111
the latter is not only semantically ineffable and may only be showed, not explicitly
discussed, but it is also a static mapping of propositions onto states-of-affairs.
Peirce’s iconicity of logic, on the contrary, does not only depict states-of-affairs
but also their iconical interrelation, making reasoning using icons possible: it thus
covers the very ‘iconic aspects of logical inference’ (Hintikka 1983, 116) about
which Wittgenstein necessarily remains silent. The very manipulations performed
on a diagram do themselves iconically refer to possible experiments on the more or
less ideal object referred to by that diagram – thus diagrams are not the accidental
sums of iconical representations plus logical manipulation. They are icons depicting
their object as well as the logical inferences performed on them.
Peirce’s generalization of the geometrical concept of diagram to all of reasoning
must be understood on this background. Diagrams are not Peirce’s iconic equivalent
to an all-embracing formal logic understood in the universal-language tradition.
Diagrams is rather an umbrella notion for widely differing representation systems
which may be picked, constructed and used for correspondingly differing domains
and purposes – the diagram notion only insisting that all of them, despite all differ-
ences, possess an iconic basis and, in sufficiently complicated cases, make possible
diagram experiments in theorematic reasoning. Hence the concept of diagram in
Hintikka’s calculus interpretation is perfectly aimed at understanding processes of
logical inference clothed in widely different representation systems and in widely
different domains. In the latter half of this book, we shall investigate three such
domains: biosemiotics, pictures, and literature.
D I A G R A M T Y P E S
As in any branch of research, the possible establishment of an inventory of
rational subtypes will constitute a major progress. Unfortunately, no simple diagram
taxonomy seems to be at hand, at least not referring to pure diagrams – for the
very simple reason that the category of pure diagrams is coextensive with mathe-
matics as such. This implies that the question of pure diagram taxonomies is
inevitably entangled in the large questions of the foundations of mathematics. Other
taxonomies might refer to different diagram intentions, different diagram graphics,
different diagram subjects, etc., but a comprehensive review of diagram taxonomies
by Blackwell and Engelhardt (1998) reveals little agreement among scholars. Peirce,
taxonomist of signs, never really attempts to develop a diagram taxonomy; the
closest he gets might be the remark already quoted, made en passant in an early
account for diagram experimentation in Robin (15), ‘On Quantity’ (c. 1895, in NEM
IV, 275): ‘ a diagram, or visual image, whether composed of lines, like a geomet-
rical figure, or an array of signs, like an algebraical formula, or of a mixed nature,
like a graph ’ so that we might envisage yet another trichotomy comprising maps,
algebra, and graphs; that is, simple diagrams, construction precepts, and diagrams
equipped with construction precepts, respectively? The construction of a rational
taxonomy of diagrams will be a major future challenge for (not only) Peircean
semiotics.116

112
C H A P T E R 4
T H E I M A G I N A R Y M O M E N T I N D I A G R A M S : P E I R C E A N D H I L B E R T
During the operational interpretation of an icon, a certain phase typically appears
which at the same time exposes the icon’s full range of possibilities and displays a
central danger of iconic fallacy. As discussed in Chap. 3, this ‘imaginary moment’
involves momentarily suspending the distinction icon-object while operating on the
former, as Peirce notes in already in the 80s:
Icons are so completely substituted for their objects as hardly to be distinguished from them. Such are
the diagrams of geometry. A diagram, indeed, so far as it has a general signification, is not a pure icon;
but in the middle part of our reasonings we forget that abstractness in great measure, and the diagram is
for us the very thing. So in contemplating a painting, there is a moment when we lose the consciousness
that it is not the thing, the distinction of the real and the copy disappears, and it is for the moment a
pure dream – not any particular existence, and yet not general. At that moment we are contemplating
an icon. (‘On the Algebra of Logic’, 1885, W5, 163; 3.362)
This moment of fiction when we, operating on the icon, takes it for the object itself,
is crucial for our operations: here, the constraints on our operations stemming from
the icon’s formal properties are identified with the constraints stemming from the
object’s properties and the constraints stemming from the question leading us to
diagram experimenting (the three sources discussed above), and it feels like we are
operating on the very object itself. This goes for all icons, from paintings where
we leave our observer’s position and momentarily insert our imaginary body on a
stroll into the landscape and to equations where we cease manipulating only ink
symbols on a sheet and tackle invariances in arithmetic directly. This ‘imaginary
moment’, of course, is a description in psychological terms of a phase in a process
that is not itself of psychological nature. But the important thing in our context is
the virtual source of error inherent in this moment: properties stemming from our
preformed folk understanding of the object in question may interfere, without our
attention, in our experiments with the icon – with the result that we see things in a
picture not really presented there, or we find regularities in a formalism which are
not really implied by it. The latter was, of course, the case in Euclidian geometry
where our everyday conceptions prejudiced us to assume the parallel axiom true –
a fact which in the history of mathematics predisposed mathematicians to be on
guard against intuition.117
Thus, there is a certain tension in this ‘imaginary moment’. To the extent that
the imaginary moment leads to the eventual interpretant, the conclusion seems
to be directly ‘read off’ the diagram and so furnishing evidence. On the other
hand, even if this fertile moment is the very source of evidence, it is precisely
the seductive welding together of object and representation in this phase which
constitutes the major source of error in diagrammatic reasoning and has long
since been recognized as such. The whole formalist endeavor in the philosophy
of mathematics and the emphasis upon symbolic calculi and mistrust of geometry
since the late nineteenth century is based on attempts at getting rid of the dangers
of seduction by intuition in this very moment. More precisely, this danger can be
traced to the triple source of constraints on the possible experiments in this crucial
phase of the reasoning process: they descend, as we saw above, from the initial pre-

M O V I N G P I C T U R E S O F T H O U G H T
113
diagrammatic interpretant, from the diagram intention as well as from the internal
regularities of the diagram-icon as iconic legisign. But the first two of these sources
are of course ripe with common sense, with folk theories and virtually ideological
preconceptions of the object and thus possibly with wishful thinking – and the
imaginary moment may lure the reasoner into accepting these preconceptions and
tacitly letting them govern the experiment so as not to discover crucial formal
possibilities in the legisign or even to abandon internal legisign-constraints to the
benefit of fallacious common sense assumptions in cases or aspects where the two
are mutually exclusive. Hence the idea of formalism in mathematics; one could
describe Hilbert’s idea as that of getting rid of the imaginary moment precisely in
the decisive part of the process leading from the diagram-icon via the middle to
the eventual interpretant, bracketing the process from signification in these phases
and then reinvesting it after having reached the transformed diagram, that is, the
theorem. Of course, orthodox Hilbertians will be shocked to see the idea of purely
formal proof theory (with intuition’s role reduced to the level of meta-mathematical
interpretation) transformed into iconic diagram manipulations: the Peircean process
at first glance seems to be almost the opposite: one could leave out the possibly folk
theoretic symbolic determination while manipulating the icon – and then reinvest
the symbolic interpretation after having reached the theorem. But a closer analysis
reveals the similarities: the diagram in Peirce is iconic indeed, but it is a formally
controlled, ‘rational’ icon equipped with a syntax of transformations, while the
Peircean symbols here are the possible source of error because of their immediate
interpretants in the form of pre-diagrammatic ordinary icons, ‘wild’ icons, so to
speak. The reason for confusion here comes from widely differing conceptions of
‘symbol’.118
We can add that the well-known mainstream formalist idea from the full-fledged
Hilbert doctrine of the 1920s that diagrams should be completely expelled from
the proof to a role merely of heuristic support device (cf. Husserl below) was
not always unanimous in Hilbert, as discussed in Michael Greaves’ (2002) fine
book on the somber destiny of diagrams in twentieth century geometry and logic.
Hilbert’s famous standard idea, as expressed in the early (1894) quote ‘A theorem
is only proved when the proof is completed independent of the diagram.’ (72),119
sometimes gave way to rather different ideas like the 1900 quote: ‘ arithmetical
signs are written diagrams, and geometrical diagrams are drawn formulas’ (74).
Here, Hilbert in fact expresses a completely Peircean idea of equivalence between
symbolic and diagrammatical expressions.
Correspondingly, formalist reading in Hilbert and rule-governed ‘imaginary
moment’ in Peirce may thus be seen as parallel ideas of controlling a seductive
phase of reasoning. Then, the isolation of the purely diagrammatic part of the
process (Peirce) would be equivalent to the idea of keeping a pure mathematical
reasoning apart form uncontrollable iconicity (Hilbert).
Moreover, Hilbert perfectly realized that a certain and inevitable minimum of
Anschauung remains indispensable even in symbolic calculation, namely the basic
ability to identify, count, and permute symbols on a string. In both cases, then, the

114
C H A P T E R 4
crucial opposition ceases to be between symbolic and iconic and becomes rather
the opposition between a controllable, rational intuition and a ‘wild’ pre-formal
intuition. The crucial difference is rather, now, that the Peircean point of view
will see the remaining controlled domain of rational intuition as a definitively
iconic field, while the Hilbertian will often see it as purely symbolic, unfortu-
nately, but unavoidably, to be exposed to a severely constrained finite intuition,
corresponding to the simplest arithmetic, able to infallibly count strokes in a row
(assuming the early digital idea that the finite symbol alphabet could be trans-
lated into a system of such strokes). Of course, Hilbert himself was no Hilbertian
and he perfectly realized the unavoidable remnant of Anschauung in this ‘formale
Redeweise’ (cf. Kreisel 1982).120 Here, Peirce’s technical research into iconic logic
diagrams shows, as mentioned, that the task undertaken by ‘symbolic’ calculi may
be equally well performed by apparently much more explicitly iconic systems.121
The equivalence of Peirce’s graphs to formal syntactical systems proves, of course,
that the latter possess the same degree of iconicity as Peirce’s – both may give rise
to the extraction of the same amount of non-explicit information (as Hintikka also
notes, Hintikka 1997, 154). Still, the problem that motivated Hilbert is still relevant
for the Peircean account of diagrammatic reasoning: we cannot expect, even less
can we demand, the imaginary moment to involve the whole process from initial
interpretant to eventual interpretant. The very formal raison d’être of diagrammatic
reasoning entails that purely diagrammatic constraints with no apparent interpre-
tation, only motivated by the diagram as a rule-bound legisign, may take over in
decisive phases of the argument and, just like in Hilbert, preclude ‘wild’ intuitions
from intruding. Thus, the imaginary moment must be virtually split into two: an
initial moment where diagram and symbol (1) are identified, and a final moment
where transformate diagram and symbol (2) are identified, so as to keep a pure
diagrammatic transformation phase in between them. In this case, the comparison
between symbol (1) and (2) of course becomes crucial: in the empirical case, the
question will be, does the symbol (2) give meaning as expressed in a proposition
about symbol (1) – e.g.: has an object of type (1) ever empirically given rise to an
object of type (2)? If not then the diagram may be invalid, or the observation insuf-
ficient. So the pragmatist trial-and-error feedback between initial and final symbols
in the diagrammatic reasoning process must be the Peircean means of avoiding
being caught up in the ‘imaginary moment’.
D I A G R A M , C O N T I N U I T Y , C O N C E P T , A B D U C T I O N , P R A G M A T I S M 
The diagram has intimate connections to many central aspects of Peirce’s doctrine.
The prototypical diagram: a set of lines between points on a continuous sheet
of paper, may serve to indicate the important relation between the diagram as
epistemological device and the signification of Peirce’s notion of the continuum
for metaphysics. How do we immediately ‘see’ that the conclusion of a diagram
experiment is valid for a whole class of cases referred to by the premisses? One
source is, of course, the typicality of the diagram, but this typicality consists in the

M O V I N G P I C T U R E S O F T H O U G H T
115
possibility of continuously deforming any token to the diagram type. Something
analogous holds for the transformations. We see this by the fact that a continuum
of possible realizations are built into the diagram. This may take place by different
means: one is the continuity of the underlying sheet. By imaginatively performing
the transformative change of angle size on the sheet we see that the tripartition of
angles into acute, rectangular, obtuse is complete, because we can make the angle
pass through all values between 0 and 180. The variable x is in the same way, so to
speak, a hole in the sheet through which a whole continuity of instantiations may
pass. Of course, discrete diagrams exist where this idea is less relevant (equations
defined only with reference to natural numbers etc.) – but continuity, so Peirce’s
metaphysics, is more inclusive than discontinuity, so that we are only able to
understand the latter against the background the former.
Continuity is also, as we saw in Chap. 2, the basis for Peirce’s ‘medieval’ realism
with regard to the existence of real universals which refer to natural habits and the
continuity of their possible instantiations. But diagrams are intimately connected to
symbols, as we have seen, in the diagrammatic reasoning process. Concepts are ‘the
living influence upon us of a diagram’122 – this should be compared with Peirce’s
basic pragmatist meaning maxim, according to which the meaning of a concept
is equal to its behavioral consequences in conceivable settings. This implies that
signification of a symbol is defined conditionally: ‘Something is x, if that thing
behaves in such and such a way under such and such conditions’ – ‘Something
is hard, if it is not scratched by a diamond’. But this maxim, developed on the
basis of a conception of scientific experimenting, is formally equal to the idea of
diagrammatic experiments: the signification of the concept is the diagram of the
experiment. The aim of science is to try to make such conditional definitions as
diagrammatic as possible. This is the diagrammatic component in Peirce’s laconic
enlightenment maxim, ‘symbols grow’: new symbols arise through diagrammatic
experimentation.
D I A G R A M P E R S P E C T I V E S
Peirce readily admits that his use of the word diagram employs it in ‘ a wider sense
than is usual’ (PAP, 1906, NEM IV, 315); precisely this is the great advantage of
his diagram concept: a whole series of semiotic processes – the tropisms studied by
biosemiotics,123 the contemplation of pictures, metaphorical, analogical, and poetical
reasoning, linguistic and narratological syntax, basic sensorymotor schemata, as well
as mathematics proper – become understandable as different realizations of one and
the same basic rational semiotic behavior, namely, diagram experimentation. Thus,
it liberates semiotics from the static and narrow idea of the en- and decoding of
signs, because the interesting part of semiotics lies elsewhere, in the epistemological
dynamics of diagram interpretation – at the same time as it saves semiotics from
the false and ungraspable ‘dynamics’ of irrationalist poststructuralisms, vitalisms,
and constructivisms. Moreover, it constitutes a wholly actual attempt at making
explicit René Thom’s great intuition in philosophy of science, ‘ there is only

116
C H A P T E R 4
science from the moment when you can embed the real within the virtual’.124
You only understand a phenomenon in terms of a scenario mapping (some of)
the possible ways of changing that phenomenon into related, virtual phenomena.
Quite contrary to Quine, eager to expulse counterfactuals from science, this basic
idea is what diagrams formalize: various counterfactual transformations of the
phenomenon’s real possibilities as the means of gaining insight into it.125 The
diagram as a central concept in epistemology thus unites a series of actual scientific
and philosophical currents: cognitive semantics and linguistics, the resurfacing
of diagrammatic reasoning in AI as well as, more generally, the renaissance of
intuition, pragmatism, and scientific realism in the philosophy of science.

C H A P T E R 5
EVERYTHING IS TRANSFORMED
Transformation in Semiotics
Rien ne se crée, rien ne se perd, tout se transforme.
Lavoisier
Transformation procedures are crucial to diagram understanding. Traditionally,
however, the notion of ‘transformation’ has not played a central role in semiotics. If
we check the main semiotic dictionaries and encyclopaedias, the article in Sebeok
1986 under that word mainly deals with Chomsky’s transformation grammar, while
the notion does not appear as the headline of a separate article but is only put to
use en passant as an auxiliary notion in the description of certain theories.126 In
the otherwise more idiosyncratic dictionary of Greimas (1979) presenting mainly
the concepts of Greimas’ own theory, the notion surprisingly receives the broadest
treatment with reference to its origin in European comparative linguistics and its
mathematical use, primarily in the US. Greimas’s subsequent description loosely
hints at some general ways of using the term in semiotics, even if, as could be
expected, its use in Greimassian semiotics (to which we shall return below) plays
the main role.
Our hypothesis here is that these sins of omission tend to hide the decisive and
central role played by transformations in semiotics in general. Our aim here is to
outline its use in different semiotic fields and theories – to provide a brief overview
over the possible roles and tasks which it has – or ought to have.
If we go to the history of semiotics,127 the term ‘transformation’ is most openly
central to exactly Chomsky’s generative grammar with its idea that one and the same
deep structure may be transformed to a set of different, cognate surface structures by
means of a set of transformation rules. Transformation holds a prominent position,
moreover, in Lévi-Strauss’s brand of structuralism (even if here being subject
to less explicit investigation) with its idea that a myth may be transformed into
other, related myths by the transformation of structure, measured in relation to
a reference myth, in principle arbitrarily selected. Lévi-Strauss himself refers –
which is only taken up by rather few of his many disciples – to the Scottish
biologist d’Arcy Thompson who early in the twentieth century tried to found a
theoretical, morphological biology built on the notion of transformation. Inspired,
among others, by both Lévi-Strauss and Chomsky, Greimas’s semiotics takes up
the concept, now under the notion of ‘conversion’, it being the procedure which
117

118
C H A P T E R 5
takes its point of departure in simple deep semantics and develops that into realized
meaning via a series of intermediary steps. A certain interest here is deserved by the
narrative level where can be found the notion of ‘narrative schema’, involving the
idea of a general regularity in the temporal process of texts, connected to concrete,
empirical texts by transformation. In recent semiotics, transformation plays a main
role in the systematical picture semiotics of Groupe , while cognitive semantics
and linguistics as central procedures under different notions claim transformations
(‘mapping’ and ‘blending’ of conceptual or mental spaces), just like transformation
in the main inspiration of this current, the cognitive psychology of Eleanor Rosch,
plays a main role as that procedure which connects the prototype of a semantic
category with different, less typical instantiations of it. In the diachronous linguistics
of the nineteenth century, a central transformation problem resides in the idea of
sound laws as the nexus of linguistic development.
On the other hand, it is striking that no prominent concepts of transformation
are to be found in most of European structuralism and structural linguistics, the
Saussure-Brøndal-Hjelmslev-Eco lineage. Here, the exception is the theoretically
not very explicit Jakobson (e.g. in his idea of a projection between the two main
axes of language). In Peirce, such as he has become popularized as a taxonomist
of signs, transformation might not seem central in a first glance, but a closer
investigation finds transformations in the heart of his semiotics, namely in diagram-
matical variation and the abstraction procedures facilitating diagrams. In Husserl’s
semiotics and phenomenology, the transformation concept explicitly plays a central
role, first in the variation of profiles in the phenomenology of perception (where
the continuous transformation of one Abschattung into another grants the unity
of the object perceived), second in the idea of a cognate procedure on the ideal
level in the concepts of Wesenserschauung where the eidetic variation finds the
identity of an ideal object on the basis of the transformational possibilities of an
empirical example. A related idea, more formalized, is to be found in Cassirer and
his formalization of perception on the basis of group theory: an object perceived is
defined by invariance in a group of geometrical transformations.
As might be evident in this list of semiotic concepts of transformation, there
are certain recurrent sources present: mathematics, biology, linguistics. The former
because here the formal treatment of various types of transformations (function,
mapping, variation, etc.) may be found which may then be put to use in the empirical
field of semiotics; the next because semiotics as an empirical science is often rooted
in the more basic and comprehensive science covering those living beings having
access to meaning; the latter because language is often taken to be a privileged and
fundamental semiotic system. These three sources of inspiration are not parallel,
now, mathematics is purely formal, general and a priori (without involving here
the large infights of philosophy of mathematics, I just mean a priori as valid prior
to empirical application) – while biology and linguistics are empirical sciences
which to the same degree as semiotics (and other empirical sciences) must use
mathematical formalisms, whether implicitly or explicitly, but both of them share
some of the regional ontological prerequisites to semiotics as an empirical science.

E V E R Y T H I N G I S T R A N S F O R M E D
119
As to the former, both Husserl and Peirce, qua practising mathematicians, had
a direct interest in mathematics which inspired the variation type concepts of
both – based on the mathematical concepts of function or mapping as the procedure
taking one object into another.128 An influential version of the concept of transfor-
mation is to be found in Felix Klein in his famous Erlangen-program which system-
atizes different geometries depending on which transformations leave their objects
invariant, and more generally group theory as a formal concept for sets equipped
with different procedures taking elements into other elements belonging to the set. In
our days, a further development is category theory, generalizing the transformation
concepts of different mathematical sub-disciplines to the notion of arrows between
objects (as generalized functions) and adjungated functors operating between whole
categories (thus providing of meta concept of transformation between whole subsets
of mathematics: arithmetic, set theory, group theory, topology, etc.).
To the extent that biology is counted among the sciences of meaning (cf. ‘biosemi-
otics’, e.g. Sebeok 1992, see Chaps. 9–12) and the discussion of the ongoing
use of meaning categories even down to biochemistry (‘genetic information’),
various transformation concepts of biology also inform semiotics, thus the metabolic
cycle as basic for semiotic intention (Thom 1975, Uexküll 1982), the transport
of information in genetics, epigenesis as transformation procedure in ‘develop-
mental’ biology – but also the concept of mutation in the theory of evolution.
Even if mutation often plays the role as an arbitrary basic concept which cannot be
further explained (as an error in transformation), a rational explanation is sought
in the actual complexity theory (The ‘Santa Fe’-school, Kauffman, Goodwin, etc.)
which reference back to d’Arcy Thompson and the ‘rational morphologies’ of
the nineteenth century. Thus, there seems to be a connection between whether a
biological theory involves a notion of transformation (in addition to causal concepts)
and whether that theory recognizes a meaning concept in biology. In many actual
semiotic theories, biological foundations often play the role of yet uncovered limit
condition (the inneism of Chomsky, Lévi-Strauss’s idea of the universals of human
cognition in neurology, Greimas’s reference to a ‘natural world’ prior to semantic
investment, the body concept of phenomenology and, correlatively, the ‘embod-
iment’ notion of cognitive semantics) – the actual neurobiological research may be
expected to achieve a large semiotic relevance in the more detailed investigation of
these spontaneous ideas. In general, though, biology as a theoretically articulated
science remains split into subdisciplines to such a degree that its explicit reflections
on its formalisms used do not seem much more developed than semiotics.
Much more could be mentioned than this list of examples: transformations and
the transformation of transformations pop up in many forms and in some sense it
is strange that the discussion of the central status of the transformation concept in
semiotics has not begun long since. Several reasons may be given for this striking
omission. One is the general phenomenological rule that evident phenomena may
be hard to make explicit. Another reason – more in the history of science – may
be that European semiotics with its roots in linguistic structuralism has often, lead
by Saussure’s methodological distinctions between synchrony and diachrony as

120
C H A P T E R 5
well as langue and parole, tended to see static structures as having ontological
prominence over their transformations and thus has been interested primarily in
‘codes’ seen as stable relations between content and expression. The very concept
of the sign may thus, paradoxically, have hindered the insight into the centrality of
the concept of transformation. If the colocalization of expression and content are
taken as central or essential, then the transformation of expressions, of contents,
or holding between the two of them may be relegated to the periphery of semiotic
investigation. The distinction between diachrony and synchrony in Saussure has
often, in this tradition, been taken as an ontological barrier privileging synchrony
over diachrony – and, furthermore, the place of synchronous description in the
middle, between diachronous linguistic development on the one hand and linguistic
use on the other has split this structuralism into two concepts of time without mutual
contact and both ontologically underweight, with the often-noted implication that
diachronous system change as the result of changes in use tends to become invisible.
Correlatively, much criticism of this tradition – cf. post-structuralism – has referred
to the transgression of those ‘static structures’, but then most often in an irrational
vitalism referring to a deep, ungraspable movement which are not formally grasped
as a transformation. Within linguistics, the focus upon use has given rise to the
various pragmatical traditions sensitive to changes in linguistic usage, but then often
in versions having little interest in the structural character of sign systems. These
developments constitute, of course, part of the ‘transcendental Jalta’ diagnosed by
Jean Petitot in twentieth century philosophy and science, between logical atomism
and reductionism on the one hand and vitalist irrationalism on the other; in this
tragic split, the notion of transformation seems a victim which is either reduced
away on the one hand or mystified into a dynamic deep ontology beyond scientific
reach on the other.
The field covered by semiotics is indeed vast, and there is no reason beforehand
to assume that the transformations involved, not to talk about the theoretical tools
needed to study those transformations, should be identical nor simple. For this
reason we must approach the question in a so to speak botanical way and try to
achieve an overview over the most important concepts of transformation used in
the semiotic sciences as they are evolving. I do not claim the list of transformation
ideas below to be exhaustive, but I hope to have picked a series of central and
typical versions.129
L É V I - S T R A U S S : T R A N S F O R M A T I O N A N D S T R U C T U R E
A S I N T E R D E P E N D E N T C O N C E P T S
Claude Lévi-Strauss (1971, 73, 74, 88) is probably the scholar in semiotics, broadly
taken, in whom the concept of transformation occurs most explicitly. Even if his
formalizations most often take place ad hoc and are not tied to precise definitions
nor consistent relations between the different formal subtypes,130 transformation
has a crucial place in his definition of structuralism. Lévi-Strauss is, of course,
anthropologist and so to speak a practician comparing myths by transformation

E V E R Y T H I N G I S T R A N S F O R M E D
121
without first making those transformations explicit. The central idea lies in the
assumption that it is the narration of a myth which provides its core – and this
narrative structure can be understood only in comparison of the myth with other
myths. This comparison is possible only by transformation: the myth is transformed
into neighboring myths, cognate myths, etc., and only the location of the myth in
this landscape of transformation decides its content. A myth, thus, consists of a
group of variants. In this view, the concept of structure is solidary with the concept
of transformation: it is meaningless to claim that a single myth ‘has’ a structure –
a structure being a pattern only discernible in relations of variance and invariance
by transformation between several myths – a structure only exists as realized in a
multitude of related objects. Lévi-Strauss only rarely expresses this idea as directly
as in the late interview volume (1988): ‘But the notion of transformation is inherent
in structural analysis. I would even say that all the fallacies, all the abuse made to or
with the notion of structure come from the fact that their authors have not understood
that it is impossible to conceive of the notion isolated from transformation. Structure
cannot be reduced to system: a set of elements and the relations which unite them.
To talk about structure, it is necessary that there are invariant relations between
the elements and relations of several sets, so that you can pass from one set to the
other by means of transformation.’131 In this context, it is important to point out
that the concept of transformation is open to both synchronous and diachronous
investment – it refers to the structural relation between myths as well as to their
possible origin and genetical family relations. Which myth is chosen, in the single
case, as ‘reference myth’ is the choice of the investigator based on pragmatical
considerations – an idea solidary with Lévi-Strauss’ empirical work: the general
deep structure of myth is an invariance of all possible transformations and thus not
localized in any particular object. In a history of science context, it is interesting
to note that Lévi-Strauss’s concept of transformation does not at all stem from
structural linguistics – which it is normal to assume to be his main theoretical source
of inspiration outside of anthropology, just like the source of his preference for dual
opposition structures in his friend Jakobson. His transformation idea, quite on the
contrary, explicitly stems from d’Arcy Thompson to whom we shall return below.
It is interesting to remark that transformation in Lévi-Strauss seems to be prereq-
uisite to the concepts of identity and difference: the identity of a myth is constituted
as a group of variants (understood as variants due to transformation) – but at the
same time one such myth relates to neighbouring myths due to specific transfor-
mations. Thus it is transformation which forms the basis of identity and difference
on the level of myths – and there seems to be a continuum between the two
because the delimitation of variants of ‘one’ myth and variants of another depends
upon the generality of the transformation chosen. A further important consequence
is that the concept of transformation refers to organized wholes (myths – more
generally, gestalts, patterns, schemata, etc.) – structure resides in several, compa-
rable organized wholes. Interesting in our context is also the fact that the concepts
of transformation and structure are here related to a concept of abstraction of a
non-inductive kind: ‘Regarding comparative method, I have often said that it does

122
C H A P T E R 5
not consist in comparing first and generalizing afterwards. Contrary to what is often
believed, it is generalization which founds and makes possible comparison.’132
D ’ A R C Y T H O M P S O N A N D T H E P R I M A C Y O F C O N T I N U O U S
T R A N S F O R M A T I O N
D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson is probably considerably less known than Lévi-
Strauss; he was a Scottish ‘naturalist’ or theoretical biologist in the beginning of the
twentieth century. His scepticism towards Darwinism notwithstanding, his general
idea was to study biological form in a sort of phenomenological bracketing of
the yet unknown – then even more than today – precise biochemical processes
underlying them. The relative simplicity of macroscopic biological form allowed
for a purely morphological science of biological appearance133 which might, inter
alia, investigate the question of scale of biological phenomena (originally Galileo’s
idea), and which prompted the construction of a doctrine of transformations (‘On
the Theory of Transformation, or the Comparison of Related Forms’) where he was
able to take one and the same bone form, organ form and in some cases the whole
body shape in related species and demonstrate elementary, continuous Cartesian
transformations holding between them. On the other hand, such transformation is
possible only between related species being variations of one and the same type –
they may never connect completely different Baupläne. D’Arcy Thompson thus is a
partisan of natural morphology. Very illustrative – also in relation to the discussion
of scale – is his‘derivation’ of the same bone structure in ox, sheep, and giraffe
by a simple shortening of scale in one dimension and a logarithmic contraction in
another (277):
Figure 14. Structural similarity between foot bone structure in (a), ox (b), sheep, (c), and giraffe
Most famous – thanks to their illustrative evidence – is his morphololgies of
different fish species where he introduces radial coordinates (ill. 149, 151). A
corresponding treatment of skulls of horse, rhinoceros, and tapir does not yield
the same degree of detail correspondence (they are more remotely related), and

E V E R Y T H I N G I S T R A N S F O R M E D
123
Figure 15. Pelvis from Archaeopteryx and Apatornis with three intermediate forms reconstructed by
interpolation
yet – with the exception of certain details regarding eyes and dental positions –
interpret the skull of a rabbit as a relatively simple bending (and diminishing) of the
rhinoceros skull. There is thus an unspoken idea here that more general morpho-
logical similarities can be determined by the same type of transformation as the
more specific ones, only with a increased tolerance towards detail deviance. With
this basic idea, d’Arcy Thompson saw the possibility of theoretical reduction of
the vast empirical biological complexity – at the same time this reduction permits

124
C H A P T E R 5
the single species to maintain its specificity as the result of one specific transfor-
mation. By correspondence with the Danish draughtsman Gerhard Heilmann, he let
produce a series of plates which tries to map intermediary forms between given
morphological types, such as those (fig. 15) between the pelvis shapes in early birds
(Archaeopteryx and Apatornis (309)).
From these immediately convincing diagrams, D’Arcy Thompson draws the quick
conclusion that continuous transformation permits us to privilege the simplest trans-
formation between two types and thus assume that they represent the real process
of evolution connecting those types. Thus, he gives a rendering of the famous
series of ‘missing links’ from the stipulated ancestral tree of the horse (the first
such tree which seemed possible to sketch on the basis of paleontological findings)
and compares it with the series of construed intermediary forms derived from a
continuous transformation between the earliest known proto-horse Eohippus and to
the Equus of our time. Several sources of error, however, are present her. Not only
can we not assume that the empirical paleontological findings belong to one and
the same line – several of them may, of course, belong to side-branches to the line
leading to Equus. But, principally more grave, it is not in general the case that
particular continuous transformations are unique, they are in general elements of
a whole generic equivalence class of possible continuous transformations between
the two forms (if not, the transformation would not be stable). In the horse example,
this implies that there will be more than one possible route leading from the proto-
horse to the horse, and we have no formal means for preferring any single one
among them. These two things imply that we may not select one simple transfor-
mation and expect of evolution to have chosen exactly the same continuous series
of transformations. Here, Thompson exaggerates the degree of information which
can be extracted from morphological analogies. This does not, however, prevent his
method from possessing a series of important properties: it compares morphology
on the basis of the whole shape structure and not from singular, independent features
(as did paleontologists in his time, e.g. in the comparison of human and ape skulls
based on measuring size along a few axes). It constructs morphological classes
on highly different levels of generality (cf. the rabbit example) determined by
different transformations. It also provides an impression of the limits to morpho-
logical classification: transgressing the large animal groups in the animal kingdom,
morphological transformation gives less meaning, because they pertain to wholly
different Baupläne. It gives an indirect picture of the underlying complexity of trans-
formations (the change of ‘powers’ forming the shape in question as he says with a
deliberately vague notion). It introduces a phenomenological morphology category
where structural classification becomes possible even if (potential) knowledge about
the underlying causal dynamics is bracketed. Doing so, it provides a formalization
of some of those ‘inexact essences’ of non-geometrical kind which Husserl referred
to and which he – probably too hastily – condemned as inaccessible to axiomatic
formalization.
A very important corollary to these continuous transformations is that they do
not take an inventory of discrete elements as their basis (even if such elements

E V E R Y T H I N G I S T R A N S F O R M E D
125
may, of course, appear as their outcome) – which is why they allow that certain
elements under certain transformations vanish completely. D’Arcy Thompson does
not directly make this important implication explicit, but it lies implicitly in his
observations regarding the small bone interclavicus in the Ichtysaurus which in
the transformation to Cryptocleidus is ‘minute and hidden’ (305). In a continuous
variation nothing prevents that a certain element can cease to be realized but which –
knowing the transformation – may be said still to be imaginarily present (cf. next
chapter) – an important fact because it demonstrates that the amounts of explicit
large-scale elements in two shapes connected by transformation do not have to
be identical – thus without this fact prohibiting the existence of such a transfor-
mation. Spontaneously experienced similarity (in the inventory of elements) hence
does not count as a decisive criterion of the existence of a significant transfor-
mation between two phenomena. In discontinuous transformations, in contrast, a
1-1 mapping between elements would normally be expected and the lack of that
possibility either as an indication of the non-relatedness of the two phenomena or as
their difference must be explained by the addition of some explicit rule or reason.134
F E L I X K L E I N A N D T H E E R L A N G E N P R O G R A M
Lévi-Strauss and D’Arcy Thompson have, each of them, sporadic references to the
German mathematician Felix Klein and his work on the relation between transfor-
mation and invariance in mathematics. His famous, so-called Erlanger program from
1871, systematizes the bundle of different geometries of his time. The centuries
of attempts at proving the parallel axiom of Euclidean geometry (given a line
and point, only one line parallel with the given one may be drawn through the
point) had produced the strategy of denying that axiom in the hope of deriving a
self-contradiction as a proof of it. Instead, these denials of the axiom turned out
to produce fully consistent, alternative geometries (Lambert, Saccheri, Taurinus,
Gauss – formalized by Lobachevski, Bolyai, and Riemann) – namely the so-
called hyperbolic and elliptical geometries, respectively (where infinitely many
or none parallels might be drawn, respectively). At the same time, the so-called
projective geometry was developed (Monge, Poncelet, Carnot) which, in contrast
to the (non-)Euclidean geometries are not metric and introduced the principle of
continuity (Poncelet) which allowed for the proof of general theorems for many
different figures, even if some of the elements of the figures in certain cases
became imaginary (Chasles) – cf. above how this principle plays an empirical role
in d’Arcy Thompson. Cayley could now place metrical geometries as a subset
of projective geometry. Klein’s basic insight (‘Vergleichende Betrachtungen über
neuere geometrische Forschungen’ (1872)) now was the fact that these different
geometries might be systematized after which group of transformations each of them
allowed for.135 The aspects of objects each of them studied were interdependent with
the transformations because the objects might be determined by invariance with
respect to those transformations. In the Euclidean geometry, e.g. rotation, parallel
displacement, mirroring in a line or in a point, (in short, ‘stiff movements’) e.g. are

126
C H A P T E R 5
allowed transformations, because a figure remains the same when subjected to these
procedures which keep shape, angles, size, etc. invariant. The group of projective
transformations, e.g. is more general and gives rise to invariants as linearity, co-
linearity, conic sections, harmonic sets of points (which, to be sure, also hold for the
more specific Euclidean geometry). Klein’s general classification had this character:
Figure 16.
even if he also determined even more general geometries, such as the algebraic
geometry of the ‘Cremona’-transformations, differential geometry leaving the
second derivative invariant, and finally a geometry whose transformation group
consisted only of different forms of inverse continuous mappings (so-called homeo-
morphisms): topology, the so to speak most general geometry where only invariants
as connexity, compactness, open- and closedness, number of holes remain and
Figure 17.
Projective geometry may be considered as geometry of a sphere, projected from the center and onto
a plane parallel to the equator plane and touching the sphere at the North Pole. Thus, all great circles
on the sphere become lines in the plane – lines which end in ideal points at infinity of the plane –
just like the projection of the equator becomes an ideal line at infinity. In projective geometry, several
transformations are permitted which do not exist in Euclidean geometry, making, on the other hands, the
correlated invariants fewer (Length, angle and ratio of lengths, e.g. cease to be invariant in projective
geometry). This points to a general structure regarding transformations: the more identity preserving
transformations allowed in a given diagram, the less invariants are preserved – and the more general
those invariants which remain (such as topological invariants like connectedness and number of holes)

E V E R Y T H I N G I S T R A N S F O R M E D
127
objects can be conceived independent of the space in which they are embedded. This
classification has been further refined since Klein, and his endeavor is primarily
relevant in our context because it provides the foundation for the idea that a vast and
differing inventory of possible transformation groups (with each their corresponding
inventory of invariant objects) can be made for the formalization of space. It is an
open issue how many of these transformations have direct semiotic relevance but
apart from Euclidean geometry there is a long tradition for pointing to the fact that
various topologies due to their ‘generalization ability’ play a huge role in perception
and language (cf. e.g. Leonard Talmy 2000; René Thom 1980).
The group of transformations characterizing each geometry may be formalized
in group theory which opens up the possibility of a meta transformation where
the optics may change by the changing of geometry and it becomes possible to
signify one and the same object in different ways, because different invariances
correspond to different properties – without this perspective shift dissolves the
objectivity of the object in question. A figure with three straight edges is, of course,
a triangle in Euclidean geometry while the same figure, topologically speaking,
is a connected, 1-D manifold. Klein’s duplicity of transformation and invariance
thus allows, phenomenologically spoken, that the object’s objectivity is maintained,
while different acts pick out different aspects of it.
The concept of transformation in mathematics is explicitly tied to geometry as
in Klein, even if the concept strictly taken is synonymous with the more general
concepts of function and mapping. Transformations are thus also characterized by
the different possibilities of describing a function. By a procedure (intensionally),
by a graphical representation (intermediate between intensional and extensional),
by correlated sets of points (extensionally). Extensional description is, of course,
only possible to exhaust in finite, i.e. discrete, cases where the set of element pairs
can be given explicitly. Intensional description by a procedure rule (e.g. f(x) = tan
x) in a certain sense comprises transformations of continua but suffers, on the other
hand, from not being able to make explicit its extension (and thus not naturally
state the field of validity of the function – e.g. that the given function has no
value for /2). As to graphical representations (which are continuous but suffer
from imprecision and, in many cases, from being partial only), the main tendency
in mathematics in the last century and a half has been to see them as heuristic
tools only, which ought to be marginalized. Here, the actual interest in diagram-
matic reasoning forms, of course, a counter-movement. Most transformations in
semiotics take place without any conscious intention and explicit representation
and it may for this reason be difficult to indicate preferred representation mode
for them; maybe the mixed version could be expected to appear most often,
even if the other two pure versions may also appear in different pragmatical
contexts.
Let us from this preliminary triad of explicit transformationists in anthropology,
biology, and mathematics look at a series of more implicit transformation concepts
in mathematics (various aspects of qualitative dynamics) and biology (biosemi-
otics, complexity theory), cognitive semantics and linguistics (Lakoff, Turner),

128
C H A P T E R 5
psychology (E. Rosch, S. Harnad), semiotics (Greimas, Groupe ) as well as
philosophy – Husserl, Peirce – in order to get an overview of the different semiotic
role of transformations in these sciences.136
Q U A L I T A T I V E D Y N A M I C S
The most explicit influence from mathematics in semiotics is probably René Thom’s
controversial theory of catastrophes (1977, 1980), with philosophical and semiotic
support from Jean Petitot (1985, 1992). Catastrophe theory is but one of several
formalisms in the broad field of qualitative dynamics (comprising also chaos theory,
complexity theory, self-organized criticality, etc.). In all these cases, the theories
in question are in a certain sense phenomenological because the focus is different
types of qualitative behavior of dynamic systems grasped on a purely formal level
bracketing their causal determination on the deeper level. A widespread tool in
these disciplines is phase space – a space defined by the variables governing
the development of the system so that this development may be mapped as a
trajectory through phase space, each point on the trajectory mapping one global
state of the system. This space may be inhabited by different types of attractors
(attracting trajectories), repellors (repelling them), attractor basins around attractors,
and borders between such basins characterized by different types of topological
saddles which may have a complicated topology.
Catastrophe theory has – cf. the general discussion of the Erlangen program –
its basis in differential topology, that is, the branch of topology keeping various
differential properties in a function invariant under transformation. It is, more
specifically, the so-called Whitney topology whose invariants are points where the
nth derivative of a function takes the value 0, graphically corresponding to minima,
maxima, turning tangents, and, in higher dimensions, different complicated saddles.
Catastrophe theory takes its point of departure in singularity theory whose object
is the shift between types of such functions. It thus erects a distinction between an
inner space – where the function varies – and an outer space of control variables
charting the variation of that function including where it changes type – where, e.g.
it goes from having one minimum to having two minima, via a singular case with
turning tangent. The continuous variation of control parameters thus corresponds
to a continuous variation within one subtype of the function, until it reaches a
singular point where it discontinuously, ‘catastrophically’, changes subtype. The
philosophy-of-science interpretation of this formalism now conceives the stable
subtype of function as representing the stable state of a system, and the passage of the
critical point as the sudden shift to a new stable state. The configuration of control
parameters thus provides a sort of map of the shift between continuous development
and discontinuous ‘jump’. Thom’s semiotic interpretation of this formalism entails
that typical catastrophic trajectories of this kind may be interpreted as stable process
types phenomenologically salient for perception and giving rise to basic verbal
categories.

E V E R Y T H I N G I S T R A N S F O R M E D
129
Figure 18.
One of the simpler catastrophes is the so-called cusp (a). It constitutes a meta-diagram, namely a diagram
of the possible type-shifts of a simpler diagram (b), that of the equation ax4 +bx2 +cx = 0. The upper
part of (a) shows the so-called fold, charting the manifold of solutions to the equation in the three
dimensions a, b and c. By the projection of the fold on the a,b-plane, the pointed figure of the cusp
(lower a) is obtained. The cusp now charts the type-shift of the function: Inside the cusp, the function
has two minima, outside it only one minimum. Different paths through the cusp thus corresponds to
different variations of the equation by the variation of the external variables a and b. One such typical
path is the path indicated by the left-right arrow on all four diagrams which crosses the cusp from inside
out, giving rise to a diagram of the further level (c) – depending on the interpretation of the minima as
simultaneous states. Here, thus, we find diagram transformations on three different, nested levels.

130
C H A P T E R 5
The concept of transformation plays several roles in this formalism. The most
spectacular one refers, of course, to the change in external control variables, deter-
mining a trajectory through phase space where the function controlled changes type.
This transformation thus searches the possibility for a change of the subtypes of
the function in question, that is, it plays the role of eidetic variation mapping how
the function is ‘unfolded’ (the basic theorem of catastrophe theory refers to such
unfolding of simple functions). Another transformation finds stable classes of such
local trajectory pieces including such shifts – making possible the recognition of
such types of shifts in different empirical phenomena. On the most empirical level,
finally, one running of such a trajectory piece provides, in itself, a transformation
of one state into another, whereby the two states are rationally interconnected.
We cannot here go further into the formalisms of catastrophe theory and their
semiotic interpretation,137 but suffice it to say that these three levels of trans-
formations are interlinked, because the higher transformations take the lower as
their objects, varying their conditions. Generally, it is possible to make a given
transformation the object of a higher order transformation which by abstraction
may investigate aspects of the lower one’s type and conditions.138 As an abstract
formalism, the higher of these transformations may determine the lower one as
invariant in a series of empirical cases (for Thom, e.g. the giving of a gift and in
the structure of a sentence involving indirect object).
Complexity theory is a broader and more inclusive term covering the general
study of the macro-behavior of composite systems, also using phase space repre-
sentation. The theoretical biologist Stuart Kauffman (1993) thus argues that in a
phase space of all possible genotypes, biological evolution must unfold in a rather
small and specifically qualified sub-space characterized by many, closely located
and stable states (corresponding to the possibility of a species to ‘jump’ to another
and better genotype in the face of environmental change) – as opposed to phase
space areas with few, very stable states (which will only be optimal in certain, very
stable environments and thus fragile when exposed to change), and also opposed,
on the other hand, to sub-spaces with a high plurality of only metastable states
(here, the species will tend to merge into neighboring species and hence never
stabilize). On the base of this argument, only a small subset of the set of virtual
genotypes possesses ‘evolvability’ as this special combination between plasticity
and stability. The overall argument thus goes that order in biology is not a pure
product of evolution; the possibility of order must be present in certain types of
organized matter before selection begins – conversely, selection requires already
organized material on which to work. The identification of a species with a co-
localized group of stable states in genome space thus provides a (local) invariance
for the transformation taking a trajectory through space, and larger groups of
neighboring stabilities – lineages – again provide invariants defined by various
more or less general transformations (cf. d’Arcy Thompson). Species, in this view,
are in a certain limited sense ‘natural kinds’ and thus naturally signifying entities.
Kauffman’s speculations over genotypical phase space have a crucial bearing on a
transformation concept central to biology, namely mutation. On this basis far from

E V E R Y T H I N G I S T R A N S F O R M E D
131
all virtual mutations are really possible – even apart from their degree of environ-
mental relevance. A mutation into a stable but remotely placed species in phase
space will be impossible (evolution cannot cross the distance in phase space), just
like a mutation in an area with many, unstable proto-species will not allow for any
stabilization of species at all and will thus fall prey to arbitrary small environment
variations.
Kauffman here takes a spontaneous and non-formalized transformation concept
(mutation) and attempts a formalization by investigating its condition of possi-
bility as movement between stable genomes in genotype phase space. A series
of constraints turn out to determine type formation on a higher level (the three
different types of local geography in phase space). If the trajectory of mutations
must obey the possibility of walking between stable species, then the space of
possibility of trajectories is highly limited. We shall return to Kauffman’s semiotic
ideas in Chap. 12.
Finally, self-organized criticality as developed by the late Per Bak (1997) belongs
to the same type of theories. Criticality is here defined as that state of a complicated
system where sudden developments in all sizes spontaneously occur. The prototype
is boiling water where vapor bubbles of all sizes appear. Here, criticality is delimited
to one, catastrophic point at 100 degrees centigrade. The prototype of self-organized
criticality, in turn, is a sand pile rising from a continuous addition of sand from
above. After some time, this pile reaches a maximum steepness after which any
single new grain of sand may release avalanches on the side of the pile – the smaller
the avalanche, the more frequently it occurs, and vice versa, size and frequency
having a 1/f relation. This invariant property may be found in highly different
systems sharing the property of such 1/f noise (widespread small, rarer larger
events) and thus allows, parallel to catastrophe theory, a formal transformation of
invariance between as different empirical phenomena as traffic jams, earthquakes,
bourse cracks, extinction of species in an ecological system, Schumpeter ‘creative
destruction’ in economics, etc.
These examples make evident a certain use of the concept of transformation
which lay already in the Erlangen program, connecting it to the concept of form.
Transformations identifies invariances: the fact that traffic jams, earthquakes, etc.
all can be said to be self-organized critical systems is the same to say as that a
related form may be found in all of them and thus may be mapped between them.
G R O U P E 
–
D O U G L A S H O F S T A D T E R
The Belgian group of semioticians Groupe  in 1993 published what already stands
as a new classic of pictorial semiotics, Traité du signe visuel. Here, they attack the
linguistophile French semiotics of the 60s by involving psychological and cognitive
research in the visual system, and one of the decisive concepts in their theory is
exactly transformation. They introduce, on the characteristical third place between
signifier and referent a meaning concept on the purely visual level named type,
characterized somewhat diffusely by being a sum of visual paradigms (a head, in a

132
C H A P T E R 5
paleo-Greimasian way, will then be composed of the marks superativity, roundness,
closedness with the subtypes of eyes, ears, nose, and mouth ). The decisive step
in our context, however, is that the verbal denomination of these features do not
define them; they are types on the purely visual level (even if all of them, in
the example given, have a denomination in natural language – far from all visual
types necessarily have that). Such types are conceived as invariants in relation to a
long series of possible iconical transformations, geometrical transformations (trans-
lations, rotations, displacements, congruences, projections, topological transforma-
tions, aggrandisations, diminishings), analytical transformations (various filters,
continuisations, blurrings, differentiations, discretizations), optical transformations
(changes of contrast or depth sensitivity, inversions), and kinetical transformations
(integrations, anamorphoses). The decisive criterion here is that transformations
stabilize the image as the type remaining invariant through transformations. It
provides, in turn, for the possibility – cf. above – that these transformations are used
inversely, resulting in a whole flora of transformation rhetorics whose effects can
be investigated. Given, e.g. a head, it may be turned, filtered, discretizised, anamor-
phosed, etc. if it remains a type with a sufficient amount of redundant features to
be recognized as such. Here, a crucial semiotic duplicity is evolved (which may
also be found in Hofstadter): that possible transformations leave the type invariant
(rather than define it), but, conversely, give it a series of variation possibilities to
be used semiotically and aesthetically.
Douglas Hofstadter has analyzed related examples, e.g. in relation to designer
typefaces (1986).139 His question comes, so to speak, from the opposite side of
Groupe ’s sender’s point-of-view (seeing transformation as a rhetorical device),
namely a cognitive receiver’s point-of-view: how is it possible immediately to
recognize a letterform, an A, e.g. given the enormous amount of very different and
highly artificial designer typefaces we meet? Hofstadter runs through an argumen-
tation for the fact that no computational algorithm is possible which may produce
all possible As (thus, the A is yet another example of a Husserlian ‘inexact
essence’). The argument is an analogy to Gödel’s theorem: a sufficiently complex
formal system cannot be both consistent and complete. Analogously, no program to
generate As can be both consistent (generating As only) and complete (generating
all possible As). But the fact that such a transformation algorithm may not be
constructed only gives transformation free reins to construct As in a trial-and-error
process – thus Hofstadter sees this logical limitation as equivalent to a creative
freedom explaining the fact that still new designer typefaces surprise the market
year after year. The type A is defined by certain central characteristics, but they
are not necessary and sufficient properties for the single As which may not, then,
be defined beforehand. When the observer categorizes a strange designer A, he
involves in a trial-and-error process as well (diacritically guided by the other letters
of the same typeface, often appearing alongside it), whether it is possible to stably
transform the apparent hieroglyph into a prototypical A. It may be expected that
the single typeface is characterized by a specific set of such transformations. In
this case, transformation defines identity: that is counted as an A which may be
transformed to prototypical A. The transformative variation of prototypical As is

E V E R Y T H I N G I S T R A N S F O R M E D
133
thus also an ongoing investigation of the border areas of the type category. Here,
transformation takes two roles, as in Groupe , it leaves types invariant and it
opens up a stylistic field of variation possibility within that type. Hofstadter even
extends the argumentation to artistic creation in general to be analyzed as ‘theme
with variations’. Analogies abound between Hofstadter and cognitive semantics, to
which I shall return.
P A R I S S C H O O L S E M I O T I C S
The semiotics of Greimas also involves transformation concepts on several levels –
the most explicit case being that of ‘conversion’ leading from simple semantic units
(conceived of in Jakobsonian binary terms), over narrative dynamization of these
units and to discursivation with iconization, enunciation and the whole set of surface
sophistications of the text. Conversion is conceived as the transformation category
which adds new, specifying properties to a pre-existing schema – and thus not as
variable as the plastic continuous transformations in the two preceding examples.140
Reference may be made to Petitot’s attempt at a catastrophe theoretic modelization
of the lower levels of this process, involving plastic transformation possibilities. Yet,
the theory contains a less formalized, but analytically strong tool in the so-called
‘narrative schema’, an idealized textual event process schema based on Propp’s
more empirical formalization of Russian fairy-tales. Greimas’ schema is constructed
as a series of presuppositions. A later phase presupposes the earlier phases, not
the opposite way around – this implies that any phase of it may deviate from the
given norm. It provides, so to speak, a reference tale, and any particular empirical
tale may be determined by how it modifies, that is, transforms this arch-fairy-tale.
In this case as well, no necessary and sufficient properties may be listed, because
any particular property may vanish during the transformation (but not, of course,
all of them at the same time). Maybe the fairy-tale in question never produces a
hero which is then only imaginarily present, just like in projective geometry. The
generalization of Poncelet’s principle of continuity thus relativizes the logical ideal
of necessary and sufficient conditions, on a purely formal, pre-logical level. The
prototypical tale has a hero, of course, but it is possible to transform it into a version
with no hero.
This idea is connected to a general fact in the basic use of transformation defining
invariants by their insensitivity to (a specific) transformation – this typification
creates those entities which, in turn, may be involved in logical calculi. Transfor-
mation thus, also in Paris School semiotics refers to a basic geometry preceding
logic, even if this is far from always explicitly admitted.141
C O G N I T I V E L I N G U I S T I C S A N D S E M A N T I C S
An actual semiotic current with central transformation concepts is the American
cognitive linguistics and semantics (Lakoff, Johnson, Sweetser, Talmy, Turner,
Fauconnier, etc., cf. Fauconnier and Turner 2002; Lakoff 1987; Talmy 2000; Turner

134
C H A P T E R 5
1996). Here, I shall only comment upon two related issues, Lakoff-Johnson’s
metaphor concept and Turner-Fauconnier’s blending concept. Lakoff-Johnson’s
metaphor concept is motivated by the observation of the widespread occurrence
of structural, conceptual metaphors in ordinary language: ‘Love is a journey’ –
which then serve as a deep structure with an infinity of surface manifestations:
‘Our relationship is not running well’, ‘We go to therapy in order to add som new
fuel to our marriage’, ‘We cannot find our way together anymore’, etc. The idea is
that such metaphors map structure from one semantic domain upon another – with
the aim of understanding parts of this second domain. This mapping, of course, is
a transformation constitutive for the conceptual metaphor in question. Whether the
structural similarity between the domains is now constituted by the metaphor or
whether, conversely, it has a pre-existing similarity as its condition of possibility is
a standing quarrel in metaphor theory, but in both cases the connection between the
two fields presupposes a transformation which maps a more general schema (here
the gestalt of source-path-goal) from one domain onto the other. Transformation
of other bits of structure from other domains onto the same target domain are also
possible, of course (‘Love is an illness’, ‘Love is a revelation’, etc.), but the decisive
kernel remains transformation as a means of understanding. Another category of
transformation here goes from the deep structure of the established metaphor and
to its manifold of surface manifestations which may be found in a continuum
from well-established ‘dead’ expressions in ordinary language and to more creative,
maybe artistic ones. Linguistic usage here plays the same role as designer typog-
raphy in Hofstadter’s case: it investigates the possibilities of established metaphor
by further transformation.
Turner’s and Fauconnier’s blending theory is, in fact, a further generalization
of Lakoff-Johnson’s metaphor model. They find many cases of coupling between
semantic spaces which do not possess the orientation characteristic of metaphor
where transformation indicates a semiosis so one domain becomes expression for
the other as content. Examples include a philosopher today discussing with Kant
and so blending his own arguments with Kant’s imagined answers – without any of
the dialogue partners being a metaphor of the other. Furthermore, they make explicit
the general structure always at stake in transformation by giving it its own mental,
‘generic’ space, so that any blending has (at least) three typical inputs: those of the
two more or less empirical ideas to be blended and that generic structure which
facilitates the blend. In this analysis, widespread grammatical phenomena, e.g.
compound nouns, are seen as results of semantic blending, characterized negatively
by having no compositional explanation (there is no fire in a fire station while
there are railways in a railway station – such combinations must hence be seen
as blendings).142 This definition opposed to simple compositionality is equivalent
to Hofstadters non-computability claim, also in this case the result becomes a
trial-and-error transformation in the lack of general procedure for the mapping of
elements onto one another. The relation to Hofstadter’s theory is becoming evident,
furthermore, in the fact that parts of the two research teams now collaborate – and
Hofstadter’s work on analogy inferences is a good example of the meeting point

E V E R Y T H I N G I S T R A N S F O R M E D
135
of these traditions. Analogy questions are not in general computational; most often
they have several possible, not equally brilliant answers. Hofstadter has created a
trial-and-error computer program with random components able to solve simple
formal analogy questions by running the same questions over and over and thus
charting the different possible answers. Analogy questions of ordinary language
are, of course, more difficult, because they require context knowledge. Who is
Denmark’s first lady? PM Anders Fogh Rasmussen’s wife? But she does not
participate in public life? The queen? But she has a formalized status. The best
answer is probably Prince Henrik, the Queen’s spouse – even if both of the other
two are also possible answers and satisfies different amounts of the requirements of
the analogy. The answer to such ‘creative’ questions thus requires blending – here
between an American concept and a Danish context – but the decisive thing in this
context is that the investigation of the different answers requires a transformation
where an American structure is mapped onto a Danish empirical case which is
impossible without certain smaller give-and-take-counter-transformations (in the
case of Prince Henrik: he is not a woman) characteristical for blendings. Blendings
are thus the formula for a calibrated compromise between different transformations
which is why it may not be reduced to compositionality.
H U S S E R L A N D P E I R C E
After this hasty overview over a series of different and more or less formalized
concepts of transformation we shall now go to a more principal level and view them
in the context of the more explicit transformation concepts in Husserl and Peirce.
In Husserl, there is a transformation, of course, in his paradigmatic example in the
Ideen (1980a [1913]): the perceptual synthesis of a series of profiles, shadings, or
aspects of an object. These variations of the object are spontaneously synthesized in
perception and are understood as aspects of one and the same object because we are
able to transform continuously between them. Continuous transformability is thus
what grants the objectivity of the object. An analogous procedure Husserl proposes
for ideal entities. Already in the Prolegomena of the Logische Untersuchungen
(1900–01/1975, 1984), the idea of ideal entities is introduced, characterized by the
fact that one or more particular properties is substituted by a variable. A decisive
phenomenological task is to distinguish between the mode of givenness of individual
objects and that of abstract, ideal objects (as is always the case in language). The
6th Investigation investigates ‘categorial intuition’ as the act which directly presents
e.g. grammatical aspects of language and other abstract entities – and Husserl takes
care to note the important fact that in such ideal objects the distinction between
perception and imagination vanishes, so that imagination is an equally valid way of
access to such objects. In the Erfarhrung und Urteil (1939, 1985) this is taken further
in the theory of Ideenschau or Wesenserschauung according to which we may grasp
essences directly and thus understand an ideal content – by means of the method of
eidetic variation.143 This procedure is, of course, crucial for the determination of the
phenomenological prerequisites to logic: in order for logical propositions to appear,
involving ideal entities, we must know the way of access to such ideal entities.

136
C H A P T E R 5
We vary the idea by a transformation departing from an example, in principle
arbitrarily chosen, incarnating the idea in question. Imagination varies this particular
example over a continuum of virtual instantiations. This must presuppose, in order
for the search to be exhaustive, that the variation procedure is continuous. Thus,
eidetic variation presupposes infinity – the ideal category may be incarnated in a
virtual infinity of different extensions. Husserl poses the question of what exactly
forces or determines this free variation and prevents it from going anywhere, but he
is unable to answer it exactly: there is no given limit (if it was at hand, no variation
would be necessary), it is, rather (like in Hofstadter) the very transformative ability
to return to the original example which decides how long variation can be drawn.
In a certain sense you could say there is nothing further to be said about it if eidetic
variation is simply a way for ideal objects to appear, then the investigation has
reached its limits (cf. below). Another question refers to whether variation should
be actually completed in imagination so that all the extension of possible variants
of the idea is in fact covered. In most, if not all, cases this will be impossible,
because of the infinity of possible variants (cf. Peirce’s doctrine of continuity). If
we imagine variation as a continuous change of some parameter in the object, then
the temporal synthesis is what grants that all instantiations in the varied segment
have been covered – no direct intuition of all those instantiations. We vary, e.g.
the size of a triangle, the configuration of the angles, and see that we could in
principle take this variation as far in any direction as we might wish. We must, in
fact, make the very act of variation into the object of a founded higher-order act
which synthesizes some pieces of accomplished variation and judges that it could
be extrapolated to cover the whole of the idea. Here, of course, is a possible source
of error in variation: this higher-order extrapolation may be wrong and overlook
important areas of the extension of the idea. A formal equivalent to the halting
problem of computer science is probably at stake here: it is not possible to devise
a general procedure to determine whether a given idea has been searched to a
sufficient degree to map all significant variants.
This problem is related to that of what Husserl calls exact versus inexact
essences – which may be distinguished according to whether variation may predict
all single concrete instantiations of the idea: in the concept of the triangle, variation
is synthesized and it is realized that an extrapolated variation will be able to produce
all possible triangles with all possible combinations of side and angle sizes. In
inexact essences – e.g. empirical universals – this is not possible, which is why
Husserl concludes that these remain ‘vague morphologies’ inaccessible to axiomatic
treatment (Ideen §§71–75). We know, however (Gödel’s incompleteness theorem,
of which the halting problem forms a computational version) that axiomatic systems
exist where not all concrete variations (theorems) may be formally predicted. To
that extent, the distinction between exact and inexact essences is more blurred than
Husserl realized. But the positive correlate to this incompleteness insight is that
also essences which are not completely formally decidable permit more or less
comprehensive formalization (e.g. already natural numbers). As the many different
uses of the concept of transformations in semiotics also seem to hint at, it is thus

E V E R Y T H I N G I S T R A N S F O R M E D
137
not impossible to specify different formal properties in a variation mapping inexact
essences, and even if there is a central point in the fact that they may not be axiom-
atized and rendered in necessary and sufficient properties, then a huge open field
remains regarding the mathematical formalizability of these ideal objects (both a
priori, tied to the material ontology of the essence in question, and empirically).144
The concept of eidetic variation has from time to time been wrongly taken as a
strange, mystical ability – but it is important to maintain that it is a completely ordinary
everyday process as a thought experiment isolating a type by transformation. Eidetic
variation is so broad a concept that it probably founds the more specific semiotic
transformation types we have here discussed. Even if ideal objects may be accessed
through variation it is not their only mode of givenness: representation by a bound
variable (an x, an empty slot, a place to be filled in, a variable property), be it explicit or
not, is another representation of ideal objects – from literary works to equations. There
is no real understanding without ideal types which are for that reason widespread all
over semiotics (the typical sign as such, for one, is ideal).
As is evident, eidetic variation is closely connected to a non-inductive abstraction
theory. This leads us to what is, in fact, Peirce’s version of eidetic variation, also
built upon a non-empirical theory of abstraction. Abstraction is, in Peirce, several
different things (and just like in Husserl distinct from the issue of induction.).145
First, it involves ‘prescission’ which is an act of focusing, which disregards certain
irrelevant properties in order to focus instead upon other, relevant properties. In
this procedure, the removal of properties corresponds to the introduction of a
variable as the precondition of the isolation of a predicate (e.g. the isolation of
the property ‘round’ from the other properties of an object). Another procedure
is ‘hypostatic abstraction’ as the procedure which makes a new subject out of a
predicate in order to facilitate further investigation (investigating, e.g. ‘roundness’
as such). These two transformations are the prerequisites for the construction of
a diagram (in this example: a circle) making possible the schematization of the
content of a concept and its ideal grasping (Peirce calls this the observation of
universal propositions). By the variation of this diagram different transformations
may investigate the extension of that idea, its limits, its relation to cognate diagrams
(the point; ellipses and other conic sections; polygons), the impossibility of squaring
it, circumscription by polygons, etc. – all results which appear with the necessity of
ideality. The lawlike aspects of empirical investigation thus involve the incarnation
of diagrams in the matter in question – thus Peirce’s idea of the role of diagrams in
knowledge thus provides his equivalent to Husserl’s concept of eidetic variation. It
even adds important details of the variation procedure, first its phases of focusing,
hypostatization, and variation, second its distinction of different classes of variation.
A decisive distinction to Peirce already mentioned is that between ‘corollarial’ and
‘theorematic’ diagram experiment. The former is directly read off the diagram while
the latter requires the introduction of new entities in the diagram (cf. the helping
lines and similar constructions in geometry). The latter requires an abductive ‘jump’
in variation146 and thus makes evident why variation is not always an intuitively
easy transformation (cf. the existence of unsolved and undecidable questions). As

138
C H A P T E R 5
in Husserl where variation may distinguish ideas in still higher generality, leading
to the issues of formal and material ontologies, transformation is also in Peirce
recursive: a new variation may take the former as its subject in a new higher-order
diagram.
Husserl’s and Peirce’s very general concepts of transformation, eidetic variation
and diagrammatic experiment, respectively, closely connected to the mode of
existence of ideal objects in general, make evident the very basic status of trans-
formation. It can be argued that a series of ontological issues which are often
taken to be primitives in semiotics (and elsewhere) are tied to transformation.
Thus, e.g. the distinction between static and processual states-of-affairs which have
given rise to so much vitalist discussion (e.g. in post-structuralism). Transfor-
mation precedes both ‘static’ and ‘dynamic’ issues – they refer to two different
interpretations of a transformation as being a relation between two entities and
as being something taking place in time – so to speak equivalent to the question
of Geltung and Genesis.147 Transformation does not choose any of the two sides
but makes possible investigations of valid, a priori relations between concepts on
the one hand and genetic investigations into the empirical change of objects on
the other hand. Similar relations probably hold in the highly ideologized issue of
identity/similarity/difference. An assumption of identity may probably be tied to any
transformation – the invariance it allows for may be interpreted as the identity of an
abstract object through change – an identity being so much more general, the larger
the amount of varied properties are, and the less the core kept invariant. To this
extent this ‘semantical’ notion of ideal identity (different from the numerical identity
of empirical existence) is relative to the set of transformations used. This explains
the trivial fact that any object is in some sense similar to any other object148 – at
the same time as explaining why this is not valid as a criticism of similarity as
such: similarity is not arbitrary but relevant to the transformation chosen. Thus,
transformation does not chose sides between harmonizing Identitätsphilosophie on
the one hand and radicalizing philosophy of difference on the other: it is a means
of description preceding both.149
This chapter has taken us from different specific uses of transformation concepts
in semiotics and to their generalization in Husserl’s and Peirce’s theories for the
ontology and epistemology of ideal objects and their transformations to which
we shall return in more detail in the next chapter. We may here sum up the
different pragmatical tasks for transformation: the emphasis may be placed on
invariance (identity), on variance (the process), on the comparison between the two
ends of transformation (similarity/difference), the comparison between different
transformations of the same object, on repeated variations back and forth between
two or more transformands (judgment/blending), on the transferral of further, more
or less untransformed matter (metaphor), on a double grasping of the resulting
object as the output of several different transformations.
As to semiotics especially, the following tasks may be listed:
- abstraction (cf. Peirce’s prescission and hypostatic abstraction, respectively)

E V E R Y T H I N G I S T R A N S F O R M E D
139
- categorization (categorical perception as the transformation of a continuum to a
discrete system)
- to grant identity (of types, from phonemes and morphemes up to more compre-
hensive signifying structures)
a) to understand a token as instantiation of a type
b) to achieve overview over a type
c) to constitute a type
- to synthesize a manifold
a) in perception
b) in categorical intuition
- to detect similarity (by comparative synthesis of the transformands)
- to map concepts (cf. Peirce: concepts as transformative conditionals, the meaning
of a concept being coextensive to the transformative effects the object of the
concept may be conceived to possess)
- to generate a variation of subtypes in a hierarchy of ideal entities (correlative to
subsumption under a type), and connected to this:
- to constitute regional (material) ontologies
- to constitute and describe iconic signs as well as the iconical component in higher
sign types (as correlation between types)
- to grasp the aspect of an object as the arche-form of the sign (selected by
transformation) – cf. also the proposition (‘this aspect is an aspect of this object
/these objects’)
- to reasoning as a transformation guided by the invariance of truth (and, more
unfolded, by the invariance of possibility, truth, probability, corresponding to ab-,
de-, and induction)
- to understand something in terms of something else (cf. Turner’s ‘literary mind’:
allegory as a basic procedure), and correlatively:
a) analysis (of texts)
b) integration of concepts (blending, analogy inference)
c) recursivity (the transformation of transformations)
- answering questions/solving riddles (with the trial-and-error transformation
involved) – cf. Hintikka’s game-theoretical semantics
Many of the theories touched upon in this chapter are not traditionally classified
as semiotics (mathematical, biological, philosophical theories). Why then keep that
notion as a headline for the whole field of thought and meaning made possible by
transformation processes? This issue comprises both empirical, natural phenomena
(d’Arcy Thompson) and ontological and epistemological basic issues. The term
semiotics only has a relevance for this vast field if it may be understood as based on
meaning. This, in turn, is only meaningful if we take ‘meaning’ in an objective sense
(cf. biosemiotics, Chaps. 9–12) comprising teleological processes in the empirical
world without requiring any observing subject in anthropomorphous sense – and,
if it comprises access types to the ontological zoo of different ideal objects on
the other hand. Human thought and language are, of course, a privileged access to
these ideal objects which must not lead to the idea that these objects are restricted

140
C H A P T E R 5
to or created by the human mind, a fallacy which, depending on regional ontology
chosen, will lead into biologism, historicism, psychologism, subjective idealism, or
other reductive –isms – all of them springing from a genetic fallacy assuming that
ideal objects and the transformations defining them should pertain to a specific and
delimited ontological field. Transformative semiotics, in this use of the word, will
cover much more than usually assumed – what is won, on the other hand, is the
understanding of transformation as the basic process of semiotic intelligence: only
a reifying forgetting of transformation (probably motivated in the efficiency and
invisibility of most of the basic procedures of our cognitive apparatus) makes us
overlook transformation being pervasive in our everyday perception, language, and
reasoning.

C H A P T E R 6
CATEGORIES, DIAGRAMS, SCHEMATA
The Cognitive Grasping of Ideal Objects in Husserl and Peirce
Diagram experimentation forms the prototype of the various transformation concepts
encountered in different semiotic theories. Diagrams are, as we saw, types, or ideal
objects – and they may be used to refer, in turn, to other general, ideal objects.
A theoretical tradition with emphasis on the access to ideal objects is Husserlian
phenomenology. Husserl’s conceptions of abstraction and kategoriale Anschauung –
categorial intuition – was first developed in his early work and played an important
role in Logische Untersuchungen150 and later in Erfahrung und Urteil and elsewhere.
Here, the grasping of ideal objects pertains not only to mathematics and logic – even
if they form an important case – rather, it forms a crucial parts of everyday cognition
in so far as most cognitive acts are not simple and involve general elements in what
Husserl calls ‘sinnlich gemisschte’, sensuously mixed form.
In this chapter, we shall outline the early Husserl’s theory of access to ideal
objects with the aim of comparing and integrating it with Peirce’s diagram doctrines.
U N B E L I E V A B L E B U T T R U E
It is a strange fact that so little comparison between Husserl and Peirce has
been undertaken.151 Probably the historical reason is that the two philosophers
both stand on the initial edge of the analytical/continental split and ended up
as founding fathers for each their main currents in philosophy – phenomenology
and pragmatism/semiotics, respectively. Seemingly rooted in each their specific
tradition, the large bulk of common ideas and interests in their works has been
ignored. Distorted parodies of the two – Husserl the transcendental solipsist, Peirce
the pan-semiotician – have added to preclude a closer Auseinandersetzung between
the two.
Correspondingly, it is a little known fact that the two of them did in fact know the
other’s work – albeit not, unfortunately, to a degree sufficient to reveal the crucial
convergences to any of them. Husserl’s interest in Peirce lies mainly in the beginning
of his carreer; he refers to Peirce’s early semiotic work at several occasions around
the Philosophie der Arithmetik period, but there is no reference later than the
nineties, so Husserl never came to know the mature Peirce’s phenomenology and
semiotics from around the turn of the century, and so he hardly influenced Husserl’s
later thinking. Conversely, Peirce several times refers to Logical Investigations
which came out in the midst of Peirce’s last fertile period of thought – but he only
141

142
C H A P T E R 6
mentions it in a pejorative manner, classing it alongside other German logic studies
as despicable examples of psychologism. This characterization evidently rules out
that he may in fact have read very much of the book himself.
Husserl’s Peirce references mainly surface in his review of the first volume of
Schröder’s Algebra der Logik (1890; a work much influenced by Peirce, to be
sure) from 1891 (Hua XXI, 2–43) and his subsequent discussions with A. Voigt
(1893, also in Hua XXI). Here, Husserl’s main idea is to reject Schröder’s view
of logic as being extensional only, even if he also praises him for his work. He
was subsequently reproached by A. Voigt (reprinted in Hua XXI) for overlooking
the intensional logics of Frege and Peirce and replied to that comment. Even if
Husserl mainly refers to Peirce as a precursor of Schröder, a couple of interesting
comments are involved: Husserl frowns over Peirce’s idea of assertions as presented
by Schröder, it is ‘unglaublich aber wahr’ that he may think judgments are special
cases of thought habits (20). Husserl probably here fails to grasp Peirce’s wide
and non-psychological idea of habits. On the other hand, Husserl praises Peirce’s
method from ‘On the Algebra of Logic’ (in Schröder’s presentation) as one which
‘ impresses through its special originality, simplicity and elegance. It appears,
especially after the simplification which Schröder gives it, as eminently useful, and
for that reason it should be wished to receive a richer amount of related and calcu-
lated tasks.’152 Mullin (1966) remarks that these recensions were in Peirce’s library
with editor’s stamp – so if Peirce did not himself receive them from Husserl, he got
them from Schröder or (less probable, though) bought them in an antique book store.
The early Husserl thus may, to some extent, be influenced by Peirce through
Schröder. The degree of Peirce’s indebtedness to Husserl is equally difficult to
ascertain. The mature Peirce decides upon the term ‘phenomenology’ for a part of
his study which is, in some respects, rather close to the early Husserl’s use of the
word as referring to the study of essences. It is the study of universal elements of
all phenomena; it is a study explicitly anti-psychological (and ante-psychological)
of nature; it is the most basic of all positive studies (by ‘positive’, Peirce does
not refer to empirical ‘Tatsachenwissenschaften’ only, rather, ‘positive’ refers to
sciences of the given as opposed to sciences of the merely possible), and logic
is founded upon it; it is a study that includes all kinds of possible experiences,
including dreams and abstract thought; and it is a study – almost an outline of
a Peircean phenomenological reduction – bracketing whether the phenomena it
studies exists or not. Of course, Peirce does not share the later Husserl’s basing
phenomenology on a study of conscious acts, but this difference seems more a
difference of emphasis within a field than it is a foundational difference.
‘Phenomenology’ did not play any important role in the papers published in
Peirce’s lifetime, but it rose to prominence due to Hartshorne and Weiss’ edition
of CP where they picked it as a headline term – Hartshorne having studied by
Husserl in Freiburg in the 1920s. That was no bad choice; Peirce’s use of the term
‘phenomenology’ is indeed intense, but covers a rather short timespan:
Phenomenology, whose business it is simply to draw up an inventory of appearances without going into
any investigation of their truth. (‘Minute Logic’, 1902, 2.120)

C A T E G O R I E S , D I A G R A M S , S C H E M A T A
143
Phenomenology ascertains and studies the kinds of elements universally present in the phenomenon;
meaning by the phenomenon, whatever is present at any time to the mind in any way.
(‘Syllabus’, 1903, EPII, 259; 1.185)
I will so far follow Hegel as to call this science Phenomenology although I will not restrict it to the
observation and analysis of experience but extend it to describing all the features that are common to
whatever is experienced or might conceivably be experienced or become an object of study in any way
direct or indirect.(‘Harvard Lectures on Pragmatism’, 1903, EPII, 143; 5.37)153
This science of Phenomenology is in my view the most primal of all the positive sciences. That is, it is
not based, as to its principles, upon any other positive science. By a positive science I mean an inquiry
which seeks for positive knowledge; that is, for such knowledge as may conveniently be expressed in a
categorical proposition. (ibid. EPII, 144; 5.39)
 Be it understood, then, that what we have to do, as students of phenomenology, is simply to open
our mental eyes and look well at the phenomenon and say what are the characteristics that are never
wanting in it, whether that phenomenon be something that outward experience forces upon our attention,
or whether it be the wildest of dreams, or whether it be the most abstract and general of the conclusions
of science. (ibid. EPII, 147; 5.41)
The business of phenomenology is to draw up a catalogue of categories and prove its sufficiency and
freedom from redundancies, to make out the characteristics of each category, and to show the relations
of each to the others. (ibid. EPII, 148; 5.43)
There are three sciences according to me to which Logic ought to appeal for principles, because they
do not depend upon Logic. They are Mathematics, Phenomenology, and Ethics. (Letter to John Dewey,
June 1904, 8.242)
() what I have called phenomenology, that is, just the analysis of what kind of constituents there are
in our thoughts and lives, (whether these be valid or invalid being quite aside from the question). It is a
branch of philosophy I am most deeply interested in and which I have worked upon almost as much as
I have upon logic. It has nothing to do with psychology.(letter to William James, Oct. 1904, 8.295)
Phenomenology has no right to appeal to logic, except to deductive logic. On the contrary, logic must
be founded on phenomenology. (ibid. 8.297)
The word is also used in the passing in a letter to Lady Welby, Oct. 1904 (8.328),
as well as in a 1906 commentary to a proposal by a Mr. Peterson to discuss
philosophical terminology (The Monist, Vol. 16, 147–151 (1906), 5.610).
As is evident, the main period for Peirce’s use of the term covers the years
1902–06 with the main emphasis on three years only, 1902–04. From around
1905, Peirce substitutes the terms ‘phanerology’, ‘phanerochemy’, ‘phenoscopy’,
and especially ‘phaneroscopy’ for ‘phenomenology’.154 ‘Phaneroscopy’ is used in
the ‘Adirondack Lectures’ (1905, 1.284), ‘Logic viewed as Semeiotics, Introduction
Number 2. Phaneroscopy’ (1.285–87, dated by the editors of the CP ‘c. 1904’);
‘Phaneroscopy or the Natural History of Concepts’ (c. 1905, 1.322); ‘Phaneroscopy
fan’ (1906, 4.7); ‘Phaneroscopy (phan)’ (intended for the Monist, January 1907,
1.306); a letter to James (1909, EPII, 492ff; 8.303). Thus it seems that the substi-
tution of ‘phaneroscopy’ for ‘phenomenology’ takes place rather systematically
around 1904–05 – but due to Peirce’s intensive use of the latter in the fertile
1902–04 period and Hartshorne and Weiss’s subsequent use of it as a volume title
in the Collected Papers, it has come to stand out as the standard notion for Peirce’s
investigations in the area.
As a matter of fact, Peirce’s use of the word is not unrelated to Husserl’s, as is
evident from the characterization above claiming that phenomenology ‘ studies
the kinds of elements universally present in the phenomenon; meaning by the

144
C H A P T E R 6
phenomenon, whatever is present at any time to the mind in any way.’ – given
that ‘the mind’ in Peirce is not coextensive with the human mind, neither is it an
empirical issue to be studied psychologically.
Thus, there is a striking temporal coincidence between Peirce’s use of the term
‘phenomenology’ (1902–06) and his Husserl references. When Peirce discusses
the origin of the concept, he refers to Hegel only, but this simultaneity points to
the possibility of Peirce having borrowed the term from his – probably – cursory
readings in LU.
As to Peirce’s explicit references to Husserl, they are rather few – twice he
is mentioned only as part of lists of German logicians (‘Minute Logic’, 1902;
‘Review of John Dewey’s Studies in Logical Theory’, The Nation 79, Sept 15, 1904,
219–20; 8.188). Once, however, Peirce writes about ‘ the distinguished Husserl
(Note: See, e.g. his Logische Untersuchung, Teil I, Kap. 3 (1900)) after underscored
protestations that their discourse shall be of logic exclusively and not by any means
of psychology (almost all logicians protest that on file), forthwith become intent
upon those elements of the process of thinking which seem to be special to a mind
like that of the human race, as we find it, to too great neglect of those elements
which must belong, as much to any one as to any other mode of embodying the same
thought.’ – instead, Peirce’s existential graphs are mentioned as an alternative, non-
psychological rendering of logic (1906, 4.7). Peirce shares a widespread criticism
of Husserl at the time – for falling prey, in the later Investigations, to the same
psychologism which he himself attacks in the Prolegomena.
The missed encounter between the two thus seems to have a background in both
of them misunderstanding the other’s account of logic. Peirce emphatically saw
logic as an ideal, normative science – Husserl likewise saw it as an ideal science, but
equally emphatically not as a normative science. When Husserl rejected normative
logic, however, it was simplistic accounts of logic as psychological ‘Denkökonomie’
he had in mind. Thus, it seems that this less decisive difference made both of
them misconstrue the other’s point of view as being psychological. Peirce directly
attacks Husserl for psychologism, and Husserl’s attack on Peirce’s – unbelievable
but true! – identification of judgments with habits seem to rely on a presupposition
that habits are psychologically contingent facts. This minor difference between the
two seemingly spreads fog over their basic agreement in antipsychologism to a
degree such that none of them noticed it.
In any case, the closest similarity between the two’s careers seems to hold
between the mature Peirce and the early Husserl, that is, coincidentally, between
their thought as it develops simultaneously around the turn of the century, that is the
period when Husserl writes Logical Investigations while Peirce strives to mould the
mature version of his philosophy including phenomenology and semiotics. Just to
enumerate a series of virtual meeting points between the two (each of which could
merit a separate study)
- their basis in an anti-psychological first-person perspective (even if very different
outcomes eventually spring from this idea in the two of them)

C A T E G O R I E S , D I A G R A M S , S C H E M A T A
145
- the giving up of the inner/outer dichotomy in favor of a functional relationship
between subject and object (cf. Rudolf Bernet).
- the refusal of all Ding-an-sich-like notions by emphasizing the reality of the
object as it is known (and, correlatively; the perfect knowledge of an object as a
limit case to a series of knowing acts)
- the interest in making a taxonomy of different ways of approaching an object
(in Husserl: the inventory of different intentional acts and their components: in
Peirce: the taxonomies of signs and their components). There is even a certain
structural similarity (albeit not identity) between Peirce’s well-known icon-index-
symbol triad and Husserl’s imaginative-indexical-signitive intentions in the 1st
and 6th LU.
- the foundation of logic upon phenomenology.
- the emphasis on autonomous forms in logic (Husserl: nominale und propositionale
Akte – Schlüsse; Peirce: rhema-dicisign-argument) – and their ensuing a priori
theories of linguistics and semiotics, respectively.
- the conception of complicated cognitive acts/signs as founded on a motivated
complex of simpler acts/signs.
- the conception of meaning as being general (as a species of meaning acts (early
Husserl anno LU) or a type (Peirce, at least in so far as regards sufficiently
complicated and interesting signs))
- the anti-Cartesian refusal of absolute doubt in favor of doubt within a horizon
- the striving for a phenomenological solution to the problem of how mathematics
and universal, objective knowledge in general may be shared by subjective acts
of knowing.
- the discovery of (proto-)speech acts (Husserl: the notion of different act qualities
and the frame question of the 6th Investigation; Peirce: the so-called ‘Gamma
graphs’).
- the introduction of variables as empty ‘slots’ in logic and semantic expressions
- an Aristotelian realist tendency to claim the reality of species and our direct access
to them (eidetic phenomenology and ‘Wesenserschauung’, Husserl; the generality
of perceptual judgments and the ‘pragmatic maxim’ and diagram experiment as
means of clarifying a concept in Peirce), along with the idea that the law of the
excluded middle does not hold for ideal matters
- the positive redefinition of the synthetic a priori (as ‘pure laws including material
concepts’ (Husserl, 3rd Investigation) or as ‘universal propositions relating to
experience’ (Peirce))
- a criticism of empiricist and psychological theories of abstraction in favor of an
‘ideierende Abstraktion’ (Husserl) or Peirce’s complex of abstraction types – and
even the close connection between the conditions of possibility of abstraction and
a mereology for the phenomenon (Husserl’s 3rd Investigation; Peirce’s definition
of his three types of distinction).
- the attempt at giving a rational exposition of the loose Kantian idea of a schematic
meeting between ‘Sinnlichkeit’ and ‘Verstand’ in epistemology (Husserl: ‘katego-
riale Anschauung’, Peirce: diagrams).

146
C H A P T E R 6
The aim of this chapter is to compare Husserl’s account of categorial intuition in
the 6th LU (and its prerequisites elsewhere in that work) with Peirce’s diagram
and diagrammatical reasoning notions. Just like Peirce develops his notion of
diagram-icons to understand the observation aspect of the access to ideal and
universal objects, Husserl undertakes a daring extrapolation of the concept of
intuition (‘Anschauung’) to involve the grasping of grammar and linguistic syntax,
of essences, of states-of-affairs, etc. Thus, analogous roles are played by diagrams
and categorial intuition155 in Peirce and Husserl around 1900, and the immediate
difficulties in admitting this probably stem from their different prototypes of these
notions: that of grammar and linguistic syncategorematica in Husserl, that of
geometrical construction proofs in Peirce. Our aim here is to introduce the cross-
fertilization between those two concepts to be put to use in an actual understanding
of the cognitive ability to grasp, understand, and manipulate ideal objects.
M E A N I N G A N D I N T U I T I O N I N T H E L O G I S C H E U N T E R S U C H U N G E N
In Kant, of course, we find the idea that a crucial problem of epistemology is the
possible mediation between what he considers two faculties of mind, Verstand and
Anschauung, respectively. A simple integration between the two in an ‘intellectual
intuition’ is deemed impossible and the belief in its possibility leads into the ‘transcen-
dental illusion’. The possible mediation between these two is only deemed possible
in the construction of rule-bound schemata (the arch examples being arithmetics,
geometry (the triangle) in the realm of pure schemata, and the concept of the dog
in the realm of empirical schemata). Each in their way, Husserl and Peirce strive
to clarify the more precise relationships behind the sketchy Kantian deliberations.
In the LU, this problem is highlighted in the second section of the 6. LU but
with close ties to various other chapters throughout the book. The prerequisite
to understanding the ideas given in the 6. LU is, of course, the structure of the
intentional act as outlined in the 5. LU. Here, Husserl distinguishes between the
act itself, its content and its object. The content is the act’s meaning conceived
of as species, and it, in turn, includes three dimensions: the quality of the act (its
character of being propositional, imperative, wishing or whatever), the matter of the
act (the way the object is presented), and the representative content of the act (the
degree of fulfilment in which the object is presented: intuitive vs. signitive acts). In
the intuitive acts – of which perception is the prototype –, the object is immediately
given in ‘anschauliche Fülle’, but in other, more distant acts, the object is merely
intended in a symbolic fashion, the so-called signitive acts, which prototypically
comprise linguistic expressions (but not only, cf. below). The meaning of signitive
acts has no intuitive character, but, on the other hand, they aim at being fulfilled
by synthesis with decidedly intuitive acts (not unlike symbols requiring icons for
making explicit meaning in Peirce). This more complicated, founded act forms the
‘Erfüllungssynthese’, that is, it fulfills an immanent striving present in the merely
signitive acts. This very tension between signitive and intuitive acts forms Husserl’s
version of Verstand and Sinnlichkeit, respectively, and it is at stake in any linguistic
and symbolical act in general as well in science more specifically. This fulfilling

C A T E G O R I E S , D I A G R A M S , S C H E M A T A
147
of an empty signitive act is thus a higher-order act, involving the Leervorstellung
of the signitive act, its intuitive fulfilment, as well as the act founded upon the two
which unites them.
A host of problems are involved here. For in sufficiently complicated acts, the
signitive act contains lots of elements not immediately present in the fulfilling
perception. Husserl’s introductory example in the LU is sentential structure; all
the unselbständige moments of the sentence apart from the material presented
in the nominals subject and predicate: quantifiers, conjunctions, numerals etc. –
the syncategorematica of the 4. LU. This leads to the idea of the kategoriale
Anschauung, ‘categorial intuition’. The basic claim of phenomenology: that the
justification of any kind of knowledge ultimately derives from the possibility of
grasping it in intuition, is extended to include these ‘categorial’ aspects of meaning.
Thus the concept of intuition is generalized to encompass categories. The categorial
content of the act also aims at its own fulfilling intuition, that is, the idea that the
object of the logical and formal apparatus of the expression can in some sense be
grasped intuitively as it is in itself, in perfect analogy with the perceptive fulfilment
of the parts of the expression referring to sensible objects. Categorial intuition thus
comes to bear an immense weight in Husserl’s epistemology: it becomes responsible
for the grasping of all that is not simply perceptual.156 To be blunt, categorial
intuition is what makes Husserl differ from a crude sensualism. Thus, it involves not
only syncategorematica, but all kinds of ideal objects taken in a broad sense of the
word: states-of-affairs, logic, mathematics, formal ontological categories, material
ontological categories, all sorts of natural and cultural kinds, word meanings.157
Thus the different essences grasped by eidetic variation already introduced in the
LU are intended by categorial intuition which thus subsumes Wesensschau.158 And
thus the ideal objects grasped by categorial intuition include Ingarden’s ‘purely
intentional objects’ involving the objects of linguistic meanings in general and
literary works in particular. In introducing the new distinction between signitive and
categorial, Husserl clarifies aspects which were mixed up in the Kantian outline: on
the one hand, we have merely signitive meaning aiming at its intuitive fulfilment.
On the other hand, we have two different forms of intuition, sensuous and categorial,
respectively – and the categorial intentions possess their own type of intuitive
fulfilment, more or less remotely founded upon sensuous intuition, to be sure.
This gives a combinatiorial table as follows:
Figure 19.
There are two possible sides to the signitive act; one side which requires fulfilment
in a categorial intuition, another side requiring fulfilment in a sensuous intuition –
maybe both in one synthesizing act. Apart from very simple cases, most acts include

148
C H A P T E R 6
categorial components (as soon as perceptual judgments are passed, for instance, or
general properties of any kind are invoked, categorial meaning is implied). A pure
intuition is only possible, it should be added, in the cases of certain types of objects
(i.e. mental acts and certain species and universals159), but emphatically not in the
cases of empirical objects, in which only partial fulfilments are possible due to their
appearance in adumbrations.
The first axis (signitive-intuitive) is complicated by the fact that other types of
approaches to the object are possible: intuitive acts comprise also imagination which
presents its object through (partial) similarity, only without allowing immediate
fulfilment. (Here, imagination should probably be taken to include imagery, fantasy,
and memory alike, which were subsequently distinguished in Husserl’s writings
in the years after the LU (see Chap. 14)). Finally, the combinatorial table given
above is complicated by the fact that signitive intentions typically involve categorial
meaning;160 only signitive intentions with no syntax nor generality (exclamation of
simple word meanings) might constitute a limit case.
T H E I S S U E O F M E A N I N G
This ingenious construction leaves one question open: how is the fulfilment of
a signitive act (a categorial form, respectively) performed? As Jocelyn Benoist
(Benoist 1997, 136) has remarked, ‘The paradox is that a signitive categorial
form can only be satisfied by an intuition which is already itself categorized.’161
The problem is that no positive determination of the meaning part of the signitive
intention, taken separately, is undertaken. On the one hand, signitive acts are distinct
from mere indexical Anzeichen;162 on the other hand, meaning is distinguished from
all kinds of psychological imagery, representations, ‘Vorstellungen’. Meaning, in
the original ‘species theory of meaning’ of the LU, is seen as the species whose
instantiations are the single mutually synonymous meaning acts, but this does not
indicate how the meaning in the specific case can be characterized.
But without any further positive determination of the meaning concept, it remains
difficult to describe precisely why a specific meaning finds its fulfilment in the exact
set of intuitions it does. We know from the criticism of the empirical abstraction
theories in the 2nd LU that the way we make an ‘ideierende Abstraktion’ is
analogous to what Husserl later in Experience and Judgment calls eidetic variation;
that is, we substitute for all non-essential parts of the phenomenon empty, algebraic
variables, making it possible to focus upon the invariant species left. This variation
procedure must not be understood, of course, as if the specific core left was itself
untouched by the variation which investigates which range of variability the species
left is able to assume.163
C A T E G O R I A L M E A N I N G S A N D O B J E C T S
The meaning respectively object side of the act are easily distinguished in the
prototypical categorial case of logic. Logic categories include subject, predicate,

C A T E G O R I E S , D I A G R A M S , S C H E M A T A
149
proposition, etc., and the corresponding object categories include object, property,
state-of-affairs, etc. In general, logical categories refer to object categories
pertaining to what Husserl calls formal ontology,164 the general science of objects
without regard to their material qualities. This apparently simple duality between
formal logic and formal ontology hides some complications. Both are species
concepts, but meaning species and object species are not identical, even if the
grasping of the second by means of the first plays a crucial epistemological role.
Both, consequently, are species made explicit by the ideational abstraction described
in the 2nd LU. At the same time, categorial meanings form a crucial part (that is,
moment) of sufficiently complex, ‘sinnlich gemisschte’ empirical meaning species
in general (cf. below), just as categorial objects form parts (that is, moments) of
empirical object species. This forms the central link in Husserl’s solution to the
problem of epistemology: by means of the dependency calculus in terms of parts and
wholes, complex objects characterized by specific sets of interrelated parts may be
represented in signitive meanings characterized by analogous interrelation systems
between their parts.165 This implies the possibility for manipulating with empty,
signitive meanings without constant reference to their intuitive fulfilments: the
(partial) isomorphism of the manipulation rules guarantee the fulfilment possibility.
This basic idea is analogous to Peirce’s general diagram concept in which the crucial
feature is that the diagram is a sign representing its object by a schematic figure
connecting parts by means of rational relations, that is, precisely a mereological
analysis of the object in terms of ideal relations graspable by abstraction. This
analogy leads to the question of this chapter: what precisely does categorial meaning
comprehend? It goes without saying that the basic logic categories form prototypical
categoriality, but as categoriality is present wherever we rise from a purely sensous
perception fulfilment, logic is not sufficient for describing categoriality.166
A whole series of problems is connected with this issue: the role played by
categoriality in fulfilment of signitive intentions; the status of pictorial signs (and
the categoriality inherent in them) in relation to the grasping of ideal objects; the
principle of variation in the determination of species in general.
M E A N I N G A S T H E D E T E R M I N A T I O N O F A R A N G E O F P O S S I B L E
I N T U I T I O N S
Let us take a closer look at what meaning is supposed to do. In the beginning of the
6th LU it is laconically stated that ‘The ’generality of the word’ means, therefore,
that the unified sense of one and the same word covers (or, in the case of a nonsense
word, purports to cover) an ideally delimited manifold of possible intuitions, each
of which could serve as the basis for an act of recognitive naming endowed with the
same sense.’ (6th LU, Vol. 2, 691–92/ Hua XIX 563, our italics) This is exemplified
as so often before in the word ‘red’: ‘To the word “red”, e.g. corresponds the
possibility of both knowing as, and calling “red”, all red objects that might be given
in possible intuitions. This possibility leads on, with an a priori guarantee, to the
further possibility of becoming aware, through an identifying synthesis of all such

150
C H A P T E R 6
naming recognitions, of a sameness of meaning of one with the other: this A is red,
and that A is the same, i.e. also red: the two intuited singulars belong under the
same “concept” ’ (ibid.). The bound variation of the species meaning in question
may singularize it in particular instantiations. Thus, it is the opposite operation of
the variation undertaken in the abstraction process’ isolation of the species in the
first place.
This eidetic variation procedure can allegedly be applied from the most simple
to the most complicated cases; in the Prolegomena’s conclusive and ambitious
outline of a ‘theory of theories’ concentrating on theoretical form, we find the same
idea at the level of whole theories: to substitute for its given parts undetermined
variables to leave only the formal categorial structure of the theory behind (§67).167
Furthermore, the variation can be extended to involve the formal structure itself: by
the variation of basic factors in the theory, the conditions for the transposition of
one theory into another may be made clear (§69). Correlatively, on the object side
of the theory, the domain of knowledge corresponding to the purely formal theory
will be the idea of pure mathematics in general, the Mannigfaltigkeitslehre (§70). If
space, writes Husserl, is the categorial form of cosmos, studied by geometry, then
this is only a part of a genus of categorially determined manifolds describing space
in a generalized meaning of the word. Here, the categorial form of the theory is
strictly correlated to its object side. To the formal logic of the former corresponds
the formal ontology of the latter.
In the 2nd LU, Husserl returns to the question in the famous discussion of the
general triangle in the British empiricists. He refutes Locke’s claim that the non-
existence of the general triangle should imply that it is only a mere invention of
understanding, and he criticizes Hume’s psychologistic and nominalist idea that a
singular representation becomes general merely by means of the addition to it of
a general name. On the other hand, Husserl is close to Berkeley at this point: the
universal is a singular idea used to represent all other singular ideas of the same
sort, provided that representation here is read as implying meaning rather than
reference, as triggering rather than substituting. The single sign may not refer to
an infinity in extension, but it means ‘any triangle, no matter which one’.168 Thus,
the role of singular illustrations for universal concepts, tokens for types, should
be, Husserl repeats over and over, taken as trigger (‘Anhalt’) rather than substitute
(‘Stellvertreten’). So it is a means of grasping the thought rather than a substitute
for it, but it is not necessarily a less prestigious role to be Anhalt than Stellvertreter.
For the role of the trigger seems to be an illustration – an illustration subsequently
to be read in an eidetic fashion, and, in turn, to be varied eidetically in order to
yield ‘any triangle’.169
V A R I A T I O N A N D A B S T R A C T I O N
In the conclusion to the 2nd LU’s eidetic abstraction theory, Husserl explains
the extended meaning of abstraction as follows: ‘Thus we directly apprehend the
Specific Unity Redness on the basis of a singular intuition of something red. We

C A T E G O R I E S , D I A G R A M S , S C H E M A T A
151
look to its moment of red, but we perform a peculiar act, whose intention is directed
at the ‘Idea’, the ‘universal’. Abstraction in the sense of this act is wholly different
from the mere attention to, or emphasis on, the moment of red; to indicate this
difference we have repeatedly spoken of ideational or generalizing abstraction’
(2nd LU, Vol. 1, 432/ Hua XIX, 226).
In this two-tier account for abstraction (emphasis – generalization) there is a
surprising similarity to Peirce’s abstraction theory, in which he puts great weight
on distinguishing various types of abstraction having to do with the distribution of
attention to selected aspects of the object on the one hand (involving three types of
‘distinctions’), and the so-called ‘hypostatic abstraction’ on the other. The seminal
attention focussing abstraction, which enables us to distinguish parts which can not
act as distinct unities, is ‘prescission’.170 But this focussing mechanism, however
important, does not in itself lead to higher degrees of abstraction. The property
focussed upon must, in turn, be made subject to ‘hypostatic abstraction’ which
makes of it a general noun as a subject for a new proposition with predicates to
be determined. This two-step abstraction mechanism seems to make explicit what
Husserl is more briefly outlining in the 2nd LU in the quote given with its distinction
of the ‘Hervorheben’ and the ‘generalisierender Abstraktion’, the emphasizing and
the ensuing generalizing abstraction.
To return to the issue of the ‘illustrative’ aspect of meaning, this abstraction
account seems to clarify what we more exactly do when using a picture as
‘Anhalt’:
first, we emphasize the moment of it in question (‘Red’, ‘Triangle’),
second, we generalize this moment of it by variation which is what, third, permits
us to give it a specific, nominalized name (‘Redness’, ‘Triangularity’). But once
this has been achieved, there is, conversely, a way ‘back’; by using variation we
may now devise the ‘ideally delimited manifold of possible intuitions’, that is, we
may, by variation, produce any particular triangle. The variation principle delimits
the manifold. The question here is: what is the part played by categoriality in this
relation of variation between signitive intention and intuitive fulfilment?
H U S S E R L ’ S E X A M P L E S I N T H E L O G I S C H E U N T E R S U C H U N G E N
Husserl’s general description of categorial intuition suffers from the same defects
as does the analogous description of sensuous fulfilment – we do not know the
precise road from signitive categorial intentions to fulfilled categorial intentions
presenting categorial intuitions. But unlike the case in the perceptual counterpart,
we do not even have a clear idea of what the relevant fulfilment looks like. Husserl’s
own primary examples point to formal logic and its use in linguistic syntax of
empirical languages as for instance when he considers the example of conjunction
(‘and’). He writes, in a famous passage, that the act of conjunction is different
from simple – non-categorial – perceptions of sensously given unitary sets, series,
swarms etc., because it is a distinct act adding the contents of two former acts to
mean the compound content ‘A and B’. So this conjunction is a founded, categorial
act requiring its own intuitive fulfilment.171

152
C H A P T E R 6
Some of the more complicated examples given in the course of the LU may throw
some light upon this issue – e.g. the mathematical expression to be calculated; the
map of England; the recognition of Goethe’s handwriting; the model of the steam
engine. Husserl himself does not make any categorial conclusion to this variety
of examples, but taken together, they make it possible to outline what we may
conceive categorial intuition to involve. Not all of these examples are given in
the relation to the 6th LU’s chapters on categorial intuition, but still they involve
different aspects of it.
The first example concerns the mathematical expression (53)4 and concerns mediate
fulfilment. It is not the case that the meaning of a complicated expression is of the
same kind as a simple word meaning. On the contrary, the complicated expression
facilitates ‘ the possibility of fulfilment-chains built member upon member out of
signitive intentions. We clarify the concept (53)4 by having recourse to the defin-
itory presentation: Number which arises when one forms the product 53 · 53 · 53 · 53.’
(6th LU, Vol. 2, 723/Hua XIX, 601) In the same manner, this expression takes us
back to simpler definitions, and every step in this operation is an act of fulfilment,
prescribed by the signitive representation: ‘A remarkable property of the cases just
discussed, and of the class of significative presentations which they illustrate, lies in
the fact that in them the content of the presentations – or, more clearly their ‘matter’ –
dictates a determinate order of fulfilment a priori.’ (6th LU, Vol. 2, 724/ Hua XIX,
602) What can be learnt from this example is that certain expressions allow their
contentstobeconstructedbyanordered,stepwiseoperationwithincreasingfulfilment.
If we generalize this to other mathematical expressions we can add that it is far
from always the case that the procedure to be undertaken is unanimous nor clear.
An equation may be solved in different ways, in different variables; maybe it may
not be solved at all; maybe it is not even known whether it may be solved (Goldbach’s
conjecture). In short, in expressions like these, a (in some respects) rule-bound but
otherwise(inotherrespects)freeoperationcanbeperformedinordertoseekfulfilment,
but only in some cases is it clear that stepwise fulfilment is able to reach its goal.
This may be compared to an example given a couple of pages earlier on an
intuitive series of fulfilment: ‘Another example of an intuitive fulfilment-series is
the transition from a rough drawing to a more exact pencil-sketch, then from the
latter to the completed picture, and from this to the living finish of the painting, all
of which present the same, visibly the same, object.’ (6th LU, Vol. 2, 721/ Hua XIX,
599). This fulfilment series has a slightly different character from the mathematical
case – also apart from involving imaginary rather than signitive intentions. In the
painting series, the earlier stages may be left behind, once the latter more fulfilled
ones are reached – not so in the mathematical example where it is important to
remember the expression of which the number 244,140,625 is in fact the result.
Here, conversely, (53)4 might as well serve as a fulfilment of this number, in
an intention pointing the opposite way, given the signitive intention (much more
difficult, to be sure) to resolve it into its prime factors.
A peculiar case concerns what Husserl calls ‘signitive intentions outside the
meaning function’ – referring to acts of classification without the relevant word

C A T E G O R I E S , D I A G R A M S , S C H E M A T A
153
being invoked. The recognition of an object as a Roman roadstone or of a tool as a
drilling machine, for example – but separated from the uttering of the corresponding
word. The classification of a phenomenon as belonging to a species, a token to a
type, thus seems to be the pure function of the signitive intention.172 ‘Objects are,
strictly speaking, only ‘known’, as they are given in their actual intuitive foundation,
but, since the unity of our intention ranges further, objects appear to be known
as what they are for this total intention. The character of knowing is accordingly
somewhat broadened. Thus we recognize (know) a person as an adjutant of the
Kaiser, a handwriting as Goethe’s, a mathematical expression as the Cardanian
formula, and so on. Here our recognition can of course not apply itself to what is
given in perception, at best it permits possible application to intuitive sequences,
which need not themselves be actualized at all.’ (6th LU, Vol. 2, 716/ Hua XIX,
593). With the signifier of the expression placed in brackets, this paragraph in fact
presents the signitive intention in nuce: it concerns the pure species and the problem
of how, given a concrete perception, this perception is classified as instantiating
the species: a piece of handwriting identified as Goethe’s. This, in fact, is to our
day still a problem hard to solve: how is it possible to identify a style of writing?
From a general point of view, this question may be of the same kind as those about
the emperor’s servant and Cardan’s theorem, but from a more detailed cognitive
science point of view, there is a huge difference. The simple version of variation is
certainly not possible in the Goethe’s handwriting example: there are no simple parts
which may be replaced with algebraic variables. Rather, the species are grasped
through the variation of the whole with certain stylistic features kept constant: the
variation of the type of ink and the type of paper is easily performed, but more
difficult is the variation of the written expression with the style kept invariant. We
can not seriously assume a variation which de facto covers all possible texts in the
world, rewritten using Goethe’s hand writing, rather we implicitly grasp the idea
of such a variation and judge it possible in principle. Goethe’s style is grasped
as a set of certain, typical, stable variation aberrations as compared to a normal
zero handwriting.173 This is an adaptation to intuition processes which need not
be actualized themselves: we need not see for our inner gaze other examples of
Goethe’s handwriting in order to recognize an example of it – this variation is
presumably undertaken without being explicit in consciousness.
From this example, two things can be inferred: that the main problem resides
not in the (mostly arbitrary) relation between word expression and meaning, but in
the relation between meaning and its fulfilment; that the variation process involved
in classification may vary the content continually while keeping general moments
invariant which characterize the whole of the object and which are hard, maybe
impossible, to make explicit as such.
A further example is the map of England, a prototypical diagram example. Husserl
mentions it as an example of an indirect representative serving as partly fulfilling
intuition: ‘ as when the use of a geographical name calls up the imaginative
presentation of a map, which blends with the meaning-intention of this name ’
(6th LU, Vol. 2, 727/ Hua XIX, 606). When the fulfilling of the name ‘England’ is
performed by a map (instead of the object itself), it sure is an indirect object. ‘The

154
C H A P T E R 6
analogy of what appears and what is meant, which may be present here, does not
lead to a straightforward presentation by way of an image, but to a sign-presentation
resting upon the latter. The outline of England as drawn on a map, may indeed
represent the shape of the land itself, but the pictorial image of the map which
comes up when England is mentioned, does not mean England itself in pictorial
fashion, not even mediately, as the country pictured on the map. It means England
after the manner of a mere sign, through external relations of association, which
have tied all our knowledge of land and people to the map-picture’ (ibid.). The map
referring to England is seen as a complicated expression with several levels; the
iconic qualities of the map in relation to England is superposed by the use of it as
a sign referring to England as the object, including the associative connections to
our diverse knowledge of that country. So the map is no mere picture even if built
on iconic qualities. It must be considered as a diagram which implies two things:
a similarity between map and object plus, in turn, the use of the map as a sign for
the object, including association with qualities not directly mapped therein.
What can be learnt from this example is that the map has a double foundation,
composed of a moment of similarity on the one hand and a signitive intention on
the other.
The last of Husserl’s scattered examples concerns the most typical diagram
example in the LU: the steam engine model. The example occurs in the context
of the chapter of the 6th LU conclusive to the exposition of sensuous and
categorial intuitions. The chapter introduces the crucial distinction between the
categorial synthesis of simple perceptions on the one hand (e.g. particular states-
of-affairs) – and general intuitions with general objects on the other, giving rise
to synthetical and abstractive categorial intuitions, respectively. In the former, the
founding acts’ objects are included in the founded acts, not so in the latter –
but both are categorial acts. Accordingly, we may distinguish at least three types
of involvement of categorial intuition: one is present in the categorial moments
of simple perception judgments, e.g. of concrete states-of-affairs. Another is the
pure grasping of categorial structures in specie, in logic and mathematics. And yet
another is the use of categorial means to grasp general empirical objects.
A crucial observation here is the following: ‘Talk of ‘perception’ presupposes the
possibility of correspondent imagination: a distinction between them, we held, is part
of the natural sense of our ordinary talk about ‘intuition’. But it is just this distinction
that we cannot here draw. This seems to stem from the fact that abstractive acts do
not differ in consonance with the character of the straightforward intuitions which
underlie them; they are quite unaffected by the assertive or non-assertive character
of such underlying acts, or by their perceptual or imaginative character.’ (6. LU §52,
Vol. 2 800/ Hua XIX, 691) The fact that the distinction between imagination and
perception becomes irrelevant in the case of categorial intuition is very important:
it implies that when talking about categories, an imaginative fulfilment is as good
as any. This brief statement is ripe with consequences. The function of imagination
as access to ideal structures is implied, just as the role of thought experiments in
science and thought in general. This implies, moreover, that merely imaginative

C A T E G O R I E S , D I A G R A M S , S C H E M A T A
155
representatives of categorial structures may be used as completely fulfilling signs
for them. As to the categorial structure of an object, an image of a special, general
kind (or, as Peirce calls it, a diagram) permits us to directly grasp the very category
in specie. This includes a general categorial ‘reading’ of a particular example, cf.
the discussion of Locke’s triangle above. An individual object can not serve as an
analogy of itself, Husserl writes, but ‘It is quite different in, e.g. the case where
mathematical analysis has given us an indirectly conceived Idea of a certain class of
curves of the third order, though we have never seen any curve of this sort. In such a
case an intuitive figure, e.g. of a familiar third-order curve, perhaps actually drawn,
perhaps merely pictured, may very well serve as an intuitive image, an analogon, of
the universal we are intending: our consciousness of the universal is here intuitive,
but analogically intuitive, in its use of an individual intuition.’ (6th LU §52, Vol.
2, 801/ Hua XIX, 692, our italics). This interesting claim is what is examplified
in the steam engine example: ‘And does not an ordinary rough drawing function
analogically in comparison with an ideal figure, thereby helping to condition the
imaginative character of the universal presentation? This is how we contemplate
the Idea of a steam-engine, basing ourselves on a model of a steam-engine, in which
case there can naturally be no talk of an adequate abstraction or conception. In such
cases we are not concerned with significations, but with universal representations
by way of analogy, with universal imaginations, in short’ (ibid.; the German version
has: ‘In solchen Fällen haben wir es mit keinen blossen Signifikationen zu tun’, so
the English quote should rather talk about ‘mere significations’).
This characterization of the model of the steam engine174 thus unites iconicity and
generality, Peirce’s two major characterizations of the diagram. Unlike the merely
signitive word ‘steam engine’, the model implies a general imagination of the idea of
such a machine – and the act of imagination is in abstract, categorial cases a complete
fulfilment. But implicitly, it also displays the third major feature of diagrams: the
possibility for experimenting. A model of a steam engine only reveals the idea
of the working of this apparatus when conceived of in a temporal, operational,
and experimental fashion. The model gives rise to a thought experiment, letting
water be heated, steam to be produced and suddenly cooled with the characteristic
working process of the machine as a result. Mobile parts of the object possible to
manipulate physically may add to the efficiency of such thought experiments. This
feature of the diagram is only implicitly present as a necessary feature in Husserl’s
steam engine example, but in the mathematical example above it was made explicit
in the idea of a stepwise, operational Erfüllungsreihe.
To sum up: categorial intuition and its use in the direct ‘erschauen’ of meaning as
species constitutes a strikingly close (even if much less explicit) parallel in the LU
to the mature Peirce’s diagrammatic epistemology. Peirce’s distinctions between
pure and applied diagrams find a counterpart here in the distinction between pure
categorial intuition (in which categories are grasped in abstraction from the acts
they spontaneously appear in) and categories put to use in the grasping of empirical
species (as the steam engine) or of empirical state-of-affairs. Furthermore, Peirce’s
extrapolation of logic from formal inference schemata to cover a much wider range

156
C H A P T E R 6
of signs finds its (implicit, that is) counterpart in the (few, but) widespread examples
in Husserl’s text making it clear that not only logic, but also geometry and the whole
‘Mannigfaltigkeitslehre’ of the Prolegomena form the content of pure categorial
intuitions, possibly to be put to use, in turn, in applied – ‘sinnlich vermisschte’ –
categorial intuitions.
Finally, it must be the more or less perfect grasping of categorially formed species
that allows for the mysterious route leading from signitive intentions to intuitive
fulfillings. How should the passage from the word ‘steam engine’ to the perceptive
fulfilling of it be possible if not via the intermediary (maybe only parts or aspects
of) a general, imaginative model of it?175
T H E A M B I G U O U S S T A T U S O F P I C T U R E S I N T H E L O G I S C H E
U N T E R S U C H U N G E N
Taken as a whole the LU remain ambiguous as to the role of pictures. It seems as if
two tendencies are verschmeltzt in the early Husserl: one is the phenomenological
turn against psychologism; the other is the formal turn against imagination to the
benefit of formal calculi, and I believe there is a tendency in Husserl to identify or
confuse the two. This can be seen in his repeated arguments against ‘phantasies’
in the question of semantics – all at the same time as the steam engine example
admits the crucial role of imagination in categorial intuition fulfilment. But this
identification is misplaced. There are two strands in this argument. One is the
anti-psychological argument: semantics is not psychology and meaning must be
conceived of as an ideal, phenomenological species and should not be taken to
rely on more or less contingent, individual fantasy pictures only. But this does
not entail that semantics is formal understood as devoid of intuition, rather it
necessitates a concept of phenomenologically pure, eidetic pictures, the ‘allgemeine
Imaginationen’ that Husserl points to at the end of the central chapter in the 6. LU –
that is, diagrams.
The ambiguous attitude towards pictures is mirrored in a similarly ambiguous
attitude towards space. Husserl writes for instance (3rd LU, Vol. 2, 455/ Hua XIX,
256) in connection with the redefinition of analytic/synthetic concepts that ideal
objects comprise two types, the essences to which ‘ correspond the concepts or
propositions which have content, which we sharply distinguish from purely formal
concepts and propositions, which lack all ‘matter’ or ‘content’. To the latter belong
the categories of formal logic and the formal ontological categories mentioned
in the last chapter of the Prolegomena, which are essentially related to these, as
well as to all syntactical formations they engender. Concepts like Something, One,
Object, Quality, Relation, Association, Plurality, Number, Order, Ordinal Number,
Whole, Part, Magnitude etc., have a basically different character from concepts
like House, Tree, Color, Tone, Space, Sensation, Feeling, etc., which for their part
express genuine content’, the two categories of concepts giving rise to formal and
material ontologies as analytical and synthetic disciplines a priori, respectively.
Here, surprisingly, space is classified alongside the other material species belonging
to different material ontologies. This classification of it apparently runs counter to

C A T E G O R I E S , D I A G R A M S , S C H E M A T A
157
what is said in the conclusion of the Prolegomena where we find the idea that the
correlate to a purely formally conceived theory is a field of experience in general,
this field in turn to be studied by Husserl’s general conception of mathematics,
the ‘Mannigfaltigkeitslehre’. But here, this study includes space, placing it on the
purely formal level, far from the ‘sachhaltige’ rendering of it in the quote above:
‘ if we mean by ‘space’ the categorial form of world-space, and, correlatively,
by ‘geometry’ the categorial theoretic form of geometry in the ordinary sense,
then space falls under a genus, which we can bound by laws, of pure, categorially
determinate manifolds, in regard to which it is natural to speak of ‘space’ in a yet
more extended sense’ (Prolegomena, §70, 242/ Hua XVIII, 252). Thus, the specific
space concepts pertaining to each material ontology are but species of a formal genus
of space belonging to formal ontology. But this general space category implies that
space is also among the categories finding fulfilment in pure categorial intuition.
This allows for the Husserlian counterpart to Peirce’s pure diagrams (requiring
space) with no reference to any actual existence.
This allows us to return to the issue of the possible role of pictures in the
fulfilment of signitive intentions. As a geometer, Husserl agrees completely with
the formalist tendencies of his time:
‘It is a well-known fact that no geometrical concept whatsoever can be adequately
illustrated. We imagine or draw a stroke, and speak or think of a straight line.’
(1st LU, Vol. 1, 302/ Hua XIX, 70). The picture drawn is no representative of
the geometrical object – cf. Locke’s triangle – but is a mere ‘Anhalt’, a trigger
for a more precise fulfilment, just like Peirce’s diagram token is not in itself a
representation but merely a precondition for the diagram type to be grasped. Now,
given the possibility of a stepwise fulfilment with an increasing degree of fulfilment,
this role of ‘Anhalt’ may be given a more detailed description: the picture is read
in an eidetic manner, governed by the signitive intention present (for instance,
the picture of a triangle accompanied by the word ‘triangle’ – as opposed to the
same picture accompanied by the word ‘manifold’, ‘polygon’, ‘Jordan-curve’, etc.,
emphasizing other moments in it). This eidetic reading of the concrete picture is a
higher-level categorial act, founded on the signitive and pictorial acts alike, and it
makes possible the eidetic imagination of the general picture. The concrete drawing
is not general, but the categoriality of the signitive intention present prompts such
a reading. Husserl himself does not consider further this interplay between pictorial
and signitive intentions leading to eidetic imagination, but Peirce’s diagram concept
does just that. It emphasizes the diagram’s double determination: it is an icon in
so far as it is a (skeletal) picture of its object, but it is governed by a symbol
permitting the emphasizing of the relevant aspects of the picture intended. In so far,
the interplay between symbol and icon, signitive and pictorial intentions, prompts
eidetic abstraction permitting to imagine the pure species. This species may now, in
turn, be used to map the relation structure of widely differing objects (triangle trade,
erotic triangles, triangulation in navigation, etc.). The diagram category thus makes
evident that the mereological dependency calculi of the 3rd LU kind are necessary
but not sufficient for formal ontology. Mereology needs supplementation by other

158
C H A P T E R 6
branches of mathematics; geometry, topology, and category theory are prominent
candidates, but only ongoing investigation will show which formal disciplines
will be needed adequately to map the categorial properties of diagrams and the
corresponding categorial objects they depict.
H U S S E R L I A N C A T E G O R I A L I N T U I T I O N S A N D P E I R C E A N D I A G R A M S
To sum up, in the relation between signitive and intuitive acts, categorial intuition
plays the role of:
- permitting the synthesis of contents into all kinds of nominal objects and states-
of-affairs
- permitting eidetic variation to be a crucial device for grasping species, that is,
meaning. Once the species is constituted, the variation procedure may work in
the other direction furnishing the species with possible particular instantiations
- permitting the rule-bound, stepwise fulfilment of certain signitive acts (the mathe-
matical and the sketch examples)
- permitting the adequate grasping of structures in formal ontology, this implying
the necessity (as Jean Petitot points out) of geometrising the basic structures in
formal ontology176
- grasping the content of complicated empirical species (the steam machine
example) by permitting rule-bound operations involving its parts in specific
configurations.
All these points make categorial intuitions play roles analogous to those played
by the diagram in the mature Peirce’s theory of knowledge. Here, diagrams are
similar to their objects in two crucial aspects: they form relational, mereological
analyses of their objects, and – as we saw in Chap. 4 – they are subject to Peirce’s
operational criterion for iconicity: one phenomenon is an icon for another if and
only if experiments or manipulations on the former may reveal new insight into the
latter (‘new’ in the sense that the information in question is not explicity expressed
in the icon). This implies that diagrams are the vehicles for all deductive reasoning –
such reasoning simply being defined as manipulations on diagrams.
This procedural aspect of the diagram’s iconicity is not explicitly thematized
in Husserl’s account for categorial intuitions, but it is, as shown, present in his
examples. The crucial variation procedure itself is nothing but an operation on a
diagram; the steam engine model permits to imagine the working of the machine
in an operational procedure; the rule-bound transformation of the mathematical
expression is another operation on a diagram.
In Peirce, this operational criterion for iconicity is tied to the continuity
metaphysics: to perform an operation on the diagram implies the continuity between
the single diagram instances which the operation connects – which facilitates the
corresponding continuous unity of the depicted object in space and time.177 From
a Husserlian point of view, this central property in diagrams connects to several
important issues. One is the idea clearly brought to the fore in Ding und Raum, that

C A T E G O R I E S , D I A G R A M S , S C H E M A T A
159
the very prerequisite for the unity of a logical entity is the continuum of Abschat-
tungen of an object which makes their schematic synthesis possible. This forms the
very basis of the founding of logic on phenomenology in Husserl, and it implies,
as Jean Petitot remarks, that the categories of object and of logic both presuppose
continuity. This casts a Husserlian light on the operational icon definition in Peirce’s
diagrams: it is because the object itself is defined by a range of continuous opera-
tions that a formalized icon may depict it by repeating (parts of) these opera-
tions. Furthermore, it connects time-consciousness intimately to diagrams – and to
categorial intuition: it is only through the synthesis of temporal experience with the
fulfilment series involved in diagram manipulation that the corresponding insight
into its object becomes possible.
D I A G R A M S A S W H O L E S W I T H S E N S U O U S M O M E N T O F U N I T Y ?
Having thus argued for a ‘diagrammatizing’ reading of categorial intuition and the
LU, we may now let Husserl’s conception throw a refining light back onto Peirce’s
ideas. For why is it that diagrams are so apt at capturing ideal objects? As Elmar
Holenstein argues,178 Husserl’s arguments in §60 ff of the 6. LU places him at a
delicate intermediate position with respect to the different schools of Gestalt Theory.
Husserl claims, of course, that categorial acts are founded upon sensuous acts – but,
on the other hand, he does not claim the same for acts intending sensuos Gestalts
which are grasped immediately. In the first claim, Husserl agrees with Meinong’s
and the Graz school’s ‘theory of production’; in the second claim, though, Husserl is
on a par with the Berlin School led by Koffka, claiming that the Graz view reintro-
duced sense data not pertinent in experience and invoking the direct perception of
Gestalts instead. If Husserl is correct on this point, this may throw some light upon
the efficacity of diagrams: they permit to grasp categorial contents by the repre-
sentation of them in sensuous Gestalts, provided with signitive, categorial reading
instructions. True, as we have seen, the sensuous Gestalt is by no means sufficient
in itself (Locke’s triangle) and it needs to be supplemented by general rules for
its eidetic reading, for its variation, as well as for the experimenting upon it. The
diagram (or, at least, the simplest significant part of it) must be graspable in one
glance in order to represent the relevant species or type. There must be a minimum
of spontaneous Gestalt grasping for the mind to be able in any way to construct
more complicated Gestalts on the one hand or to abstract features from the Gestalt
in order to represent categorial properties.179 This would give a further Husserlian
support to Peirce’s claim that all necessary reasoning proceeds by diagrams.
Peircean diagrams or Husserlian categorial intuitions – both point to the necessity
of the direct intuitive access to ideal objects as a prerequisite to a phenomenolog-
ically conceived realism. Categories and diagrams give intuitive access to ideal-
ities and, in turn, make possible the recognition of empirical objects instantiating
analogically formed properties. This points to the necessity of further investigation
a de-mentalized notion of icons, of allgemeine Imaginationen, in all degrees of
generality, and of their role in categorial fulfilment.

C H A P T E R 7
MEREOLOGY
Parts and Wholes in Phenomenology and Semiotics
In Peircean diagrams as well as Husserlian categorial intuitions, part-whole relations
thus play a foundational role. Strange as it may seem, though, mereology – the
theory of parts and wholes180 – has only rarely caught the explicit attention of
semiotics.
Semiotics, as a study taking signifying phenomena in general as its object, is
faced with the issue of the signification of wholes in relation to the signification
of its parts as a completely everyday phenomenon, and the recognition of distinct
levels or layers of signification is also a well-known idea in most parts of semiotics.
Taking the prototypical case of a text as an example, semiotics is faced not only with
the traditional linguistic question of the organization of phonemes and morphemes
into words, and in turn, words into sentences by means of syntax, but also, in turn,
the successive integration of sentences into more extensive wholes of transphrastic
discourse, periods, scenes, scripts, narrations, genres, systems of ideas, etc. As
is the case in the sciences more generally, this mereological problem gives rise
to two typical approaches; one, reductionist, takes a compositional attitude to the
signification of wholes which is consequently seen as some kind of sum of its
elements, so that an algorithmic syntax of some sort is supposed to make it possible
to derive the whole’s signification directly from the knowledge of the signification
of its parts. The second, holist, stance takes the signification of the higher levels as
irreducible, relying on their own phenomenological motivation, and, correlatively,
the parts as being an analytical result of a partitioning of the whole, expanding
the possibilities of the whole and making its signification in the single case more
precise.181
In this chapter we shall briefly discuss the mereological implications in four major
trends of semiotics with different degrees of connection to the Brentanian tradition
in philosophy from which modern mereology originate, namely Husserl, Jakobson,
Hjelmslev, and Peirce. Husserl, of course, is a Brentanian, and in his famous third
Logical Investigation, he outlines a theory of parts and wholes as a part of formal
ontology. The second, Jakobson, has direct connections to this tradition, primarily
via Husserl; the third, Hjelmslev, displays striking similarities with the tradition
without any direct influence admitted; the fourth, Peirce, working simultaneously
with Brentano, has no relation at all to the tradition but still structural similarities
are found.
161

162
C H A P T E R 7
H U S S E R L
It is strange to so small extent Husserl’s work is recognized or even known in
the semiotic world. As hinted at in the previous chapter, most of his work either
explicitly deals with or at least touches upon issues central to semiotics. In his
early work, around the period of the Philosophie der Aritmetik, he even uses the
word himself,182 and later, in his first chef-d’oeuvre Logische Untersuchungen
(1900–01), he investigates a whole series of central semiotic questions. Logische
Untersuchungen ought to count as a classic of semiotics. Its long Prolegomena
contains a detailed attack on psychologism in logic and semiotics – in so far it
constitutes a major contribution to the fundamental anti-psychologism of general
semiotics alongside Peirce’s strongly related position. The first investigation draws
a distinction between two sign types, Ausdrücke and Anzeichen, respectively: signs
conferring meaning to an object vs. signs merely indicating an object. The second
investigation is a critique of empiricist abstraction theories attempting to make
induction the source of abstract knowledge – and it points instead to a phenomeno-
logical change in conception modus as responsible for abstraction’s grasp of ideal
objects. The third investigation, to which we shall return below, constructs the
foundations for a formal ontology of wholes and parts which forms a basis for
all phenomenological and semiotic investigations in so far as it makes possible to
distinguish proper parts from non-proper parts, the last including what is usually
called properties. The fourth investigation takes the mereology of the third as the
foundation of a pure, that is, a priori grammar, mapping dependency relations
between linguistic entities; nouns and sentences are taken as independent primitives
upon which other linguistic entities are dependent. The fifth investigation is the first
sketch of Husserl’s intention theory, also constructed with the part-whole toolkit
of the 3rd LU, distinguishing between the quality, the matter, the representative
content, and the object of an act, respectively. The quality is in our days’ terms a
speech act category; it refers to the act’s character of being propositional, imper-
ative, wishing, etc. The matter of the act is the way its object is presented in the act,
and the representative content, finally, is the degree of fulfilment with which the
object is presented (perception representing the highest degree of fulfilment, and
linguistic representations (‘signitive acts’) and imaginations (‘imaginative acts’) like
phantasies, pictures, dreams, memories, etc. being act types with different lower
degrees of fulfilment). All these aspects of the act are presented as moments, that
is, ‘unechte Teile’, in the terminology of the third investigation. Finally, the sixth
investigation takes up epistemology on the basis outlined in the former investi-
gations; as we have just seen, the central problem of categorial intuition (how
categories, among them linguistic categories, possess their own type of intuitive
fulfilment) is discussed.
As is evident, most of the issues discussed in the Logische Untersuchungen lie at
the heart of semiotics, and the mereology of the third investigation forms a crucial
piece of formal ontology for the description of all these subjects. The main idea is
that all objects may be described in terms of parts and wholes, and that two types
of parts may be distinguished. Proper parts versus non-proper parts or parts versus
moments, respectively. Parts – ‘echte Teile’, or ‘Stücke’, or concrete parts – are parts

M E R E O L O G Y
163
which may be separated from the whole they constitute, while moments – ‘unechte
Teile’, or aspects, or abstract parts – are parts which may not be so separated.
This sparse definition may be extended to relative autonomy and dependency,
respectively, so that one object is relatively dependent on another if that content
may only exist in connection to the other or parts of it. This idea makes possible
the crucial structure of three possible dependency relations between parts:183
If we consider any pair of parts of a whole, the following possibilities obtain:
1. There is a relation of foundedness between both parts.
2. There is no such relation. In case 1, the foundedness can be:
(a) reciprocal
(b) one-sided  (LI, 466)184
Husserl’s mereological investigations include further points of interest – so as for
instance the difference between wholes requiring a moment of unity and wholes
not requiring it. Smith 1994 (236) summarizes Husserl’s ideas in a small taxonomy.
Between wholes, Husserl distinguishes those which do not require additional objects
to exist (such as nut and bolt), opposed to those that require additional unifying
objects such as nails or glue. The latter category yields two subtypes, depending on
whether the unifying object is a concrete part or an abstract moment. In the latter
case, the moment of unity will correspond to von Ehrenfels’s ‘Gestaltqualitäten’.
This distinction is related to different versions of Gestalt theory, cf. Barry Smith’s
recapitulation of the Austrian Gestalt school’s ‘production theory’ requiring such a
moment of unity in addition to the parts, as opposed to the Berlin Gestalt school’s
claim that no parts of a gestalt are genuine and all parts are moments only accessible
by abstraction (Smith 1994, Chap. 8). Both schools’ theories have their advantages
and flip sides. The Graz school has the advantage of distinguishing between a part
and the role played by that part in the gestalt in question, while the Berlin school
tends to blur this distinction and thus opt for holism. The Graz school, on the other
hand, tends to come close to Helmholtz’s old idea of Gestalt-like phenomena being
the result of ‘unbewusste Schlüsse’ – unconscious inferences – so as to make them
an additional feature added to sense data by the intellect – while on the other hand
the Berlin school does not follow this subjectivist idea: its holism has the merit
of integrating both subjective and objective determinants as responsible for the
Gestalt, and so the Berlin school will find Gestalts not only in the physiology of
the gestalting subject, but also in the purely objective, even physical surroundings.
Smith’s conclusion is not unanimous, but it seems as if the two schools correspond
to different gestalt possibilities on a continuous scale rather than being mutually
exclusive, so that both very subjective and very objective gestalts as well as a
large range of intermediate types are possible. We can not go further into this vast
discussion here, but a further clarification of types and subtypes of Gestalts and their
relation to their parts will no doubt enrich the semiotic discussion of mereology.
Husserl’s mereology further forms the basis for his reinterpretation of the a priori,
see the next chapter.
Finally, Husserl’s fourth Untersuchung should be considered. Here, he outlines
a pure, a priori grammar using the mereological tools of the third Investigation –
an idea, as a matter of fact, closely related to Hjelmslev’s idea (cf. below). In

164
C H A P T E R 7
contradistinction to Hjelmslev’s empiricist idea of using mereology as a descriptive
metalanguage for linguistics, Husserl’s idea is to base the mereological description of
language on certain ontological presuppositions, namely the privileging of the noun
and sentence, respectively, as independent entities (after the Scholastic distinction
between categorematica and syncategorematica, respectively; the former possessing
an autonomous signification). Furthermore, Husserl defines the important distinction
between Widersinn and Unsinn, respectively – logical and grammatically nonsense,
respectively, where the latter depends on irreconcilable syncategorematica being
combined,whiletheformerisgrammaticallycorrectwhilesemanticallycontradictory.
Husserl’ssketchesofapuregrammarreceivedmoreinterestinlogicthaninlinguistics:
theybecameimportantforAjdukiewicz,Lesniewskiandthedevelopmentofcategorial
grammar. But even so, a volume like the brillant Rational Grammar by Jean-
Louis Gardies not only outlines the Wirkungsgeschichte of the fourth Investigation,
it also gives a detailed account of its possible implementation in linguistics.
J A K O B S O N
The fact that Jakobson’s version of structural linguistics involves strong influences
from Husserl’s Logische Untersuchungen is clearly stated at several occasions in
Jakobson’s oeuvre, but it has only received general recognition after the work of Elmar
Holenstein who, in a period of relative phenomenological oblivion during the fifties-
sixties-seventies, never ceased to underline the crucial lines of connection between
structuralism and phenomenology (Holenstein 1975, 1976). He even traced three or
four variants of phenomenology taking each their characteristical departure in the
LU, and thus setting the premisses of much twentieth century thought, as follows:185
Figure 20.

M E R E O L O G Y
165
In this respect, the first, third, and fourth investigations, on the sign, mereology,
and pure grammar, respectively, become a founding part of structural semiotics
with its emphasis on the possibility of unfolding a set of a priori foundations for
the study of semiotic phenomena.
As early as a young member of the Moscow Linguistic Circle, Jakobson was
acquainted with the Logische Untersuchungen through the Russian Husserl disciple
Gustav Spet;186 the Prague Circle which he joined in the twenties was influenced by
Husserl through its founder Vilém Mathesius,187 and to the end of his life, Jakobson
did not cease to emphasize the central role of Husserl in the development of
semiotics188 and structural linguistics.189 As a main figure in Prague Structuralism,
Jakobson placed a great emphasis on the 3rd and 4th LU especially, and several
times he underlined his view of linguistics as a science investigating a hierarchy
of wholes and parts,190 and he envisioned language as a whole as a ‘pattern of
relations’. In one of his major accomplishments as a linguist, the definition of the
phoneme, he used Husserlian concepts not only to underline the anti-psychological
character of the phoneme,191 but also to describe the phoneme as composed of insep-
arable aspects. Jakobson never made one over-all theory of language, convinced
as he was that linguistics must be made up of pieces taken from widely differing
sources, ranging from anthropology to mathematics, but the mereological issue is
also to be found in his most well-known contribution to the formal research of
language, his notion of the ‘marked’ versus ‘unmarked’ units of language. His main
idea here is that language at many levels makes use of a paradigmatic opposition
between parts which are defined by asymmetric dependency.192 Markedness is
defined as follows: ‘One of the essential properties of the phonological correlation
consists in the fact that both members of a correlation pair do not enjoy equal
rights: one member possesses the mark in question, the other one not; the former
is called marked, the second unmarked ’193 The opposition between these two is
contradictory, in so far the unmarked term does not imply the absence of the feature
implied by the marked term, it only implies the absence of any reference to that
feature, be it positive or negative. Later, a correlated idea is presented in the theory
of zero-signs, referring to the ‘opposition de quelque chose avec rien’, with a
Saussure quote.194 The marked term is dependent on the unmarked, not vice versa.
This asymmetry implies that the unmarked term may play the role as the more
general term of which the marked term forms a part. A semantic example will serve:
Figure 21.
In the two extremes, horses and elephant, symmetry prevails; there is a mutual
dependency between ‘mare’ and ‘stallion’ and a one-sided dependency of both on
‘horse’, so here markedness is used to erect co-ordinate subclasses of a class. In

166
C H A P T E R 7
the elephant case, English does not admit special terms for the sexes (except for a
duplication of the cow-bull distinction).
With respect to cows, however, ‘bull’ is the marked term, while ‘cow’ is
unmarked. This implies two different meanings of ‘cow’, general and specific,
respectively. This is to say that in neutral contexts, the unmarked term is used; when
you for instance see a field with cows and bulls on it, you can indicate them all by
pointing to them and stating: ‘See the cows’, while if one of your children points
to a bull and adds: ‘See the big cow’, you will answer: ‘That’s no cow, it is a bull.’
So the term ‘bull’ is unilaterally dependent on the term ‘cow’. The unmarked term,
so Jakobson, has a zero-meaning (in this case, with respect to gender) in contrast to
the marked term, but it is characteristical that the semantics of the unmarked term
now oscillates between referring to the marked feature being absent on the one hand
or referring to the absence of any marked feature on the other. (Cf. the specific and
the general use of the word). ‘Cow’ consequently oscillates between entertaining a
one-sided and a mutual dependency with ‘bull’. This feature is, of course, not only
found in at many levels in language structure, but also for pragmatic reasons in use,
when you want to single out some (small) marked subset of a set: ‘All linguists are
stupid, except for cognitive linguists’:
Figure 22.
In short, this distinction may be invoked when you want to express that something
is part of a larger whole, but yet an atypical part.
Thus, the linguistic distinction between marked and unmarked corresponds to a
cognitive and phenomenological relation pertaining to prototypicality. If you take
as a basis a prototypical case, then the appearence of a non-typical case will possess
an ambiguity: it is, on the one hand, part of the category, but, on the other hand,
it differs from the prototypical case at the center of the category. Hence, there is a
motivation to distinguish this case from the prototypical case, so that a seemingly
symmetrical opposition is constructed. Yet, the prototypical case’s categorizing
power still extends to the marginal case, so that will still be subsumed under its
main category. Thus, the marked category is at one and the same time in opposition
to the unmarked category and constitutes a subtype of it – the core characteristic of
the marked/unmarked relationship. This corresponds to the fact that in semantics,
the tendency is that the case considered most normal, widespread, prototypical,
stereotypical (or any other typicality measure) case is referred to by the unmarked
term, while the less typical case is referred to by the marked term, the marked term’s
expression typically being longer, more complicated, and more rarely used than the
unmarked term.195 Thus, the marked/unmarked distinction finds its foundation in a
phenomenological mereology.

M E R E O L O G Y
167
H J E L M S L E V
A much more ambitious and reflective theory is Louis Hjelmslev’s glossematics
(partly conceived in cooperation with Hans-Jørgen Uldall). It is probably not very well
known that this theory is founded almost unanimously on a mereology. In oppositon
to Jakobson, however, this theory’s relation to the central European phenomeno-
logical mereology is much less clear. Glossematics takes as its point of departure the
necessity of basing the cultural sciences taken as a whole on a relation as unanimous
as the concept of quantity in natural sciences. This relation is taken to be quality,
measured in dependencies. The dependency of one phenomenon on another is taken
to be the very basis of the theory in Uldall’s Outline of Glossematics. In his magistral
introduction to the glossematic project, Prolegomena to a Theory of Language
(Danish Omkring sprogteoriens grundlæggelse, 1943),196 Hjelmslev takes the
central object of the theory of language to be the sign, which he analyses as follows:
Figure 23.
The idea, now, is that the central object of the study of language as a system is
the two boxes of form. Form of expression and form of content, respectively, are
the two areas which may be grasped by glossematics, and even the sign, correlating
units from those two domains, does not belong to the linguistic system, but to the use
only. This implies that not only the matter of expression and content, respectively,
that is, phonetic matter and the phenomenological world referred to is left out of
scope, but also expression and content in so far as they are substances shaped
by linguistic form. As the central object left, the respective systems of form of
expression and form of content are now made the objects of linguistic analysis. This
is pursued by beginning with the discourse as an undivided whole, and analysis now
is supposed to partition this object into invariant parts, named functives, registering
the internal function relationship between them. Having exhausted this description
at a given level, analysis goes on to repeat the procedure as to the internal structure
of the elements, and the procedure is supposed to go on until a bottom of ‘figurae’
are reached on each of the two domains. Thus, Hjelmslev adheres to what Langacker
calls the building block metaphor. The first partitioning is supposed to give the
two functives expression and content, thereafter follows (e.g.) periods, sentences,
morphemes, etc.

168
C H A P T E R 7
Here, the idea of a glossematic algebra of dependencies finds its place. Between
two functives on a given level, three so-called functions may be discerned, defined
by types of dependency. Three possible dependencies may hold between two
functives: dependency, interdependence, and correlation (which is the absence of
dependency). Dependency occurs when one part requires another for its presence
(but not vice versa), interdependence occurs when two parts mutually require each
other and consequently only appears together, while constellation occurs when the
occurrence of two parts is free, and both, one, or none of them is equally possible.
Hjelmslev now distinguishes between dependencies in the domains of linguistic
linearization and system, defined by both-and relations and either-or relations,
respectively, which in his vast terminological system are christened selection,
solidarity, combination, and specification, complementarity, autonomy, respectively
(37). We can illustrate Hjelmslev’s idea with an example from the syntactic field.
Selection, one-sided dependency, is at stake, for instance, in the relation between
main clause and relative clause (a relative clause may not occur without a main
clause, while the opposite is not the case). Solidarity, two-sided dependency, occurs
for instance at the sentence level between noun phrase and verb phrase, and combi-
nation, zero dependency, is found e.g. between two main clauses.
It is striking that Hjelmslev here as the basis for his theory of language takes three
mereological types of dependencies very well known in the Brentanist tradition. We
find them in Brentano, for instance, and at a prominent place in the 3rd LU where
we have already seen the identical distinction between ‘gegenseitige’, ‘einseitige’,
and no relation, respectively (264–65, cf. above).
There is not, however, any mention in Hjelmslev as to where he is inspired to
his triad of dependencies which he merely ‘predicts’ for purely formal reasons.
While his co-founder of the Copenhagen circle and enemy Viggo Brøndal refers
to Husserl, just like their common disciple Paul Diderichsen does decades later,
there is no mention of any phenomenological inspiration in the Prolegomena.197 At
several occasions, Diderichsen remarks upon the complete similarity between the
dependence calculi of the Prolegomena and Logical Investigations, but no further
explanation is given.198 The reasons for this are hard to guess, but three possibilities
(at least) are at hand. One is, of course, that Hjelmslev simply came upon the idea
of a mereological grammar independently; another is that the absence of references
is due to the very radical and autonomy-claiming linguistics he is about to found.
Unlike his companion Brøndal, much more Jakobsonian in spirit in his reference
to the philosophical tradition and to a multiplicity of sources for his version of
structuralism, Hjelmslev wants to free himself from any metaphysics, inspired as
he is by logical positivism, especially in Carnap’s version. Maybe he saw too
much metaphysical heritage in references to the phenomenological tradition? A
third possibility is influence via an intermediate (so as for instance Anton Marty;199
both Jakobson and Brøndal seem unlikely in that role) or from a common source
of inspiration (Brentano).
If we go into the history of glossematics in more detail, an even more complicated
relation to mereological considerations shows up. In addition to the dependency
calculus of the Prolegomena, Hjelmslev has a further concern with mereological

M E R E O L O G Y
169
issues in his calculus of so-called ‘concept zones’ (on the content side, approxi-
mately corresponding to ‘semantic domains’) and their parts. This idea appears as
early as 1933, in the context of the semantic motivation of grammatic categories and
in direct discussion with Jakobson’s markedness concept (Hjelmslev 1985, 35ff).
Jakobson’s binarism of course implies that paradigms with three terms must be
analyzed as degenerate versions of four-term systems obtained by the combination
of two two-term systems. Arguing against binarism, Hjelmslev proposes – probably
with inspiration from Brøndal – a tripartition instead of a bipartition of the zone
of a given conceptual substance, yielding two opposed parts with a neutral domain
between them. (To see which use Hjelmslev makes of these ideas, let us mention
his analysis of grammatical numerus which is seen as founded on the concept
zone of discrete versus compact, including a neutral zone between them. Hjelmslev
1972, 94f). Interestingly, Hjelmslev calls this calculus ‘sublogical’; it is inspired by
Lévy-Bruhl’s idea of ‘participation’ in primitive thought where opposed terms may
share content. Thus, formal logic is supposed to be but one possible derivate from
this sublogical basis, an idea not unrelated to Husserl’s idea of a phenomenological
foundation of logic (Husserl 1985).
Such a three-part zone now may be occupied by different terms, defined by
placing each their emphasis on differing combinations of the three parts of the zone,
this emphasis indicated by a slash in the relevant part(s) of the concept zone:
Figure 24.
So a term of a paradigm is now seen as a specific combination of the three
parts of the paradigm’s concept zone. Thus, Jakobson’s markedness-unmarkedness
distinction corresponds to two of these possibilities only, namely the term occupying
only one of the opposed terms (markedness), together with the term indistinctly
occupying the whole concept zone (unmarkedness). Thus, unmarkedness is no
longer the mere absence of the marked term, unmarkedness is reconstructed as
the vague presence of the whole of the concept zone. But the distribution of the
emphasis/non-emphasis over the three-part concept zone yields seven possibilities
(with the exclusion of the case without any emphasis at all) instead of two. Later
in the development of glossematics, this calculus is further complicated by the
introduction of two emphasis degrees (already in 1934, cf. Hjelmslev 1972), and
in the elaborated technical presentation of glossematics in the ‘Resumé’ of the
early forties (Hjelmslev 1975), a new set of seven possible emphasis patterns
over three-part concept zones is established. These different emphasis terms now
combine pairwise to give twelve possible different polar opposites within one and

170
C H A P T E R 7
the same concept zone (Hjelmslev 1975, 42), just like systems with from two up
to six internally opposed terms appear as a possibility of different emphases of a
concept zone (ibid. 31–32). It must be said, though, that the implicit constraints
preventing free combination to give an even larger set of possibilities are never
made explicit, and neither of two recent and very thorough reconstructions of
Hjelmslev (Gregersen 1992; Rasmussen 1992) make clear the nature and role of
these constraints. In our context, it must be added, though, that the concept zone
calculus in its ‘bound’ variant is argued to give exactly the three dependency types
as a corollary (Hjelmslev 1975, 60). Thus, it might be said that just like in Husserl,
an explicitly mereological calculus (the partitioning of the concept zone it into three
parts and their possible combinations) results in a dependency calculus – even if the
route of derivation is much more labyrinthine in Hjelmslev’s case and necessitates
further research surpassing the scope of this chapter.200 As to the influence question,
there seems to be a thin thread leading from the third investigation via Jakobson’s
markedness concept to Hjelmslev’s complicated three-value markedness calculi and
further on to his three dependency types – but without any explanation as to how
exactly the same dependency calculus appears at each end of the thread.
Anyway, the radical purism in Hjelmslev’s dependency calculus as well as in
his concept zone calculus also have other consequences which is my main reason
to bring him into the discussion in this context of actual mereological thought.
Hjelmslev’s purism namely displays some dangers in a too consequent mereo-
logical approach. To see this, take Hjelmslev’s mereological treatment of linguistic
tradition. The whole inventory of morphology and syntax, of distinctions between
syllables, words, flexions, sentences, hypotaxis, parataxis, etc. must be given up
completely in favor of a purely mereological description. We are not supposed to
distinguish preposition and government, e.g. in any other way than by knowing
that one selects the other, the whole complex of the two again being independent
of the clause as a whole on sentence level. The same goes for semantics where
the shortcomings of the theory were most easily felt; the consequent mereological
approach prohibited any phenomenological semantics in so far the elements of
meaning were allowed to receive purely arbitrary denominations only.201 Being
functives, they were to be referred to by algebraical letters, and their semantic
content was supposed to be read off of their mereological dependencies only.202 In
semantics, the theory restricted itself to banalities such as that the meaning of ‘bull’
was dependent on the meanings of ‘ox’ and ‘male’, respectively.
What is to be learned from the partial failure of Hjelmslev’s grand mereological
project? The set of restrictions the theory admits deliberately cuts it off from possible
insights, first in the letting out of sight language’s reference to any context (‘matter’),
and second in its dogmatic decision that any relation between expression and
content is arbitrary merely. Both these ideas have been excellently attacked by the
cognitive semantics tradition.203 The main implication in this context, however, to be
drawn concerns the consequences of the idea of a purely mereological dependency
calculus used as a descriptive metalanguage. Such a calculus so to speak conceives
its object from outside, sees it constructed by discrete building-blocks holding a

M E R E O L O G Y
171
highly restricted set of dependencies between them. To describe language and other
semiotic phenomena (which is, implicitly, the ambition of glossematics, the matter
of expression being of secondary importance) it is necessary not to delimit oneself
beforehand to one selected calculus (even if it is a fertile one) of description.
Moreover, Hjelmslev’s use of it repeats some of the Berlin School’s less lucky
consequences without gaining its advantages: Hjelmslev ceases to use traditional
linguistic terminology, so that for instance morphology versus syntax should be
mereologically reinterpreted. But doing so, the Graz School advantage of being
able to distinguish a part (a word’s morphology) from the role played (in sentence
syntax) in a gestalt, is lost.
Another drawback is the extremely discontinuous character of the calculus, given
by the definition of the dependency calculus to hold between well-defined units
of a lower level (which is not a necessary implication by dependency calculi). All
continuous phenomena in signification are a priori bracketed by the choice of so
restricted a metalanguage (on the linguistic expression side intonation, prosodic
features, gestures; on the content side the whole question of continuous schemata
and their (continuous) eidetic variation in semantic description.)
Finally, a drawback is a fact which Barry Smith has often referred to: mereology’s
explicit and admitted weakness. In Lesniewski’s version, this was even picked as a
special privilege of the theory, making it independent of ontological assumptions.
The flip side of this is that mereology’s weakness makes it unfit to describe
most empirical wholes without further formal equipment. In linguistics, this further
equipment is most often tacitly presupposed – in for instance the idea of co-existence
of terms in a sentence. But dependence relations do not in any way imply the
existence of parts in the same place. A whole consisting of the tone A, my left
shoe and the contour of England is perfectly admissible. Contiguous wholes thus
require at least additional topologies for their description, making it possible to
distinguish connected and non-connected wholes – and they may require metrics,
spatio-temporal embedding and much more in order to map further properties
of interest; this goes for objects in general as well as for objects of semiotics
specifically. Mereology and its dependency calculi do remain a very important
formal part of semiotics, but we have no reason to assume that they exhaust the
formalisms necessary, just like a considerable work in formal ontology will be
required to yield a more refined taxonomy of gestalt types.
In Husserl, mereology forms a crucial part of formal ontology, relevant for
any ontological domain whatsoever (but not necessarily with any claim for being
exhaustive for formal ontology), and it subsequently plays a central role in his
pure grammar. In Hjelmslev, exactly the same calculus is supposed to be the
formalism relevant to describe all possible formal properties in semiotic systems as
a presuppositionless metalanguage deprived of any of the ontology-like ambitions
of phenomenology. Yet, Husserl’s refusal that ‘vague morphologies’ may be
formalized may approach him to Hjelmslev, and their strong reliance on depen-
dency calculi may probably have its reason in their reliance on the former’s weak,
methodological reliance upon logic, and the latter’s strong methodological reliance

172
C H A P T E R 7
upon language, respectively, both being discontinuous systems. Jakobson, on the
other hand, makes a less theoretical use of mereology, but his theory points towards a
pragmatical grounding of mereology in prelinguistic, phenomenological perception
of wholes with atypical parts – generalizing an experience of discovery: the sudden
appearance of a new, strange phenomenon within the bounds of the supposedly
well-known.
A S A W H O L E
Consequently, a much more liberal stance must be taken with respect to which
forms may count as significant. It comes as no surprise when we claim that an
outline may be found in Peirce’s diagram concept. But it is noteworthy that the
diagram is connected to mereology in two ways.
The diagram is a stylized picture of its object – and this stylization involves two
kinds of abstractions. One is the so-called ‘prescission’, the second of Peirce’s three
distinction types, dissociation, prescission, and discrimination, respectively. These
separation types, in fact, form the equivalent in Peirce to the dependency calculi
we isolated in the other three semioticians (see Chap. 10). Dissociation separates
independent objects; prescission separates objects of which one may be supposed
to exist separately; discrimination separates objects which may only be represented
separately. The precise relation between these distinction types and the dependency
calculi of Husserl and Hjelmslev has not been established yet, but the following is a
first attempt: dissociation is the distinguishing ability corresponding to constellation
in Hjelmslev and independence in Husserl, while prescission seperates a founding
part from a founded part and discrimination vice versa (so that interdependent parts
may only be discriminated, while unilaterally dependent parts may be prescinded
(the independent part) or discriminated (the dependent part)).
When making a diagram, we must prescind it from the particular token drawn
on a piece of paper so as to grasp it as an ideal object. Furthermore, the activity
we may picture with a diagram by manipulating it may itself be made the object
of a higher-order diagram. This is ‘hypostatic abstraction’ in Peirce’s system, to be
sharply distinguished from the distinction types: it makes a noun out of a predicate
and thus makes it possible further to investigate the properties of this predicate.
Prescission thus is a focusing mechanism, leading to the predicative isolation of
still more general properties of an object – while abstraction is an objectifying
mechanism, making an object of thought out of a predicate, or, as Peirce puts it
sloganlike, it makes a thing out of a thought.
Now, the second mereological feature of the diagram is that it – be it pure or
applied – forms in itself a whole consisting of interrelated parts. Murphey, in his
1961 classic survey of Peirce’s development, writes on Peirce’s continuum concept:
‘Indeed, the very idea of the continuum as that every part of which is similar to
the whole so obliterates the distinctions between class and member, individual and
general, concrete and abstract that it is impossible to make the notion precise without
running into contradiction’ (343). Maybe this was exactly Peirce’s intention. The

M E R E O L O G Y
173
vanishing of the element/subset distinction was a defining feature of Lesniewski’s
mereology, and it is correct that Peirce’s continuism repeats it. For to what does a
diagram refer – a continuous field of cases which may not be sorted in elements
and subsets – it s herein its generality resides.
The character of the interrelations in the diagram makes certain experiments
possible, and these experiments are now interpreted as holding also for the object
depicted:
Deduction is that mode of reasoning which examines the state of things asserted in the premisses, forms
a diagram of that state of things, perceives in the parts of that diagram relations not explicitly mentioned
in the premises, satisfies itself by mental experiments upon the diagram that these relations would
always subsist, or at least would do so in a certain proportion of cases, and concludes their necessary,
or probable, truth. For example, let the premiss be that there are four marked points upon a line which
has neither extremity nor furcation. Then, by means of a diagram,
Figure 25.
we may conclude that there are two pairs of points such that in passing along the line in any way from
one to the other point of either pair, one point of the second pair will be passed an odd number of
times and the other point an even (or zero) number of times. This is deduction. (Untitled manuscript,
c. 1896, 1.66)204
An important diagrammatical operation is the working together of prescission of
abstraction, that is, a diagram property is selected as an object which may itself be
subject to rule-governed manipulation (cf. Chap. 11). Abstraction permits the diagram
to be recursive and embed one diagram with its whole set of procedures as an object
in a more abstract diagram making it possible to investigate the first one. To stay in
the map example, we can for instance generalize from the single map and abstract
the subject of ‘mapness’, leading to the question of possible projections giving rise
to maps with various properties. In Husserlian slang, this makes possible to inves-
tigate still more abstract moments as if they were Stücke. In a diagram, thus, mere
aspects of the object may appear objectified as autonomous parts. This is, as a matter
of fact, a crucial means in diagrammatically making implicit information explicit.
The strength of the diagram category is that it – in contrast to the dependency
calculi of the early Husserl and of glossematics – displays an open variety of
continuous and discontinuous mereological devices used in the construction of
meaning. In any case, namely, a diagram analyses its object into a collection of
interrelated parts, the relations of which may be specified in many terms in addition
to dependency: connectedness, boundedness, quantity, locality, form, metric

174
C H A P T E R 7
relations  In short all relations giving possibly rise to necessary reasoning205 which
is a set the extension of which we may not be in a position to determine beforehand.
Husserlian mereology may, however, contribute to an aspect of diagrams only
marginally hinted at in Peirce: their connection to the issue of the synthetic a
priori. Husserl’s doctrine of dependency and foundation in the 3rd LU was, in fact,
intended as defining the analytic and synthetic a priori anew – as the disciplines
of formal and regional ontologies respectively. Both were to be charted by mereo-
logical calculi, the former in a pure, the latter in a material version. In the next
chapter, we shall attempt to extend Husserl’s brilliant insight to the continuous
mereology representations in Peirce: the diagrams.

C H A P T E R 8
DIAGRAMMATICAL REASONING AND THE SYNTHETIC
A PRIORI
It would be a great mistake to suppose that ideal experi-
mentation can be performed without danger of error 
Peirce, ‘The Logic of Relatives’, The Monist, Vol. 7
(1897), 3.528
In the broad tradition of Austrian thought to which Husserl belongs, a conception of
the a priori has developed which differs in many respects from the Kantian notion of
a priori which has been the target of so much criticism in the twentieth century.206
Kant’s famous idea was that there was a third category alongside mere analytical
knowledge (‘All bachelors are unmarried’) where the predicate was contained in
the subject and which was thus a priori true, on the one hand, and synthetic a
posteriori knowledge (all kinds of empirical knowledge of states of the world) which
depended upon the contingent behavior of the world. Between the two were the
‘synthetic a priori judgments’ which differed from the latter in being independent of
empirical knowledge, and which differed from the former in being not reducible to
tautologies. Kant’s main examples were arithmetic, geometry, and physics – and the
leading question of his whole critical philosophy became, as is well known, ‘How
is synthetic a priori knowledge possible?’ Kant’s answer depended as we touched
upon in Chaps. 3–4 upon his idea of ‘schematism’ which may make concept and
intuition meet – and thus his account for synthetic a priori judgments was tied to
his overall idea that science is made possible by the application of categories and
forms of intuition by the subject upon the world which does not, in itself, possess or
support such forms. Synthetic a priori knowledge hence was characterized by being
infallible – because tied to our own conceptualizations – and subjective – because
being the result of the imposition on the world of means of knowledge production
inherent in the subject.
The Austrian idea of the a priori is wholly different and far more Aristotelian
in spirit. In economics, a tradition running from Carl Menger through Ludwig von
Mises to Joseph Schumpeter, Friedrich von Hayek and Murray Rothbard incarnate
Austrian apriorism; in philosophy a closely related set of ideas springs from several
of Brentano’s pupils – Carl Stumpf, Husserl, Adolf Reinach – to be taken up
nowadays by the renaissance of that tradition championed inter alia by the ‘Manch-
ester gang of three’, Kevin Mulligan, Peter Simons, and most explicitly, Barry
175

176
C H A P T E R 8
Smith. To put it briefly, this idea of the a priori moves its foundation from subject
to object. A priori regularities hold, not because of the imposition on the world of
some forms or faculties in the subject, but because of recurrent, stable structures
of reality itself. And, for the same reason, the a priori does not, as in Kant, refer to
anybody’s ‘judgment’ but rather to the object of such judgments: propositions, and,
in turn, to those states-of-affairs referred to by propositions. This has the conse-
quence, now, that the a priori covers a much wider range of domains than Kant’s
notion, centered upon mathematics. Mathematics continues, to be sure, to occupy
a central place in the Austrian a priori, but a priori foundations lie, for an Austrian
point of view, at the bottom of every single special science by virtue of the fact
that every science requires its own stable, interrelated network of basic concepts –
providing what Husserl called ‘regional ontologies’ and Carl Stumpf nicknamed
‘Vorwissenschaften’ (Stumpf 1907) – proto-sciences. Austrian a priori, thus, comes
in packets, where different parts and aspects of the object of a science are tied
together in a relational whole which forms the prerequisite to – rather than the
result of – empirical research in the area. As Barry Smith remarks, the knowledge
of such a priori structures is most often implicit or tacit (cf. the Austrian Michael
Polanyi’s notion of ‘tacit knowledge’) – being made explicit, a priori structures
often – not always – seem disappointingly trivial. Focal examples discussed in this
tradition include claims like ‘nothing can be red and green all over’. This obser-
vation explains why such a widespread phenomenon can at the same time escape
attention by scepticists of all sorts, from positivists claiming nothing exists between
analytical and empirical knowledge and to historicists and culturalists claiming the
basis of all knowledge varies potentially infinitely in time and space. Finally, as
Murray Rothbard and after him Barry Smith have strongly argued, the Austrian
notion of a priori is not, unlike the Kantian notion, infallible. As a priori struc-
tures are objective, we have the same distance to them as we have to contingent,
empirical knowledge – and we may make huge and long-lasting mistakes in grasping
those structures, as has in fact been the case in many cases in that most central a
priori domain of mathematics. Thus, Austrian a priori may give rise to ‘fallibilistic
apriorism’207 where the a priori field is vastly extended in comparison to the Kantian
version, but where our access to it is subjected to constraints parallel to those
on empirical knowledge. Even if often tacitly presupposed in both common sense
reasoning and scientific investigations, it demands a huge effort to make explicit
and coherent our knowledge of the a priori – and, what is more, such work may
end up contradicting and revising parts of our more or less implicit assumptions. In
what follows we shall intermittently use Wojciech Zelaniec’s abbreviation of the
synthetic a priori: ‘synap’.
In the Brentano tradition, the central articulation of the Austrian conception of
the synthetic a priori takes place in Husserl, more precisely in the 3rd LU. The
mereological calculus presented here forms the very basis of Husserl’s account
of synap structures – because such structures have the character of consisting of
relations of necessity between parts and wholes. As we discussed in the preceding
chapter, Husserl’s idea was to chart such relations using three different relations

D I A G R A M M A T I C A L R E A S O N I N G
177
of dependency. Real instantiations of such relations simply form the flesh of his
idea of the a priori. The mereological distinction between abstract and concrete
(dependent/independent, inauthentic/authentic) parts forms a nucleus of formal
ontology holding for every conceivable object, alongside with subject/quality,
individual/species, genus/species, relation/collection, entity, number, series, size,
etc. The very existence of a dependent part – ‘Moment’ – implies a law of essence
presupposing the existence of certain pure species of which it forms a part and
on which it is thus dependent (§7). It is important, though, not to conflate this
distinction with the distinction between exact and vague phenomena – which
is orthogonal to the distinction between genuine parts and moments (§9). Any
dependent part presupposes an ideal law describing its relations of dependency to
other specified parts and wholes – and vice versa: if any part participates in an
ideal law, it is dependent (§10). Such laws are motivated by the specificity of the
domain in question and are expressed in material concepts – to distinguish them
from formal ontological concepts as the above, referring to the materially empty
idea of an Object as such (§11). This distinction between formal and material is,
in Husserl’s doctrine, the basis for the genuine distinction between the analytical a
priori and the synthetic a priori. Here, a crucial difference to the Kantian tradition
appears: Kant identified the distinction between a priori and empirical with form
and matter, respectively, making form the a priori contribution of the subject. Here,
matter concerns the ‘sachhaltige’ concepts – while the formal is identified with the
general concepts holding for all possible objects. This does not imply, however, that
the material/synap regularities can not be formalized, that is, expressed in formal
languages or other generalized forms of representation. Husserl attempts to outline
a series of pure mereological laws in the formal ontology of parts and wholes
(§14) which he foresees should be further developed in mathematical research –
and it is important to see that this formal ontological endeavor runs in parallel
with what he expects to take place in the different material domains where these
laws will be further specified in material concepts and their interrelations. Another
way of expressing the dependency of a part on another or on a whole is to say
it is founded on it or that it is ‘completable’ (‘ergänzungsbedürftig’) by it. In
the domain of color, for instance, color and extension are in a mutual relation of
foundation. The founding part may, in turn, be founded in still another part, etc.
Thus, Husserl’s reformulation of the a synthetic priori can also be resumed in the
laconic statement that ‘Alles wahrhaft einigende ist Fundierung.’ (§22) – all really
uniting is founding – relevant for formal ontology when no material concepts are
involved, relevant for materiel or regional ontologies when material concepts are
involved.
Husserl’s theory of the synthetic a priori plays a crucial role in his overall
development: the results of the 3rd LU are put to use immediately thereafter in the
fourth to sixth investigations. Thus, in the fourth investigation, a synthetic a priori
theory of grammar is outlined,208 in the fifth the first steps in Husserl’s theory
of intentionality are taken, seeing the different determinations of intentionality as
founded aspects in the sense given and thus constituting an a priori account of

178
C H A P T E R 8
conscious acts, and in the sixth investigation epistemological issues are treated on
that basis, as we saw in Chap. 6. Thus, Husserl’s whole phenomenology is in a
certain sense a synthetic a priori theory of the region of pure consciousness and
its objects, and the different idealist or realist interpretations of it can, in fact, be
rephrased as discussions of which parts of intentionality are founded on which other
parts: is the object of intention an independent (realism) or a dependent (idealism)
part of the act?
Later, in the Ideen III, Husserl outlines a taxonomy of different regions of
reality: material thing, body, and soul, respectively, but it is not necessarily the
implication that each synthetic a priori complex of these three large domains
could be immediately constructed ‘from above’. Rather, the material ontologies
or regional ontologies seem to have to be built ‘from below’ so to speak, from
salient object complexes treated in the different domains and in close connection
with the empirical scholarly disciplines investigating them. Thus, some of the most
successful results of these ideas among Husserl’s immediate pupils cover much
more restricted domains. Prime examples are Adolf Reinach’s legal phenomenology
of social acts which has gained a reputation as the first thoroughly developed speech
act theory, with ‘social acts’ as occurring in court as its central object,209 and Roman
Ingarden’s theory of literature built on a phenomenological theory of language (see
Chap. 17) – both of them selecting nested parts of language as their domain for
synthetic a priori mappings of regional ontology.
The basic idea in Reinach, however, remains that legal speech acts are constrained
by the synthetic a priori structure of social actions – so that the edifice of social
institutions is possible only because they conform to such a priori regularities. As
Barry Smith wittily summarizes: ‘Thus, there could be no culture or society in which
the validity of contracts is in general made conditional on the parties’ undergoing
painful surgery, or on the finding of a proof for some hitherto unproved conjecture
in mathematics’ (Smith 1992, 6). Such facts are to a large extent immediately
graspable by people with only a common sense understanding of legal matters.
Such regional ontological regularities, moreover, generally come in packets. Take
the institution of promising. It involves at least two parties, one giving the promise
and another taking it, it involves an obligation, it involves a time scale within
which the promise is to be fulfilled, it involves a type of action being the object of
the promise, it involves the possibility of a sanction if the promise is not kept.210
This whole complex forms a sort of synthetic a priori molecule which can not
be disrupted in different cultural or historical circumstances – even if it may,
of course, be instantiated and shaped in such circumstances in a high variety of
ways and different connections to other facts and social acts. Furthermore, the
concepts involved in promising: responsible parties, trust, obligation, action, time
limit, sanction, etc. refer further on to other basic concepts in the synthetic a priori
networks of social acts. Thus, the Austrian conception of the synthetic a priori
is resistant to all kinds of psychologisms, historicisms and culturalisms and the
unavoidable skepticism connected to them – but it is also, on the other hand, resistant
to a positivist interpretation in terms of logic and fact alone. Such regularities

D I A G R A M M A T I C A L R E A S O N I N G
179
involve – again Smith – ‘the ineliminable presence of materially specific concepts’
(7) in their formulation. So they may not be expressed by purely logical concepts
and relations only. Rather, they possess the character of constituting whole networks
of a priorially connected material (and formal) concepts. Even in a domain as far
from the natural sciences as that between law, social science and linguistics which
occupies Reinach, such laws can not be mere conventions only. Smith argues against
Searle’s idea that such institutions are built from human conventions, by pointing
to an infinite regress: ‘the very practices involved in formulating and adopting
conventional rules presuppose universal categories of the given sorts’(9) – the very
possibility of making a convention in the first place is the result of a certain type
of contractual speech act which cannot, then, itself be conventional.
Another, closely related tradition is Austrian economics where the a priori stance
has dominated a tradition running from Carl Menger to Murray Rothbard.211 The
idea here is that the basic structures of economy is entrenched in the more basic
structures of human action as such. Nowhere is this more evident than in the work
of Ludwig von Mises – his so-called ‘praxeology’ is built from the idea that all
basic laws of economy can be derived apriorically from one premiss: the concept of
human action. Of course, this concept is no simple concept, containing within itself
purpose, product, time, scarcity of resources, etc. – so it would be more fair to say
that economics lies as the implication of the basic schema of human action as such.
Even if the Austrian economists’ conception of the a priori is decidedly objectivist
and anti-subjectivist, it is important to remark their insistence on subjectivity within
their ontological domain. Thus, the Austrian economics tradition is famous exactly
for their emphasis on the role of subjectivity in economy. From Carl Menger
onwards, they protest against the mainstream economical assumption that the
economic agent in the market is fully rational, knows his own preferences in detail,
has constant preferences over time, has access to all prices for a given commodity
at a given moment, etc. Thus, von Mises’ famous criticism of socialist planned
economy is built on this idea: the system of ever-changing prices in the market
constitutes a dispersed knowledge about the conditions of resource allocation which
is a priori impossible for any single agent – let alone, any central planner’s office –
to possess. Thus, their conception of the objective a priori laws of the economic
domain perhaps surprisingly had the implication that they warned against a too
objectivist conception of economy not taking into account the limits of economic
rationality stemming from the general limitations of the capacities of real subjects.
Their ensuing liberalism is thus built on a priori conclusions about the relative
unpredictability of economics founded on the role played by subjective intention-
ality. For the same reason, Hayek ended up with a distinction between simple and
complex processes, respectively, cutting across all empirical disciplines, where only
the former permit precise, predictive, quantitative calculi based on mathemathical
modeling while the latter permit only recognition of patterns (which may also be
mathematically modeled, to be sure, but without quantitative predictability). It is
of paramount importance, though, to distinguish this emphasis on the ineradicable
role of subjectivity in certain regional domains from Kantian-like ideas about the

180
C H A P T E R 8
foundational role of subjectivity in the construction of knowledge as such. The
Austrians are as much subjectivists in the former respect as they are objectivists
in the latter. In the history of economics, the Austrians occupy a middle position,
being against historicism on the one hand as well as against positivism on the
other. Against the former, they insist that a priori structures of economy transgress
history which does not possess the power to form institutions at random but only as
constrained by a priori structures. And against the latter, they insist that the mere
accumulation of empirical data subject to induction will never in itself give rise
to the formation of theoretical insights. Structures of intelligible concepts are in
all cases necessary for any understanding of empirical regularities – in so far, the
Austrian a priori approach is tantamount to a non-skepticist version of the doctrine
of ‘theory-ladenness’ of observations.
A late descendant of the Austrian tradition after its emigration to the Anglo-
Saxon world (von Mises, Hayek, and Schumpeter were such emigrés) was the
anarcho-liberal economist Murray Rothbard, and it is the inspiration from him
which allows Barry Smith to articulate the principles underlying the Austrians as
‘fallibilistic apriorism’. Rothbard characterizes in a brief paper from 1957 what
he calls ‘Extreme Apriorism’ as follows: there are two basic differences between
the positivists’ model science of physics on the one hand, and sciences dealing
with human actions on the other: the former permits experimental verification of
consequences of hypotheses, which the latter do not (or, only to a limited degree, we
may add); the former admits of no possibility of testing the premisses of hypotheses
(like: what is gravity?), while the latter permits a rational investigation of the
premisses of hypotheses (like: what is human action?). This state of affairs makes it
possible for economics to derive its basic laws with absolute – a priori – certainty:
in addition to the fundamental axiom – the existence of human action – only two
empirical postulates are needed: ‘(1) the most fundamental variety of resources, both
natural and human. From this follows directly the division of labor, the market, etc.;
(2) less important, that leisure is a consumer good’ (316). On this basis, it may e.g.
be inferred, ‘that every firm aims always at maximizing its psychic profit’ (317).
Rothbard draws forth this example so as to counterargue traditional economists
who will claim that the following proposition could be added as a corollary: ‘that
every firm aims always at maximizing its money profit’. This can not be inferred
and is, according to Rothbard, an economical prejudice – the manager may, e.g.
prefer for nepotistic reasons to employ his stupid brother even if that decreases
the firm’s financial profit possibilities. This is an example of how the Austrians
refute the basic premiss of absolute rationality in terms of maximal profit seeking.
Given this basis, other immediate implications are: ‘the means-ends relationship,
the time-structure of production, time-preference, the law of diminishing marginal
utility, the law of optimum returns, etc’ (318). Rothbard quotes Mises for seeing the
fundamental Axiom as a ‘Law of Thought’ – while he himself sees this as a much
too Kantian way of expressing it, he prefers instead the simple Aristotelian/Thomist
idea of a ‘Law of Reality’ (ibid.). Rothbard furthermore insists that this doctrine is
not inherently political – in order to attain the Austrians’ average liberalist political

D I A G R A M M A T I C A L R E A S O N I N G
181
orientation, the preference for certain types of ends must be added to the a priori
theory (such as the preference for life over death, abundance over poverty, etc.).
This also displays the radicality of the Austrian approach: nothing is assumed about
the content of human ends – this is why they will never subscribe to theories about
Man as economically rational agent or Man as necessarily economical egotist. All
different ends meet and compete on the market – including both desire for profit in
one end and idealist, utopian, or altruist goals in the other. The principal interest, in
our context, in these features of economical theory is the high degree of awareness
of the difference between the – extreme – synthetic a priori theory developed, on
the one hand, and its incarnation in concrete empirical cases and their limiting
conditions on the other.
Barry Smith, in ‘In Defense of Extreme (Fallibilistic) Apriorism’ (1996b) directly
plays on Rothbard’s title in his articulation of his position. The article takes the form
of a skiing slalom where a question is posed and a position rejected at every turn of
the trajectory, thus gradually narrowing the field, only to end in the conclusion that
synthetic a priori knowledge exists – as the final summary of the paper goes:212
Do the empirical theories with the help of which we seek to approximate a good or true picture of
reality function without any non-empirical presuppositions?
Yes: Extreme empiricists
No: Are the propositions which express these pre-empirical assumptions in every case analytic (tauto-
logical, lacking in content)?
Yes: Logical positivists
No: Do we have an infallible knowledge of all the synthetic pre-empirical propositions which are
presupposed by the various sciences in the different phases of their development?
Yes: Extreme Cartesians
No: Could these assumptions, which are presupposed by the empirical sciences, be arbitrary?
Yes: Feyerabend
No: The propositions in question must therefore be characterized by a certain plausibility. Is this
plausibility always a contextual affair?
Yes: Hermeneutic relativists
No: There is therefore something like an intrinsic plausibility. Are the intrinsically plausible pre-
empirical synthetic propositions which play an indispensable role in the sciences given only individually,
so that we have only a few isolated examples thereof between which no systematic relations would
obtain?
Yes: Ad hoc Kantianism
No: Is it really true, as the Kantians assert, that the intrinsically plausible or intelligible pre-empirical
synthetic propositions here at issue are read into or imposed upon the world by us?
Yes: systematic Kantianism
No: Might the intrinsically plausible pre-empirical synthetic propositions all be false?
Yes: Epistemology Nihilism
No: Certain pre-empirical synthetic intrinsically plausible propositions thus require ontological corre-
lates which are their truth-makers: there are intelligible structures in the world, which we could also
call ’a priori structures’. (189–90)

182
C H A P T E R 8
Of course, some of our conceptions regarding such structures may, at any moment,
be false – herein fallibilism. But just like the case in the Peirce-Popperian version
of fallibilism with respect to empirical knowledge, not all such conceptions can
be wrong at the same time, and we have fair reason to believe that the amount of
correct synthetic a priori knowledge in fact increases during the history of science.
In that sense, fallibilistic aprorism is not without analogies to certain brands of
Neo-Kantianism attempting to historicize the a priori, seeing it as dependent on
our best scientific theories at any moment – so as e.g. Cassirer’s position. All
depends, of course, on the nature of this historical dependency – if the claim goes
that validity of a priori positions is per se determined by history, then it amounts
to nothing more than historicizing the transcendental subject imposing its changing
forms on a formless unknowable reality, ‘hermeneutic relativism’ will be the result,
and nothing is gained. If, on the other hand, the claim is that history permits science
and philosophy to grasp ever more structural aspects of reality, then the position is
close to the one discussed here. Cassirer’s position is especially ambiguous as to this
issue; in some expressions, he seems very close to the realist position, and in any
case, some of his results may easily be reinterpreted in an Austrian framework, cf.
for instance his famous 1945 paper on the history of the emergence of structuralism
from Goethe via Maxwell and Gestalt Theory to Jakobson which may easily be
read as a charting of the successive discovery of a structural a priori.
The American philosopher Michael Friedman in fact makes a case for the inerad-
icability of the a priori along such Neo-Kantian lines in his Dynamics of Reason.
Let us compare his argument to the Austrian tradition. In his Parting of the Ways,
Friedman compared Carnap, Cassirer, and Heidegger as three different roads taken
in modern philosophy from a common Neo-Kantian point of departure – based on
the empirical fact that all three of them were present at the Davoser meeting in 1929,
so to speak the last summit meeting before twentieth century philosophy split in
differing traditions. Comparing the analytical and continental excesses of Carnap
and Heidegger, respectively, Friedman ends up proposing to continue the middle
road of Cassirer, then made impossible by World War 2 and the split tradition in
philosophy. This is, in fact, what he himself attempts in Dynamics of Reason – not to
reconstrue Cassirer’s own position, but on the basis of a discussion of an intertwined
history of philosophy and of science through the nineteenth and twenteeith century
to construe a position Cassirerian in spirit. His point of departure is the analytical
tradition from Carnap to Kuhn and the different conceptions of ‘stratification of
knowledge’ at stake here. Carnap’s well-known distinction between L-rules and
P-rules in the epistemology of physics – logical rules versus physical rules – is seen
as a forerunner of Kuhn whose project was enthusiastically greeted precisely by
Carnap. The physical rules are internal and synthetic as opposed to the logical rules
being external and analytical, and Carnap’s idea is that when problems may not be
solved internally, physically, it may be time for a revision of the L-rules (which,
in the spirit of logicism, also include mathematics) (32). They thus constitute a
relativized and constitutive a priori (40–41) and are thus comparable to Kuhn’s
notion of a scientific paradigm. Friedman now argues for two indispensable addenda

D I A G R A M M A T I C A L R E A S O N I N G
183
to this picture. One is an intermediate layer between the supposedly purely empirical
and logical layers in Carnap’s brand of positivism.213 Guided by history of science,
Friedman points to a necessary even if overlooked level of ‘coordination principles’
guiding the application of logic and mathematics to empirical data,214 principles
as for instance the equivalence between accelerated movement and movement in
a gravitation field in general relativity, or the principle of absolute light velocity
in special relativity. This layer of coordination principles is presumably part of the
‘relative a priori’; it may, evidently, change during the history of science. In an
almost Peircean wording, Friedman emphasizes that these coordination principles
contain ‘real possibilities’ (84), and he even stresses the basic idea that they must
possess ‘counterparts in reality’ (87). Here, a decidedly Neo-Kantian framework
like Friedman’s seem to come very close to an Austrian idea of the a priori – from
a completely different point of departure. Having thus supplemented the Carnap-
Kuhn conception with a realist addendum, Friedman adds another important idea:
when comparing different possible paradigms in a Kuhnian revolutionary situation,
the scientist is not only faced with a crude pragmatism ordering him to chose the
(unnegotiable) paradigm which explains most. He also has to take advice from what
Friedman calls ‘philosophical meta-paradigms’ (44). Also in this idea, Friedman is
informed by history of science – pointing to the fact that major and well-described
breakthroughs in physics were most often extremely well-informed in the philo-
sophical debate of the time, so e.g. Newton and his background in the metaphysical
discussions between Descartes, Gassendi, Huyghens, Spinoza, and Leibniz; or
Einstein being well-versed in the discussions on the foundations of geometry in
Helmholtz and Poincaré (44–45). Philosophy does not supply direct answers, but
it supplies possible ‘meta-frameworks’ and thus forms a source for ‘suggestions
and guidance’. In this reformulation of the Carnap-Kuhn two-tier model into a
four-tier model, Friedman by the same token relativizes the radicality of paradigm
shifts. For such transformations must, as Cassirer insists (65) ‘leave a determinate
stock of principles unaffected’. When the two-tier model with its direct theoretical
determination of empirical understanding is given up, we may imagine different
kinds of paradigm shifts with changing amounts of continuity comprising selections
of empirical regularities, certain coordination principles, or mathematical models.
New coordination principles could evolve continuously out of the earlier ones, and
their transformation could be guided by a changing philosophical meta-framework.
Friedman consequently proposes that the a priori realm (now consisting of synthetic
‘coordination principles’ and (more or less) analytical logico-mathematical struc-
tures) ceases to be constitutive in the trans-historical meaning of the word (but
remains constitutive in the indispensability use of the word) – giving way to a
regulative use of reason. Such a conception of the constitutive a priori, hence,
rejects its unrevisability and its certainty – in short it becomes fallibilist, to use
Smith’s vocabulary. Thus it is interesting to take note of a certain convergence
between leading followers of the Austrian paradigm and of sophisticated defenders
of the Neo-Kantian paradigm – both of them committed to the role played by a
priori assumptions in actual history of science.215

184
C H A P T E R 8
But which kinds of propositions does the synthetic a priori area contain, and
what is the basic property shared by such propositions? The Polish philosopher
Wojciech Zelaniec has undertaken a so to speak empirical piece of botanization
among simple examples of ‘synap’ sentences, as he calls them, in order to explain
their seeming obviousness. Thus, he does not seek any foundational definition of
the synthetic a priori nor of the analytic, and his investigation does not depend on
that – rather it is a contrastive investigation comparing synap sentences with other
sentences with related properties: tautologies, sentences which may be transformed
into tautologies, highly plausible empirical sentences, seemingly obvious sentences
allowing for imagination of counterexamples, seemingly obvious sentences allowing
for the conception – not the imagination – of counterexamples, etc. He begins by
listing a series of central synap examples taken from philosophical literature which
is worth repeating here:
1. every color is extended (Kant, Berkeley, Hume, Husserl, Stumpf)
2. for every two events, if one of them is later than the other, the other is not later
than the first one (Pap)
3. if something is beautiful and real, then it is good (Roth)
4. everything red is colored (Chisholm)
5. every three tones are ordered linearly with regard to their pitch (Roth, Husserl,
Stumpf)
6. the pleasant is preferable to the unpleasant (Scheler)
7. no surface, if it is red all over, is at the same time green all over (Schlick,
Wittgenstein, Russell, Ayer, Pap, (Aristotle))
8. everything that is square has a shape (Chisholm)
9. only good actions can be the object of a duty (Scheler)
10. man acts (Hoppe, von Mises, (Aristotle))
11. if any tone-quality is eliminated, a tone-intensity will also be eliminated
(Husserl)
12. every promise gives rise to – mutually correlated – claim and obligation
(Reinach, Lipps)
13. pink is more like red than black (Austin, similar examples in Locke, Hume,
Reinach, Hering)
14. every judgment comprises a presentation within itself (Stegmüller, (Brentano))
(Zelaniec has extensive references to the authors merely indicated here, 19–21; those
put in brackets do not directly quote it as a synap example but have a related idea)
As is evident, Zelaniec’s examples differ from Friedman’s examples which much
morehavethestatusofbasicontologicalhypothesesintheresearchprocess.Zelaniec’s
synap sentences deal with many different domains but they share a basic common-
sense quality – and Zelaniec’s idea is precisely to investigate the reason in ‘normal
people’ for assuming such sentences to be synap. Among ‘normal people’, he excepts
people believing only tautologies are obvious as well as people with special infor-
mation of the domain in question – and then he undertakes a comparison with a
set of other seemingly obvious sentence types, as mentioned. His overall result (44)
is that synap sentences are seen as obvious because they do not admit counterex-

D I A G R A M M A T I C A L R E A S O N I N G
185
amples: ‘ it is the obviousness of sentences whose counterinstance cannot be
conceived.’Thesentencetypeclosesttothisissentenceswhosecounterinstancecannot
be imagined, yet can be conceived (sentences dealing with hectagonal coins and
curved space are the examples given here).216 What Zelaniec claims to have achieved
is of course not in any way defining the synthetic a priori – merely to establish its
existence by means of the listing of prototypical examples, and describe the reason
for the conception of them as being obvious. Yet, there is not necessarily any tension
between Zelaniec and those accounts of synap sentences which focus more upon
their status in the sciences. As philosophical examples, the sentences picked are
intended as being prototypical and easy-to-grasp illustrations of the synap category,
and there is no reason not to assume that much more complicated and difficult-to-
decide examples such as Friedman’s ‘coordination principles’ may be found farther
from the center of the category, so to speak. What is interesting in our context,
however, is Zelaniec’s central result of ‘counterinstance cannot be conceived’. In this
is implied that when trying to make sense of a synap sentence, one is urged to try
to find a counterexample, but fails in this endeavor, and, furthermore, sees that one
must so fail. In the easy cases, this insight is immediate, but we can easily imagine
cases when that insight requires centuries of thought and experiment to be realized.
This brings us to the so to speak ‘epistemological’ issue connected to the
synthetic a priori. By which means is our access to such structures made possible?
Smith says little about it – except for pointing to such knowledge often being
tacit or implicit and hence requiring great efforts to be made explicit. But which
efforts? Husserl, as is well known, has a surprisingly simple answer which we
have already discussed, namely his well-known doctrine of ‘Wesenserschauung’
or ‘eidetic variation’. Already in the Logische Untersuchungen there are traces
of this doctrine in the idea of the Prolegomena that concepts in theories can be
replaced with variables, thus leaving the general formal skeleton of the theory
behind which may then be varied in order to obtain a ‘theory of theories’. In the
first chapter of the Ideen, he returns to the issue in the discussion of ‘sciences of
essence’ (Wesenswissenschaften), including both formal (logic, mathematics, etc.)
and material ontologies. He places great emphasis on the claim that such grasping
of essence is indeed a form of intuition (‘Anschauung’) analogous to empirical
perception (14), so as to distinguish it from induction:
The Eidos, the pure essence, may exemplify itself intuitively in givennesses in experience such as
perception, memory, etc., but just as well also in pure fantasy givennesses. Thus we may grasp an
essence originarily by taking our point of departure in corresponding intuitions, but just as well also in
intuitions not experienced, not involving being, but rather ‘merely imagined’ intuitions.
If we in free fantasy create some spatial figures, melodies, social processes, etc., or if we pretend
to have experience acts, of pleasure or unpleasure, will, etc., so can we also there, through ‘ideation’,
originarily intuit many pure essences and maybe even in an adequate way: be it the essences of spatial
figure, of melody, of social process, etc. in general, be it the relevant special type of figure, melody, etc.217
This process of ‘ideation’ takes place in fantasy, and it takes place ‘ auf Grund
einer freien Fiktion und Variation von einem solchem Dinge’, as he says a little
later about the physical object as example.

186
C H A P T E R 8
This grasping of essences thus takes place by what in Erfahrung und Urteil is
called ‘eidetic variation’ – we vary in fantasy outline the object investigated until
we find the ontological limits it cannot possibly transgress without ceasing to be
the kind of object it is. When he describes the process in Erfahrung und Urteil,
more detail is added. The process, also called ‘ideation’, is supposed to take place
in three main steps:
1. The productive activity which consists in running through the multiplicity of variations.
2. The unitary linking in continuous coincidence.
3. The active identification which brings out the congruent over against the differences.
(Husserl 1973a, 347)218
The process is supposed to differ from that of forming merely empirical generals,
which are constructed by a method close to that often described as induction: a
series of repeated, similar experienced objects give rise to an expectation of further
real possible instantiations.219 Thus, the extension of such empirical concepts is
open, but their unity is purely accidental. Otherwise with ‘pure generals’ (‘reinen
Allgemeinheiten’) which are reached by the three steps above. In that process, the
point of departure is one conceived object – ‘eine Erfahrungsgegebenheit’ – which
is then subjected to variation, not in real examples, but in a controlled process of
imagination, of fantasy:
It is based on the modification of an experienced or imagined objectivity, turning it into an arbitrary
example which, at the same time, receives the character of a guiding ‘model’, a point of departure for
the production of an infinitely open multiplicity of variants. It is based, therefore, on a variation. In
other words, for its modification in pure imagination, we let ourselves be guided by the fact taken as a
model. (ibid. 340)220
This process of variation gives rise to the grasping of the unity of the concept
in what remains invariant in the variation process as the necessary and general
form without which the type of object would be unthinkable. In this ‘Ideenschau’,
the general essence is intuited directly. This idea obviously entails problems: the
variation process is open and endless – so we should not expect the variation
process to cover all possible instantiations given in their individuality – a sort
of problem akin to finitism in mathematics: we cannot expect the mind actually
to perform an infinity of operations. Husserl of course realizes this problem: this
‘ does not imply that an actual continuation to infinity is required, an actual
production of all the variants’ (ibid. 342).221 Rather, the very variation process
itself is subject to an act of imagination: ‘On the contrary, what matters is that the
variation as a process of the formation of variants should itself have a structure
of arbitrariness, that the process should be accomplished in the consciousness
of an arbitrary development of variants’ (ibid. 342).222 The termination of the
imaginary variation process is imagined only, in a sort of second-order imagination:
‘This remarkable and truly important consciousness of ’and so on, at my pleasure’
belongs essentially to every multiplicity of variations. Only in this way is given
what we call an ’infinitely open’ multiplicity; obviously, it is the same whether we
proceed according to a long process, producing or drawing arbitrarily on anything

D I A G R A M M A T I C A L R E A S O N I N G
187
suitable ’ (ibid. 342).223 This second-order imagination makes an object out of
the primary imaginary variation, synthesizing it in imagining it finished. I think this
is what Hintikka sees when he states that the ‘ Wesensschau accomplishes two
different things. It separates the essence of an empirical object from its hyle and it
makes this essence an object of intuition’ (2003, 183). Separation and object-making
are analogous to Peircean prescission and hypostatic abstraction, respectively (cf.
Chap. 11).
It is not exactly clear which criteria Husserl imagines when he talks about the
formation of variations until a suitable (‘Passende’) point where the unity is evident.
Maybe we should see here a germ of fallibilism in Husserl’s description: when
does one know the variation has been undertaken to a sufficient degree? It is
easy to imagine cases where a certain variation seems to display smooth growth,
for instance, but where further variation, if not broken off prematurely, would
give rise to discontinuous surprises (cf. geometrical singularities in the grasping
of a manifold). This does not, evidently, constitute any kind of obstacle to the
process – but it seems to account for the fallibility of the process in cases only to be
discovered later. In fact, it constitutes a sort of equivalent to the ‘halting problem’ in
computer science: you’ll never know, in each single case, when a sufficient amount
of semantic phase space has been covered by your variation process, and there is
no shortcut permitting to decide it beforehand; the most effective search algorithm
in semantic space is the very variation process itself.
Now, Husserl imagines that the whole of this manifold gives rise, at a higher
level, to the ‘eigentliche Erschauung des Allgemeinen als Eidos’ (413) – the true
seeing of the universal as eidos – because the single images are made to cover
each other so that difference in details are seen as metamorphosis of one and
the same Eidos. Husserl’s favorite metaphor of covering (‘Deckung’) can here be
compared to Peirce’s idea of such a process as a ‘composite photograph’, a concrete
metaphor with closely related implications.224 The result of this covering process is
the emergence of something being itself (‘ein Selbiges’) which is taken to appear
in a ‘passive preconstitution’, part of Husserl’s idea of a ‘passive synthesis’ as
part of the ante-predicative experience. This unity is a ‘unity in contradiction’, it
is no individual but a fluctuating unity of constantly changing, mutually exclusive
individuals – but it forms the basis for the intuition of the essence being the constant
in the flux. Only then, this ‘Selbiges’ is taken as object for an active, intutive
grasping (414), but it is important that the open manifold of variants is kept in mind,
even if the trajectory through it is realized only passively. Thus, the very idea of
difference presupposes the unity of the idea, because ‘nichts in Widerstreit treten
kann, was nichts Gemeinsames hat.’ (418) – nothing may enter into opposition
which does not have anything in common.
Averycrucialpointinthe‘Wesenserschauung’isthatitmusttakeplaceinfantasyin
order to reach the completion necessary for the grasping of an essence. Contemplation
of ever so many single cases will never be sufficient (so to speak Husserl’s equiv-
alent to Popper’s claim that there is no logic of induction or Peirce’s idea that
induction is bound to remain probable only) – hence Husserl’s constant criticism

188
C H A P T E R 8
of inductive theories of abstraction (already in the 2. LU). In the world of fantasy,
all regularities of a real, particular experience can be repeated, in ‘quasi-mode’, and
the single cases contemplated must be treated as mere possibilities among others in
this ‘ puren Phantasiewelt, einer Welt absolut reiner Möglichkeit.’ (424) – this pure
fantasy world, a world of absolutely pure possibility. The reason for this primary
status of fantasy in variation is only hinted at in Husserl: it is the continuity of the
flow of variants in fantasy which is impossible in the mere comparison between
concrete cases.225 A corollary to this – exactly like in Peirce – is that the extension
of generals covers a continuity of pure possibilities (‘reine Möglichkeiten’, 429)
which do not possess individual specificity (ibid.), so that differences between
fantasy worlds can not be measured in either identity nor not-identity.
Just as in the LU, this procedure is taken to cover a priori truths of essence,
characterized by their a priori necessity – and the procedure is deemed relevant
for any domain of objects as such, from mathematics and the natural sciences and
to ‘jederlei Gegenstandssphäre’ (427). The relevance of this procedure in Husserl
is thus enormous: ‘Von jeder konkreten Wirklichkeit und jedem an ihr wirklich
erfahrenen und erfahrbaren Einzelzuge steht der Weg in das Reich idealer oder
reiner Möglichkeit und damit in das des apriorisches Denkens offen’ (428): from
any concrete reality the road into the ideal realm of pure possibilities lies open
– and thus into a priori thought. Thus, the eidetic variation as a procedure is
quintessential for all science, but it must also be supposed to occur ever so often –
albeit less explicit and controlled– in everyday life.
Thus, an implication of eidetic variation is that the grasping of pure concepts
necessitates the workings of fantasy at a large scale and in many cognitive processes
where we might not usually expect it. This has crucial corollaries for the place of
fiction – and hence of literature – in a Husserlian perspective, to which we shall
return in more detail in Chaps. 14 and 17.
In Husserl’s combined description of the formal and regional ontologies by
means of foundation relations on the one hand, and his epistemology of such
domains by means of eidetic variation on the other, a strange tension stands out:
the ontological relations of necessity in themselves are taken to be discrete –
they consist of dependency relations between aspects – but the epistemological
access to them is continuous, it requires the flowing fantasy variations of the
ontology investigated. Of course, the continuous search might seem relevant for
the detection of discontinuities, much like we fumble our way with the hand in
the dark continuously along the wall in order to discover the discontinuity of the
light switch. Still, there is a strange mismatch here which we also remarked in the
preceding chapter: why not admit continuous dependency relations (of the type:
the larger a given spatial extension is, the more color does it have – or any other
continuous function between variables)? Husserl himself lists mathematical physics
among the a priori regularities (427) without noting that most of physical laws are
continuous regularities connecting different aspects of physical processes – thus, in
fact, being prototypical instances of such continuous dependency relations.
This ‘Austrian’ doctrine of the synthetic a priori and our access to it has obvious
corollaries in Peirce. My basic idea in this chapter is, as you will guess, that Peirce’s

D I A G R A M M A T I C A L R E A S O N I N G
189
concept of diagrammatical reasoning substantially enriches our understanding of
the epistemological access to synthetic a priori structures of ontology.
Here lies, though, a major terminological problem to be sorted out. Even if not
central in the many skeptical developments of twentieth century philosophy, the
vocabulary used by the Austrian tradition is not far from that generally understood
by philosophers. Not so with Peirce – for whom we hope to have to some extent
prepared the ground in the first part of this book. Peirce is no friend to the a priori,
he writes, for instance,
But, it will be said, you forget the laws which are known to us a priori, the axioms of geometry, the
principles of logic, the maxims of causality, and the like. Those are absolutely certain, without exception
and exact. To this I reply that it seems to me there is the most positive historic proof that innate truths
are particularly uncertain and mixed up with error, and therefore a fortiori not without exception. This
historical proof is, of course, not infallible; but it is very strong. Therefore, I ask how do you know that
a priori truth is certain, exceptionless, and exact? You cannot know it by reasoning. For that would be
subject to uncertainty and inexactitude. Then, it must amount to this that you know it a priori; that is,
you take a priori judgments at their own valuation, without criticism or credentials. That is barring the
gate of inquiry. (Untitled ms. 1897, 1.144)
Blocking the way of inquiry, as we know, is the worst thing research can do. So
Peirce’s criticism of the a priori turns on the idea that it should be possible to reach
any certain knowledge by means of uncritical inward reflection only. So, it is a
variant of the Kantian a priori he attacks. Still, as we have seen in the central PAP
discussion of diagrams from 1906, he adopts Kant’s notion of ‘schema’ and sees
diagrams as his own contribution to the explanation of access to general objects by
observation. The same point is expressed as early as 1893:
Kant declares that the question of his great work is ‘How are synthetical judgments a priori possible?’
By a priori he means universal; by synthetical, experiential (i.e., relating to experience, not necessarily
derived wholly from experience). The true question for him should have been, ‘How are universal
propositions relating to experience to be justified?’ But let me not be understood to speak with anything
less than profound and almost unparalleled admiration for that wonderful achievement, that indispensible
stepping-stone of philosophy. (Logic of Quantity, 1893, 4.92)
The problem, according to Peirce, can be rephrased as the question why universal
propositions based on experience are possible – covering, of course, Husserl’s
empirical as well as pure generals. The direct observation of real generals is possible
in Peirce who sticks to the Aristotelian maxim that ‘Nihil est in intellectu quod non
prius fuerit in sensu’ (‘Harvard Lectures on Pragmatism’, 1903, EPII, 126; 5.181).
This is interpreted, however, in a not quite Aristotelian and definitely not empiricist
fashion because Peirce claims experience, perception, to be the source of such
universality, present already in our perceptual judgments with their basis in percepts
which are not necessarily directly accessible.226 This provides the phenomenological
foundation of diagrammatical reasoning in Peirce’s theory of perception: by the
observation of diagrams, universal regularities can be made directly observable,
given a certain typifying interpretation of those diagrams. But this displays a striking
degree of structural analogy to Husserl’s doctrine of eidetic variation which is
precisely the idea of founding general concepts in perception – although perception

190
C H A P T E R 8
(‘Anschauung’) in a extended sense of the word. In Peirce, there is exactly the same
identification between relations of necessity and diagrammatical reasoning as there
is in Husserl between necessity and the synthetic a priori structures revealed by
ideation. But Peirce’s conception of diagrammatical reasoning is considerably wider
than is Husserl’s eidetic variation – at least taken at face value from his descriptions
of the procedure. In Husserl, eidetic variation accounts for the perceptual genesis
of pure concepts, succeeded by the search for dependency relations between such
concepts – but in Peirce, diagrammatical reasoning accounts both for the genesis of
such concepts and the possible relations between them – and for the experimental use
of diagrams to discover new, possibly undetected such relations. Peirce’s diagrams
accounts for eidetic variation – both at the level of the single diagram-concept and
on the level of the reasoning performed in it (recall Peirce’s continuity insistence
that diagram reasoning should make sure the result holds in all similar cases) – but
also in the special form of variation seeking completely new – implicit – information
by means of diagram manipulation. Jaakko Hintikka has rightly pointed to Peirce’s
self-declared ‘most important discovery’ as being the distinction between corollarial
and theorematical reasoning, the former easily reading a conclusion off a given
diagram, and the latter introducing some entirely new factor in the diagram so as to
facilitate a new and unforeseen conclusion.227 But still, in Peirce the diagram plays
the same role in providing the phenomenological foundation of concepts – it is, for
instance, possible in Peirce to attempt to make the content of a symbol explicit (or,
in any case, more explicit) by using the symbol as a recipe to draw a diagram.
Where is the borderline between analytic and synthetic in Peirce, then? It goes
without saying that empirical generals – the real possibilities – must belong to the
synthetic domain, but where is the precise limit to the analytic? Of course, in Peirce a
distinction is possible between pure and applied diagrams – but diagrams’ necessary
realization in space-time (which they NB share with the variation procedure in
Husserl) makes it difficult to imagine any completely pure diagram. Take the
example of a simple map giving the coastal profile of an island. This map may
be seen as a geometrical curve with no further interpretation, in some sense as
‘pure’ a diagram as they come (here ‘pure’ to be taken in another sense than in
Husserl, rather like ‘formal’ in Husserl). Still it can be used as a vehicle for diagram
experiments – we may establish the curvature of parts of the curve or the area of
its interior. A next step could be to see the drawing as a geographical map, that is,
investing it with basic contents from geographical regional ontology, so for instance
the concepts of sea, coast and inland. These concepts entail certain constraints on
the drawing on the map – now all coastlines must form closed curves, so-called
Jordan-curves.228 Geographical ontology does not permit any coast suddenly to
stop – unlike, of course, a geometrical line which may virtually end at any chosen
point. This ontological interpretation now makes new diagram experiments possible:
how much new land may be gained by the drying out of a certain shallow bay, for
instance. A next step may add political ontology to the map – maybe the island is
divided by several states so that a manifold of borders can be superposed on it – this,
in turn, giving rise to new diagram experiments, maybe of a military sort: which

D I A G R A M M A T I C A L R E A S O N I N G
191
borderlines ought to be changed, seen from an possible power’s point of view?
Still, all these experiments may still be ‘pure’ in a sense: they are material, they are
‘sachhaltige’, but they are still general in the sense that we have not yet interpreted
the map in terms of references to this world, we have only invested it with synthetic
a priori concepts stemming from different ontologies. Now we invest the island
with the names of Hispaniola and the countries Haiti and the Dominican Republic –
only now the diagram map receives an empirical concept structure (but still being
general, because the map covers the island in all of the relevant period with constant
coastline and borders).
Peirce’s identification between diagrams and necessity relations mirrored
Husserl’s identification between a priori and necessity relations, we said. But there
is one more term in Peirce’s doctrine: pure diagrams and necessity are, in his
doctrine, coextensional also with mathematics. But mathematics as such Peirce, as
against Kant, tends to categorize as analytic. In an intriguing paper, Stephen Levy
(1997) has charted Peirce’s discussions of the status of mathematics with respect to
the analytic/synthetic distinction (and the relation between mathematics and logic
in Peirce where many different countercurrents goes against his ‘official’ view that
logic is dependent on mathematics, not vice versa). Levy quotes Peirce’s ‘official’
view that mathematics is analytic: ‘An analytical proposition is a definition or a
proposition deducible from definitions  Mathematical propositions  are in truth
only analytical’ (A reply to Carus in The Monist (1893), 6.595, quoted in Levy 1997,
194). This is as clear as it could possibly be, one thinks, but later Peirce has second
thoughts. Levy quotes a refutation of Kant’s idea that 7 + 5 = 12 is synthetic –
Peirce argues that this equation follows from the definitions of arithmetic via a series
of purely logical steps (The Carnegie Application, 1902, NEM IV 58–59). Here,
however, Peirce finishes his argument by claiming: ‘There is, in short, no theore-
matic reasoning required to prove from the definitions that 7 + 5 = 12.’ Levy rightly
concludes that by 1902, mathematics is thus partitioned in an analytic and a synthetic
part following the division between corollarial and theorematical reasoning.229 After
this idea, corollarial mathematics is analytical while theorematical mathematics –
along with the investigation of real possibilities in the special sciences – belongs
to the synthetical domain. The closer establishment of this distinction remains, of
course, an issue for future research. As Levy also argues, this distinction coincides
with the appearance of abduction in mathematics. As he rightly claims, Peirce
only rarely discusses this almost omnipresent issue (as many different necessity
implications follow from any axiom or theorem, which route should we pick in our
proof? – this question may be determined by hypothesis – abduction – only). Levy
(86) discusses one of the few times Peirce relativizes his definition of mathematics
by necessary reasoning in explicitly introducing hypothesis in mathematics:
 it is an error to make mathematics consist exclusively in the tracing out of necessary consequences.
For the framing of the hypothesis of the two-way spread of imaginary quantity, and the hypothesis of
Riemann surfaces were certainly mathematical achievements.
Mathematics is, therefore, the study of the substance of hypotheses, or mental creations, with a view
to the drawing of necessary conclusions. (‘On Quantity’, c. 1895, NEM IV, 268)

192
C H A P T E R 8
Hence, the hypothesis-making, abductive side of mathematics must fall within
the domain of the synthetic, conforming to Peirce’s overall tendency to let the
analytic cover necessity and deduction, while the synthetic covers probability and
ab- and induction. In a late quote, Levy finds a deliberation in which Peirce
compares theorematic reasoning and abduction: ‘theoremic reasoning  is very
plainly allied to Retroduction, from which it only differs, as far as I now see,
in being indisputable.’ (MS CSP 754, c. 1907, quoted from Levy). The question
remains open, however, how this intricate web of ab- and deduction is to be parsed:
are all conclusions reached by deduction on the basis of a theorematic abduction,
synthetic, or is it only that hypothesis itself? Peirce seems to remain silent on the
issue – but it is evident that we will here argue for the primacy of the former
interpretation. In that case, diagrams and abductive diagram experiment become a
royal road to the investigation of the synthetic a priori.
As to the synthetic a priori in the special sciences, it is a corollary to Peirce’s
architectonics of sciences that all sciences study mathematical structures, albeit
incarnated in further ontological and empirical clothing relevant for the science in
question. Necessary structures in all sciences are diagrammatical, precisely because
they may – potentially, at least – be studied by means of mathematics, but they
place upon their subject further material constraints of metaphysical character,
depending on the science in question.230 The regional ontology provides further
constraints, guiding which parts of mathematics are relevant in the science in
question. In this respect, Peirce’s doctrine holding mathematics as first science is at
odds with Husserl’s idea. Even if the procedure of eidetic variation is generalized
from mathematics, Husserl vacillates as to the possibility of mathematics to study
the outcome of such variations. We have already remarked the differences between
the first and second editions of Logische Untersuchungen on this point: in the first
issue, it was seen as a major phenomenological task to describe vague forms in
exact mathematical language – in the second issue, this task was given up in favor
of the idea of ‘vague essences’ in experience which are assumed impossible to
map mathematically. Why Husserl gave up that central idea is hard to say – it
has not necessarily any inner connection to the well-known ‘transcendental’ turn
he began to initiate in between the two issues of the LU. Jean Petitot has, as we
discussed earlier, insisted on the idea that any ontology – or objectivity, as he as
a Neo-Kantian prefers to say – must be formalized with the use of mathematics
relevant for the essences of that ontology. Doing so, he makes, in fact, a Peircean
move, requiring suitable diagrammatical structure to cover the synthetic a priori
structure in question.
Again and again, a certain problem in a position connecting an Austrian a priori
ontology with epistemological access comes up: where is the precise borderline
between the synthetic a priori laws of a given domain on the one hand, and the
contingent, empirical data and tendencies recorded in that domain, on the other?
Here, Zelaniec’s common sense treatment of the a priori and Friedman’s embedding
of the a priori in scientific development may, surprisingly, support each other.
There is no exhaustive definition of what synthetic a priori regularities are – we can

D I A G R A M M A T I C A L R E A S O N I N G
193
describe them and their role in reasoning, philosophy and science. Some of them
are tacit, almost trivial regularities which we all depend on already in everyday
reasoning (Zelaniec),231 others have the form of necessary, non-trivial hypotheses
called for in the ongoing development of science informed by both metaphysical
discussions, empirical findings, and mathematical models (Friedman) – but in both
cases we can not beforehand make explicit the exact borderline between synthetic a
priori regularities and mere empirical tendencies found in the object studied. Rather,
this distinction forms one of the basic issues in the ongoing development of science
and philosophy. It is simply a crucial part of the interplay between common-sense
basic assumptions, the different special sciences, mathematics, and philosophy to
approach and refine the charting of that difference. To say it is an empirical issue
would make no sense – but it remains, pace Barry Smith’s ‘fallibilistic apriorism’,
a question fallible both for empirical and a priori reasons and a question which may
not be solved by pure armchair philosophy – but only by a philosophy involving
itself in the ongoing development of the special sciences. Such investigation must be
continued in specific regional ontologies. This is why we pass to the next three parts
of this book where we search for diagrammatical and synthetic a priori regularities
in three areas: those of biology, pictures, and literature.

PART II
BIOSEMIOTICS, PICTURES, LITERATURE

C H A P T E R 9
BIOSEMIOTICS AS MATERIAL AND FORMAL ONTOLOGY
Therefore, if botany and zoology must perforce rest upon
metaphysics, by all means let this metaphysics be recog-
nized as an explicit branch of those sciences, and be treated
in a thoroughgoing and scientific manner.
Peirce ‘On Science and Natural Classes’, 1902 (EPII, 116).
The notion of biosemiotics is no doubt so intriguing because it unites the foundational
problems of no less than two sciences within its name. The first is, of course, biology.
The concept of biosemiotics is coined by Ju. S. Stepanov232 in 1971, and the idea
is that biology must take serious the amount of semiotic terminology used in it,
seemingly impossible to reduce. Biology, even in its most recent Neo-neo-Darwinian
brands, seems not to be able to get rid of a whole vocabulary taken from linguistics,
semiotics, informatics, philosophy, logic, and related sciences of meaning. Thus,
concepts more or less explicitly borrowed from these domains now fill the gap which
wasearlierfilledbyvitalistdreamsofyetundiscoveredphysicalforcesandthelike.All
currents in biology – from vitalism proper with its exaggerated ontological commit-
ments to strange, yet unknown forces, and to neo-Darwinist reductionism – each in
their manner bear witness to the predicament so brilliantly predicted by the often
overlooked masterpiece of eighteenth century theoretical biology, Kant’s ‘Kritik der
teleologischen Urteilskraft’.233 Here, Kant predicts that no ‘Newton of the grass straw’
will ever appear, because biology cannot be reduced to mechanistic physics. Yet,
on the other hand, no substantialist vitalism is deemed possible; the only means left
to interpret biological phenomena is to understand them in analogy with the teleo-
logicalprinciplesalsousedintheappreciationofgoal-orientedactivities.Thesemiotic
metaphors abundantly used by the biology of our day have often been noticed:234
‘genetic information’, ‘messenger-RNA’, ‘DNA code’ etc. pointing to the semiotic
role of certain entities in a goal-oriented process and thus bearing witness to the indis-
pensability of the teleological or intentional concepts even at the most tiny orders
of magnitude in biology. Now, the introduction of biosemiotics is an attempt to take
this mass import of metaphors seriously without on the other hand falling prey to
vitalist excesses. Such recurring expressions must be a sign that biology is basically
a semiotic science and that it – pace Kant – will never get rid of its semiotic vocab-
ulary. Thus, the basic idea of biosemiotics is to establish the sign as a primitive
197

198
C H A P T E R 9
concept in biology, and something like a Bohrian complementarity seems to appear:
no matter how thorough a purely biochemical description of biological processes
might become, it seems it will still be lacking the intentional understanding conveyed
by the semiotic concepts or metaphors – and, probably, vice versa, semiotics needs
the biochemical underpinning before becoming real biosemiotics. The biosemiotic
program remains, it must be admitted, still a mere program; until now it has not
made significant contributions to the development of biology and there is even a
considerable confusion as to the precise meaning of semiotic concepts when trans-
ferred to biology as well as to the amount of semiotic assumptions being carried
with them.
Theotherscienceshakeninitsfoundationsbybiosemioticsis,nosurprise,semiotics.
Inthesubstantialpartofsemioticsinspiredbylinguistics,theassumptionisoftenmade
(tacitly, that is) that semiotics is a human science; the ability to produce, communicate
and understand signs is in this tradition spontaneously seen as a human privilege.
Thus, the claim of biosemiotics to be a candidate for a real science also threatens
this type of foundation for semiotics. The biosemiotic project invariably involves the
idea that a substantial part of the semiotic vocabulary may be meaningfully exported
from semiotics proper to biological phenomena. Thus, the very idea of a biosemi-
otics tends to dissolve the borderline between natural and human sciences, to attack
it from so to speak both sides. But if this attack should really prove successful, it
will invariably entail deepgoing consequenses for the sciences on both sides of this
borderline: biosemiotics as a science is not possible as a simple expansion of well-
established semiotics onto a new field, on the contrary, it necessarily implies a founda-
tional crisis for semiotics and a thorough discussion of the basic semiotic assumptions
in a biological light.
It is well known that in semiotics as a whole, there is a very wide disagreement
as to which domains do fall under the scope of semiotics, ranging from very
restricted doctrines, admitting only conscious, completed acts of communications
by human agents as semiotic phenomena, and to ultra-Peircean versions of pan-
semiotics implying that any physical process in the universe falls under the reign
of semiotics. It is less well-known that a subspecies of this vagueness – so fatal to
semiotics’claimsforbeingrecognizedasaunifiedscience–characterizestheattempts
at founding a biosemiotics. One school simply identifies biology and semiotics
on the basis of the strong intuition that the physical world (or, more properly,
the simple physical world, apart from more complex phenomena as biology) in
itself does not contain sign processes. This idea – first advocated by Th. Sebeok
(e.g. 1991) and supported by many, for instance A.U. Igambardiev (1992), Floyd
Merrell (1992, 1997), the actual Copenhagen biosemiotics school (Hoffmeyer,
Emmeche) – is counterargued by various arguments, not only by a version of
Peirceanism (cf. Peirce’s claim from his absolute idealism period that matter is just
inert mind and thus part of semiosis proper), but also by the idea that a conti-
nuity must prevail between simpler and more complex physics (e.g. John Deely
1992, 63). Thus, the foundational question raised by biosemiotics in biology by the
same token becomes a foundational question for semiotics: how far does semiotics
extend?

B I O S E M I O T I C S A S M A T E R I A L A N D F O R M A L O N T O L O G Y
199
This and the following three chapters investigate these issues and thus form an
integration of my contributions to the Copenhagen School of biosemiotics since Jesper
Hoffmeyer’s pioneering effort took its beginnings around 1990.235
In this chapter, I shall try to trace the possible consequenses for both disciplines,
semiotics and biology. Let us begin by investigating the basic antinomies of biology as
laidoutbyKantinhisalreadymentionedbasicdoctrineonthepossibilityoftheoretical
biology, ‘Kritik der teleologischen Urteilskraft’.
T H E B A S I C A N T I N O M Y O F B I O L O G Y I N K A N T
This treatise takes as its object the realm of physics left out of Kant’s critical demar-
cations of scientific, that is, mathematical and mechanistic, physics in the Kritik der
reinen Vernunft. Here, the main idea was that scientifically understandable Nature
wasdefinedbyGesetzmässigkeit,bylawfulness.InhisMetaphysischeAnfangsgründe
der Naturwissenschaft, this idea was taken further in the following claim: ‘I claim,
however, that there is only as much proper science to be found in any special doctrine
on nature as there is mathematics therein ’, and further ‘ a pure doctrine on nature
about certain things in nature (doctrine on bodies and doctrine on minds) is only
possible by means of mathematics ’.236 The basic idea is thus to identify Nature’s
lawfulness with its ability to be studied by means of mathematical schemata uniting
understanding and intuition. The central schema, to Kant, was numbers, so apt to be
used in the understanding of mechanically caused movement. But already here, Kant
is very well aware of a whole series of aspects of spontaneuosly experienced Nature
in the ‘letzten Grenze der Dinge’ is left out of sight by the concentration on matter in
movement, and he calls for these further realms of Nature to be studied by a continu-
ation of the Copernican turn, by the mind’s further study of the utmost limits of itself.
Thisiswhatheundertakesinthe‘KritikderteleologischenUrteilskraft’wherethevery
judgments we use in seeing Nature as endowed with purposes are investigated. Why
do we spontaneously see ‘Naturzwecke’, natural purposes, in Nature? Purposiveness
is wholly different from necessity, crucial to Kant’s definition of Nature. There is no
reason in the general concept of Nature (as lawful) to assume that nature’s objects may
serveeachotheraspurposes.Nevertheless,wedonotstopassumingjustthat.Butwhat
we do when we ascribe purposes to Nature is using the faculties of mind in another
way than in science, much closer to the way we use them in the appreciation of beauty
and art, the object of the first part of the book immediately before the treatment of
teleological judgment. This judgment is characterized by a central distinction, already
widely argued in this first part of the book: the difference between determinative and
reflective judgments, respectively. While the judgment used scientifically to decide
whether a specific case follows a certain rule is bestimmende, that is, it results in expla-
nation by means of a derivation from a principle, and thus constitutes the objectivity of
the object in question – the judgment which is reflektierende lacks all these features.
It does not proceed by means of explanation, but by mere analogy; it is not consti-
tutive, but merely regulative; it does not prove anything but merely judges, and it has

200
C H A P T E R 9
noprincipleofreasontorestitsheaduponbuttheveryactofjudgingitself.Theseideas
are now elaborated throughout the critic of teleological judgment.
In the section ‘Analytik der teleologischen Urteilskraft’, Kant gradually approaches
the question: first is treated the merely formal Zweckmässigkeit: We may ascribe
purposes to geometry in so far as it is useful to us, just like rivers carrying fertile
soils with them for trees to grow in may be ascribed purposes; these are, however,
merely contingent purposes, dependent on an external telos. The crucial point is the
existence of objects which are only possible as such in so far as defined by purposes:
‘That its form is not possible after mere natural laws, that is, such things which may
not be known by us through understanding applied to objects of the senses; on the
contrary that even the empirical knowledge about them, regarding their cause and
effect, presupposes concepts of reason.’237 The idea here is that in order to conceive
of objects which may not be explained with reference to understanding and its (in
this case, mechanical) concepts only, these must be grasped by the non-empirical
ideas of reason itself. If causes are perceived as being interlinked in chains, then such
contingencies are to be thought of only as small causal circles on the chain, that is, as
things being their own cause. Hence Kant’s definition of the Idea of a natural purpose:
‘ an object exists as natural purpose, when it is cause and effect of itself.’238 This
can be thought as an idea without contradiction, Kant maintains, but not conceived
(begriffen). This circularity (the small causal circles) is a very important feature in
Kant’s tentative schematization of purposiveness. Another way of coining this Idea
is now: ‘Dinge als Naturzwecke sind organisierte Wesen’ (op. cit. 235) – things as
natural purposes are organized beings. This entails that naturally purposeful objects
must possess a certain spatio-temporal construction: the parts of such a thing must
be possible only through their relation to the whole – and, conversely, the parts must
activelyconnectthemselvestothiswhole.Thus,thecorrespondingideacanbesummed
up as the Idea of the Whole which is necessary to pass judgment on any empirical
organism, and it is very interesting to note that Kant sums up the determination of
any part of a Whole by all other parts in the phrase that a Naturzweck is possible only
as a ‘ organisiertes und sich selbst organisierendes Wesen’ (op. cit. 237) – as an
organized and self-organizing being. This is probably the very birth certificate of the
metaphysics of self-organization. It is important to keep in mind that Kant does not
feel any vitalist temptation at supposing any organizing power or any autonomy on the
part of the whole which may come into being only by this process of self-organization
between its parts. When Kant talks about the ‘bildende Kraft’ (so beloved and hyposta-
tizedbylaterromanticismandvitalism)intheformationoftheWhole,itisthusnothing
outside of this self-organization of its parts. It is, he maintains, analogous to the arts –
but without the artist. This implies an interesting consequence: even if we conceive of
these organized beings by analogy to our own soul, these beings cannot be organized
by means of any soul (if they were, an artist was added or the organized matter would
already be there for the artist to collect). And it is thus not explainable – erklärlich –
through the analogy with our art, Kant adds in an interesting remark, because we

B I O S E M I O T I C S A S M A T E R I A L A N D F O R M A L O N T O L O G Y
201
ourselves – including our own purposes – in this respect belong to nature (we are so to
speak an empirical part of the problem, not of the solution!).
This leads to Kant’s final definition: an organized being is that in which all alter-
natingly is ends and means. This idea is extremely important as a formalization of
the idea of teleology: the Naturzwecke do not imply that there exists given, stable
ends for nature to pursue, on the contrary, they are locally defined by causal cycles,
in which every part interchangeably assumes the role of ends and means. Thus,
there is no absolute end in this construal of nature’s teleology; it analyzes teleology
formally at the same time as it relativizes it with respect to substance. This definition,
Kant affirms, lacks a constitutive concept of understanding – like the concept of
movement for mechanics – and can thus not be mathematized and reach the status
of a principle but must remain a mere ‘maxim’ (op. cit. 237).239 Kant takes care to
note that this maxim needs not be restricted to the beings – animals – which we
spontaneously tend to judge as purposeful: ‘this concept now necessarily leads to
the idea of the totality of nature as a system after purposive rules, an idea under
which all mechanisms of nature must be subsumed after principles of reason.’240
The idea of natural purposes thus entails that there might exist a ‘plan’ in nature
rendering processes which we have all reasons to disgust purposeful for us. In
this vision, teleology might embrace causality – and even aesthetics: ‘Also natural
beauty, that is, its harmony with the free play of our epistemological faculties in
the experience and judgment of its appearance can be seen in the way of objective
purposivity of nature in its totality as system, in which man is a member.’241 As
is evident, these speculations entail that it is not implied in this maxim which size
these Naturzwecke may possess: theories like Lovelock’s ‘Gaia’-hypothesis belong
to the same domain in so far it is not metaphysically decidable beforehand which
size the self-organized system may possess. But no matter the size of organisms,
an important consequence of Kant’s doctrine is that their teleology is so to speak
‘secularized’ in two ways: (1) it is formal, and (2) it is local. It is formal because
self-organization does not ascribe any special, substantial goal for organisms to
pursue – other than the sustainment of self-organization. Thus teleology is merely
a formal property in certain types of systems. This is why teleology is also local –
it is to be found in certain systems when the causal chain form loops, as Kant
metaphorically describes the cycles involved in self-organization – it is no overar-
ching goal governing organisms from the outside. Teleology is a local, bottom-up,
process only.
This Idea of Naturzwecke is now subjected to the Kantian discipline of dialectics
whichrevealsanantinomyofjudgment.Thebestimmendejudgmenthasnoprincipleof
itself,butactsaccordingtoaprinciplegivenfromoutside,guidedbywhichitsubsumes
objects under concepts. In this way, it presupposes a schematism which exposes a
concept in intuition (that is, makes it possible to list which beings in time and space
fall under the concept). On the other hand, the reflektierende judgment must, lacking
appropriate concepts, serve as its own principle (what is meant by this seemingly
strange idea is that judgment is in itself a purposeful use of the faculties of mind,
so that reflective judgment amounts to finding processes in nature similar to its own

202
C H A P T E R 9
purposeful judging procedure). These two opposed types of judgment, then, form the
antinomyofjudgment:(1)allmaterialthingsandtheirformsmustbejudgedaccording
to mechanical laws (2) certain material beings can not be judged by mechanical laws
only(op.cit.250).Thesetwomaximsobviouslydonotcontainanycontradiction,only
if they are converted into assertions of constitution: all material things can (can not,
respectively) be constituted by mechanical laws.
Of course, it is possible that in Nature an sich, these two relations between things
do possess one and the same root, but we are not gifted to tell due to our finite
mind, so we stand split between determination and reflection. And any idea of
assuming the absolute antinomy between them derives only from our tendency to
mistake the reflective judgment for a determination. Thus, Kant does not in any
way doubt the existence of organized beings, what is at stake is the possibility
of dealing with them scientifically in terms of mechanics. Even if they exist as
a given thing in experience, natural purposes can not receive any concept. This
implies that biology is evident in so far as the existence of organisms cannot be
doubted. On the other hand, biology will never rise to the heights of science, its
attempts at doing so are beforehand delimited, all scientific explanations of organisms
being bound to be mechanical. Following this line of argument, it corresponds
very well to present-day reductionism in biology, trying to take all problems of
phenotypical characters, organization, morphogenesis, behavior, ecology, etc. back
to the biochemistry of genetics. But the other side of the argument is that no
matter how successful this reduction may prove, it will never be able to reduce
or replace the teleological point of view necessary in order to understand the
organism as such in the first place: no Newton of the straw of grass is ever going to
appear.
Evidently, there is something deeply unsatisfactory in this conclusion which is why
mostbiologistshavehesitatedatadoptingitandclingtoeitherfull-blownreductionism
or (today, the very few of them) to some brand of vitalism, subjecting themselves to
the dangers of ‘transcendental illusion’ and allowing for some Goethe-like intuitive
idea without any schematization (some kind of élan vital, entelechy, Lebenskraft, or
the like). It seems obvious that the author of the ‘Kritik der teleologischen Urteilskraft’
has felt the same uneasiness. In the strange heap of posthumous writings, the famous
Opus postumum, he returns over and over again to the question; never, however, to
allowforasubstantialstvitalismwhichisprecludedbythecriticalconsciousnessabout
the dangers of the transcendental illusion. Instead, he tries to soften up the question
by philosophical means. Here, he tries to establish an Übergang from metaphysics
to physics as he awkwardly puts it, that is, from the metaphysical constraints on
mechanical physics and to physics in its empirical totality, including the organized
beings of biology. Pure mechanics leaves physics as a whole unorganized, and this
organization is sought established by means of ‘mediating concepts’. Among them is
the ‘bildende Kraft’ which is not conceived of in a vitalist substantialist manner, but
rather a notion referring to the means by which matter manages to self-organize. It thus
comprehends not only biological organization, but macrophysic solid matter physics
as well (the ‘texture of fibers, laminae and blocks, which is formed by crystallizing

B I O S E M I O T I C S A S M A T E R I A L A N D F O R M A L O N T O L O G Y
203
minerals’ (Kant 1993, 35)). Here, he adds an important argument to the critic of
judgment: ‘Because man is conscious of himself as a self-moving machine, without
being able to further understand such a possibility, he can, and is entitled to, introduce
a priori organic-moving forces of bodies into the classification of bodies in general’
(op. cit. 66) – and thus to distinguish mere mechanical bodies from self-propelled
organic bodies. This argument is akin, in fact, to present-day cognitive semantics: it is
because we ourselves are natural bodies that we are able spontaneously to understand
the biological aspect of physics. It is probably here we shall find the explanation of the
ideathatreflectivejudgmenttakesitselfasitsprinciple:thisistosaythattheveryteleo-
logical orientation of judging makes it possible for judgments to find judgment-like
processes in nature – still without being able to further understand it.
To sum up Kant’s masterful achievements in these early sketches of a theoretical
biology: biology is trapped between, one the one hand, a mechanist physics, being able
to explain things only in causal terms mathematically formalized in the differential
calculus, and, on the other hand, the spontaneous recognition by the judging body of
other judging bodies in the physical world. The scientific entry to this experience is
forever banned, but it may be possible to integrate it into philosophy by new ‘mediate
concepts’.
The relevance of Kant’s musings for biosemiotics ought to be evident. The very
reason for the coming into being of biosemiotics is the apparent indispensability
of semiotic, teleological concepts in the would-be mechanist biology of our day. It
immediately implies that biosemiotics is not, and can never be, a science in Kant’s
mechanist, causal use of the word. Instead, biosemiotics must be seen as a refined
attempt at formulating the ‘mediate concepts’ of the Opus Postumum. In fact, Kant
already anticipates biosemiotics in so far as he, in the idea of the reflective judgment’s
taking itself as principle, articulates the idea that we – because we are judging bodies –
that is, biosemiotic beings – are able to see other biosemiotic beings and formulate
the Idea of self-organized Naturzwecke to understand them.242 The teaching of Kant’s
theoretical biology for biosemiotics will then be: biosemiotics can never free itself
from this formal, teleological root; its mediate concepts of sign, meaning, information,
communication etc. will invariably express aspects of a teleological kernel – and thus
stand in opposition to the attempts in Darwinism and Neo-Darwinism to expel all
teleological concepts from biology.243
Various Neo-Kantians have sought to elaborate this third way between vitalism
and reductionism. Ernst Cassirer who elaborated a brand of Kantian semiotics in his
chef-d’œuvre Philosophie der symbolischen Formen, also left a – albeit little noticed –
sketch of a philosophy of biology in a chapter in the last of the four volumes of his
impressive Das Erkenntnisproblem. Even if this account is now more than half a
century old and lies well before Crick and Watson’s DNA breakthrough, it is still
surprisingly fresh. Cassirer concludes his historiography of biological thought with
the Vitalismusstreit and its consequenses in the beginning of the century. As a Kantian,
he opts for a third way and sees both the Darwinists’ reductionist claims and vitalisms,
like Hans Driesch’s reference to a Seele or a Psychoid in the living being, as aberrant
developments. Instead, he makes a synthesis of the leading biologists of his time,

204
C H A P T E R 9
especially his colleague in Hamburg, von Uexküll, Ungerer, and von Bertalanffy.244
Their ‘Organizismus’, as he coins it, does not aim at neither mechanist reduction nor
at the acceptance of vitalist forces, but towards the recognition of a ‘nicht-stoffliche
Ordnung’, (209) a non-material order, in addition to the causal organization of matter.
Thus, in this analysis, the holist character of Kant’s analysis of the Naturzweck is
pulledintotheforeground.Thenotionof‘Zweck’,soCassirerargues,tendstomakeus
believethepartsinquestionpossessanintentiontheydonot;theconceptof‘Ordnung’,
‘Form’, ‘System’, ‘Struktur’ better satisfies Kant’s analysis: ‘They substitute for the
concept of purpose the concept of order and system, and they characterize life by
attributing to it the property of a system.’245 This step, we could add, already lies as a
possibilityinKant’singeniousanalysisoftheconceptofendsintermsofcausalcircles,
necessarily possessing a morphological organization. In these passages, Cassirer in
fact paves the way for an epistemology of a structuralist biology in so far as he sees the
consequenceofUexküll’sthoughtasthefactthat‘ eseinselbständigeFormproblem
gibt, für das die Biologie eigentümliche Begriffe und Denkmittel auszubilden hat.’
(209) – there is an autonomous form problem for which biology must build special
concepts and means of thought. What is even more interesting is his fertile correction
of Kant: when physics now long since has supplied Newton’s mechanics with other
modes of thought, the narrow constraints of a Newtonian epistemology are no longer
valid for physics where holist concept like that of ‘fields’ now prevail; then why
shouldn’t they do as well for biology? Cassirer thus points in the direction of the
notion of ‘Form’ as the Kantian ‘mediate concept’ which will enlighten biological
thought.
If we now measure the claims of biosemiotics against these epistemologists of
biology, it is easy to see that it stages itself as a further investigator of these third-
position ‘mediate concepts’ of the Kantian tradition. A crucial question for biosemi-
otics, then, will be: what does the semiotic vocabulary add to the problem of form,
of order, of Naturzwecke? What is won with the import of concepts like ‘sign’,
‘codes’, ‘semiosis’, ‘information’, ‘messenger’, ‘semiosphere’, and the like into the
description246 ofbiologicalform?OneshouldherekeepinmindRenéThom’scautious
remark: ‘ when we speak of ‘information’, we should use the word ‘form’ ’ (Thom
1975, 127).
It must immediately be added that the word ‘form’ here plays several roles. First,
one central role is the reference to the many different aspects of internal architectonic
organization of biological beings, ranging from the structure of the cell and to multi-
cellular organisms. Second, it refers to the global, stable structure – the organism –
whichresultsasthesumofthearchitecturalbuilding-stonesjustmentioned,keptstable
by metabolism and the organism’s register of specific actions to avoid states too far
from metabolic stability. This fact opens two ways of inquiry: first, what does the
very concept of life as organized beings imply semiotically, that is, does an a priori
analysis of the concept of life in itself entail semiotic phenomena? second, the question
of organized form is more general than living beings and hence connects biology to the
cross-disciplinary question of emergence, the coming into being of ‘new properties’
in sufficiently complex systems.

B I O S E M I O T I C S A S M A T E R I A L A N D F O R M A L O N T O L O G Y
205
C A T E G O R I C A L P E R C E P T I O N : B A C T E R I A L C H E M O T A X I S
A S S E M I O T I C C A S E
Let us take a concrete example as introduction to the investigation of semiotic a
priori constraints on life. Since the classic paper by H.C. Berg, ‘A Physicist Looks
at Bacterial Chemotaxis’ it has been known that as simple an organism as E . Coli
is able to process semiotic information from its environment and act accordingly:
in the presence of a sugar gradient, it is able to swim ‘upstream’ in the gradient and
so approach a locality with higher nutrition concentration.247 How are the details in
this process? The bacterium undertakes this goal-oriented behavior due to a specific
coupling between sensors – a primitive perception – and action, organized in what
Berg calls ‘biased random walk’ (see Figs. 26–27).248 The unicellular organism has
Figure 26. A) Swimming B) Tumbling. Source: This and the next pages: Copyright 1994 from Molecular
Biology of the Cell, by Alberts et al. Reproduced by permission of Garland Science/Taylor & Francis LLC
six thin filaments protruding from its cell membrane, and in the absence of any
stimuli, it simply wanders randomly around by changing between two characteristical
movement patterns. One is performed by rotating the flagella counterclockwise. In

206
C H A P T E R 9
that case, they form a bundle which pushes the cell forward along a curved path, a
‘run’ of random duration with a mean length of 1 second. These runs interchange with
‘tumbles’withameanvalueof0.1secondwheretheflagellashifttoclockwiserotation,
making them work independently and hence moving the cell erratically around with
small net displacement. The biased random walk now consists in the fact than in
the presence of a chemical attractant, the runs happening to carry the cell closer to
the attractant are extended, while runs in other directions are not. The sensation of
the chemical attractant is performed temporally rather than spatially, because the
cell moves too rapidly for concentration comparisons between its two ends to be
possible. A chemical repellant in the environment gives rise to an analogous behav-
ioral structure – now the biased random walk takes the cell away from the repellant.
The bias saturates very quickly – within 0.2 seconds – which is what prevents the
cell from continuing in a ‘false’ direction, because a higher concentration of attractant
will now be needed to repeat the bias. The reception system has three parts, one
detecting repellants such as leucin, the other detecting sugars, the third oxygen and
oxygen-like substances. The biochemical machinery for signal transduction and for
flagellaactivationareratherwell-understood,andthewholemechanismhaslongsince
become standard textbook material, cf. the illustrations reprinted here.249 These well-
established empirical results, however, seem to await their proper semiotic interpre-
tation.
Figure 27. A) Random Walk B) Biased Random Walk.

B I O S E M I O T I C S A S M A T E R I A L A N D F O R M A L O N T O L O G Y
207
As always, it is interesting to note the ubiquity of spontaneous semiotic vocab-
ulary: ‘information-processing pathways’, ‘measurements of external concentration’,
‘sensory information’, ‘the cell cannot solve this problem’, ‘The cell sets the mean
run length at 1 second to provide ample head room for response’, ‘When watching
such tracks evolve on a computer screen, one gets the impression of a bloodhound
following a scent’, etc. (all examples from Berg, 4–6). Our contention is that this
terminology cannot be mere verbiage but reflects core properties of the process inves-
tigated. What are those properties, then, in semiotic terms? The cell’s behavior forms
a primitive, if full-fledged example of von Uexküll’s functional circle (see Chap. 10)
connecting specific perception signs and action signs. Functional circle behavior is
thusnoprivilegeforanimalsequippedwithcentralnervoussystems(CNS).Bothtypes
of signs involve categorization. First, the sensory receptors of the bacterium evidently
are organized after categorization of certain biologically significant chemicals, while
most chemicals that remain insignificant for the cell’s metabolism and survival are
ignored. The self-preservation of metabolism and cell structure is hence the ultimate
regulator which is supported by the perception-action cycles described. The catego-
rization inherent in the very structure of the sensors is mirrored in the categorization
of act types. Three act types are outlined: a null-action, composed of random running
and tumbling, and two mirroring biased variants triggered by attractants and repel-
lants, respectively. Moreover, a negative feed-back loop governed by quick satiation
grants that the window of concentration shifts to which the cell is able to react appro-
priately is large – it so to speak calibrates the sensory system so that it does not
remain blinded by one perception and does not keep moving the cell forward on in
one selected direction. This adaptation of the system grants that it works in a large
scale of different attractor/repellor concentrations. These simple signals at stake in the
cell’s functional circle display an important property: at simple biological levels, the
distinction between signs and perception vanish – that distinction is supposedly only
relevant for higher CNS-based animals. Here, the signals are based on categorical
perception – a perception which immediately categorizes the entity perceived and thus
remains blind to internal differences within the category.
One further peculiarity deserves to be mentioned: the mechanism by which the cell
identifies sugar, is partly identical to what goes on in human taste buds. Sensation of
sugar gradients must, of course, differ from the consumption of it – while the latter,
of course, destroys the sugar molecule, the former merely reads an ‘active site’ on the
outside of the macromolecule. This has, however, huge semiotic implications, for this
entailsthatE .Coli–exactlylikeus–maybefooledbyartificialsweetenersbearingthe
same‘activesite’ontheirouterperimeter,evenifbeingcompletelydifferentchemicals
(this is, of course, the secret behind such sweeteners, they are not sugars and hence do
not enter the digestion process carrying the energy of carbohydrates). This implies that
E . coli may be fooled. We recall Umberto Eco’s definition of semiotics as the study
of all devices which may be used to lie. Bacteria may not lie, but a simpler process
than lying (which presupposes two agents and the ability of being fooled) is, in fact,
being fooled (presupposing, in turn, only one agent and an ambiguous environment).
E . coli has the ability to categorize a series of sugars – but, by the same token, the

208
C H A P T E R 9
Figure 28. Flagellum rotor
ability to categorize a series of irrelevant substances along with them. This is semiot-
ically extremely important – semiotics seems to begin with this duplicity: On the one
hand, the ability to recognize and categorize an object by a surface property only (due
to the weak van der Waal-bonds and hydrogen bonds to the ‘active site’, in contrast
Figure 29. Receptor-motor coupling

B I O S E M I O T I C S A S M A T E R I A L A N D F O R M A L O N T O L O G Y
209
to the strong covalent bonds holding the molecule together) facilitates perception
economy and quick action adaptability. On the other hand, the economy involved in
judging objects from their surface only has an unavoidable flip side: it involves the
possibility of mistake, of being fooled by allowing impostors in your categorization.
So in the perception-action circle of a bacterium, we find some of the minimum
requirements for semiotic processes: the self-regulatory stability of a metabolism
involving categorized signal and action involvement with the surroundings. An a
priori semiotic hypothesis is that these properties characterize semiotic processes as
such and that the types of processes described here function as building-blocks in
more sophisticated and complex semiotic phenomena, from intercellular communi-
cation in multicellular organisms and to complicated perception and communication
in higher animals.250 A long-range goal of biosemiotics will be to analyze all such
types of sign processes in biology and discern the network of mediate concepts of
semioticsnecessarytocharacterizethem,fromthesimplesttothemorecomplexcases.
In a certain sense, these constraints on life would constitute the material ontology of
biology.
S E M I O T I C A P R I O R I C O N S T R A I N T S O N L I F E ?
It has often been noted (e.g. de Loof & Broeck 1995) that no concise definition of
the concept of life exists.251 Most attempts at definitions end up as lists of properties
required. An extreme opponent to this view, however, is the ‘strong’ school in the
‘Artificial Life’-community, parallel to so-called ‘strong AI’. The idea here is that
computer modelings of life may themselves be considered living because they instan-
tiate certain formal characteristics of living beings: they reproduce, fight, develop
and even form symbiosis- and ecological niche-like compromises between them (cf.
Langton 1997). This trend is right in leaving the ‘carbon-centrism’ of empirical
biology behind and seeing life as a theoretical and purely formal question in its own
right, but, on the other hand, an argument analogous to the AI case seems valid:
merely formal calculi do not result in intelligence nor life like we usually under-
stand them. Computer-based AI lacks qualia, genuine insight and the discussion
of its limitations due to Gödel’s theorem is an ongoing and yet unsolved strife
in AI studies (the same goes for the discussion of life, cf. Rosen 1989, 1990252);
computer-based AL lacks all the same properties (and in so far life comprises intel-
ligent beings, AL must obey the same constraints) as well as the central biological
property of metabolism. This calls for an a priori analysis of the concept of life
and related concepts253 in order to determine the ‘mediate’ concepts required for
the study of the living. Taking the Austrian interpretation of the a priori, these
mediating concepts will, simply, constitute the conceptual network of regional
ontology of biology. Recurrent features in the various list definitions of life include the
following:
Metabolism. Life is characterized by (at least in decisive phases of its being) the
necessity to organize and sustain itself by means of a metabolism, during which

210
C H A P T E R 9
low-entropyenergyisconsumedwhilethesameenergyisexcretedinahigherentropic
form. This rise in entropy makes possible a lowering of entropy in a smaller part of the
energy used (so that, of course, the total entropy change is governed by the 2nd law of
thermodynamics)whichmayconsequentlybeusedfortheconstructionoftheorganism
and its ordered patterns of behavior. This implies that the organism somehow must be
located in an environment permitting a relatively steady supply of highly organized
(low entropy) energy in some form. Some marginal kinds of life (virus in its non-active
phase) may display lack of metabolism, but we would not call virus living if not for
its possibility for an active, self-replicating phase when coupled to the metabolism
of more complicated host organisms. The same goes for simple animals (e.g. some
shrimp species) able to stay completely metabolism-less during long, cold seasons: it
must display metabolism in other phases of its existence, otherwise we would not call
it living at all. Metabolism involves a negative feed-back coupling making stable its
circular process, preventing it from going off in any of two directions – the speeding
up which would destroy the organism viz. the slowing down which would starve it to
death.
Metabolism as a crucial feature in the concept of life is ripe with proto-semiotic
categories. Already Kant’s definition of the Naturzwecke as defined by organisms
in which every part is interchangeably means and ends, implies the cyclical organi-
zation of metabolism. Life and death are defined by the continuation versus the
definitive ending of metabolism. A priori categories of food and poision must
pertain to any metabolist being: food will be energy-bearing elements of the environ-
ments necessary to develop and sustain metabolism; poison will be elements of it
which hinders metabolism to an extent such that the metabolism or parts of it are
damaged. Illness will be an a priori notion for conditions implying a reduction in
the stable possibilities of metabolism. Excrements, on the other hand, will be an a
priori category for high-entropy energy in some form (faeces, urin, heat radiation,
etc.), leaving the organism. These simple semantic consequences of metabolism
yield, of course, an enormous amount of semiotic primitives when combined.
The very concept of intention has its foundation here: the metabolism’s cyclical
structure implies that it includes a self-preserving ‘intention’ in so far it is consti-
tuted by a structure of cyclical attractors for the metabolic system. A later part of
the cycle may be seen as intended (in a teleological, not a psychological, sense
of the word) by a former part of it, and the same goes for the external means
(food, for instance) necessary to obtain the later phase of the cycle. The very
concept of narration finds it bases here – the possible dramas unfolding in cases
of crises of lack of food, threats of poisoning, pollution by own excrements, etc.,
and the more or less happy solution of the crises forms the basis of narrative
drama.
Boundaries. Apart again from the limit case of virus, all life as we know it is
spatially defined by membranes, conchs, shells, skins, shields, armor, layers, etc.
which delimit and shield the internal finely tuned homeostatic system of metabolism
from the uncontrollable energy fluxes of the environment. This, of course, entails
that the traffic across these boundaries are subjected to control so that a priori

B I O S E M I O T I C S A S M A T E R I A L A N D F O R M A L O N T O L O G Y
211
categories of mouth and anus, respectively, is a consequence, each of them being
selective and equipped with some means for selection. Santa Fe theoretical biologist
Stuart Kauffman – whose work we shall later return to – argues that the inside of
a cell must necessarily be subcritical with respect to the formation of new chemical
compounds, in opposition to the biosphere as a whole which must be supercritical.
The boundary of the organism introduces a topological distinction between spatial
regions and thus implies semiotic basic categories like proto-subject, inner/outer,
here/there.
Perception-Action. As a sophisticated means of fulfilling the needs of metabolism
is the possibility of perception and ensuing action. As soon as the metabolism
acquires means of (ever so slightly) changing its relations to the environment,
that is, it displays a variety of behavioral options facing different environment
aspects, this will imply proto-perception (not necessarily with any psycho-
logical implications, of course). This use of the notion of ‘perception’ is a
generalization and does not necessarily include the presence of consciousness,
qualia, map-like representation of the surroundings etc. It goes without saying
that organisms in environments with a plethora of relevant energy would
not need to develop organs of perception of any kind in order to locate
food, but typically, the contingent changes in food supply makes some kind
of perception add to the metabolism’s fitness. It is well-known that plants
may orient leaves towards the sun, just like E . coli will swim upstream in
the gradient of nutrition. These phenomena are, of course, ripe with conse-
quences of seemingly semiotic kind: the feed-back between the organism and its
environment is tempting to interpret in semiotic dialogue notions: the organism
reads some sign in the environment and reacts accordingly. Other species in the
environment may now register the organism’s change of behavior and in turn
‘decode’ it as a ‘sign’ to the extent that it has any consequence for their own
metabolism.
Thisinterdependenceoftheorganismwithitsenvironmentreceiveditsfirstsemiotic
interpretation in von Uexküll’s ‘theory of meaning’, but the interdependence of
perception and action in Peirce’s pragmatism forms an important predecessor. We
shall return to the details of Uexküll’s classic of biosemiotics in the next chapter; as we
saw in the E . coli example, the definition of an organism’s environment, Umwelt, on
the basis of the ‘functional circle’ connecting the organism with its environment via
twoclassesofsigns,perceptions(‘Merkmale’)andactions(‘Wirkmale’).TheUmwelt,
then, is the parts and aspects of surrounding world in so far it enters into cyclical
interaction with the organism. The functional circle may be seen as an extension of
the cyclical structure of the metabolism; it consists of those metabolic cycles which
cannot be completed except for their active integration of some outer segment into the
cycle. Thus, metabolism and functional circle form the bases of so-called ‘endosemi-
otics’ and ‘exosemiotics’, respectively. In so far one accepts the semiotic vocabulary
in the description of these cycles, it must be added that the signs in question do not yet
obey the distinction between simple signs and propositions. The organism’s recording
of the presence of an edible part of the surroundings might be translated as ‘food’

212
C H A P T E R 9
or ‘this is food’, interchangeably. An important aspect here is that the engagement
of metabolism’s perceptual parts in an Umwelt makes necessary the reduction in
complexity of the possible ‘Merkmale’. The organism excludes potential ‘Merkmale’
not relevant for the metabolism, and among the perceived ‘Merkmale’, it arranges a
certain granularity.254 The simpler the organism, the simpler and more ‘corny’ will
this granularity probably be, as a tendency. As discussed above, E . coli is unable
to discriminate edible glucose from irrelevant saccharine – the two substances are
categorizedtogetherduetoamorphologicalsimilaritybetweenthe‘activesites’onthe
macromolecules’ outside as perceived by the bacteria. In general, granularity implies
that a host of different, more and less cognate, ‘Merkmale’ will give rise to the same
type of chemical reaction in the metabolism; they will possess the same immediate
signification for the organism and hence involve a primitive version of categorization
or categorical perception.255 The very notion of a sign seems to imply this much: a
distinction between an immediate signification and a mediate signification – proto-
forms of meaning versus reference, Sinn versus Bedeutung. The fact that sugar and
saccharine tastes similarly to man or bacterium rests on their immediate resemblance
duetotheactivesiteonthemolecule(aparticularatomicconfigurationontheperiphery
of these molecules) – but the nutrition value differs highly, that is, the ‘same’ signifi-
cation (‘sweet’ – the word is used here, of course, with no necessary assumption of the
existence of sweetness qualia in the process) refers to different objects (‘food’/‘non-
food’). This possibility for the metabolism’s perception to be fooled or surprised thus
seems to be basic forthecategoryofsign.Seenfromthepointofviewofefficiency,the
metabolism must do with in an important sense of the word small signs (cf. the active
sites’ specific 3-D configuration as opposed to the whole of the macromolecule) in
order to be categorical, general and hence efficient, the flip side of this being of course
the possibility of mistaking. Seen from the point of view of form, the substance of the
macromoleculeasawholeisrepresentedthrough(asmallsubsetofits)form:the‘active
site’. This ‘smallness’ of the sign in comparison to its signification is very important
for the necessity of the sign concept at all – if the sign was not ‘smaller’ in this way, we
would have no reason to use it as referring to a category (This is what Bateson (1979)
refers to as ‘collateral energy’, his third criterion for what he called ‘mental process’.).
But what does this ‘smallness’ consist in? One level is energy. The sugar molecule in
the E . coli case is discriminated by means of the weak polarity on the outside of the
macromolecule due to hydrogen bonds; energies far smaller than the energies released
by the ensuing consumption of the macromolecule involving the breaking down of
the ordinary, strong chemical covalent bonds between its parts. If it was not for this
decisive energy level difference, we would not speak of signs.256 Another level is
size and dimensionality; the ‘active site’ on the macromolecule’s outside is less in
size and dimensionality than the macromolecule as a whole. This implies a natural
instantiation of the Aristotelian distinction between form (active site) and matter
(molecule), the same form being able to subsume (and hence signify) several different
matters.257
The first of these differences permits the sign to save energy on behalf of the
organism: at a very low energy cost, it may perceive the possibility of obtaining

B I O S E M I O T I C S A S M A T E R I A L A N D F O R M A L O N T O L O G Y
213
energy to fulfill a phase of the metabolic cycle. This economy (measured on the
background of the metabolism’s demands) is crucial to the primitive sign. The second
of these differences permits the sign to erect categorical and hence general classes.
In so far, any sign is underdetermined258 which, as we noted, makes it at the same
time efficient and fallible. These speculations immediately entail certain abilities on
the side of the sign reader: it must be able to amplify the low-energy sign perception
in order to let it result in (higher energy) action; it must possess stockpiled energy
in order to do so; and it must be able to restore the perceptual organ quickly and
with low energy cost in order to function in later metabolical cycles (the eye must
not be destroyed by the light; the cell membrane not by the active site).259 Between
sign and reader must persist a weak, stable interaction of resonance type, while the
reader must possess a high energy, comparatively unstable system able to amplify
the form perceived in the sign and take one among a whole range of different action
measures.
These deliberations show that even at this primitive level, the notion of virtu-
ality or potentiality – Peircean real possibility – is crucial to the sign. The sign –
the active site – releases a specific behavior in the organism (f. inst. swimming
up-gradient) which will result in one outcome among several possible outcomes
(staying, fleeing). On a higher level, the reading of other active sites may result
in other sets of specific behaviors. Thus, the meaning of one active site for the
organism is embedded in a virtuality of other active sites leading to other specific
meanings. The meaning of the primitive sign, consequently, is only possible as one
choice among a (maybe open-ended) set of alternative choices. Here, the linguistic
idea of paradigm finds a primitive proto-version.260 As soon as signs become
more complicated than at the molecular level, more possibilities within the inter-
pretation of one sign come into being, and the immediate meaning of a sign will
constitute a schema able to flexibly incorporate a range of different but cognate
empirical instantiations of it.261 As soon as animals with CNS become able to distin-
guish species fellows, predators, preys, from perceived visual profiles etc., we must
expect that such simple schemata complexify into action schemata involving several
different slots to be filled in, forming simple diagrams for characteristical action
sequences.
A simple organism – defined by a simple metabolism with few systematic stable
variations–willtypicallypossessanextremelysimpleUmweltwithfewcategoriesand
coarse granularity while higher discrimination ability will require more complexity on
the part of the organism and its behaviors. Similarly, the more complex the organism,
the more complex the schemata it must embody, and, in turn, the more action possibil-
ities the schemata must possess. This further separates meaning and reference, in so far
as the schemata leading to a series of different possibilities of action must now to some
extent contain representations of those actions with specific sign ‘slots’ connecting
the parts of each action series. Thus, a sign may ‘mean’ a range of different schematic
action possibilities, each equipped with further releasing signs to determine the choice
between them. (The perception of a predator may ‘mean’ escape, freezing, attack ).
We shall return to the more precise status of the ‘Umwelt’ below.

214
C H A P T E R 9
In multicellular organisms with central nervous system, the integration of a whole
set of cells in complicated, schematic perception-action cycles becomes possible, and
it seems likely that it is only at this stage that a detailed inner representation of the
environment – be it conscious or not – becomes available. That is, only at this level
perception, as we usually understand it, involving such mappings of the surroundings,
becomes possible. This implies a crucial consequence: that signs are much simpler
and much more biologically widespread than full perception – this in contradistinction
to the phenomenological idea of signs as derivative entities only, as compared to the
primacy of perception. In higher animals, it is true, special, complex signs, like in
animal communication or human language, may appear which take sets of possible
perceptions as their objects – signs which for that reason presuppose full perception.
Signs on this primitive level transgress the distinction between sign and perception
in higher animals. They might just as well be called primitive perceptions, but their
simplicity makes it more apt to call them signs. Perception involving representation in
theshapeofenvironmentalmapsprobablyonlyappearinanimalsequippedwithCNS–
and only in such mappings, a distinction between primary perceptions and secondary
signs, signs in a more narrow sense, becomes possible. Here, signs in the narrow
sense will refer to information-bearing entities foregrounded on the background of
perceptualenvironmentalmaps.Butperception,inturn,ispossibleonlyasacomposite
of simpler, biosemiotic signs which are hence primary both in complexity terms and
in evolutionary terms.262
Inner architecture. The fact that life necessarily is articulated in ‘organized’ beings
is already implied in Kant’s definitions. In biology, the conception of the cell as a
‘protein bag’ has long since given place to a charting of its complicated inner archi-
tecture with various organels, the kernel including the genome, mitochondria, chloro-
plast etc. Already the boundary constitutes a sophisticated minimal architecture, and
the flux of energy running through metabolism from outside to inside and back to
outside necessitates a further minimum of internal organization, in so far the energy
flow must be separated in its two characteristic high and low entropic components,
respectively. The very process of this separation has in itself low entropic character
and requires a spatial organization in contrast to the idea of a disorganized inside;
such a structure would be unable to perform the low entropic teleological proto-action
connected with life. This inner organization immediately implies the partwise artic-
ulation of metabolism tasks giving rise to organels (in the cell) and organs (in multi-
celllular organisms). Life is thus necessarily modular, seemingly more modular, the
higher the complexity of the tasks involved is, implying the pertinence of specific
types of mereo-topology for the study of life, making it possible to discern modular
parts defined by inner boundaries etc. Metabolism, of course, is only controllable by
means of the genome for this very reason: a specific gene must ‘code for’ a specific
type of reaction in a specific modular part of metabolism. Evolution makes possible
the further differentiation, articulation and modularization of metabolism’s cycle
which is then ripe with potential new categorizations and discriminations relevant for
the single ‘organs’ and their partial tasks. This modularity of life entails the possibility
of the modularity of signification.

B I O S E M I O T I C S A S M A T E R I A L A N D F O R M A L O N T O L O G Y
215
Intelligence. In its primitive form, intelligence is no doubt already implied by
conceptslikethejustmentioned,metabolism,boundary,perception,innerarchitecture.
In this view, the concept of intelligence must be completely discriminated from the
concept of consciousness, this being probably a property in a much smaller class of
biological beings equipped with central nervous system and highly developed cortex.
In any place, it is impossible yet to tell whether primitive animals might possess
some diffuse and marginal proto-consciousness, as has often been suggested.263 It is
probably an empirical question whether this be the case, and the question must be
abandoned presently and left for possible future research. It is still a subject of much
discussion whether high intelligence requires consciousness or whether all intelligent
taskscouldinprinciplebefulfilledbynon-consciousapparatuses(cf.DavidChalmers’
much-discussed book); in any case it seems reasonable to use the concept of intel-
ligence in connection with metabolisms’ way of coping with their Umwelten. The
biosemiotic notions of sign, meaning etc. must for this reason be cleaned for assump-
tions of consciousness and must be defined only with reference to function and form.
Still, the evident skills displayed by biological species at coping with their Umwelt
makes the notion of a higher or lower degree of intelligence an a priori concept of
biosemiotics.
Reproduction. In light of our Kantian exegesis, we remarked that metabolism is
one crucial empirical process instantiating Kant’s cyclical alternatingly-means-and-
ends definition of Naturzwecke. Now reproduction will be another. But it is important
here to underline that it ontologically depends on the first. We can imagine metabolic
life without the ability to reproduce, but not reproducing life with no metabolism.
Reproduction is hardly a necessary feature in the definition of life; in principle,
an eternally living cell in an optimal environment supplying all chemicals needed
could be imagined, a cell which consequently would not have to perform mitosis or
any other reproduction in order to survive.264 However, the empirical unstability of
nutrition flow and the competition from other individuals and species make the basic
Darwinist principles generic: the pressure of selection entailing that reproduction pays
and ensures growing fitness (and of course also that gendered reproduction and the
following larger pool of selection pay even better). The secondary status of repro-
duction, however, entails that the Neo-Darwinian attempts at letting the principles of
reproduction (scarcity of nutrition, offspring variation, competition, survival of the
fittestetc.)countasthebasicprinciplesofbiology,fromwhichallotherfeaturesshould
in principle be drawn, do not hold. Metabolism, organization, inner architecture are
logically primary to the Darwinian concepts which consequently cannot define them.
As Stuart Kauffman has pointed out, a certain amount of ‘order for free’ giving rise
to stable, self-reproducing systems is the condition of possibility for selection to do
its work: there must exist possible biological entities for selection to be able, in turn,
to select between them and force them to evolve. Even if the Darwinist principles
of reproduction, variation, selection, evolution are thus ontologically secondary to
the principles of metabolism, it probably remains true that sufficiently complicated
forms of life are impossible without evolution. Pure metabolic life with no repro-
duction would most probably remain extremely primitive. The metabolic stability of

216
C H A P T E R 9
complex life forms is not created by evolution (just like neo-Darwinist metaphors
taking genes to be effective causes of most if not all aspects of biology often imply),
butmustbesupposedtoexistbeforehandasdomainsintheoverallspaceofallpossible
species, like Stuart Kauffman argues. The possibility of reaching these optima in
the space of species nevertheless depends on evolution as the most efficient natural
searching algorithm in the space of possible species. Even if ontologically secondary,
then, the principles of evolution seem necessary for the historical coming into being
of complex organisms. Thus, the Darwinist scenario gives rise to further primitive a
priori concepts: competition, relative fitness, partner selection (in gendered repro-
duction), and, in connection with the inner-architecture, boundary and metabolism
properties, it yields categories like co-working societies of cells, symbiosis, multi-
cellular organisms etc.
This series of interrrelated a priori concepts for biology is intended to satisfy the
role of ‘mediate concepts’ from the alternatingly-means-and-ends analysis of Zwecke
in Kant. It should come as no surprise that the majority of them are well-known
biological concepts, even if maybe not technically so. The important idea is that
they form an interconnected cluster of material-ontological concepts which organize
biological thought as such rather than being mere human conventions. The use of
semiotic vocabulary in biology thus seems to form a crucial part of a whole conceptual
networkoftheoreticalbiology.Thisimplies,ontheotherhand,thatallsortsofsemiotic
terminology developed about human signifying processes may not effortlessly be
exported into biology. Rather, a certain caution is required – biological signs probably
involve a large range of complexity levels below that of human semiotics. On the
other hand, caution should also be taken in not taking biosemiotics as indication that
all of nature all of a sudden possesses semiotic aspects. One reason why it might
be difficult to decide whether there are Peircean symbols and even life in inorganic
nature is that Peirce is not himself unambiguous on the issue. Many authors supporting
versions of the pan-semiotic ideas of symbols everywhere like to quote this famous
Peirce idea:
The October remarks [i.e. those in the above paper] made the proper distinction between the two kinds of
indeterminacy, viz.: indefiniteness and generality, of which the former consists in the sign’s not sufficiently
expressing itself to allow of an indubitable determinate interpretation, while the [latter] turns over to the
interpreter the right to complete the determination as he please. It seems a strange thing, when one comes
to ponder over it, that a sign should leave its interpreter to supply a part of its meaning; but the explanation
of the phenomenon lies in the fact that the entire universe – not merely the universe of existents, but all that
wider universe, embracing the universe of existents as a part, the universe which we are all accustomed
to refer to as ‘the truth’ – that all this universe is perfused with signs, if it is not composed exclusively of
signs. (Note from ‘The Basis of Pragmaticism’, 1906, 5.448)
Most often, only the last, audacious claim is quoted – so John Deely in the very
conclusion of his recent 1,000-page semiotic history of philosophy (Deely 2001, 742).
Peirce’sideahereseemstobethatindeterminacyisgenericinsignusebecauseindeter-
minacy,followingPeirce’sontology,isgenericintheuniverseassuch.Strictlyspoken,
it does not follow from the idea that indeterminacy exists in the universe plus the idea
that indeterminacy exists in signs that all universal indeterminacy has a sign character.
But the idea thus seems to be that the objective existence of generality (like in any

B I O S E M I O T I C S A S M A T E R I A L A N D F O R M A L O N T O L O G Y
217
physicallawasforinstancegravitation)givesthecosmosasign-likestructure,because
individuals embodying generals function as signs for those universals.265 And as we
saw in the discussion of ‘real possibilities’, Peirce often extends this claim to embrace
also the existence of symbols, teleology, and life in inorganic physics. But this runs
counter to other, more modest ideas in Peirce. Take for instance the claim that
In short, the problem of how genuine triadic relationships first arose in the world is a better, because more
definite, formulation of the problem of how life first came about; and no explanation has ever been offered
except that of pure chance, which we must suspect to be no explanation, owing to the suspicion that pure
chance may itself be a vital phenomenon. In that case, life in the physiological sense would be due to life
in the metaphysical sense. (‘Some Amazing Mazes, Fourth Curiosity’, 1909, 6.322)
Here, an idea closer to Thomas Sebeok’s claim is produced: the growth of genuine
triadic relationships seems to be coextensive with biology. Again, indeterminacy, now
in the guise of ‘pure chance’ plays the decisive role, but in order to mend the obvious
gap between biology and all of the universe, a metaphysical distinction is made, that
of biology in a metaphysical viz. a physiological sense. Peirce’s idea here seems to be
that while biology proper should be taken in a restricted, physiological sense, referring
to the evolution of existing organisms, biology in a wider, metaphysical sense should
be taken as referring to the conditions of possibility for life inherent in the universe as
such. But the trivial fact the such ‘vital’ conditions must in some sense exist in prebi-
ological physics is not the same as to claim that the cosmos as such is alive or that
the cosmos as such consists of signs or symbols. In Peirce’s doctrine, the problem is
connected to the issue of the status of thirdness. In Peircean phenomenology (at a more
general level than semiotics), thirdness is defined as habit, generality, tendency, etc. –
but at the same time it is often claimed that thirdness and genuine triadic relations are
in themselves semiotic and possess a sign, or even a symbol structure. If that be the
case, and if thirdness is generic in the universe, then all of the universe will be semiotic
and even symbolic. There is ample evidence that Peirce (sometimes) believed this.
As already mentioned, I do not belong to those who see a great metaphysical point
in this idea. I see few interesting semiotic aspects in the mere fact of events being
governed by laws or tendencies, so I prefer the restriction of the whole terminology
of semiotics to biology proper, biology in Peirce’s narrow, ‘physiological’ sense of
the word. I have nothing against, to be sure, the idea that physical processes may be
described in semiotic vocabulary, but I just do not see that vocabulary adds anything
to our knowledge of such processes. Thus, they seem to constitute a sort of semiotic
zero-case where semiotic terminology may be added or not. To say that the crater on
the moon is an index of the meteor responsible for it does not add to our normal under-
standing of the physical process having taken place. Rather like you could describe
colorlessness as a zeroeth degree of coloring or your could describe the absence of
mind as a zeroth degree mind – without assuming that this implies that colorlessness
is a special sort of color or that matter is a special sort of mind. Quite the opposite of
the physics cases, however, seems to be the case in biology where more or less explicit
semiotic vocabulary seems positively indispensable: even the most die-hard reduc-
tionists invariably use such terminology and seemingly are unable to avoid it. I would
nothesitatetosupportPeirce’sargumentthatbiologicalnaturemust,ofcourse,possess

218
C H A P T E R 9
conditions of possibility in pre-biological physics, but I think it is to go unnecessarily
much too far to claim that these conditions should, in themselves, in any non-trivial
waymakeallofphysicsaliveorvitalorsemioticorsymbolicalinanyacutesenseofthe
word. This leaves open, in Peircean terminology, the task of accounting in more detail
for the intricate relations between thirdness, biology, and semiotics, to be sure. This
issue, however, may not be solved by mere Peirce philology. Rather, it requires much
further research, ranging from empirical biophysics and -chemistry and to theoretical
biosemiotics.
The primacy of the notion of metabolism in these deliberations (which we have
underlinedbybeginningwithit)supportsKant’sembryonicideaofthecyclicstructure
as basic to the ‘mediate concept’ needed for living beings.266 Following further Kant’s
lead, the above deliberations should – despite their clothing in earthly-biological
specificterminology–bepertinentforanyformforlife,notonlytheterrestrialvariants.
This leads us to the question of their more precise status.
M A T E R I A L A N D F O R M A L O N T O L O G Y F O R B I O L O G Y
Our hasty sketch of an a priori analysis of the concept of life immediately entails
an indefinite host of seemingly a priori concepts (in bold during the preceding
paragraphs) – concepts which we recognize in unproblematical everyday use not
only in biology, but in a whole range of other sciences where they most often –
but not always – count as metaphors. Without further notice we may talk about
the metabolism of an economy, the society as an organism, the narration of a text,
and, of course, the signs’ life in a society. What is the status of these concepts?
Let us begin the answer to this question via a detour around the concept of
‘emergence’. Emergence refers, in the epistemological debate in theory of science
in the recent decades, to the idea of ‘new properties’ showing up in systems
of sufficient complexity.267 Thus, it seems intuitively suitable to speak of the
emergence of life and hence biology out of physics, the emergence of minds
and societies, hence psychology and sociology, out of biology, but also e.g. the
emergence of multi-cellular biology out of cellular biology, etc. The existence
of the concept is, of course, due to the conceptual knot presented by the theory
of evolution: if nature, on this scale, is basically continuous – as the theory of
evolution maintains (natura non facit saltus), then what is to be done with the
phenomenologically striking ‘domains of being’ that nature displays? They must,
consequently, have evolved as a sort of discontinuous cuts into continuity, and
these cuts are then eo ipso unexplainable within each of these ‘domains of being’
which the single sciences occupy. ‘Emergence’ is a philosophy-of-science denom-
ination for this problem. It implies several consequences for its strange in-between
position between epistemology and ontology. The level-jump of emergence is for
a first glance of epistemological character, because it is given by cross-domain
unexplainability (an epistemological property) in the domain-defined disciplines.
On the other hand, the phenomenological ‘domains of being’ seem so strikingly

B I O S E M I O T I C S A S M A T E R I A L A N D F O R M A L O N T O L O G Y
219
evident that it is tempting to give them an ontological status and hence not to reduce
the problem to mere epistemology implying that we in a number of generations
might reach an all-encompassing, unproblematic, and continuous unity science. From
this point of view, then, the distinction between single sciences of our day would
appear left behind like a curious Middle-age cul-de-sac, just like we today see the
distinction between the sublunar and supralunar worlds in Aristotelism. The distinc-
tions seem much too evident ever to be subject to such a reduction, and the place
of emergence between epistemology and ontology is (yet?) undecidable. Maybe,
even, is it in principle undecidable, because every observation of emergence implies
unexplainability and hence ontological undecidability – while only an emergence-
explained-away can have its ontological status revealed, that is, as a non-existing
case!
If emergence shall not, consequently, be only a vague and negative concept
for the not-yet-understood, then it must receive more positive determinations. The
very idea that one concept may be used to subsume all cases of ‘appearance of
new properties’ does rest on this supposition: that there is, somehow, something
in common between the emergence of biology out of chemistry on the one hand
and the emergence of psychology out of biology on the other – in addition to
the mere ‘appearance of new properties’. The philosophical reason for accepting a
concept of emergence must hence rest on an (most often not explicit, that is) idea
of formal ontology – formal to the extent that the various level-jumps so named
do not have the same material base in common. The concept of formal ontology
refers to Husserl’s famous distinctions. On the one side, ‘formal ontology’ is the
science of abstract objects and their properties and interrelations, just like formal
logic is the science of abstract concepts and propositions, their properties and inter-
relations. Prominent candidates to formal ontology in Husserl (cf. for instance the
famous 3rd Logische Untersuchung) is mereology, the science of wholes and parts,
the distinction between genuine parts and moments, dependency, the category of
object etc. – formal properties assumed to be relevant for any field of knowledge
whatsoever. On the other side, formal ontology is contrasted to what Husserl inter-
changeably calls ‘regional’ and ‘material’ ontologies. They are plural and constitute,
in fact, his way of dealing with the different ‘domains of being’. To him, the regional
ontologies are three: ‘materielles Ding, Leib, Seele’ (cf. Ideen, Vol. III), crudely corre-
sponding to physics, biology, psychology/sociology, respectively. What, now, consti-
tutes the very relation between these regional ontologies? Husserl does not, to my
knowledge, pose this question: this very distinction between material ontologies, is
it material or formal? Of course the distinction has a material side (cf. the relation
physics/chemistry and biology, where the matter of the latter presupposes and in
some sense contains the former). But the distinction between material ontologies
must, if the concept of emergence has any philosophical interest whatsoever, have
a formal side. If it does not have a formal aspect – that is, an aspect that can be
describedwithoutreferencetothematerialcharacteroftheparticularlevel-jump –then
the concept of emergence would degenerate into a purely nominalist denomination
of a bundle of problems having nothing ontologically in common. It follows that

220
C H A P T E R 9
‘formal ontology’ applied to this distinction has another meaning than ontology in
the discussion of epistemology and ontology above. There, the question was whether
the level-jump did exist as anything but a lack of satisfactory scientific explanation.
Here, it is supposed it does indeed exist, and that it possesses both material (specific)
and formal (general) properties. But as the concept of emergence is characterized
precisely by being unable to ‘fill in’ the hole in the continuity of explanation, then the
formal ontological version of it must necessarily be no exhaustive explanation, but
a necessarily not-exhaustive, general description comprising all cases of emergence
(if not, they would not be conceiveable as instantiations of the same category).
Thus, it seems that either emergence is part of formal ontology, or it does not
exist.
Which formal and general properties are now central to emergence? If physics in
its present-day version is assumed as basic ontology, in the sense that all phenomena
are based on interactions between microphysical elements, then emergence seems to
be the coordination of a larger amount of particles into a pattern not itself physical, a
pattern which is now the bearer of the ‘new properties’. This implies that the objects
on the emergent level necessarily have a larger physical extension than the elementary
level of physics, as well as the fact that these objects must be characterized by some
kind of coordinated, collective behavior taking place between the physical entities of
the lower level. Here, the concept of form becomes central to understand the pattern
formation of collective behavior. But if this model – generalized from the prominent
level-jump physics-biology – is valid, then it sets certain restrictions on which other
phenomena may obtain status as emergence. The jump from cellular to multicellular
biology seems to satisfy these requirements, in so far we here have a case of pattern-
forming behaviors of entities defined on the lower level, and multicellular organisms
are then the entities pertaining to the upper level. This consequence now meets the
hindrancethatweusuallyunderstandbiologyasbeingone,fromvirustoprimates–but
thisintuitionmightbeaconsequenceofourownbeingmulticellularbeings.Ifwewere
ourselves thinking bacteria, then the jump from cellular to multicellular biology might
assume the character of a violent and unexplainable jump  This formal ontological
point of view implies another consequence for the jump biology-psychology. If the
emergent level is characterized by being composed by collectively acting parts from a
lower level, then theobject of psychology can not be the psyche; then its object must be
the brain (or even: organismsequippedwithbrains),brainswhich,inturn,asanewand
unique property have the psyche. The idea is not that the object of psychology should
be the brain in a merely physiological use of the word (if so, it would not be a case of
emergence), but that the object of psychology – as any higher order science, must be
a complex, coordinated whole consisting of entities from a lower level. In the other
end, nothing prevents us from assuming that formal ontological concept of emergence
may already be indispensable in physics, cf. the emergence of macrophysical objects
(crystallography,hydrodynamics,solidmatterphysics,meteorology,etc.)outofinter-
active patterns of microphysics. Here, it seems, formal ontological concepts related to
emergence are needed in addition to the basic formal ontology at stake in microphysics
and elsewhere: concepts such as self-organization, complexity, level, etc.

B I O S E M I O T I C S A S M A T E R I A L A N D F O R M A L O N T O L O G Y
221
B I O S E M I O T I C S A S M A T E R I A L A N D F O R M A L O N T O L O G Y
These deliberations now take us to the last main point of this chapter. If we accept the
regional a priori character of the basic concepts of biosemiotics, and if we accept the
formal ontological character of the concept of emergence, then the road is paved for
the conception of biosemiotics as a special branch of formal ontology, as pertaining
to a specific subclass of emergent interactive pattern-forming systems. Valid for the
material region of biology, the basic biosemiotic ontological categories also hold
for higher emergent levels of psychology, sociology, etc. (even if these will add, of
course, their own further categories). Material ontologies are nested, and they inherit
the material categories of the lower levels as formal constraints on their own level.
Barry Smith has taken up the study of formal ontology in the wake of the Austrian
traditionfromBrentanoandHusserl,andinsomerecentpapershesuggeststointroduce
the concept of ‘niche’ as a fundamental concept in formal ontology. As predecessors,
he refers to Aristotle (his definition of place, ‘khora’), von Uexküll (the Umwelt), to
the biologist Evelyn Hutchinson’s modern definition of the ‘ecological niche’ (as a
‘volume in an abstract space determined by a range of physical parameters pertaining
to food, climate, predators, parasites, and so on’, Smith and Varzi 1998b, 201), to
the psychologist Roger Barker (‘physical-behavioral units’), and to the founder of the
‘ecological’ theory of vision J.J. Gibson. Smith remarks the strange fact that despite
all human action is defined by the niche it belongs to, very little attention has been
paid to the subject, and almost no attention to the subject as an ontological issue. In
his own development of formal ontology, he takes his departure in the Husserlian
idea of mereology (which, in contrast to set theory, does not assume knowledge on
any basic elementary level and thus is phenomenologically ‘bottomless’, cf. Chap. 7).
Because of its high generality, mereology still lacks notions to grasp connected objects
(it can not distinguish between, say, a composite red object like a red car, and the
mereological sum of all red objects), and some sort of topology must be added to the
formal ontological repertoire, making it possible to formalize the notion of bounded,
connected objects. Furthermore, formal ontology must be able to assign its objects
places in a space, giving rise to locality as a third formal ontological basic concept.
Now, the concept of niche (or, physical-behavioral unit, setting, environment) must
be added in order to understand the organized space-time cell which an agent and
its specific actions unfolds around it. In Barker’s version, the ‘unit’ is a bounded
space-time region in which a human activity takes place and unites its parts into a
whole (a chess game, a football match, a real estate sale, an education process, etc.).
‘Environment, person and bodily interior are thus combined together topologically
within a nesting arrangement.’ (Smith, 12) – thus agent and environment is connected
in a non-random pattern. Gibson’s ‘ecological niche’ permits Smith and Varzi (1998b)
to generalize this idea to any object which is tuned into its environment by a specific
set of perceptions and actions.
Now, if ‘niche’ is a sufficiently general formal ontological concept as to cover the
bowling bag containing a number of bowling balls (Smith and Varzi (1998b), 22),
and Barker’s ‘physical-behavioral unit’ is a special subcase with a human agent –

222
C H A P T E R 9
then biosemiotics seems to be the formal ontology for those niches containing a living
agent equipped with metabolism and Umwelt. So, we would get a relation as follows:
Physical-behavioral units ⊂metabolic niches ⊂niches in general
In our a priori analysis of the concept of life, metabolism with its ensuing networks
concepts was a central idea, and the whole biosemiotic vocabulary seems, in fact, to
be constructed in order to suit into the metabolic cycles of an organism. The genes
are codes in so far they direct the details of the metabolic growth of an organism;
the messenger RNA brings a message relevant for the direction of the metabolism,
just like animal perception is relevant for the continuation of metabolism. In short,
it is the cyclical organization of metabolism which makes it meaningful to speak of
‘intention’ (whether conscious or not), because the directedness of intention, be it
inside the organism or directed outwards into the niche is governed by the cyclical
attractor of metabolism. René Thom once remarked that extrapolation of the concept
of formal cause in biology made it possible to let it subsume the effective and the
teleological cause, respectively, in so far they are only two different viewpoints on
one and the same metabolic process.268 Thus the biosemiotic vocabulary centered, like
Kant predicted and Cassirer further argued, around the concept of intentionality, of
telos, formally interpreted as cyclic pattern or order, gives meaning in relation to the
notion of the cyclical flow of metabolism.
But is this not a bunch of anthropomorphisms, the sceptic will say. Is this not only a
gloriousillusionprojectingsemioticconceptsfromthehumansphereontoourinnocent
surroundings? In so far we ourselves engage in biological niches (and even extend
and develop them into sophisticated psychological, sociological, etc. niches) we of
course know the semiotic vocabulary from phenomena in our own everyday life –
but this does not imply it is a subjectivist vocabulary; it simply pertains to objects
which possess the same ontological structure as our niches. Of course, one must be
careful that the biosemiotic vocabulary is kept objective: there is no need to assume,
for instance, that our idea of an intuitive content, including qualia, consciousness, etc.,
will be pertinent for lower-order biological niches. When speaking about ‘signs’ at
these levels, a qualia-less, consciousness-free sign concept must be assumed before,
in each case, to investigate whether anything makes probable the presence of qualia.
Biosemioticsasaformalontologymustbecompletelyemptiedforanypresuppositions
about consciousness, this being (maybe only until further research, it should be kept in
mind), a purely empirical question (even if possible empirical facts veri- or falsifying
the assumption of consciousness in other beings are of course hard to come by).
But the decisive hint which makes us think biosemiotics is in fact the relevant
formal ontology for higher niches is precisely the fact that its notions seem to be
transcategorical. We may use the vocabulary not only about organisms and human
beings, but also about those meta-organisms at higher levels made out of patterns in
organism and human behavior – families, groups, firms, countries, cultures, etc. –
in economics, sociology, political science, psychology, historiography. One animal
society may signal to another, one anthill compete with another, one species with
another; one state may bring message to another, compete with another, wage war on

B I O S E M I O T I C S A S M A T E R I A L A N D F O R M A L O N T O L O G Y
223
another, enter into symbiosis with another. Biosemiotics as a material ontology for
biology, in fact, has formal bearings for all complex systems and thus become part of
a formal ontology for emergence and the behavior of complex systems in general.269
This finally raises the issue of the relation between formal and material ontologies,
respectively.Semiotics,ontheonehand,seemstobetranscategoricalanditscategories
applicable on all complex systems with a metabolism; on the other hand, it seems
to have a privileged relation to biology as its most simple instantiation.270 Thus, the
seemingly inevitable semiotic vocabulary in biology has no equivalent in physics (that
is,innon-biologicalphysics).Hence,evenifbeingapieceofformalontology,biosemi-
otics does not seem to possess the same generality as for instance mereology. But this
points to the fact that material ontologies must also be described by formal means. We
havenodirect,extra-formalaccesstotheseontologies;hencetheywillratherbecharac-
terized by the amount of formal tools appearing necessary for their description. Thus,
biology and higher complex systems can not be described adequately without a set
of Kantian ‘mediate concepts’ of biosemiotic kin while physics (present-day physics,
that is) seems to be doing fine without it. Simple, that is, pre-biological physics seems
to be a semiotic zero-case where the introduction of the formal ontological biosemiotic
vocabulary does not lead to new insights: the crater on the moon as an index makes
no harm, indeed, but does not add anything to the normal physical understanding of
the process. On the other hand, sufficiently complex physical systems call for the
vocabulary of ‘mediate concepts’ and are indeed, despite hard attempts, impossible to
describe without it.
What is, on the other hand, gained by the recognition of semiotic vocabulary in
biology?Itisstrikingthatbiosemioticshashardly,untilnow,yieldedanynewempirical
biological insights. The recognition of semiotics as formal ontology rather has the role
of explaining the necessity of the omnipresence of semiotic terminology in biology
as it already is pursued and thus liberates biology from vain attempts at reducing it.
Furthermore, it encourages biology to develop its spontaneous semiotic vocabulary
into a common, agreed-upon, ontological conceptual system – just like the case in
theoretical physics where the material physical ontology of powers, matter, fields,
mechanicalcausesandeffects,etc.isunderconstantcriticaldevelopmentandarenever
taken for dispensable metaphors only. It consists, then, rather of a material ontological
framework necessary for the empirical findings of biology to be understood precisely
as facts of biology – and, in addition, serves as a formal ontological tool for higher
domains.

C H A P T E R 10
A NATURAL SYMPHONY?
Von Uexküll’s Bedeutungslehre and its Actuality
The Baltic-German biologist Jakon von Uexküll, one of the founders of ethology,
enjoys a renaissance these years, both in the discussions of biosemiotics and of
‘embodiment’ in philosophy and cognitive science. Thus, von Uexküll’s basic
diagram of the ‘functional circle’, characterizing every animal species, is central to
the current biosemiotic attempts at understanding the foundations of biology. But
von Uexküll’s fertile idea is not unanimous – several different and even mutually
contradictory ideas compete in his conception of it. This gives rise to certain
dangers in biosemiotics which must be tackled in an analysis of what is involved in
the ontology of ‘functional circles’. For an overall historical view, von Uexküll’s
theoretical biology is a main contribution to the ‘developmental’ or ‘epigenetic’
trend in the biology271 of the recent centuries – and like so many of the contributions
to this undercurrent of biological thought it is not without a certain involvement with
vitalism. Since the establishment of the so-called ‘Neo-Darwinist’ synthesis and the
discovery of DNA, this tradition has been marginalized in the biology departments
concentrating upon biochemical empirical research and a Neo-Darwinist philosophy
privileging the genotype as the core object of biology. Consequently, the devel-
opmental or morphogenetic point-of-view with its interest in biological form and
phenotypes has, as a tendency, been relegated to characters on the periphery of
the biological institutions, e.g. ethologists, philosophers, semioticians, catastrophe
theorists, complexity theorists, etc. From this exile, morphogeneticists keep claiming
that biochemical reductionism will never be able to explain the phenomenon of
the living being in its entirety – and is consequently, from Neo-Darwinist side met
with routine accusations for vitalism, the harshest four-letter word in contemporary
biology.272 My contention is that there remains indeed valuable thought in this
tradition, but, on the other hand, the vitalism accusations are often correct. What
needs to be undertaken, then, is a task of criticism: the insights of the epigenetic
tradition must be purged for vitalism in order to fit into our actual level of knowledge
where élan vital, unknown organic force fields, and the like are definitely out of
question.
Jakob von Uexküll is a perfect example of the ambiguity of this tradition – his
work contains many acute critical corrections to our days’ Neo-Darwinian orthodoxy
in biology – at the same time as being marred with an irrationalist vitalism which is,
225

226
C H A P T E R 10
at best, to consider aged. Its insistence on founding a theory of life sui generis – that
is, not a theory with a physicalist reductionist perspective – is sound, in so far
as it points to central issues nowadays left to ecologists, ethologists, and artificial
life philosophers presumably dealing with more superficial layers of biology than
biochemistry. Its central concept of ‘Umwelt’273 as the stable world of possible
influences and reactions forming the environment of an organism is an important
correction to a Darwinism taken to the extreme, taking genes and their mutations
as its only ontological entities endowed with causal efficiency. Yet, on the other
hand, von Uexküll’s ardent anti-Darwinism and more general anti-evolutionism
makes his theory a bizarre brand of creationism: the biological world is created by
a ‘composer’ – inferred from a throroughgoing musical metaphor in von Uexküll’s
thought, in turn inherited from von Baer274 – and even if von Uexküll must admit
that the span of biological life must be counted in millions of years and whole
kingdoms of animals, he does, in fact, little more than stretch the seven days of
creation into a longer timespan for a composer god’s work to unfold. These latter
features of his thought, unfortunately, make it a hard job to evoke a serious scientific
interest in his endeavor.
To some extent, the picture is parallel in semiotics. Being one of the founders of
biosemiotics avant la lettre, von Uexküll is, on the other hand, a semiotician whose
conception of Bedeutung, of meaning, is to a large extent caught up in an subjectivist
and skepticist ontology and epistemology which has little attraction for a modern
scientific semiotics. Now that von Uexküll is once more being rediscovered –
largely thanks to Thomas Sebeok’s efforts275 – there is no reason that semiotics
should inherit what has hindered his influence in biology. In this chapter, I shall try
to distinguish von Uexküll’s fertile contribution to semiotics from its clothing in
irrationalist vitalism – being fully aware that in so doing, we might deprive him of
some of his attraction for more schwärmerisch or constructivist admirers as well.
T H E S E M I O T I C S O F T H E F U N C T I O N A L C I R C L E
The backbone of von Uexküll’s theory of meaning, of course, is his ‘functional
circle’ constituting and delimiting the Umwelt of the organism in question. The
circle closes the two processes of perception and action, Merken und Wirken, into
one continuous movement so that one becomes the presupposition of the other, and,
consequently, the one becomes the telos of the other, in a never-ending teleological
circuit with no static goal.276
Perception is undertaken with respect to subsequent action, and action permits
survival and further perception. In doing so, von Uexküll performs, in fact, a formal
‘secularization’ of the so contested notion of teleology. The telos does not consist in
any goal outside the functional circle, but is simply defined by it.277 The organism
is able to perceive a limited range of stimuli from the surrounding world only, and
furthermore, is able to respond to those stimuli in a correlated series of specific
actions, both to be conceived of in semiotic terms: both form signs to be read and
performed by the organism. These stimuli and responses make up its functional

A N A T U R A L S Y M P H O N Y ?
227
Figure 30.
circle which, in turn, constitutes its Umwelt as the repertoire of relevant perceptions
and actions.278 Thus, there are very large differences between the possible Umwelten
of different species. To take one of von Uexküll’s favorite examples, the tick,279
waiting patiently, maybe for years, on a tree for a mammal to come by, is deaf,
blind except for a primitive luminosity sensitivity and has a very limited sense of
smell, tuned to detect butylic acid as a sign of mammal sweat. This Merkmal, if
present, now releases a Wirken: The animal drops, and if hitting the mammal, its
temperature sense guides it through its furs to the warmest – and thinnest – spot on
the skin where the next Wirken takes place when it sinks its jaws into it and sucks
blood in order to become able to procreate by parthenogenesis. Guided by light, the
young ticks crawl up on a straw or a leaf to repeat the cycle. Correspondingly, the
Umwelt of the tick is very poor, constituted by light, temperature and the smell of
butylic acid and containing mammals only – mammals, to be sure, which have very
little (but not nothing) in common with our mammal concept in so far as they consist
only of sweat, heat and blood, so to speak. On the action side, the Umwelt contains
little more than waiting, falling, crawling, and sucking. Higher animals, of course,
hold much more complicated Umwelten, but the common and defining feature of
all of them is the fact that these Umwelten are constructions of signs – Merkzeichen
and Wirkzeichen, respectively: perception signs and action signs. These signs as
read and enacted by the organism give rise to the objects of its Umwelt, any object
being composed of Merkmale and Wirkmale, respectively: perception properties
and action properties. Thus, an equivalent name for the functional circle simply
is: meaning circle.

228
C H A P T E R 10
N A T U R A L I Z E D K A N T I A N I S M
This, in itself groundbreaking, theory of a large variety of phenomenal worlds
in different animal species is now interpreted in a strange ontology. The basic
framework is inherited from Kant, and von Uexküll thus forms part of a tradition
that could be called ‘neo-Kantian semiotics’.280 Kant may, of course, be interpreted
in several ways, and von Uexküll’s Kantianism is not without problems. Taking his
point of departure in a subjectivist reading of Kant, von Uexküll states that
’All reality is subjective appearance’. This has to be a great, fundamental understanding also of biology
[] The task of biology is to widen the results of Kant’s research in two directions: 1. to take into
account the role of our body, especially of our sense-organs and our central nervous system and 2. to
explore the relations of other subjects (the animals) to the objects.
(quoted from Thure von Uexküll 1982, 9281)
This naturalization of Kant implies two worthwile endeavors as quoted: to extrap-
olate the phenomenal world’s constitution from a naked transcendental subject and
to the body in a Merleau-Ponty-like embodiment intution, and to extrapolate its
range from our species only and to other species in an ethological intuition. But
at the same time, von Uexküll – as is evident from the opening statement in the
quote – falls prey to a widespread German temptation at naturalizing the consti-
tutive subjectivism as well, with a result not entirely different from Nietzsche’s
perspectivism. The semiotic theory just outlined is seen as the constitutive theory
of all other possible thought; physical laws of nature, for instance, become mere
extrapolations and abstractions in the specific human Umwelt – and the Umwelt in
general being something that arises by a ‘projection’ on part of the organism. Here
lies one basic flaw in von Uexküll’s reasoning: it is not possible to take one feature
of our Umwelt – the organism in question – and hold it outside the constitution,
only to let it form the basis for the consecutive construction of its Umwelt. The
organism is not, of course, able to constitute itself, so two possibilities remain –
either the naturalized subject as organism is kept outside constitution (but then it
is no longer constitution in a transcendental use of the word, in so far as empirical
phenomena (the organism itself as phenomenon) remain unexplained by the consti-
tution), or else the organism was already in an Umwelt, namely the scientist’s –
pushing the constitution one step further back and losing what was gained in
naturalization. Here lies a dilemma: either the naturalization of the transcendental
subject to organisms is pulled through – or else the constitutive function of the
subject is maintained. You cannot have both. A parallel flaw is seen when the
Kantian forms of intution space and time are sought naturalized (otherwise with
very interesting consequences, see below): the specific signs of orientation in the
Umwelt (which in themselves form the elements of a sound theory of biological
environment mapping) are taken to constitute time and space as such. This analysis
is undertaken in the following steps. Organizing signs are distinguished from content
signs, so that the former set of signs constitute time and space from more basic sign
types: local signs, directional signs, and impulse-to-operation signs (Wirkzeichen)
respectively. The latter, what we would nowaday probably class under the heading

A N A T U R A L S Y M P H O N Y ?
229
of proprioception and kinaesthetics, even permit us to construct the category of
space without any external experience, from the perception of our own body and its
movements only.282 But at the same time as all this, we are told that the Umwelt is
constituted, in turn, by the very projection of these signs of time and space onto the
organism’s outside. But the flaw in von Uexküll’s argument is evident here from
the fact that ‘projection’ and ‘outside’ are already spatio-temporal concepts which
may not, then, be tacitly presupposed in a time-and-space constitution theory. So
before the organism is supposed to construct space from various Ordnungszeichen,
it is already itself localized in a surrounding space which it consequently invades
and imposes order upon by these signs – hence space is presupposed before this
organizing which henceforth may not be said to constitute space as such in any
foundational sense of the word, merely in an epistemological sense, relevant only
for the specific Umwelt in question.283 Which status von Uexküll ascribes to this
common field in which the various Umwelten unfold, varies in his work,284 but he
in any case maintains the inaccessibility of that Ding-an-sich-like domain. Yet, in
Theoretische Biologie we read that
The material from which a foreign Umwelt is constructed consists in all cases of our objectified quality,
because no other qualities at all are accessible to us. The only difference to our Umwelt consists in
the fact that they have a lower number. [] A location which lies more to the left to us than another,
lies also in the foreign Umwelt, when both locations are present as perception-signs in them, farther
to the left, also when the number of location-perception-signs distinct from one another is less than in
our world.285
Even if perceptual granularity (see below) may vary across Umwelten, directions are
thus preserved in mapping between them. But this invariance constitutes objective
space. von Uexküll evidently agrees: to him, objectivity is correlative to spatial
determination, but still this determination is strangely seen as subordinated to the
overall subjectivism. But if space is not only objective as understood in relation to a
specific Umwelt but also across Umwelten, it ceases to be completely relative to the
subject; only the granularity of its construction remains in some sense subjective.
This is also evident in von Uexküll’s very methodology: we are not supposed to
discover other species’ Umwelten by psychological Einfühlung, but precisely by
empirical observation of which impulses may be perceived and of which actions
they release – comparing these observations with our own Umwelt. von Uexküll’s
contention that the animal Umwelt in question must always contain fewer locations
than ours is an evident fallacy that may have two reasons. One is an anthropocentric
belief in the extreme perfection of the human Umwelt as compared to animal
Umwelten (hardly probable, given von Uexküll’s tendencies towards relativism), the
other is a methodological idea that we may only reconstruct in other Umwelten what
is already in our own. But we may easily observe supersonic hearing or ultraviolet
vision in other species, just like we may observe far finer granulations of perceptual
space than our own (the sense of smell in many carnivors, e.g.), given the relevant
observation and measurement techniques. So the granularity or range of a construed
animal Umwelt needs not, as claimed, be more gross nor narrow than ours.

230
C H A P T E R 10
The very objectivity in our construction of other species’ Umwelt presupposes
the possibility of cross-Umwelt mappings of at least two kinds. One is identity
mapping: the mammal that the tick smells via a molecule of butylic acid is the
very same creature as we ascribe completely other perceptual properties (if not,
we would not be able to construe the mammal inventory of the tick Umwelt).
Another is task similarity: being able to specify the functional circles of another
species requires that we classify the circle in question in analogy with our own
functions (cf. von Uexküll’s circle types of food, flight, sex, etc.). The first of
these mappings requires spatial, indexical invariance (the two Umwelten in question
share the same underlying space, even if describing it differently topologically,
geometrically, metrically, etc.), the second requires semantic, iconic invariance (the
two Umwelten in question share functional circles with more or less analogous telos
and specific actions).286
To sum up, there is a constant tension in von Uexküll’s naturalized Kantianism,
evident in quotes such as
Every action, therefore, that consists of perception and operation imprints its meaning on the meaningless
object and thereby makes it into a subject-related meaning-carrier in the respective Umwelt (subjective
universe). (von Uexküll 1982, 31)
At one at the same time, the organism is seen as constitutive of reality as such, on the
other, a ‘meaningless object’ – heir to Kant’s an sich – is supposed to exist out there
(‘on’) before these constitutions. But either constitutive subjectivism or naturalized
subjectivism without constitutional abilities – you cannot have both. You cannot
keep your subject and eat it too. Flaws of this kind are inherent in any attempt at
naturalizing Kantian subjectivisms (the arch-example of course being Nietzsche):
in Kant, the subject remains transcendental (which raises lots of other problems, to
be sure) and this trap is avoided. To us, the choice is easy: naturalized subjectivism
must be chosen at the price of constitution – this permits us, on the other hand,
unproblematically to accept indexical as well as iconical cross-Umwelt mappings.
W H A T M A Y C L A I M T O B E A ‘ S U B J E C T ’ ?
Another peculiarity deserves to be mentioned: In von Uexküll’s presentation, the
predicate ‘subjective’ is often connected to single concrete organisms, so that there
is a tendency in the concept of Umwelt to be understood as something taking
place within the (proto-)mind of the single animal. This tendency might be more
dangerous in certain von Uexküll interpreters celebrating the dissolution of the
universe in a ‘pluriverse’ of subjective experiences. But von Uexküll’s Umwelt
construction method takes its departure in objective, spatial qualities characterizing
behavior and consequently does not imply anything about the quality of subjective
what-is-it-like-to-be-a-bat experiences. Thus the word ‘subjective’ in von Uexküll’s
Kantian declaration of faith above should not be conceived in any awareness-
consciousness-like use of the word. von Uexküll does not exclude the possibility
of a research into this domain – presumably by animal psychologists – but he

A N A T U R A L S Y M P H O N Y ?
231
maintains an objectivist stance as to the biological Umwelt reconstruction, even if
he now and then comes close to using the predicate ‘subjective’ in a psychological
way. Let us here stick to (methodological) anti-psychologism: the decisive feature
is the existence of functional circles, just like there is in semiotics, in general,
no reason to restrict signs to conscious intentions.287 The methodological principle
is stated in Theoretische Biologie but is also present in the Bedeutungslehre, for
instance in the idea that spontaneous reflexes should be included in the semiotic
interpretation of the functional circle:
Even the simple blink-reflex, caused by the eye being approached by a foreign body, does not consist
of a mere sequence of physical causes and effects, but of a simplified functional circle, beginning with
percepiton and ending with effect.That the functional circle, in this case, does not pass through the
cerebral cortex, but makes its way through lower centers, changes nothing. (34)
It thus seems perfectly reasonable to speak of the Umwelt as the whole set of types
of perceptions-reactions – not necessarily conscious – of the animal. At the same
time, it also seems – as von Uexküll also in some cases does – reasonable to speak
of the Umwelt of a whole species (‘the tick’). But, having gone so far, is there any
reason not, even more generally, to admit the Umwelt of more complicated systems
like ecologies, corporations, institutions, economies, or the like? If that be the case,
then the ‘meaning’ of his Bedeutungslehre would cease to be something taking place
in a proto-consciousness, but rather be an objective structure defined in relation
to sufficiently complex systems (probably what the general theoretical biology of
the current Santa Fe school nicknames CASes – complex adaptive systems). In the
same movement, von Uexküll’s theory will be be cleansed for its tendency towards
scepticism, as the Umwelt ceases to be a projection due to a subject and becomes
instead a self-organizing entity involving an organism and its environment.288
M E A N I N G A S M U S I C
Another way of addressing the meaning question in the Bedeutungslehre is the idea
of the apparent harmony in the incredible fine-tuning between different species’
Umwelten in ecology. The von Baer musical metaphor for the organism and for
biological correspondences in general pervades the whole of the Bedeutungslehre
and is already present in the Theoretische Biologie. There are at least two issues
at stake here: the idea of biological perfection and the (more implicit, to be sure)
idea of categorical perception. In the Theoretische Biologie, a strong emphasis is
placed on the perfection of every single species. Darwinism is counterargued by the
idea that adaptation implies imperfection being pervasive in nature, and evolution
is rejected (or its role, at least, minimized very much) by the idea of the perfect fit
between an animal and its environment. In this static idea, a series of problems in
von Uexküll’s position becomes clear. The perfect fit between animal and Umwelt
of course requires the static nature of the latter. In a changing world, no perfect
fit may a priori be assumed, but rather a continuum of differing degrees of fitting,
because environmental change naturally will disturb established animal-Umwelt
fits. The idea of a perfect fit has its correlate internally in the functional circle, in

232
C H A P T E R 10
so far as it is assumed that, in simple Umwelten, to every Merkmal corresponds a
Wirkmal and vice versa. This evidently goes for the tick and species of similarly
low functional complexity, but it seems that as soon as we reach higher animals, a
considerable openness of the Umwelt softens up the one-to-one mapping between
Wirkmale and Merkmale:
As soon as body profiles appear as perception-signs, the picture of the perception-world changes
thoroughly, for now relative positions in space begin to play a decisive role. [] Only when spatial
differences appear within the perception-sign itself you may talk about a higher stage of perception-world.
The presupposition for the existence of objects in the perception-world of an animal is provided by the
ability of the animal to construct its own functional rules for action.289
The first quote assumes (tacitly, that is) that higher perception worlds become more
objective by the introduction of spatial environment mapping; the second connects
this higher perception to the possibility of the making up of new functional rules
on an ontogenetic time scale, that is, learning. This latter idea in fact connects
the objectivity of spatial mapping with the emergence of pure objects (apart from
their role in functional circles) and a freedom in action as a result of the tendential
dissolution of the very fixed functional circles in lower Merkwelten. This remarkable
differentiation of Merkwelt types reaches its peak in the idea of a specific openness
in the human Umwelt connected to the appearance of neutral objects. But at the same
time, these almost enlightenment ideas run contrary to the dogmatist perfection
principle. For it seems difficult to conceive of the invention of new functional circles
without assuming some kind of trial-and-error test of them. And the very ‘awareness’
of neutral objects in an Umwelt corresponds to a heightened sensitivity for unknown
events and dangers – that is, a breaking up of the perfect fitting-in, as well of Merk-
and Wirkwelt respectively, as of functional circle and Umgebung, respectively.
So it seems that in von Uexküll’s musical metaphor, perfection should rather be
left out (as a necessity, not, of course, as a relative possibility). And with it, the
Schelling-like idea of the whole of the universe as one harmonious symphony. What
is gained, on the other hand, is the ability to act in a changing environment due
to general-purpose perception and actions, not tied to specific Umwelt functions –
improvisation, to include it in the musical metaphor.
But other interesting sides of the musical metaphor remain. In a central example,
von Uexküll considers the pea beetle larvae, being born from an egg in a pea, which
makes its way to the outside of the pea, only to drill this tunnel and bite a door in
the pea skin while the pea is still soft, so that it later, as a grown-up beetle after
metamorphosis, can take advantage of this passage to get out even if the pea is
now irreversibly hardened. Furthermore, a certain wasp may take advantage of the
existence of this tunnel and lay its egg in the larvae after this tunneling operation,
so as to use the larger larvae as food supply for its own larvae, sure to find the same
tunnel ready for its exit after having digested its constructor and become a grown-up
wasp. Examples like these are impossible by trial-and-error, argues von Uexküll,
and he takes recourse to the musical metaphor in order to understand such subtle
intercouplings between Umwelten. Fine-tunings like this example are examples of
a harmony, he rightly claims, and he quotes the famous Goethe stanzas about the

A N A T U R A L S Y M P H O N Y ?
233
pre-established harmony between eye and sun (‘War nicht die Auge sonnenhaft ’)
in order to depict this harmony.
Thus, the beetle is pea-like and the pea is beetle-like in this Goethean reciprocity
(and both presumably wasp-like etc.); the whole of nature is fused together with
meanings of this kind where Umwelten marvellously fit each other locally. While the
naturalized subjectivism tends to make it impossible to see beyond the horizon of the
Umwelt, the musical metaphor makes possible an inference to mend this problem:
the reciprocity of Umwelt meanings is made possible by the composer of nature’s
symphony, presumably a Mozartian god whose hands interchangeably play over
the claviature of nature’s possibilities during the course of earthly time. Even if any
evolutionist must immediately reject this far-stretched creationism, there remains
something of the Goethean harmony picture even if we secularize von Uexküll’s
vision and grant evolution its rightful role as the ‘creator’ of these harmonies. There
remains, namely, a gestaltist and hence non-irrational account of the organization of
the life of an organism. In a through-and-through vitalist as Hans Driesch, we find
the interesting idea that the entelechy, the organizing principle, emerges out of an
‘ultra-dimension’ in addition to the physical constraints in space and time. But this
dimension needs not be the refuge of unknown forces. The melody – arch-example
for the Gestalt Theorists from von Ehrenfels, Stumpf and the early Husserl onwards
to the Berlin and Graz schools – articulates an organized structure disconnected from
the here-and-now of physics and implying a teleological circle foreseeing the last
note already by the intonation of the first. Thus – as Merleau-Ponty remarks290 – this
metaphor makes it possible to see the life of the individual organism as a realisation,
a variation of the theme, requiring no outside vitalist goal – a variation, we may
add, that forms the condition of possibility of the modification of the animal’s
system of functional circles and hence the acquiring of new habits, possibly to
govern evolutionary selection in Baldwinian evolution. Here, the lucky possibilities
of Uexküll’s melody metaphor go beyond his own static perfections intentions:
music may be perfect, but it is far from always the case. Sometimes only dissonant
tuning of the instruments may be heard, in other cases false breaks during a melody
or more or less successful new variations on a theme; in any case, evolution as a
whole might be a symphony, but only if it is one of continuous improvisation.
But there is even more to be gained from that metaphor. We may ask: what are
the means used by nature in harmony – of course reconceived in an evolutionary
perspective rather than in von Uexküll’s religious vitalism?
C A T E G O R I C A L P E R C E P T I O N
Let us take a closer look at some of the implications in von Uexküll’s musical
metaphor:
We know from Sarris’s experiments that a dog trained to the command ‘chair’ learns to sit on a chair,
and will be on the look-out for other seating-accommodations if the chair is removed; indeed, he searches
for canine sitting-accommodations, which need in no way be suitable for human use.

234
C H A P T E R 10
The
various
sitting-accommodations
all
have
the
same
‘sitting-quality’
(Sitz-Ton);
they
are
meaning-carriers for sitting because they can be exchanged with each other at will, and the dog will
make use of them indiscriminately upon hearing the command ‘chair’.
Therefore, if we make the dog a house-occupant, we will be able to establish that many things will
have a ‘sitting-quality’ for the dog. A great number of things will also exist that will have an ‘eating-
quality’ (Fress-Ton), or a ‘drinking-quality’ (Trink-Ton) for the dog. The staircase certainly has a
‘climbing-quality’ (Kletter-Ton). The majority of the furniture, however, only has an ‘obstacle-quality’
(Hindernis-Ton) for the dog – especially the doors and cupboards, which may contain books or washing.
All of the small household effects, such as spoons, forks, matches, etc. do not exist for the dog because
they are not meaning-carriers. (von Uexküll 1982, 29)
There are several interesting lessons to be learnt from this quote. One, central,
is that the musical metaphor pervasive in von Uexküll’s Bedeutungslehre has the
further virtue of permitting him to talk about categorization in meaning without
explicitly mentioning it, taking us to the issue of categorical perception already
touched upon in Chap. 9. It is by now well known that music listening involves
categorical perception so that a small frequency environment around a pure tone is
heard as that tone, while the frequencies beyond a certain limit is heard as false
tones, until the next frequency window around a pure tone (depending on the scale
chosen, to be sure) appears.291 Thus, the tonal system constitutes a discontinuous
categorization of the continuum of frequencies. This fact now permits von Uexküll
to use music as a metaphor for biological meaning. All the examples in the quote
discuss how the animal ascribes a certain tone to a range of different but comparable
phenomena, that is, categorizes them. Edible stuff is categorized, just like drinkable,
climbable, unsurpassable, etc. stuff. Thus, it seems a crucial but not explicitly
admitted fact in von Uexküll’s picture of biological nature as a symphony that this
harmony is achieved by means of categorical perception. When the moth hears the
bat’s supersonic echo-signaling sound (which is the only frequency its ear is able
to registrate), then the very anatomy of the ear performs the categorization task
just like the case with the tick’s extremely restricted and precise sense of smell.
The same goes for the pea/pea beetle/wasp example: the pea beetle must be able
to categorize pea plants in contrast to all other herbs in order to find a place for
its eggs precisely there – and more so with the wasp which has to make a specific
subcategory out of those peas having already had a pea beetle visit.292
The concept of categorical perception has its origin in psychological linguistics
and its research in phonetics: how is it possible that human speakers immedi-
ately recognize discrete phonological categories in the phonetic continuum? Only
by means of categorical perception, weakening the distinction ability inside a
phoneme category and correlatively strengthening the distincion ability across
category boundaries.293 In the same way we must suppose that the dog obeying
the ‘chair’ imperative follows a categorization of ‘sittable’ objects, and it must be
assumed that this category is subject to a version of the same basic weakening and
strengthening constraints as in human categorical perception. von Uexküll almost
explicitly admits the first of these constraints when he says about the single ‘dog
chairs’ that they ‘ can be exchanged with each other at will’. Thus I would
argue that the whole Umwelt biosemiotics should be reconstructed in terms of

A N A T U R A L S Y M P H O N Y ?
235
categorical perception (CP). Now, it is long since admitted that higher animals
perform categorical perception294 but von Uexküll’s claim that even single cell
animals possess functional circles takes categorical perception back to a much more
primitive level of biology. In the previous chapter, we argued that the primitive
biological cases of categorical perception point to the fact that the procedure
must have stereochemical prerequisites already in biochemistry, and von Uexküll’s
Bedeutungslehre points in the same direction in so far as the meaning circle is
assumed to take place in simple reflex processes already and hence must have a
basis in relatively simple physiology.
On the other hand, von Uexküll’s favorite example leads him to draw too
simplistic implications from the seemingly omnipresence of meaning circles (and
correspondingly, categorical perception) among animals. His tendency to privilege
the stimulus-response-like character of the simpler Umwelten which couples one
Merkmal with one behavior (most examples are from relatively lower animals,
and the definition of meaning circle maps Merk- and Wirkmale one-to-one )
underestimates the openness he admits in higher animals’ Umwelten. This as a
consequence makes it difficult to tell the single object categorized from the category
that subsumes it. This idea corresponds to an early mistake in categorical perception
studies, that the weakened distinguishability inside a category should be interpreted
as a total lack of inside-category distinctions. Thus, it was supposed that all /b/s
are heard as /b/s with no sensibility for dialect, personal or other variations. This
idea has long since been given up in categorical perception research, and the same
ought to be the case in Umwelt biosemiotics. Thus, von Uexküll’s late contention
that animals can not perceive neutral objects (in categorcial perception terms: that
it is unable to distinguish properties in it apart from the properties giving rise to its
categorization) is dubious (and runs counter to his more open stance in Theoretical
Biology, see above):
The unsatisfactory result of this work [American rats-in-a-labyrinth research], despite the most exact
techniques of measurement and their most refined mathematical treatment, could have been predicted,
because it was based on the false assumption that an animal can at any time enter into relationship with
a neutral object. (27, my brackets)
But it is noteworthy that Uexküll himself, in the dog example quoted above,
considers the Hindernis-Ton of certain mesoscopic objects in the dog Umwelt at
the same time as he claims that all objects perceived in an Umwelt must form part
of specific functional circles. But obstacles are not part of any specific functional
circle, be it sex, food, water or other circles, but of a more unspecific and open-ended
environment mapping loosened from immediate functional utility. Moreover, the
general fact that higher animals may not only be fooled but may themselves discover
the fooling points to the fact that they do have the competence for distinguishing
different instances of a perceived category, that is, distinguishing objects with
respect to properties neutral to a given perceptual category. It is hard to see that
this is not exactly what perception of neutral objects is about. There is any reason
to believe that higher animals thus master the plural grasping of one and the same
object by several simultaneous representations, that is, at least both as types and

236
C H A P T E R 10
tokens, and possibly also as symbols for some other type (all three are assumably
present in as simple a case as the classic Pavlov conditioning: different bell sounds
are categorized as one and the same ringing type, all, in turn, symbolizing general
eating). One of the central categorical perception researchers, Stevan Harnad, in his
conclusive paper in his state-of-the-art Categorical Perception anthology, outlines
a three-level categorical perception theory built from exactly these three layers: a
continuous, pre-categorization representation; a discontinuous categorization, typifi-
cation, still on the perceptual level; and finally the possible symbolizing of the
perceptual types (for instance as linguistic labeling).295
Thus, in higher animals the categorical perception in the meaning circle has
considerably vaster complexity and variability than in the moth-bat sound case, and
the former case is probably much closer to the extreme variability and extrapolability
of the human Umwelt than to the latter reflex-like relation. If this is the case, then
von Uexküll’s sharp distinction between animal Umwelten and the human Umwelt
must also be given up. Of course there are crucial differences between the two but
it is not the case as von Uexküll in the Bedeutungslehre seems to assume, that all
animal Umwelten are equally closed in contrast to a specific human openness;296
if this idea is given up, the higher animals’ more sophisticated Umwelten may be
placed on a scale making the evolution of the extreme plasticity of the human
Umwelt understandable.297
To return to von Uexküll’s musical metaphor, there is much in it that can easily
be subscribed to: the condition of possibility for nature to link up in these strange
‘harmonies’ between different species’ Umwelten depends precisely on categorical
perception: the perceptual categories form the tones in the metaphor, and it is their
categoricity only that permits them to enter into counterpoint between the single
Umwelten. The fact that different species may entertain the Goethean likeness-
relationship between each other must be due to the reciprocal fitting in of categorical
perceptions of their Umwelten – only in this can this apparently mysterious likeness
consist.
But it is interesting to note that the categorical perception implicit in the Bedeu-
tungslehre’s melody metaphor has got some important theoretical underpinnings in
the earlier Theoretical Biology. That book begins with a presentation of space and
time in the naturalized Kantianism we quoted in the beginning. We have already
dealt with the problematic assumptions in the foundations of this idea, but if we turn
to the formal description of the very mappings of space and time, more interesting
observations show up. Both space and time are subject to a crucial granulation in the
Umwelt construction. Umwelt space is constructed – unlike Euclidean geometry –
from localities, from Orte, just like Umwelt time is constituted not from timeless
nows, but from short time bits, from Momente. The size of these Umwelt building
blocks is of course relative to the senses and the inner life of the animal in question,
respectively. But this implies that the perception and action systems of an Umwelt
imposes on the surroundings a granularity (the smallest Ort in human beings is
palpable by the fingertips and visible at close range; the smallest Moment the one
eighteenth of a second corresponding to the number of pictures per second for

A N A T U R A L S Y M P H O N Y ?
237
movies not to blink). The same is the case for the Inhaltszeichen filling shorter and
larger chunks of time and space where the ability to distinguish implies a least color
(respective tone) unity. These distinction sensivities in space, time and quality,
correlative to the perception systems in question, become the condition of possi-
bility for more advanced categorization tasks to be fulfilled. They are performed,
now, by schemata. In his insistence on this figure in the Theoretische Biologie,
von Uexküll makes his place clear in the ranks of diagram semioticians. He is
especially interested (in contrast to Kant) in empirical schemas, so as for instance
object contours making it possible to recognize objects. Such contours are described
as ‘melodies’ comprising many orientations-signs, and
By this process, the melody of the orientation-signs is the gestalting power which, however, only reaches
consciousness in the ‘gestalt’. The gestalting melody Kant called a ‘schema’, and the hidden art of
gestalting in our mind he called the ‘schematism’.298
Melodies in this general sense – that is, diagrams – and qualities are what is
needed to build the objects of the Umwelt; and as the melody metaphor suggests,
the schemata may depict spatial (e.g. familiar faces) as well as temporal (e.g. a
sequence of movements) regularities. It goes – in von Uexküll – without saying
that schemata must be subject to the same granularity as time, space, and qualities
(being built from these), and in our Peircean notions we will not hesitate to say that
diagram types must be distinguished from diagram tokens and that it is precisely the
schematism types that make it possible to use the diagram to categorize a series of
individual but related phenomena. von Uexküll places perceptual schemas as crucial
to the feed-back control of motor action in higher animals (but does not, strangely,
see the action’s impulse series as a schema itself), so that sufficiently complicated
action must be assumed impossible without implying schemata – organizing general
diagrams.
The introduction of schemata fulfills the semiotic prerequisites for the meaning
circle: a Merkzeichen may refer to a Merkmal, but also further on to a Wirkmal, a
Wirkzeichen and a Wirken. Thus, the ‘meaning’ in the meaning circle may be located
in many different places, according to which phase of the circuit the attention is
directed. The smell of a deer may mean prey to a lion, it may mean the thought of
hunt, it may mean bodily preparing for hunt, it may mean the hunt itself. The sight
of other lions preparing for hunt may similarly mean deer, prey, hunt – as well
as, according to other meaning circles, competition for meat, etc. Any part of the
schema governing a functional circle may meaningfully refer to any other part of
the same circle: this is where primitive signification lies in the meaning circle and
the reason why it gives rise to proto-signs.299 If we successfully subject sensory
material to e.g. our soccer ball schema or ‘melody’, then this Merkzeichen may
refer to a ball, to a kick, to the feeling of a kick or to a performance of a kick  In
return, the success of this Wirken may now be measured on bodily and mental
schemata of a good kick  As soon as the neutral objects permitted in Theoretische
Biologie (but not later on in the Bedeutungslehre) show up, furthermore, the possi-
bility of applying different schemata on the same sensory material appears, thereby
interpreting it merely symbolically, that is experimentally: the ball seen as a globe,

238
C H A P T E R 10
as an egg, as a sphere, etc. The semiotic strength of the coupling of category
schemata with the functional circle is that the epistemological requirements of the
first and the pragmatic requirements of the latter become equally responsible for
the categorization inherent in the Umwelt construction.
But which kinds of categorical perception are at stake in this concert? A certain
amount of confusion has plagued categorical perception research as to the very
definition of its categories. Are they defined by the boundaries, distinguishing one
category from the other, are they rather defined by the single category’s prototype
(which may again be defined by different means: typical, ideal, average, etc.), or are
they defined with regard to earlier encounters with category exemplars? The idea
that one of these definitions should outrule the others seems to be on the way to be
given up in favour of a recognition that all of them are mechanisms used to different
degrees in various categorization tasks. In any case, these different procedures can
be collected under the headline of ‘reference points’ as a common denominator for
boundaries, stereotypes, prototypes, ideals, etc. Similarly, as Medin and Barsalou
emphasize (in Harnad 1987), there may be different patterns of sensitivity so that
some categorizations or tasks may display heightened sensitivity around prototypes,
while others may display lowered sensitivity around them (477). A crucial difference
goes between boundary reference and the various prototype references, and one of
their suggestions is that
Perhaps one difference is that reference points are more likely to occur at the boundaries of SP [sensory
perception] categories than at the boundaries of GK [generic knowledge] categories. To some extent
this may reflect greater innate constraints on SP categories than on GK categories. (475, my brackets)
and that boundary categorization is tendentially more relevant for discrimination
tasks (like: is this sound a /p/ or a /b/?) while prototype categorization is more
relevant for classification tasks (like: is this animal a predator or not?).300 If this
is correct, we should expect biosemiotic categorical perception to display both, but
maybe with a tendency to favor the prototype sort (classification is biologically more
basic than discrimination). Uexküll’s simplest examples (the tick, the moth) are so
simple that they are difficult to determine with respect to the boundary/prototype
distinction. Of course the auditory sensitivity of the moth has a lower and a higher
boundary, but the animal does not in any way distinguish between what is on
either side of it (it simply cannot hear what is beyond it); it would probably be
more fair to call it a case of prototypical categorical perception. If the moth’s
sensibility window is larger than the average bat frequenzy range then we could see
it as a simple case of prototypicality. A well-known case of innate ideal reference
point is the so-called supranormal releasers which refer to facts like that new-
born seagulls accept objects of a certain coloring and form (like a beak) as their
mother – but the color-form configuration which has the strongest impact on them
is different from any empirical seagull and hence forms an ideal reference point
of their ‘mother’ category. Boundary categorization (which of course may appear
together with prototypicality in one and the same category) should be expected
where there is a crucial behavioral difference in relation to the two categories on
each side of the border, that is, it should be expected in unidimensional gradients

A N A T U R A L S Y M P H O N Y ?
239
where a continuous change leads to ethological difference (behavior difference
occuring at a temperature threshold, for instance), or when more complex but very
similar categories give rise to different behaviors (similar berries, the one being
edible, the other poisonous). Thus, we can imagine perfectly naturally occurring
‘pure’ cases of boundary CP where no typicality attractor needs be present in
the center of the categories, just as we can imagine ‘pure’ cases of prototype CP
where the boundaries are fuzzy or simply do not exist (what are the boundaries of
phenomena like ‘danger’ ). The more specific musings on these issues must be
left to further empirical research, but the point is probably clear on the principal
level discussed here: both main types of CP are present already on rather primitive
biosemiotic levels and reflect at least a double (icon-token/icon-type) or rather a
triple information (icon-token/icon-type/symbol) procedure at stake.
C A T E G O R I C A L P E R C E P T I O N A S A G E N E R A L S E M I O T I C N O T I O N
Thus, a closer analysis of a contemporary version of von Uexküll’s Umwelt forces us
to acknowledge categorical perception as a primitive notion in semiotics. But if it be
so, then semiotics ought to attempt a reformulation of the originally psychological
CP concept in non-psychological terms. The occurrence of categorical perception in
both human and animal psychologies seems sufficient evidence for it to be a formal
notion not only with psychological relevance. In the previous chapter, we tried to
trace the prerequisites of CP in (bio-)chemistry, but one could also point to its
possible relevance for other complex organism-like systems with highly selective
environment relations (institutions, ecologies, economies, social groups, etc.).301
A provisional attempt at a formal definition could be: Categorical Perception is
the granularity of Umwelt for a complicated system. The overall reason for such
a granularity (each grain giving rise to a CP) would be economy in environment
relations permitting cognition. Or rather, the economy in environment relations
is cognition, or vice versa. If so, CP is a semiotic piece of formal ontology and
should be brought in correspondence with the actual strivings in formal ontology at
generalizing von Uexküll’s Umwelt notion; cf. Barry Smith’s idea of the niche as a
general category in formal ontology discussed earlier. It seems a defining feature of
a Complex Adaptive System that it must entertain Categorical Perception in relation
to its niche so that certain types of niche stimuli evokes highly specific regulatory
actions in the Complex Adaptive System, and that certain stimuli are even able to
change the CAS’s niche relations in general (this would be the formal notion of
adaptation).
If this be the case, then this formal conclusion will allow us to draw one further
implication for biosemiotics. We have already ridiculed von Uexküll’s ardent anti-
evolutionism and his support to an irrationalist vitalism or creationism, and an
updated version of the Umwelt must of course embed it in an overall evolutionary
framework. Still, in the Categorical Perception reading of the Umwelt, it contains
a more delimited and more precise arguments against certain assumptions in the
Neo-Darwinist doxa, namely the idea that all order in nature is the result of natural

240
C H A P T E R 10
selection. As a primitive order notion, CP in its formal version seems to be a
necessary prerequisite for life as such, rather than being a contingent result of
selection.302 Thus, it constitutes a germ of order which may not be the result solely
of natural selection. Rather, natural selection seems to presuppose CP in order to
have orderly alternatives from which to select. In so far, the general biosemiotic
CP notion supports Stuart Kauffman’s claim that biological order is no product of
natural selection, rather natural selection determines which specific order among
many suits a certain environment best.
Thus, to conclude, our reconstruction of the Umwelt concept places it as central
to theoretical biology and biosemiotics in particular and to semiotics and formal
ontology in general. This only happens, of course, on the basis of a thoroughgoing
revision of the concept, depriving it of its subjectivist, skepticist and anti-adaptionist
flaws in von Uexküll’s version. It must be cleansed for all traces of radical construc-
tivism in favour of a moderate, realist constructivism: each species constructs its
own Umwelt all right, but it takes place in a common world which is not in itself a
construction. In so far, this moderate, realist construction is hardly distinguishable
from self-organization. If nature is indeed a symphony, we must not expect of it
the perfection read off of the final score. We should rather see it as continuous
rehearsals and improvisations without composers nor directors which nonetheless
results in stunning performances and the continuous invention of melodies and
harmonies as well as scales. The contribution of von Uexküll’s Bedeutungslehre
to our days’ semiotics, then, is to provide the outline of a rational analysis of the
alamodic notion of ‘embodiment’ in terms of a schematically supported functional
circle, thereby indicating the biological roots of meaning as connected to such
schemata, or, in the ever resounding musical metaphor, melodies.

C H A P T E R 11
MAN THE ABSTRACT ANIMAL
Diagrams, Abstraction, and the Semiotic Missing Link
 the brutes use signs. But they perhaps rarely think of
them as signs.
(Peirce, Consequences of Critical Common-Sensism 1905,
CP 5.534)
von Uexküll’s simple distinction between closed Umwelten in animals versus
open Umwelten for man obviously does not hold. But if biological evolution is –
among other properties – characterized by increasing semiotic sophistication, then
it becomes an urgent question to ask which decisive semiotic change took place, if
any, with the introduction of language during the Homo Habilis period in human
prehistory: what is the semiotic missing link?
In this context, Terrence Deacon’s much-discussed and groundbreaking book
The Symbolic Species attempts a new solution. Based on a threefold background of
arguments – philosophical, neurological, and anthropological, – Deacon proposes
that the main event in the animal-man transition is the introduction of symbols. Now,
as is well known, the concept of symbol is probably one of the most ambiguous
notions in the history of thought, and Deacon takes great care to make precise the
version of it he finds central. He picks the notion of symbol found in Peircean
semiotics which stands apart from many other symbol concepts by assuming the
symbol as a complex derivative notion related to simpler sign types included in its
composition. The symbol, of course, presupposes the existence of the simpler sign
types of icon and index, respectively, so that it makes sense to say that genuine
symbols presuppose icons and indices. Icons are signs defined by similarity to the
object they refer to; indices are signs defined by actual connection to the object, and
symbols, finally, as signs referring to their – general – object by means of habit.
These three classes are not mutually exclusive partitions of the field of signs; rather,
higher sign types presuppose and include more simple types. Thus, icons form the
most fundamental sign type (with respect to object reference), and all higher types
presuppose icons. Thus, indices are only possible in so far as they possess iconic
qualities: the footprint in the sand is a prototypical index, in so far as the sign refers
to the object having caused it, but it also possesses iconic qualities, in so far as the
footprint’s shape to some extent resembles that of the foot.
In order to interpret something as indexical, so Deacon, a higher-order relation
must hold between two groups of icons (in the footprint case, there must be a relation
241

242
C H A P T E R 11
between the group of possible footprints similar to the actual print on the one hand
and the group of possible foot shapes responsible for it on the other). This corre-
sponds to conditioned response in ethology, Deacon argues. Furthermore, in order
to construct a symbol, a whole group of indices are related by means of indexical
relations between their tokens.303 This relation, internal to the symbol, is now
strengthened at the expense of the intial index’s object reference. Thus, the symbol
is, as a tendency, loosened from the closer object contact found in icons and
indices. They are bracketed, allowing the symbol to function on its own in represen-
tation and reasoning, but in any specific interpretation of a symbol, its iconic and
indexical basis must be reinvoked, including the possibility of new icono-indexical
specifications of it.
This forms the base of a fertile criticism of rival accounts conceiving of symbols
as atomic primitives, so for instance the physical symbol systems hypothesis, making
symbols simple physical units corresponding in a rather direct way to other physical
units. With reference to a range of neurological brain scanning experiments which
we shall not go into here, Deacon argues that philosophical points of view related
to simpler symbol conceptions lack empirical support. This criticism is aimed
especially at Chomsky’s transformation grammar and related positions claiming the
existence of an innate grammar module in human beings, a module which allegedly
is completely lacking in apes. Deacon’s scanning experiments point to the fact that
sufficiently complex linguistic tasks inevitably give rise to very widespread brain
activity including several separated parts of the cortex in addition to the well-known
Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas involved in the production and reception of speech.
This finding forms a strong argument against the language module hypothesis,
and to counter that idea Deacon claims a symbol hypothesis. Symbol use is taken
as the distinctive advantage of mankind in comparison to other higher animals.
Symbol use – as a complex phenomenon – naturally involves the integration of a
large amount of highly different, more primitive brain competences. Hence, such
a hypothesis makes the semiotic animal-man transition more continuous so that
symbol use merely would amount to the integration of a series of competences
already to a large extent present in higher animals. The neural equivalent to symbol
processing is neither a specific module of the brain nor the simple size difference
of the cortex – but the degree of integration of the human brain which is even
neurologically measurable in terms of much longer growth period and a larger
degree of neuron interconnection between spatially distant parts (so as for instance
the cortex and the cerebellum, very important for the automatization of phonetic
aspects of speech).
Deacon proposes a both a general and a specific scenario for the evolution of
speech. The specific one features a huge amount of anthropological hypotheses304
and may be left aside in this context. The more general scenario revives the
notion of ‘Baldwinian’ evolution (after the American psychologist James Mark
Baldwin from around 1900).305 He proposed the idea that seemingly Lamarckian
acquired hereditary properties could be explained within a Darwinian framework
with a support hypothesis: that animals able to learn new behaviors may be able

M A N T H E A B S T R A C T A N I M A L
243
to direct evolution as a result of that behavior – because the behavior in question
forces fellow species members to assume it or perish. In such cases, a huge
selection pressure will favor individuals most able to learn that behavior: ‘ those
congenital or phylogenetic variations are kept in existence which lend themselves
to intelligent, imitative, adaptive, or mechanical modification during the lifetime
of the creatures which have them.’ (Baldwin 1902, 95). This Baldwinian evolution
argument is evidently stronger, the more intelligent the organism in question is.
Thus, Deacon’s idea is that the passage to symbol use is intimately connected
to the fast evolution of the human brain during the recent millions of years. He
imagines a scenario, in which embryonic symbol use in small humanoid groups
kickstarts a process selecting for higher brains with symbol processing capabil-
ities within those groups, thus speeding up evolution’s pace dramatically, with our
sophisticated symbol abilities as a result. The evolution of the human brain thus
does not precede language evolution – rather, the two form two aspects of the
same evolutionary process, and in some sense the semiotic a priori structure of
language, via peer group pressure among humanoids, acts as a further constraint on
brain evolution.306
My aim here is to try and render the semiotic aspects of Deacon’s hypothesis –
with which I basically sympathize – somewhat more precise. The main problem in it
is that even the Peircean definition of ‘symbol’ is probably much too primitive – as
well as too general – to explain the semiotic aspects of the animal-man transition.
In addition, there are some terminological problems to be sorted out; Deacon
claims he uses Peirce’s terminology, but as a matter of fact, he undertakes his
own reconstruction of it, changing the higher sign types – indices and symbols –
in two ways. First, they are rendered compositional with respect to lower sign
types, maybe for theoretical economy reasons; and, second, they are rendered more
complex than is the case in Peirce’s account, maybe in order to make them ‘fit’ the
ape/man boundary better. Thus, Deacon’s explanation of the index seems to cover
cases which in Peirce’s account automatically would be counted as symbols. Pure
indices – in Peirce only possible as a limit case – will be tied to the actual here
and now, while it is the privilege of the symbol to possess a general esse in futuro
and thus form a habit, regulating future behavior. But when Deacon claims that
conditioned behavior is indexical only, it seems he already includes future regulating
features in indices (which are nowhere apparent in the prototypical footprint index).
The problem is, of course, that if we accept the ordinary Peircean notion of symbol,
then symbolic behavior becomes widespread in higher animals,307 and the notion
becomes unfit for the task of distinguishing between animal and human behavior.
Thus, a simple Pavlovian conditioning making the ringing of a bell release the
excretion of saliva in dogs is a full-fledged symbol in Peirce’s terminology: it is a
habit, a regulation of future behavior, and it connects a continuum of possible bell
sounds with a continuum of possible eating situations, thus being a general sign with
a general object – a symbol. Accordingly, Peirce’s symbol concept includes a wide
range of subtypes of very different complexity degrees, ranging from simple terms
over propositions to arguments – each of these, in turn, including a whole fauna

244
C H A P T E R 11
of further subtypes. Thus symbol use is neither as simple as Deacon presupposes
(with respect to symbol subtypes) nor as complex as he presupposes (with respect
to the simpler sign types).308
Deacon consequently adds some further requirements to Peirce’s symbol concept
in order to make it approximately fit the animal-man transition (to be sure, he
maintains that a few higher animals, mostly apes, maybe parrots, may learn simple
symbol systems309). What he adds is a Saussure-like systematicity of requiring the
co-presence of several interlinked symbols, both paradigmatically (implying the
systematic difference between selected expressions) and syntagmatically (implying
the syntactical organization of combined expressions). Only a system of this kind,
he argues, permits ape and man to skip icon- and index-consciousness and their
tight connection to the actual world and indulge in the semi-autonomous world of
symbolicity, giving rise to the possibility of systematical counterfactual imagination.
But as to systematicity, higher animals do possess taxonomies, both in perception
(prey types) and communication (warning calls for different predators) so it seems
systematicity is not the only key to the problem.
Thus, it is correct that Peirce’s symbol definition is a necessary, yet not suffi-
cient prerequisite to give rise to the construction of counterfactual, possible worlds.
The symbol notion seems too weak to account for the specific advantage of
human semiotics over animal semiotics. More specific distinction within the field
of symbols must be sought as responsible for this decisive jump. Peirce himself
only rarely considers the question of animal semiotic behavior, but he is, at least,
quite sure that animals’ abilities are far more elaborate than for instance simple
conditioning. Take this late deliberation (c. 1911):
Some seventy years ago, my beloved and accomplished school-ma’am taught me that human kind,
being formed in the image of our Maker, were endowed with the power of Reasoning, while ‘the
animals’, lacking that power (which might have made them dissatisfied), received, each kind, certain
‘instincts’ to do what was generally necessary for their lives. At least, so I understood her. But when
I subsequently came to observe the behaviors of several big dogs and little birds and two parrots, I
gradually came to think quite otherwise. For, in the first place, I gradually amassed a body of experiences
which convinced me that many animals, perhaps all the higher ones, do reason, if by Reasoning is
meant any mental operation which from the putting together of two believed facts leads to a Belief
different in substance from either of those two. Once, for example, while I was driving () along a
country road that was very familiar to me, a setter-dog that I had never seen before raced past me at
the top of his speed. In an instant a turn of the road hid him from my sight. ‘Poor fellow!’ I thought,
‘he races after his master in fear of losing him forever.’ A moment later, reaching the turn myself, I
saw the dog again, not far ahead of me, but at a point where the road branched, and now sitting on
his haunches. He was not panting nor showing the least sign of fatigue, but evidently puzzled which
branch of the road [to take]. After a second or two, he started off at the same tremendous pace as
before, on the more travelled of the two roads, though being the older and harder, it was not very
obviously the more travelled of the two. These alternations, - a halt between two utmost speedings, with
no slightest symptom of fatigue, - seemed to me to show plainly that the dog had stopped to consider
which of the two branches of the road his master had probably taken; and his sudden choice of the
more travelled showed that he concluded that his master would probably do as most people, which was
a kind of argument: technically called a ‘probable deduction’, - the commonest reasoning of a general
in a campaign, when information is lacking, defective, or conflicting. (MS CSP 672,2–5, my square
brackets)

M A N T H E A B S T R A C T A N I M A L
245
Peirce continues with another example of a parrot fooling a dog named Spitz.
Every day, the dog’s master would come home and call ‘Spitz, Spitz, Spitz!’ in
order to take the dog for a walk. If, by chance, somebody else came to the door,
the parrot would repeat exactly the same yell, now provoking the dog to run to
the door – only to be laughed at by the presumably practical-joking parrot. It is
of course very difficult to ascertain the amount or character of reasoning taking
place in animals from behavior observation, but especially the first of Peirce’s
examples seems illustrative for a deliberate choice based on reasoning seemingly
widespread in higher animals. If we take this observation as being correct, this
implies that higher animals are not only at the command of symbols in general,
but also of those most demanding and complex of symbols called arguments and
reasonings, involving diagrams. Even if not making it explicit, the dog’s reasoning
must implement a Y-shaped diagram in some fashion or other, making it possible
for the dog to reason about which branch of the Y to chose. We may note, moreover,
that the dog’s situation at the fork road Y also, at least in germ-like form, contains
the construction of another possible, counterfactual world (like ‘what if my master
had gone the other way’ ). If the more complex parrot example is to be accepted
at face value, it even contains the deliberate construction of a possible world for
another animal, implying a theory of other minds – a type of behavior which
seems well-documented in apes wanting to fool fellow apes away from food, sexual
partners, etc., but let us stick to the more easy-to-interpret first example. Of course,
the systematic exploration of worlds of alternative possibilities requires a stable
representation system probably in the form of interconnected symbols – but the
example here goes at least to show that there is probably no upper bound to the
complexity of symbol types which higher animals have access to as single signs.
Animals do reason, and one could probably find cases displaying both abductive,
deductive, and inductive argument use, to take Peirce’s argument typology. A full-
blown process of reasoning involves all of the three of them, and if animals reason,
they master all of them – even if not necessarily explicitly, of course. They may
guess, infer, and generalize from experience, respectively; they are rational because
they are forced to – a Popperian argument – just like us. So the problem must lie
elsewhere. The problem simply does not seem to lie in the the complexity degree
of single symbol types, at least when measured on the term-proposition-argument
complexity scale of symbols. Deacon is probably on the right track when he looks
for the coming into place of a systematic interconnection of symbols making it
possible stably to construct, evolve, and research possible worlds differing from the
actually perceived world. But what makes the jump from a sophisticated reasoning
ability and to a system of symbols possible? Deacon does not go into this question,
but I think the explanation might be found in the ability to make signs explicit and
undertake explicitly controlled reasonings with them. To Peirce, explicit control is
even paramount to reasoning proper – which is why animal reasoning despite many
similarities to human reasoning only rarely may qualify as proper reasoning.310
The way Deacon describes his redefinition of the symbol concept actually indicates
that Deaconian symbols are in fact symbols subjected to such explicit control. And

246
C H A P T E R 11
the issue of explicit control points to another part of Peirce’s work, namely his
abstraction theories focussing upon the possibility of making stably explicit the
meaning of a term.
P E I R C E ’ S A B S T R A C T I O N T H E O R I E S
Peirce developed no less than two abstraction theories in so far as he finds the
colloquial use of the word ‘abstraction’ at his time (and in ours probably as well)
refers to at least two separate and autonomous issues. Both are relevant here.
One is the mind’s focussing ability, the other its ability to make issues explicit –
referred to as distinction and hypostatic abstraction, respectively.311 As often in
Peirce, the two notions stem from different traditions in Mediaeval semantics of
Scholasticism.
Even if the abstraction problem recurs over and over in Peirce’s work, he
never consecrates a whole paper to unfold it, so an exposition must be based
on a series of small notes spread in his published and unpublished work. The
abstraction problem surfaces as early as 1867, but Peirce’s interest in it reaches
a peak in the fertile years of his mature theory of signs in the first ten years of
the twentieth century. The first part of it, however, is stated as early as in ‘On a
New List of Categories’ (1867, EPI, 2; 1.549)312 where the trichotomy of disso-
ciation, prescission, and discrimination is terminologically fixed. The idea is that
there are three modes of separation which may be undertaken in the analysis of
a phenomenon, going from the most coarse, being able to distinguish different
qualities, e.g. red from blue (dissociation), over one able to distinguish what may
be supposed to exist without the other, e.g. space from color (prescission) to the
most subtle being able to distinguish what may only be thought of separately, e.g.
color from space (discrimination). This terminology remains constant in Peirce, and
in ‘Syllabus’ (1903), the three modes are directly connected to the definition of his
three categories:
In order to understand logic, it is necessary to get as clear notions as possible of these three categories
and to gain the ability to recognize them in the different conceptions with which logic deals. Although
all three of them are ubiquitous, yet certain kinds of separations may be effected upon them. They
correspond to the three categories. Separation of Firstness, or Primal Separation, called Dissociation,
consists in imagining one of the two separands without the other. It may be complete or incomplete.
Separation of Secondness, or Secundal Separation, called Prescission, consists in supposing a state of
things in which one element is present without the other, the one being logically possible without the
other. Thus, we cannot imagine a sensuous quality without some degree of vividness. But we usually
suppose that redness, as it is in red things, has no vividness; and it would certainly be impossible to
demonstrate that everything red must have a degree of vividness. Separation of Thirdness, or Tertial
Separation, called discrimination, consists in representing one of the two separands without representing
the other. If A can be prescinded from, i.e. supposed without, B, then B can, at least, be discriminated
from A. (EP II, 270).
Furthermore, these distinguishing abilities are what make the very separation of
Peirce’s basic categories possible. None of them may be dissociated, however, but:

M A N T H E A B S T R A C T A N I M A L
247
It is possible to prescind Firstness from Secondness. We can suppose a being whose whole life consists
in one unvarying feeling of redness. But it is impossible to prescind Secondness from Firstness. For
to suppose two things is to suppose two units; and however colorless and indefinite an object may be,
it is something and therein has Firstness, even if it has nothing recognizable as a quality. Everything
must have some non-relative element; and this is its Firstness. So likewise it is possible to prescind
Secondness from Thirdness. But Thirdness without Secondness would be absurd. (ibid.)313
This implies that the three categories are interrelated as follows (arrows here
meaning possibility of distinction; broken arrows impossibility):
1. <----  2.
1. <--/--> 2.
2. <--/--> 3.
The categories may not be dissociated.
1. --/--> 2. 
2. <----  3.
2. --/--> 3. 
1. <----  3.
1. --/--> 3. 
A lower category may be prescinded from a higher, not vice versa.
1. <----  2. 
1. ----> 2. 
2. <----  3.
2. ----> 3. 
1. <----  3.
1. ----> 3.
All categories may be discriminated from the others. 
This makes the definition of the categories depend on a calculus very close to
the mereology of Husserl’s 3rd Untersuchung,314 discussed in Chaps. 7–8. The
three separation modes may be rephrased as 1) the distinction between autonomous
(genuine) parts, 2) the distinction separating a founding content from a founded
content, and 3) the distinction separating any moment (founded content, or unecther
Teil) from its foundational basis. Thus, like in Husserl, the separation modes
are crucial to the explanation of the status of properties (as moments) and their
foundation interrelationship (the fact that color properties are founded on spatial
properties, not vice versa), and the separation modes can be seen as the devices
necessary for isolating general moments in the phenomenon. Prescission and
discrimination are the most significant types of distinction because they entail
the possibility of isolating predicates by leaving other properties in an object
indeterminate315 (corresponding exactly to Husserl’s eidetic variation which inserts
algebraic variables in an object for the properties not considered, cf. the Prole-
gomena in the Logische Untersuchungen). With regard to the semiotic man-animal
problem, though, it must be admitted that many higher animals can perform corre-
sponding acts, as is evident from the bonobo Kanzi’s ability to understand predicate
symbols as related in Deacon 1997. Peirce often calls prescission ‘prescissive
abstraction’ to distinguish it from abstraction proper, or as he calls it, ‘hypostatic’
or ‘subjectal’ abstraction.
While the separation types makes possible generalization – by the peeling
away of still further properties – and thus are tied to the Aristotelian

248
C H A P T E R 11
general/specific/particular
triad,
the
other
abstraction
type
is
tied
to
the
abstract/concrete dichotomy. While the first one is objective – in so far as it discerns
objective aspects of the phenomenon – the other is subjective in so far as it is tied
to epistemology and the anatomy of the process of reason (but also has objective
implications, see below).
Hypostatic abstraction is linguistically defined as the process of making a noun
out of an adjective; logically as making a subject out of a predicate. The distinction
between ‘hard’ and ‘hardness’ serves as the prototypical example. The idea here
is that in order to investigate a predicate – which other predicates it is connected
to, which conditions it is subjected to, in short to test its possible consequences
using Peirce’s famous pragmatic maxim – it is necessary to posit it as a subject for
investigation. This is evidently a completely different procedure than the separation
types (even if the two very often occur interlinked in the research process) insofar
as the output is not more general than the input. It makes an second-order object
out of a predicate, an object which may now be taken as the object for a further
investigation. It takes a thought as a thing, in short. Consequently, the operation
is recursive, and we may produce an unlimited hierarchy of ever more abstract
notions.316
In the beginning of the century, Peirce over and over again illustrates abstraction
with reference to the well-known Molière joke about the ‘Virtus Dormitiva’,
the dormitive powers, of opium.317 The joke is a parody of sterile abstractions
of Scholastic medicine, of course, and in Peirce’s positivist time, it apparently
functioned as a general warning against abstractions tout court. But Peirce turns
the table on this interpretation. He admits, of course, that it serves as an extreme
example of an idle and useless abstraction, but still there remains, if we put it under
a microscope, as he says, an ever so small step forward in the reasoning process,
even in this foolish example. By going from the statement that ‘opium puts people
to sleep’ and to the statement that ‘opium possesses a virtus dormitiva’, a hypostatic
abstraction has been performed. Something in opium is taken to have this well-
known effect. We know nothing more positively about the workings of opium in the
brain, but the hypostatic abstraction now permits us to ask further: in what, more
precisely, does this virtus dormitiva consist? It might be that opium just put some
people to sleep by coincidence, but the hypostatic abstraction – by substantivizing
this ability – asks the question of possible further reasons and structures behind this
mere fact. Thus, hypostatic abstraction is a crucial motor in the process of research
by positing new somethings, new x’s, as issues to be investigated.318 It consists
in ‘asserting that a given sign is applicable instead of merely applying it’, as he
says already in 1898,319 it goes from saying that something is red to the fact that
redness may be applied to something, and in doing so, it creates an ens rationis,
a second-intention, whose truth resides in the fact that something holds for other,
really existing things: ‘For what is an abstraction but an object whose being consists
in facts about other things?’ (‘Logic of History’ (1904), NEM IV: 11) The point of
the Molière joke, consequently, is not that hypostatic abstraction is futile, but rather
that the idea of such an abstraction being sufficient as an explanation is foolish.

M A N T H E A B S T R A C T A N I M A L
249
In a 1905 manuscript ‘Basis of Pragmatism’ (Robin nr. 284), Peirce attempts
to give hypostatic abstractions a systematic place in his semiotic architecture. In a
chapter on the ‘Division of Signs’, he gives a new trichotomy pertaining to the sign’s
relation to its immediate object (distinct from the well-known icon-index-symbol
pertaining to its relation to its dynamic object). Here, he distinguishes vague, or
indefinite signs, singular signs, and general signs, respectively. The singular sign
refers to one particular object, while the vague signs refers to objects which are in
need of more precise description in order for their object to be determined, and the
general signs refer to a possible continuity of objects, among which the interpreter is
free to chose any he likes. Among the singular signs, now, a further subtrichotomy
is posited as follows: hypostatically abstract signs, concrete signs, and collective
signs, respectively. The latter two refer to singular existing entities and entities
built from parts or elements,320 respectively, while the former are characterized
thus: ‘The Immediate Object, though Singular in form, is represented as having
the logically material character of the Priman, which is the absence of the matter
of existence.’ (67) Existence is abstracted away to highlight the ‘Priman’, that is
the Firstness, the quality which is then represented as an object. As soon as an
abstraction is performed linguistically, it becomes a symbol, so we should place
hypostatic abstractions as a specific subtype of symbols. Of course it is possible to
refer to abstractions by other means than language – diagrams will be a typical way
of referring to them, cf. below – but in these cases a symbolic, general indication
of their object will be a part of the sign. Collections, the third subtype, are of
course already itself abstractions, and an interesting fact is that also the single
existing object for Peirce is an abstraction321 – it is only possible as a limit case for
investigation; to that extent, it is no wonder that hypostatic abstractions are seen as
the most simple singular signs.
Hypostatic abstraction is supposed to play a crucial role in the reasoning process
for several reasons. The first is that by making a thing out of a thought, it facilitates
the possibility for thought to reflect critically upon the distinctions with which
it operates, to control them, reshape them, combine them.322 Thought becomes
emancipated from the prison of the given, in which abstract properties exist only
as Husserlian moments, and even if prescission may isolate those moments and
induction may propose regularities between them (and we have any reason to believe
higher animals may perform these two logical operations), the road for thought to
the possible establishment of abstract objects and the relations between them seems
barred. The object created by a hypostatic abstraction is a thing, but it is of course
no actually existing thing, rather it is a scholastic ens rationis, it is a figment of
thought. It is a second intention thought about a thought – but this does not, in
Peirce’s realism, imply that it is necessarily fictitious. In many cases it may indeed
be – as when we make the abstraction of unicornicity – but in other cases we may
hit upon an abstraction having real existence:
Putting aside precisive abstraction altogether, it is necessary to consider a little what is meant by saying
that the product of subjectal abstraction is a creation of thought. () That the abstract subject is an ens
rationis, or creation of thought does not mean that it is a fiction. The popular ridicule of it is one of

250
C H A P T E R 11
the manifestations of that stoical (and Epicurean, but more marked in stoicism) doctrine that existence
is the only mode of being which came in shortly before Descartes, in concsequence of the disgust and
resentment which progressive minds felt for the Dunces, or Scotists. If one thinks of it, a possibility is
a far more important fact than any actuality can be. () An abstraction is a creation of thought; but
the real fact which is important in this connection is not that actual thinking has caused the predicate to
be converted into a subject, but that this is possible. The abstraction, in any important sense, is not an
actual thought but a general type to which thought may conform. (Letter to E.H. Moore, Jan. 2. 1904;
NEM III/2,918).
The seemingly scepticist pragmatic maxim never ceases to surprise: if we take all
possible effects we can conceive an object to have, then our conception of those
effects is identical with our conception of that object, the maxim claims – but if
we can conceive of abstract properties of the objects to have effects, then they are
part of our conception of it, and hence they must possess reality as well (cf. the
1903 Lectures on Pragmatism, Peirce 1997, 134). An abstraction is a possible way
for an object to behave – and if certain objects do in fact conform to this behavior,
then that abstraction is real; it is a ‘real possibility’ or a general object. If not, it
may still retain its character of possibility (just like Husserl in the Prolegomena to
the LU states that the law of gravity would not cease to hold even if the last heavy
object in the universe vanished). Peirce’s definitions of hypostatic abstractions now
and then confuse this point. When he claims that ‘An abstraction is a substance
whose being consists in the truth of some proposition concerning a more primary
substance.’ (Peirce 1997, 135), then the abstraction’s existence depends on the
truth of some claim concerning a less abstract substance. But if the less abstract
substance in question does not exist, and the claim in question consequently will
be meaningless or false, then the abstraction will – following that definition –
cease to exist. But ‘unicornicity’ does not cease being an abstraction just because
no unicorns exist? The problem is only that Peirce does not sufficiently clearly
distinguish between the really existing substances which abstractive expressions
may refer to, on the one hand, and those expressions themselves, on the other. It is
the same confusion which may make one able Peirce scholar claim that hypostatic
abstraction is a deduction and another – no less able – claim it is an abduction.323 The
first case corresponds to there actually existing a thing with the quality abstracted,
and where we consequently may expect the existence of a rational explanation for
the quality, and, correlatively, the existence of an abstract substance corresponding
to the supposed ens rationis – the second case corresponds to the case – or the
phase – where no such rational explanation and corresponding abstract substance
has yet been verified. It is of course always possible to make an abstraction symbol,
given any predicate – whether that abstraction corresponds to any real possibility
is an issue for further investigation to estimate. And Peirce’s scientific realism
makes him demand that the connections to actual reality of any abstraction should
always be estimated: ‘ every kind of proposition is either meaningless or has a
Real Secondness as its object. This is a fact that every reader of philosophy should
carefully bear in mind, translating every abstractly expressed proposition into its
precise meaning in reference to an individual experience.’ (‘Syllabus’, 1903, EP
II, 279; 2.315). This warning is directed, of course, towards empirical abstractions

M A N T H E A B S T R A C T A N I M A L
251
which require the support of particular instances to be pragmatically relevant but
could hardly hold for mathematical abstraction. But in any case the step of hypostatic
abstraction is necessary for the ongoing investigation, be it in pure or empirical
cases.
The pure case corresponds to the second reason for abstraction’s central role in
reasoning: the role of hypostatic abstraction as the most central operation in mathe-
matics. It is the possibility of making an operation into the object of a new operation,
so as to investigate the rules holding for the first operation (e.g. its transitivity,
symmetry, etc.). As everywhere, this abstraction procedure is recursive and may
form a hierarchy of concepts. Generalization undertaken by prescission is, of course,
equally important in mathematics. Mathematics is linked to hypothetical deduction
and diagrams in a very tight fashion in Peirce: mathematics is the science that draws
necessary conclusions, and diagrams are the vehicles for all deductive reasoning.
Deductive reasoning featuring empirical matter must thus imply a diagrammatic,
mathematical structure, and diagrammatic reasoning forms the center of Peirce’s
epistemology: the iconicity of the diagram ensures its structural similarity with its
object, the symbol governing it determines the possibility of manipulating it with
regard to gaining new information, as discussed in Chap. 4. Both abstraction types
play a crucial role in diagrammatical reasoning:
All necessary reasoning without exception is diagrammatic. That is, we construct an icon of our
hypothetical state of things and proceed to observe it. This observation leads us to suspect that something
is true, which we may or may not be able to formulate with precision, and we proceed to inquire whether
it is true or not. For this purpose it is necessary to form a plan of investigation and this is the most
difficult part of the whole operation. We not only have to select the features of the diagram which it will
be pertinent to pay attention to, but it is also of great importance to return again and again to certain
features. Otherwise, although our conclusions may be correct, they will not be the particular conclusions
at which we are aiming. But the greatest point of art consists in the introduction of suitable abstractions.
By this I mean such a transformation of our diagrams that characters of one diagram may appear in
another as things. A familiar example is where in analysis we treat operations as themselves the subject
of operations. (Peirce 1997,226)
Thus, the two abstraction types are seminal for diagram formation. Prescission
permits to construct a general diagram, bracketing all contingent features of the
particular diagram drawing in favor of the features of it to be read as referring to
a general property. Only the required predicates is preserved by this prescission
procedure. Abstraction allows diagrams to be recursive and to investigate the
properties of other diagrams, taken as objects. By these two operations, diagram-
matic reasoning performed by rule-bound experimentation on the diagrams is made
possible. But it is important to notice in our context that we have no reason to
suppose that animals may not make simple diagrams (the road fork’s Y), nor exper-
iment upon them (the dog’s probable inference taking the more travelled of the
roads is such an experiment). But we have no reason to believe that the abstractive
making a diagram explicit is a part of higher animals’ reasoning abilities.
Seen from a logic point of view, abstraction’s character of representing predicate
classes makes it pertain to our days’ concept of second order predicate logic
(which is, of course, unlimited in contradistinction to first order predicate logic, not

252
C H A P T E R 11
allowing quantification over predicates, quantifiers, etc. but only over individual
variables). T.L. Short remarks (Short 1997, 295) that hypostatic abstraction is
identical with ‘the transition from first- to second order predicate logic’, and he
adds: ‘It does not follow that every fact about an ens rationis is inferable from
facts about other things. Second-order predicate logic is not reducible to first-order
predicate logic; mathematics could not be done without referring to classes or to
other abstract entities.’ (296) This makes explicit the purpose of abstractions: they
are not only shorthands for information already available at the concrete levels.
They may add genuinely new information – corresponding to Peirce’s idea that by
theorematic reasoning with diagrams (as opposed to merely corollarial reasoning),
new information may appear that was not explicit in the construction of the diagrams
in question.
A more detailed investigation of hypostatic abstraction must try to analyse its
basic subtypes. Obviously, there are a lot of different dimensions along which it
is possible to perform hypostatic abstractions. In language, they may give rise to a
linguistic variety of semantically different abstract noun types and, more broadly,
nominal constructions. I know of no Peirce scholar trying to go this way, but in
the Husserlian tradition of pure a priori grammar from the 4th LU, a scholar like
Jean-Louis Gardiès presents some ideas on linguistic hypostatic abstraction types.
There are, for instance, at least three types of possible quotation-marks (in a wide
acceptance of the term), each of them nominalizing the expression in question: 1)
The operator ‘the fact that ’ which forms the name of a state of affairs; 2) the
nominalization of a predicate (‘redness’, ‘humanity’); 3) ordinary quotation marks
referring to the name of a proposition (or any other element of discourse expression
(‘or’ is pronounced parallel to ‘door’), structure (‘or’ is a conjunction), or content
(‘or’ may mean XOR or it may mean V)). We may add – following Peirce’s ideas
above – 4) the collection operator forming a set of objects (‘my books’, ‘mankind’),
5) the individual object operator: ‘that object as it exists fully determined now
and here’ (or with any other spatiotemporal or other specification), cf. Peirce’s
contention that the unique object with all properties completely determined is also
an abstract idea. From linguistic tradition, a whole series of 6) verbal substantives
permits to abstract a verbal predicate in other ways than ordinary nominalization:
a) present perfect (‘operating’) forming the abstract idea of an ongoing process; b)
past perfect (‘operated’) forming the abstract idea of a process having taken place;
c) infinitive (‘operate’) forming the abstract idea of the process content apart from
realization; d) nominalization (‘operation’) forming the abstraction of the process
as a whole; e) nominalization of the agent (‘operator’) forming the abstract idea of
a specific ergative subject for a process; f) adjectivisation (‘operational’) forming
the idea of some other x having to do with the process. From predicate relations
with more than one relative, several different roles may be abstracted (from ‘give’:
‘the giver’, ‘the gift’, ‘the gifted’, ‘the given’). Other languages may add still
further types (gerundive ‘the one that ought to be given something’ etc.). But
hypostatic abstraction needs not be expressed in nor refer to linguistic entities
(even if they support it by abstraction suffixes like ‘-ness’, ‘-ity’, ‘-ation’ and

M A N T H E A B S T R A C T A N I M A L
253
many more, and highly enhance the possibilities for using it). A recurring example
in Peirce is the idea of seeing the geometrical line as an abstraction from the
trajectory of a particle. Thus, the nominalization act of hypostatic abstraction may
also include the spatial ‘stiffening’ of temporal processes or aspects thereof into
objects of an abstract space. All abstraction types probably refer – explicitly or
implicitly – to such spaces in which diagrams may take other diagrams as their
objects. The description of hypostatic abstraction in terms of linguistic or logical
vocabulary should not keep us from seeking the phenomenological basis for it, and
the possibility for diagrams of taking other diagrams as their objects (thoughts taken
as things) precisely presupposes abstract spaces embedded in other abstract spaces.
The list of how this may be achieved and represented is possibly open-ended, given
the fact that an abstraction of a given predicate may be attempted with reference to
many other already constructed abstract ideas; this open-endedness corresponds to
abstraction’s homology with second-order logic.
In spite of the fragmentary treatment of these two abstraction types, they play, as
is evident, a central role in Peirce’s architectonic. In his Carnegie application from
1902, e.g., one of the few occasions when he proposes a systematic exposition of
his mature thought, hypostatic abstraction appears already in lecture 4 (out of 36,
and long before the introduction of categories, signs, etc.). This is of course
because of hypostatic abstraction’s central role in mathematics – the possibility
of an operation to be taken as an object for another operation, investigating the
first operation’s properties. And prescissive abstraction is logically prerequisite to
hypostatic abstraction: before hypostatic abstraction of a predicate to a subject, a
predicate must already be prescinded. This interplay between the abstraction types
are rarely treated explicitly in Peirce, but on one significant occasion, he links the
two with the animal-man transition problem, worth quoting at length (in the letter
to E.H. Moore, Jan. 2. 1904):
There are two entirely different things that are often confused from no cause that I can see except that
the words abstract and abstraction are applied to both. One is , leaving something out of
account in order to attend to something else. That is precisive abstraction. The other consists in making
a subject out of a predicate. Instead of saying, Opium puts people to sleep, you say it has a dormitive
virtue. This is an all important proceeding in mathematics. For example take all ‘symbolic’ methods,
in which operations are operated upon. That may be called subjectal abstraction. This use of the word
abstract goes back to the beginning of the XIIIth Century while the other use is earlier still. So both are
of unquestionable respectability. But they have nothing in common. What I say in treating such subjects
I am apt to mean. They have nothing in common. No doubt subjectal abstraction presupposes a certain
considerable precisive abstraction in each case; but that was not introduced in making the subjectal
abstraction, it was there before. Experience is first forced upon us in the form of a flow of images.
Thereupon thought makes certain assertions. It professes to pick the image into pieces and to detect
in it certain characters. This is not literally true. The image has no parts, least of all predicates. Thus
predication involves precisive abstraction. Precisive abstraction creates predicates. Subjectal abstraction
creates subjects. Both predicates and subjects are creations of thought. But this is hardly more than
a phrase; for creation and thought have different meanings as applied to the two. Without precisive
abstraction man would not be man; but I can well believe, - indeed, I do think it probable, - that a large
fraction of the races of mankind, by no means necessarily very low in the arts, are entirely devoid of
the power of subjectal abstraction. ()(NEM III/2, 917–18).

254
C H A P T E R 11
Lots of interesting ideas are implied in this. Here we find the idea that prescissive
abstraction precedes hypostatic abstraction, that the former creates predicates and
the latter, in turn, creates subjects. In so far as even simple collections are abstract
entities, it follows that this creation process goes on in human thought all of
the time and not only in its purified form in the sciences. Everyday reflection
is impossible without it; T.L. Short even argues that the self – and correlatively
self-consciousness – is an entity inferred by means of hypostatic abstraction from
faults in single actions (as the source of those errors).324 In relation to the semiotic
animal-man transition question we find in the passing a reflection upon abstractions’
relation to biology: the idea that without prescissive abstraction man would not
be man, while many human beings, maybe even cultures,325 may be in lack of
sufficient ability to perform hypostatic abstractions. This is not, it must be admitted,
very precise, and we have already assumed prescission to be widespread in higher
animals, evident in their ability to associate via qualities (Peirce: ‘The most ordinary
fact of perception, such as ‘it is light’, involves precisive abstraction, or prescission’
(‘Minute Logic’, 1902, 4.235)). In any case, if many higher animals may prescind
and man not be man without it, hypostatic abstraction seems restricted to mankind,
even if maybe unevenly distributed among us (which might in fact be an indication
that selection pressure for it is still at work, or has been until recently).
As is evident from the above, this conforms with our general idea: it is the ability
to form not symbols in general, but the special symbol type called hypostatic abstrac-
tions, that distinguishes (most) men from (most) animals. It is, of course, a very
difficult problem to ascertain which mental procedures higher animals are capable
of. But it seems reasonable to assume that they master symbols, including arguments,
action according to diagrams, and even symbol systems in some rudimentary form,
involving huge amounts of generality made possible by prescission – but with no
means to extract that generality from sensory experience and to isolate it, control it
or experiment upon it. Here, Peirce’s 1905 reflection briefly quoted at the beginning
of this paper adds the explicit control dimension as an important role for the
abstractions to play:
Pragmaticist. To my thinking that faculty [of language] is itself a phenomenon of self-control. For
thinking is a kind of conduct, and is itself controllable, as everybody knows. Now the intellectual control
of thinking takes place by thinking about thoughts [cf. the description of hypostatic abstraction in such
second intention terms]. All thinking is by signs; and the brutes use signs. But they perhaps rarely think
of them as signs. To do so is manifestly a second step in the use of language. Brutes use language, and
seem to exercise some little control over it. But they certainly do not carry this control to anything like
the same grade that we do. They do not criticize their thought logically.
(‘Pragmaticism, Prag. [4]’ c. 1905, 5.534, my brackets)
Man as well as animals are consequently rational beings, probably even necessarily
so. Both are involved in a constant series of arguments in a reasoning process
involving a whole range of simpler sign types. But what enables man to build
up his symbol systems and its resulting more acute and accelerated rationality is
prescission and abstraction working together, making it possible to isolate and to
make explicit single phases in the ongoing chain of arguments in order to control

M A N T H E A B S T R A C T A N I M A L
255
them, scrutinize them, experiment upon them, combine them, recombine them, and
improve them. Animals may possess the same abilities in germ, prescission probably
especially so, but the continuum going from animal to man is to be grasped in
terms of gradually higher mastering of abstraction. It must also be admitted, though,
that this ability greatly enhances man’s ability to commit errors, to be fooled, to
lie. Of course, higher animals possess all these abilities, but abstraction adds the
possibility for the construction of the enormous subdomains of discourse involving
counterfactual universes: myth, religion, literature, science whose vast capacity for
general truths mirrors an equally large capacity for general fallacies.
This would also conform well to Deacon’s Baldwinian assumption: that the
behavior-selection feedback in symbol using Homo habilis communities acquired
an extreme pace measured against evolution’s normal velocity. For the active
controlling and explicit experimenting on signs makes it possible to develop
them significantly within one single biological generation, while the spontaneous
historical aspects of language evolution (change in phonetic patterns, etymology,
etc.) is a much slower phenomenon, even if still quick as compared to biological
evolution. Given this scenario, it seems reasonable to assume that a very strong
selection pressure has prevailed against the increased possibility of fallacies,
especially against the formal logical fallacies without any empirical content, but also
against violations of basic linguistic constants like the subject-predicate structure.326
All in all, these abstraction operations permit us to construct an indefinite amount
of abstract objects, more or less apart from the actually surrounding world of here
and now – and it permits us, by the same token, to construct explicit diagrams
to bring these abstracta to the test, yielding the amazing increasing insight in
empirical regularities as well as in formal and synthetic a priori laws of fallibilistic
apriorism.327
If this idea is correct, human beings are indeed a symbolic species, even if not
the only one. Man is rather the abstract animal.

C H A P T E R 12
THE SIGNIFYING BODY
A Semiotic Concept of Embodiment
If biosemiotics is right in claiming the fundamentally semiotic character of
biological processes, then this should throw a new light upon the concept of
‘embodiment’ so fashionable in recent linguistics and philosophy. The semiotic
‘missing link’ issue of the previous chapter must thus be a special case only of the
more general issue of the emergence of semiotically competent body types during
evolution: a natural history of the signifying body.
In traditional semiotic thought, however, the body has been almost ignored. If
we take structuralist semiotics, we should expect a treatment of the body as of any
other concept in language, persuading us that the body differs in different languages,
cultures, in short in different semiotic systems and that a study of such different
systems will show us as many different cultural representations of the body. No
extra-structural constraints are supposed to determine the spectrum of possibilities
of body representation.
Thus, the body would be conceived of as a concept subjected to the free arbitrarity
of semiotic systems – and no special attention would be paid to the body as a
crucial prerequisite to semiotic articulations. This ignorance of the body is about to
undergo a complete change – epitomized in the widespread popularity of different
versions of the concept of embodiment. What is called for is a concept of the body
which, in itself, makes evident the basic semiotic competences of an organism –
thus, a body concept which entails semiotics. It is to be expected, naturally, that
this will give rise to a more fine-grained typology of bodies depending on how
complicated and sophisticated semiotic behavior the organism in question is able
to indulge in.
This ‘embodiment’ turn of semiotics which has been underway during the recent
decades, has called for new interest in old positions all the way back to Aristotle, as
well as a reorientation in actual tendencies of biology and philosophy. Among the
former count reappropriations and reinterpretations of the foundations of ethology
and theoretical biology, examplified here in Jakob von Uexküll, as well as a
renewed interest in phenomenology, examplified here in Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s
work with its focus upon the body and the ‘flesh’ as the necessary concept to
avoid sterile mind-matter dualisms. Among the latter count the cognitive semantics
movement (Eleanor Rosch, George Lakoff, Mark Johnson, Leonard Talmy, Mark
Turner, Gilles Fauconnier, etc.) and its emphasis on the ‘embodiment’ of cognitive
structures; the ‘complexity theory’ around the Santa Fe school (Murray Gell-Mann,
Christopher Langton, Brian Goodwin, Stuart Kauffman) and its reinterpretation of
257

258
C H A P T E R 12
classical issues of theoretical biology within the framework of a general theory of
complexity; and finally, within semiotics itself, the emergence of ‘biosemiotics’
(Thomas Sebeok, Terrence Deacon, and the Copenhagen school (Jesper Hoffmeyer,
Claus Emmeche) to which I myself to some extent belong as a fellow-traveller).
This paper will briefly present and discuss the body concepts involved in these
developments and their semiotic possibilities.
C O G N I T I V E S E M A N T I C S
–
T H E B O D Y I N T H E M I N D
The well-known American tradition in linguistics and philosophy known as
‘Cognitive Semantics’ or ‘Cognitive linguistics’ (Lakoff, Johnson, Turner,
Fauconnier, Sweetser, Talmy, Langacker, etc.) has, during the recent 25 years,
provided a new view of language, loosening the autonomy of linguistics in order to
connect it to developments in cognitive science – using insights from psychology,
philosophy, comparative literature, anthropology, neurology, etc. ‘The linguistic
turn’ is rolled back – language is seen as a specific combination of a series of
different, cognitive, pre-linguistic competences. In doing so, Cognitive Semantics
covers a large field of semiotic issues; thus it constitutes one of the main develop-
ments of semiotics from 1980 onwards – even if it most often does not explicitly
use the term ‘semiotics’.
A very basic tenet in this tradition has been its insistence on the bodily motivation
of cognitive, semantic, and linguistic structures. Such structures are claimed to
be ‘embodied’. This claim is aimed against the formalist and logicist trend in
American analytical philosophy and linguistics (especially against the Chomskyan
tradition) – that is, against the tacit or outspoken assumption that the bodily basis
of thinking beings is irrelevant for the study of thought and language (which may
then be studied by purely logical, formal means) – a famous version of this claim
is Putnam’s old ‘functionalist hypothesis’ equating mind and brain with computer
software and hardware, respectively. Against the implications of this analogy (the
brain as a Turing machine able to ‘run’ any mental program ), the idea is that
the specific architecture of body and brain is fundamental to thought and language.
This part of the program has been made explicit especially in Lakoff and Johnson’s
large tractatus Philosophy in the Flesh (1999). A closer look reveals, though, that
is it not always completely clear what is intended by the embodiment claim. The
following subclaims constitute the details of the embodiment hypothesis.
a) A philosophy must be true to bodily experiences – instead of indulging in
A Priori philosophizing. This implies, in turn, two things. It must be open to the
results of the various sciences pertaining to bodily experience – psychology, anthro-
pology, linguistics, neurobiology, etc. Furthermore, it must refrain from universal
claims, since all facts about the mind depend on the empirical variation studied by
these special sciences, cf. the so-called ‘experientalism’ of Lakoff and Johnson. It
is important to note, however, that these two claims are not necessarily connected.
The interdisciplinary view of cognitive processes implied by the former does not
entail the anti-apriorism of the latter. Rather, a Husserlian idea of a priori structures

T H E S I G N I F Y I N G B O D Y
259
with necessary conceptual networks underlying the special sciences would easily
fit with interdisciplinarity, and it may be argued that Cognitive Semantics often, in
fact, involves a priori arguments without admitting it (the embodiment hypothesis
could, inter alia, be seen as exactly an a priori hypothesis).
b) Reason and thought use, to a large extent, competences involving the sensori-
motor system – in conceptualizing phenomena in terms of spatial and motor relations
borrowed from or directly relying upon these systems. This implies the possibility of
sensori-motor inferences: structures from these parts of the brain facilitate reasoning
determined by spatial and motor properties of the phenomena intended.
This idea is examplified in two core hypotheses of Cognitive semantics: the
dependency of language and thought upon two fundamental sets of semantic primi-
tives, ‘basic-level concepts’ and ‘kinaesthetic image schemata’, respectively. Both
are cognitive entitites which are inherently meaningful due to the fact that we
know them from our bodily interaction with the environment (hence, they are not
vulnerable to the ‘symbol grounding problem’ asking about the foundation of the
meaning and reference of symbols – they are always-already meaningful). The first
idea stems from psychological investigations by Eleanor Rosch and claims that
the fundamental concepts in the human mind refer to types of things or actions
with which we have a basic, typical motor experience – and of which we can
hence form simple schematic image representations. Chairs, tables, cars, houses;
walking, talking, sleeping, etc. The basic idea is thus that our sensori-motor acquain-
tance with the world determines our fundamental concepts – an idea not foreign
to an Uexküllian point of view. More abstract concepts (‘furniture’, ‘vehicles’,
‘movement’, ‘action’, etc.) lack associated specific motor programs as well as a
clear schematic images in termes of the specific whole-and-part structures of the
phenomenon in question. More specific concepts, on the other hand (‘kitchen table’,
‘Louis XVI chair’, ‘dozing’, ‘marching’, etc.) are formed as subclasses of the basic
level concepts by further specifying the actions and images involved on the basic
level. The specific lexicon of basic level concepts is, of course, culture dependent.
It has a core, motivated by basic bodily functions, but large parts of it are relative
to the perception and action practices developed on top of them in a given culture.
Image-schemata are embodied Gestalts (be they explicit or not) used in perception
and reasoning: part-whole, center-periphery, link, source-path-goal, cycle, iteration,
contact, adjacency, forced motion, support, balance, straight-curved, and near-far,
and a few more, but probably not many more. The idea is that we tacitly know
these Gestalts, their structure, and the inferences which they support, from our
ordinary bodily activity; they are crucial aspects of what it is to be a body.
Their description thus adds to the implicit body theory of cognitive semantics: a
body is hence characterized by goal-oriented behavior (source-path-goal); connect-
edness (container); stable mereological-anatomical structure (part-whole); hierar-
chical structure – head/body vs. limbs (center-periphery), orientation in gravity
fields (up-down) etc.
A crucial implication of these hypotheses is a dissolution or, at least, a
relativization of the perception-conception boundary: concepts are motivated (but

260
C H A P T E R 12
not exhaustingly determined) by structures in perception and action. A further
crucial implication is that these basic bodily experiences provide the starting
point for more sophisticated mental activity; thus abstract thought is taken to
arise from metaphorical projections of these structures from the basic bodily field
and onto other domains more remote form sensori-motor activity. The extensive
metaphor theory of this tradition is constructed on the basis of this hypothesis,
rendering metaphor an important cognitive tool, giving rise to structural metaphors,
each of them underlying many linguistic metaphorical expressions. The structural,
conceptual metaphor ‘Knowing is seeing’ known in many languages thus gives
rise to a long series of different expressions like ‘enlightenment’, ‘Can’t you
see what I explain?’, ‘Take a closer look at this problem’, etc. This gives the
implication, in turn, that imagination becomes an important cognitive tool, not
only in these conceptual metaphorical projections, but also in the trial-and-error
construction of more elaborated conceptual models in thought experiments, so-
called ‘idealized cognitive models’, built from basic concepts, image schemata and
layers of mappings between them.
This gives a rough picture of the body concept at stake in cognitive semantics.
There are, however, certain problems in that concept. It is not at all clear what the
exact extension of these claims is. The immediate – prototypical – body referred
to here is, of course, the human body. The general reference is to ‘our body and
brain’, this ‘our’ supposedly referring to the body and brain of the human species,
but the extension of this expression is unclear in at least two dimensions. One
is ‘downwards’ in the animal kingdom: how many of these competences used in
the description of this body concept hold for higher animals? We should probably
expect higher animals to make use of basic level concepts and kinaesthetic image
schema as well – but maybe to a lesser extent the metaphorical extensions of these
basic tools.328 Another is ‘sidewards’ in a Kantian manner, so to speak: are these
claims valid not only for the contingent, empirical human race but for any possible
reasoning subject as such? Cognitive Semantics itself gives an explicit answer to
this question: no. They claim their theory is empirically built by the investigation of
human languages referring to the human body and brain and thus reject all a priori
reasoning. Still, a problem remains here. Even if it is easy to agree with Cognitive
Semantics that theories of meaning which disregard the body must themselves
be disregarded, it is less easy to agree that their theory itself is, in fact, purely
‘experiential’ and without any a priori assumptions. Some of the assumptions used
are taken from various special sciences, true, but this does not entail they have no
a priori validity.329 So the question remains whether it is, in fact, the case that any
possible real intelligence must possess some sort of a body, conceptualize in some
set of basic level concepts and use some repertoire of kinaesthetic image schemata,
etc.? This a priori question is not answered within Cogntive Semantics, but as far
as I can see, it becomes a crucial question for generalized semiotics on the one
hand and theoretical biology on the other.
Another problem in the theory is that the relation between embodiment and
general semiotic competences is fairly underdeveloped. If a body is characterized

T H E S I G N I F Y I N G B O D Y
261
by instantiating (some of the) Gestalt schemas mentioned, this does not in any
way imply that that body is necessarily able to understand, still less represent such
schemata nor build language from them. A bacterium behaves according to the
source-path-goal schema (when swimming upstream in the sugar gradient thanks
to its ‘biased random walk’), it instantiates the container and part-whole-schema by
its closed cell membrane, and so on, but this does not in any way imply that it has
any functional, not to talk about mental representation of those schemata. Ability
to reason with such schemata requires the tacit or explicit mental representation of
them, separated from actual sensori-motor behavior, due to the kinaesthetic sense
and to the existence of sensori-motor integrative body images in the nervous system.
Here, Cognitive Semantics is in need of further underpinning of neurological as
well as phenomenological work on these issues.
V O N U E X K Ü L L R E V I S I T E D
–
T H E B O D Y A S F U N C T I O N A L C I R C L E
We have already discussed a theory at the root of ethology which has reflected some
of these problems in a proto-semiotic manner and which has gained wide renewed
interest in semiotic circles during the last decades: von Uexküll’s ‘Umweltlehre’.
The functional circle in von Uexküll provides, in fact, a basic sensori-motor body
conception, described in semiotic terms: perceptions and actions are classed as sign
types: Merkzeichen and Wirkzeichen, respectively, all in all making up the ‘Umwelt’
of the species in question. The body and its surroundings are thus conceived of as
correlatively defined entities: a body is a body only with respect to its niche in a
specific Umwelt, and vice versa. This definition of the body is thus correlated with
that of the environment it constitutes. In this conception of the organism, the body
per se is conceived as a semiotic device: it is an intrinsic property of a body that it is
able to perceive the surroundings through signs and act correlatively through signs.
The extension of this definition of the body to what is later called ‘endosemiosis’
is natural: when one part (the external parts) of the functional circle requires sign
use, why not other parts (the internal parts) of it?
We saw that von Uexküll vacillated with respect to admitting the existence of
neutral objects (not defined by correlated actions) in higher animal Umwelten.
But the choice for us is easy: neutral objects are necessary, precisely because
they disrupt the virtually perfect fit between organism and Umwelt. The existence
of general – underspecified – perception and action diagrams are hesitantly
admitted in von Uexküll. And this generality in Umwelt relation of any body
increases with complexity of the organism and its related perception and action
patterns. The perception of neutral objects is, importantly, a prerequisite to learning
because learning in some sense consists of nothing but the de-neutralization
of neutral objects, drawing them into more complicated segments of functional
circles. But in order to be thus invested with meaning, neutral objects, of course,
must be phenomenologically present before their use in learning. The perfect fit
between organism and environment must thus be relativized: life time adaptability

262
C H A P T E R 12
presupposes to some degree the perception of neutral objects, not immediately
functionally relevant.
As we saw, the musical metaphor in von Uexküll has, on the other hand, a
crucial implication which is never made explicit in the Umweltlehre. In the same
manner as tonally discrete music, the body-surrounding fit is possible only through
discretization of the continuum of possibilities, both in the perception and the
action relation. Perception possesses a highly constrained selection of possible
environment stimuli – ranging from simple cases like the possibility of sensing only
groups of specific chemicals and to more complicated cases like the necessary limit
of discrimination ability in any continuous perception spectrum (visual, auditive,
tactile, etc.). In short, perception and action both possess a certain granularity which
allows them to be pragmatically efficient at the prize of a certain imprecision.
This imprecision, it is evident, implies certain limitations – larger or lesser – on
the perfection of the organism-environment fit. Both more perceptual precision
(which is also energetically more expensive), on the one hand, and more perceptual
economy (which is also less precise), on the other, may be favored by selection,
according to the specific conditions in the single case. In semiotic terms, this implies
that in the functional circle, a tension is at stake in embodied semiosis between
semiotic complexity on the one hand and semiotic economy on the other. The
‘perfection’ discussed by von Uexküll can be nothing but a local optimum (always
potentially subject to change due to environmental pressure and change) in the
tension between these two possibilities in all functional-circle defined bodies. Thus,
the Umwelt concept furnishes semiotics with a basic idea of a body as semiotically
defined by the set of its perception and action sign possibilities330 – which in the
right interpretation may potentially serve adequately as a biological underpinning
to the often vague embodiment talk in Cognitive Semantics.
M E R L E A U - P O N T Y
–
T H E B O D Y ’ S F U N C T I O N A L C I R C L E
O P E N I N G U P
It is well-known how Merleau-Ponty’s special brand of phenomenology took its
point of departure in Husserl, enriched by ethology and psychology of perception.
This leads Merleau-Ponty to a characteristic third position in relation to mind-matter
problems where this well-known dualism and various, more or less one-sided,
attempts at resolving it are rejected with reference to the primary position of bodily
being and perception. Thus, both rationalism and idealism are rejected as hyposta-
tizations of pure mind, while, correlatively, materialism and traditional naturalism
are rejected as hypostatizations of pure matter. The very condition of possibility of
mental or idealized structures on the one hand and pure, material objects on the
other, is bodily being whose behavior and perception form a prerequisite basis which
cannot be further dissolved – cf. Merleau-Ponty’s concept of ‘flesh’ antedating both
mind and matter. Unlike many other phenomenologists of Heideggerian influence,
Merleau-Ponty never, however, saw such a philosophical stance as alien to science,
and it is well-known how he supported this hypothesis by references to biology and

T H E S I G N I F Y I N G B O D Y
263
psychology of perception. It is probably less well-known how he – to the end of his
short life – undertook a major work to support this position by reference to central
figures in different branches of biology. These reflections appeared in university
courses in the latter half of the fifties and Merleau-Ponty’s lecture notes from those
courses have only recently (1995) been published – and they add further details
precisely to his conception of embodiment. Here, Merleau-Ponty confronts a long
series of biological thought ranging from German idealism (Kant, the romantics,
Husserl), vitalism (Driesch), behaviorism (Watson), Darwinism, ethology (Uexküll,
Tinbergen, Lorenz), and many others – reading these currents in order to interpret
their results philosophically and extract the points relevant to Merleau-Ponty’s own
embodiment phenomenology.331
Here, I can run through only some of the main points he addresses. Referring
to von Uexküll in particular, Merleau-Ponty takes care to note that the notions
of an organism equipped with an Umwelt in which to unfold its behavior –
‘comportement’ – is more basic than consciousness; quite on the contrary,
consciousness is but one of the special forms this behavior takes, not unlike the
claim of Peircean semiotics. The functional interrelation between organism and
surroundings is prerequisite to the emergence of consciousness, not the other way
around – an idea in which von Uexküll would probably agree.332 Correspondingly,
with its functional definition, the Umwelt is not only to be found at the level of
the whole organism; even a single organ could be said to have its own Umwelt
(220) – an idea which, of course, opens the ‘endosemiotic’ issue. The distinction
is drawn between lower animals – mere functional bundles – where the Umwelt
forms a closed set of reaction types, and higher animals who possess, thanks to
the central nervous system, an internal representational mapping of the surrounding
world facilitating an open Umwelt (225), not unlike our argument in Chap. 10.
Thus, higher animals have sensory organs able to move (cf. movable snout, eyes
and ears, intertwining sensation and motion in quick perception-action searching
sequences) which enable them to actively explore and inform the world (225) – this
moveability of the sensory organs so to speak short-circuits the functional circle
and enables the organism to increase precision and decrease the time and space
granularity of the Umwelt relation considerably. This implies, correlatively, the
‘possibilities of objects’;333 the animal may distinguish its own spatial position, e.g.
against gravity; this ability becomes complete only with a proper neural system of
proprioception (226) facilitating feed back control of behavior as measured against
the interiorized Umwelt and its Merk- and Wirk-components – a proper perceptual
world and a behavior world. Only now when the body is, in itself, perceived, the
perceptual world becomes possible as an oriented, represented mental map world
inhabited not only by stimuli but by independent, body-like objects.334
Merleau-Ponty’s philosophical interpretation of Uexküll’s Umwelt concept takes
its departure from his basic melody metaphor: the Umwelt as a melody singing
itself. This image loosens the Umwelt from pure, actual, physical time, just like the
melody it is aimed towards the future, as it cancels the priority of effect over cause,
ends over means, essence over existence. The Umwelt thus, in Merleau-Ponty’s

264
C H A P T E R 12
interpretation, acquires an ideal character, not in any subjectivist sense, but as
general, opposed to the actuality of the present existence – the Umwelt is an
ideal structure which, like the melody, persists over and above the vissicitudes
of the single moment. Behavior in such an Umwelt thus cannot be understood
taken moment for moment, but only as a meaningful whole extended in time.
Without being defined in actual time and space, it is thus trans-temporal, trans-
spatial – almost a Platonic idea, in some sense, but at the same time the result of
a process of self-organizing schematization involving organism and environment.
In higher animals, the functional cycle of the Umwelt loosens ever more from its
immediate pursuit of teleological ends and indulges in interpretations of symbols.
Merleau-Ponty thus takes sides in Uexküll’s fight against himself as to the possi-
bility of the existence of neutral objects and the corresponding freedom in the
Umwelt. To Merleau-Ponty, this possibility is crucial and points to the possibility
of the existence of ‘pre-culture’ in higher animals (231). Symbols point out of
the immediate present to future perception, event, and action possibilities, and the
action through symbols permits organisms to perform not-innate complicated action
wholes.335 Merleau-Ponty’s fertile reinterpretation of von Uexküll is enriched by
the reflective introduction of a long series of other biological thinkers. I shall here
restrict myself to those who add to the body concept here outlined. E.S. Russell’s
idea of ‘directiveness’ of organic activities is referred for its generalization of the
notion of behavior to encompass not only the ‘external circuit’ of a body’s relation
with its Umwelt – but also the internal regulation of an organism. There is no
definite limit between these two (235), and hence it makes sense to talk about
bodily behavior already during morphogenesis. This idea thus, moreover, dissolves
the strict borderline between the organism and its behavior which should be seen,
rather, as dual concepts: ‘The body belongs to a behavioral dynamics. Behavior is
inscribed in embodiment.’336 Thus, the relative plasticity of behaviors is seen as an
integrated property in the being of a bodily organism as such, both at the external
and internal levels – pointing again towards the semiotic notion of ‘endosemiosis’
for intra-organism semiotic processes.
Adolf Portmann’s study of the outer appearance of animals becomes an important
source to a beloved theme of the elder Merleau-Ponty, namely the duplicity of
perceiving and being perceived – of visibility and invisibility. Parts of an animal’s
outward appearance may be the chance result of a local process (the shell of a
snail) and is thus without interest in this respect, but other aspects of appearance
(the skin of the zebra) is the result of non-local processes characterizing the whole
animal and its Umwelt relation. Thus, these aspects have two characteristica: one,
they satisfy a mimetic teleology as if there were a perceptive relation between the
two – animal morphology and environment (246). But this apparent teleology, to
Merleau-Ponty, cannot be primary but requires, in the first place, a certain freedom
of expression which may, in turn, direct the appearance towards utility in some
cases, in others not so. Thus, animal appearance has an aspect of ‘presentation’,
of existential manifestation by which the animal makes itself visible to fellow
creatures (and invisible to predators, it should be added ). In a parallel to the older

T H E S I G N I F Y I N G B O D Y
265
Husserl’s notion of ‘intersubjectivity’, Merleau-Ponty thus introduces the notion
of ‘inter-animalité’ as granting an ontological status to the notion of species (this
idea probably may freely be extrapolated to the notion of ecosystem): an animal
looks in a way which it is itself able to see (in order to be able to be recognized
by specimens of its own species): ‘l’animal voit selon qu’il est visible’ (247).337
Inter-animality thus requires the constitution and recognition of other creatures from
profiles, it requires a degree of understanding of their intention types – this covering
species fellows as well as typical prey and/or predators in the ecosystem of the
species in question. This inter-animality must further include common aims as well
as internal battles in herd-animals – so as to form the phenomenological basis of
the well-known sign and communication systems often developed in such species.
The notorious pupil of von Uexküll, Konrad Lorenz, is also made the object
of an interesting reinterpretation, notably concerning his controversial notion of
‘instinct’. According to Lorenz, an instinct is an innate action series which requires
a certain environmental releaser in order to be actualized. This idea has often been
interpreted and dismissed as a purely mechanistic idea, but Merleau-Ponty rejects
this reading and points to the fact that Lorenz’s notions of objectlessness and
Prägung, imprinting, entails quite the opposite. The instinct in Lorenz is objectless
and it thus possesses a ceremonial, ritual excess on top of its possible function.
Moreover, the phenomenon of Prägung shows that instinct is in many cases incom-
plete and requires a fill-in from the environment which implies that it entails an
open orientation towards the surroundings, especially in complex cases where the
actualization of an instinct is only possible with an adjoining Umwelt construction,
with systematic world elaboration (255). This relative emptiness and openness of
instincts is what enables it to become, in turn, a kernel in symbol construction:
instinctive action series may be cut off from their – possible – telos and be taken
to symbolize quite different phenomena in animal communication (254). Exactly
the objectlessness of the instinct makes possible its imaginative reinterpretation as
a basis for symbol formation.
Merleau-Ponty’s interpretation of his great master Husserl is interesting in this
context. Husserl’s problem is, Merleau-Ponty argues, analogous to that of Schelling:
to find a place for nature in a philosophy of reflection. Hence, two competing
tendencies are to be found in Husserl. One, connected to his transcendental
philosophy, sees natural objects as connected to the ‘natural attitude’, the attitude
of innocence, characteristic of the unphilosophical observer who must unlearn this
naive way of seeing in order to grasp the constitutive, phenomenological stance.
The other tendency attempts to understand natural objects as pertaining to different
regional ontologies, and the break with the natural attitude is an attempt also to
clarify this pre-reflexive stance, in which the natural world is given to us in a
passive synthesis: ‘Phenomenology rejects the natural attitude and, at the same time,
does more than any other philosophy to rehabilitate it.’338 Nature, interpreted as
consisting of pure things, is the correlate of pure consciousness, but antedating this,
there is the more original, perceived and lived world, the Lebenswelt. This world
is the world of the body – the body as the organ of the Husserlian ‘I can’, so to

266
C H A P T E R 12
speak Husserl’s version of the sensori-motor Umwelt alien to the merely perceptual,
action-free world supposed by large parts of the philosophical tradition since Kant.
The body perceives the objects not in a detached way, but by considering the motor
possibilities implied: ‘The object appears to me as a function of the movements
of my body.’339 The body is the privileged place both for my inhabiting the world
of things, and, at the very same time, for my perceptions. (107). The body is, as
always in Merleau-Ponty, subject and object at one and the same time: the world
of things is part of my body. (108) The body is the zero-point of orientation, not
only in space-time, but in all normative scales: it is thus the body which founds the
very idea of normativity.
As to the existence of other bodies, I grasp them by an Einfühlung which is
basically corporeal (109): I perceive them as perceiving bodies before I perceive
them as thinking, and the latter idea presupposes the former. This bodily relation
with other bodies is indispensable for the possibility of the thought of pure things: it
is only now that the pure object can be defined as a thing to which other bodies have
virtual access: this ‘intercorporéité’ (109) defines the very access to pure objects.
(cf. Dan Zahavi’s discussion of intersubjectivity as object constitutive). It is in this
relation that I pass from prehuman to human, Merleau-Ponty claims, anticipating
Tomasello’s ‘joint attention’-hypothesis (even if it remains unclear exactly how this
‘intercorporéité’ differs from the ‘inter-animalité’ of animals which also possess
the ability for empathy).340
But this reference of the universe to the body and to humanity, does that not
overlook that life might disappear? and what would, in that case, be left? (111). This
possible disappearance, Husserl claims, would not entail that the evidence of refer-
ences would disappear, so we must assume a mute world would remain even in that
case. Thus, in Ideen II, Husserl may define nature as that to which I have an original
and primordial relation ‘ le seul unique monde pour tout le monde’ (112) – the
only world for everybody in the world – as Merleau-Ponty jestingly puts it.
Merleau-Ponty remarks the constant tension between this idea and the idea of the
break with the natural attitude which it presupposes, and he concludes by saying
that Husserl never really resolved this tension which he implicitly admitted, e.g. in
his double concept of constitution (constitution ‘par actes’, through conscious acts,
on the one, anti-naturalistic side, and ‘latente’, on the other, naturalistic side, 112).
Obviously, Merleau-Ponty ontologically prefers to underline the latter, pertaining
to the ‘passive synthesis’ while, at the same time, maintaining the methodological
necessity of the transcendental ‘epokhe’ of the former.
All in all, the body concept in Merleau-Ponty’s reflections on nature has the
following characteristics:
- It refers to future possible states and thus transgresses the pure actuality of
physics – and at the same time points to ‘real possibilities’ as having ontological
existence (cf. Peirce’s insistence on exactly that notion)
- It is prerequisite to both the subject and object category.
- It has a primary sensori-motor relation to the world, forming an integrated complex
of Umwelt and behavior.

T H E S I G N I F Y I N G B O D Y
267
- It has the possibility of transgressing its own finality in behavior with an ‘open’
side facilitating mere expression and symbol use – already in the case of higher
animals which thus possess the germs of culture.
- Merleau-Ponty, furthermore, envisages the need for the transgression of the body
concept in both up- and downwards directions, so to speak: he admits the possible
Umwelts even of single organs (and cells?) on the one hand, at the same time as
he locates the animal in an ‘inter-animality’ anticipating intersubjectivity.
In comparison to the body concept of Cognitive Semantics, Merleau-Ponty lays
the same stress on the primacy of the sensori-motor entanglement of the body, on
its gestalt competences, and its imaginative abilities – and in rare moments, the
cognitive semanticists also count Merleau-Ponty as a forerunner, if not inspirator.
In addition to Cognitive Semantics, Merleau-Ponty, with his Uexküll and related
references, extends his body concept to cover higher animals as well, while the
specificity of the human body comes into play along with language, intersubjectivity
and the appearance of pure objects (even if his notes are not unambiguous on this
point – the access of higher animals to neutral objects must provide an important
step towards pure objectivity, just like the notion of ‘inter-animalité’).
C O M P L E X I T Y T H E O R Y
–
‘ A U T O N O M O U S A G E N T ’ A S A F O R M A L
B O D Y D E F I N I T I O N
A recent tradition of thought with huge implications for theoretical biology is the
so-called ‘complexity theory’ of the ‘Santa Fe school’ (Murray Gell-Mann, Brian
Arthur, David Pines, et al.) finding formal regularities of complexity in all domains
where a manifold of interacting entities are at play: from solid state physics over
biology to economics and sociology. Especially the work of Stuart Kauffman is of
interest in our context; even if his work does not contain explicit reflections on the
body concept, such reflections can be easily inferred from his general discussion.
He takes his beginning point in the Darwinian idea of the origin of life in a
biological ‘primordial soup’ of organic chemicals and investigates the possibility of
one chemical substance to catalyze the reaction of two others, forming new reagents
in the soup. Such catalyses may, of course, form chains, so that one reagent catalyzes
the formation of another catalyzing another, etc., and self-sustaining ‘loops’ of
reaction chains is an evident possibility in the appropriate chemical environment.
A statistical analysis shows that such catalytic reactions may form interdependent
networks when the rate of catalyzed reactions per molecule approaches one, creating
a self-organizing chemical cycle which he calls an ‘autocatalytic set’. When the rate
of catalyses per reagent is low, only small local reaction chains form, but as the rate
approaches one, the reaction chains in the soup suddenly ‘freeze’ so that what was
a group of chains or islands in the soup now connects into one large interdependent
network, constituting an ‘autocatalytic set’. Such an interdependent reaction network
constitutes the core of the body definition unfolding in Kauffman, and here, as in
Uexküll, its cyclic character as the basic precondition for self-sustainment must be

268
C H A P T E R 12
noted. He now defines an ‘autonomous agent’ – a sort of general, formal organism
concept – as follows. An autonomous agent is an
Autocatalytic set able to reproduce and to undertake at least one thermodynamic work cycle. (49)
(- defined, in turn, as the recurrent release of thermal energy for performing mechanical work)
This definition implies two things: 1) reproduction possibility, and 2) the appearance
of completely new, interdependent goals in work cycles. The latter idea requires
the ability of the autocatalytic set to save energy in order to spend it in its own
self-organization, in its search for reagents necessary to uphold the network. These
goals evidently introduce a – restricted, to be sure – teleology defined simply by
the survival of the autocatalytic set itself: actions supporting this have a local teleo-
logical character. Thus, the autocatalytic set may, as it evolves, enlarge its cyclic
network by recruiting new subcycles supporting and enhancing it in a developing
structure of subcycles and sub-sub-cycles. This has its exact analogy in economy,
Kauffman argues: in eighteenth century England, coal-fired pumps were employed
to empty the coalmines for water – and thus made possible more efficient coalmining
and industrialization as a whole. Again, we recognize the Kantian description of
teleology by locally self-sustaining cycles.
Now, Kauffman proposes that the concept of ‘autonomous agent’ implies a
whole new cluster of interdependent concepts (forming so to speak, in itself, an
autonomous agent network on the conceptual level ). Thus, the autonomy of
the agent is defined by ‘catalytic closure’ (any reaction in the network demanding
catalysis will get it) which is a genuine Gestalt property in the molecular system as
a whole – and thus not in any way derivable from the chemistry of single chemical
reactions alone. Tasks and molecules constitute, on this level, a duality:
Figure 31.
The work definition here concerns the governed release of energy with respect
to a task. Thus ‘organization’ becomes the set of constraints pertaining to an
energy release process in the system. To the conceptual cluster around ‘autonomous
agent’ thus also belongs: the emergence of organization consisting of entities
measuring relevant properties of nonequilibrium systems in the environment,
identifying sources of energy that can perform work. This requirement is, as
is evident, co-extensive to what we normally call perception and action – the
search for, identification of, digestion of, and putting to use energy sources in
the environment (83). Thus, also all of the following concepts pertain to one and
the same conceptual network defining an ‘autonomous agent’: Work, constraints,
construction, measuring, energy, information, event, organization (as closure of the

T H E S I G N I F Y I N G B O D Y
269
set of possible molecules, of catalytic tasks). Thus, semantics is first of all defined by
teleology – in an autonomous agent, chemical agents (or to be more precise, specific
molecular configurations on the surface of macromolecules) can become signs.341
It is interesting to note that Kauffman’s definitions on the basis of speculative
chemistry thus entail not only the Kantian cyclic structure, but also the primitive
perception and action phases of Uexküll’s functional circle. Thus, Kauffman’s
definition of the organism in terms of an ‘autonomous agent’ basically builds on an
Uexküllian intuition (even if there is no reference to von Uexküll), namely the idea
that the most basic property in a body is metabolism: the constrained, organizing
processing of high-energy chemical material and the correlated perception and action
performed to localize and utilize it – all of this constituting a metabolic cycle coordi-
nating the organism’s in- and outside, defining teleological action. Perception and
action phases are so to speak the extension of the cyclical structure of the closed
catalytical set to encompass parts of its surroundings, so that the circle of metabolism
may only be completed by means of successful perception and action parts.342
Of special semiotic interest are certain corollaries to the concept of ‘autonomous
agent’. Environment perception must, for economical reasons, be semiotic. One
aspect of this is the fact that perception must coarse grain the environment and search
information on a certain level of stimulus dissolution. Biological evolution makes
perception tend towards an optimal coarse graining of environmental information.
Another aspect is that ‘usefulness’ of an object in relation to a given agent only
pertains to a few properties – just like a few properties then may play the role
of signs for their useful objects. The useful properties and the sign properties
may, in many cases, coincide (giving a high degree of interpretational security),
but in other cases, the sign properties may merely overlap or even differ highly
from the object properties which are sought after, introducing an arbitrary aspect
of such signs. A third semiotic constraint in the concept cluster surrounding the
autonomous agent concept is the fact that we – as any other autonomous agent –
are unable to overview the configuration space of the biosphere and search for
regularities therein. The space of all possible biological species is so enormous that
it is impossible to access directly in any rational way (and much worse, then, the
space of all possible interspecies relations which is larger than 2number of species). This
necessitates storytelling as the only way to access general knowledge about typical
event series – storytelling here ranging from innate action sequences which have
proved useful for survival, over acquired knowledge about typical event sequence
structures in environment interaction, and to human explicit narrating. Narratology
thus, analogous to our argument in Chap. 9, becomes an a priori consequence
of the vastness of biological configuration space and the a priori impossibility of
access to that space. The autonomous agent furthermore introduces the distinction
ought/is, correlative to the distinction between task functions and effective causes
in an organism, while on the other hand the physical distinction between laws and
intitial/boundary conditions is relativized by the circularity and growth potential of
the agent. Stephen Jay Gould’s well-known notion of exaptation343 also stems from
the inability to access biological configuration spaces: no finite list over biological

270
C H A P T E R 12
functions can be predetermined. Thus, invention refers to new combinations of
select properties among the indefinite number of properties of a system.
The evolution of autonomous agents is taken as the empirical basis for the
hypothesis of a general thermodynamic regularity based on non-ergodicity: the
Big Bang universe (and, consequently, the biosphere) is not at equilibrium and
will not reach equilibrium during the life-time of the universe. This gives rise to
Kauffman’s idea of the ‘adjacent possible’. At a given point in evolution, one can
define the set of chemical substances which do not exist in the universe – but which
is at a distance of one chemical reaction only from a substance already existing
in the universe. Biological evolution has, evidently, led to an enormous growth
of types of organic macromolecules, and new such substances come into being
every day. Maybe there is a sort of chemical potential leading from the actually
realized substances and into the adjacent possible which is in some sense driving
the evolution?344 In any case, Kauffman claims the hypothesis that the biosphere
as such is supercritical in the sense that there is, in general, more than one action
catalyzed by each reagent. Cells, in order not to be destroyed by this chemical
storm, must be internally subcritical (even if close to the critical boundary). But
if the biosphere as such is, in fact, supercritical, then this distinction seemingly
a priori necessitates the existence of a boundary of the agent, protecting it against
the environment. Kauffman does not go deeply into this, but it is, as a matter of
fact, an a priori argument for the existence of cell membranes, skin, fur, plate, etc.
To sum up, the body understood as an ‘autonomous agent’ has the following
implications:
- It defines a conceptual cluster involving reaction chains forming a loop in autocat-
alytical closure, emergence of organization, perception, action, work, constraints,
construction, measuring, energy, information, event, organization, semantics,
teleology.345
- Thus, the birth of meaning, signs, and intention supposedly take place alongside
the self-organization of autonomous agents.
- Narration and story-telling are necessary in the absence of access to the configu-
ration space of autonomous agents and their interrelations.
- The body boundary is implied by the necessity of the sub/supercritical distinction.
In relation to biosemiotics, it is crucial to note that the definition of autonomous
agents takes the body concept all the way down to cell level (and maybe below as
a limit case, cf. ‘autocatalytic closure’)
B I O S E M I O T I C S
–
A N A T U R A L H I S T O R Y O F E M B O D I M E N T
Biosemiotics, as discussed in the previous chapters, has emerged as a semiotic
project during the last decades, involving the initiative of the late Tom Sebeok,
and, among others, the Copenhagen school (Jesper Hoffmeyer, Claus Emmeche).
I can not run through the whole set of ideas of Hoffmeyerian Copenhagen
biosemiotics here, and many of them have been repeated through the previous
chapters, but let me sum up some of its basic assumptions. Independently of
Kauffman, biosemiotics sees the cell as equipped with a point-of-view – defined

T H E S I G N I F Y I N G B O D Y
271
as a ‘stable integration of self-reference and other-reference’ (Hoffmeyer) – and
like in Merleau-Ponty or Kauffman, this does not necessarily imply the presence
of consciousness. This definition refers to the self-description by genetic means
on the one hand, necessary to pass on the information about the stable structure
of the body to the next generation, and, on the other, to the stable representation
of the outside within the cell, due to its system of ‘perceptions’ facilitated by
specific chemical receptors. The self-description, in turn, is double, due to life’s
‘code duality’: the digital DNA representation is not the only information inherited,
and it is certainly not, as it is often maintained, the only ‘cause’ of the phenotypical
organism. The whole cell structure with different organels constitutes an additional
‘analogue code’ which is inherited directly (some of the organels may even have
their own DNA) in the egg cell.
Membranes are seen as crucial in biosemiotics because defining the inside/outside
distinction characterizing all life forms, facilitating the highly constrained traffic
across this boundary in the form of signs (perception can, then, be rephrased as ‘inner
outsides’, just as action changing the surroundings into a specific ecological niche
can be rendered as ‘outer insides’). Moreover, internalized membranes of many
different sorts facilitate semiotic processes inside the cell, regulating metabolism.
Likewise, in higher animals, internalized skin sensors might have given rise to the
part of the important part of the nervous system performing proprioception.
The simplest semiotic process is categorical perception, or environmental granu-
larity (already at biochemistry level) – thus biosemiotics finds the semiotic vocab-
ulary indispensable to describe even biochemical reactions – that is, when they take
place in the context of the cell’s metabolism. ‘Scaffolding’ is a concept invented
by Hoffmeyer for the general process of stabilizing, channeling, automatizing
and sophisticating (by adding new stable possibilities) a segment of metabolism:
ranging all the way from cell architecture, organ structure, and to nest building,
herd behavior, language, writing. In Hoffmeyer, increasing ‘scaffolding’ implies
the converse notion of ‘increasing semiotic freedom’ – higher animals may not
only be able to recognize tokens as instantiations of types, but also use these,
apart from their possible reference to the immediate surroundings, to symbolize,
to play, to reason, to argue, to use diagrams. This bodily basis even permits suffi-
ciently complex organisms to make abstractions by treating relations as a thing
(metaphorically) – probably only humans are able to do this explicitly and at will.
Biosemiotics in general thus points to the necessity of defining the body concept
in constant interaction between biology and semiotics: the body as the minimal
biological entity simply is a sign processing device. The evolutionary stance of
biosemiotics, moreover, urges it to try to define a series of differently abled bodies
so that the ability to specific sign use is correlated to a type of body346 – attempting
to charting a ‘natural history of the sign’ (Hoffmeyer).
Umberto Eco originally proposed the idea of a lower threshold of semiotics,
presumably distinguishing human language and sign use from simpler signal
systems in biology. This idea has, of course, been challenged by biosemiotics finding
instead a crucial threshold between inorganic and organic nature – cf. Sebeok’s idea

272
C H A P T E R 12
A biosemiotic Scala Naturae
Searle threshold – conscious, deliberate, intentional communication actions –
linguistics
Eco threshold – linguistics and other human sign systems – humanities
the ‘biosemiotic missing link’ – probably consisting of several sub-thresholds?
Deacon threshold – symbols?
Lakoff threshold – metaphors? (- but is there any clear limit between metaphor and concept
extension?)
Husserl threshold – intersubjectivity?
Tomasello threshold – joint attention?
hypostatic abstraction?
Merleau-Ponty threshold – multicellular bodies with central nervous system (and
probably consciousness), symbol processing, ‘interanimalité’ and environment
mapping – higher zoology
Uexküll threshold – active information gathering, functional circle – zoology
Lynn Margulis threshold between unicellular and multicellular organisms (plants,
fungi, animals) – pertaining to the introduction of stable intercellular semiosis
and cell differentiation
threshold between prokaryotes and eukaryotes where the DNA in the former
is not yet separated from the protoplasm so that it may much more freely be
communicated to other prokaryotes
Sebeok threshold – semiotic processes proper – biology
Peirce ‘threshold’ – protosemiotic processes – all of the universe
of biology and semiotics as co-extensive. Thus the idea emerges that the crucial
task is not to find one lower threshold of semiotics but rather to establish a whole
ladder of thresholds of increasing biosemiotic complexity. In addition to thresholds
separating the inorganic from the organic world and animals from human beings, we
may expect semiotically defined thresholds separating unicellular from multicellular
organisms, plants and fungi from animals, animals with/without central nervous
systems and correlated environment representations – and probably many more. As
we saw in Chap. 11, Terrence Deacon argued (1997) that the semiotic ‘missing
link’ is the transition from iconic and indexical to symbolical signs; a problem here
is that if we use Peirce’s symbol definition, many higher animals use symbols.

T H E S I G N I F Y I N G B O D Y
273
Maybe the semiotic missing link is constituted by several subthresholds lying close
to each other which yet await untangling? – the ability of diagrammatical reasoning
is probably also shared by some higher animals, the use of metaphor likewise, the
existence of intersubjectivity and, correlated, objectivity arguably has its primitive
form in Merleau-Pontyan ‘inter-animalité’. The use of the special symbol type of
argument can also, presumably, be found in many higher animals. As we saw, the
best candidate for the semiotical missing link might be a special subtype of the
Peircean symbol: the so-called ‘hypostatic abstraction’, making of some aspect or
relation of a phenomenon a new, explicit object. This would be the ability to make
explicit signs, arguments, symbols and thus subject them to deliberate control and
change – and hence facilitating their fast development in culture.
In any case, one of the tasks of biosemiotics must be the construction of a
semiotical ladder of evolution, combining basic body types with semiotic ability.
On the opposite page is indicated, as a conclusion to the last four chapters by way of
proposal,347 a first outline of such a scale with some of the single steps nicknamed
after central authors.

C H A P T E R 13
CHRIST LEVITATING AND THE VANISHING SQUARE
Diagrams in Picture Analysis
Most studies of pictures and pictural phenomena take place without any further
determination of the concept of picture: the everyday meaning of the word are
without further notice taken as sufficient. In many cases this causes no problems, to
the extent that the study only involves the description and interpretation of selected
properties in the picture in question. For a more systematic gaze, though, it is
hardly satisfactory that the very category of picture remains vague. Very often, it
is spontaneously assumed that a picture is an object somehow picturing another
object. For specialists with some measure of knowledge of art history, such an idea
must immediately cause problems: most of the abstract or non-figurative tradition of
twentieth century art depicts – for a first glance – no other object. Other spontaneous
ideas hold that the picture is a visual entity which some person has produced with
the intention of communicating some content – maybe even an especially aesthetic
content – or, maybe, a content about which something is claimed, so that the picture
has the character of a proposition. The ideas of what is a picture thus flutter around
concepts like visibility, intention, communication, similarity, abstraction, reference,
proposition. There is, however, some of these concepts which for a closer gaze
proves irrelevant for the basic determination of the picture concept. The idea that
visual pictures should exhaust the picture category is already undermined by the fact
that we talk, without further notice, about pictural meanings, iconic language and so
forth (without any idea that these notions should in themselves be pictural!), just like
synaesthetic phenomena of all kinds point to the fact that the category of pictures
does not belong to vision alone. Nothing prevents a sound from picturing another,
and even if visual pictures constitute a prominent and prototypical class of pictures,
nothing indicates that they exhaust the category. The idea, on the other hand, that
pictures should be the expression of the communicative intention of somebody, does
not seem plausible either on closer scrutiny. Naturally occurring images, mirrorings,
echoes, mimicry phenomena and so on point to a broader concept of picture, just like
the developments away from purely intentional meaning concepts in the aesthetic
disciplines in general. Just like in the case of the work of art, it is not exhaustive
or even decisive for our experience of an image that it corresponds to what the
sender might intend it to mean. The possibility of discovering important properties
in an image which the artist did not intend when he painted it, lies open to us; if
this was not the case, the artist might just as well serve as an index of solutions for
the aesthetic analysis, and he might ease his own work as well as that of the critic
by simply publish a written account of his intention instead of painting. Similarity,
275

276
C H A P T E R 13
then, seems to be definitely dealt with already in the art history of the twentieth
century – for is it not the case that similarity in pictures is but the result of a
restricted, mimetic, and outlived poetics which has long since been obliterated by
the avant garde? Has it not long since – supported by deconstructivist and negativist
theories – made it clear that behind every tempting similarity hides an abyss of
differences? My hypothesis is, however, that it is, despite of all this, in similarity
we shall seek the very definition of the concepts of image and picture as such.348
If we take a series of the archangels of the so-called nonfigurative tradition, e.g.
Malevich, Kandinsky, Klee, Mondrian, Newman, Rothko, Reinhardt – it is striking
(even if their claims will, of course, not suffice to settle the case definitively) that
they themselves by no means suggest that their pictures do not represent anything,
quite on the contrary. It goes without saying that they do not represent interiors
nor exteriors from the natural or cultural world, easy to recognize for an untrained
gaze – but they are taken to refer to more subtle matters, for many of the painters
mentioned even to mystical, religious spheres. Even an observer like myself – who
has a hard time letting Rudolf Steiner figure as the key to Kandinsky – has the
immediate and spontaneous experience that these pictures represent something, be it
personal mental ideas or emotions, be it realms of ideal geometry, be it that-which-
cannot-be-depicted  it does not matter in this context. The decisive thing is that
similarity cannot be given up as that which defines a picture in the first place. The
iconoclastic tradition discussed in Chap. 3, supposed that similarity was (almost)
identity, that it was a dull copy of something given, that it maybe only mimed
natural beauty and thus constituted a primitive set of tablets which must be crushed
in order to push forward to a radically new and sublime language of art. I will
suggest that we – from the vantage point of our time – can see this idea as a special
sort of avant garde kitsch. It is the avant garde version of the deer by the forest lake
over the couch because it just like the deer – only with reversed value ascription –
assumes similarity to be an easy and unproblematic issue.349 The history of the
avant garde demonstrates – quite on the contrary – that the limits to the concept
of similarity are very wide indeed. Just like the concept of œuvre, of artwork, has
only been extended and become still more multifaceted and enriched by the many
attacks on it by the avant garde, the concept of similarity has been diversified and
extrapolated to realms where we did not recognize it functioning earlier. Especially
the concept of the artwork which – however this may take place – gives the single
piece of art its definitivity, its closedness, a set of borders, results in the fact that
what appears within these borders assumes the character of a sight seen within a
frame, a margin, or other boundaries in space and time, that what is seen within
these limits appear as representing something. The fact that it may very often be
quite difficult to determine what this something is, does not change the fact that
as soon as we are within the realm of the artwork, we are perfectly aware that the
work has, in some way, to be decoded. But as the artwork cannot – if it aims at
being a good work, that is – rely on conventions alone (this would conflict with the
second and in other respects problematic demand of the avant garde: originality350),
no other resource is left but similarity. The history of art of the twentieth century

C H R I S T L E V I T A T I N G A N D T H E V A N I S H I N G S Q U A R E
277
with its triumph of experiment has thus – quite to the contrary to what is often
assumed – been a triumph of similarity.
What does this similarity entail for the definition of the picture? Many artworks
which we spontaneously conceive of as pictures (and thus primarily iconical signs),
however, also possess indexical aspects (maybe due to their title which may refer to
existing phenomena – the portrait painting’s title referring to the person portrayed;
the landscape paintings to the locality; the indexical reference of the signature
to the artist, etc.), as well as symbolical aspects (e.g. by virtue of their use of
different conventions for indirect reference to phenomena – the iconographical
convention like the lion referring to the apostle Marcus). We may concentrate upon,
however, the primarily iconical signs – what Peirce terms hypoicons. They are
the class of signs, then, which primarily functions iconically. Here, Peirce’s non-
circular description of what ‘iconical’ means remains decisive – his requirement
that icons are signs, by the contemplation of which it is possible to learn more
about their object that what lay in the mere construction recipe for the sign. When
possessing the key to an icon, it is possible to take out of it more information
about its object than what is explicitly stated in the sign itself. It is for this reason
that similarity-based signs seem ‘deep’, and the definition by ‘more information’
is, contrary to the intuitive similarity definition, operational to the extent that it
may be used as a criterion to determine whether a sign is in fact an icon. The
fact that many easily decodable icons exist might give rise to the idea that it
should always be very easy to determine the object of an icon; this is, however,
a very dangerous fallacy. Icons may, in some cases, be very difficult to decode.
Perhaps the object may be determined vaguely or partially only; the decisive thing
remains, according to the operational definition, whether more information may
be retrieved about the object than what explicitly appears. To grasp more exactly
what lies in this operational definition, we must again consider Peirce’s triadic
subtypology of the category of hypoicons. They fall in images, diagrams, and
metaphors, respectively. Images in this restricted, technical meaning of the word are
similar to their object due to some simple quality (color, shape, tonality, size );
diagrams are all similarity-based signs which refer to their object by means of
some skeletal analysis of the object into mutually connected parts. The diagram
consists of a sketch-like anatomy of its object – as the most ordinary examples one
may point to function diagrams, cake diagrams, column diagrams, matrices – but
also, cf. below, a much larger set of icon types. Metaphor, finally, is the picture
type which refers to its object via the intermediary of a third object. When a
metaphor does not in an evident way display which diagram it makes use of, it
becomes ambiguous and opens up interesting possibilities for poetical use, but this
will, from the Peircean point of view, be a marginal, atypical use, even if strongly
interesting and fertile.351 In art, however, this use becomes central. The naked, easy-
to-grasp diagram rarely occurs in art – and even in prototypical diagrams, surplus
image similarities (in Peirce’s special use of the word ‘image’) often occur – as
when a column diagram over the average income in different countries are tinted
with the colors of the flags of those countries.

278
C H A P T E R 13
The decisive implication for the status of the picture category in these distinctions
lies in the extension of the diagram category, cf. Chap. 4. This category, at a first
glance so easy to determine and seemingly bound to lines and arrows on paper,
proves much more comprehensive, given the operational icon definition. Peirce
gradually realizes this, as when he sees that e.g. algebraic formalisms also have
diagrammatical character – to the extent that they may be manipulated in order to
display new information not explicitly present. Here, Peirce’s non-circular definition
of similarity demonstrates its full force: icons are all those signs by means of which
more knowledge about their object may be gained. Diagrams, consequently, are that
subset thereof which functions by analyzing their object in parts, interconnected
by means of rule-bound relations. This entails a series of further determinations
of the diagram: it includes all signs by means of which something can be inferred
with necessity (which then, in turn, holds for their object) – that is, diagrams
include all signs allowing for deduction. As discussed in Chap. 4, this implies that
diagrams as a decisive feature possess the possibility of being manipulated with
the aim of reaching deductive consequences. This manipulability and, correlatively,
deductibility, is what makes diagrams icons with the special feature that they may
be used to think with. If we consider the less abstract side of diagrams, we see that
this holds also for very ‘mimetic’ diagrams. As mentioned, Peirce never undertook
any further partition of the diagram category, and the establishment of a rational
typology of diagrams remains one of the most important tasks for actual semiotics to
pursue,352 but it seems obvious that maps are involved as a crucial type of diagrams.
Maps come, even if we restrict ourselves to geographical maps, in a continuum
of widely varying degrees of abstraction, from aerial photos, preserving distances,
angles (provided the area depicted is sufficiently small), color and much more  and
to e.g. subway maps which are neither color-, distance-, nor angle-preserving but
only preserves the mutual topological relations between subway stations and lines
as points on a network of topological connections. Common to all maps, however,
seems to be the idea that a route in the diagram corresponds to a route in the object
which facilitates the possibility of certain diagram experimentation on maps (what
is, e.g. the highway distance between Paris and Berlin? – this is not stated explicitly
in any way on your average map of Europe, neither in the printing process nor in the
construction of the map based on triangulations in the landscape, but the information
may be easily retrieved by a small diagram experiment using a ruler and the scale of
the map).
Maybe my conclusion is evident: all pictures, also in the ordinary art-history-
meaning of the word, are also diagrams – primarily maps in the general meaning
of the term suggested.353 As I hinted to above, this idea must be seen in relation
to Peirce’s idea that signs are only signs in actu, that is, to the extent that they are
used as signs. This implies that if I see a picture hanging remotely on the wall,
peripherically in my field of vision where it appears almost as a vague impression,
then it is only, of course, an image in Peirce’s simple sense. But as soon as
I – be it as a spontaneous viewer of the picture or as professional analyst – go
closer into the picture, the use of it as a diagram automatically becomes relevant.

C H R I S T L E V I T A T I N G A N D T H E V A N I S H I N G S Q U A R E
279
I measure distances on the picture plane with the eyes and spontaneously infer
information about distances between foreground figures, medium ground appear-
ances and background features in the space depicted; I observe the striking effects
of contrast between certain colors and may oppose them to other, non-contrasting
colors. I may construct a space,354 in which I can imagine my body moving
around; this very wandering route inside the landscape has the characteristics of
a diagram manipulation. I may question, for instance, the artificial, the striking,
the aesthetic, the failed or other qualities in the distribution of picture objects
on the plane – doing so, I make a manipulation where I imaginatively move
around objects on the plane and observe the changes in their mutual relations.
It is, in short, impossible to reflect or speculate upon a picture – in sponta-
neous perception or with the distance of the analyst – without conceiving of the
picture as a diagram, manipulating with its parts according to different rules and,
so doing, retrieve new knowledge of the objects depicted, be they concrete or
abstract.
Now pictures – in the art history use of the word – constitute a special subset of the
diagram category. They are visual, they are delimited, they are two-dimensional (2
1/2-dimensional, if we include texture, bas-relief, frame, etc.). They are, moreover,
characterized by the fact that they are only rarely accompanied by any explicit
symbolic set of rules or conventions governing the possibility for their diagram-
matical manipulation (this in opposition to mathematical diagrams). But this does
not mean they do not function as diagrams; it rather means that we, by contemplating
them, make use of two things: 1) the spontaneous diagrammatical abilities charac-
terizing natural perception, constituting an autonomous intelligence inherent in the
visual system (giving rise to facts like that it is almost impossible not to see depth in a
perspectively construed picture), 2) the experimental use of diagrammatical abilities
taken from other fields of experience. Art is thus diagrammatically underdetermined
in a way analogous to the metaphorical underdeterminacy of poetry – which is why
it calls for interpretation: many different diagrams and metaphors may call for appli-
cation in experimenting analytical picture observation. Thus analysis of art (but this
goes for any analytical process) involves a crucial abductive component – abduction
being the Peircean prerequisite for any gaining of new knowledge. Abduction makes
a guess at an unexplained phenomenon by suggesting a general law or state of
affairs which would have the phenomenon in question as necessary consequence
(other possible laws, regularities, or prerequisites might have the same effect which
is why abduction is not necessary but remains a qualified guess). But once an
abduction is proposed, then it may be tested by the manipulation of the diagram
implied in the hypothesis proposed (we return to the role of ab- and deduction
in interpretation in Chap. 16). The outcome of the diagrammatic deduction may
then, in turn, be inductively compared with other knowledge about the phenomenon
in question, giving Peirce’s three-beat motor of reasoning as a result: abdution-
deduction-induction.355 It may thus be discovered de- and inductively whether the
abduction in question is fertile; in the opposite case another abduction must be
suggested.

280
C H A P T E R 13
C H R I S T L E V I T A T I N G 
Let me illustrate this idea of the analysis of pictures by a couple of examples. Some
years ago, the Danish art historian Erik Fischer published an exquisite little book on
the Danish romantic painter C.W. Eckersberg356 – including a brilliant analysis of
Eckersberg’s famous altarpiece from Frederiksberg Church in Copenhagen. Fischer
recapitulates the iconographic background of the picture. Eckersberg was asked by
the rector of the church to base his picture on John 17.6–19 which is the so-called
‘high priest’s prayer’ in the latter part of the last supper – a topos with, it must be
admitted, a rather meager pictural potential.357
Fischer now wonders what Eckersberg’s seemingly uncomplicated last supper
rendering may yield as an illustration of this ecstatic speech of farewell, in which
Christ claims not to be of this world. In his search for further content in the picture,
Fischer stumbles over the empty seat of Judas in the right foreground zone of the
picture and sharply remarks: is it not the case that this stool is positioned in a
strangely oblique way in the room? Fischer makes this observation and now adds
the abduction that the stool is not only oblique but that this serves a deliberate
artistic purpose which is why he now indulges in an experimentative manipulation
of central relations in the picture, that is, treats it as a diagram (69–70) ‘His empty
Figure 32. Eckersberg’s Altar Piece for Frederiksberg Church, ordered 1839

C H R I S T L E V I T A T I N G A N D T H E V A N I S H I N G S Q U A R E
281
stool is highlighted in the foreground. Not only is it highlighted, it also seems to
play a compositional role of its own: its vanishing point (FpII), at the extreme left of
the painting, demonstrates that Eckersberg provided his composition with a second
horizon, C-D, a unique phenomenon in the history of Post-High Renaissance art.
The C-D horizon forms a Golden Section in the part of the composition that is
below the J-K line.’ First, he constructs the perspectival horizon line as implicated
by the lines of the ceiling girders. This diagrammatical deduction rests, of course, on
the premiss that the picture depicts a room which has as will normally be the case,
a horizontal ceiling with parallel girders. The result is a horizon with the room’s
vanishing point (FpI) at Christ’s right shoulder. He now repeats the same procedure
with the seat of the stool and finds that Judas’ seat has a completely different, much
lower horizon from that of the dining room, indicated by the vanishing point (FpII).
This observation is now corrobated by an earlier sketch of the picture, in which
Eckersberg again has made this construction of the horizon corresponding to the seat,
and Fischer consequently finds that the seat really, measured against the horizon line
implied by the ceiling, is skew. This diagrammatical finding supports his abductive
hypothesis and now allows Fischer – using another unspoken assumption, namely
that the disciples did not know of ergonomically correct seats but used stools with
approximately horizontal seats (this unspoken premiss is, of course, supported by
the general symmetry of the stool’s design) – to conclude that the picture is a case
Figure 33. The painting with Fischer’s auxiliary lines showing the double horizon of the ceiling and the
stool, respectively

282
C H A P T E R 13
Figure 34. Eckersberg’s sketch with Fischer’s auxiliary lines
of deliberate use of double perspective with the rhetorical effect of a structural
derogation of Judas. His horizon is, literally, far below that of our Saviour: ‘The
second horizon bears a subtle iconographic message. Judas is the son of perdition,
so ‘his’ horizon is placed low in the composition cosmology; his ‘vanishing point’,
at the extreme left, must be seen as an unmistakable indication that he has moved
away from harmony toward betrayal.
The line L-M further stresses the expulsion of Judas: it touches the far corner of
his empty stool, which is thus once again symbolically relegated to its own sphere
at the very bottom of the composition.’
If we now take further Fischer’s idea and repeat the same operation, now with
respect to the sides of the stool resting on the floor (again based on the helping
hypothesis that they are parallel), then we obtain yet another horizon line, the X-Y
line, this time for the floor of the room. This line, surprisingly, lies even lower than
the one construed from the seat. This implies that the stool is almost impossible as
a geometrical object – if measured on our ordinary ideas of how stools normally
have parallel sides and orthogonal vertices. This implies that the stool stands out
as a disquieting object which due to its double perspective and its oblique form
irritates our gaze and indirectly insists on Judas’s betrayal and disappearance, and
in so far this observation yields further support to Fischer’s reading. But what if
we suppose, now, that the stool is not skew in relation to the perspective of the
floor but that it stands, in fact, in a normal way on the floor? If this is the case,

C H R I S T L E V I T A T I N G A N D T H E V A N I S H I N G S Q U A R E
283
X
Y
Figure 35. The painting with my auxiliary lines added to Fischer’s, indicating the third horizon pertaining
to the floor
then the very perspective of the floor deviates strongly from that of the ceiling, and
then further perspective anomalies follow. Then the whole geometry of the room
of the supper explodes; ceiling and floor yawn and moves away from each other
in the direction into the picture towards the horizons. Whether it is the floor that
goes downward or the ceiling that goes upward (or both) is of course impossible to
decide within the picture’s own system of reference, because it gives no hint which
may decide which one of the now no less than three possible horizon lines should
be privileged as being horizontal. But no matter this undecidability, a remarkable
fact remains. Namely the fact that given the tilting floor, Christ is now simply
unable to reach the floor behind the table, if we assume that he was created like
a normal man with approximately the same distance from top to groin as from
groin to feet. This diagram manipulation thus urges the question: What could be
the possible reason for Christ to stand on an invisible platform behind the table
or to wear extreme Sylvester Stallone boots to appear taller than he actually is?
Or what could be the reason for a radically long-legged Christ which I believe
we have no further biblical evidence to support? – or, the other way around, a
Christ secretly levitating over the floor behind the tablecloth? The left side of
the table is mercifully hidden by the sitting disciples and thus does not allow for
an additional, corrective horizon construal based on the (allegedly) rectangular,

284
C H A P T E R 13
horizontal shape of the table top. Our experimental deduction on the picture read
as a diagram thus leads us to infer these facts. Do they corroborate our abduction –
that there might lie further information hidden in the multi-perspective structure
of the picture? This is the case, indeed, because the scene of the last supper leads
directly on to resurrection and ascension – decisive upward movements which are
then prefigured in this picture’s intricate application of a triple perspective. Christ is
here already, during the last supper, characterized by an upward movement which
very well points to the claim in the evangelical text base of the picture: He is not
of this world. These two diagram deductions – Fischer’s and mine – possess an
objective validity which does not depend on what Eckersberg’s intention (or the
picture observer’s, for that matter) might have been. On the contrary, our judgment
of these diagram experiments depends on their fertility in relation to the given
picture and its contextual background. Thus, it is at this point we cease to read
the picture as a pure diagram and include the symbolical reference it carries (due
to its conventional use as an altar piece and the correlative reference to a specific
phase of the passion of Christ). And in both cases, Fischer’s and mine, we find
in this symbolical framing of the picture as an applied diagram, so to speak, facts
corroborating our manipulating deductions. It is not only Eckersberg who failed on
a bad day and crafted a malfunctioning diagram (as would be the case if the picture
was to be read naturalistically only, and the different additional hypotheses as to
horizontal ceilings, floors and seats were correct) which makes an ordinary room
twist in surreal lines. Quite on the contrary he has made an ambiguous diagram,
open for a triple reading, whose tension between the perspectives of ceiling, floor
and seat enables the observer to judge Judas’ low status and skew nature, as well as
the beginning levitation of Christ pointing forward to resurrection and ascension.
Fischer’s analysis has, of course, a further support due to Eckersberg’s preliminary
sketch which is lacking in the case of my additional argument (the floor horizon
in the sketch coincides with that of the stool top). But the sketch has only the
role of inductively strengthening Fischer’s argument; it proves deductively nothing
(and presupposes an intentionalistic reading of the picture) but it merely serves the
purpose of further support for the probability of his claim. The decisive test of
both analyses lies in their inductive continuity with the symbolic dimension of the
picture – corresponding to Peirce’s notion of the symbolical government of the pure
diagram, deciding which conceptual reality it depicts in concrete usage. Here, the
category of the artwork plays an important role as that which allows us to detect
these hidden similarities in the picture: if the picture was not a work of art with
the special definitivity this implies, then we would rather be tempted to dismiss
it as a bad piece of student’s work bearing witness to a vacillating understanding
of the laws of perspective with the result that all parallel lines do not meet in the
same horizontal point. Herein, the analysis of an artwork is different from a pictural
analysis as we would make if this picture was an ordinary photograph: then we
would be forced to other helping hypotheses, so as for instance that the stool of
Judas is in fact deform, that Christ stands on a small, hidden platform on a tilting
floor, that Christ has been ingested growth hormone by John the Baptist during

C H R I S T L E V I T A T I N G A N D T H E V A N I S H I N G S Q U A R E
285
adolescence, etc. The category of the artwork obliges us with its definitivity to
search for the coherent reading rather than the probable reading, in the hope that it
will, in the end, convince with its fertility in the final understanding of the work.
But pictural phenomena which are not artworks and do not share their strongly
teleological composition, do not demand such an integrated understanding; they
may as phenomena require a decomposition in parts calling for each their diagram.
They are none the less worthy phenomena for that, of course, whereas the work
of art will suffer from such inconsistencies if not they may be deemed motivated
at some level of analysis. Herein, the object of artistic analysis differs from other
objects.358
This presentation demonstrates the characteristic shifting between abduction
understood as qualified guesses faced with strange observations, deduction under-
stood as diagram experimentation on the picture, abductive helping hypotheses,
inductive probability arguments and a final conclusion measured on the symbolical
governing of the diagram. This procedure is probably not unique for the analysis
of pictures, not even for aesthetic analysis as such. Rather, it is a general heuristic
for scientific analysis of object properties not yet fully determined (in that case its
behavior might be deducted directly from theory). It is the road of the power of
judgment to abductively guess and afterwards to corroborate this guess by deductive
experiment and inductive probability support. Still, this leaves the analysis of
pictures with a special status, because unlike the case in many other disciplines
its very object contains a direct diagrammatic aspect. In most other disciplines it
is a task for the scientist to find, formalize and corroborate which diagram may
adequately map a given phenomenon. A (sufficiently complicated) picture, however,
only exists to the extent it is already a diagram.
This implies that the analysis of pictures ought to be interested not only in its
connection to visual objects in general or to aesthetic objects in general – but to
diagrams in logic, mathematics, maps, algebra, and graphs. Diagrams comprise all
things by means of which necessary conclusions may be drawn. Thus, the diagram
category implies that all pictures with diagram qualities (which is: most pictures)
involve the possibility for logical inferences regarding certain implications for
their object. A traditional logical understanding of this fact would probably be that
what is pictural about the picture should be seen as a mere heuristic surface over
a depth of logical propositions whose content might be more adequately expressed
in purely formal calculi. Such an idea would, with a certain displacement, repeat
the linguistic imperialism in early picture semiotics where pictures’ character of
being signs with content was seen as so central that the very visual qualities of the
picture tended to be reduced to a peripheral epiphenomenon.359 To avoid merely
substituting a logical imperialism for linguistic imperialism, it is important that this
logical aspect of pictures be correctly understood. The logical aspect of the picture
is inherent in its very iconic construction, in its very diagrammatical structure, and
contrary to the possibility of a logical imperialism of the sort mentioned, a Peircean
view would see symbolical calculi as a mere subset of the general iconic realm
of logic.

286
C H A P T E R 13
 T H E V A N I S H I N G S Q U A R E
This diagrammatic rendering of the analysis of pictures might give difficulties,
however, when we face pictures where no evident diagrammatic systems are at
stake (as in the Eckersberg case perspective and its analysis of perceived space
into mutually connected positions), nor any symbolical content which may govern
the diagrammatical experiments – phenomena which were abundantly present in
Eckersberg’s painting. Let us now, to support for our hypothesis, turn to a diagram-
matic case study of a picture without any explicit diagrammatic structure and
symbolical content. Malevich’s Suprematist Composition: White Square on White
from 1918 may of course not, with its low-profile articulations, hide a complexity
of the same kind as Eckersberg’s altar piece; but still it would be a mistake to claim
that we view even a picture of this simplicity as a mere image in Peirce’s sense of
the word.
The meditative calm which may inhabit the viewer by the contemplation of such
a work of art was understood by Malevich himself as a direct access to being
itself with the acquittal of ordinary reason connected to everyday perception,360
but even a quasi-mystical experience of this kind does not take place without
diagrammatical means. Even the symbolical governing inherent in the painting title
is here extremely vague and is delimited to a description of the picture surface in
very general terms. Already in this fact, though, we find a hint: there is a delicate
tension between the generic ‘white square on white’ and the specific appearance
of the canvas surface. A ‘white square on white’ might with the same means be
presented in infinitely many other ways: the small square might be differently
located on the canvas and have any other size as long as it remained smaller than
the picture. This immediately opens the picture for diagrammatical manipulation:
we may imaginatively let the inner square reduce and grow, move around on the
surface. The fact that this diagrammatic exercise would not change anything in
relation to the generic title is a point which makes it possible to see the specific
picture itself as generic, so that the painting in a certain sense represents an infinite
set of other pictures of white square on white – an effect which Malevich has
no doubt sought in his idea that his painting should display nothing less than
the absolute itself. But this does not exhaust the diagrammatical possibilities of
experiment on this surface. Ground and figure are only distinguished by a difference
in shades of white on the lower limit of being perceptible, making the small square
an inkling bluer than the background, against which it luckily, gestaltistically stands
forward (which is also referred to in the title’s ‘white square on white’) by means
of a discrete comic strip contour. This makes possible a variation well-known from
Gestalt theory: the Kippfigur shifting between object and background, so that the
small square changes from being an object in the foreground and to being a hole
in the surrounding foreground – a change facilitated by the more blueish tone’s
more remote character in atmospheric air. This diagrammatical experiment is even
basically made possible by the visual system and is not necessarily in need of
any conscious effort. A further fact is that the title’s repetition of the concept
‘white’ is contradicted by the two main nuances on the surface, to the extent that

C H R I S T L E V I T A T I N G A N D T H E V A N I S H I N G S Q U A R E
287
Figure 36. Suprematist Composition: White Square on White
(Kasimir Malevich 1918)
we should understand exactly the same color by the word ‘white’. Neither fore-
nor background are, in fact, perfectly white, and the ‘white’ of the title must thus
also be generic and refers to white as a class of different whitish shadings.361 The
diagrammatical exercise called for by this fact is naturally to imagine the difference
between the two whites disappear and the contour to vanish completely so that the
small square simply implodes in the background – which would be the case if both
whites were in fact identical. This procedure introduces a subtle play, for the very
contour between the two parts of the surface is what introduces a minimum of depth
in it – whether it turns one way or the other. If the square in the foreground ceases
to exist, the depth of the background remains as a vacuum into which the viewer
is sucked. Even if the two surfaces are only minimally distinct, the picture surface
thus holds a possibility for a Rothko-like hovering into the picture which lets the –
diagrammatically imagined – completely emptied surface have a depth, a void, a
nothing with spatial qualities; probably for Malevich an adequate representation of
his Absolute. A further diagrammatical experiment is possible with reference to
a diagram already present in the visual system before any ascription of content:
If the vertically suspended picture is supposed to refer to a zone equipped with
gravitation, the inner square immediately assumes weight, and its oblique position

288
C H A P T E R 13
related to the frame indicates an instability which at any time may be released,
letting the square fall away with the pure, unspotted depth remaining.
Even if the title of the picture also in this case allowed for the construction of
a symbolical frame which might, to some extent, orient the picture’s interpretation
as a diagram, then the overall result is here – as in large parts of twentieth century
art – a radical underdetermination compared to the Eckersberg case. This implies
that, in viewing such a picture, you are forced, as an observer, to an abductive trial-
and-error process, attempting the use of diagrams and consecutive manipulations
with no other guaranty than that of perception for one diagram being better than
another. An analogy is, again, the use of sophisticated metaphor in much modern
poetry which does not allow one unambiguous diagrammatical interpretation: such
underdetermination only augments the possibilities for diagrammatical manipu-
lation. This diagrammatical diffusity does not, however, contradict the fundamental
similarity character of the picture. Even if the surface is only made to refer to a
universe of pure geometry362 – cf. the title – then it is an undoubtable relation of
similarity, just like the secondary relation which, in turn, with a Platonic gesture
lets this idealized universe of geometry refer to the Absolute as such (if we agree
to ascribe the Absolute traditional properties like ideality, purity, simplicity, etc.).
What is gained by realizing the diagrammatical character of picture viewing is
not least the close relation between picture and thought. It is a corollary to Peirce’s
generalized conception of logic that thought, even if general, can never leave an
intuitive, iconic basis, and the diagram as a category is, as mentioned, Peirce’s heir
to Kant’s famous schemata as a meeting place between intuition and thought. This
implies that we automatically, spontaneously see pictures as bundles of diagram-
matical variation possibilities (some of which are already present in the hardware
of our visual system), and we think – when we do so, that is – in and with them
by attempting to make explicit these diagrams, to add other and less spontaneously
appealing diagrams – and to examine some or all of their manipulative possibilities.
This gives the strong insight – for the analysis of pictures – that the contemplation
of pictures is ripe with connections to general epistemology.363 This implies the
necessity for the picture analyst to go deeper into the field between arts and diagrams
(in a more narrow use of the word), and it further implies the maybe more difficult
requirement that he must give up his spontaneous idea that the picture displays what
it displays and nothing more. Frank Stella’s famous ‘What you see is what you see’
only remains correct in a diagrammatical light, if ‘see’ is taken in a broad sense
including more than vision proper – namely logical and conceptual insights. Seen
as a diagram, the picture is a machine à penser, allowing for a spectrum of different
manipulations. It is these manipulations the analysis of pictures must reveal, and
they are not immediately visible in one glance on the canvas.364

C H A P T E R 14
INTO THE PICTURE
Husserl’s Picture Theories – and Two Types of Pictures
‘Things, however, are difficult, and it is easy to run wild ’
Husserl (Hua XXIII, 342)
We have investigated the possibilities of diagram manipulation in picture viewing
and analysis. A further attempt at surpassing naïve picture understanding is provided
by the sections of Husserl’s phenomenology in which he outlines a taxonomy of
acts and thus describes the picture as an act type and spends extensive discussions
on placing it in relation to other act types.
After having put forward the idea of different types of intentional acts in Logische
Untersuchungen which we touched upon in Chap. 6, Husserl often in the following
years returned to the attempt of devising a more fine-grained typology than the
one outlined there. The distinction between perception, imagination, and signitive
acts of various types had to be refined, especially as regards the imaginative types
of acts. In the years from LU and to 1912, but even well into the 20s, Husserl
struggled with the elaboration of this branch of phenomenology, and the papers
containing these strivings are collected in Husserliana (Hua) Vol. XXIII with the
title Phantasie, Bildbewusstsein, Erinnerung, a title suitable for the project because
Husserl’s investigation concentrates upon establishing a series of subspecies to the
imaginative acts of LU where the three types mentioned hold prominent positions.
Most of the papers have a preliminary, discussing character, and even the more
thoroughly argued texts often have the character of the investigation of an issue
where the conclusion still remains to be made – but in the long run of the repeated
investigations, gradually the central problems in the descriptions become clear.
A large work dating from the 1904–05 lectures about phenomenology and episte-
mology deals with the distinction between fantasy and pictorial consciousness in
an explicitly experimental way – Husserl investigates a claim he earlier shared but
which is now abandoned during the text: the idea that fantasy is a sort of pictorial
consciousness (as in Beilage 1 from 1898). A long series of smaller papers, notes
and addenda from these years and thereafter are concerned with fantasy versus
picture, fantasy vs. memory, contradiction (‘Widerstreit’) as the basis of pictorial
consciousness, empty presentations, etc., and various taxonomies of act types are
proposed. The next larger work to follow is ‘Modi der Reproduktion und Phantasie.
Bildbewusstsein’ from 1912 where the discussion about the status of fantasy is
attempted solved – now on the base of emerging transcendental phenomenology – by
289

290
C H A P T E R 14
the determination of fantasy as a reproductive modification, based on a distinction
between impression and reproduction. This text is also accompanied by a series of
Beilagen, inter alia about fictional consciousness, ‘iconic phantasies’, the relation
between fantasy and actuality, the different aspects of pictorial consciousness,
aesthetic consciousness, etc. Finally, a last group of smaller texts from the years
1918–24 are about the modi of intuition, the relation of fantasy to pure possi-
bilities and to neutralization (taken as the suspension of the act’s character of
existence claim).
The notion of picture belongs to the most stable elements in this flux of new ideas
and typologies making the many texts not only variants but outlines of original and
untested ideas. Here we shall extract an outline of the resulting concept of picture –
followed by a concrete proposal for a new phenomenological distinction on that basis.
The distinction in the LU between perception and the bundle of less direct
types of access to the object, the imaginative respective signitive acts rests on
the idea that an indirect approach to the object may take place with or without
accompanying pictures. Here, it is taken for granted that pictures, fantasy, dream,
memory, expectation, etc. all share the character of being imaginative – and further
investigation naturally must attempt a description of the distinctions between these
imagination subspecies. When reading Husserl’s vast works on these problems
up to 1912, it is striking to see that the notion of picture holds, as mentioned,
a rather stable definition throughout the period. The determination of the concept
of picture by the triad of picture, pictural object and sujet is constant, just like
the relation of similarity, tying them together, and the relation of contradiction
which complementarily prevents them from being identical. This double tension of
similarity and contradiction provides a constant description of the picture and the
type of consciousness assumed to correspond to it. The decisive problem for Husserl
during that period is rather the description of fantasy which seems to be a sort of in-
between, difficult to determine, between the explicit relation of similarity between
well-defined, separate objects in the picture on the one hand and the immediate and
direct access to the object offered by perception on the other.
Fantasy seems to share the picture’s relation to its object, defined by similarly, on
the one hand; on the other, fantasy seems, just like perception, to take place directly
(even if not referring to any object present) and without any intermediary, thus there
is not in fantasy any contradiction or tension between several ways of accessing the
same perceptual content as is the case in pictures. Husserl’s never-ending reflection in
that period has, for that reason, fantasy as its primary goal rather than pictures proper
(fantasy along with memory, dream, expectation, etc. which share fantasy’s picture-
like qualities without any explicit similarity/contradiction relation like in pictures
proper).Correspondingly,Husserl’spictureconceptisnarrow,beingtiedtoexternally,
physically existing picture objects endowed with certain visual or tactical moments. In
the perspective of Peirce’s broad concept of icons, iconicity naturally involves fantasy
which in a Peircean view must be classified as being a type of hypoicon. A further
reason for including both fantasy and pictures under the icon concept is the role of
fantasy in the grasping of sophisticated types of icons – more about this later.

I N T O T H E P I C T U R E
291
Let us present the picture theory of ‘Phantasie und Bildbewusstsein’ where the
triad mentioned is outlined:
When we here distinguish between object and picture, it soon becomes apparent that the concept of
picture is here double. The object depicted is opposed to a double entity: 1) the picture as a physical
thing, as this painted and framed piece of canvas, as this printed piece of paper, etc.
2) The picture as the pictural object which appears through this particular bundle of colors and forms.
This is not the object depicted, the pictural sujet, but the concise analogon of the fantasy picture, namely
the appearing object which is the representative of the pictural sujet.365(Hua XXIII, 19)
In contrast to many naïve definition of pictures by means of similiarity, this
definition – just like Peirce’s – avoids the identification of meaning and reference.
Against the picture taken as a merely physical object stand not one diffuse meaning,
but two distinct phenomena: the object, be it real or not, to which the picture refers,
and the pictorality, the ‘pictorial object’ (Bildobjekt) in Husserl’s terminology,
which is what makes it possible for the picture to refer to its sujet, to its object of
reference. As Husserl sums up, (ibid.):
Three objects are what we have. 1) The physical picture, the thing made out of canvas, of marble, etc.
2) The representing or picturing object, and 3) the represented or depicted object.366
This distinction involves Husserl’s decisive criterion for pictorality, namely whether
a ‘Bewusstsein von Differenz’, a difference-conscoiusness distinguishing between
2) and 3) is present (20). If 2) did not differ from a perception of the object itself,
there would be no picture. If we compare this to Peirce’s concept of the icon we
find a related idea: a transformation of invariant structure must hold between the
two sides of the icon (corresponding here to 2) and 3), respectively), and the case
of identity will correspond to a null-transformation where we would not talk about
iconicity. A decisive difference between the two, on the other hand, lies in the
question of the picture’s dependency upon consciousness (maintained by Husserl,
not so by Peirce). This implies, of course, that the difference between object and
meaning – Husserl’s ‘Widerstreit’ – to him is not only a structural fact in the picture
sign as such, but requires a more or less explicitly articulated consciousness of
contradiction.
This pictorial consciousness consists in the fact that the picture is constituted
by the contemporaneous presence of two different presentations of the object:
first, the presentation of the picture as a physical object appearing – second, the
derivative act, founded on the former, which takes (aspects of) this presentation
as picture of another object which is not, in itself, intuitively given, and which
appears only through this presentation. The relation between pictorial object and
reference object (what Husserl calls sujet) repeats, on the one hand, the tension
inherent in perception between intuitively given profiles and their synthesis into an
object, on the other hand a pictorial consciousness must precede it and select certain
moments in the physical picture, making them interpretable as such profiles. These
moments in the appearance of the physical object thus provide the basis of two
contrasting acts, one direct and one pictorial. Pictorial consciousness thus involves
two sides: the conscious directedness towards an object (31) through a picture – and

292
C H A P T E R 14
the consciousness of contradiction which distinguishes between the two contrasting
interpretations.
This analysis of pictorial consciousness has a series of consequences:
– It becomes possible to distinguish between those moments in the pictorial object
which are similar to the object and allows it to appear, on the one hand, and
those moments which do not resemble it or are decidedly in contradiction to it,
on the other: ‘What functions representationally in the content of the pictorial
object is indicated in a special manner: It produces, it represents, depicts, makes
intuitive. It is as if the sujet gazes towards us through these features. These
features appear first in simple perception and only stand out in it against the other
features of the pictorial object, against moments, parts, properties which either
decidedly possess the opposite character, that of contradiction to properties in
the sujet referred to, or which do not have neither one nor the other character.
Such characterless features depict nothing, but it remains undecided how the real
object is represented in them.’367
– On the basis of this idea, a further distinction between different pictures of the
same object can be made – and, more generally, a distinction between different
types of pictures using different classes of moments in this similarity relation.
– It becomes possible to distinguish between two different types of use of the
picture: one which uses the picture mainly as sort of indexical ‘trigger’ to refer to
the object (what Husserl calls a ‘symbolical’ use of the picture, cf. his idea of the
trigger role of illustrations in geometry) versus a more proper use of the picture
which momentarily lets pictorial object and reference object fuse together so that
we directly grasp the latter through the former (analogous, in fact, to Peirce’s
idea of an ‘imaginary moment’ in icon processing where it is as if the object is
perceived directly).
– Aesthetic contemplation of pictures may be distinguished as a special focussing
on the pictorial object as appearance (where both the picture as physical support
as well as object reference are bracketed). In the text in question, Husserl draws
the consequence that the aesthetic picture must stand in a clear distance to its
object (41), so that the differential character of pictorial consciousness is at its
most clear and the bracketing of the object depicted is easiest. It is interesting to
note that Husserl’s deliberations here touches upon his recurrent wax doll example
(where we erroneously take a life-size wax doll to be a human being) where the
spectator is spontaneously fooled by the high degree of perceptual resemblance
despite our clear, conceptual insight that it is not a living human being. The
purely conceptual knowledge about the Widerstreit is thus not sufficient for the
aesthetic feeling, about which we know that ‘ the picture must distinguish itself
clearly from reality, that is, purely intuitively, without any help from indirect
thoughts.’368 Pure consciousness of Widerstreit must be spontaneous and intuitive,
not a secondary product of reflection. Aesthetic contemplation of pictures thus
appears as a threshold phenomenon in a continuum: on the one hand it must be
distinguished from pictures with unclear, vague, or diminished consciousness of
Widerstreit where the interest in the object has the upper hand and the attempt

I N T O T H E P I C T U R E
293
to grasp the object directly is important (cf. ‘the imaginary moment’); on the
other hand it must be distinguished from merely symbolical uses of the picture
where it it is also taken primarily as a type of access to the object, but this time
with extra sharpened contrast consciousness and without any direct imagination
of object qualities.
– Finally, the analysis of pictorial consciousness serves in a recurrent fashion
as Husserl’s background for his (vain?) attempts at a consistent description of
fantasy as act type. The large text which we have here discussed, in this respect
plays the role of an intermediary text where Husserl’s earlier idea about the
pictorial quality of fantasy (maintained in Beilage 1 (108) from 1898 and, even
if less explicitly, in the Logische Untersuchungen) is finally given up.
The fact that the constant tension between similarity and contrast in the definition
of pictures must, in fact, be at stake in two separate relations in the picture as a
whole, is finally made explicit in a contemporary note, Beilage III (dated ‘wohl
um 1904/05’) which, given the triadic definition of the picture, clearly poses two
separate questions: ‘Welches Verhältnis besteht zwischen Bild und Sache? Welches
Verhältnis besteht zwischen Bildobject und Sache?’ (138).369 Here, the basic
contrast between the picture and the picture object which the sensory appearance
provides for intuition is outlined in addition to the already mentioned contrast
(similarity, but no total identity) which must lie between the pictorial object and
the sujet, the referential object.
The decisive relation of similarity, defining pictoriality,370 is here analyzed in
two steps. First, a relation between the picture taken as a physical object and the
pictorial object it makes the observer see. Here, of course, a similarity must be at
stake, while the latter is identical with a subset of the moments of the former –
subjected, of course, to a different interpretation. At the same time a difference must
be at stake because it is a subset only of the aspects of the physical object which
participates in the pictorial object. We can add that it is possible to imagine extreme
cases like pictures giving rise to entirely different pictorial objects, depending
upon which moments are taken to give rise to a pictorial object and in which
way (Wittgensteinian duck/rabbits, photographic double exposures, puzzle pictures,
partial reflections in glass, etc.). Second, there is a relation between pictorial object
and reference object, sujet, state-of-affairs or whatever we call the object referred
to. Here holds a to some extent analogous distinction between which moments of
the pictorial object are taken to refer to the object by means of similarity, and
which not. Pictorial consciousness, to conclude, must consist of two sets of solidary
relations of contrast and similarity.
Is it a given thing, now, that the very same moments in the picture’s appearance
which constitute the pictorial object are identical with those which, in turn, refer
to the object? Husserl does not pose this question, maybe because of the fact that
it seems immediately obvious that the pictorial relation prototypically involves one
and the same subset of moments of the picture (even if, of course, taken in three
different ways). Yet it must be emphasized that a vast set of modifications of this
basic relation seems possible: different moments of the picture may contradict one

294
C H A P T E R 14
another with a lot of different rhetorical effects as the result. The fact that one picture
depicts a face which is considerably more oblong than any existing face known
must, immediately, be taken as the reference to such a deform or mutated bodily
part. If, however, the object reference in some way (maybe by means of a symbolical
indication determining the object referred to as a really existing person, maybe by
means of pictorial aspects of the very pictorial presentation (the shape or context
of the face in the picture makes it clear the figure in question is a certain American
president), etc.) is indicated as being a real person, then the oblong character of the
face changes from being a real property of the object depicted to being a rhetorical
effect in the description of that object, and the picture changes status from depicting
an abnormality to being a caricature. The two sets of similarities thus provide the
theoretical basis for a vast range of different pictorial rhetorics, depending upon
which elements and aspects in the double transformation relation between physical
picture and object possess character of reference and which possess character of
meaning, to put it crudely. It is on the basis of an idea like this that the Belgian
semiotician gang Groupe  has devised their investigation of different types of
transformation between pictorial object and reference object.371
The notion of picture is grosso modo kept unchanged in the group of 1912 texts,
e.g. in ‘Zur Lehre vom Bildbewusstsein und Fiktumbewusstsein’ where the same
triad of Bildding, Bildobjekt, Bildsujet is presented (489). Yet, an important change
has taken place: where pictures were earlier presented as a derivative structure
founded on perception, the contradiction inherent in pictorial consciousness now
has the character of ‘Hier streiten zwei Wahrnehmungen, bzw. zwei Wahrnehmung-
sobjekte’ (487). This is not the case in all pictorial consciousness, now, only when
pictorial consciousness is founded on a perception. In that case, the fantasy picture
may be ‘saved’ as a special case of picture with no direct perceptual basis – but then
in favor of giving up of the definition of pictorial consciousness by the duplicity
of similarity and contrast. This change is deeply connected to the whole transcen-
dental Kehre in Husserl’s thought which is evident from ‘Phantasie als Durch und
durch Modifikation. Zur Revision des Inhalts-Auffassungs-Schemas’ from 1909.
Here, Husserl begins by asking to the source of the ever failed attempts at under-
standing the relation between perception and fantasy. The fallacy is localized in
the distinction between ‘Auffassung’ and ‘Auffassungseinhalt’ which makes seem
that one and the same content should be given for two different apprehensions
in the two act types. This is wrong, instead ‘Rather: “Consciousness” consists
all the way through of consciousness, and already sensation as well as fantasy is
“consciousness” ’372 Where the content was earlier seen as an entity independent
of consciousness which was subjected to different act types, now consciousness
is closed around itself as a consequence of the transcendental reduction (or as its
prerequisite?). This in contrast to the earlier doctrine where sensation and sensorial
content was one, but on the other hand distinct from perception as conscious act.
Now, sensation and perception are placed on one and the same, conscious level.
The earlier doctrine is, in this context, represented by Beilage XII (‘Empfindung –
Phantasma und die ihnen wesentlichen “Auffassungen” ’, from 1904/05) where

I N T O T H E P I C T U R E
295
the idea, quite on the contrary, is that sensation and fantasy as contents are not,
in themselves, conscious, but only becomes so in perception and fantasy as acts
which take the sensation and the fantasy, respectively, as objects. The difference
between these two texts thus display very well the theoretical development from
object to noema in the field of imagination types especially.373 The reason why
conscious acts here must direct themselves toward non-conscious contents is that
the opposite is taken to lead into regression: the fantasy imagination is not itself a
fantasy, and if it were, then it would require yet another imaginative act in order to
grasp that, another, in turn, to grasp that, etc. But then, on the other hand, so goes
the criticism of this earlier doctrine, the content must in itself be marked by the
difference between sensation and fantasy, for we can not perceive a fantasy content
nor vice versa: phantasize about a perceptual content. We may only make founded
second-order acts like the perception of a fantasy imagination or the phantasizing
about a perception.
Accordingly, we may quote two of the more elaborated taxonomies in order to
illustrate the development in Husserl’s thought. In Beilage IV (from 1904/05, 39),
the typology is rendered in the following Porphyrian tree:
Figure 37.
The two subcategories under the picture category refers to pictures founded
in perceptions and pictures founded in phantasies (picturing something not-
remembered in fantasy), respectively. As is evident, fantasy is here taken to be repre-
sentative (because it represents something not present), but not analogizing like the
picture. It is clear that the type of representation here referred to (comprising fantasy
and memory, differing from picture as well as from symbol) has a special character.
It is construed as a derivative and secondary access to the object as compared to
perception, but is opposed, on the other hand, to improper (uneigentliche) Vorstel-
lungen, which require outer support in the form of pictures or symbols.
If we jump five years to 1910, we find in text 12 ‘ “Empfindung”, Erinnerung,
Erwartung und Phantasie als Modi des Zeitbewusstseins. Bewusstsein als Zusam-
menhang’ a completely different taxonomy, motivated by the transcendental
Kehre. The point of departure is now the molecule of time consciousness
involving retention-presentation-protention. While presentation is characterized by

296
C H A P T E R 14
Gegenwart, presence, all three aspects of time consciousness may be subject to
an assertive374 repetitive consciousness (‘Wiederbewusstsein’) giving rise to three
new categories: memory, perception and anticipation (Erinnerung, Empfindung,
Erwartung), called forth by re-presentation, co-presentation, and for-presentation,
respectively (Wiedervergegenwärtigung, Mitgegenwärtigung,Vergegenwärtigung).
Finally, these three categories may be modified, in turn, by a non-assertive act
giving rise to fantasy (which must fall in the same three temporal classes). This
gives us something like the schema below (referring only to the left part of the
former tree dealing with Vorstellungen proper):
Non-assertive
Representation
F
A
N
T
A
S
Y
Assertive
Repetitive
Consciousness
Memory
Perception
Anticipation
Original
Consciousness
Rentention
Presentation
Protention
This paper virtually explodes (quite explicitly) of unsolved questions: what then
with picture and symbol consciousness? They must now be the result of still
further modifications – symbol consciousness as the mere associative linking of
two conscious states, and picture consciousness (presumably) as the analogizing
such linking. In this context, the overall principle now is the associationist credo
‘Bewusstsein ist immer Zusammenhang und notwendig Zusammenhang’ (291) –
consciousness is always connectedness and necessarily connectedness.
If we go on, however, to 1912 (in the large ‘Modi der Reproduktion’ and contem-
poraneous texts and fragments), fantasy again approaches pictorial consciousness,
now in a reverse movement, so that the fantasy concept tends to embrace the
picture concept rather than the opposite. The notion of fantasy must be generalized
(‘Reproduktion und Bildbewusstsein’, c. spring 1912, 475), and two types of modifi-
cation by Vergegenwärtigung – Husserl’s word for representation – are presented:
perceptive and reproductive, respectively (corresponding to fantasy proper and
pictures). This happens based on the argumentation that the distinction between
assertive and non-assertive is independent of the distinction between picture and
fantasy and, more generally, independent of the distinction between impression and
reproduction. These distinctions may be freely combined. This idea corresponds to
that maintained in Ideen I, §§109–15. Thus both assertive and non-assertive pictures
and phantasies exist, and the distinction from 1910 where phantasies were seen as
non-assertive is given up.375 On the other hand, pictures and phantasies now fall
in the same category, both being reproductive acts in contrast to the impression of
perception. The picture (perceptive or ‘eikonische Bildlichkeit’) now has the same
structure as reproductive fantasy (as against perception and simple fantasy), both

I N T O T H E P I C T U R E
297
may be (non-)assertive (384), both are pure Darstellung and may, in turn, give rise
to real propositions as well as fantasy propositions: ‘I follow a play in the theatre,
or I contemplate a painting. Here differs, just like in reproductive fantasy, the ideas,
perceptions, judgments, emotions etc. which are produced in the picture (pictorially
produced) from the actual ones called forth in me, the observer. Actual is the very
production itself.’376 – depending upon whether the acts in question are taking place
in fantasy (picture) or has fantasy (or picture) as their content.
The reintegration of the two may also get an expression as the following: if the
sujet is lacking in the fundamental triad of the picture (picture – picture object –
object), the result will be fantasy (in a narrow sense, we must assume) or memory
(‘Zur Lehre vom Bildbewusstsein und Fiktumbewusstsein’, c. 1912, 489).
The result of this re-approachment of picture and fantasy – just like in the phase
prior to 1905 – is, consequently, that the Widerstreit is dampened to be a mere possi-
bility in pictures: ‘But only where a pictorial consciousness is based in a perception
situation (where a perception does in fact form part of a perceptual context but is not
embedded in it unanimously) or where a pictorial consciousness in the same manner
is embedded in a memory context do we have pictorial consciousness connected
to contradiction; all this must be grasped in a more precise manner. I must protect
myself against unsuitable generalization: as if picture and contradiction necessarily
belonged together.’377 Contradiction now is found in the special case of perceptual
pictures and memories only, while it is not present in pictorial consciousness
(comprising fantasy as well) in general.378 Six years later, this continuous vacil-
lation in the relation between picture and Widerstreit is sought solved by a lucky
idea: a distinction between real and merely possible Widerstreit: ‘One must distin-
guish between the cases of real contradiction as in the case of actorial presentation,
and the cases of potential contradiction which depend on environmental intentions
which hang on to the object intuited but which must first be ‘developed’ in order
to lead to real contradiction.’379 Contrast needs not be explicit, it may lie as a
possibility in the relation of the picture to its context (that is, the Widerstreit of the
picture, fantasy, memory against the actual world of perception). This was antici-
pated already in the distinction between actual and potential assertion in the Ideen.
We shall return to possible consequences.
The reason for the new subsumption of pictures under fantasy as a special sort
of perceptive reproduction is to be found in the insight that both forms may include
real moments of perception within them – and thus constitute different combi-
nation possibilities between perception and reproduction. The problem is first of
all apparent in fantasy: Husserl observes that fantasy very often takes its point
of departure in matter from perception which is then recombined, transformed or
otherwise changed. Later he goes so far as to say that it is dubious whether pure
fantasy without any connection to acts of experience does exist at all (1918, 509).380
With a recurring example – the reading of fairy-tales – Husserl argues that here
factual information is mixed with fictitious phenomena into a fantasy, a quasi-reality
(379) with the consequence that the Widerstreit is bracketed (382).381 Generally,
‘quasi’-concepts in this period become a central way to present the broad fantasy

298
C H A P T E R 14
concept’s way of functioning. In fantasy, I am quasi-attentive; what I invest in a
fantasy is a quasi-I who quasi-perceives and quasi-judges. The phenomenological
basis for Ingarden’s theory of literature with its emphasis on quasi-judgment is
outlined in these strains of Husserl’s work around 1912 (see Chap. 17 – we can
add that Ingarden in just this period began as Husserl’s student and assistant).382
The description by means of the ‘quasi’-operator may thus without problems be
extended to pictures proper which may now be defined as ‘quasi Setzung der
perzeptiven Anschauung (Bildanschauung).’ (468) of which holds that ‘Jedes echtes
Bild, perzeptives Bild, ist quasi Auffassung und nicht etwa Intention, nur herabge-
drückt.’ (399) – pictures have a quasi assertion of perceptive intuition and are thus
only quasi experience.
This large text from 1912 ends with a chapter on terminological clarification
whose main distinction goes between passive sensoriality and the whole series of
spontaneous activities subsequently built upon it (a constant, dating back to Logical
Investigations, now in new clothing). This clarification, however, also leads to a new
series of questions. The overall problem seems to be that Husserl now has a rather
productive combination calculus of many different modifications and intentions –
without this combination, on the other hand, being completely free. While the later
texts (from 1909 and clearly from 1912 onwards) build upon the transcendental
Kehre’s closure of consciousness as well as a weakening of the Widerstreit as a
criterion, they also add lots of interesting new insigths and ideas: the introduction of
anticipation in the context of imagination (that only memory should be covered by
the picture-fantasy problem seems strange), the close relation to time consciousness,
as well as a series of sophistications of the description of the aesthetic Einstellung.
We shall here go on to assume the Widerstreit as a basal criterion, even if it for
us must be freed from its tie to the consciousness concept and be relativized into
a merely possible consciousness of contrast (just like Husserl himself proposed,
tied to the merely possible assertions implied in parts of every picture 383 – see
above). The contrast or contradiction between the three poles of a picture is a purely
objective relation, and the idea of any explicit consciousness of contradiction runs
into problems like that of illusions: perceptions which are fooled by a picture (like
a trompe-l’œil when it in fact works). Here, the Widerstreit is temporally realized
(just like in fantasy), but what did the gaze actually see during the time span before
the Widerstreit was discovered? Then, there was not – according to the picture
definition by Widerstreit – yet any picture at stake, but it would be ridiculous to
claim, on the other hand, that it is a case of ordinary, direct perception, because a
non-existing object is what is seen. The formation of a new and strange category
to absorp illusions may be avoided by assuming that the picture did function as
pictorial object – but now without the first, founding sensation became conscious
as such. The perception so to speak began with an ‘imaginary moment’ without
contrast consciousness. But the question of whether explicit consciousness is a
necessary prerequisite to contrast can be generalized to pictorial consciousness
as such. A similar argumentation may be made regarding subliminal perceptions
(of which Peirce was one of the first experimental investigators): the fact that it

I N T O T H E P I C T U R E
299
is possible for the mind or brain to process pictures (measured by the fact that
they inflict upon behavior) without they reaching consciousness at all. It would
be meaningless to say that such pictures are not pictures only because no explicit
picture consciousness can be traced. We shall therefore argue for a modified version
of Husserl’s plastic 1918 suggestion and keep the contrast definition as central –
only, it must be generalized to a merely potential contrast.384
Let us leave now this long philological discussion with the aim of outlining
the most central proposal for the solution of the fantasy/picture problem. We can
say that, to Husserl, that discussion never ended. The latest text in Hua XXIII
(Beilage LXV from the middle 20s) ends, significantly, with the re-emergence of
the Widerstreit, now accompanied by a question mark: ‘Is there not contradiction
in all fantasy, also pure fantasy? In perceptions, memories, anticipations. I inhibit
all positing of a world. But does not every fantasy possess some place, something,
which contradicts it?’385 Potentially, yes.
Let us now focus upon a series of different interesting detail ideas regarding the
picture especially.
P I C T U R E S A N D S E N S E S
An important issue in Husserl’s account deals with the basic relation between picture
and sensation. The prototypical picture in Husserl is always visual, but Husserl
emphasizes in the early period en passant (Beilage III, 1904/05, footnote, 138) that
pictures may exist only in the sense modalities of vision and touch – presumably for
the reason that any picture must possess a partially contrast-evoking sensorial skin –
which these two senses should be the only ones being able to give rise to. Also in
this dimension, Husserl’s picture category is more narrow than Peirce’s (hypo-)icon
theory which does not only cover all senses but also abstract, ideal images. But
Husserl does not give any closer argumentation for the idea that only these two
senses should be picture generating. It seems hard to ignore the picture potential in,
e.g. the classical effects of radio theatre: a man in the studio repeatedly bites noisily
in an apple, and in the living room of the listener footsteps in snow are heard  But
you don’t need to go that far: if the visual gestalts of the actors on stage pictorially
display the figures of the drama, then their voices supposedly fulfill exactly the
same task auditively? Husserl seemingly has not thought the issue through which
also seems to appear from the fact than in later discussions (cf. below) he, without
further notice, may list auditive examples like the relation between different versions
of Beethoven sonatas and the intention of the composer. If we expand the question
to cover not only pictures as they appear directly for the senses, more problems
appear. The sujet which the picture depicts needs not be an individual object,386
such as might be the spontaneous idea, and the later Husserl is, in fact, ready to
admit that the picture as such is an ideal object (537). This opens up the vast issue of
the relation between pictorial and fantasy consciousness to the possibilities inherent
in categorial intuition and Wesenserschauung387 to grasp ideal objects. In the LU,
the distinction between perception and imagination, so important for the intuition

300
C H A P T E R 14
of empirical objects, became irrelevant for categorial intuition. Here lies one of
the most important lacunae in Husserl’s theory – stemming from the spontaneous
idea that the objects of pictures and phantasies are necessarily individual. But ideal
objects may – as we know from the 3rd investigation – be co-intended as aspects
of individual objects, and hence it would not seem strange, rather the opposite,
if these aspects might be isolated for access in pictures and phantasies. Rather it
could be said that the quasi-character of the picture entails that its object can never
be thoroughly determined in all aspects by pictorial means alone (cf. Ingarden’s
related idea of ‘schematized aspects’ referring only to certain properties of their
object, see Chap. 17), and that the picture for this reason possesses ideal character,
just like the later Husserl should maintain. Peirce has, as we have seen, a ingenious
solution to this problem in his concept of the diagram.
H U S S E R L I A N A E S T H E T I C S
A recurrent feature in Husserl’s treatment of the picture/fantasy problem in the
whole period is that he tries to develop aesthetic corollaries from it. His basic
aesthetic ideas are taken from the definitory triad of the picture and it is contained
in the simple idea that the aesthetic attitude highlights the appearance of the picture
object, while the sujet, the object of reference, loses interest – cf. Beilage VI
(c. 1906) where the interest in the reference object is opposed to the aesthetic interest
in the appearance of the picture object. This approaches aesthetic contemplation to
fantasy in a narrow sense, to theoretical reflection, as well as to neutralization as
the non-assertive presentation of an object or a state-of-affairs, as the later Husserl
remarks. In the first round, Husserl seeks to determine aesthetics by the pleasure of
appearance contemplation (ibid.), but he constantly returns to the attempt at further
understanding of what is special in the aesthetic interest in appearances.
In Beilage IX (c. 1905, 159), the ambiguous quality of aesthetic apperception is
highlighted. Husserl comes to this conclusion from the simple nesting of picture
consciousnesses within one another. The reproduction of a work of art, e.g., involves
two separate pictorialities (the etching as a picture of the original painting vs. the
etching as a picture of the object of the original painting – the sonata as Beethoven
intended it vs. the sonata as the expression of certain emotions). It is hard to see
precisely how the conclusion follows from these premisses, but we can observe
that if a picture has, in this way, two nested objects, then it has also two nested
appearances. Aesthetic interest may then be directed towards each of them – and,
what is more, it is not, in general, predictable which level of appearances aesthetic
intention may chose to focus upon (the picture as color, the picture as form, the
picture as the result of an expressive act, the picture as the reproduction of objects in
a 3-D space, the picture as the reproduction of certain recognizable objects in a 3-D
space, etc.).388 Aesthetic contemplation may not only highlight one or more of these
strata of appearance, but also focus upon their possible interaction. In addition to
this, a classical demand in the contemplation of art is maintained (‘Forderungen, die
die Teile des ästhetischen Ganzen gegeneinander üben ’, ibid.) which must also

I N T O T H E P I C T U R E
301
involve these different levels of appearance as aspects of the wholeness of aesthetic
experience – an idea of course taken further in Ingarden’s idea of a ‘polyphony’ of
the different levels of the work of art.
In addition to this, it must be emphasized that this preliminary formalism with
its bracketing of the referred object also must be modified by object properties.
In the second picture theoretical assault period (‘Modi ’, 1915, 390) Husserl
claims that ‘The content of the object itself is not aesthetically insignificant. It is
not the same whether it is an emperor or not, if it is a significant or an everyday
event, etc. Is it then about a co-sounding of effects of emotions (awe, affection)?
But also something else: Any objectivity which motivates existential pleasure or
phantasizes quasi-pleasure. In itself, this pleasure is not aesthetical. But aesthetic
pleasure which is dependent on the mode of appearance may connect itself with this
pleasure (as an actuality) and the whole has the character of a heightened aesthetical
pleasure. Stilleben. The interaction between actual pleasures or quasi-pleasures (in
nature: pleasure with the fertile fruit trees, fields, etc.) and suffering and other actual
positions taken is, however, in itself a main piece of real aesthetical pleasure. So
also this belongs to the “mode of appearance”.’389
Not only the play in between the levels of appearance, but also the interplay
between appearance and object – form and matter, if you like – belong to the
appearance of the aesthetic, while the aesthetic contemplation at the same time
brackets any existence claim as to the matter side, hence the connection to ‘quasi’. It
is important to maintain that Husserl in these brief determinations thus distinguishes
between the aesthetic level (tied to the interplay between forms of appearance and
matter, as well as to the emotions involved herein) and the far more comprehensive
category of the fictive which is characterized merely by the fact that the distinction
between assertive and non-assertive is suspended – cf. the quasi-judgment charac-
teristic of fictional literature in Ingarden’s theory of literature. And it is equally
important to underline that this aesthetic interplay does not, necessarily, appear
explicitly as thematic, conscious content and object of attention (392). But these
basic aesthetic determinations hold, without further notice, for picture as well as
fantasy; they even hold for aesthetic aspects of the theoretical interest (ibid.): the
pleasure of theoretical insight, the beauty of a mathematical proof.390
Fictionality, pictoriality in a sufficiently broad sense as to include theoretical
knowledge, thus seem to be a prerequisite (but hardly sufficient) to aesthetic contem-
plation. But a decisive feature in fictivitiy and indeed in representation in general is
that it – contrary to empirical reality – is endowed with what Ingarden later named
‘Unbestimmtheitsstellen’ which in Husserl’s brainstorm is merely called Unbes-
timmtheit (1922/23, 561), given by the fact that the pictorial object only represents
the object in certain selected aspects and in other respects appears empty: ‘Auf die
Frage, was der phantasierte Zentaur am Phantasiemorgen essen wird, mit wem sie
unterhalten oder kämpfen wird, gibt es keine Antwort.’ (1918, 523) – nobody may
know what a fantasy creature had for breakfast.391 The fact that all fantasy and
picture activity has this character (not to speak about signitive intentions; nine tenths
of Ingarden’s literary theory consists of a phenomenological linguistics) is in some

302
C H A P T E R 14
sense a simple consequence of the definitions Husserl gave already in the years
after the Logische Untersuchungen, but these implications are made explicit only
more than ten years later. A related fact which Husserl also only thoroughly realizes
in this period is the crucial ideality of the picture – exactly because the picture
shares the empty slots, it is so to speak endowed with those algebraical variables
which already in the Prolegomena to the Logische Untersuchungen were character-
istic for ideal objects and which in Erfahrung und Urteil opens the epistemological
possibility of their determination by means of ‘eidetic variation’.392
Husserl’s argument simply concludes that as fantasy does not present reality, it
may only present possibilities. And the possible is, as against reality, not individual,
it is ideal, on some or other level of generality. About the picture of a mountain,
Husserl claims – as against the real mountain, existing in time – that ‘Dieses
“Bild” ist ein idealer Gegenstand (nicht etwa ein Reales in der Zeit Dauerndes),
der Berg bietet dieses Bild dauernd, aber es selbst ist kein dauerndes.’ (Beilage
LVIII, c. 1917, 538). But if the object of a picture is ideal, it can not be real,
but merely possible. The ideality of pictures thus refers to pure possibilities, and
fantasy in general is unable to imagine individual entities: ‘Thus fantasy can not
really represent any individual, it gives “something” which is shaped in the form of
an individual and which is only made intuitive with its (in relation to individuality)
undecided meaning content.’393
I C O N I C I T Y B E T W E E N H U S S E R L A N D P E I R C E
In the very last text about pictorality from the 20s, Husserl surprisingly approaches
many of the central ideas in Peirce’s icon concept (the icon’s possibility, vagueness,
and ideality, icons as the base of communication, their connection to predicates,
their lack of conformity to the principle of contradiction, even continuity ):
– Vagueness: In ‘Reine Möglichkeit und Phantasie’ (c.1922/23, X), the ‘als ob
seiend’, the ‘quasi’ of fantasy is described thus: -‘Possibilities, individual pure
possibilities are flowing.’
– Non-observance of the Principle of Contradiction: imagination gives – ‘Infinitely
many possible realities, which are mutually inconsistent, etc.’ (Bilag LXII, c.
1918, 566) – an infinity of possible realities which are mutually exclusive.
– The predicate character of pictures -‘Predicate is something identical which may
be identical in many, in “manifold”, which appears identical in changeable and
different possibilities and may determine the concrete.’
– The picture as a prerequisite to any communication of meaning: fantasy as pure
possibility is a presupposition for the communication of signification between
subjects as intersubjective fantasy, because the subjects involved refer to the
same ‘intersubjektiv identisches.’ (568)
– The predicates of fantasy as something which may be completed by the filling-in
of a subject: -‘And correspondingly I can think of some subject which supposes
this on the basis of its facts.’

I N T O T H E P I C T U R E
303
– Even an idea analogous to Peirce’s metaphysics of the continuum with the loss
of individual identity is hinted at, when Husserl says ‘ when I, in an exemplary
manner, run through the extension as pure extension, then it does not occur to
me to intend the respective subjective, individualizing differences. If I imagine
one single centaur, then I do not mean “it” as imagined exactly by me. Should
we say that the singular of a pure extension (of an extension of pure individual
possibilities) that the exemplary single is, in itself, already a general, an identical
which, in turn, has a pure extension of possibilities?’ (Our italics). The pure
extension of a predicate does not refer to individual objects but to a general
object which, in turn, refers to an extension of pure possibilities.394
This ideality of fantasy and picture is also developed in relation to aesthetic issues.
With respect to decisive references, literature is, e.g. principally undecidable:
In the horizon of undecidability which the given world and time has for everybody, the poet places
himself, deciding it, filling it in with Gestalten.
Reader, poet in a world and time. Two extremes:
a) The given world and time may be so fully determined as our surrounding world right now is (not
the real world). For instance today’s Berlin determined in that way in which it is for us and even for
the Berliners themselves. b) Extreme counterexample. Once upon a time in some fabulous country, in
another time, in another world with quite different animal beings, even other natural laws, etc. Between
these two extremes all art develops.395
Correspondingly, art goes forward between depicting something existing (by pictorial
consciousness) and producing pure fantasy worlds, between (empirical) realism and
(imaginary) idealism. Here, numerous intermediary possibilities may be developed.
It can immediately be added that this theory of genre in spe (for all art forms) has
its phenomenological basis in the very observation of pictures, namely in its two
potential phases, with and without pictorial consciousness, respectively. Also this
idea dates back all the way to 1904/05 when Husserl made the distinction between
the observation of the picture endowed with Widerstreit on the one hand, and the
direct grasping of the object through the picture on the other, what was later recog-
nized as a phantasizing relation to it, corresponding to Peirce’s ‘imaginary moment’.
The Widerstreit is simply suspended when I focus upon the sujet. (467, 1912).
The possibility grasped may of course be more or less ‘pure’, depending on
whether it involves individual reality (548); this also lay implicitly already in
Beilage V where a distinction was made between genuine pictorial consciousness
which truthfully sees what is alike in what is alike, and different grades of ‘impure’
consciousness, all the way down to when the impurity is present to so large an
extent that we can no longer grasp the sujet through the pictorial object as if it was
in some sense present itself (143).
This continuous variability in the degree of resemblance between pictorial object
and sujet may be discussed in the light of Husserl’s different concepts – or rather,
metaphors – for more or less adequate perception. The recurrent concept of covering
(‘Deckung’) is used already in the Logische Untersuchungen as a concept for
adequate perception, and in Beilage V, this concept is also used about such ‘impure’
cases where we only remotely recognize the sujet in the pictorial object – e.g. in a

304
C H A P T E R 14
rude children’s drawing. We can grasp that it is meant to depict a human being, even
if we do not see the human being in it. ‘Or maybe yet a little bit. We have covered
the men, the two of them cover each other, but give widely apparent differences.
The difference is so crude that we no longer feel disturbed by the consciousness
of falsity by our tendency to identify, on the contrary, the tendency to identify is
lacking and because of the huge distance we find the representation ridiculous.’396
It is, however, hardly the only reaction possible; we may also find such a rendering
of the object practical, economical, diagrammatical. The decisive thing, however,
is the metaphor of ‘covering’ which allows us to grasp the difference: we sort of
place the picture ‘on top of’ the object, we map the one onto the other and by
doing so we grasp the degree of difference between them. The interesting thing
here is that this discontinuous idea of covering in the same text intermingle with a
continuous idea of ‘merging’. The example with the children’s drawing is further
analyzed as two intentions depicting the same object which are connected and
merge into a synthetic unity. This results in a ‘Übererinsstemmungsbewusstsein’
displaying similarity where ‘eins in der andere verfliesst und doch wieder als anders
empfunden wird’397 (our italics). But this similarity is triggered by a continuous
deformation or variation process rather than a ‘covering’. Maybe one could say
that the two of them are necessary as simultaneous procedures to keep similarity
as well as difference, the flowing together as well as the covering? The continuous
variation is tied, of course, to the possibility of unfolding relations lying implicitly
in the picture, cf. below.
P I C T U R E S W I T H I N O R D I N A R Y P E R C E P T I O N
Let us finally use the results of this discussion of Husserl’s concept of pictures to
argue for a new phenomenological distinction between two types of pictures, in the
first approachment regarding visual pictures of a non-moving kind. Our point of
departure will be a couple of Husserl’s fragmentary ideas. In Beilage VI Husserl
wonders why it is that we have the insight of everyday phenomenology that nature
is able to be spontaneously given as a landscape and thus function as a picture.
How is that possible?
Why does nature, a landscape, function as ‘p i c t u r e’? A remote village. The houses ‘small houses’.
These small houses have a) a changed size as against the houses as we normally see them, b) a lessened
stereoscopy, changed colours, etc. They are just like pictures conceived as toy houses. The same with
human beings: dolls.398
The picture thus lies enfolded as a possibility within ordinary perception already.
When the gaze assumes a certain distance to things, they lose stereoscopic depth as
well as size – and, we could add, they also lose immediate corporeal relevance to the
perceiving subject. It implies that already the regard at a distance implies a certain
neutralization (as well known from everyday idioms like ‘ seen at a distance ’,
‘ seen from Sirius ’), from where the things assume an objectivity which is, at
the same time, the basis for fantasy variations (the houses turn into dolls’ houses).
This is, in fact, a grounding of the possibilities of picture and fantasy already in the

I N T O T H E P I C T U R E
305
‘schlichte’ perception which is apt to counterargue all claims that the competence of
producing and understanding pictures should be something conventional requiring
learning, analogous to language acquisition.399 The remote gaze is, in fact, a double
gaze complete with Widerstreit and all what follows: we may shift between seeing
the remote houses as real houses at a long distance and as dolls’ houses very
close; we can not see both at once. It is, so to speak the naturalness of puzzle
pictures for perception which founds the inherent pictorality of nature.400 These
two ways of seeing are, of course, correlated to to corresponding sets of actions:
the neighboring village I can walk to, trade with, exchange women with, wage
war against, etc.; the dolls’ house village I can play with in an action space of
fantasy. This corresponds furthermore, as Husserl will later say, to two different
egos involved in the two different attitudes. Thus, there is an Ichspaltung already
in perception.401 There is nothing tragic in this splitting of the ego, however, quite
on the contrary it corresponds to a panel of possibilities for the subject which may
dress up in different fictitious roles, all depending on the character of the picture.
Now, let us take a closer look on the subject’s relation to fantasy and picture (nr.
16 (1912), 467): ‘I may well also ‘phantasize myself into’ the picture. This can only
mean that I extend pictorial space over me and my surrounding space and include
myself – with the exception of the real things which I see – in the picture whereby
I bracket by actuality; I myself then become a modified I, without positing. Then
my participation is that of a depicted observer (it belongs to the pictural object),
not that of a sympathetic observer outside the picture.’402 This means that, in the
phase of the ‘imaginary moment’ I perform a more or less conscious, fictitious
splitting of the ego and appears as a fantasy figure inside the picture. When the
split in the picture stops, the observing subject is so to say split instead and a
phantasized ego enters into the object in the imaginary moment. This ingenious
observation gives a new meaning to the traditional embedded observer in romantic
painting (Friedrich) which merely makes explicit and thematic a relation which
has a broader phenomenological generality: when we observe a landscape picture,
we automatically already – even if most often unthematically – find ourselves in
the midst of it. When we see the dolls’ house village, we already are in it. But
given this double character of landscape, a whole bundle of different experimental
possibilities open themselves for the fictitious observer who is now placed in its
foreground. He may undertake his walk towards the village in the distance. Or he
may reach out his arm and begin playing with the dolls’ houses in it. The real
observer’s splitting off of a fiction observer immediately gives rise to the possibility
of the splitting off of a second order fiction observer. But we are not threatened by
a regress. The doubling will rarely be repeated more than a few times.
But we can speculate – which Husserl does not – what other competences
may be ascribed to the subject finding itself inside the picture – apart from mere
observation. The further evolution of bodily phenomenology since Husserl (from
Merleay-Ponty to Rosch, Lakoff, etc.) will highlight, of course, the fictive observer
as a body possessing a whole series of characteristic ways of action which may
be played through in fantasy action in the picture. As regards the picture formally

306
C H A P T E R 14
conceived of as a sign, the Peircean viewpoint will maintain that any use of a
picture which rationally distinguishes its parts and their interrelation and indulges in
experiments with those interrelations, is diagrammatical. Thus, we must assume that
the observing fiction observer may investigate the picture due to those diagrams he
may construct on the basis of bodily action possibilities – or, in any case, those of
them which is actualized by the inherent action possibilities offered by the picture in
question. Diagrammatical experimentation with schemata is thus not a privilege for
maps and scientific models only, rather, these media are made possible (genetically,
of course not a priorically) by the more primitive competence of gaining access to
a landscape by means of a body.
Peirce’s diagrams, as we know, allow for an experimenting manipulation which
corresponds to hypothetical situations allowing that an information which is not
explicit in the picture, is extracted and made explicit. Husserl does not develop any
corresponding idea, but certain passages in him seems to suggest that he vaguely
realized the possibility. Thus, in Beilage XXXIV, he says about the synthesis of
ideas that it may possess the character of ‘ new formation of such syntheses and
analyses which separates partial appearances from the unitary appearances with the
partial meanings put into synthesis etc. In the explicit, new matter (kernels) appear.
Thus explication of what was concealed in the formerly given appearances.’403
New formation of syntheses may produce matter which was hidden in the given
appearances – but this is, exactly what characterizes diagrams as synthetical signs.
When the fictional observer in the picture makes such new syntheses experimenting
with the matter of the picture, he makes diagrammatical experiments with parts of
the picture using his spontaneous bodily relation to the pictorial scenario. Thus, this
ability in picture observation unites Peirce and Merleau-Ponty.
This idea gives rise to a long range of different possible ways of contemplating
pictures, depending on which bodily stance is adopted – a yet unmapped, or at least
only vaguely mapped region in traditional theory of pictures. In the next section I
shall try to cover one dimension (among many possible) in this new field.
P I C T U R A L A C C E S S I B I L I T Y
It is well known how the opposition between abstaction and figuration which
dominated large parts of early modernism in painting long since seems outdated
or irrelevant. No partisans of one or the other any longer roam – and if a few
should remain, they are unable to put forward their ideas without a moldy taste
of retro or of arbitrary or irritating politicizing. This has the simple reason that
abstract and figurative is no longer (nor have they ever been) oppositions, but
rather extremes on a continuum of possibilities – corresponding, but not identical
to Husserl’s continuum between the timelessness and the timeboundness of art. An
abstract painting is still depicting, more or less, this lies in its basic character of
being an idea containing slots of indeterminacy. Minimalism and concretism from
the 60s onwards might point towards another tension, which was independent of
the depicting qualities of the artwork, but rather involved that function on the one

I N T O T H E P I C T U R E
307
hand and the direct perception of the picture as a physical object on the other: the
tension between abstract and concrete. One and the same work may be grasped as
abstract, that is depicting something, even if on a general level, and as concrete,
that is, depicting nothing but its own matter and form, present for the observer
and cut loose from any pictorial signification or reference. During a certain period
also this tension gave rise to politicizing partisan activity for one of the other of
these possibilities – but this in vain, as the two possibilities in many cases are
just as much properties of the observation as properites in the artworks. Of course,
it remains to be the case that different criteria must be expected for what counts
as a successful artwork, depending on the two attitudes – but it is very difficult
to seen which arguments should conclude the strife for one of the attitudes being
more aesthetically authoritative than the other – no matter what avant garde partisan
myths one or the other may serve. The fact that partisan wars of this kind may be
ceasing is one of the good consequences (hopefully, that is) of the victory to death
of avantgardism as an ideology in the art institution: art is not politics and to be
artist or critic is not to be a partisan.
This leaves, on the other hand, the field open for more sensitive phenomenologial
investigations distinguishing different basic possibilities in the picture – without
having to choose one or the other as a partisan. A distinction for which I shall here
argue has its basis in Husserl’s determination of the picture as founded already
in ordinary perception (cf. above) – and his idea that picture perception installs a
fictitious observer within the very space of the picture. These determinations give
rise to the distinction between pictures which immediately opens up a space for
the perceiving body to move around in – as against pictures which do not open up
such a space. The prototype of the former is of course landscape pictures which the
observer digests with the abilities of the wanderer. The picture is mapped by the
observer moving along one of the possible routes which the picture displays. On the
other hand, lots of pictures do not offer such possibilities. The prototypical picture
here is probably the portrait where a face typically provides the main fraction of
the picture plane and where the background only rarely challenges the observer to
bodily investigation – so much more as the observer is kept still by the presence
of the person portrayed, often even by his or hers insisting gaze, and kept at bay
by the no-go zone of bodily distance. We speak of prototypes here, of course, the
tension between these two types defines here, like in many other cases, a continuum
where we may expect a huge zone of intermediaries of many kinds where tempting
mountain walks call behind Mona Lisa or where, conversely, all of the central field
of the landscape picture is occupied by monolithic tree groups and makes access
difficult for the walking or floating body.404
It any case it is important to notice that this distinction between accessible
and inaccessible pictures is orthogonal to e.g. the continuum between abstract and
figurative. A first idea might be to identify the figurative picture with accessibility
and the abstract one as inaccessible, but this is not the case. The portrait, as
mentioned, but also the Stillleben, the scientific planche or diagram, and the close-up
are picture types which do not, or at most marginally, permit the crossing routes

308
C H A P T E R 14
of the wandering body. It is not, it is true, precluded for the imaginary body
to change form into a fruit beetle and undertake the six-feet walk between the
exquisite volumes of the Stillleben and conquer the fruit bowl as a mountain range
by the filigran-like diving into the labyrinths of rot of the grapes – but still it
remains a marginal and derivative praxis in relation to the immediate observation
which rather strikes an evaluative pose on a distance equipped with an imaginary
fruit knife. Many abstract pictures have, of course, the same kind of rejection of
bodily movements. This holds, of course (but not only) for the strong tendency in
abstraction to highlight the surface and the two-dimensionality of the picture, very
often coupled with a a concretist emphasis on the material character of the picture
plane. It is hardly possible to access the typical Warhol because already the fat
layer of silk print gives the picture a fundamental and abstract two-dimensionality,
no matter the figurative character of the motif. It is hardly possible to access a
Mondrian, even if it ever so much displays the traffic of New York’s street grid
seen from a skyscraper (the top achievement will be following one of the stylized
cars on a restricted, 2-D ride). Or a Barnett Newman where one must push the
eye to its limit for seeing the vertical lightning bolt as an opening or the two
surrounding planes as scenographic pieces it is possible to traverse. But many
different abstract pictures are indeed open to access in this use of the word – not
only the later Monet where the spaces depticted has long since freed themselves
from any direct reference to the water lilies, but also Kandinsky where the single
elements in the picture often float in a diffusely defined, but undoubtable 3-D space.
Or Rothko, where the titillating bichromatics often suck like a pipe leading directly
to an out-of-the-body or light-after-death experience of occultism. Pollock, where
you float around in intergalactic dust, if it does not devaporate into oatmeal. The
reason behind these different spatialities is of course the different formal means
by which the imagined space in question is constituted – and they do not depend
on whether the objectivities depicted are recognizable in any figurative sense of
the word.
These means to space construction constitute a long list of artistic devices with
each their rules and structures:
– Dedicedly elaborated perspectives with vanishing points on a horizon facilitated
by parallel lines in the motif naturally immediately opens the picture plane and
erects a space, but far less than that may suffice
– A hint of a horizon line may be sufficient
– A light-dark opposition may construct space, as a tendency letting the lighter
parts lie closer to the observer than the darker ones
– A figure-ground distinction which lets the ground draw back and the figure jump
forth: this distinction may give rise to whole foreground-middle ground-back
ground hierarchies, so that uncut pregnant forms immediately appear as standing
before forms whose pregnant contour has been broken ‘by’ the foregrounded
forms

I N T O T H E P I C T U R E
309
– A differentiation in sharpness drawing the sharply contoured phenomena into the
foreground at the expense of more diffuse phenomena relegated to the background
– Anarticulatedgradingofthelightfallonasurfacemayletitdefineitsspatiallocation
and, e.g. assume an oblique position from the foreground into the background
– An articulated patterning of increasing tightness in a texture or a pattern where the
less tight part turns toward the observer and the more tight parts away from him
– ‘Expressive’ lumps and bits of color which in addition to their concretion has
a tendency to occupy the foreground of the picture, differing from the thinner,
more delicate layer of color disappearing into a remote dim
– Bright, violent color valors claim foreground positions while more discrete
nuances vanish behind them because of the fact that light intensity falls propor-
tionally with the square of the distance – and atmospheric air adding a further
dampening of color intensity
– The related fact that atmospheric air reflects blue light to a larger extent than
red light implies that colors from the red end of the color spectrum seem, as a
tendency, closer than colors from the blue end
– The upper part of the picture automatically offers itself as celestial and more
remote than the lower parts’ pieces of middle and foregrounds, due to the fact
that we live on the surface of a planet endowed with gravity
Any of these devices may, of course, be counteracted by one of the others, and,
in figurative pictures moreover by the mutual relations of recognizable items (the
matchbox close, the car remote, if they should not be reinterpreted as high-rise
and toy mobile, respectively). But in general, these devices make possible that the
body may spontaneously access a large spectrum of abstract paintings which only
very remotely or in a very stylized way could be said to possess figurative content,
if at all. If some of these effects work against each other, a further effect may
result because they do not necessarily simply annull each other – the result may
be spaces which remain undeniably spatial but contain zones hard to define, or
have a composite character with kippfigur – like changing possibilities of spatial
interpretation of certain parts or contrasting interpretations of different parts.
Very often, we probably have a spontaneous urge to interpret such spaces as
landscapes or exteriors in some generalized use of these concepts, even if they are
not inhabited by any figurative landscape effects at all and do not even have to have
any horizon. What does the body do when accessing such pictures? The prototypical
access is, of course, that of the wanderer, investigating where you can move by foot
along walks, roads, stairs, openings, doors, etc. in the picture – and, furthermore,
imagining the changing views while being subjected to these transports – most
often involving phantasizing due to the slots of indeterminacy in the picture.
But the plasticity of fantasy gives rise to a series of other variations – where
the experimenter changes the very rules of the spatial picture as diagram. First,
the observer may continuously change his size (and thus crawl upon the pyramid
of lemons in the fruit bowl or, conversely, with the steps of a giant gain access
to the remote city on the horizon). Second, a series of subcategories must be

310
C H A P T E R 14
distinguished, after which modus of movement is allowed for the searching body
when accessing pictural space. In certain pictures, you morph into an air spirit and
fly over cities and abysses, in short assume properties intermediary between bird
and deity, experiencing the whole of 3-D space offered by the picture. Another
type of change in movement mode is tempo which (most often) may be speeded
up so you hastily can cover different possibilities in the picture, still another
will cover other changes in movement type: maybe you not only walk or fly,
but sail, swim, drive, etc. – just like an experiment may change the types of
hindrances accepted (you walk unhindered directly through a bush, or a house,
or a mountain).405 Thus, we must claim that Husserl is wrong when he (text
12, 1912, 476) tries to understand the character of Stimmung in the landscape
painting and claims that this has nothing to do with the fictive observer: ‘Such
represented atmospheres, feelings, etc. do not presuppose a co-representation of the
observer, even if he enters action in his own way. More precisely, I – with this
atmosphere – do not belong to the picture.’406 Quite on the contrary, our hypothesis
would be that the Stimmung of a picture is highly dependent upon the bouquet of
possible peripathetical action possibilities determining which kind of access to the
pictorial space is possible (I do not claim, of course, that the Stimmung depends
only on this). Take as a commutation test a picture of a forest wilderness with
no pathways appearing in it. Its Stimmung will change abruptly if a narrow, but
well-trodden walk is introduced in a small corner of it, leading through it. As an
addendum to this chapter, at series of different picture examples are added with
differing degrees of accessibility and different positions on the abstract/figurative
continuum.407
The hypothesis that this wandering access (and its different possibilities and
impossibilities) play so huge a role in the understanding of pictures is based on
several assumptions. A genetical – and non-phenomenological – assumption is
that we, as a mammal species, must possess the basic competence of orienting
ourselves in a set of surroundings, find our way, trace prey, avoid predators, deal
with species fellows – which implies a high degree of competence presenting
qualified guesses of what may hide in the indeterminacy spots of a given set of
exteriors. An a priori explanation, a phenomenological essence description (which
needs in no way to conflict with the former, as they refer to empircial and ideal
regularities, respectively) will point to the idea that understanding is necessarily
diagrammatical – it includes maps, diagrams, schemata on a spatial substrate which
are dealt with by moving around in an abstract space of possible spatial behaviors
and by changing such an abstract mapping. Cognitive semantics has pointed to the
fact that such mechanisms are widespread in human behavior and ordinary language.
Thus it is no coincidence that it is the case in both concrete, metaphorical, and
abstract landscapes that it is possible to run wild. As Husserl – exactly in relation
to the question of pictures – metaphorically said:
D I E D I N G E S I N D A B E R D I F F I Z I L , U N D M A N G E H T L E I C H T
I N D I E I R R E 

I N T O T H E P I C T U R E
311
A P P E N D I X : P I C T U R E A C C E S S I B I L I T Y E X A M P L E S
The following ten pictures demonstrate some of the different combination possibil-
ities between abstract/figurative on the on hand and accessible/inaccessible on the
dimensions of the other
Figure 38. Wooded Landscape.
(Gillis van Coninxloo, 1598)
While prototypical landscapes provide a bundle of pathways for the viewer, Coninxloo is one of the first
to close these roads, positioning the observer lost in the midst of dark forests. Despite a huge degree
of figurativity, we make a considerable way along the axis from accessibility to non-accessibility. We
have a deep 3-D gaze into the thicket, but no path is taking us there.

312
C H A P T E R 14
Figure 39. Abstractes Bild.
(Gerhard Richter, 1991) © Gerhard Richter and Marian Goodman Gallery, New York
The later pictures of Gerhard Richter are arch-examples of a virtuoso playing on the axis between
accessible and non-accessible. In these almost completely abstract paintings, with color drawn over
the surface with wide paint scrapers, a dim haze or thin curtains or spyholes in a surface hint at an
underlying space to move into.

I N T O T H E P I C T U R E
313
Figure 40. Untitled #223.
(Cindy Sherman, 1990) © Cindy Sherman, Untitled #223, 1990, color photo 58 ×42 inches, Courtesy
of the Artist and Metro Pictures
The portrait is presumably the prototypical case of a non-accessible genre. The insisting gaze, or, like
here, the intimate occupation of the person portrayed maintains a no-go-zone. The acute difference
between the foregrounded person and a background losing depth, specificity, and meaning, approaching
uniform darkness, prevents the body from entering the picture.

314
C H A P T E R 14
Figure 41. Infinite Divisibility.
(Yves Tanguy, 1942) © Yves Tanguy, Infinite Divisibility, c/o Beeldrecht Amsterdam 2007
Analmosttooclear-cutillustrationofthefactthattheaxisofaccessibilitydoesnotcoincidewiththeabstract-
figurative axis is provided by the work of Tanguy. Here, we find ourselves in an undoubtable 3-D space,
complete with ground, sky and object shadows, opening up for a horizon-seeking wanderer – but where the
represented objectivities are abstract.

I N T O T H E P I C T U R E
315
Figure 42. Press photo from the England-Hungary 3–6 match
(Wembley, London, 1953 [photographer unknown])
The sport photograph illustrates how the ability to read a picture based on the imagined movement of
the observer’s body may, in many cases, presuppose a massive amount of tacit knowledge on the part of
the observer. To understand and appreciate a football picture you must not only know the rules, but also
typical playing situations so you can continue the movie the next decisive seconds by the identification
of yourself with one or several of the playing bodies, maybe trying different possible developments.
Your stretch your leg a little more than the front player depicted and you reach the ball.
Figure 43. Still-life with Wine Glass and Silver Bowl
(Pieter Claesz, undated)
The still-life genre of course explicitly depicts a stiffened tableau. On the figurative level, it gives the
viewer the role of observer of an arrangement organized by others who may have regretted and left.
Without further notice, you can sit down by the table and imagine sipping the wine, but there is no
reason not to metamorphose into an imaginary fly and take a more ambitious round-trip in the inviting
space produced.

316
C H A P T E R 14
Figure 44. The Lu Mountains
(Wang Hui, 1692)
In the Chinese landscape tradition the network of pathways in a 3-D thicket is a frequent topos. In
a Husserlian sense, the movement possibilities organized by a picture are most often present in an
unthematized way. They are temporal ‘back sides’ of the frozen moment of the picture. The exception to
this rule is roads and pathways – here somebody has walked before you – which explicitly thematize the
possibility of movement transgressing the crystallized moment of the picture. The depiction of wanderers
may make this possibility actual.

I N T O T H E P I C T U R E
317
Figure 45. Bare Træer
(Per Marquardt Otzen: Drawing from the anthology B
²
re Trxer [‘Trees Only’], Copenhagen 1994)
© Per Marquard Otzen
The prototypical path to follow lies in the middle of the field of vision. By blocking this part of the
picture, the possibilities of access is preserved because you can enter through one of the side routes.
Still, a forceful reduction of movement possibilities is notable, and a picture such as this is a compromise
between accessible and unaccessible pictures.

318
C H A P T E R 14
Figure 46. Church Interior. Tepotzotlan
(Tina Modotti, 1924)
A completely figurative picture showing the ceiling in a church loses 3-D interpretability and thus
assumes a both abstract and non-accessible character

I N T O T H E P I C T U R E
319
Figure 47. Park
(Gustav Klimt, before 1910)
Despite the fact that 90 percent of the picture surface seems unaccessible and is vacillating between
figurative and abstract and is only pushed into the former by the bottom line of the picture, this painting
is eminently accessible. A rich bundle of ways opens into the park landscape at the bottom left

C H A P T E R 15
SMALL OUTLINE OF A THEORY OF THE SKETCH
It is striking so little space has been devoted to the sketch in pictorial semiotics,
measured against its central role in the process of creation in many pictures as well
as against its central role in recent art history – not to talk about its role as a general
tool of thought and memory.
Here, we shall attempt to draw some preliminary lines to a sketch theory. For a
crude art history overview, it seems clear that before modernism, the sketch plays
the role mainly as an introductory phase in creation, as a working tool on the road
towards the finished work. Presumably, it seems just as clear that one central effect
of modernism has been to focus upon various features of the sketch, isolate them,
cultivate them and see them as just as essential – or even more so – than the finished
work of art. This has lead to the fact that many genres of modernist painting and
drawing share qualities with the sketch – as well as to the fact that the sketches
inherited from earlier phases of art history have been subject to a revalution so
that they in many cases are seen as more interesting than the finished pieces of
work which they gave rise to. And it is probably, finally, equally clear that now,
when we turn back to form an overview over modernism’s different currents, the
sketch can not claim neither more nor less prominence than the finished work of
art – the polished, overworked piece and the raw, unfinished fragment now appear
as parallel possibilities, and there is hardly any point in attacking one of them on
behalf of the other – so much more because the artistic reverence for the sketch or
the fragment with a strange necessity makes it into a work of art.
We shall here conceive of the sketch in the light of the Belgian Groupe ’s
pictorial semiotics as it has been presented in the treatise Traité du signe visuel
(1992). They here present (136) a triangular model for visual signs in general:
Figure 48.
321

322
C H A P T E R 15
The overall architecture of the model is hardly shocking for any experienced
semiotician; what is at stake is an updated version of that set of distinctions between
sign, meaning, and object (here, significant, type, and referent) which in various
variants date back to antiquity. Yet, Groupe ’s version of it contains some decisive
accents. When the category of meaning is here rendered by the concept of ‘type’, the
group explicitly refers to a visual type. This aspect of the Group’s visual sign concept
is explicitly turned against the linguistico-centrism of much pictorial semiotics
since the 60s, partially evident in the import of linguistic terminology in pictorial
semiotics, partially, and more dangerously, in the accompanying assumption of
the primacy of language so that all visual types presumably can be described
exhaustively in ordinary language or in the metalanguage of theory. By emphasizing
the visual type, Groupe  points to the inexhaustibility of the visual sign: it is no
superficial vehicle for the communication of a more proper, linguistic or symbolic
content; it has in itself, already on the visual level, stability thanks to the typicality
of its content. It is, of course, hard to exemplify in text, because ordinary language
in many cases has an expression ready to cover a related content, as soon as any
visual type for some reason has demonstrated its interest – but a good example
might be those spheres with a marked equator that occur in many of Magritte’s
paintings along with easily recognizable everyday interior. Magritte scholars often
refer to them as ‘bells’, but they cannot be identified with any ordinary utensil
and remain enigmatic objects in the context of the space of the picture. This does
not, on the other hand, hinder them in begin strikingly easy to recognize from one
painting to the next; here we have a purely visual type without any corresponding
denomination in ordinary language (and even if the ‘bell’ of the art historians should
become widely known, it would not, of course, exhaust the specific visual typicality
which permits them to be recognized – not any old bell will do). Of course, the
routine recognition of both concrete and abstract everyday objects is to a very large
extent made possible precisely by the existence of visual types: when we see and
recognize a bicycle, a chair, a car, etc., we do so because we recognize its visual
appearance – only on that basis do we add our linguistically articulated knowledge
and identify that object by means of our linguistic denomination.
But this visual type is not determined by the linguistic etiquette, quite on
the contrary it functions, in many cases, as a prerequisite to the linguistic
denomination.408 The concept of visual type thus points to the fact that there is a
strong pre-linguistic generalizing intelligence in perception able to extract types of
(series of) particular visual impressions, and able to keep these types stable, able
to vary these types so that different concrete phenomena become visually under-
standable by being categorized as tokens of that same type, and able to compare
and distinguish different visual types.
The other special property in Groupe ’s version of the classical semiotic triangle
lies in the appearance of the term ‘transformation’ at the basis of the triangle. It
refers to the fact that visual signs function by means of similarity, that they are
Peircean ‘hypoicons’ – and this implies that some or other property-saving trans-
formation holds between the signifier of the sign and that object it refers to. What

S M A L L O U T L I N E O F A T H E O R Y O F T H E S K E T C H
323
is kept invariant in the transformation between the two is exactly the type. A large
and useful part of Groupe ’s evolution of its sign concept is the listing of how
many different visual transformation we have at our disposal when gestalting visual
signs. The fact that visual similarity is no simple property, as too often assumed
by many,409 is demonstrated by the many different geometrical, analytical, optical,
kinetic and other transformations which permit one sight to resemble another.
The sketch as a sign is characterized, now, by making use of a special selection
of transformations making aspects of the object discrete. Groupe  does not
explicitly treat the sketch, but they remark en passant (during their development
of the rhetorical figures made possible by the so-called analytical transformations):
‘ your can subdue certain lines so as to leave only those judged important. In that
way you get the sketch which provides a synthetic vision of the subject and often
delivers regulating layouts which may be used for the correct interpretation of the
final work.’410
This implies that the sketch presupposes an analytical transformation of the
object to a structure of lines. The Group here takes ‘analytical’ to refer to the
differential calculus which (among other things) permits to decide where a mathe-
matical function has its maxima and minima (where its first derivative equals zero).
But if we envisage the surface of an object as the graph of a function, then it
is precisely these points of its surface that interests a draughtsman, because they
give rise to lines in the sketch’s analysis of them: contour, folds, etc. The drawing
thus provides an analytical transformation of the seen object, reduced to a set of
lines. In addition to this, a further analytical transformation follows on the level
of color – by discretization typical colors of the object may be isolated, adding a
new set of lines distinguishing e.g. areas of light and shadow, areas with different
color, different texture, etc. Whether these colors and textures are added to the
drawing or not, this set of transformations adds another set of possible lines for
the draughtsman. The spontaneous extraction of lines from the perceived object is
the basis for the construction of the sketch. As emphasizes the Group, the retina is
constructed with the aim of extracting lines separating qualitatively different zones
in the perceived (typically contours, of course, but also borderlines distinguishing
different colors or textures in one object), because the visual cells of the retina are
connected in a network so that two connected visual cells getting approximately
the same impression tend to annihilate this small difference in a phenomenological
Verschmelzung, a merging into one continuous colored surface, as the result. If,
Figure 49.

324
C H A P T E R 15
contrariwise, two close visual cells receive strongly deviating input while each of
them at the same time belong to a cell-community with related inputs, the network
reacts in a characteristic curve (fig 49; Groupe , 66).
The radicality of the edge is ‘exaggerated’ by the eye which thus in its very
construction is aimed at analyzing the visual object into a structure of lines. Given
this inventory of lines in the phenomenon, the draughtsman may now make a further
selection among them and obtain a sketch. Whether he does this in order to get a
first structuring of his work which later will be fully orchestrated with detail depth
coloring, etc. – or whether he does it for its own purpose, is not significant for our
basic observation. On the other hand, the draughtsman may add further lines in the
sketch as a trial-and-error attempt at reproducing the line structure offered by the
visual system – he may indicate a number of strokes in a zone where the final line
would appear only if the drawing is taken further than the sketch phase. Thus, we
may distinguish between different sketch techniques:
Figure 50. (a), contour (b), stylized contour (c), contour doubling (d), stylization of oblong object into
lines (e), d) plus line bendings as symbol of functional bending (f), analysis of the object into cylinders
(g), and analysis of the object into prisms
Here is selected seven typical among many different possible sketch techniques.
They may be combined, more may be added, but all of them build on the simple
set of lines in the visual phenomenon synthesized into an object. We must add that
the basic definition of the sketch by the analytical transformation seems too simple.
In many cases, the sketch adds what Groupe  call stylization which systematically
exaggerates and suppresses different features with some pragmatic aim of making
certain aspects of the type more easily read than others. Stylization is strictly
speaking another set of devices than sketching proper, but in the ordinary perception
of the sketch both procedures occur, because the sketch itself builds on a hasty
stylizing of the object: it does not reproduce the exact contour of the object, but

S M A L L O U T L I N E O F A T H E O R Y O F T H E S K E T C H
325
a simplified, stylized rendering of it. Among its techniques count the following:
the subsumtion of the lines drawn under a certain and limited class of types (most
often straight lines and a few curves), the subsumtion of angles under a few angles
with selected, discrete values (45 and 90 degrees, e.g.), the ‘stretching’ of lines to
continuity, even rectilinearity, exaggeration of symmetry, etc. (Groupe , 365–68).
All these transformations may be found in the examples above, with the addition of
the subsumtion of volumes under a certain selection of simple types (e.g. cylinders,
spheres, cubes, straight lines, etc.). The uniformization of colors and textures to be
subsumed under a small selection of types of these is another possibility which we
can not here illustrate.
The single sketch technique selects its set of lines with a semiotic purpose, deter-
mined by whether the aim is the precise or approximate appearance of the contour,
whether (aspects of) the construction of the object, its function, its relation to other
objects, etc. is the goal. The sketch thus possesses a rich variation of different
transformation possibilities with a corresponding selection of lines, determined by
which properties in the object is to be represented. Sketching and stylization may,
on the other hand, be driven so far that the effect becomes, in fact, diminished
readablity rather than increased.
In addition to this comes the possibility that the scarcity of the sketch can be
utilized to point to indeterminacy, both in the object depicted and in the perceiving
subject. The visual sign’s being a type makes it general and implies that it may
subsume several possible objects under it. This effect may, of course, be countered
by the appearance of indices in the picture, disambiguitizing who or what the
sketch refers to. This typicality is strengthened in the sketch case, the sketch being
typically even more general than the more detailed visual sign. With reference to
this (deliberate) indeterminacy in the object, the sketch may provide a Peircean
diagram of the object. In a sketch like the following:
Figure 51.
this aspect is evident, just like in construction diagrams, function diagrams, etc.
which are sketches selecting certain sets of disambiguous information of the object
depicted. It is striking, however, that this indeterminacy may, in artistic contexts, be
turned 180 degrees against the observer. Maybe he is a cool, technocratic, schematic
person who not only regards isolated diagrams with precise purposes this way, but
perceives his surroundings in general in this formalized and sterile way? Or maybe
he is a confused marginal existence to whom objects only appear as vague clouds?
Even more striking is the interpretation of subjective vacillation of the sketch in
cases like the following:

326
C H A P T E R 15
Figure 52.
the many competing contours may be given several different interpretations: maybe
they are a series of still more precise approximations to the object – or they bear
witness to the fact that the object is hard to grasp in a precise way, maybe because
of a very faceted morphology (a face), or maybe due to the fact that the object
is moving or in a process of change. In the same way, the missing completion of
the contour hints into whole, completed objects is ambiguous: maybe a process in
development is hinted at here. These interpretations of the sketch is still objective –
but in many cases they are spontaneously supplied with subjective interpretations:
it may the instability of the perceiving subject which makes it difficult to focus
precisely on the object. This instability, in turn, may be ascribed to properties
in the perception apparatus (it is difficult to keep eye and head completely still,
difficult to synthesize the different profiles of complicated objects from different
points-of-view) or to the more emotional or volitional instability in the subject (an
angry, upset, ecstatic, traumatized, drunk, confused person has more difficulty in
concluding precise perceptions successfully or drawing correct sketches) – so to
speak an impressionist versus an expressionist field in subjective imprecision.
We shall assume that the objective use of the sketch and its obvious connections
to epistemology is phenomenologically primary (the sketch as a proto-diagram). But
the artistic sketch, even if it has its root in this objectivity, should not necessarily
be measured on the sketch as a diagram. As always, when art takes over a device,
the aesthetic judgment criteria of art itself take over as well, and from this point of
view the subjective and objective aspects of the sketch yield equal possibilities for
further aesthetic use.
To conclude, we shall propose the distinctions between 1) sketches depending
on which lines in the the object or in the understanding of it are highlighted, and
with which semiotic aim – and 2) between objective and subjective uses of the
indeterminacy assumed by the visual type in the sketch.

C H A P T E R 16
WHO IS MICHAEL WO-LING PTAH-HOTEP JEROLOMON?
Literary Interpretation as Thought Experiment
Among the many problems in literary scholarship, an institutional one stands out.
During the recent decades, literary studies have been literally swamped with theories
imported from a long range of disciplines – to the extent that in an American context,
courses are being taught under the naked headline of ‘Theory’. This involves all
brands of hermeneutics, structuralism, formalism, post-structuralism, critical theory,
ecological criticism, gender-class-race, post-colonialism, social constructivism, new
historicism, psychological theories and sociological doctrines of all kinds – plus the
‘post’ or ‘neo’ versions of all these – and many more. Potentially, this import of
inspiration has – in lucky moments – seemed to make literary studies the very focus
of the humanities where new syntheses could emerge and new understandings of the
humanities at large find their place. But more often than not, the plethora of theories
has given rise to bewilderment. And specific strategies have evolved to cope with
the confusion. One is the internal splitting-up of literary studies into sub-branches
where each scholar picks one theory and spends his time in happy isolation in his
office, caring little about the equally narrow-minded research taking place in the
neighboring offices. This Balkanization of literary studies, however, is nothing but
the recipe for their dissolution as scientific endeavor. Another strategy is a little
more promising: the supermarket-like idea that you pick your theory according to
the text you tackle. In some cases, formal aspects of the text are intriguing, in other
cases the text’s embeddedness in social contexts, in still other, the thematic content –
and so on. Still, this strategy has its drawbacks: the dissolution is only transported
into the individual scholars’ head, if he does not undertake any reflection as to the
interrelation of this optional menu of theories.
What is lacking is a precise idea of the very role played by theory in the
interpretation of literary texts. In particular, any consciousness of the difference
between method and theory is all but absent in the theoretical supermarket. Very
often, the two words are used interchangeably, presupposing a very direct relation
between theory and text, so that a theory should, in itself, contain a method for its
being put to use. But this relation is not direct. For between text and theory comes
method. Methodology in the scientific treatment of literary texts may encompass
highly different procedures: research in readers’ response, research into the life of
the author, into the period, genre, institution, culture, or any other context of the
text, undertaken with interpretative or statistical, a priori or empirical means. But
one basic method is common to all the different schools and theories mentioned, a
method so simple that it tends to be overlooked: that of reading and interpreting
327

328
C H A P T E R 16
the literary text itself. It forms the core of all other methods used (and, in turn, in
all theory application). This chapter investigates this reading process as a special
case of pragmatic epistemology as laid down in Peirce’s semiotics. It is important
to underline that this investigation is pre-theoretical in a precise sense of the word.
It presupposes, that is true, certain theories of the process of gaining knowledge.
But it does not presuppose any choice as to a preconceived theory of the nature of
the literary text. Quite on the contrary, it tries to describe the place for such theories
in the interpretation process.
A B - D E - I N : T H E T H R E E - B E A T M O T O R O F I N V E S T I G A T I O N
As Peirce analyzes any process of interpretation in three interconnected phases deter-
mined by the three argument types abduction-deduction-induction, in that order, it
comes as no surprise that literary interpretation may also be so analyzed. A more
detailed investigation will show, however, certain particularities as to the structure
of literary interpretation.
Peirce’s pragmatic semiotics in its mature version involves, it is well known,
three levels, with changing titles through the development of his thought. A common
way of expressing them is the distinction between Speculative Grammar, Logic,
and Methodeutic (cf. Chaps. 2–3). Logic is the study of truth-preserving inferences
and arguments and their interrelation – not unlike our days’ definition, but still
covering argument types nowadays rarely counted as purely logical, so as for
instance abduction. Speculative Grammar is sometimes called also semiotics or
stecheiotic. It is the study of the constituent signs of those arguments, in short, all
instruments which may be used to express thoughts. Methodeutic, on the other side,
is the study of how to combine arguments in order for knowledge to progress. In
our day we would probably call it epistemology or, more pragmatically, heuristics.
The picture is blurred, furthermore, by the fact that Peirce often calls the sum of
all three Semiotics or Logic in a broad sense. The decisive point here, however, is
that Peirce’s logic and semiotics are conceived in close relation to an epistemology
focusing upon the growth of knowledge (thus emphasizing the context of discovery
rather than, or at least to the same extent as, the context of justification, to put in in
Reichenbach’s terminology). Van Heijenoort’s and Hintikka’s classical distinction
between two lines in the development of logic is very apt here: on the one side we
find logic-as-language (Frege-Russell-Quine), on the other logic-as-calculus (Boole-
Peirce-Schröder).411 Even if many of the core results of the two lines are the same
(such as logic of relations, quantification, formal representation all having been
invented independently by Frege and Peirce), the overall conception of the task of
logic differs. In logic-as-language, logic is conceived as a formal language in which
any possible claim can be expressed, and it thus covers the whole universe because
it involves the very possibility of all what can be said. In logic-as-calculus, on the
other hand, the emphasis is on the role of logic in the ongoing reasoning process –
and logic is seen as problem-solving, pointing to a multiplicity of problems in
different contexts and thus maintaining the intimate connection between logic and

W H O I S M I C H A E L W O - L I N G P T A H - H O T E P J E R O L O M O N
329
epistemology. Peirce clearly belongs to the latter tradition, and this is evident in
his epistemology where the specific abduction-deduction-induction configuration of
arguments expresses his pragmatic maxim as his fundamental requirement of sound
investigation. Before turning to the details of the Abduction-Deduction-Induction
reasoning cycle, let us look more closely on Peirce’s original contribution in his
doctrine of Abduction.
A B D U C T I O N : L O G I C A N D C R E A T I V E P E R C E P T I O N
It is well known how Peirce adds to the traditional two forms of inference, Deduction
and Induction, a third, Abduction.412 While deduction is a necessary inference, and
induction a probable inference only, abduction is a merely possible inference. At
a closer look, it is rather two aspects of what is traditionally seen as Induction
which are now separated into Abduction and Induction, namely the proposal of
a hypothesis and the empirical testing of it in a number of cases, respectively.
The more precise determination of abduction changes over Peirce’s lifetime and
is, as such, the subject of some controversy. Let us here briefly run through the
most crucial among the different aspects of abduction.413 In (‘Deduction, Induction,
and Hypothesis’, 1878, EPI, 188; 2.623), Peirce gives an early description of the
character of the three types of inference, based on different configurations of the
rule-case-result triad known from the ordinary syllogism (abduction appearing here
under the name of ‘hypothesis’):
DEDUCTION.
Rule.–All the beans from this bag are white.
Case.–These beans are from this bag.
.·. Result.–These beans are white.
INDUCTION.
Case.–These beans are from this bag.
Result.–These beans are white.
.·. Rule.–All the beans from this bag are white
HYPOTHESIS.
Rule.–All the beans from this bag are white.
Result.–These beans are white.
.·. Case.–These beans are from this bag.
Here, the conclusion to the abductive argument is a possible statement only: the
white beans in the Result may, of course, stem from a lot of other possible sources.
As Hoffmann (2002, 254) points out, Peirce’s distinction between two premisses
in Abduction (and Induction as well) is irrelevant, because they can be simply
combined into one, and later on Peirce himself states that the premiss is always only
one, however many parts it may be composed of or may be analyzable into. But the
conclusion may have highly variable degrees of generality, and in some sense it is
the very choice of Rule, more or less general, which forms the interesting part of
abduction. Thus, the Case presented here as the conclusion is only reached on the
basis of the selection of a Rule – among many possible – which gives the desired

330
C H A P T E R 16
Result. Later Peirce tries to take this into account when he attempts to formalize
the logical form of abduction as follows (in his 1903 lectures on Pragmatism):
Long before I first classed abduction as an inference it was recognized by logicians that the operation
of adopting an explanatory hypothesis  which is just what abduction is  was subject to certain
conditions. Namely, the hypothesis cannot be admitted, even as a hypothesis, unless it be supposed that
it would account for the facts or some of them. The form of inference, therefore, is this:
The surprising fact, C, is observed;
But if A were true, C would be a matter of course,
Hence, there is reason to suspect that A is true.
Thus, A cannot be abductively inferred, or if you prefer the expression, cannot be abductively
conjectured until its entire content is already present in the premiss, ‘If A were true, C would be a matter
of course’. (‘Harvard Lectures on Pragmatism’, 1903, EPII, 231; 5.189)
Here, the Result becomes the surprising fact C to be explained, and a Rule A
to explain the fact is what is sought, and the conclusion is neither A nor C as
explained by A (as was the case above), but the possibility of A being true (because
it accounts for the appearance of C). But, as Peirce himself is the first to admit, the
presence of A in both the premiss and the conclusion causes problems. It implies
that this logical form does not in any way account for the process of adoption of the
hypothesis (but only for the reason to believe in the hypothesis, namely that it does
in fact imply that fact). Hence, the very act of finding hypotheses is a prerequisite to
the judging of them in this logical form – as well as the act of comparing the many
possible different candidates for A. It is important here to underline that the amount
of possible As are in all cases indefinite (in the above example, other possible As
could be: ‘these beans have been painted white by the experimenter’, ‘these beans
have mutated into a white variant’, ‘these beans come from a bag of chalk’, etc.),
so a crucial task in the economy of investigation is to focus upon the candidates
for A which are in some sense plausible, given the context.
Here, the role of abduction is to find a hypothesis to explain a surprising case –
and the role of induction, conversely, becomes to test a hypothesis against facts in
a quantitative investigation.414 While abduction goes from case to rule, induction
runs the opposite way from rule to cases. Between them, deduction intervenes in
order to develop testable consequences of the hypothesis reached by abduction.
Abduction takes its point of departure in certain facts and proposes a (more)
general, ideal explanation of these facts. Deduction investigates certain ideal conse-
quences of this explanation. Induction, finally, takes us back from the ideal expla-
nation and its consequences to facts, comparing explanation and further facts and
judging the former on that basis:
Figure 53.
The problem remains evident in the fact that while Peirce contends that there
is substantially no information in the conclusion which was not already (albeit,

W H O I S M I C H A E L W O - L I N G P T A H - H O T E P J E R O L O M O N
331
maybe, implicitly) in the premisses, on the other hand he claims that Abduction
is the only source for new information in the reasoning process (deduction and
induction providing no new material). But hence, this innovation cannot stem from
the logical form of Abduction.
But if the logical form of abduction does not suffice to explain the adoption
and selection of hypotheses, then how is that to be explained? Abduction is a
‘qualified guess’ – but what is it that qualifies the guess and makes it differ from
mere fumbling in the dark or mere mechanical testing of an infinity of equally
possible hypotheses? In the same manner as induction in which non-logical material
is introduced in the empirical testing, abduction includes non-logical material in
addition to its logical form. In both cases, the material stem from perception – but
in what sense? As Hoffmann argues, this becomes possible to see if we draw a
distinction between the logical form of abduction of the 1903 lectures on the one
hand and the ‘creative’ act of perception of the surprising fact on the other, leading
to the adoption of a hypothesis.
In the same lecture, Peirce discusses ‘perceptual judgments’ (given a red chair in
the visual field, we may make the proposition ‘the chair is red’) as an extreme case
of abduction. Perceptual judgments differ from prototypical abduction in one crucial
aspect: they are not subject to conscious self-control and hence cannot seriously be
doubted, even if they are not necessary deductions. As all matter in the conclusion
of an argument must be contained in the premisses, perceptual judgments hence
must rest upon logical matter being present implicitly (or, in the psychological
instantiation of the inference, in the mind outside the reach of consciousness) in the
premisses:
Ultimately therefore it must come from the uncontrolled part of the mind, because a series of controlled
acts must have a first. But as to the logical form, it would be, at any rate, extremely difficult to
dispose of it in the same way. An induction, for example, concludes a ratio of frequency; but there is
nothing about any such ratio in the single instances on which it is based. Where do the conceptions
of deductive necessity, of inductive probability, of abductive expectability come from? Where does the
conception of inference itself come from? That is the only difficulty. But self-control is the character
which distinguishes reasonings from the processes by which perceptual judgments are formed, and
self-control of any kind is purely inhibitory. It originates nothing.
Therefore it cannot be in the act of adoption of an inference, in the pronouncing of it to be reasonable,
that the formal conceptions in question can first emerge. It must be in the first perceiving that so one
might conceivably reason. And what is the nature of that? I see that I have instinctively described the
phenomenon as a ‘perceiving.’ I do not wish to argue from words; but a word may furnish a valuable
suggestion. What can our first acquaintance with an inference, when it is not yet adopted, be but a
perception of the world of ideas? (EPII, 233; 5.194)
The creative side of abduction, hence, is a sort of Wesensschau, it is, as Hoffmann
says, an act of ‘creative perception’ (264). In an unused section of the lecture,
Peirce continues:
A mass of facts is before us. We go through them. We examine them. We find them a confused snarl,
an impenetrable jungle. We are unable to hold them in our minds. We endeavor to set them down upon
paper; but they seem to be so multiplex intricate that we can neither satisfy ourselves that what we have
set down represents the facts, nor can we get any clear idea of what it is that we have set down. But

332
C H A P T E R 16
suddenly, while we are probing over our digest of the facts and are endeavoring to set them into order,
it occurs to us that if we were to assume something to be true that we do not know to be true, these
facts would arrange themselves luminously. That is abduction  (EPII, 531)
The creative perception spontaneously organizes the facts in a pattern.415 It is, in
fact, a case of gestalt perception in which a certain interpretation is inherent in the
very organization of the perception. Several such organizations may be possible
(just like a finite number of measuring data may give rise to an infinity of different
mathematical curves accounting for them) which are to the same degree motivated
by the data implied. Peirce gives as an example (‘Lectures on Pragmatism’, 1903;
CP. 1.183) a drawing by his father which may interchangeably be perceived as a
wall of round stones or as the continuous drawing of one line – in fact, a classic
example of the gestalt phenomenon of ‘Kippfigur’ well-known from Neckar’s cube
or Rubin’s vase.
Figure 54. A wall of stones or one continuous line?
Peirce’s doctrine on perceptual judgment from around the turn of the century thus
unknowingly enters the contemporary debate as to the status of such gestalts. Both
the Berliner and the Grazer gestaltists maintained, as against von Helmholtz’s
reference of such phenomena to unbewußte Schlüße, that no act of logical judgment
was required to form such complexes. Peirce’s doctrine of perceptual judgments
might at a first glance seem to side with von Helmholtz. According to him, all
thought and sensation are inferences, and it is impossible to reach pure sensory
data before logical interpretation of sensation. Any given perception is part of the
ongoing perceptive process, resting on former perceptual judgments. Still, the detail
of Peirce’s doctrine rather seems to give him an intermediate position between von
Helmholtz and the gestaltists: the inferences at stake in perceptual judgments are
of a peculiar type – they take place without any control and are immediately given
without any possibility of doubt; this spontaneous, in-built character takes them
closer to the properties of the gestaltist account:

W H O I S M I C H A E L W O - L I N G P T A H - H O T E P J E R O L O M O N
333
That part of the conclusion which inserts the wholly new element can be separated from the rest with
which it has no logical connection nor appearance of logical connection. The first emergence of this
new element into consciousness must be regarded as a perceptive judgment. (EPII, 232; 5.192)
Here, it is connected to Peirce’s crucial observation that abduction is the only
inference that is able to introduce new matter in the investigation process – deduction
only being able to flesh out what was implicit in some assumption, and induction
merely being able to test the implications of a hypothesis against further facts. As
this innovative character of abduction can not stem from its trivial logical form, it
must stem from this character of ‘creative perception’.416
Still the problem remains, in the abductive reasoning, of how to select potentially
fruitful hypothetical organizations of material without having to represent and go
through the whole series of merely possible such hypotheses.417 Our discussion of
literary interpretation may serve as a clue to this question.
A B D U C T I O N - D E D U C T I O N - I N D U C T I O N
In the methodology governing the ongoing investigation process, Abduction is
connected to Deduction and Induction as phases to be processed in that order.
Abduction gives rise to the formation of a hypothesis. Deduction now takes over and
seeks out some more or less complicated necessary implications of that hypothesis.
Abduction took us from facts to hypothesis, that is, from the empirical world to an
ideal world. Deduction works in this ideal world – the only sphere where necessity
is possible – and traces certain ideal consequences in the model so proposed.
Induction takes these consequences and returns to the world of facts, seeking out
further empirical data which may (or may not) corroborate these new consequences
of the ideal model. If these data support these consequences, it is to be taken as a
sign that the hypothesis proposed has a certain probability of being true (of course,
other possible hypotheses might have the same ideal consequences and hence have
the same validity in the test). In both cases, the stage is set for a new abduction.
If induction confirmed the hypothesis, abduction may now refine or sophisticate
the hypotheses and allow for further deductions from the model to be tested. If
induction falsified the hypothesis, abduction must start all over again by proposing
a reformed or wholly new hypothesis – by the molding of it so as to avoid the
pitfalls recorded in induction.
In this way, the Ab-De-In sequence forms a cycle to be run through over and over
again – so to speak Peirce’s version of Gadamer’s well-known ‘hermeneutic circle’
in text interpretation. As implied by the Gadamerian term of ‘Vorverständnis,’ it is
also the case in Peirce’s circle that no pure pre-theoretical beginning is possible. The
‘surprising fact’ taken as first premiss in Abduction is, of course, only surprising as
measured against certain expectations of a general, that is, theoretical kind, be they
explicit or implicit. Peirce thus could be said to antedate Gadamer by more than half
a century – but his account also adds a host of crucial details to the interpretative
circle. Peirce’s ab-de-in cycle is nothing special for science or literature, it is more
or less subconsciously run through countless times every day in everyday reasoning

334
C H A P T E R 16
where its single phases most often do not pose any serious problems which merit
explicit reflection.
Having abducted a hypothesis, Deduction takes over. But what is Deduction
supposed to do with the hypothesis? Peirce famously distinguishes between two
types of Deduction, Corollarial and Theorematical, and it is due to Hintikka that the
contemporary relevance of this distinction has been highlighted (cf. Chap. 4). But
even before we consider them, there is an often overlooked aspect of Deduction’s
relation to a Hypothesis: it does not follow by necessity in which aspect of the
Hypothesis a Deduction should take its point of departure. Beginning with one
proposition a whole series of different necessary inferences are possible, the more
complicated the Hypothesis is, the more necessary consequences. If the abductive
hypothesis claims, e.g., that the facts in question constitute a circle, then we might
be interested in finding the necessary tangents or radii of that circle, or we may
be interested in finding inscribed or circumscribed polygons of that circle  all
of which possibilities follow by necessity from the concept circle. Deduction, in
short, is no algorithm; rather, it is the condition of possibility for the construction of
different algorithms, each of them consisting of different series of necessary steps.
Thus, even in the beginning of Deduction, something like an Abduction in the ideal
realm must take place: in which direction do we want to test the hypotheses? Which
aspects of it would we prefer to take as basis for consequences to be tested?
Deduction deals with ideal phenomena and thus always has a more or less explicit
mathematical character – and in short, undertaking a mathematical proof, we most
often have an idea of the theorem we seek a proof of, so we select implications of
our hypothesis which in some way seem similar to or oriented in the direction of
what we intend to prove. This, Peirce claims, may be undertaken in two different
manners: Corollarial and Theorematical. The former sets up the whole of the
hypothesis, maybe in a drawing or maybe by a synthesizing gaze on all components
of the hypothesis – and then the conclusion is directly read off of the hypothesis as
a whole. The latter is more complicated. It requires the addition of new material –
construction lines of Euclidean geometry is Peirce’s prototypical example – and on
the basis of this construction some manipulation or experiment with the hypothesis-
plus-construction is undertaken. Very often, the intriguing or challenging part of
the proof is the abduction allowing to find the right constructive additions to the
hypothesis. This idea sets Peirce apart from the algorithmic or formalist ideals in
mathematics where intuition should be bracketed and mere symbol manipulation
take over – and, on the other hand, approaches him to a Kantian view of mathematics
where construction is a necessary part of mathematical proofs. This ‘theorematic’
part of deduction is what makes it possible for mathematics to be at one and the same
time completely deductive and ripe with new discoveries. In deductive inference
and diagrammatical reasoning – in Peirce the two are identical – it is possible to
observe generality directly, because we objectify our knowledge-gaining apparatus.
Diagrams may be represented in material figures (which, it is true, require an
idealizing reading) and thus avoid the subjectivist pitfall of the mind as a closed cage
of representations. Diagrams are, at one and the same time three things: structures

W H O I S M I C H A E L W O - L I N G P T A H - H O T E P J E R O L O M O N
335
of the ideal hypothetical world discussed, objective material structures open for
intersubjective scrutinizing, and subjective representations. None of these aspects
can be missed: even if material diagram tokens require an idealizing reading to be
understood as types, it is important to see that this reading, conversely, may need
the support of the material diagram tokens. The fertility inherent in the multiplicity
of possible chains of necessary deductions springing from a hypothesis reaches its
peak point in theorematic reasoning. Which construction and which experimental
manipulation can be undertaken on the basis of a given hypothesis is an open
issue – augmented by the inexhaustibility of mathematics – and of the world of
ideal objects in general.418
Induction, then, has to test the deductive consequences of the hypothesis
proposed. This, not surprisingly, may be done in three different ways.419 Peirce’s
shortest presentation of them counts Crude, Quantitative, and Qualitative Induction,
respectively (Manuscript ‘G’, c. 1905, 2.755). Crude induction is the simplest
version which he sometimes nicknames pooh-pooh. It is the argument that as x has
never been observed, then x is unlikely to occur at all. It is, of course, an extremely
weak argument, but still, according to Peirce, extremely important because it is
put to use all of the time when, without saying it, it is supposed that the ordinary
experience may count as default value. It must, however, give way to the slightest
sign of any positive evidence to the contrary. It is the argument that all swans
are white, as no black swans have been seen. As it turns out, it plays a crucial if
mostly neglected role in literary interpretation. Quantitative induction is the inves-
tigation of a hypothesis by controlled sampling in a finite set of investigations, to
be treated statistically. This – strongest – inductive argument plays rarely a role,
if any, in literary interpretation. Finally, Qualitative induction is applied when the
conditions for Quantitative Induction are not present (when there is no finite set
from which to select a sample). It is an intermediary between the two others (also in
strength):
It consists of those inductions which are neither founded upon experience in one mass, as Crude
Induction is, nor upon a collection of numerable instances of equal evidential values, but upon a stream
of experience in which the relative evidential values of different parts of it have to be estimated according
to our sense of the impressions they make upon us. (ibid. 2.759)
In normal scientific investigation, Crude Induction merely plays the role of
background screening, almost automatically weeding out all sorts of logically
possible, but materially fantastic hypotheses. The inferred consequences of the
hypothesis chosen are tested by means of Quantitative and Qualitative Induction,
respectively. In the experimental sciences, Quantitative Induction takes place in
relation to an experiment devised by the hypothesis. The results of the experiment
are now compared to the deductively predicted results, and statistic evaluation of
a number of results may lead to the conclusion of verifying, falsifying, or, most
often, relativizing or refining the hypothesis. Qualitative induction is a weaker sort
of test dispensing with quantitative measurability; we shall return to it below.
As is evident, Peirce’s Ab-De-In Doctrine forms an early version of the well-
known Hypothetico-Deductive method. It adds, however, to this, the deliberations

336
C H A P T E R 16
on the abductive choice of hypothesis, the diagrammatical account of deduction,
and the admission of non-quantitative inductive testing. Let us try to conceptualize
literary analysis in terms of Peirce’s apparatus.
L I T E R A R Y I N T E R P R E T A T I O N
To a large extent, literary interpretation shares the features of ordinary text interpre-
tation, e.g. of ancient documents, or of more or less complicated pieces of everyday
writing. Literary texts, however, add certain dimensions to interpretation as such.
Literary texts are prototypically closed in the sense that they constitute a work, an
œuvre with strictly defined boundaries. These boundaries are not absolute, but they
constitute a first barrier for and constraint upon interpretation. Interpretation ought
to go as far as possible within textual boundaries and establish the internal systems,
meanings, coherences, claims, forms, aesthetics, world view, or whatever interpre-
tation is looking for, before it crosses the boundaries in order to search for the
answer to unsolved questions in the text in its context. This is not the case in non-
literary texts where we immediately go outside the text to solve puzzles unanswered
by the text – if a text lacks information on some point, we do not hesitate to supply
it from elsewhere. Of course it is possible to read ordinary texts from a ‘literary
stance’ trying to establish an internal structure before adding outside material, and
the conceptual distinction between literary and non-literary texts should not lead
us to assume that empirical texts fall in two strictly separate classes; rather, there
is a continuum between prototypically literary texts and prototypically ‘ordinary’
texts. The prototypically literary text’s closedness, however, urges us to read it
in a generalized manner: not only for the particular content it seems to convey,
but interpreting it as pointing to some more general claim than is evident on the
text’s surface. Its closedness and its supposed generality are two sides of the same
coin. This is what elementarily characterizes literary interpretation: its generalizing
intention aimed at a text seen with a certain closure. Literary interpretation proto-
typically presupposes that the text carries a general content of which the particular
contents of the text is but an instantiation.
No matter what more specific theory the reader may entertain about literature, this
interpretation follows a certain method. The beginning of interpretation is nicely
caught in Freud’s classic description of the analyst’s mind during analysis, that
of ‘gleichschwebende Aufmerksamkeit’, floating attention420 – aimed at nothing
specifically but listening in order to discover connections in the patient’s speech.
The same is the case in literary interpretation. Its base is an ordinary reading of the
text, including the passions, emotions, thoughts, observations, pleasures or pains
it has given rise to on the part of the reader. It is on the basis of this immediate
conception of the text that the ‘gleichschwebende Aufmerksamkeit’ sets in. It does
not look for anything specific, that is, it is equally open to remark phonetic resem-
blances or oppositions, prosodic repetitions, graphic patterns, semantic overlappings
or ambiguities, rhetorical similarities or contrasts, thematic recurrences, narrative
developments, metaphorical structures, organization of space-time, different dia-,
idio-, sociolects, genre structures – not to mention the possible cross-mappings of

W H O I S M I C H A E L W O - L I N G P T A H - H O T E P J E R O L O M O N
337
patterns between all these and more. In short, all sorts of correlations in the text
may be picked up by the first phase of literary interpretation. They constitute the
‘surprising facts’ of Peirce’s epistemology, surprising, that is, in contrast to an
‘ordinary’ reading of the same text. They call for the selection of a hypothesis – an
abduction. This is not a special hurdle to pass, rather abductions spring forth all of
the time during this phase of interpretation, most of them so obvious that they need
not be explicit. There may be a striking amount of imagery pointing to death in a
certain lyrical poem – an abduction now may state the hypothesis that the poem is
not only about a pastoral scenery like it immediately seems to be the case – but that
it also carries a metaphysical reflection about mortality. This is a striking fact of
surprise: a landscape description does not normally entail a death description. Now,
the hypothesis erects an ideal model: the poem contains a reflection of mortality.421
What would we expect from a reflection upon mortality? The theme of mortality
has a lot of aspects, and each of them has certain necessary implications (proto-
typically – all other things equal, of course). Death implies silence and stillness,
the ceasing of any projects, a grave implies rotting flesh populated by worms, the
passing of a family member implies mourning relatives, etc. A piece of cultural
knowledge adds further possibilities: death may be represented by hourglasses,
scythes, skulls, unused instruments and books, cut flowers, etc. – the whole imagery
of the memento mori genres in literature and painting.422 Are any of these many
deductive consequences of the hypothesis chosen corroborated by the text? Here
induction enters the scene. Crude induction plays a large role in the interpretation
of literary texts, because we can assume that in the absence of any signs pointing
to the contrary, everything unmentioned possesses a default value.423 The role of
crude induction is so much larger in literary texts, because there is no other access
to the textual universe than text itself – this in contradistinction to ordinary texts
about empirical subjects where there always is an infinity of possible information
about a given subject, and hence the possibility of counterinformation showing up.
The literary text is, even if voluminous, finite, and if nothing ever is told or implied
about the main character’s legs, we can safely – even more safely than in real
life cases – assume that he has two legs. This omnipresence of crude induction
in relation to literary text forms a first step in the text’s generality, because the
corresponding ‘Unbestimmtheitsstellen’ refer to an infinity of possible extensions
(the legs may be long or short, with much or little hair, etc. – they remain general
legs until further described). Crude induction does not, of course, tell us anything
about more specific hypotheses like the one about death in a lyrical poem. Such
hypotheses call for Qualitative Induction. Let us here take a closer look at how
Peirce describes it:
Qualitative Induction consists in the investigator’s first deducing from the retroductive hypothesis as
great an evidential weight of genuine conditional predictions as he can conveniently undertake to make
and to bring to the test, the condition under which he asserts them being that of the retroductive
hypothesis having such degree and kind of truth as to assure their truth. In calling them ‘predictions,’
I do not mean that they need relate to future events but that they must antecede the investigator’s
knowledge of their truth, or at least that they must virtually antecede it. I will give an illustration of such
‘virtual antecedence.’ Suppose that to avoid wasting a great deal of time upon a hypothesis which the

338
C H A P T E R 16
first comparisons with the facts may show to be utterly worthless, an investigator of a certain conjecture
draws up and resolves to follow a well-considered initial program for work upon the question, and that
this consists mainly in working out and testing as many consequences of the hypothesis as he can work
out by a certain mathematical method and can ascertain the truth or falsity of at a cost of not more
than $100 for each. But suppose that among the half dozen predictions to which that method will carry
him, there, quite unexpectedly, turns up one whose truth has long been known to him, though it is a
surprise to him to find that it is deducible from the hypothesis under examination. What course does
sound logic impose upon him under these circumstances? The answer is that he must reexamine the
process of retroduction that suggested the hypothesis; and if the fact that is now repredicted in any
degree influenced that hypothesis, it has had its due effect, and must not be used again. But if not, will
he then be free to use the prediction if he likes? Not at all: the validity of his Qualitative Induction
will be found to depend upon his following a rational and decisive method; he has no more right, but
rather less, to favor the inductive rejection of the retroductive suggestion, than to favor its inductive
adoption; and he is bound, as a man who means to reason as honestly as the imperfections of his nature
and training will permit, to admit the true prediction into his counsels. The predictions must eventually
be so varied as to test every feature of the hypothesis; yet the interests of science command constant
attention to economy, especially in the earlier inductive stages of research.
Having made his initial predictions the investigator proceeds to ascertain their truth or falsity; and
then, having taken account of such subsidiary arguments as there may be, goes on to judge of the
combined value of the evidence, and to decide whether the hypothesis should be regarded as proved,
or as well on the way toward being proved, or as unworthy of further attention, or whether it ought to
receive a definite modification in the light of the new experiments and be inductively reexamined ab
ovo, or whether finally, that while not true it probably presents some analogy to the truth, and that the
results of the induction may help to suggest a better hypothesis. (‘G’, 1905, 2.759)
Here, Peirce outlines how Qualitative Induction may fail: if one of the consequences
is recognized as true by the interpreter for other reasons than the argument in
process or facts presented in the induction, then he must reconsider the hypothesis –
maybe it was this truth, accidentally occurring among the implications of the
hypothesis, which lured the interpreter into accepting the hypothesis in the first
place, and not its fertility in the ongoing interpretation. In our example, this would
correspond, e.g., to a case where the interpreter has a certain obsession with Freud’s
concept of a death drive, regards it as one of the necessities of death, and assumes
the hypothesis for this reason (rather than because of observations in the text). If
such ‘false’ predictions are avoided, then, the remaining predictions should now be
inductively tested. Are any hints of rotting flesh, worms, silence, emptiness, sorrow,
etc., or skulls, cut roses, crosses, hourglasses, etc. found in the text? If there are, the
hypothesis may be considered strengthened, if not proved, and in any case it may be
refined, now maybe concentrating upon a special aspect of or conception of death,
which may then be further investigated through new deductions and inductions.
A very important implication of this Ab-De-In cycle in interpretation is the fact
that only the two of the phases deal directly with the text, namely Abduction and
Induction, each in their direction, so to speak:
Abduction seeks a theory. Induction seeks for facts. In abduction the consideration of the facts suggests
the hypothesis. In induction the study of the hypothesis suggests the experiments which bring to light
the very facts to which the hypothesis had pointed. The mode of suggestion by which, in abduction, the
facts suggest the hypothesis is by resemblance, [] the resemblance of the facts to the consequences
of the hypothesis. The mode of suggestion by which in induction the hypothesis suggests the facts is

W H O I S M I C H A E L W O - L I N G P T A H - H O T E P J E R O L O M O N
339
by contiguity, [] familiar knowledge that the conditions of the hypothesis can be realized in certain
experimental ways.
(‘On The Logic of Drawing History from Ancient Documents’, 1901, EPII, 106; 7.218)
Abduction selects a hypothesis able to account for the facts in question – induction
seeks confirmation among facts of the deductively ‘enlarged’ hypothesis. Both share
the comparison between facts and hypotheses, and it is easy to see that in the want
of the deductive phase, the two of them might easily mirror each other so that any
hypothesis might only bring into its horizon suitable facts, so that such ‘theory-
laden’ facts might blind the interpreter from admitting counterhypothetical facts.
Here, the intervening deductive phase is extremely important. It turns, momentarily,
away from the facts of the text and contemplates only the hypothesis handed over
from Abduction. It then considers it as an ideal model and draws a bundle of
necessary consequences of it, completely disregarding its background in the text
for a moment. This is where theory of any kind may step in. The hypothesis is,
in itself, theoretical of nature. In the grasping of its consequences, theorematic
reasoning allows for the introduction of new variables, new ‘construction lines’
in order to facilitate new experiments which may uncover more of the possibly
implicit content of the hypothesis. This is the place where theoretical assumptions
of all kinds may enter the methodological circuit of interpretation. If I hold certain
theories about death – for instance Freud’s already mentioned speculative idea of
the Thanatos principle – they may be invoked as additional material in order to find
what further consequences may be drawn from the idea that the text in question
deals with death. Freud’s theory, for instance, implies that there is a drive in nature
and psychology to reach the lowest level of energy and tension. Consequently,
lowering of tension may be ventured as a possible deduction from the enlarged
hypothesis, and this implication may now be inductively tested. It is of crucial
importance here to distinguish between the two motives for theory import: theory as
explicit ‘construction lines’ imported in the diagrammatical reasoning interregnum,
or theory as unrecognized, implicit guide-lines for the selection of the hypotheses
in the first phase. In the former case, theory may be so to speak controlled or
checked by induction; in the latter case not so, because it silently governs the very
selection of hypotheses to be checked. This constitutes, in fact, a difference between
interpretation and overinterpretation.424
It is, indeed, a subtle difference. For is it not the case that theoretical precon-
ceptions are at stake already in the early abduction phase of ‘creative perception’?
If the ‘creative perception’ leading to the death hypothesis in the first place is a
perception of the poem’s landscape scenery as strangely barren, dark, and desolate,
then is it not the case that our theoretical predispositions play a role in our selection
of that hypothesis among many other possible hypotheses to be tested? It is, of
course, the case. Our arsenal of theoretical devices plays its role twice, both in the
pre-explicit choice of hypotheses in the creative perception phase of abduction and
in the experimental phase of deduction. What is important, then, is that theory’s
role in the former case is not that of a presupposed truth, but rather that of an
assumption, a way of viewing things experimentally.

340
C H A P T E R 16
The deductive phase on a certain distance to the text may be compared to
Ricœur’s idea of a so to speak structuralist phase in any ever so hermeneutical
text interpretation with its ‘Einfühlung’ – a phase in which the structures of the
text are objectified and, in the passing, seen as beyond any author intention,
as an autonomous, ideal system equipped with their own internal regularities.
Diagrammatical reasoning makes possible the explicit discovery of truths hitherto
being only implicitly present in a diagram. This is why this phase of interpretation
is so important: it is here that the not immediately obvious may be revealed.
In our prototypical presentation, we have artificially pretended the interpretation
to take place in the course of one Ab-De-In circuit. This is, of course, a simplification
for the sake of explanation. In real interpretation, the circuit is traversed any number
of times, and each new text observation gives rise to yet another hypothesis-
deduction-test series. There is reason to believe that any initially assumed hypothesis
will either be refuted or refined during the ongoing interpretation. This does not
imply, however, that interpretation following this method, will invariably end in
one very subtle and many-faceted hypothesis. A literary text is a huge, complicated
phenomenon, and there is no a priori reason to methodologically assume that its
crucial features will in all cases sum up in one hypothesis, be it ever so complex. Of
course, hypotheses may endlessly be combined by ‘and’ to yield huge combinatorial
hypotheses (yet without any further internal cohesion), but we may easily expect
that, in some cases, different text observations give rise to contradictory hypotheses
which may both be corroborated by different inductive test observations. In that case,
interpretation will have to conclude that an ambiguous text is under investigation.
J E R O L O M O N R E V E A L E D
Peirce himself did not, of course, test his epistemology in literary interpretation.
There exists, however, a very interesting quote where he presents a piece of fictitious
interpretation of a fictitious homegrown example:
Suppose, then, that, being seated in a street car, I remark a man opposite to me whose appearance and
behavior unite characters which I am surprised to find together in the same person. I ask myself, How
can this be? Suppose I find this problematic reply: Perhaps he is an ex-priest. He is the very image
of such a person; he presents an icon of an ex-priest. Here is an iconic argument, or abduction of it.
Secondly, it now occurs to me that if he is an ex-priest, he should be tonsured; and in order to test
this, I say something to him calculated to make him take off his hat. He does so, and I find that he
is indeed tonsured. Here at last is an indication that my theory is correct. I can now say that he is
presumably an ex-priest, although it would be inaccurate to say that there is any definite probability
that he is so, since I do not know how often I might find a man tonsured who was not an ex-priest,
though evidently far oftener than he would be one. The supposition is, however, now supported by an
inductive induction, a weak form of symptomatic or indexical argument. It stands on a widely different
basis from that on which it stood before my little experiment. Before, it rested on the flimsy support
of similarity, or agreement in ‘flavor’. Now, facts have been constrained to yield confirmation to it by
bearing out a prediction based upon it. Belief in the theory rests now on factual reaction to the theory.
Thirdly, while the man’s hat is off, I read in the crown of it a name that has been pasted into it. I have
no doubt whatsoever that it is the man’s name. I do not go into the question of how I come to be so
confident of that. As long as I have not doubt, it matters not how doubt came to be destroyed. I get out

W H O I S M I C H A E L W O - L I N G P T A H - H O T E P J E R O L O M O N
341
of the car, and go to call upon the chancellor of the diocese; and that he will tell me the truth I equally
believe implicitly. I ask the chancellor, ‘Who is Michael Wo-Ling Ptah-Hotep Jerolomon?’ (Pardon my
nonsense.) He replies, ‘he is an ex-priest.’ ‘Is he the only man of that name?’ ‘No, there are, or may
be, fifteen. Fourteen of them reside in this town and are ex-priests. The fifteenth went, twenty years
ago, to High Tibet, and has never been heard of since.’ It thus appears that the name read in the hat,
thought having no striking ‘flavor’ of ex-priest about it, nor any such causal connection with the man’s
being an ex-priest as was the tonsure, yet in consequence of this knowledge becomes a symbol of the
man’s being an ex-priest; for a symbol is a sign which becomes significant simply by virtue of the fact
that it will be so interpreted. So, it might conceivably have been an accident that the man was tonsured,
but now that the name Michael Wu-Ling Ptah-Hotep Jerolomon signifies for me a probability on that
ground alone is over fourteen to one that he is an ex-priest. There is no escape from that. It is what
I consider myself certain of. It is only a probability. Yet now, fourthly, combining the arguments into
one mixed argument, and considering, what is logically relevant, that I have no serious stake in the
question, I am satisfied to consider the mixed argument as proof, and to dismiss the question until it
may acquire more importance. (Although the illustration is silly, it all the better covers the case.)
(MS CSP L 75 E, 163–73)
Abduction: this man is an ex-priest. This idea is based on the surprising fact that
he does not look like an ordinary person, but looks like a cleric.
Deduction: an ex-priest probably has a tonsure
Induction: test showing he has, in fact, a tonsure
Now the original hypothesis is strengthened by a further observation: the name
Michael (etc.) Jerolomon in his hat (resting on the crude induction that a name in
a hat is most often the name of the person wearing it)
Abduction: this ex-priest is Michael Jerolomon
Deduction: he is probably from this town’s diocese
Induction: a call to the diocese reveals 14 priests of that name, against whom only
one with that name has left the town for Tibet
The inquirer, of course, ought to have compared this finding with the telephone
directory of the town (maybe there is a total of 3000 Michael Jerolomons living there)
before he concludes to the 14/15 probability of the man being a priest. But suppose
he knows that name is not widespread in the town – then the initial hypothesis seems
corroborated with a degree of probability bordering to absolute certainty.425
I N T E R P R E T A T I O N P E R S P E C T I V E S
Peirce’s example is an – albeit fictitious – example of ‘ordinary’ interpretation. We
already remarked the crucial difference between literary and ‘ordinary’ interpre-
tation: in the former there is a crucial distinction between internal and external text
observations. The interpreter, in the first phase, seeks to establish his reading with
internal text observations only. This does not, however, imply that he excludes all
of his encyclopaedic knowledge about the world while reading. When a text speaks
about the Eiffel tower, the reader automatically assumes all his general knowledge
of that edifice – that is, until further notice. This is part of the ‘crude induction’
in literary interpretation. But as soon as any signs in the text hint at the idea that
this is not in all respects the ‘normal’ Eiffel tower referred to, the reader must

342
C H A P T E R 16
bracket (parts of) his knowledge of that tower and admit the text’s right to alter
reality. In so far, the Ab-De-In cycle of interpretation makes use of the reader’s
encyclopaedic knowledge all of the time, even during the internal ‘close reading’
phase. Quite another issue is the text conceived no longer as a sign, as a piece of
communication, but as a product of its own extratextual context – be it the author,
the literary institution, the period, etc. Here, the text is seen rather as a symptom of
other phenomena in reality. Here, the introduction of knowledge about the author’s
biography, the social or political conditions present at the time the text was written,
etc. should be introduced with the same care as theoretical assumptions during the
Ab-De-In cycle. They may be introduced as further motivations for a hypothesis
or for the refinement of it, or they may be introduced as further fact corroborating
an inductive testing. But just like the case about the danger of overinterpretation in
theory introduction, they must not run counter to textual observations which thus
retain a primacy over theory as well as context. Any attempt to directly deduce the
text from (parts of) its context will, for this reason, be fallacious. This primacy is
not absolute. It may be relativized many times during the ongoing interpretation
process when the introduction of external factors is called for: to understand the
text as a replique in a conversation, to understand it as aimed at a specific type of
reader, to understand it as reflecting certain conditions in the life of the author, to
understand it embeddedness in the political culture of the period, etc.This relative
primacy of text observations is, so to speak, the rational kernel of the autonomy
doctrine of new criticism close reading.
The Ab-De-In cycle of interpretation can be compared with related processes in
Peirce’s philosophy. One is its very center, the pragmatic maxim from ‘How to Make
Our Ideas Clear’, and, in turn, its basis in laboratory experiment. The pragmatic
maxim, as is well known, claims that the content of concepts should be clarified by
considering which conceivable effects the object of that concept could have – then
this will be the whole of that concept’s content. But how does one investigate the
conceivable effects of a concept? This should be done, of course, by a process of the
same form as the Ab-De-In cycle. The pragmatic maxim is explicitly motivated by
the structure of scientific experiment: a hypothesis is thrown forth (abduction), an
experiment is constructed in speculation which will give such and such results if the
hypothesis is true (deduction), the experiment is performed and supports or falsifies
the assumption (induction). On the other hand, as is always the case in Peirce’s
philosophy, nothing is in logic which was not always already (albeit less controlled)
in nature. So the Ab-De-In cycle has its naturalist counterpart in the trial-and-
error of Uexküllian functional circles and maybe even – so Peirce – in process of
evolution: variation (abduction), species consequences of variation (deduction), and
natural selection (induction). Thus, on Peirce’s account, scientific experiment, the
clarification of concepts, literary interpretation, and biological evolution share the
same fundamental trial-and-error structure – involving the crucial diagrammatical
experimentation phase introducing ideal objects. The idea that interpretation so to
speak has a biological structure is be relevant for the nascent science of biosemiotics
(cf. Chaps. 9–12).

W H O I S M I C H A E L W O - L I N G P T A H - H O T E P J E R O L O M O N
343
All of these processes might be collected under the headline of ‘thought exper-
iments’ – assuming, of course, that ‘thought’ is here taken in an objective idealist
sense rather than in a subjectivist sense. Thus, literary interpretation as thought
experiment is intimately related to semiotic processes in nature and culture, while
owing its specificity to the special properties of its object, the literary text.

C H A P T E R 17
FIVE TYPES OF SCHEMATIC ICONICITY
IN THE LITERARY TEXT
– An Extension of the Ingardenian Viewpoint
When the universe of discourse relates to a common
experience, but this experience is of something imaginary,
as when we discuss the world of Shakespeare’s creation in
the play of Hamlet, we find individual distinction existing so
far as the work of imagination has carried it, while beyond
that point there is vagueness and generality.
Peirce ‘Multitude and Number’, 1897, 4.172
We have have already encountered Husserl’s theory of fictionality (defined by
the ‘quasi’ attitude) as well as his gradual realization that fictions and pictures
possess an ideal quality – to the extent that none of them are fully determinate and
thus necessarily contain Unbestimmtheiten. These observations form the point of
departure for his famous pupil Roman Ingarden who is well-known for being the
phenomenologist who earliest and most thoroughly worked out the foundations of a
phenomenologial aesthetics in general and a phenomenological theory of the literary
work in particular.426 What is less well known is that at the same time as Ingarden
developed these possibilities within Husserlian phenomenology, he undertook this
enormous work in order to correct what he conceived as a fallacy in the heart
of phenomenology, namely Husserl’s transcendental turn towards transcendental
idealism.427 Ingarden saw little difference between Husserl’s understanding of ficti-
tious objects after the ‘quasi’-mode on the one hand, and the reformulation of his
theory in Ideen where the object pole of phenomenological acts under the concept of
noema was made a consciousness-immanent entity, on the other. So transcendental
idealism, in Ingarden’s account, treated the whole world as a fiction. The initial
impetus for Ingarden’s obsession with phenomenological aesthetics was thus to
develop it to an extent where the crucial difference between real and fictive objets
became evident. Thus, Ingarden’s aesthetics, beginning with his chef-d’œuvre Das
literarische Kunstwerk (1931) and continuing with Vom Erkennen des literarischen
Kunstwerks (1938, 1966) and numerous other aesthetic investigations, has a double
aim: one, of course, is to found an aesthetics on a phenomenological basis, the
other, to provide ontological arguments for philosophical realism – such as it is
finally laid out in the unfinished three-volume work Der Streit um die Existenz der
Welt (1966–74).428
345

346
C H A P T E R 17
The literary work is thus placed as non-real as opposed to ordinary reality –
and this crucial idea is argued on the basis of two observations: the objects to
which it refers are quasi-objects merely, referred to by quasi-judgments. And the
literary work itself is non-real, albeit in another meaning of the word: it is general,
schematic, and (in a certain sense) ideal. While the former of these reasons is what
allows Ingarden to counter the basis of Husserl’s idealism, the latter is what forms
the basis of his own theory of the literary work, a theory which is, in many respects,
the direct heir to Husserl’s own theories of fictions and pictures (cf. Chap. 14).
Here, we shall discuss Ingarden’s detailed theory of the literary work with
emphasis on the implications of his ideas about the schematic character of the
work – or, to put in a Peircean vein, the diagrammatical character of it.
Ingarden’s account for the structure of the literary work contains, as is well
known, four Schichten, four strata, levels, or layers: the level of word sounds, the
level of meanings, the level of represented objectivities, and the level of schematized
aspects. As is evident, the three of these levels roughly correspond to aspects of the
sign which have been discussed at least since Aristotle: its expression, its content,
and its reference. The fourth stratum, the level of schematized aspects is not part
of average sign definitions – but stems from a phenomenologically classical idea,
namely Husserl’s observation in Ideen that perceived objects may never be grasped
in their totality but only through one or several out of a huge variety of possible
‘profiles’ or aspects, dependent on which point-of-views they are perceived from.
The basic set of conceptual tools in Ingarden’s account is thus surprisingly general
and deals with perceptual and linguistic issues not specific to literature. Thus it is
no wonder that something like 90 percent of Das literarische Kunstwerk is spent
on the construction of an ambitious phenomenological linguistics – the main part
of whose results covers any language use whatsoever. When Ingarden talks about
‘the literary work’, it thus also includes e.g. scientific treatises, and only a minor
part of Das literarische Kunstwerk is spent on outlining the specificity of the
literary work of art – in Vom Erkennen he further tries to single out the precise
difference between scientific texts and literary works of art. When it comes down
to what distinguishes a literary work of art from any old literary work, the answer is
threefold, added on top of the linguistic theory: it is the special use of schematized
aspects in order to making intuitive the represented objects; it is the polyphony
between the ways the four levels are articulated in the particular work – and it is
the evanescent ‘metaphysical qualities’ which the work – if successful – is able to
manifest: the humorous, the tragic, the merry, etc. This is not to say, however, that
the pheno-linguistic doctrine he presents as its foundation is trivial, quite on the
contrary. Let us run trough the single levels of the construction.
The level of word sounds is probably the least problematic – even if an already
classic criticism adds to it the fact that most literary works have their privileged form
of existence as printed books, so that the graphic form properly ought to be included
in this level. This is, however, possible without major problems. Das literarische
Kunstwerk is written simultaneously with the first articulations of linguistic struc-
turalism in Prague (which was, through Jakobson, heavily influenced by Husserl’s

F I V E T Y P E S O F S C H E M A T I C I C O N I C I T Y
347
Logische Untersuchungen just like Ingarden), so it is no wonder that Ingarden’s
account for the level of word sounds bears resemblance to the structuralist idea
of the duality between phonology and phonetics. To Ingarden, word sounds are,
just like the other parts of the work, general – they do not consist of the physical
acoustic sounds which are uttered in any single, inner or outer, reading of the work
(nor of the physical instances of grapheme series constituting the correlating book,
for that matter). The level of word sounds consists of types – the word sound
type is constant from one use to the next, and thus different from the ‘phonic
material’ in which it incarnates in each single case of expression. This ‘ideality’
(Ingarden would not use that word in this connection) or generality of the word
sound of course has functional reasons. The word sound expresses one and the
same meaning and hence must be as identical as the meaning itself. (38) On this
proto-structuralist basis, a series of further ideas are added: a distinction between
‘lifeless’ as opposed to ‘living’, ‘vibrant’, ‘powerful’ words, of which scientific
terms serve as an example of the former, while the latter have certain onomatopoetic
qualities: ‘ the characters which arise from the purely phonetic ‘Gestalt qualities’
and move from the meaning onto the word sound reveal themselves more clearly in
the word sound and color it, so to speak, with the quality that is characteristic of the
designated object ’ (44) This poetic function – to use Jakobson’s terminology –
plays a crucial role in the contribution of the word sound level to the polyphony
of the whole work as well as in Ingarden’s account for the schematized aspects.
Phonetic formations of higher orders include all the well-known effects of rhythm
and tempo, melody, rhyme, assonance, tone, etc. and the fact that they are all part
of the contribution of the word sound level to the specific polyphony of the work
of art is hardly surprising.
The analysis of the meaning level takes up a huge part of Ingarden’s doctrine,
and it indeed forms an ambitious outline of his phenomenological linguistics with
its base in Husserl’s 3rd and 4th logical investigations. It forms a first outline
of what was to become Ingarden’s ontology in Streit and provides the clue to
language (and hence, literature) as a schematic construct. Like in Husserl’s 4th
investigation, the two autonomous meaning units are the noun and the sentence,
respectively – while the syncategorematica, Ingarden’s ‘functional words’ do
not possess an autonomous meaning. And like in Husserl’s 5th investigation, a
composite act structure is taken as the basis of intentional directedness. Its version
regarding the account of the meaning of names differs, however, significantly
from Husserl’s version: it consists of 1) the intentional directional factor (the
reference being singular or multiply oriented (single-rayed or multi-rayed), being
actual or potential, being stable or variable, etc.), 2) the material content (the quali-
tative constitution of the object), 3) the formal content (the ontic status of the
object – it being a substance, a thing, a quality, a state etc.), 4) the moment of
existential characterization (whether the object is real, ideal, etc.), and in some
cases 5) the moment of existential position (whether the object is a fact or a
fiction). Verbs, on the other hand, are completion-requiring – not unlike Peircean
rhemes.

348
C H A P T E R 17
An important notion here is the distinction between the actual and potential
‘stock of meaning’ (84). Any specific use of a word actualizes an aspect of its ideal
sense – and the other merely potential aspects of meaning may now be indirectly
present in intonation in spoken language, and, in written language, by means of
reference to the ‘system of meanings’ to which the word belongs, and by means of
the localization of the word in different contexts, each of them selecting among the
possible stock of meaning. (88) These indirect ways of indicating possible meanings
Ingarden calls ‘suggestions’ or ‘readily potential meanings’ as opposed to possible
meanings not so indicated – in the course of a work, a word may collect many such
suggested possible meanings. This is supposed to cover both material and formal
aspects of meaning – and this whole idea becomes important in order to understand
Ingarden’s difficult notion of ‘schematized aspects’.
First, it is this outline of a linguistics which permits Ingarden to ask the questions
leading to his basic idea of the ontology of language and of literature. For such
meanings of words, sentences, and sentence complexes, are they not ideal objects?
In a certain sense, the most decidedly are. They are identical from one use to
the next (as a prerequisite to the possibility of understanding), this identity is not
numerical (Faust remains one work, whether it is printed in a circulation of 2,000
or of 200,000), their kind of existence is not physical (if it was physical, then
each single copy of Faust would be a different work), it does not exist at a single,
specifiable location in time and space. This was what lead Husserl to assume the
ideality of meanings (and furthermore to outline the (later abandoned) species
theory of meaning in the Logische Untersuchungen with the idea that the meaning
of an expression is simply the species of the correlated act). Ingarden admits all
these arguments against meanings and literary works being real objects. But still
they can not be ideal objects in the same sense as logical truths, geometrical objects,
or mathematical regularities nor material essences – for they come into being at
certain specific points of time in history, they may disappear again, and, unlike these
genuinely ideal objects, they invariably depend on subjective intention for their
existence: they require the existence of speakers, authors, and readers. If they were
really ideal objects, they would not come into being at specifiable points and would,
in some sense, have timeless existence, only waiting to be discovered by the author.
Hence they form prime examples of Ingarden’s third ontological category, in some
sense intermediary between ideal and real: pure intentional objects (100). They are
heteronomous, because they depend on subjective intentions for their existence,
they require physical support for their existence, and they may refer, in turn, to any
kind of objects, be they real, ideal, or imagined. It is they that generally constitute
the basis for the reference of propositions. In ordinary cases, the pure intentional
object so to speak remains invisible, because the object referred to is seen through
the correlated pure intentional object. Only in cases like faulty reference or
fictitious reference does the pure intentional object become visible as such.
Even if pure intentional objects are ultimately dependent on the intentionality
of acts of consciousness, the ontic relativity of the objects represented does not
refer directly back to such intentionality, but to an intentionality immanent in the

F I V E T Y P E S O F S C H E M A T I C I C O N I C I T Y
349
units of meaning – constituted by the fact of communication and of its necessity
to be able identically to reproduce a meaning from one occasion to another. This
shift implies an advantage as well as a loss. The advantage is that meanings, unlike
e.g. perceptions, cease to be completely subjective formations and thus become
intersubjective – the loss is that the lack of richness and completeness, dependent
on single intentions, makes of the meaning a ‘skeleton’, a ‘schema’ only. (126–27)
Thus the schematic character of the literary work lies already in the basic linguistic
schematization of meaning. To say that schematization is a loss, however, might
be seen as a strange façon de parler – it should rather be seen as a gain, because it
is schematization that permits thought economy, plasticity of reference as well as
experimentation possibility. These enormous benefits, it is true, are bought at the
prize of a loss of richness.
Pure intentional objects imply a special use in Ingarden of the phenomenological
notion of Sachverhalt – state of affairs. Thus he claims that the pure intentional
objects constitute in themselves states-of-affairs – no matter whether any real or
ideal correlate exists or not. On the other hand, such correlates are, if they exist,
states-of-affairs in themselves.429 The former use of the concept of states-of-affairs
thus gives rise to subtle determinations like the following: ‘ the states-of-affairs
created and developed by the sentence is transcendent with respect to the sentence
content yet, according to its essence, belongs to it.’ (116) Such ‘purely intended
states-of-affairs’ differ from states-of-affairs pertaining to an ‘ontic sphere’ (real or
ideal) being autonomous in relation to the sentence, and even if their existence is
heteronomous in relation to the sentence and finds its ontic basis in sentences, they
are, on the other hand, transcendent in relation to them.
This forms the basis of the next level, the level of represented objects or objec-
tivities. They form the only ‘thematically apprehended’ stratum of the work (217) –
that is, the whole edifice apart from the objectivities are only implicitly part of the
immediately experienced work. The reader focuses upon the objects dealt with in the
work. The object430 is, of course, not directly grasped from the sentence meanings
of the text. These sentence meanings refer to, as we have seen, states-of-affairs,
and it is these states-of-affairs which permit, in turn, the access to the objectivities
represented. The purely intentional sentence correlate is not – unlike the existing
state-of-affairs it may refer to – completely determined (142). As state-of-affairs,
it is already schematic – or ideal in the sense of the word that it may be repeated
identically. This implies, on the other hand, that it may be ambiguous – it may, for
instance, contain mutually contradictory parts which gives it what Ingarden calls
‘opalescence’ or ‘iridiscence’, fluctuating indeterminability.431 The status of the
object level depends on the special character of the propositions realized in sentences
on the meaning level. They organize a continuum from referring only to purely
intentional objects in one end and to referring to autonomically existing objects
in the other. The correlative propositions Ingarden names ‘pure affirmative’ and
‘genuine judicative’ propositions, respectively – the former roughly corresponding
to Meinong’s ‘assumptions’ (‘Annahmen’) which do not involve any existence
claims.432 On this continuum, the quasi-judgments characteristic of the literary

350
C H A P T E R 17
work are located.433 The ‘ontic setting’ of a real world of genuine propositions
is maintained, but the ‘matching intention’ (between pure intentional and existing
objects) and ‘identification’ (with a sphere of existence) are left out. The inten-
tionally projected states-of-affairs thus form ‘their own world’ – which may deviate
to larger and lesser degrees from the real world. The purely intentional states-of-
affairs already belong to the object stratum (188) – they form so to speak the bridge
from meaning stratum to object stratum: ‘Since the same object can be revealed in
various differently constructed states-of-affairs – since the state-of-affairs are like
many windows through which we can look into one and the same house, each time
from a different standpoint and from a different side, into another part, or finally, for
a second time through the same window – a certain cleavage occurs in the ‘stratum
of objects’ of the literary work. In their representation function the states-of-affairs
are that which represents, while the objects constituted within them are the repre-
sented. But since the state of affairs is at the same time something which belongs
to the proper ontic range of the object (constituted within it), this representation is
in the final analysis a self-representation of the object in what belongs to it.’
We give this long quote because it pinpoints the difficult relationship between
meaning and object levels – and at the same time involves the fourth and last
level, the stratum of schematisierte Ansichten, of ‘schematized aspects’. We so
to speak look through the states-of-affairs (cf. the window metaphor) in order to
reach the represented objects ‘and have them as given.’ (191), while the medium
itself is usually not thematically in the foreground, but remains in the background.
Another metaphor for the same is that the different states-of-affairs so to speak
capture the objectivities: ‘ the states-of-affairs, figuratively speaking, merge into
a ‘net’ in which the given object is “ensnared” ’ (157), or that it is as if ‘a beam of
light were illuminating a part of a region, the remainder of which disappears in an
indeterminate cloud but is still there in its indeterminacy.’ (218)
This implies a delicate relationship between the states-of-affairs and the objectiv-
ities. The latter is constituted out of a manifold of connected states-of-affairs. The
way they connect these states-of-affairs is seemingly one of continuous merging:
the limits between the single states-of-affairs pertaining to the same objectivity are
artificial, and they are fused into one complex. This process thus forms a formal
equivalent to Husserl’s famous analysis of perception and the synthesis of the
perceived object from profiles; the object, on its side, being able to give rise to
potentially a continuous infinity of profiles. But unlike the case in perception, the
basis of the synthesis, in the work, does not form a continuous manifold. Rather,
this manifold consists of single, isolated sentences with each their meaning and
state of affairs correlate – which implies that the object, in Ingarden’s metaphor,
is so to speak ‘dispersed, like a ray of light in a prism, in a discrete manifold
of distinct, though connected, states-of-affairs.’ (159) – even if this gives us
the possibility of selecting a varied range of different, but still only individual
states-of-affairs (198).434
Thus, represented objectivities – that is, pure intentional objectivities – differ
from real objects in a radical manner. Ingarden examplifies this in his interesting

F I V E T Y P E S O F S C H E M A T I C I C O N I C I T Y
351
accounts of represented time and space which both differ from real as well as
perceived time and space by being schematic because constructed from a finite
number of meaning units. While real objects – unlike the case in Peirce – are
supposed to be unanimously and universally determined, with all determinations
fitting consistently into one whole, and being absolutely individual, so that ideas
in them are incarnated or individualized at the lowest possible level of differen-
tiation – pure intentional objects, on the other hand, are schematic and thus not
thoroughly determined, they are not necessarily consistent, and ideas in them are not
necessarily individualized.435 This implies, all in all, that purely intentional objects
are schematic. This gives rise to the famous Unbestimmtheitsstellen, the spots of
indeterminacy, or, as Wolfgang Iser would later call them, the Leerstellen – of
which there is an infinity (or, as Ingarden would later say, a very large number).
The supposedly real object in a quasi-judgment hence involves that ‘ only a
formal schema of infinitely many spots of indeterminacy is projected, but almost
all remain unfilled.’ (250). This forms the basic reason why the literary work is ‘in
principle incomplete’ and thus in need of further supplementation (251) – but it is
important here to stress that nothing specifically literary has yet been said by this. It
goes for any purely intentional object as such and thus for all objects projected by
meaning, hence by all language and all (supposedly) sufficiently complex sign use.
The reason why we do not experience these spots while reading is threefold: the
represented objects are ‘visible’ only through the aspects determined by the choice
of meaning units; some of the spots are covered by schematized aspects, and, finally,
the reader supplies his own selection of concretizations and thus in a sense ‘goes
beyond’ what lies in the text (this giving rise to the important distinction between
the literary work and its concretizations which must not, in turn, be confused with
their product: the reader’s psychological experience). The flip side of this is the
possibility for the work of making radically new objects: objects of impossible
objects or events, transgressing regional ontological boundaries, making inconsistent
states-of-affairs – even until ‘two different worlds are struggling for supremacy.’
It follows from this that Ingarden’s final aesthetic criterion of polyphonic organicity
is not to be taken for any sort of glib harmony, as it has sometimes been maintained
as an argument against him – quite on the contrary, such clashing phenomena on
the object level may constitute part of the work’s aesthetic quality. The reader’s
activity in selecting concretizations of such spots forms a major issue in Ingarden’s
follow-up work Vom Erkennen des literarischen Werkes.
That such a concretization is performed in reading the literary work follows from
the fact that we most often do not experience its objectivities as indeterminate;
we experience them actually as analogues to ‘whole’, naturally perceived objects.
It is as if the ‘net’ of states-of-affairs catchting the represented objectivity merges
into a continuous sheet, meticulously following the shape of the object. How is the
finite set of purely intentional states-of-affairs in the literary work to some extent
‘restored’ to yield something analogous to a perceived object?
The reason for this lies in the fourth level, that of schematized aspects. Shortly
described, this stratum is that which makes it possible for us to reach intuitively

352
C H A P T E R 17
satisfactory, perception-like syntheses of the objects represented. Still, its basis
and ways of functioning belong to the most difficult and least clarified parts of
Ingarden’s doctrine. An otherwise diehard Ingarden fan like René Wellek simply
bluntly dismisses the existence of such a level and subsumes it under the represented
objectivities.436 Already in the account for the synthesis of purely intentional states-
of-affairs, two important ideas stand out. Ingarden distinguishes three types of
states-of-affairs, pertaining to appearances, essences, and occurrences, respectively
(Soaussehensverhalten, Soseinsverhalten, and Geschehensverhalten). In a few pages
(192–96), Ingarden outlines a trans-phrastic theory of the interlinking of such states-
of-affairs over the sentence level: while the essence states-of-affairs constitute a
kind of kernels, the appearance states-of-affairs allow the connection of them to
‘a possible subject’, while the occurrence states-of-affairs with their event quality
permit the interlinking of essence states. The occurrence states ‘ have the capacity
to exhibit the objects partaking in the respectively developed occurrences to a much
greater degree than do pure states of essence.’ (195) – an almost pragmatic (in
Peirce’s sense) idea: effects are what matters in the understanding of an object; states
of occurrences ‘to a certain extent exhibit themselves’ (ibid). They thus facilitate the
formation of a system of ‘realized mutually interconnected states of essence’ (ibid.)
and contribute to the ‘representing, and frequently also to the exhibiting, of entire
segments of the world of objects.’ (196). Even if the three state types mentioned
may thus form an interconnected web of states (governed, of course, by all kinds of
narrative, thematic and other gestalt structures on the object side, we may add), they
still not suffice to mend the finitude of state-of-affairs nor enter into full intuitive
givenness like in sense-perception.437 This ‘intuitivization’ (197) in imagination is
channeled by the interconnected states-of-affairs – and by the schematized aspects.
‘Aspect’ of course refers to Husserl’s analysis of perception and the objects
presenting themselves through a continuous manifold of perceived profiles,
‘Ansichten’ or aspects – so that there is a ‘ strict affiliation between every
perceptually given property of a thing and the manifold of aspects, strictly ordered,
according to rules, in which the given property appears.’ (262). This implies that
the very idea of a ‘property’ is, in itself, a certain ‘idealization’ of the set of
profiles, it is in itself a ‘skeleton, a schema, of concrete, flowing, transitory aspects’
(no two concrete aspects being identical – while one property may be identical
from one object to the other – so already in the concept of invariant property a
high degree of generality is present). This property obtained by idealization is the
schematized aspect – and the single, concrete aspects are now variations within the
limits set by the schematic aspect to which they belong. In the work, they have the
‘basis of their determination and, in a certain sense, their potential existence in the
states-of-affairs projected by the sentences or in the objects represented by means
of the states-of-affairs.’ (264) – in any case, their immediate base in the work is
the states-of-affairs. Such schematized aspects lie predetermined in, e.g. a novel’s
representation of Paris, and must be filled in – to a larger or lesser degree – by the
reader. Just like the case with perceived objects, all schematized aspects in which
they may be given belong to the represented objects – but, and this is Ingarden’s

F I V E T Y P E S O F S C H E M A T I C I C O N I C I T Y
353
crucial hypothesis at this point – they are potential only and in order for some of
them to be evoked and reach a degree of intuitive givenness, other factors than the
represented objects must intervene. Some of the schematized aspects of the repre-
sented objects are to some degree ‘held in readiness’, prepared for actualization.
The factors determining this partly lie in the states-of-affairs: the thus-appearance
of objects and the exhibiting as against the simple representation of the object. Such
aspects thus lie in between potentiality and actuality (obviously, the Peircean notion
of ‘real possibility’ of tendencies and patterns is relevant here). And they partly
lie in the well-known figural tools of poetic language: metaphors, images, similes,
etc. And finally they lie in Ingarden’s favorite (but rarely concretized) example
of special word sound patterns, onomatopoietically suggesting certain schematized
aspects of an object to be selected, or word sounds referring to specific contexts of
linguistic use (that is, referring to different Bakhtinian discourses).
The common ground for these only sketchily described bases of the ready-making
of certain schematized aspects is as evident their indirect character. Direct reference
to schematized aspects, on the contrary, immediately makes of the aspect an explicit
object (which may then lie open for study in different ways), but this does not result
in the (partly) intuitive givenness aimed at, because the object originally referred to
will disappear and the aspect taking its place as object instead (this, in fact, will be
a case of Peircean ‘hypostatic abstraction’). The objects are what is described, but
to some extent this description takes place through the schematized aspects held in
readiness. This forms, as it were, Ingarden’s version of the old Hollywood motto:
show, don’t tell – the latter being equivalent to the making explicit the aspects held
in readiness. But the aspects themselves are ‘jumpy’, just like the interconnected
web of states-of-affairs (again, as against continuous, perceptual aspects) – and
most often only a few selected aspects are held in readiness. Moreover, they are
actualized in imagination only. This is why the degree of vividness of actualized
intuitivization changes all of the time during reading – sometimes objectivity stands
out rich with details, other times it shrinks to a skeleton-like structure, and only the
important, implicit ‘stabilization’ of aspects prevents us from thematically realizing
this highly changing appearance of the object, thereby shattering the truthfulness
of the objectivity represented. The same goes for the ‘murky cloud’ from which
the actualized aspect emerges (as against the perceived foreground object’s embed-
dedness in its perceived background surroundings). By analogy, this aspect doctrine
may be extended to cover our access to mental states in other subjects by means of
‘internal aspects’ making the ‘soul’ referred to appear in a certain determinate state.
A certain enigma seems to be at stake here: the finite patchwork of states-of-
affairs was in need of continuous supplementation in order to be able to intuitively
coalesce in a simulation of real perceptive experience. But how should this be
accomplished by means of another finite set of patches, not even integrated to
the same degree as the states-of-affairs, in the form of schematized aspects? It
is as if we expected to get a continuous sheet out of the superposition of two
patchwork blankets. Continuing in this metaphor we might say that a superposition
of two patchwork quilts would ensure that we encounter a continuity at most points

354
C H A P T E R 17
(if the two are suitably arranged), if not in the one patchwork, then in the other.
So we would so to speak float along on shifting layers of continuity, and the
bumps between the states-of-affairs would be (most often) eased by continuity in a
stabilized schematized aspect 
In any case, the contrast picture which Ingarden paints of a text deprived of
schematized aspects is frightening: the represented objects would be purely blankly
intended in the reading and merely thought in a completely unintuitive manner –
they would be empty, purely ‘conceptual’ schemata, and one would never have the
impression that one was dealing with a ‘unique, live quasi-reality.’ (277) Thus, the
stratum of schematized aspects plays a major role in the literary work of art – in
fact, this forms part of Ingarden’s main description of the artistic character of the
work, along with quasi-judgments and metaphysical qualities, while all of the other
features of the work, including the spots of indeterminacy, remain characteristic
of any linguistic or other utterance whatsoever. Ingarden’s chapter on the role of
schematized aspects in the literary work is short, however, and strangely poor. The
basic points remain that the aspects adorn the objects with real-life-like vividness
and richness – even to the extent that they may co-constitute them – and that the
aspects add to the polyphony of the whole work their own decorative contribution.
This brings us to the final set of ideas in Ingarden’s account: the aesthetic
qualities of the work as a whole. One side of this is the said polyphony of the
strata, merging into one aesthetically pleasing organic whole (including aestheti-
cally pleasing tensions, contrasts, paradoxes, inconsistencies, impossibilities, etc.).
The idea is here that the contributions from the single strata supplement each other
in some way, and it is probably the case that no further precise determination can
be made of what makes such a whole aesthetically successful in general. The other
side of it deals with the famous ‘metaphysical qualities’ which are essences that
pertain not to single objects but to whole situations or events – let us give Ingarden’s
often cited example list: ‘the sublime, the dreadful, the shocking, the inexplicable,
the demonic, the holy, the sinful, the sorrowful, the inescapable brightness of good
fortune, as well as the grotesque, the charming, the light, the peaceful, etc.’ As was
evident in the simpler case with the aspects, these qualities are not in any way the
direct object of the literary work. They are qualities which in some sense pertain
to the object level (even if colored by the whole of the work’s polyphony), but
the whole development and structure of the work in some sense embody these
qualities and allow them to appear. They should not, of course, be confused with the
psychological reactions they may arouse in the reader. In his description of these
qualities, Ingarden’s dry, phenomenological tone almost gives way to a vitalist,
romantic sweep: the metaphysical qualities have a character of ‘revelation’ which
puts them into contrast to the ‘gray, faceless, everyday experiences’ (277) – and
they do not allow purely rational determination.438 They may be experienced only in
appropriate situations, on which they must be presumed dependent, and then reveal
a ‘deeper sense’ of life (278). The object stratum of the work being heteronomous
(dependent upon the meaning level), the qualities associated with this stratum can
not be fully realized, but still they may be ‘concretized’: ‘they simulate their own

F I V E T Y P E S O F S C H E M A T I C I C O N I C I T Y
355
realization’ as Ingarden says (294) – which is what permits the reader, on the other
hand, to contemplate them relatively calmly, in the well-known aesthetical distance.
T H E E X T E N S I O N O F T H E S C H E M A T I C A S P E C T C A T E G O R Y
Now, a whole series of questions remains as to the relation between the synthesized
objects caught in the net of states-of-affairs – and the schematized aspects, tightening
this net and making it pseudo-continuous. Let us take a look at some of the main
problems.
Some of the problems are indicated, more or less directly, in Ingarden himself.
His concept of concretization of course refers to the filling-in, by the reader, of spots
of indeterminacy along with the actualization of aspects held in readiness. This
concretization is what provides the reader’s experience with a more rich, detailed,
perception-like version of the work than the schematic construction explicitly
present at the meaning level, and it requires the active participation of the reader’s
imagination. Still, we should not think that the concretization has the character
of rendering the objectivities in the text fully determined and with full perceptual
clarity. The case is rather that a very schematic version is substituted by a less
schematic – but still schematic – version. Much of the filling-in must be assumed
to take place by Peircean ‘pooh-pooh’-induction tacitly inferring the ‘standard’ or
‘normal’ version of things or aspects not explicitly mentioned in the text – but
this ‘normal’, default version has, in itself, general or schematic character and,
moreover, this filling-in is by its very nature ordinary and un-pregnant. A related
issue is the fact that far from all spots of indeterminacy may be filled-in. In some
cases, furthermore, the possibility must be regarded that too much filling-in will
spoil the artistic effect (Voltaire: the secret of boring is to tell everything), if for
instance the filling-in removes an ambiguity or a generality which formed part of
the aesthetic polyphony (while in other cases, the removal of ambiguities may be
required and, on the contrary, add to the polyphony).
Ingarden (1968) thus envisages two different ways of reading: one – close to
the spontaneous reading – concretizing, as opposed to a more clinical, analytical
reading which consciously seeks to avoid concretizing and keeping the work in its
most schematic form possible. Of course, we can add, these two possibilities must
constitute the two ends of a continuum with different intermediary possibilities
selecting certain types of indeterminacies to be or not to be filled in, and selecting
certain aspects to be actualized or not. Furthermore, the ‘pooh-pooh’ filling-in makes
it necessary to distinguish two types of filling-in, the one thematic and with some
degree of perceptual richness, the other one unthematic and thus not perceptually
conscious, but rather consisting of the tacit co-representation of implied properties.
This leads to the most important set of issues: how many phenomena in the text
have the schematic character admitting spots of indeterminacy – and, correlatively,
what in the stratum of meaning provides the foundation of the holding-in-readiness
of aspects? Ingarden himself is rather vague on these issues, as we have seen, and

356
C H A P T E R 17
these aspects of his theory most decidedly requires a filling-in relating his doctrine
to other results in semiotics and text theory.
Ingarden’s theory, as often pinpointed, has its immediate background in Husserl’s
work – the foundation concept, the act theory and the (much-disputed) realism
of Logische Untersuchungen, the perception theory of the Ideen I-II, the meaning
theory surfacing in Cartesianische Meditationen, the quasi-mode of the writings
published in Hua XXIII, etc. (cf. Chaps. 6–8, 14). The schematized aspect theory
having its precursor in Husserl’s doctrine of perception from Ideen I and the
‘Sinnesschema’ of Ideen II, places the schematized aspects very close to perceptual
experience. But does this necessarily have to be the case? As discussed in
Chap. 6, Husserl’s theory of kategoriale Anschaaung implies that also categorial –
schematic – objects possess their own mode of direct givenness. So do schemata
not have aspects? We may address a circle by focusing on its periphery or on some
select points on it, on its center, on a circle segment, on an inscribed polygon etc. –
these are aspects of the circle in analogy to the different profiles or aspects of a
perceived object. We may be able to grasp the entire circle from one such aspect,
just like we see the complete object even from one apparent aspect only. The same
goes even for abstract complexes not being of the geometrical kind which remains
still rather close to perception.
Take for instance scripts or frames – Schank and Abelson’s well-known restaurant
example (1977) with a script connecting all the aspects of going out eating: selecting
a place, ordering a table, going there, waiting to be shown a table, reading and
deciding the menu, calling the waiter, ordering the meal, eating and drinking in a
specific order, calling for the waiter to get the bill, paying, tipping, leaving – with
side-scripts (going to the toilet, meeting friends and pulling tables together, leaving
because the food was awful, etc.). This empirical gestalt configuration evidently
has a general, schematic structure. The interesting thing in Ingardenian context is
that such a schema permits both to function as provider of enormous amounts of
spots of indeterminacies (ranging from the location or interior of the place over
the other guests to menu details etc.) which may be filled-in in a more and less
detailed manner, and to function as supporting aspects held in readiness – because
very few words referring to such a script are sufficient to evoke the whole script
in the mind of the reader (if the words ‘table’, ‘menu’, ‘waiter’ surface in adequate
combination, the whole restaurant script may be actualized as abstract, schematic
aspects held-in-readiness). It seems like Ingarden’s focus on perception on the one
hand and on word and sentence meanings on the other precludes him from seeing
structures like this.
Ingarden’s own – rather few – examples of filling-in and aspects held-in-readiness
are thought-provoking as to which schemata actually function in them. Take, e.g.,
his discussion of the corridor walk in Thomas Mann’s Zauberberg as a successful
piece of continuous time representation – here, ‘ we not only find a manifold of
successive, closely interconnected states-of-affairs representing an almost uninter-
rupted story, but, at the same time, closely interconnected aspects of corresponding
objectivities are imposed on us. []  we see almost continuously before our eyes

F I V E T Y P E S O F S C H E M A T I C I C O N I C I T Y
357
the pertinent objects in appropriate aspects: first the room, then the corridor, etc.
As we pass by, we see everything as it would appear sequentially in reality.’ (283).
What grants the unity of this series of aspects, of course, is not only their sequential
ordering in the text (disorderly, expressionist glimpses which are discussed as
counterexample, may occur equally ordered), but the mapping of this sequential
ordering from the meaning onto the object stratum, kept together by the gestalt figure
of source-path-goal. This ‘kinaesthetic image schema’ (Lakoff) here functions as a
sort of abstract schema, implicitly present only, which forms part of the filling-in
operation necessary to grant the continuous experience of the two patchwork sets
of separated states-of-affairs and separated aspects. Another example displays a
similar feature in the discussion of represented space which is ‘ as if pocked with
gaps, which show up as, so to speak, spots of indeterminacy’ (224). This conclusion
is reached on the basis of the example of a room in a novel: ‘ a situation is
represented as taking place in a given room and that there is no indication, even
by a single word, that there is anything outside of this room. [] If the actually
represented space (within the room) does not end at the walls of the room, it is
only because it is the essence of space in general not to have any discontinuity.
It is only through this impossibility of spatial discontinuity that the space outside
the room is corepresented: in turn, the space within the room is corepresented; in
turn, the space within the room consequently becomes a segment of space.’ (223)
But this conclusion implicitly relies on another gestalt: the schema which Lakoff
nicknames ‘container’, consisting of an inside and an outside separated by a closed
boundary. This schema is what makes possible the corepresentation.439 But where
should we seek the foundation of such schemata? Probably in the meaning level: the
concept of room prototypically involves the container gestalt, just like the concept
of walking along a corridor prototypically involves the source-path-goal gestalt.
The second base of Lakoffian cognitive semantics involves a ripe source of
indeterminacy and filling-in possibilities as well: that of the basic level concepts
of the psychologist Eleanor Rosch. A certain medium level in concept structure
is taken to be basic, that involving cars, chairs, tables, dogs, running, walking,
speaking, red, green, etc. The idea is that basic level concepts form the uppermost
level where a common schematic image for the corresponding object, aspect or
activity is possible, the uppermost level where a schematic motor program for
interacting with the object, aspect, or activity is possible – which is why such
concepts are easiest to learn and in most languages are associated with short, central
word sounds. This opposes basic level concepts to more specified concepts on the
one hand, adding further specifications to the overall concept (Chesterfield chairs,
bulldogs, stepping) and more general concepts losing the common schematic picture
and action schemata (furniture, pets, moving). This intermediate position – exactly
like in the restaurant script example – makes basic level concepts good candidates
both for holding large amounts of indeterminacy spots (which color, shape, age, etc.
of the chair) and for holding aspects in readiness thanks to the detailed perception
and action schemata associated with them (‘he went among the furniture and sat
down’ permits us to imagine the typical bodily movement series and an average

358
C H A P T E R 17
default chair associated with such an act, even if the latter has not been mentioned
at all). The intermediate status of basic level concepts permits them to function
‘both ways’, so to speak, probably in different combinations in different contexts –
both as general schemata and as providers of relatively specific imaginations of
objects and actions.
The examples highlighted here thus span from transcultural gestalts like container
and source-path-goal over basic level concepts with their mixture of crosscultural
(body parts, animals, mothers, eating, sleeping, walking, etc.) and culturally central
objects and practices (cars, driving, teepees, houses) and to highly culturally specific
schemata like the restaurant script. To the former category must be added narrative
regularities like the Greimasian narratological molecule of Hero, Witch, King,
Dragon, and Princess (more technically, Subject, Helper, Destinator, Anti-Subject,
Object) which also seems to be transcultural and functioning as a cohering factor
in large chunks of text, interconnecting the states-of-affairs of many sentences.
Also here, very few actualized aspects of this basic schema easily and almost
automatically permits the reader to fill-in the whole structure of the narrative
conflict, its many aspects and different possibilites of development. To the latter
category must be added whole ideologies and Weltanschuungen, Islam, Christianity,
Communism, Capitalism, etc. which form enormous, schematic complexes which
may be actualized by very timid means (a sickle moon, a cross, the word ‘prole-
tarian’, ‘shareholder’ etc.). Thus, the insight that the aim of filling-in of schematized
aspects does not only involve sensuous schemata gives us an enormous amount of
conceptual schematic structures held in readiness adding to the vitalization of the
text during the reading process.
We shall not go further in this direction here, but a basic result seems to be
that the somewhat crude duality between abstract and concrete in Ingarden’s theory
of concretization should probably be substituted by a continuous ladder of more
and less abstract schemata (thus explaining the fact that many schemata may serve
both as indeterminacy sources and as aspects-in-readiness sources).440 The Austrian
economist and philosopher Friedrich von Hayek who also was a philosopher of
mind, has an interesting proposal in this context. His idea is that the whole of the
mind’s activity, all its variety and difference untold, has one common character-
istics: categorization. The mind at all its levels involves categorization, of input on
many levels of refinement, of output, of bodily dispositions, etc. – which implies
that the contents of the mind, when they reach the threshold of consciousness,
are always, at least to some extent, categorized. This he coins in the counterintu-
itive but highly interesting hypothesis of the ‘primacy of the abstract’ which we
also discussed in the biosemiotics section.441 Against the idea that perception is
through-and-through concrete and that its possible abstract aspects or contents are
added or distilled only by later, abstracting processings of the primary, concrete
content, Hayek claims that what appears before the mind is invariably infused with
abstract – that is, schematic – structure from the very beginning. Thus, ordinary
perception is already ripe with abstract aspects (also a Peircean idea)– we need not
perform any complicated, secondary, founded act in order to isolate these. People
we pass by on the street, e.g., appear to us schematic, we do not notice their exact

F I V E T Y P E S O F S C H E M A T I C I C O N I C I T Y
359
dress, facial expression, walking style, etc. unless now and then one of them are
saliently singled out for further concretization. Rather, the degree of concreteness in
ordinary experience is highly variable and dependent on ongoing shifts in attention
distribution.
This implies, in our context, that the concretization operations in literary reading
become easier to understand. If ordinary perception is already to a large extent
abstract and involves constant changes in concretization, the distance so to speak
becomes less drastic (but still large enough to require concretization and filling-in
operations) than was the case if perception was 100 percent sensuous, particular,
and detailed.442
But if these different schematic aspects of the text are indeed diagrammatical,
in Peirce’s sense of the word, then we should expect them to function as possible
vehicles for diagram experiments. Indeed, in the previous chapter we developed
the idea that, in reading or analyzing a text, the deductive reasoning phase implied
more or less explicit cases of such experiments. In ordinary filling-in reading with
its thematic focus on the level of represented objectivities, such experimenting
is probably most evidently found in genres like detective novels, agent novels,
thrillers, fairy-tales, fiction prose in general, where the experimenting with the
possible outcomes of plot structures form a crucial part of the reading process – very
often aided by the explicit diagram experimentation undertaken by a represented
figure (a detective) which the reader may follow with awe or with the superiority
of better insight provided by the narrator. This explicit, thematical case only forms,
however, the tip of the iceberg: any case of deductive reasoning performed during
the reading, thematically or unthematically, forms a diagram experiment in Peirce’s
sense. The relevance of such experiments adds further details to Ingarden’s account
for the filling-in procedure – it not only covers the dressing up schematic conceptual
skeletons with imagined perceptual clothing, but it also covers a variety of logical
inferences, thereby adding to the (quasi-) statements being explicitly represented in
the literary work – on the basis of the schematic structures present in the work. Thus,
the reader not only equips the work with much more sensuous illustrations than are
explicitly present, he also develops the work logically, by thought experimenting
from its schematic basis. This becomes strikingly evident in the art of suspense
where the reader may be able to infer to the existence of some vague threat not
being explicitly referred to in the text, or where informations present in the text
allow for the drawing of a conclusion which is not (yet?) available for characters
in the represented world with their delimited point of view. But still, these explicit
examples are only salient representatives of a process going on at a much broader
scale.
A good example of literary diagram experiment is provided by metaphor which
has been widely discussed in literary theory and cognitive science of the recent
decades. Both the metaphor theory of Lakoff and Johnson and the related blending
theory of Turner and Fauconnier highlight the fact that in such textual phenomena
as metaphors and blending, schematic objects (structures mapped from source to
target space in the former, ‘generic space’ facilitating the integration of different

360
C H A P T E R 17
inputs in a blend in the latter) play a central role. Metaphors thus also permit the
duplicity of indeterminacy and holding-in-readiness – a source of indeterminacy
relies in the fact that the text only rarely makes explicit the details of the mapping
between source and target (and in some cases does not even make the target clear) –
and a source for aspects held in readiness lies in the amount of semantic possibilities
in the source concept which is not actualized in the given mapping, giving rise to
the excess-of-meaning-experience so often associated with metaphor. As is evident
from the theory of metaphors emerging from the cognitive semantics tradition,
metaphor covers a continuum from basic, everyday expressions which most often
pass unnoticed (‘I see.’ as metaphor for ‘I understand.’ due to the metaphor UNDER-
STANDING IS SEEING), and to sophisticated, elaborated or combined or nested
cases in literary works. While the former are processed automatically, the more
complicated cases are less automatized. Already in rather simple cases, the under-
standing of metaphor requires thought experiments. Most metaphors, e.g., do not
make explicit the range covered by the mapping involved, neither as regards the
number of aspects of the source phenomenon to be mapped upon the target, nor
as regards the possible generalization of the mapping to cover related phenomena.
If my love is a rose, it goes without saying that the beauty and fragrance of the rose
are among the aspects mapped, but what about the rose’s verticality, its blooming
during summer, or the fact that it thrives well on a diet of horse manure? And
if the metaphor is accepted, is the possibility open that HUMAN BEINGS ARE
FLOWERS in general, so that my love contrasts to other girls being petunias, tulips,
thistles, and potatoes? Even a simple metaphor as that mapping rose upon girl may
involve such thought experiments of diagrammatical nature, and much more compli-
cated metaphor craft most often require elaborate thought experiment in order to be
understood. The understanding of all sufficiently complicated schematic structures
in the literary text, both on the level of themee, narrative structures, enunciation,
style and rhetoric require diagram experiments. This highlights an aspect of the
literary work of art which is underestimated in Ingarden’s account: that of the
literary work as a sort of thought-machine, requiring the reader to fill in inferences
from the schematic structures in the text.443
The most important implication of seeing Ingardenian schemata as diagrams,
however, is the Peircean conception of generality as continuity. Indeterminate spots
are unbestimmt all right, but Iser’s renaming of them to Leerstellen is a rather
unlucky terminological choice. Such spots are not empty but remain filled with
continuous generality involving the knowledge that variation experiments could be
undertaken to give them further flesh. The Peircean-Hayekian idea that ordinary
perception is perfused with generality makes it less strange that general spots of
indeterminacy easily shade into proto-perceptual experience – there is no absolute
distinction between perceptual and poor schematicity, rather, the two approach each
other on a continuous scale. This is also why the filling-in of an indeterminacy
spot in a diagram may be satisfied by another, more detailed diagram. We do not
have to require filling-ins to be completely determinate; in many if not most cases
a schematic filling-in is sufficient.

F I V E T Y P E S O F S C H E M A T I C I C O N I C I T Y
361
R E A L I S M , T R U T H , A N D ‘ I D E A S ’ I N T H E L I T E R A R Y W O R K
Ingarden’s monumental work is, as mentioned, intended as a support for his position
in the idealism-realism schism which he saw develop between himself and his
master Husserl. His solution based on the analysis of literature as fictitious texts
led him to assume three major object spheres: that of real, that of ideal, and that of
purely intentional objects, the former two being autonomous, the latter not so. This,
as we have seen, also made him develop his own brand of Husserl’s act theory.
A counter-question must here be posted: literature now functions as the contrast
case to acts aiming at real or ideal objects, as the phenomenon which thanks to its
fictivity permits the discovery of the region of purely intentional objects – but does
it not thereby make literature so to speak more fictive than necessary?444 Where does
it leave the common notions of literary ‘realism’, the idea of a ‘truth’ in the literary
work, etc.? Ingarden closes his book by pondering over these issues. Of course,
the very definition of the literary work of art by quasi-judgments precludes the
possibility that the work should in any sense contain a true judgment in the proper
sense (and the idea that this might be the case may have been more widespread
when Ingarden wrote Das literarische Kunstwerk; nowadays it is an error rarely
committed.) Still, there are three more loose senses of the word ‘true’ in which
a literary work could be said to be true, as Ingarden claims. One is its function
as reproduction (do the represented objectivities resemble certain real objectivities
which they intend?), one refers to the work’s ‘objective consistency’ (Do its repre-
sented objectivities cohere?), and one refers to the manifestation of the already
discussed ‘metaphysical qualities’ (the latter are also Ingarden’s interpretation of
the commonplace of the ‘idea’ of the literary work of art).
These ideas require some comments. The first idea of the truth of the work, that
of resembling reproduction, is placed by Ingarden as relevant only for historical
novels, that is, for a very small part of literary works in general. But why reserve
this notion of truth for the resemblance to a given empirical segment of the world?
This truth may be generalized to covering also types of objectivities – does the work,
e.g., satisfactorily recreate tendencies, structures, atmospheres of a given age? Such
types range, in themselves, from clear to vague, and some of them may be close to
Ingarden’s metaphysical qualities, but it cannot possibly be the case that all attempts
at describing central structures of a country during a period possess the existentialist
insistence of ‘metaphysical qualities’. This idea of truth is similar to the superficial
idea of realism or iconicity in French structuralism and post-structuralism, e.g. in
Greimas and Barthes who differ in many respects but whose accounts for ‘reality
effects’ have much in common: it refers to the text’s surface and its make-believe
by means of the detail of typical reality-references, superimposed on top of more
important layers of the text, be they structuralist semantics or streaming textual
pleasure. Ingarden’s account does not have the derogatory character of these French
anti-realists, but still this kind of truth plays a (too) marginal role also in his account.
To take a trivial example, what about key novels where main characters may be
more or less reliably identified with really existing persons – this may not be a
‘reality effect’ only, but rather constitutes a central intention and issue of such

362
C H A P T E R 17
works. Or take ‘typical’ realism as discussed in the Lukacsian tradition – novels
aiming to representing central laws and regularities of the periods or societies
depicted. Neither in this case such realism is a reality effect only, but a relation
whose degree of truthfulness may be reasonably discussed – even if still, of course,
on the typical level and not on that of more concrete empirical reality.
The second idea of literary truth, consistency, implies some problems not
discussed by Ingarden. Taken at face value, consistency is an internal concept
(cf. consistency truth theories in philosophy), and Ingarden’s first description does
indeed have this character: ‘ once represented objectivities are established by
meaning contents of sentences as objects of a determined ontic type (e.g., as
real objects and, in particular, as real psychic individuals), a consistency must be
maintained in their further determination if they are to be constituted in the over-all
course of the work as identical ’ (302). This internal consistency idea, however, is
mixed up with what is, in fact, quite another idea: conformity to regional ontological
structures: ‘This consistency, however, can be maintained only if the content of
represented objects is formed, at the very least, according to the a priori essential
laws of a given ontic region.’ (ibid.). Surely, the first idea also referred to ‘objects
of a determined ontic type’, but earlier in the book Ingarden took care to note that
it belongs to the privileges of the literary work to mix regional ontological domains
to create improbable and impossible creatures. Such creatures, when first created,
must also maintain an ontic stability – so they are permitted by the first, internalist
consistency criterion, but prohibited by the latter, externalist consistency criterion.
As a matter of fact, there is no contradiction here; the case is probably that Ingarden
in his very short chapter confuses what is, in fact, two autonomous and equally
valuable truth notions of the literary work, the former judging the coherence of the
objectivity level represented, the latter judging the work’s adherence to the a priori
essence laws of a given regional ontology.445 A further issue here deals with the
question where to delimit this latter kind of literary truth – regional ontology –
from the latter of the two ‘effect of reality’ truths above. Of course, typical expres-
sions of a location, an age, etc. are empirical generalities only and thus differ from
regional ontological essences (like person, mind, will, etc.). But the difference may
be very difficult to tell – both in the single literary work which may easily mix up
empirical and a priori issues, but also in philosophy and science where the precise
amount of a priori regularities in single domains is far from mapped out. Probably
the understanding of the different a priori structures of reality is as indefinite as
that of empirical facts – cf. ‘fallibilistic apriorism’ discussed earlier. So even if the
distinction between empirical and apriorical may be easily maintained in theory,
the precise delimitation is blurred and different literary works may present their
competing versions to be compared.
Finally, there is the ‘noblest’ among Ingarden’s truth criteria, that of the
‘metaphysical qualities’. This requires the mysterious manifestation of such qualities
which – just like is the case with their real life appearance – has the uncon-
ditional form of revelation. Either they are there, or they are not there. This
should not, however, prevent us from trying to indicate their status in the cases

F I V E T Y P E S O F S C H E M A T I C I C O N I C I T Y
363
when they do in fact appear. In Ingarden’s definition, they all pertain to the
lived world of intersubjective human existence – and we may, again, ask for the
precise delimitation of these qualities and regularities pertaining to the regional
ontologies relevant for man. Husserl never developed in detail his doctrine of
regional ontologies (apart from his crude distinction between those of physics,
psychology and sociology, approximately), and even if a Stumpfo-Husserlian like
Barry Smith’s vision of a large series of more and less fine-grained regional
ontologies remains provisional, realist phenomenological ontology must maintain
that all empirical phenomena are governed by regional ontologies. This also goes
for intersubjectivist, existential reality of the kind Ingarden speaks about when
outlining his doctrine of ‘metaphysical qualities’. Is the literary manifestation of
such qualities a provisional grasping of them, until a proper regional ontology is
developed for their understanding – or, the opposite way around, is literature perhaps
a unique and appropriate way of grasping these core phenomena of human reality?
Or, a compromise, are both ways parallel and equally valid ways of exploring
human reality? Until further notice, I prefer to believe the latter.
To sum up, the discussion of truth and realism in literature leaves us with no less
than five different notions446:
L I T E R A R Y P S E U D O - T R U T H S
(1) truth as empirical resemblance
(2) truth as typical resemblance
(3) truth as internal consistency
(4) truth as external (ontological) consistency
(5) truth as manifestation of metaphysical qualities
Even if an Ingardenian literary theory must be basically a theory of fiction, it thus
may give rise to a rich palette of iconic ways in which literature interferes with
reality.447 The two former types refers to iconic relations to empirical reality; the
third to an internal iconicity in the text (that figures and entities in the text remain
sufficiently similar over the development of the text), the fourth pertains to iconicity
in relation to regional ontologies, and the fifth iconicity in relation to metaphysical
qualities as experienced in real life.
In the next chapter we shall look into how a subgenre constitutes itself on the
basis on the fourth type, conformity to a material ontology – that of political science
and, particularly, espionage.

C H A P T E R 18
THE MAN WHO KNEW TOO MUCH
Espionage in Reality and Fiction: Regional Ontology and Iconicity
The very fantasy of a spy’s life, the loss of his own identity,
his pursuit of pseudo-information through pseudo-relations,
makes him a sort of hero of our time.
Malcolm Muggeridge
S C H M I T T A N D S M I T H
A basic form of iconicity in literature is the correspondence between basic
conceptual schemata in literary semantics on the one hand and in factual treatments
on the other – corresponding to the type 4) iconicity in the previous chapter. Thus,
the semantics of a subject like espionage is not subject to arbitrary variation in
literature, but is rather highly dependent on the regional ontology involving such
phenomena.
Political science and historiography contain an enormous amount of concrete
studies of famous espionage cases and agent operations, concerning the activities
of both domestic and foreign services. Similarly, cases of this kind have caught
public imagination to a huge extent with a whole literary genre – that of the spy
and the agent novel – as a literary result. Just like its cognate the detective genre
rises with Poe and Rue Morgue, the spy novel is born, albeit more gradually, with
Kipling, Conrad, Ambler, Greene, Somerset Maugham, etc., to grow into one of
the stable and comprehensive literary subgenres of the twentieth century.
It is a strange fact, however, that despite its firm grip around the imagination
of the twentieth century, both in fact and fiction, espionage does not seem to
have given rise to any significant amount of proper scientific treatment. No classic
piece of writing entitled ‘Vom Geheimdienste’ by any Clausewitz exists in political
science.448 Despite the constant and delicate tension between the existence of secret
services, necessary for the security of a democratic society, on the one hand, and
the same democracy’s basic principles about open administration, human rights,
and equality, on the other, no tradition for deeper, theoretical understanding of this
necessity and these tensions seems to exist. It is almost as if the natural secrecy of
the subject is mirrored by a secrecy covering the principal reflection on it – whereas
on the other hand both the factual and the fictitious coverings of single, concrete
cases explode. The latter seems, in fact, to constitute a huge corpus of case-based
365

366
C H A P T E R 18
reasoning governing the public – and maybe also the services’ own – reasonings
about the tasks, the constraints, and and regulations of the services.
I shall here attempt to outline the ontology of espionage, as a basis for the factual
as well as the fictitious cases and for the possibility of iconicity holding between
them. The clever reader will be quick to intervene: do I not confuse two separate
problems? Is the description of the espionage novel not a piece of narratology
dealing with genre literature – a task for literary studies – while the recurring
structures of the object itself, espionage, is rather a task for political science and
sociology? It is of course not possible to assume beforehand that these two tasks will
be identical, but still it seems to me that a strong argumentation is at hand for the
fact that they are intimately related. Not only because of the fact that all reflection
of a subject marked ‘secret’ must keep on the distance of abduction from it, relying
to some indefinite extent on the imagination and fantasies of the interpreter. But
also because the relation between semantics and ontology for actual semiotics, as
argued in this book, is rather different from what was assumed in the tradition
running from structuralism to deconstrution and other post-structuralisms denying
the possibility of iconicity in language and literature. The question of literary
mimesis pertains, as we saw in the previous chapter, to several different levels: one is
the possible similarity between aspects of textual expression and the subject treated
(the figure poem as an example); another is the possible depicting value of a text in
relation to certain empirical properties of reality (be they factual, as in journalism
or historiography, be they more general like in the discussion of the possibility of
literary realism to reveal insights about a given period, society or other issues). The
iconicity at stake in the discussion in the following lies at an even more basic level:
iconicity at the level of semantic structures used. I shall argue that the spy novel
provides an example of this basic iconicity in so far as the very construction and
understanding of a spy novel is only possible by the use of ontologically motivated
concept structures similar to those incarnated in real life espionage cases.
We have already discussed Barry Smith’s ‘fallibilistic apriorism’ extending the
philosophical a priori realm to a long range of conceptual structures in the founda-
tions of the single empirical sciences (Chap. 8). An implication of this idea is that
a priori structures cover a far wider field than normally assumed; there is no reason
to believe that formal ontology, common to all possible objects, is yet complete,
and there is similarly no reason to assume that the single sciences’ material or
regional ontologies may not be investigated much more thoroughly than has been
the case. The basis of each single science will contain, in its basic conceptual
structures, a comprehensive network of interrelated terms of formal and regional
ontology. It follows from this idea that works of fiction sharing the same subject
as one of these sciences, will also share, to a considerable extent, one and the same
basic conceptual structure.449 Thus, Smith’s approach entails that the semantics
describing the content of a given domain will have iconic affinity to the ontology
of the domain (even if many specific differences may of course prevail in the single
case). This is the implication of one of Smith’s slogans: ‘putting the world back into
semantics’.450 So, we take the spy novel as an example of the fourth Ingardenian

T H E M A N W H O K N E W T O O M U C H
367
iconicity type – to conclude with the issue of how this type may indirectly activate
iconicities of the fifth type, that of metaphysical qualities.
If we begin, naively, by taking a dictionary definition of a central concept for the
agent novel like the term ‘spy’, we will find he is a person who ‘illegally investigates
(especially military) secrets’.451 This definition refers to a whole range of implicit
presuppositions belonging to an espionage script, an underlying highly structured
diagrammatic scenario. Deprived of references to that scenario, the semantics of the
word ‘spy’ would be ineffable. A spy investigates some subject secretly because
of a certain danger or illegality in the investigation which, in turn, is determined
by the fact that its subject is the business of some competing power, political
or private, domestic or foreign. There is thus an a priori connection between the
secrecy of the information and the relative illegality in which the spy indulges. The
parenthesis of the dictionary definition implies that the spy typically has been sent
out as an instrument to gather information by one power, militarily competing with
another power possessing the secrets. Thus it is only in the light of this a priori,
more general and more comprehensive, ongoing struggle that espionage becomes
meaningful. The spy is, in essence, dependent on that schematic whole. Any fight
sufficiently elaborated in time and space will always imply that knowledge about the
opponent’s next move adds to the probability for a positive outcome: this implies it
is possible to try to anticipate that move and improve the efficiency of one’s own
next move. Or one may simulate such a move in order to seduce the opponent to
open a flank giving a possibility for an even more efficient move. The agonistic
structure of feints, simulated feints, etc. is implied here, as it is well known from
mathematical game theory and instantiated in a long series of other fight or game
types. The historiography of warfare is to a large extent based on the investigation
of such structures of mutual deception strategies.452 The raison d’être of the spy as
collector of information lies in this scenario or script of struggle, and his role is to
be a tool for one of the agonists of the battle waged.
Here we have isolated a minimal version of the regional ontology of espionage by
looking at background presuppositions to a dictionary definition of the word ‘spy’.
A more systematic investigation might go the opposite way and try to develop the
concepts of war, fight, game, or battle in order to distill espionage as one of the
possible moments of fighting. A project of this kind is to be found in A.J. Greimas’s
narratology. Despite its apparent simplicity, this narratology remains one of the
most sophisticated instruments to analyze narrative structures.453 At a first glance,
the ‘narrative schema’ of this theory is deceptively simple: a Destinator, defined as
an actant impersonating central values, sends out an Operator Subject in order to
solve a certain task. This subject is endowed with certain competences by a Helper
during a first ‘qualifying’ trial; then follows the ‘principal’ trial where the Subject
tries to defeat an Anti-Subject in order to take some Object in his possession. Back
at the Destinator’s, the Subject presents his results in a third and last, ‘glorifying’
trial and he receives – if the result is convincing – a Sanction judging the Subject’s
efforts. If the Subject wins this trial, he may receive a final Object as a reward
or trophy. These three trials may, in specific cases, be realized in highly different

368
C H A P T E R 18
ways, ranging from regular wars and to peaceful exchanges. A version of it clothed
in fairy-tale garments makes the schema more intuitive: a King is threatened by a
Dragon who has abducted the Princess, and he sends out a Hero to make up for
it. The Hero must first gain a magical object or competence from some Sorcerer
and he may now kill the Dragon and free the Princess. Back at the Court, the Hero
displays the saved Princess and receives a reward, maybe the Princess and half
of the Kingdom. If this diagram of imagination is so apparently simple, then it is
probably due to its omnipresence in human imagination rather than to an inherent
simplicity, not to talk about triviality. The schema contains a complexity generator
due to the fact that every single phase of it refers to intersubjective relations with
all the possible mirrorings, dialectics of recognition and possible misunderstandings
involved. This has as a consequence that the schema may ‘develop’ in a huge bundle
of different directions. The interaction between two actants which is in one version
a raging battle may in other versions be a completely peaceful exchange – and,
what is more, in each phase the teleological development mapped by the schema
may go wrong. Maybe the Hero is too afraid to go to war; maybe the Sorcerer
refuses to let go of his medicine copyright; maybe the Dragon actively tries to get
rid of the awful Princess; maybe the King stubbornly sticks to both halves of his
Kingdom; maybe there is a secret alliance between Dragon and King in order to
fool the public, etc., and etc. As is evident, the schema is extremely plastic with
respect to variations – at the same time as it has the stable character of being a
prototype for the charting of socially integrable actions in general. As an addition
to this powerful variability, the staging of narrative events in more or less artful
enunciation may select single phases of the schema to emphasize and elaborate,
while other phases are neglected. It may, moreover, display the events narrated,
as seen from changing points-of-views of different actants, and, finally, it may
recursively repeat the realization of it in different versions including the substitution
of characters filling the actant roles and the embedding of local versions of the
schema into more encompassing versions.
But the very question of social integration implied in the relation between Desti-
nator – norm representative – and Subject – norm breaker – guides us on our way to
the status of the spy in this schema. Of course, espionage may occur in each of the
phases in the schema – in so far as the secret obtaining of secret information may be
desirable in all intersubjective relationships. But because the Destinator incarnates
socially stable values, the character of the Hero’s task is decisive for the interest
taken in the narrative in question. If the Hero’s task follows ordinary procedures
as governed by central administration, little remains to be told (‘Once upon a time,
there was King who should send a document to the council in one of his towns. He
gave the task to one of his very best couriers, and the document did in fact reach
its goal regularly. The courier received his contractual wage and lived happily ever
after.’). A procedure of this kind is of course covered by the narrative schema’s
domain of modelization, but for a narrative to be interesting it is well known that it
must contain some moment or other of norm break. This is, in fact, already implied
in the very distinction between Destinator and Operator Subject: the frictionless

T H E M A N W H O K N E W T O O M U C H
369
action might as well be undertaken by the Destinator himself (if the Destinator in
case is, e.g., central administration). The King might himself grab his good sword
all at once and force it through the heart of the dragon. But he must have another
actant do it, even one who receives occult, extraordinary, illegal abilities from some
Sorcerer, that is, a person incarnating a competence transgressing what is usual
and law bound and hence having powers and possibilities exceeding those of the
King. The killing of the Dragon, moreover, most often takes place far from home –
that is, far from the regular domain of laws and outside of public control. In this
extraordinary competence in the Hero lies as a germ espionage, and more broadly,
the secret agent, as an aspect of the Hero’s deed. The Hero constitutes his own
Special Task Force, and his deed is in itself to some extent a Covert Action. Now
these features in the Hero actant do not distinguish the spy as opposed to e.g. the
warrior, the detective and similar stereotypes derived from the same basic structure
in the Hero.
Consequently, further differentia specifica must be found in order to grasp the
difference between spy, detective, soldier, and the correlated fiction genres. We may
as a first preliminary emphasize that the three of them share the Hero’s character of
being exceptional. The detective novel does not have the regularly working police
officer as its hero, the war novel does not have the average, ordinary soldier as its
hero. The detective novel favors precisely the private eye, and even more so, the
deviant private eye who does not do his work ‘by the book’ but differs from the
police in two respects: he does not, like they do, act correctly according to the rules,
and, conversely, he is not involved in their muddle of corruption and mafia deals
resulting from their rule breaks. Exactly because he does not act ‘by the book’ he
may, paradoxically, act by the spirit and do the right thing. Even if we do, in fact,
focus upon a regular police officer in the corps, we most often chose a deviant
cop whose personal character and working methods transgress the average (model
Colombo). Analogously, the modern war novel generally takes the point of view
of a rebellious private, despising his superordinates at a comfortable distance to
the front line, not obeying nor respecting their orders. Thus, this ‘front pig’, being
an uncompromising survivor, may perform especially dangerous services. What
distinguishes the spy – and the spy novel – from these stereotypes is that while the
private eye and the front pig form individual cases of deviancy in the service of
a higher cause (which they may serve so much more efficiently because of their
disregard for rules), the spy’s deviancy, on the contrary, is systematical. The very
service for which he is working constitutes an anomaly in modern society.454 The
secret service is so to speak an institutionalized deviancy inside the state, a whole
state organization characterized by not being forced to do things ‘by the book’.
As contemporary conflict researchers (like in Scandinavia Ole Wæver and Ola
Tunander) have emphasized, we must turn to obscure political thinkers like Carl
Schmitt in order to understand the specific character of these organizations. Schmitt
began his classic of philosophy of state Politische Theologie from 1922 with the
famous words: ‘Sovereign is he who determines the state of emergency ’. In
the context of Greimasian fairy tale logic, it is the Destinator who commands the

370
C H A P T E R 18
state of emergency.455 Ordinary law is valid only in so far a state of emergency is
not declared – and the actant who decides whether the normal state prevails is of
course endowed with the power of suspending it, to some (larger or lesser) degree
depending on his own judgment only. Schmitt’s cynical tradition turns Clausewitz
upside down: the universalization of the schema of Friend and Foe makes politics
a war continued with other means456. In such a tradition it will be a corollary
that a preparedness or capacity outside ordinary legality must be kept, also during
(apparent) peacetime. The state of emergency is always potentially present, and for
this reason an organization is needed which is continuously able to judge which
extralegal means are necessary to cope with occurring threats against the security
of state.457 Schmitt is, for this reason, the Cold War’s and Terrorism’s theoretician
avant la lettre: any peace is according to him nothing but a cold war. In the
Greimasian narrative schema the agent and the spy thus belong to a scenario in
which the Destinator as a sovereign partially stops doing things by the book – and
turns, instead, to the Schmittian book.
T H E M A N W H O K N E W T O O M U C H
–
T H E P O S I T I O N A L C H A R A C T E R
O F T H E S P Y
This implies a series of distinguishing features in the spy as a potential aspect of
the Hero – in contradistinction to the detective and soldier characters. In the most
comprehensive and detailed text analysis which Greimas undertook – the book
length Maupassant analysis Maupassant, the short story ‘Deux Amis’ analyzed has
as its main theme precisely: espionage. During the Prussians’ siege of Paris in 1871,
two Parisian friends go fishing, and they receive a paper passport in order to cross
the French lines into no-man’s-land (which is a peaceful zone, there is still 40 years
to World War I). After fishing, they are picked up by a Prussian patrouille who
demands that they reveal the password they are supposed to possess in order to pass
the French lines. They are unable to do so, of course, as the do not possess any
password, and they are summarily executed. Greimas’ detailed analysis finds that
this killing represents the cruelty of power (especially Prussian power) as opposed
to heroic citizens keeping a secret. The Danish semiotician Per Aage Brandt has,
at this point, caught Greimas in a misinterpretation with crucial implications for
the status of the spy. The two Parisians do not possess the password which the
Prussians believe (they only have a paper passport), and they are unable to say
what they do not know: they do not keep silent for heroic reasons. Correspondingly,
the Prussian officer is not personally cruel, he just acts conforming to an ordinary
logic of warfare.458 The two of them have, in fact, seen the position of the German
lines, and if they are allowed to get back behind the French lines, no Prussian may
prevent them from informing the French defense. Even if the two fishermen are
by no means spies, neither intentionally nor institutionally, they invariably become
spies, functionally, because they are who they are where they are.459 If you take a
walk on a secret military area with your camera – we may recall certain Danish
tourists arrested in Poland in the mid-eighties – then you are a spy, no matter

T H E M A N W H O K N E W T O O M U C H
371
whether the reason you do so may in fact be your innocent interest in a rare bird. In
this light, the Prussian is not cruel, he just acts according to the jus necessitatis of
warfare – exactly the same principle according to which secret services act during
the cold war of peace. A classic of this species constitutes the Profumo affair, in
which the British secretary of defense was forced to quit because he kept the same
mistress, Christine Keeler – whether she took herself paid for her services or not –
as a Russian intelligence officer, Jevgenij Ivanov. It is improbable that Keeler did in
fact hand over sensitive information to the latter, but the simple fact of her position
in the scenario was sufficient to release the scandal.460
This is of course the reason why it may be very important for the state to keep
a file on persons with access to classified material. If they – who positionally are
potential spies – should also decide to become spies in actu, then they must be
made silent. They may be forced, for instance, to go out in the press and discredit
themselves, maybe declare themselves insane, so all their sayings become polluted
with ambiguity – and then they are maybe rewarded, in secret, with a pension that
they would not have received under other circumstances. The specific methods of
pressure are many, but the structure is stable – it is, as we know from a classic
of the spy genre: it is impossible definitely to come in from the cold when you
have first been out there. When first you have been a spy, then you continue being
it, positionally, no matter what you may personally decide, because you now have
the unavoidable property of knowing too much. This logic of position implies that
the spy forms a radical example of impossibility of social reintegration. It is a
well-known fact in fairy-tales that when the victorious Hero returns home with
a Dragon’s ear in one arm and a Princess in the other, a narrative problem may
arise. Why should he be satisfied with a Kingdom and half of the Princess or
whatever the King is prepared to offer – he, the Dragon slayer, who achieved what
the King himself could not? Why shouldn’t he take it all? The military coup as
a structural possibility is inherent in this argument, just like revolutions, stabs-in-
the-back and so on, and during peacetime the same logic seems to underlie the
notoriously difficult reintegration of veterans after great wars. The extreme level
of excitement and fear, the fact that every moment and every action concern life
and death, the ultimate dependency upon the small Männerbund at the front and
its unconditional friendship – all these experiences may make an ordinary civil life
in peacetime seem like a dull superficial existence. It has often been remarked that
the rocker organizations Hell’s Angels and Bandidos were founded by American
veterans from World War II and the Vietnam War, respectively, and the same goes
for Nazism’s triumph in the twenties and thirties which was only possible due to
the support from enormous self-organized bands of First World War veterans in the
SA and related Freikorps. Serbia in our time, marred by enormous mafia structures
embedded in the state and led by former paramilitary troops from the wars in the
90s, forms an actual example of how difficult it may be to prevent the influence
of such types on the state when first they are around.461 The reintegration of the
veterans is a psychological (and in large number cases a sociologial or political)
problem which may be contained by different means – the reintegration of the

372
C H A P T E R 18
spy an individual problem (and of course no large scale social problem), but then
again so much more impossible. The spy may sing until he is dead, and hence he
must be bound with pensions, threats, blackmail etc., because he can not leave the
position of knowledge he now occupies. This structure is what, conversely, makes
it possible for a spy to blackmail or punish his former organization if it does not
treat him as expected. The British spy Leslie Nicholson was stationed in Prague in
1930 and spent 20 years there in the service of the SIS. When his wife became ill,
he asked C, Sir Stewart Menzies (the ‘M’ of Fleming’s Bond novels) for a loan
which was refused. After his wife’s death, Nicholson emigrated to the USA and
took revenge on the SIS by publishing his British Agent there in 1964.462 Peter
Wright’s Spycatcher from 1987 is a related example.
T W O S E R V I C E T Y P E S
The stable security structure of Post-war twentieth century features, in most
countries, two organizations, foreign and domestic, and with connections to the
military and the police, respectively. This structure has ancient roots (even if there
was a tendency until the Second World War that services were founded ad hoc
and cancelled in periods of peace463) and gives rise to a stable set of differences.
Codes of honor based on mutual recognition is considered a military virtue and
tend to have a certain influence on the former services, while the latter in its
tendency mirrors the radicality of civil war as opposed to international warfare.
Police-based services have as their object the state’s own citizens (or domestic
foreigners) conspiring against the security of the very state in which they live.
Thus, they are aimed against traitors who are not seen as objects for the soldier’s
(potential, that is) gentleman-like behavior towards other soldiers only accidentally
serving foreign powers, maybe being forced to do so by conscription. The French
historian of religion Georges Dumézil once made an interesting observation in
this respect when he discussed the relation of freedom to the second function (the
military function) of Indo-European religion and ideology.464 I translate the relevant
passage from an interview:
Jacques-Alain Miller: ‘Generally, as you analyze it, the second function displays
a paradoxical aspect, because it effects the socialization of rather asocial
features.’
Georges Dumézil: ‘It is dangerous, but exactly for the reason that it does not
respect laws, it may also happen that it may give rise to happy exceptions in
those procedures where summum jus summa injuria.’
[cf. later in the interview: GD: ‘The warrior is a creature who in all cases, not
only sexuality, is always on the limit between the legal and the illegal, the
ordinary and the exceptional.’]
JAM: ‘Thus you write that “the warrior keeps the features which takes him away
from ordinary people and even puts him in an opposition to the social order
which he has as his task to protect when necessary.” ’

T H E M A N W H O K N E W T O O M U C H
373
GD: ‘Ths possibility for opposition to the social order may appear for better
and for worse. Deep down, it corresponds to the opposition between army
and police. During the German occupation it was the opposition between
Wehrmacht and Gestapo. It was much better to be involved with the former
than with the latter. How could I forget the Mauss incident? He was saved
because his flat had been claimed by the army ’
JAM: ‘But doesn’t the army represent the military function here?’
GD: ‘Yes. The army needed his apartment and its terrace at eighth floor, close
to Porte d’Orléans, for anti-aircraft defense. One morning, I was at Mauss’s
place when a colonel, in a brusque but friendly manner, made him understand
that the respite which he had been given had run out. Mauss negotiated and
eventually got a new respite. Thanks to this, his library could be transported
to the Musée de l’Homme and he himself could move into another place fifty
meters from home in a flat required by the army.’
Jean-Claude Milner: ‘That is Mars Tranquillus?’
GD: ‘Let us say that is military honour.’
JCM: ‘And the Gestapo?’
GD: ‘They represented, unfortunately, the first function. Police has to do with
the first function. The Rig Veda calls the stars “spies” for the sovereign god
Varuna.’
Alain Grosrichard: ‘That implies that deep down the descendants of the Germans
still used trifunctionality during the war?’
GD: ‘Let us not go that far. Let us just say that by coincidence, Gestapo’s and
the Party’s relation to the army now and then mirrored the mythical depth of
the relation between Varuna and Indra.’
JCM: ‘You have written by several occasions that German culture has underlined
two aspects of the second function: its violent side, the military gang, the
Männerbund, as well as its autonomous side, freedom. But when I read you I
have in the back of my head texts by nineteenth century historians claiming
that the individual liberty was born in the forests of Germania. Is it possible,
according to you, to find a sort of matrix in German law rather than Roman
law, tied to the second function, which might serve as the structure of some
sort of freedom?’
GD: ‘A priori, it does not seem improbable. Let us think of the thing, the English
and Scandinavian parliaments.’465
Apart from the fact that the right-wing royalist Dumézil here appropriates a
Scandinavian-German myth about the origins of freedom which must have been
felt like an insult on the Left Bank, the distinction made is interesting. The warrior
makes possible freedom, honor, mutual recognition and has his place on the limit
between law and transgression; the high priest and judge – and their spies – of the
first function seem highly elevated over that very limit. The spy and the police are
connected to the somber first function which, unlike the second, has nothing to do
with freedom, autonomy, and honor. We glimpse the ravens of the first function

374
C H A P T E R 18
sovereign deity Odin, these scouting scavengers, as an archetype of the spy – and
the crafty Odin versus the brave Thor as an adequate Nordic icon of the Indian
Varuna/Indra distinction. According to this distinction, the first function’s police is
thus potentially less concerned about rules and rights and hence less ‘democratic’
than is the second function’s army466 – and so the intelligence services of the two
organizations, although both tend towards the first function side of the distinction
so that army intelligence rather forms a sort of intermediate compromise between
the constraints of the two functions. The first function, however, is superordinate
to the second; it is precisely sovereign, also in a Schmittian sense of the word,
because it is a task of the first function to determine whether ordinary law prevails.
Prisoners of war are respected due to conventions and are returned to the enemy
after the war; foreign spies are relegated, while the country’s own undermining
forces are classified as traitors and even criminals of an especially malignant type –
this indicates that Dumézil’s distinction remains to some extent valid in our days
foreign and domestic services and their different treatment of their opponents.
The foreign services meet as their opponents organizations, similarly organized
and equipped, from enemy or neutral (or even friendly) states. This implies a
mirror structure we recognize from many spy novels, and it entails defection as
a constant possibility. For the double, triple or nth level agent it is a possible
way out when the earth is burning beneath him and the threat of exposure comes
close; for the agent in general a way out, also to escape from other possible,
maybe personal problems. The capital you may use to buy defection is, of course,
inside knowledge which will subsequently be paid off in long-stretched debriefing
sessions. The defector will now find himself at the mercy of the receiver country
and an obvious possibility is the emergence of a new relation of mistrust given
by the fact that the defector’s interest is to feint more knowledge than he actually
has and to delay the disclosure of it until he has gained maximal advantages from
it. Domestic services most clearly representing Dumézil’s first function are only
part of this mirroring by their involvement in counter-espionage, while its other
measures taken against the state’s own citizens rarely face a similarly organized
resistance. In return, the interior service in many modern states is likely to suffer
from a structural paranoia due to its status as subject to a controlling Destinator in
the form of public, parliamentary control.467 It may seem natural for this service
to act as an autonomous instance – also in a stronger sense than indicated by the
natural Weberian tendency of all bureaucracies towards secrecy. Thus, it may seem
a matter of course for it to extend its interests also to powers or persons which may
not be a threat to security of the state but are merely threats to the service’s interests,
that is, politicians or writers with critical or even merely controlling intentions
related to the services. A continuum thus stretches from security of state and to
security of the service, and it is hard to exclude the possibility that a service may
in case of crisis chose the latter rather than the former. The military coup is, by a
homologous structure, the foreign service’s corresponding possibility; the domestic
service’s possible unfaithfulness is bound to follow less conspicuous ways – for
an unverified example, take the recurring rumors about right wing circles in the

T H E M A N W H O K N E W T O O M U C H
375
Stockholm secret police SÄPO and their support to the Palme assassination.468
According to Seymour Hersh’s recent book on Kennedy’s presidential period,
J. Edgar Hoover was able to guarantee his continued leadership of the FBI under the
newly elected president (who disliked him) by maintaining huge dossiers involving
sensitive information on Kennedy, including his first and blacked-out marriage in
the forties.469
Generally, democratic control with such organizations is by nature a delicate
issue. Control commissions must keep silent, even regarding the controllers’ own
political parties, and on the other hand, how can a commission make sure it has
received access to all relevant information from the services? This tension has a
principal a priori character, in so far as total public control with such organizations
would severely limit or even reduce their possibility of action – it is a given thing
that such organizations must, for the sake of efficiency, be given a certain margin
in which to operate, both as regards secrecy and as regards violation of law for the
sake of security – even if this fact makes the organizations constantly vulnerable to
potential public scandals. The old saying, attributed to Lenin: trust is good; control
is better, cannot be applied here. The problem about control of the controller leads,
of course, to an infinite regress which is only doubled by the necessary secrecy in
the control of secrecies. Control must, sooner or later, at some delicate level, meet
a limit, beyond which only trust remains.470
T W O I N S E C U R I T I E S
A further a priori necessity in the spy and agent characters is the particular
recruitment circumstances. No matter how upright, well-educated, and clear-minded
the leading figures in an intelligence organization are – and they must be, if any –
they are in no position to impose the same requirements on all their subordi-
nates. To undertake the dirty work, they will have to use occurring characters of
different kinds. The Greimas asymmetry between Destinator and Hero thus multi-
plies internally within the organization: the director of secret actions must make
use of concrete tools operating in that part of reality which must be kept under
surveillance, influenced and manipulated – and for secrecy reasons it is obvious
that you can not arbitrarily plant anybody anywhere. You must, to a large extent,
use persons who by coincidence have a character, a past, or a position making it
possible for them to fit unseen into the environment in question. And this implies
that you cannot afford to be too fastidious: this is not tasks which it is possible to
educate people to fulfill, except for – exactly – exceptional cases. This does not
imply unfaithfulness as a necessity but as an always threatening limit possibility:
this personnel outside of perfect control consists to some extent of misfits, persons
of a peculiar psychology, persons who for odd reasons feel attracted to intelli-
gence work, people easy to convince to betray their employers, ideological fanatics,
people who feel drawn by sinister affairs, people who undertake such duties of
bitter necessity, people who are easy to threaten to do such tasks – even if you may
ever so much hope that their main motivation be idealist. As in so many aspects of

376
C H A P T E R 18
intersubjectivity, these actors’ motivations are hard to determine: idealism, loyalty,
excitement, desire for recognition, money, threats, brute force  the manifold of
possible motivations implies that the superordinate person will have a tendency
to make sure that he, just in case, has access to the latter means of influence.
This insecurity implies that an elementary relation of mistrust inside the organi-
zation is obvious – which is proved by the many cases of important information
that was not taken seriously. Dusan Popov informed the American army about the
Japanese Pearl Harbor plan but he was not believed; the Soviet Western intelligence
was well-informed about Operation Barbarossa, but they were in no position to
convince Stalin; CIA was under severe political pressure to privilege information
about Iraqi weapons of mass destruction and suppress information claiming the
opposite  this insecurity spreads like a fog in the relation between the intelli-
gence organization and its own informants and henchmen on all levels. An obvious
danger in this fuzzy subworld is that the organization believes what it wants to
believe, and it must face the paradox that the more information a message contains –
that is, the more surprising it is – the less probable is it that the message will
be believed.
This top-down insecurity is doubled, however, by a parallel and even more
decisive bottom-up insecurity. For security reasons, the single agent must of course
know as little as possible about the general plan of which he forms a part – not to
speak about other parallel operations – but this necessary ‘compartmentalization’ of
information and tasks implies a fundamental insecurity about the very character of
the operation as seen from below.471 Not only is the individual, like in all struggles,
at a feint’s distance from the enemy and his intentions; this basic indecidability
is doubled, for the spy’s point of view, by a parallel insecurity as to the exact
intentions of his own side. This structure has its most prominent result the heavy
weapon of counter-espionage, the double agent, who acts as if he belongs to one side
while employed by the other (probably, maybe his sympathies are changing ).
You will never know, as a spy, if your spymaster or leading officer is miserly
with information because his deepest sympathy lies elsewhere – cf. the classic
uncoverings of the third, fourth, fifth man of the Cambridge Five, all of whose
existence was known long before a name could be singled out. This structure entails
that a fundamental insecurity spreads in the whole spy world, pinpointed in Len
Deighton’s description of how Bernard Samson’s own wife Fiona all of a sudden
disappears as the enemy’s most treasured double agent. This insecurity has several
sources (apart from the enemy’s natural attempts at spreading fog): the insecurity
whether the mission you are on has a real purpose or if it is rather a deception
operation destined to fool the enemy while the really important operation takes place
elsewhere; the insecurity whether the mission you are on is in fact planned by double
agents in your own organization; the insecurity whether your own organization
does in fact attempt to satisfy the goals it presumes and not completely other
purposes.
In extreme cases an agent may, as a ‘useful idiot’, function as a tool for an
organization without even knowing it himself. And such matters may not even be

T H E M A N W H O K N E W T O O M U C H
377
settled by archive files – because a spymaster has his own interests, in turn, in
relation to his superordinates on a higher level. A well-equipped archive with files
on alleged ‘agents’ and ‘spies’ may keep him safe, even if the persons mentioned
are to a large extent not at all spies but only innocent people to whom he maintains
loose contacts.
In the secret organization, this very secrecy principle has an ambiguous character
which adds to the spreading of fog. The basic motivation for secrecy is naturally
immanently given: the enemy must not know what we know. But to this, a proce-
dural secrecy is quickly added: the enemy must not know the illegal procedures
undertaken in order to gain information etc. – this becomes in itself a potential
conflict cause. And this problem doubles once more internally in democratic
societies: the public must not know (too much) about the types of method used
because this may delegitimate democracy’s own laws and ideals. These constraints
have led to a violent growth in the use of the three classic grades of secrecy:
confidential, secret, and top secret. In the American context, this has recently been
investigated by senator Moynihan (1998) finding that the extent of secrecy is now
so all-encompassing that it forms a threat to the very efficiency of the services,
and, in the last resort, to the security of state. Secrecy is naturally a basic problem
in an open society, but in addition to that comes the fact that secrecy may blind the
intelligence organizations for important real-world facts. Moynihan predicted the
fall of the Soviet Union as early as in the late seventies, and he wonders why the
CIA did not have the slightest idea of what was to come, even immediately before
the breakdown – in spite of the obvious crisis in Soviet economy and the inter-
national decline of Marxism as an ideology.472 Too much secrecy not only entails
that the organization may loose grasp of its own informations; it may, furthermore,
lead to the widespread misunderstanding that just because something is marked
Top Secret it is eo ipso true. But even worse, Moynihan argues: the enormous
increase in secrecy has given the American services a reputation as state monsters
turned against the population, and a frightening statistics proves that around three
fourths of the American population believe in conspiracy theories involving the
services, among them the Kennedy and Martin Luther King assassinations, the lore
about the secret military shootdown of UFOs and autopsy of extraterrestrials at
Roswell in the fifties – and much more. The extent of secrecy thus may threaten to
destabilize the very relation between state and population – and Moynihan proposes
a radical intervention. Obligatory discharge of secrecy marked material after 10
years (of course with the possibility of withholding especially sensitive cases). In
all cases, his diagnosis is thought-provoking: the very act of secrecy may contribute
to inefficiency as well as to discrediting of the organization using it.
It is thus a part of the nature of espionage that a potential insecurity with several
structural sources spreads at many levels. This should not, of course, hide the fact
that most of the everyday work in such an organization is probably completely
undramatic and is concerned with information taken from official or other public
sources. Very often 75 percent is mentioned as an estimate of the part of the
organizations’ work which remains completely untouched by such insecurities. But

378
C H A P T E R 18
even if the insecurities do not have to be part of one and every operation, they
are constantly present as a potential limit condition. Moreover, they are most often
involved in sufficiently complicated, spectacular, and embarrassing cases, which is
why they play a main role in the spy literature – cf. Muggeridge the spy’s quote at
the beginning of this chapter.
L I T E R A T U R E A N D A G E N T S
These fundamental insecurities distinguish the spy from the detective and the front
pig. The detective may be ever so insecure about who and what may be trusted
in the world of crime and police, but his own common sense is unshaken, even if
he is disillusioned about everything else; his own mission, be it with or without
success, is basically out of the reach of doubt. The front pig may be ever so let
down and deserted by superordinates and under attack from enemies, left behind
in the most meaningless and disillusioned battle on Earth – but his own and his
front pals’ fundamental fight for survival provides a firm ground of reality not
to be shaken. Before we go on to investigate the spy novel’s relation to these a
priori structures in the ontology of espionage, it is worth mentioning that exactly
the insecurities mentioned give writings about espionage a rather particular relation
to categories like fact and fiction. Even the memoir writing by indubitable spies
is ripe with paragraphs to which they themselves are the only possible or only
actual sources. This implies that they may potentially take themselves all possible
freedoms when describing the events in question, just like they may owe different
persons and organizations to cut things out or color the narration in various ways.
The insecurity moment in the very object thus implies that a potential fictivity
sticks to even the most well documented spy accounts. It is very few other factual
domains which could give rise to volumes like the Faber Book of Espionage473
which as matter of course mixes up excerpts from spy novels with ditto memoirs.
Ian Fleming side by side with Kim Philby, Graham Greene with George Blake,
Somerset Maugham with ‘Dusko’ Popov. This intricate relation between espionage
and literature is also emphasized by the fact that very many top agent novel authors
possess a first hand knowledge about the business. This includes Fleming, le Carré,
Somerset Maugham, Greene – who even worked together with Philby – which
is why their works of fiction might be suspected (and are in fact so suspected!)
for, to larger or lesser extents, to be key novels. Is James Bond a fiction copy
of Popov (minus his hump), is Leslie Nicholson the model for Greene’s Nobody
to Blame, etc. ?). In the same vein, anecdotes flourish about the really existing
organizations having lent inspirations from spy novels or their authors; cf. the idea
that Fleming should be the source of CIA’s plans of killing Fidel Castro by a cigar
explosion or infecting him with barber’s itch so he would lose his charismatic beard
and, with it, political power. Thus, there is a fluid borderline between fact and
fiction because of the fact that fiction is a core part of the ontology of espionage.
This does not imply that a unanimous reality of espionage does not exist – it just
entails that we have no methodologically granted access to that reality.474 Thus,

T H E M A N W H O K N E W T O O M U C H
379
there is a structural connection between literature and espionage. The author shares
central features with the spy in so far he is a (partly) disinterested observer on
the margin of the society in which he lives – but in addition to this structural
analogy, there seems to be an empirically well-founded correlation between writers
and intellectuals on the one hand and spies on the other. Already the playwright
Christopher Marlowe performed counter-espionage for Queen Elizabeth I and her
chief of intelligence Walsingham against Mary Queen of Scots and paid with his
life for it. Geoffrey Chaucer is believed to have spied for John of Gaunt, and the
famous French eighteenth century spy, the Knight of d’Eon (often disguised as
Miss Lia of Bermont) was also the author of a treatise on economics. The first
intelligence service in England around the Duke of Marlborough involved Daniel
Defoe who later became the first leader of organized intelligence in England and
thus, in a certain sense, one of the founders of Secret Service. In addition to many
deeds as active spy, e.g. against the Scots, he even wrote one of the first papers on
intelligence ‘A Scheme for General Intelligence’ (1704).475 ‘Intelligence is the soul
of public business,’ so Defoe, who continues to define counter-espionage: ‘For as
intelligence is the most useful to us, so keeping our enemies from intelligence among
us is as valuable a head.’, just like he recommends the organization of archives
with files on all potential problem sources. Already Defoe used his literary work
as an alibi during political information gathering, and he thus forms a prototypical
example of a practical connection between the author’s and the intellectual’s free,
philandering lifestyle and their potential use for intelligence purposes.
‘ E X I S T E N T I A L C O R R E L A T E ’ A N D E N U N C I A T I O N
Both the detective, the agent, and the front pig novels are meaningless without
some version or degree of a first person narrator perspective – without which the
elementary suspense of these genres is difficult to maintain. Omniscient narrators,
especially with respect to the time aspect, but also with regard to the inner life
of many persons, would spoil these effects, apart from the fact that they would
seem unnatural with their unrealistically, unavailable amount of knowledge. But
the spy novel seems even more tied to the first person perspective than the other
two, in regard to time, space, and persons, because the first person perspective is a
prototypical point of view for the experience of radical insecurity.
This leads to the question of what could be called the ‘existential correlate’ of
these genres, that is, their iconic relation to other domains on a higher, secondary
level of iconicity, connecting to the fifth iconicity type of Chap. 17, that of the
‘metaphysical qualities’. We should of course not suppose that the legitimacy of
these genres lies only in their ability to allegorize basic existential experiences
for the reader. There is a huge amount of direct information about espionage
ontology as well as empirical facts of real milieus and experiences in them, and
espionage is in itself, moreover, a complicated facet of existence – but all the
same it seems to call for an explanation that these genres possess the mass appeal
which have made them huge popular genres of the twentieth century. It seems

380
C H A P T E R 18
to be connected to the fact that these related genres make possible a bouquet of
rather different allegories in relation to other domains of life. The detective genre’s
affinity to cool intellectual games, solution of enigmas, intelligence tests, a heart
of gold behind the tough appearances, lonely cinema noir rainy day melancholy,
etc. probably forms the most well-known of these male cocktails. The front pig
genre rather has a connection to fundamental feelings of misfit, hatred towards
superordinates and ordinary life, violent reaction, radical and unanimous choosing
side, bodily primitivism, and the dream of Männerbünde, the blending of blood
and unconditional male friendship. The spy genre, on the other hand, lies on a
continuum from idealism over the violation of idealism and to charades, loss of
identity, fundamental lack of orientation and insecurity where any firm supposition
about reality may vanish and initiate a foggy Nebenwelt in which a dark and somber
worldwide destiny develops unpredictably. The spy may despair, but his loneliness
is not the outsider’s like the detective’s, it is rather the loneliness of being tied to
an irreversible position in a structural paranoia where any figure like in a puzzle
picture may all of a sudden change into its opposite. The connection to politics is
of course direct and in no way allegorical, but in addition to that, these structures
seem to give the spy genre a special relationship to love and religion, maybe even
the more dark and despairing aspects of the two. Love, jealousy, sex, and so on
play marginal roles for the detective and the front pig who may deal with these
matters in a unashamed Hemingwayian toughness; for Marlowe or Kelly’s Heroes
women are interesting staffage but no intrinsic issue – but these issues are evidently
generic in spy literature. Already in the objectivity itself, there is a connection, cf.
the classic features of female spies, both as honeytraps, patiently waiting for the
appearance of the classical pillow talk (while maybe the seances are filmed or in
other ways documented for use in blackmail).476 Here, a common sense insecurity
as to the continuum between sex and love is mirrored in a continuum between sex
and blackmail. But in addition to these structures in espionage itself, the stable
occurrence of these themes in spy literature is probably motivated in the structural
analogies in the respective domains which make them obvious to use as allegories
for each other. To many literary spies, the mysteries of love seem to be realities into
which you may flee when the insecurity on the first level becomes unbearable – just
to discover that a structurally analogous insecurity repeats itself at the second level.
A similar analogy of structure which may be a reason behind the popularity of
the genre, is theology. We have already remarked upon Carl Schmitt’s idea of the
theological genealogy of modern political science concepts. Theology becomes – via
the deism of Enlightenment – constitutional law; the priest becomes the lawyer; God
becomes the sovereign; epiphany becomes the state of emergency. You may continue
the parallels yourself: the religious community and the heathens become friend and
foe, respectively; atheism and doubt become the ideologies of the bourgeoisie (the
‘discussing’ class trying to evade decision). Just like faith makes only sense for a
believer, thus politics requires, according to Schmitt, ‘existentielle Teilhaben’. It is not
necessary to join Schmitt in his fascist conclusions to these analogies in order to see the
spy novel as intensely occupied by a theology of the state477. Democracy, to Schmitt,

T H E M A N W H O K N E W T O O M U C H
381
was a naïve belief in the possibility of the definitive extermination of sovereignty; for
a more cool point of view, democracy is rather a strong – if not the only – means to
contain and control a sovereign position which may not be exterminated, and among
thechiefpoliticalvirtuesofdemocracyispreciselythefactthatyouneednotbeexisten-
tially aroused by it in order to claim your rights as a political citizen. But the position
of sovereignty in democracies is precisely located in the secret services and the (most
often,small)centralpartsofthepoliticalelitecontrollingthem.Inandaroundtheintel-
ligence organizations, all the theological paradoxes repeat themselves. This goes for
thepoliticalscienceunderstandingofthem,butalsofortheparticipants:thecontinuum
in espionage from existential bottomlessness and to idealist confession mirrors the
continuumfromdoubttofaith,andjustlikethewaysoftheLordarepastunderstanding,
even for the believer, so exactly the same holds for the ways of the State, even for the
most devoted spy. He becomes a mystic of the state, be it real or dreamt-up, serving
an enigmatic entity which by its very nature never can be met with face to face, which
he may only meet in his own doubtful deeds where any victory is provisional, open
to dispute and maybe even a defeat in disguise. In theology, the spy novel thus finds
another ‘existential correlate’ – and with it all the passions, the rare epiphanies, and
the dark-nights-of-the-soul – both in dogmatic theology and popular belief versions.
But here, the espionage novel adds to these existential passions a cool and
comfortable objectivation in so far as they are here played out in full intersub-
jective orchestration. In doing so, the spy genre may stage these existential and
theological structures without the first person perspective leading to orgies of
expressive psychologisms. Most often, the first person perspective is – in spite of
its status as point-of-view – minimally described, exactly because the objective
scenario of the plot stages the existential figures. This allows for a cool and objective
rendering of structures which in other genres may be given rather juicy and self-
indulgent psychological descriptions.478 This force of the spy novel may be that it
orchestrates the passion of the state at the same time as it provides an objective
iconic tool to grasp certain Ingardenian ‘metaphysical qualities’, the bottomlessness
of love, existence, faith, and doubt: a stable instrument to understand a set of basic
insecurities.
I C O N I C I T Y I N E S P I O N A G E R E P R E S E N T A T I O N
To conclude, a basic condition of possibility for the spy novel lies in its iconic use
of basic a priori structures of espionage in an Ingarden iconicity type 4). A basic
outline of this schema can be found in the presuppositions of any definition of the
word spy. A further analysis demonstrates a series of structural corollaries to this
spy definition:
1. The spy as a special moment of the narratological hero (as opposed to the related
characters, the detective and the front pig)
2. The positional character of the spy – the possession of secret knowledge as
determination independent of any espionage intention or affiliation in the person
in question

382
C H A P T E R 18
3. A tendential structural difference between foreign and domestic services
4. Two types of basic insecurities in any espionage hierarchy: one top-down
insecurity eroding the superordinates’ trust in the subordinates. And one bottom-
up insecurity inflicted by the ‘compartmentalization’ of secret services, eroding
the spy’s trust in the organization employing him.
5. The secrecy and insecurities of espionage makes fiction a virtual aspect of every
factual writing about it.
These basic ontological features of espionage are iconically reproduced in the spy
novel genre and contributes to its very definition as such.
The fifth property, moreover, implies a particular, intrinsic relation – and
iconicity – between the role of authors and the role of spies.
Finally, the clarification of these basic diagrammatical properties of espionage
makes possible a hypothesis about a second-order iconicity holding between the
espionage novel and the metaphysical qualities of other discourses, namely those
of love and of theology. These two fields structurally share the basic insecurities of
espionage which is why it may be used iconically to address, more or less directly,
and more or less allegorically, central problems of love and religion.
Thus, iconicity is at stake in at least two different aspects. Basically, an iconicity
between espionage as such and the novels about it is made possible by shared
diagrammatical semantics. On this basis, other important iconic relations become
possible, namely those between spies and authors and those between espionage on
the one hand and love and religion on the other.
This conclusion forms an empirical case against two ideas of the relation between
iconicity and literature. One is the skepticist idea that iconicity should play no role
at all in literature and that, consequently, it should be possible to describe literary
issues with literary theoretical concepts only. Against this, it may be argued that the
very existence of stable genres – as for instance the spy novel – point to iconical,
realist foundations outside of literature proper. Another is the idea that iconicity
in literature should concern only the relation between expression and content (like
figure poems, basically). Against this, it may be argued that a more basic iconicity
concerns also the relation between meaning and reference, in this case between a
literary subgenre and a schematic a priori structure defining its domain of reference.
Our attempt at charting the regional ontology of espionage took its point of
departure in the necessary presuppositions to a dictionary definition of ‘spy’. Our
further development of this ontological structure involved theoretical and empirical
observations and investigations from a host of rather different sources. This points
to the special conditions of charting regional ontological structure. Even if a priori,
such structures may not be fruitfully investigated by pure armchair speculation only.
Even if basically diagrammatical, such knowledge must base itself on the analyses
of the empirically presented structure of the field, pendling back and forth between
a purely diagrammatical grasp of regional necessity regularities on the one hand
and empirical concepts produced in the ongoing scientific and other research in
the field.

PERSPECTIVE
In the course of this book, we have argued for the actuality of two traditions: that
of Peircean pragmatism and Husserlian phenomenology. We have even argued that
they share a considerable amount of valuable thought - particularly involving the
Peircean notion of diagrammatical reasoning and the Husserlian conception of the
synthetic a priori of material ontologies.
Roughly, these two ideas connect in two ways. Diagrammatical reasoning is a
major road to the understanding of ontological structure – and diagrams, in turn,
form a core notion in the material ontology of semiotics.
These ideas are developed in two steps – one purely philosophical, and one
intervening in the material regions of biology, pictures, and literature.
The development of this meeting between Peirce and Husserl is thus only to
a limited extent seen as an issue of history of ideas. Rather, it is taken to be an
intervention in the actual discussions of phenomenology, ontology, and semiotics,
of biosemiotics, pictures, and literature – and this is why the discussions of Peirce
and Husserl have – all through the book – been embedded in a host of actual issues
and discussions with other philosophers, scientists, and critics.
The resulting diagrammatology is intended to contributing to the survival of
the enlightened idea of the study of the humanities as a rational, interdisciplinary
endeavor – during a Dark Age at the humanist faculties strangely wedding construc-
tivist irrationalism to glib marketing and political correctness.
383

APPENDIX: PEIRCE’S CONCEPTION OF CONTINUITY
BETWEEN MATHEMATICS AND PHILOSOPHY
Mathematical reasoning consists in thnking how things
already remarked may be conceived as making a part of
a hitherto unremarked system, especially by means of
the introduction of the hypothesis of continuity where no
continuity hitherto had been thought of 
Peirce (‘Spinoza’s Ethic’, NATION III, 85)
When René Thom claims, in the preface to his Ésquisse d’une sémiophysique
(1988), to be the first philosopher of the continuum since Aristotle, then it is correct
only to the extent that there are not indeed very many philosophers who have been
interested in that concept – unlike the heavy interest in continuity in mathematics.
But Thom’s claim, in any case, not only overlooks figures like Leibniz, Kant,
Veronese, and Weyl, but most conspicuously Peirce’s effort in the field, especially
in the mature versions of his thought in the years around 1900. The concept of
continuity is central to the whole of Peirce’s thought. ‘Of all conceptions Continuity
is by far the most difficult for Philosophy to handle’ (R&LOT 242), writes Peirce in
1898, and consequently continuity is ‘the master key which adepts tell us unlocks
the arcana of philosophy,’ (untitled manuscript, 1897, 1.163), in short it is ‘ the
most difficult, the most important, the most worth study of all philosophical ideas.’
(‘The Categories’, undated, NEM IV, 310).
It plays, in particular, a main part in Peirce’s metaphysics and consequently –
following Peirce’s Kantian idea that metaphysics mirrors logic479 – in Peirce’s
comprehensive logic. This is why it also becomes of seminal importance for what
connects logic and metaphysics in Peirce: his conceptual realism. Peirce’s ‘extreme
realism’ is built on the concept of continuity. It is regrettable, thus, that excellent
discussions of his realism – like Boler or Haas – only marginally involves continuity;
this might be for editorial reasons, though, since some of the decisive texts have
only been published since their books. Finally, the concept of continuity provides
the basis – often overlooked – for Peirce’s more well-known semiotics, in particular
in relation to the central concept of the icon.
Continuity as a metaphysical concept, however, is intimately tied to the mathe-
matical presentation of it in Peirce, following his architectonic system for the
sciences, according to which mathematics is the first science.480 Peirce was one of
the first philosophers to see the problems in a consistent mathematical treatment
of infinity and continuity481; according to himself his very first definitions in the
field go back to 1867, but it became central from at least 1880 (Peirce’s strongly
mathematical period, when he held a position at the Johns Hopkins University from
385

386
A P P E N D I X
1879–84), that is, before he could have known neither the works of Dedekind nor
Cantor (Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen appears in 1888482, and Cantor’s papers
only gain recognition among international mathematicians during the eighties483).
Potter and Shields (1977) refer to Peirce’s ‘pre-Cantorian’ period up until around
1884 when he held the Kantian idea that continuity could be defined as infinte divis-
ibility. During the 80s, Peirce became familiar with the writings of Cantor whom
he greatly admired. Not without certain aberrations and criticisms, he basically
shares Cantor’s definition of continuity up until the mid-90s. After around 1895–96,
Peirce gradually develops his own version of set theory with the aim of providing
a continuity description on that basis, and so his main papers on the issue fall in
the period from 1897 to 1908. The continuum definition now revolves around the
idea that in continuity, all parts have parts of the same kind. Potter and Shields
refers to this period as ‘Kantistic’, maybe a little wildleading as Peirce’s earlier,
pre-Cantorian idea of continuity as infinite divisibility was also a Kantian idea.
Potter and Shields outline a last period from 1908 to Peirce’s death in which he
takes the continuity of time to be the measure stick of all continuity, thus prolonging
an older tendency to describe continuity as no collection at all.484 Detailed treat-
ments of the problem of continuity thus only appear in the decades around the turn
of the century; main points in his reflection on the issue are to be found in ‘The
Law of Mind’ (1892, EPI, 312ff, 6.102ff), ‘The Logic of Quantity’ (1893, 4.85),
Robin-numbers 14 and 28 (christened ‘On Quantity’ and ‘Multitude and Continuity’
by Eisele) from 1895 and 1897, ‘Fallibilism, Continuity, and Evolution’ (c. 1897,
1.141) the lecture series known as ‘Reasoning and the Logic of Things’ (1898,
R&LOT), the ‘Lowell Lectures’ (1903, partly in CP 4.510, partly in NEM), the
papers on existential graphs (1903, 4.418), ‘The Bedrock beneath Pragmaticism’
(1906, parts in CP (4.553n2; 4.561n1; 6.174–176)),‘Some Amazing Mazes’ (1908,
4.585), and ‘A Sketch of Logical Critics’ (1911, EPII, 451ff, partly 6.177) – and
recurring reflections on the continuum are to be found in much of his mature work
in this period.
T H E L A W O F M I N D
Let us begin by presenting the whole complex of problems which Peirce connects to
the concept of continuity, as it appears in his ‘Cantorian’ period in his characteristic
excursive style, in which he in a few lines moves from mathematics to ontology to
psychology to religion. A critical presentation of ‘The Law of Mind’ (1892) which
forms Peirce’s first large discussion of his metaphysics of continuity, his so-called
‘synechism’, will illustrate the range of problems he expects it to solve.
‘The Law of Mind’ is Peirce’s first major discussion of the problem. In the
preceding article in the series written for The Monist, of which ‘The Law of Mind’
is the third, Peirce proposed the concept of ‘tychism’ as referring to a doctrine
of ontological absolute chance. He now adds the idea that this concept must give
rise to an evolutionary cosmology ‘in which all the regularities of nature and of
mind are regarded as products of growth, and to a Schelling-fashioned idealism

A P P E N D I X
387
which holds matter to be mere specialized and partially deadened mind’ (6.102).485
This programmatic monism is now taken as the basis for the validity of the law of
mind – briefly, the tendency of ideas to spread – holding for mind in a more narrow
sense as well as for matter, corresponding to Peirce’s contention that the ideas of
Thirdness constitute a ‘thought-like’ reality without reference to any thinking human
subject. Peirce refers to the fact that many years earlier (he thinks of ‘Questions
Concerning Certain Faculties Claimed for Man’ and ‘Some Consequenses of Four
Incapacities’, both from 1868) he had tried to develop this doctrine, albeit by then
being too blinded by nominalist prejudices. What Peirce refers to in these early
papers is partly the problem of epistemology having to begin from something ‘first’
which he rejected on the basis of an Achilleus-and-the-Tortoise argument from
continuity (EPI, 26; 5.263) claiming that science is always-already in the process
of development. And partly the idea that science continually approaches reality
due to the ongoing effort of the community of researchers (EPI, 52; 5.311).486
In these early papers, his reflections referred to continuity in the development of
knowledge only, hence the later rejection of the ideas as nominalist. In ‘The Law
of Mind’, on the contrary, the idea is revised so as to refer to ideas understood
as fully objective entities: the very Law of that title refers to the fact that ‘ideas
tend to spread continuously and to affect certain others which stand to them in
a peculiar relation of affectibility. In spreading they lose intensity, and especially
the power of affecting others, but gain generality and become welded with other
ideas.’ (EPI, 313; 6.104) Thus the strongly idealist formulation of the Law, and the
rest of the paper consists of comments to this. Peirce’s introductory argumentation
of the objecitivist continuity of ideas rests on an analysis of memory.487 How is
it possible at all for past ideas to be present in actuality? If not by some kind of
vicar or representative (which we might never remain sure to understand), then
only by ‘direct perception’. The problem has a certain analogy to the old Husserl’s
famous discussions in ‘Ursprung der Geometrie’: how is it possible to secure the
stable heritage of knowledge in a represented form? – only by the maintenance
of that original evidence which gave rise to its symbolization in the first place.488
In Peirce, the answer is ‘ by direct perception.’ (EPI, 314; 6.109). This is why
an idea, if present now, can not be complete past at all; the present now must be
connected with the relevant parts of the past by a series of infinitesimal causal
steps – by continuity. The fact that ideas may thus possess a constancy during
time becomes an argument in Peirce for a continuous conception of time, an idea
which consequently cannot tolerate the idea of a time line dissolved into a powder
of separate points. Consciousness must thus – monism here allowing Peirce to
pass directly from experienced time to consciousness – cover an extended interval
of time which can not, on the other hand, be a finite interval (in that case time
would not pass), but precisely an infinitesimal interval. This is a decisive step in
Peirce’s argumentation which explains his metaphysical sticking to the formulation
of calculus in infinitesimal terms in his philosophy of mathematics (as against
Weierstrass’s version using limits, which had become the canonical version in
Peirce’s time and well until the 1960s and the appearance of non-standard analysis).

388
A P P E N D I X
To Peirce, infinitesimals are not only mere conventions for calculating; they possess
real existence, and it is they that grant the continuous connectedness of time as
well as of consciousness. The fact that the object of consciousness must also be
continuous, Peirce now tries to argue with a (rather weak) argument of Kantian
flavour: ‘ in this infinitesimal interval, not only is consciousness continuous
in a subjective sense, that is, considered as a subject or substance having the
attribute of duration, but also, because it is immediate consciousness, its object is
ipso facto continuous.’ (EPI, 315; 6.111) This subjectivist – and hence potentially
nominalist – argument is probably part of the reason why Peirce later sees ‘The Law
of Mind’ as a mere step in his development of a continuity theory. Time consists of
moments possessing an extension, not of instants being mere points. Instants may
appear only relative to moments, not as autonomous entities in themselves. In this
claim for an ontologial argument for the existence of infinitesimals, Peirce may be
compared to the non-standard analysis of the recent decades (A. Robinson) which
reintroduced infinitesimals, even if not for ontological reasons, and without any
direct practical implications to the extent that ‘non-standard analysis’ is consistent
with the standard theory using limits (cf. below).489 Peirce, on the contrary, has a
metaphysical background for preferring infinitesimals – his logic of relations: ‘The
illumination of a subject by a strict notation for the logic of relatives had shown
me clearly and evidently that the idea of an infinitesimal involves no contradiction,
before I became acquainted with the writings of Dr. Georg Cantor [] in which the
same view is defended with extraordinary genius and penetrating logic.’ (EPI, 316;
6.113). Peirce here overlooks the fact that Cantor in no way endorsed infinitesimals,
quite on the contrary. It allows him, however, to introduce his old distinction (from
‘The Logic of Number’, 1881) between finite and infinite sets, defined by the fact
that only finite sets are subject to de Morgan’s ‘syllogism of transposed quantities’.
This idea is equivalent to Dedekind’s and Cantor’s definition of infinite sets as
sets with subsets having the same size as the sets themselves,490 and as they it
takes as its basis the Bolzano measuring of the relative size of sets the one-to-one
pairing of their elements. In Peirce’s gay example, reference is made to Balzac’s
Physiologie du mariage, wherein it is claimed that any young Frenchman boasts
of having seduced a French woman. As a woman in this use of the word may be
seduced only once, and as there are as many French men as women, it follows that
no French woman escapes seduction. But this argument only holds provided the
set in question is finite. If the French population is growing (and why shouldn’t
it, considering the amount of seductions), the conclusion is not necessarily true. In
this case, the example corresponds to Cantor’s well-known proof – which Peirce
refers (EPI, 316; 6.115) – that there are as many even numbers as there are whole
numbers, because to any whole number, an even may be found, and vice versa. But
still they remain a subset of the whole numbers.491
Now follows Peirce’s first attempt at classifying transfinite sets. He claims that
‘of infinite collections there are but two grades of magnitude, the endless and the
innumerable’ (EPI, 317; 6.116). This is obviously wrong, as Peirce later acknowl-
edged, but let us follow his argument. The merely endless sets are countable, just like

A P P E N D I X
389
the finite sets, but even larger sets exist which are not countable, because they are
not subject to what Peirce calls the Fermat inference. Peirce gives an unnecessarily
complicated algebraic example; the idea is simple and equivalent to mathematical
induction (which Peirce for terminological reasons finds ‘improperly’). The Fermat
inference consists in the possibility of proving a theorem valid for all n, if it is
possible to prove it for n = 1 and then prove that if it is valid for n, then also for
n + 1. This conclusion requires, of course, that the set in question – as may the
whole numbers – be arranged in a list, in a countable set. And that is not the case
for all sets, as proved by Cantor: the irrationals may not be so arranged, because
the distinction between them requires an infinite decimal expansion: ‘Now if they
cannot be exactly expressed and discriminated, clearly they cannot be ranged in a
linear series.’ (EPI, 319; 6.117). Peirce does not refer Cantor’s proof, the famous
diagonal proof, later so crucial to computer science, but the very wording of his
own argument is interesting: he interprets uncountability as implying that the single
elements of such a set may not be clearly distinguished as individuals, and this
points forward to his own ontological interpretation of the concept of continuity
as a concept of a hyper-set in which the single elements totally lose identity. In
contradistinction to the bipartition of infinite sets, Peirce immediately (EPI, 319–20;
6.118) introduces a further distinction of the uncountables in two. First, he claims
with Cantor that a line contains exactly as many points as a 2-D plane or a 3-D
body.492 The coordinates of the single points may be compressed into one single
decimal expansion, no matter how many dimensions (and correlatively, coordinates)
the entity in question may have: place the first coordinate’s first decimal on the
first place of the number; the second coordinate’s first decimal on the second pace;
the third coordinate’s first decimal on the third place, and so on. This, of course,
becomes impossible if the number of dimensions is infinite; a set of infinite sets
of numbers which may each of them vary uncountably must transgress the simple
uncountable set, and Peirce consequently calls it endlessly infinite: ‘The single
individuals of such a collection could not, however, be designated, even approxi-
mately, so that this is indeed a magnitude concerning which it would be possible
to reason only in the most general way, if at all.’ (EPI, 319; 6.118). Again, Peirce
forwards the idea that the single, distinct individual may become blurred in very
large sets, without his argument being particularly clear: it is not evident why it
should not be possible to reason about single individuals in such a set, and later
Peirce must admit that the elements of even uncountable sets are distinct so that
any idea of the anticipation of continuity in transfinite sets must be argued in other
ways. The fact that Peirce has not yet grasped the rules of calculation for transfinite
numbers is demonstrated by his idea that the product of two uncountable numbers
should be larger than each (as e.g. the set of possible pairs composed by one number
from each set cf. note 16). It will later occur that a given transfinite entity must
appear as exponent in order to let a larger transfinite set appear: Aleph-n < 2Aleph−n.
These deliberations, however, take Peirce to the decisive question: what is conti-
nuity? Here he takes his basis in one version of Kant’s definition – infinite divis-
ibility – which quickly, and following Cantor, must be dismissed: the rationals

390
A P P E N D I X
are infinitely divisible but not continuous, because between two given rational
numbers uncountably many irrational numbers may be found.493 Cantor’s definition
is, instead, that a continuous series is ‘concatenated and perfect. By a concatenated
series, he means such a one that if any two points are given in it, and any finite
distance, however small, it is possible to proceed from the first point to the second
through a succession of points of the series each at a distance, from the preceding
one, less than a given distance. This is true of the series of rational fractions ranged
in order of their magnitude. By a perfect series, he means one which contains every
point such that there is no distance so small that this point has not an infinity of
points of the series within that distance of it. This is true of the series of numbers
between 0 and 1 capable of being expressed by decimals in which only the digits
0 and 1 occur.’ (EPI, 320; 6.120).
Peirce here refers Cantor 1879–84, 194 where the corresponding concepts are
‘perfekt’ and ‘zusammenhängende’, and the continuum consequently ‘perfekt-
zusammenhängende’.494 ‘Perfekt’ is here defined as being the same as non-
reducible, that is, not reducible by ‘Ableitungen’, which successively isolate the
limit points of a set,495 while ‘zusammenhängende’ in our days’ terminology will
be dense (in itself dense).
Even if Peirce extensionally agrees with this definition (in so far as he finds it
includes continua and excludes non-continua), he is not satisfied for intensional
reasons: the definition is metric (which is only true in a relative sense: ‘Es handelt
sich also um eine ‘metrische’ Eigenschaft des Kontinuums’ (194); Cantor here refers
to the definition of Zusammenhang by distances less than a certain neighborhood
distance epsilon) – which is not the case for the distinction between continuous
and discontinuous. The fact that a perfect series is defined by containing every
point of a certain description is regarded by Peirce as a definition by negation
(because points not caught by this description are excluded), while no positive idea
is given about ‘what all the points are’. This cricitism seems to presuppose Peirce’s
own idea of the continuum which excludes that it may be described as a set of
points of any properties whatsoever, but requires a description on its own level,
prerequisite to any division of it into points; without the presupposition of this idea,
Peirce’s criticism seems ill-placed. Finally, he attacks Cantor for giving no distinct
definition of the concept of continuity, because his definition falls in two parts, not
yielding any intuition of what the continuum as an entity really is. As mentioned,
Cantor believed at this point that the continuum hypothesis could be proved within
set theory, so that the continuum was equal to the power of the arithmetical line
which was again equal to the first transfinite cardinal after the countables, and he
consequently viewed the definition given as holding for the geometrical line. Peirce
in a certain sense agreed in the continuum hypothesis, in another sense he did not –
and none of them knew, of course, it was later to be proved indecidable in set
theory (Cantor’s version as it was later formalized by Zermelo and Fraenkel).
Peirce now undertakes to provide an alternative definition based on Kant’s admit-
tedly incomplete suggestion. How are the ‘holes’ in Kant’s definition (infinite
divisibility corresponding to density) to be ‘mended’? ‘What is required () is to

A P P E N D I X
391
state in non-metrical terms that if a series of points up to a limit is included in
a continuum the limit is included’ – from the argument that given a ‘hole’ in a
Kantian series, at most one of the end points may belong to the set (if both belonged
to the set, then there would be, according to Kant’s definition, at least a further
point between them belonging to the set, cf. the Dedekind cut). So if we can require
both points to belong to the series, the hole is ‘mended’. Peirce notes that this seem
to be the property Aristotle saw in defining the continuum as something whose
parts has a common limit (Peirce refers to Physica 227a, Metaphysica 1069a496).
This definition Peirce baptizes ‘Aristotelicity’, to be added to the ‘Kanticity’ of
infinite divisibility: ‘The property of Aristotelicity may be roughly stated thus: a
continuum contains the end point belonging to every endless series of points which
it contains. An obvious corollary is that every continuum contains its limits. But
in using this principle it is necessary to observe that a series may be continuous
except in this, that it omits one or both of its limits.’ (EPI, 321; 6.123).497
Frankly, this definition of continuity seems no less ‘double’ than Cantor’s.
Partly, it requires density (‘Kanticity’), partly it requires that any delimited part
must contain its limit (‘Aristotelicity’, corresponding to Cantor’s ‘perfection’498),
moreover, it corresponds well to the standard definition today. Peirce now connects
it to the existence of infinitesimals: the word ‘infinitesimal’ simply is Latin for
the ordinal number the ‘infinitieth’ and it refers to the fact that incommensurable
numbers need an infinitieth number in their decimal expansion in order to be
fully described. This is why continuity makes possible infinitesimal entities, Peirce
claims in an argument which must presuppose the continuum hypothesis in Cantor’s
version. His criticism of Cantor here – as Marco Panza puts it (Salanskis (ed.)
27) – seems to amount to the fact that Cantor wants to give a definition in order to
constitute the object, while Peirce rather conceives of the task as to satisfactorily
describe something already given beforehand, cf. Dipert’s (1997) characterization
of Peirce’s disagreement with Dedekind as pertaining to intensional vs. extensional
description of sets. Rather than a mathematical difference, it is a disagreement as
to the requirements for the very character of a description.
After this mathematical interlude, Peirce returns to the philosophical use of the
concept of the continuum. First a problem of perception: which color should be
ascribed to the borderline between to colored surfaces? As the color of a point,
seen from a continuist point of view, must be identified as the color in a certain
neighborhood around the point, we may only say that the color of the borderline is
half of each of the two adjacent colors. The present now must be another case of
such a limit surface, consisting half of past, half of future – corresponding to the
definition of velocity in the differential calculus as the middle value of speed in an
infinitesimal interval. These ideas painlessly are generalized to consciousness: ‘Just
so my immediate feeling is my feeling through an infinitesimal duration containing
the present instant.’ (EPI, 322; 6.126)
These quick analyses of time and consciousness now hold decisive implications
for the Law of Mind, for the distinction between past and future makes the Law of
Mind – unlike physical laws of force – irreversible. The present now is influenced

392
A P P E N D I X
by the past, not by the future. From this truism499, Peirce derives radical conse-
quences: the continuity between past and the present implies that ‘ every state of
feeling is affectible by every earlier state’. In this version, the theory seems rather
radical, because it does not delimit the influence to a local neighborhood around the
single ‘state of feeling’ – if it is not to be read in a fashion making consciousness
itself identical to that local space. That seems not to be the case, though, if we are to
believe the following definition of an original continuum of feelings towards which
human consciousness only possesses a highly restricted window: ‘The development
of the human mind has practically extinguished all feelings, except a few sporadic
kinds, sounds, colors, smells, warmth, etc., which now appear to be disconnected
and disparate.’ This idea is connected to Peirce’s cosmology, which is for the first
time developed in this series of lectures – according to which the beginning of
evolution was constituted by an infinite space of possibilities, from which evolution
gradually selects some to realize. The realized feelings are in themselves continuous
(albeit in less dimensions than the original space of possibilities) so they appear
temporally articulated in infinitesimals. Correspondingly, they have a continuous
spatial extension, which takes Peirce into his strange doctrine of slime, of proto-
plasma which is seen as the physiological continuum permitting emotion to enter
into motion. This spatial continuum has wide implications in Peirce: ‘Since space
is continuous, it follows that there must be an immediate community of feeling
between parts of mind infinitesimally near together. Without this, I believe it would
have been impossible for minds external to one another ever to become coördinated,
and equally impossible for any coördination to be established in the action of the
nerve-matter of one brain.’ The continuity of space and the continuity of feeling
are taken to solve all at once both the problem of the existence of other minds and
of the mind-matter relation. Both these problems’ character of the transgression of
boundaries is taken to rely on the lack of insight in a monistic continuity underlying
the apparent limits.500
Continuity, thanks to monism, immediately becomes the question of the conti-
nuity of ideas. Ideas are defined by three aspects, after Peirce’s three metaphysical
categories: their quality as feelings; the energy with which they affect other ideas501;
their tendency to imply other ideas. Energy is supposed to diminish, as the idea
spreads. It seems like Peirce here argues in some kind of analogy with the decrease
of light intensity proportional to the squared distance. Its quality, unlike its intensity,
is unchanged (a weak recollection of a strong red colour is not a weak red ).
The continuity of feeling of course implies that ‘A finite interval of time generally
contains an innumerable series of feelings; and when these become welded together
in association, the result is a general idea. For we have just seen how by continuous
spreading an idea becomes generalized.’ Now we approach the very exegesis of
the Law of Mind, and there are several interesting points to comment here. If we
accept the premiss that any finite time interval contains an uncountable number of
feelings, then there is still some distance to the conclusion that these should be able
to synthesize into one general idea. It is obviously only possible in some cases,
namely when they are ‘welded together in association’. Here Peirce’s doctrine of

A P P E N D I X
393
ideas all of a sudden becomes rather brutally psychological, and even in a rather
primitive associationism, not unlike the British empiricists: if anything may be
associated with anything, then the Mind may entertain any ‘general idea’ it might
wish. Consequently, Peirce must describe this general idea as ‘vague’ due to its
unlimited character, still, on the other hand, it is claimed to have the inner property
of a ‘living feeling’ with strong anti-nominalist implications. Ideas are seemingly
essentially related, ‘we can directly perceive the one gradually modified and shaping
itself into the other. Nor can there any longer be any difficulty about one idea
resembling another, when we can pass along the continuous field of quality from
one to the other and back again to the point which we had marked.’ (EPI, 326;
6.139). Just like the case in the other great phenomenologist Husserl, a refined
and continuous version of the psychology of association pays a central role in the
description of the synthezicing activity of the mind in Peirce.502 As the synthesis
is here described, its object is not merely ordinary associations of ideas potentially
being able to synthesize anything, but specifically iconic associations, connections
by similarity, objectively existing in the multidimensional quality space. Thus, it
is a variety of eidetic variation in this quality space which grants the real connec-
tions of ideas in Peirce, making possible, in turn, their association for the mind
as well as in the world. After an interlude about the intensity of ideas, Peirce
specifies this connection: ‘We can now see what the affection of one idea by another
consists in. It is that the affected idea is attached as a logical predicate to the
affecting idea as subject. So when a feeling emerges into immediate consciousness,
it always appears as a modification of a more or less general object already in
the mind.’ (EPI, 326; 6.142). This points towards Peirce’s theories of abduction
and his distinction between abduction, induction, abstraction, and prescission in the
field which were earlier most often covered by simplicist empiricist-psychological
abstraction theories (see Chap. 11). Ideas may not at all be connected without
continuity (6.143). It may happen, however, in a universe suffused by chance – cf.
Peirce’s ‘tychism’ – that ideas are associated which may not form a general idea.
But association does not follow mere coincidence, generally, there is a Darwinian
tendency, by selection, presumably, in ideas to gather in more general ideas. The
scientific quest for truth in the community of researchers, the development of civil-
isation in general, and behind them biological evolution, lie, implicitly, behind this
argument. This ‘mental law’ conforms to the forms of logic, however, deduction
corresponds to the fact that a general idea releases a reaction (like when the frog’s
dissected legs react when pinched), in induction, a habit is constructed which is
present as a general idea in a series of single feelings, and in abduction (here:
hypothesis), the general idea is called for by a single feeling (the logical inference
drawn from a single observation to the fact that the entity in question may belong to a
general category making its behavior understandable). Only deduction is necessary,
while the two other inference forms are probable and possible, respectively (in this
context both are called probable, EPI, 329; 6.147), mental action is not necessary
and invariable, quite on the contrary it is insecure, plastic, and vital. This argument
draws the consequence of monism: the Law of Mind is claimed valid not only

394
A P P E N D I X
for human thought but also for the evolution of the world even down to details
like the claim that the mind’s tendency to follow logical forms is also shared by
the movement processes in the world: this is what constitutes Peirce’s famous and
extreme ‘logical realism’.
This now permits Peirce to restate the Law and its implications: 1) from a
nominalist point of view ideas may not be similar to each other nor influence
each other, 2) momentaneous feeling flows together into one continuum of feeling,
gaining generality – in this conceptual realism, similarity, connections between
feelings and the world cease to constitute problems, 3) because of this, general
feelings are no longer mere words, but even more than the feelings in which they
incarnate (cf. ‘extreme realism’), 4) the highest law – which Peirce does not abstain
from calling ‘heavenly and living harmony’ – does not require the single feelings to
resign from their individuality, but merely to influence one another. The potentially
totalitarian implications of this somewhat Hegelian-Schellingian idealism is sought
avoided by this turn: the Law does not require the single ideas to do something
determined, they are just urged to self-organize without the result of this process
being dictated beforehand, 5) we are thus unable, at our present level of knowledge,
to say to which extent this evolution is governed.503 (EPI, 330; 6.150ff).
With this theory, Peirce declares, in yet a surprising turn, we are close to an
explanation of personality. Personality is also a general idea which may not be
grasped in one glance: ‘It has to be lived in time: nor can any finite time embrace
it in all its fullness.’ Our finitude as human beings here dampens realism: we are
not able to grasp sufficiently complex general ideas in finite time: personalities and
other such generalities belonging to the realm of continuity.504
To sum up, Peirce’s metaphysical doctrine of continuity, this ‘synechism’,
entails logical realism, objective idealism and tychism as well as a thoroughgoing
evolutionism.
As is evident from this presentation, Peirce’s mathematical speculations on
continuity is intimately related to his phenomenology (Firstness and Thirdness,
characterized by potential and actual continuity, respectively), his philosophy of
mind (the doctrine of motivated associationism), epistemology (the tight analogy
between evolutionary processes in the world and logical inference processes in the
mind), ontology and metaphysics (the continuous character of being, the continuous
reality of universals), not to speak about religious speculations (a continuous and
therefore (!?) personal God). Even if the motivation for Peirce’s strong interest
in the continuum is obviously extra-mathematical and related to the need for an
ontological ‘glue’ to make the different parts of his architectonic stay together,
Peirce maintains that the possible mathematical definition of the term is necessary
for its use elsewhere. This is implied by his conception of mathematics (inherited
from his father, the mathematician Benjamin Peirce) as the science which draws
necessary conclusions from hypotheses. Even if mathematics is in itself hypothetical
through and through (and thus not in itself true or false, it is true only as a corpus
of if-then propositions which may have mutually contradictory implications, so as
e.g. the different non-Euclidean geometries), it is the reasonings of mathematics to

A P P E N D I X
395
which the more empirical sciences have to look in order to find formal structures.
This is why the mathematical determination of the continuum is necessary for Peirce
in order to develop the concept in its ontological and empirical applications. The
‘Law of Mind’ is often referred to as insufficient (and rightly so) in later Peirce
texts, among other things exactly with reference to its conception of continuity. Its
chaotic mixture of subjects, though, form a good introduction to grasp the wide
span of issues continuity is supposed to explain in the mature Peirce’s thought in
the years around the turn of the century.
C O N T I N U I T Y B E Y O N D T H E T R A N S F I N I T E S
The presentation of the purely mathematical aspects of the concept of continuity
is – as so often the case in Peirce – spread out in a long series of more or less
finished works from the period around the turn of the century. One of the most
thorough versions is to be found in Robin nr. 28, published in NEM III with the
title ‘Multitude and Continuity’ (dated by Robin as 1897?). The title is well chosen,
for the goal of this cautious presentation is to situate the concept of continuity
in relation to the doctrine, inspired by Cantor, of transfinite sets and their size,
‘multitude’ (Peirce’s translation of Cantor’s ‘Mächtigkeit’, our days’ ‘power’). It
might surprise that Peirce choses to treat Cantor’s development of the transfinites
so detailed as is the case: his main point of view remains, as already in ‘The Law of
Mind’ that the continuum is a primitive phenomenon which may not be derived from
simpler phenomena – and yet he devotes great energy to the reconstruction of his
own version of an analytical, Cantor-style theory whose aim is to build continuity
‘from below’ by means of sets of points. We shall return to this seeming paradox.
Peirce had developed his own terminology since the beginning of the eighties505
which calls for a presentation. ‘Multitude’ is, as mentioned, his term for Cantor’s
‘Mächtigkeit’, measuring the size of sets from one-to-one mappings; Peirce often
uses the term as synonymous with a set equipped with such a measure. ‘Collection’
is his translation of Cantor’s ‘Menge’ (today: ‘set’) even if the two terms do not
coincide in all respects. ‘Enumerable’ is his term for the power of sets with a finite
number of elements. ‘Innumerable’ refers to the opposite property and thus corre-
sponds to Cantor’s concept of ‘transfinite’. This field may, of course, be subdi-
vided into several categories, of which the smallest is called ‘denumerable’, corre-
sponding to Cantor’s ‘abzählbar’ (today ‘countable’), referring to the power of the
natural numbers and related sets. Sets transgressing this size are ‘abnumeral’ (today
‘uncountable’), – referring e.g. to the power of the reals. This power constitutes –
Peirce here more or less tacitly following the continuum hypothesis (CH) – the first
abnumeral number. Cantor believed to have given a proof of the CH, and general
opinion of the period held it to be true and possible to prove; as mentioned, it was only
in 1964 finally proved indecidable with respect to ZFC set theory. Peirce’s overall
stance here thus does not differ from that of the period.506 With respect to the use of
the concept of ‘abnumeral’, Peirce sometimes lets it include the ‘denumerable’ so that
countable sets are seen as the zeroth abnumeral number. Later texts often substitute

396
A P P E N D I X
Figure 55.
‘-postnumeral’ for ‘abnumeral’, the former with the addition of a prefix addressing
which uncountable set is referred to (‘primi-’, ‘secundo-’, ‘tertiopostnumeral’,
etc.), just like ‘denumerable’ is later changed into ‘denumeral’ (because only one
class of countables exist), and ‘abnumeral’ conversely into ‘abnumerable’ (because
several such classes exist). We may sum up Peirce’s concepts in the diagram above.
We said above that Peirce in this text – as in general – supports the continuum
hypothesis (CH) as it is usually presented: Aleph-1 = 2Aleph−0. This is, however,
a truth with some modifications. Peirce (most often) agrees fully in the equation
as given here: that the first cardinal number after the countables is equal to two
elevated to the power of the countables. In this he agrees for several reasons.
First, he agrees with Cantor in Cantor’s theorem proving that the set of subsets
(today: the power set) of a set with a members is given by 2a, and that this number
is always larger than a. This proof Peirce repeats at several occasions – and he
even thinks he preceded Cantor in proving it. Furthermore, he agrees in the non-
trivial content of CH that no further powers exist between the power of the natural
numbers and the power of the reals: ‘Let us now ask, what is the smallest multitude
which exceeds a denumerable multitude? That there is a multitude which exceeds a
denumerable multitude has already been shown. Namely, the possible combinations
of whole numbers is such a multitude. The possible combinations of whole numbers
each of which consists of an enumerable collection of whole numbers is merely
denumerable. But the possible combinations of denumerable whole numbers form
a collection which exceeds a denumerable collection. I call this multitude the first
[abnumeral multitude].’ (NEM III, 83–84).507 The opposite idea would be that even
if the reals can be proved (Cantor’s diagonal proof) to have greater power than
the natural numbers, it is not thereby proved that a certain specified subset of the
reals might not be greater than the natural numbers and smaller than the whole of
the reals so that 2Aleph−0 would equal Aleph-2 or even a higher Aleph; this is what
Cohen’s forcing technique in the 1960s proved indecidable. Peirce even agrees with

A P P E N D I X
397
Cantor in what was later called the generalized continuum hypothesis (GCH): the
idea that this relation not only holds between the Alephs 0 and 1, but between each
successive pair of Alephs: Aleph-n + 1 = 2Aleph−n, so that the transfinite numbers
form a well-ordered set of Alephs where the next Aleph in line has the same power
as the set of subsets of the former Aleph which again equals the set of ordinal
numbers having the former Aleph as its power. When Peirce does not, in another
sense, agree with CH at all, it refers to a prerequisite so taken for granted that it
does not at all appear in the canonical formulation of it. It is the idea that Aleph-1,
the power of the reals, is supposed to be identical to the power of the arithmetical
line, in turn identical to the power of the geometrical continuum (which is apparent
only in the name of the hypothesis). This intuition which dates back at least to
Descartes’ analytical geometry identifying arithmetical numbers and geometrical
line, so that for any point on the line there is a number, and vice versa, seems
so evident that it need not be mentioned. In a Peircean light, however, CH as we
usually understand it, should rather be stated as Aleph-1 = 2Aleph−0 = c, where c
refers to the power of the geometrical line. It is the last part of this equation which
makes Peirce strongly disagree, and it is his alternative idea of c which the text in
question sets out to prove. This idea is already inherent in the special way Peirce
conceives the relation between infinite entities. Let us take a look at his ‘proof’
(which is of course not valid) of CH, after he has just articulated it in the quote
above:
That there is no multitude greater than the denumerable multitude and less than the first abnumeral, I
argue as follows: the demonstration does not seem to be perfect [sic]; but I think it is only because I do
not succeed in stating it quite right. The addition, or aggregation, of denumerable collections is entirely
without effect upon the multitude, even if the multitude of collections aggregated is denumerable. The
multiplication of denumerable collections, that is the formation of all possible compounds each being
a set composed of an individual out of each collection, is also without effect, if the multitude of
denumerable factors is enumerable. But if the multitude of factors is denumerable, the result is the first
abnumeral. Now since there is no multitude greater than every enumerable multitude and less than the
denumerable multitude, it follows that there is no multitude greater than the product of every enumerable
collection of denumerable factors and less than the products of a denumerable collection of denumerable
factors which is the first abnumeral multitude. (84)
This sounds immediately seductive: Peirce lists the types of calculation – addition
and multiplication – which are without effect on the size of a countable set in so far
as they are used a finite number of times. Is multiplication used, on the other hand, a
countably infinite number of times (corresponding to 2Aleph−0 you will get a larger
set consisting of possible combinations, that is, possible subsets of the countable
set. This implies, Peirce infers, that when you pass from a finite to a countably
infinite set of operations, then you go from a countable set to an uncountable set as
a result. But if this should count as a proof, then the burden is passed a step down
in the Aleph hierarchy, the premiss being that there is no transfinite entity less than
Aleph-0, that is, no infinite large numbers exist which are smaller than the set of the
natural numbers. But it is, in fact, a possible implication of Peirce’s point of view
that such numbers exist.508 But even apart from such Peircean peculiarities in the
proof, it does not hold. It might be possible to define a set with power intermediate

398
A P P E N D I X
between the naturals and the reals with other means than multiplication. This is not
excluded by the argumentation.
Peirce now goes on to consider uncountable sets and he observes, with Cantor,
that just like it was the case with Aleph-0, the product of a finite set of uncountable
factors is still only uncountable (here, Peirce has learnt things since ‘Law of Mind’):
if every factor of n factors is given in decimal expansion, then we may make one
combined decimal expansion so that the first factor of the first number is given
the first place the first factor of the second number the second place  the second
factor of the first number in place n + 1, the second factor of the second number
in place n + 2, etc. This implies that the product of a finite set of uncountable
numbers may be described in one single decimal expansion and thus be contained
in Aleph-1. But again the picture changes – according to Peirce – by an infinite
(but countable) amount of factors, taking us into Aleph-2. Peirce’s argument, thus:
Aleph-1Aleph−0 = Aleph-2. But this is not the case, given his premisses; the result
remains caught up in Aleph-1. The exponent must be uncountable in order for a shift
to take place: Peirce here argues against GCH – or he has rather misunderstood it.
About Aleph-2 Peirce goes on:‘Mathematics offers no example of such a multitude.
Mathematics has no occasion to consider multitudes as great as this’ (85).509 In the
same way, Peirce constructs Aleph-3 and then he continues:
And so the multitudes succeed one another indefinitely; and the constituent individuals of collections of
those multitudes are distinct from one another.
Thus, the whole series of multitude, so far as yet made out, begins with the multitude of a non-existent
collection, or zero, and then comes the multitude of a single object, and then the multitude of 2, and so
on increasing by one without end. After these multitudes comes the denumerable multitude which may
be called the zero abnumeral multitude, then the first abnumeral multitude, then the second abnumeral,
and so on increasing in order by one without end. All these multitudes thus form two denumerable
series, and consequently there is only a denumerable multitude of different possible multitudes, so far
as yet made out. (85–86)
All this might appear to be a (partially unsuccessful) attempt of an relatively
orthodox presentation of Cantor’s set theory; yet there is a strange emphasis on the
role played by the countable sets in Peirce’s account. In all cases it is the transition
from a finite to a countably infinite set of operations which is supposed to give
power change as its result. This is of course not allowed by GCH, according to
which Aleph-x + 1 is achieved by elevating two to Aleph-xth power (and not only
to the Aleph-0th power, as Peirce seems to assume). Peirce furthermore seems to
have the idea that the whole series af Aleph powers is itself countable – opposed
to Cantorian set theory in which Alephs may get ever larger transfinite ordinal
numbers as their indices. Despite the generativity in the set of transfinite sets, it
appears to Peirce to be somehow ‘tamed’ by the countable infinity, by the natural
numbers.
After these preparations we now reach Peirce’s own continuum hypothesis,
presenting his idea of the relation of the geometrical line to transfinite sets (PCH,
we might call it). It is given first in the form of a hypothesis:

A P P E N D I X
399
Let us now suppose that there is a collection of distinct objects of each of those multitudes. Then, taking
any one of those collections, no matter what, there is, among the whole collection of those collections,
a denumerable multitude of collections each of which is greater than the collection chosen. Let us then
throw all the distinct individuals of those collections so as to form an aggregate collection. This aggregate
collection is greater than any of the single collections; for it has, as we have just seen, a denumerable
collection of parts greater than any one of those collections. I shall call it a supermultitudinous collection.
(86)
Peirce imagines the construction of a set constituted by the sum of the elements
in a sum of sets composed by one set from each power class. In doing so, he of
course unknowingly uses what was later identified as the Axiom of Choice (AC)
and proved indecidable – it allows us to chose one element from each of an infinte
set of sets. This union of sets of all powers U(Aleph-n), n →, Peirce now claims
constitutes a ‘supermultitudinous’ collection S, larger than any cardinal. It is of
course true, as Peirce claims, that such a set will be larger than any single Aleph-n,
because it contains the elements of a set with the size Aleph-n + 1, and he even
adds an equivalent to CH on this higher level: ‘It seems to be sufficiently evident
that there is no collection at once greater than every abnumeral collection and less
than such a supermultitudinous collection.’ (86), a claim which may be proved if
(in addition to Peirce’s other, fallacious premisses), the simple CH is assumed to
be valid.
But why is it not the case that this set is merely identical to Aleph-0, as it would
be the case in orthodox set theory? First of all we must admit that Peirce differs
from the later standard ZFC set theory by not assuming the so-called ‘Axiom of
Replacement’ saying that for every set it holds that if the elements are replaced by
something else (e.g. other sets), the result will still be a set. By this axiom, ZFC
goes beyond the countable set of cardinal numbers because we may substitute for
every number of the natural numbers the cardinal having the number in question as
index and then take the union of the sets in this set – this set will have a cardinality
exceeding any cardinal with a countable index. Peirce does in fact construct such
a set, but he now argues that the decisive interest in such a set lies in the fact that
it may be proved that this set S has properties differing from all other transfinite
sets, making it the equivalent of the very power of the continuum. The kernel of
this argumentation is the following ‘proof’ which just as little as his ‘proof’ for
CH is valid. Still, it expresses nicely which metaphysical requirements a Peircean
continuum definition must meet:
The collection of possible ways of distributing the individuals of a supermultitudinous collection, S,
into two abodes is no greater than that supermultitudinous collection, S, itself. For denoting by  the
denumerable multitude, the abnumeral multitudes are [] Exp , (Exp)2, (Exp)3, etc.510; and the
magnitude of the supermultitudinous collection is the limit of this series. It is, in short, the result of a
denumerable succession of exponential operations upon the denumerable multitude. But the magnitude
of the collection of possible ways of distributing the individuals of a collection into two abodes is
simply the result of an exponential operation upon the magnitude of the collection itself. Hence the
magnitude of the ways of distributing the individuals of a supermultitudinous collection into two abodes
is obtained by adding one more to the collection of exponential operations successively performed upon
the denumerable multitude. But this collection of operations being denumerable, the addition of one

400
A P P E N D I X
operation to it does not increase the magnitude. Hence, the collection of possible ways of distributing
the individuals of a supermultitudinous collection into two abodes equals that collection itself.
But we have already seen that the multitude of ways of distributing the individuals of a collection of
distinct individuals into two abodes exceeds the collection itself. Hence, it follows that a supermulti-
tudinous collection is so great that its individuals are no longer distinct from one another. (86–87, our
italics)
Peirce here argues that the set S is larger than any transfinite number and conse-
quently makes its single elements lose individuality. In the above quote we have
emphasized the two decisive steps in the argumentation. In the period immediately
before the first step we find the correct claim that the power of a set of subsets
of a set is an exponential function of the power of the set. But after this claim,
the argumentation fails when Peirce claims that the power of S should be obtained
by adding ‘one more’ to the series of exponential operations quoted. What is that
supposed to mean? In the series ‘Exp , (Exp)2, (Exp)3, etc.’ it is already presup-
posed that it goes towards infinity; hence S will not be obtained by the ‘one more’.
It would rather require a countably infinite ordinal 0 as index for the set, as it
would be the case in standard Cantorian set theory where the series of Aleph-n’s
is followed by a series of Aleph-n’s, and so on, with no largest transfinite set
showing up. By this fallacious argumentation Peirce ‘proves’ that S has the same
power as the set of its own subsets: S = 2S, at odds with Cantor’s theorem x < 2x.
This contradiction Peirce attempts to solve – in the second step – by claiming that
this inconsistency implies that S can not at all be a set (for which x < 2x must hold).
Which kind of an entity, then, is S? S ceases to have distinct elements, because
x < 2x describes the power relation between a set and the set of possibilities for
combining its distinct elements into two sets (corresponding to its power set). ‘It
follows’, Pmirce bravely claims, but why it should be exactly the distinctness of
this definition that must be given up is not clear. It would be equally possible to
conclude that S does not exist; that S is inconsistent; that S is neither a set nor a
collection or class; that it is impossible to take out subsets from S  etc.511
No matter which construction Peirce makes of S, though, it is evident that it
suffers from exactly the same inconsistency as does Cantor’s ‘set of all numbers’
 which cannot include its own ordinal number, because the inclusion of that will
make its own power larger. Cantor saw this already in the 90s, and if Peirce realized
this he might have a sounder version of his idea of S: Cantor’s inconsistent set
of all numbers might be interpreted as referring to the fact that the continuum as
constructed by points is necessarily inconsistent.
Thus, even if Peirce’s ‘proof’ of the existence of a superpower set is thus far
from convincing, it demonstrates how he imagines the continuum conceived of
as something that transgresses any possible transfinite number referring to sets of
distinct elements. An obvious question is why Peirce is so concerned to grasp the
continuum in relation to the series of cardinal numbers when, at the same time,
he conceives of it as a ‘superpower’ beyond all of them. The ensuing presentation
answers that question. He is forced to ask the question whether S really ‘stops’ the
transfinite series, that is, whether all supermultitudinous classes will now have the
same size (‘magnitude’; Peirce must of course give up the notion of ‘multitude’

A P P E N D I X
401
here). He begins by considering a subset of S, namely finite decimal expansions, of
which he may claim that ‘all individuals which are marked each by an enumerable
collection of characters form a denumerable collection of individuals.’ (87). The
crucial feature of this claim is that the set of finite combinations is not in itself finite,
but countably infinite; this simple implication of the calculation of a power set has
an interesting implication to Peirce: ‘Any one of them or any collection of them may
be taken away without affecting the remainder: but yet there are already symptoms
of incipient cohesiveness in them, a premonition of continuity. Remember that the
multitude of grades of enumerable multitude is denumerable; and the multitude
of all the grades of multitude is no greater.’ Time and time again, Peirce seeks
an anticipation at lower levels of the transfinite hierarchy of the cohesion of the
continuum and the vanishing of the distinctness of its elements; here his focus upon
the countable infinity recurs. Peirce introduces the term ‘arithm’ to signify the set
of size levels below a certain set, so that the arithm for 0 is 0, for 1 is 1, for 2 is
2, and generally is identical with the number itself for all finite numbers. But as
there are only – to Peirce – countably many transfinite numbers, then it must be the
case that, ‘ the arithm of all higher multitudes is the same. It is the denumerable
multitude, which may be called infinity, ’ (88) (which would not be the case in
ordinary set theory where PCH is not assumed). Peirce interprets this as follows:
‘ this unity of the arithms of all the higher multitudes is the first embryon of
continuity’ (88) It is difficult to appreciate what exactly are the implications of this
claim, but Peirce makes the following explicitation:
The entire collection of those individuals that are marked by enumerable series of characters, is
denumerable. But as soon as the denumerable multitude of interpolations has been made, the collec-
tions of characters attached to the last inserted individuals are denumerable, and the collection of
individuals here is of the first abnumeral multitude. Stop it at any point you please, however early,
if all the individuals marked by enumerable series of characters are there, there is also along with
them a first abnumeral multitude of individuals marked by denumerable series of characters. They stick
together. (88)
The quote refers to the imagination of a procedure where you are on the way to
fill the set of finite numbers to the top, an infinite operation because of the infinity
of the set. Peirce then imagines – contrary to intuitionism – the termination of this
infinite series of procedures which is only marked by the fact that one all of a
sudden must use infinitely many figures in order to give the next numbers, the first
irrationals, so to speak, so that you are already in the process of construing the
next, uncountable, set, the reals. You can not fulfill the finishing of the countable
set without already implying its uncountable successor, this is Peirce’s decisive
argument making the bottom-up construction of transfinite sets presuppose the
existence of higher-level sets. It is in this way, allegedly, that the continuum is
anticipated in these sets’ ‘sticking together’: we may not terminate the construction
of Aleph-0 without already beginning on construing Aleph-1. By introducing the
operational point of view, Peirce in one sense anticipates constructivism, even if
with a totally different aim: constructivists will claim that a process involving an
infinity of operations may not be ascribed any reality; Peirce will quite on the

402
A P P E N D I X
contrary claim that when you not merely define your way ahead formalistically,
but imagine how the operations are to take place, then it is indecidable beforehand
‘when’ the construction of a transfinite set has terminated. You will first ‘discover’
this when elements of a higher set ‘come along’. You cannot have Aleph-0 without
being already fully involved with Aleph-1. The quotation marks above indicate that
the apparent psychology of this presentation should only be taken for heuristics: the
anti-psychologist Peirce will not in his interest in the character of the construction
operation refer to psychology, but only raise the question as to the criterion for the
conceivable, succesful termination of the procedure. The fact that there are no other
conceivable criteria than the appearance of higher elements from a set of the next
power then becomes the crucial argument: ‘ and before there can be any past after
the denumerable collection is all there, a first abnumeral collection must already be
there.’ (92) Peirce repeats this point in different guises over several pages without
any substantially new arguments occurring. It seems problematic to assume that the
whole of Aleph-1 is supposed to appear in the completion of Aleph-0; it must be
sufficient if one single real ‘showed up’; in which sense would this one number
presuppose the existence of whole sets of Aleph-1 power?
The argumentation might seem made with a guided hand. Elsewhere, Peirce may
suggest that it is of no importance where in the Aleph series the strange transition
to S takes place: ‘It is, however, of secondary importance at what particular place
in the series of multitudes this phenomenon occurs. It must occur somewhere ’
(NEM III, 121 n1). While continuity thus seems anticipated in arithmetics, it is the
case, conversely, that numbers as distinct entities may only express discrete order,
never size (‘magnitude’): numbers ‘cannot possibly express continuity’ (93). On
the contrary it will be the case that between a limit (e.g. ) and a series converging
onto it, any magnitude whatsoever may be interpolated. This leads back to S, for
may this ‘set’ be so interpolated? Here, the existence of S is again defended with
a fragile argument. Peirce talks about the possible interpolation of the different
‘postnumeral quantities’, that is, uncountable sets: ‘But if we suppose that all such
orders of systems of quantities have been inserted, there is no longer any room for
inserting any more. For to do so we must select some quantity to be thus isolated
in our representation. Now whatever one we take, there will always be quantities
of higher orders filling up the spaces on the two sides.’ (95) Here, the argument
for the claim that c = S comes from the infinitesimal side, form the possibility of
‘filling up’ the geometrical line. Here we hear the surprising claim that if we have
filled up the line with all Aleph-n’s, then there is room for nothing more, and thus
the whole line will be complete. But there is no precise definition of this ‘filling
up’, and the argument is not valid. It would be possible to fabricate a completely
parallel argument (satisfying constructivists!) against the existence of the reals: take
a real number, it must lie between two fractions, but no matter which divisor is
chosen for the fractions, there will be fractions with higher divisors ‘filling up’. But
what is the proof that there is no more space left?
It seems like Peirce himself realizes the fragility of his argument: the text
concludes symptomatically with a whole bunch of further arguments. The first is

A P P E N D I X
403
a Gedankenexperiment with knifes cutting the line into parts, a surprising picture
in so far as it runs counter to the whole Cantor-like tendency in the argument up
till now, having attempted to synthesize the line from a combination of elements:
‘Across a line a collection of blades may come down simultaneously, and so long
as the collection of blades is not as great that they merge into one another, owing
to their supermultitude, they will cut the line up into as great a collection of pieces
each of which will be a line, – just as completely a line as was the whole. This I
say is the intuitional idea of a line with which the synthetic geometer really works,
his virtual hypothesis whether he recognizes it or not; () cast aside all analytical
theories about lines, and looking at the matter from a synthetical point of view to
make the mental experiment and say whether it is not true that the line refuses to
be cut up into points by any discrete multitude of knifes, however great.’ (96, our
italics). This would imply that if you – the synthetic geometer – should throw away
all the analytical arguments, then this should also include the vacillating proofs of
the preceding pages trying to construct the line from the ‘merging’ and ‘welding’
of distinct entities. This you might do without if you accept the continuum as a
geometrically intuitive primitive object, on which points are mere different classes
of intersections. The number of points into which the line presumably may be cut,
is of course also taken to be S, of which Peirce gives no less than two blitz proofs:
The possible lines into which any line may be cut at one chop exceed any discrete multitude. Now the
points on a line form a collection at least as great as the collection of the possible lines into which it
can be chopped. Hence, the points of a line are supermultitudinous.
The other proof is this:
A line consists wholly of points; but in order to chop a line into points, the two ends of each piece
must unite; and to do that without shrinkage they must merge into one another. Hence the collection of
blades of the chopper must be so great that its constituent blades are no longer distinct. (97)
It is not difficult to complete this ‘proof’ which just like the first one rests on the
intuition of the line as composed of a set of small lines any of which is larger than
points. The premiss is thus that the synthetic line contains pieces of line in the
number S, not so far from what should be proved, and you need only the further
premiss that points are smaller than lines in order for the proof to be finished. The
first premiss, however, is little less problematic than is the conclusion.
It is interesting that Peirce – after all these proof attempts – return to his definition
of mathematics as the science which draws necessary conclusions from hypotheses.
It must be this idea which lies behind his claim that: ‘This I declare to be the
synthetic geometer’s hypothesis of the relation of a line to its points. But it does
not affect my argument if it be not so. It is sufficient for my main purpose that
it is a perfectly consistent hypothesis. For all I am trying to do is to elucidate
the conception of a supermultitudinous collection and show that it involves no
contradiction.’ (97, our italics) The whole of the argument is so to speak fictitious,
what Peirce wants to prove is only that a certain concept – S – is consistent – not that
it exists in any more ontological sense. Mathematical existence in this claim seems
formalistically to be reduced to consistency. After having regarded and rejected
the possibility that S’s ‘cohesiveness’ could be due to a certain tricky arrangement

404
A P P E N D I X
of its elements only, Peirce admits, before his final conclusion, that ‘There is, I
confess, a paradoxical aspect in the proposition that a collection may be so great
that its individuals lose their separate identities. But the key of that paradox will
probably ultimately be discovered to lie in some unnoticed condition in the general
hypothesis of a collection which requires the mergency of individuals.’ (100, our
italics)512
But the proof that PCH is consistent in relation to set theory (if we assumed
it could in fact be proved) is not the same as the claim that it is implied by set
theory. ‘Half’ of Cohen’s proof of CH’s indecidability in relation to ZFC set theory
consists of Gödel’s proof of its consistency in relation to ZFC set theory. Peirce
consequently only believes he has proved that PCH is not inconsistent with set
theory, and consequently he must await the appearance of a new axiom, ‘some
unnoticed condition’ in the definition of the concept of set may finally connect
the two theories – not unlike Gödel when he, 50 years later, hoped for a solution
to the CH problem by the assumption of new, abstract, and complicated axioms
concerning the concept of set which might be obtained by phenomenological, non-
formal means.
If we look at Peirce’s argumentation for S from a distance, there are several
paradoxes to be solved. We already mentioned one: Peirce’s strange interest in the
construction of the transfinite hierarchy of sets, given his explicit insistence on the
intuition of the synthetic line before any divisions – a line which it should not, then,
be necessary to create by the ‘merging’ of discrete points.
Another strange issue is the fact that given Peirce’s idea of mathematics as
the pure investigation of the implications of hypotheses, it seems peculiar he tries
to found the decisive concept in his metaphysics on a mathematical argument.
The answer to this question can only be that Peirce, in metaphysics and logic,
regards mathematics as a sort of aide, a supply of deductively valid diagrams whose
application in less hypothetical cases mathematics assumes no responsibility for.
But in that case, Peirce’s argument is metaphysical and not mathematical, and all
the mathematical argumentation only goes to show that the idea of a superpower
continuum is not inconsistent: the mathematical argument, were it valid, does not
prove S’s existence, but only its possible existence – the further verification of the
hypothesis is no mathematical issue but a case for phenomenology, logic, semiotics,
and metaphysics.
A third reason for puzzlement is the combination of similarities and differences
in relation to prominent positions in the philosophy of mathematics of the twentieth
century The idea of mathematics as the investigation of hypotheses approaches
Peirce to Hilbertian formalism; just like his unproblematic acceptance of objects
requiring infinities of operations to be constructed (which is no problem for the
formalist as long as the calculus in question may be stated in a finitist metalan-
guage) – but on the other hand, Peirce displays certain affinities with intuitionism,
partly in the synthetic aspects of his arguments for S, partly in his idea that the
generativity of transfinite cardinals must somewhere be stopped. Peirce will not be

A P P E N D I X
405
hindered in undertaking innumerably many operations, but he can not subscribe to
the idea of Aleph- many operations.
A fourth reason, finally, is the tension between his insistence that the continuum
exceeds any attempt at grasping it analytically with discrete means – and on the
other hand his claim that sufficienty large discrete sets seem to be inhabited by
germlike tendencies towards continuity, the idea that one cardinal in some sense
implies the next one – in general the idea that the transition between discontinuity
and continuity must, in itself, be continuous. We shall return to these points.
In a lecture series from 1898 which has recently been published in its entirety
under the title Reasoning and the Logic of Things (RLOT) Peirce again takes up
the definition of the continuum, now connected to his claim for the reality of
infinitesimals and the most elaborated version of his continuum metaphysics. Let
us discuss Peirce’s metaphysics of infinitesimals and the publishers’ Ken Ketner
and Hilary Putnam’s reconstruction of Peirce’s position.
I N F I N I T E S I M A L S A N D T H E S T A T U S O F M A T H E M A T I C S
In the third of the 1898 lectures, Peirce introduces his logic of relations, to which
we return below.513 We shall not here discuss Peirce’s diagrammatical notation
techniques for logic, but only take note of those ideas implying continuity and
infinitesimals. Peirce implicitly takes his point of departure in the traditional
predicate judgment ‘S is P’ which is generalized to the extent that more than one
subject may appear in it. This is well known from everyday language, as for instance
in constructions like ‘X sells Y to Z for the price of Æ’. Peirce then determines
the predicate as that structure in the construction which is left when all subjects
are replaced with empty slots. In this way the predicate outlines a relation between
a plurality of subjects, and predicates may take potentially infinitely many empty
slots to be filled with subjects. By his famous theorem of reduction, Peirce claims
that all predicates with a valency larger than three may be reduced to a combination
of predicates each of which are no more than trivalent. Trivalent predicates exist,
on the other hand, which may not be further decomposed into bivalent predicates.
The predicate in the logic of relations thus implies a more extensive generality
(and, consequently, possibility for comparison) than does the classical predicate
judgment. Now subjects may be related not only in terms of satisfying (or not)
the same predicate, but also in terms of satisfying one predicate in different slots;
appear in analogous slots in different predicates, etc. Similarity, in this respect, is
just a simple relation among many, and the concept of a class of objects defined by a
predicate is substituted with the concept of a ‘system’ defined with the interrelations
between its objects (156).
Second, it is crucial to note that to Peirce this relational logic makes possible
a tripartion of the types of signs necessary to describe these relations. First verbs
describing predicates (to which he counts adjectives, common nouns, etc.), second
demonstrative pronouns (including proper names), referring to the subjects involved

406
A P P E N D I X
in the expression, and finally logical operators (negation and conjunctions, etc., see
Chap. 1). These three classes of signs now provide the meaning, reference, and
inference, respectively, of the proposition.514 (155).
The crucial issue here with respect to the continuum is that the classes
(Peirce uses the term even if he has just argued it ought to be replaced with
‘system’) of objects referred to by propositions of the logic of relations very
often possess generality (predicates are general and subjects may be). That this
generality can only be defined by continuity forms a cornerstone of his semantic
realism.
Now he runs through, in high speed, his ‘proof’ for the supermultitudinous set S,
and then he divulges in new deliberations on the nature of the continuity of a line.
Take, he says, a circle, it is a set of points, because a particle which in every moment
contains a point, moves along the periphery and draws a line which consists only of
points in which the particle has been. This appears to be a traditional description of
the matter, but Peirce, importantly, adds that no point on this line has any distinct
identity; it is only when we single out a point on the line that it becomes distinct
from the others – because a discontinuity is then created. If we now cut the line
in this point, then the marked point has become two points. This claim, of course,
is contrary to the concept of the Dedekind cut which defines a real number (and
hence, in the classical interpretation of the arithmetical line, a point on this line)
by dividing the line in a closed and an open section (that is, one part containing its
limit point and another not so):
It has become two points. And if those two ends were joined together so as to show the place, –
they would become one single point. But if the junction ceased to have any distinguishing character,
that is any discontinuity, there would not be any distinct point there. If we could not distinguish the
junction it would not appear distinct. But the line is a mere conception. It is nothing but that which we
can show; and therefore it follows that if there were no discontinuity there would be no distinct point
there (160).
The two points are two as soon as we can distinguish them. What is at stake here
is of course not mere psychological distinction skill, the crucial thing is what can
be demonstrated with logical means. One should not be fooled, however, by the
apparent simplicity of the criterion; even if the line is only our ‘conception’, the
evidence it presents to us is not complete – cf. also Peirce’s Gödelian idea that new
axioms might settle the continuum hypothesis.
Even more counterintuitive to the present conception of the line is the following
claim: one can remove one point from the end of the line segment, but still an end
point will remain – as against standard arithmetic, according to which we are left
with an open interval with no limit point included in the line if we remove the limit
point from a closed interval. As is evident, Peirce’s conception of the geometrical
line is very different from the arithmetical line:
‘The end of a line might burst into any discrete multitude of points whatever, and they would all have
been one point before the explosion. Points might fly off, in multitude and order like all the real irrational
quantities from 0 to 1; and they might all have had that order of succession in the line and yet all have
been at one point.’(160)

A P P E N D I X
407
Points in an amount corresponding to the real numbers may be removed in an
ordered series from one single point on the line. As is evident, this conception of
the line also implies a completely different conception of the point which is close to
the Aristotelian idea of the line being primitive and the point being the addition of
a discontinuity to the line. It goes even further than Aristotle’s idea which does not
contain any idea of a point being able to contain other points, let alone an ordered
series of points.
The editors of Reasoning and the Logic of Things, Ketner and Putnam, have
added to their preface an attempt to construe a consistent hypothesis from Peirce’s
doctrine of point and line. They observe that none less than Gödel remarked that
it seems intuitively correct (as against the Dedekind cut) to assume that if the
geometrical line is cut into two parts, the result will be two symmetrical pieces
(personal communication to Putnam, 38n). The division of the line should not be
conceived of as the mapping of sets of points (because the line is no set of points),
but quite on the contrary as an irreducibly geometrical transformation, and they
propose that Peirce’s point of view may be expressed in analogy with non-standard
analysis which, like him, reintroduces infinitesimals in analysis. Thus, when Peirce
claims that the infinite series of points ‘are’ one single point, then this is no identity
claim, but rather a mereological use of ‘to be’ so that it should be read as saying
that the point ‘consists of’ of many points, just like in the proposition ‘India and
Pakistan were one country in 1940’. Hence, Peirce’s conception of the point implies
that the points may have parts – and transfinite reasoning, of course, parts may
have the same power as the whole they partake in.
Formalized in non-standard analysis, they continue:
 we say that two points P and Q whose distance is infinitesimal are ‘identical modulo the infinites-
imals’, and we symbolize this by using a wiggly equals sign: P ≈Q. If P is a point, the collection of all
points Q such that P ≈Q is called the monad of P.(44)
It can now be shown that every point must lie within the monad of a standard
point, and they propose that Peirce’s idea can be expressed in the following way:
his concept of ‘point’ corresponds to the concept of ‘monad’, and parts of points
corresponds to normal points. Then it becomes meaningful to say that every point
(monad) contains a set of parts (points) with the power of the reals. Given Peirce’s
identification of the power of the geometrical line with the supermultitudinous set
S, one may infer that the set of non-standard points on the line (exceeding Aleph-1)
must be vast; in Peirce’s construction of this phenomenon it does not, however,
give meaning to distinguish standard and non-standard points, respectively, because
Peirce does not share the ambition of non-standard analysis to correspond to standard
analysis. So is it, from this point of view, possible to ‘remove’ a monad from the
end of the line? Ketner and Putnam plausibly argue that this point of view must be
constructivist: by removing the monad we create a new monad of possible points;
what is removed is a ‘notion of a possibility’, and it would give no meaning to
say that we removed the whole set of points which could ever be construed in the
monad of the original point (53). We may add to Ketner and Putnam’s discussion
that Peirce has already elsewhere, in his analysis of the continuity of time (which

408
A P P E N D I X
we have already touched upon), proposed a distinction analogous to that between
monad and point, namely instant/moment. The latter has an infinitesimal extension
and hence actual reality as opposed to the former which are mere, punctual aspects
of the latter and which may be actualized or not.
Construed in this way, Peirce’s position with respect to infinitesimals is
consistent, and Ketner and Putnam may propose that Peirce’s use of the concepts
of potentiality and actuality in relation to the possible and actualized points takes
him close to Putnam’s own ‘modal logic view of set theory’515 (50): sets are not
mathematical objects in the sense that we, e.g., have the set of all real numbers516
before us, the sets are constructions which implies no more and no less than given
a certain set of operations we may construct them. In this respect – they continue –
Peirce comes close to e.g. Brouwer’s intuitionism with the crucial difference that
Brouwer would let the finitude of the human mind prohibit infinite series of opera-
tions (which implies, in turn, the sacrificing of well-known mathematical objects as
for instance the real numbers), while Peirce, given the free domain of potentiality
on the one hand and the doctrine of ‘real possibilities’ on the other, did not erect
prohibition signs of that kind. Given the potentiality of concepts, Peirce does not
refrain from assuming a set transgressing the power of any transfinite set, his S –
but this has the epistemological reason that intuition and perception always already
contains this set. The faculty of intuition thus radically exceeds what any potential,
transfinite series of operations would ever be able to accomplish.
These vast sets of points are not, actually, on the line which is not, in turn,
composed of them. As an Aristotelian, Peirce may indeed say that the points on
the line potentially are there but that they are only actualized when we perform
some operation making them distinct. It is this Aristotelian train of thought which
forms the base for Peirce’s constant link between the continuum and the concept
of potentiality – and it is this metaphysical intution which provides the motor in
Peirce’s various attempts to chart the domain of the transfinites: multitudes of ever
so great a power are distinct and hence potentially actualized while the realm of
the merely possible always remain greater than that of the actual. This is why
Peirce seeks a mathematical foundation for the point of view that the continuum
exceeds any transfinite power.517 In this way, Peirce founds his doctrine on a modal
triad: the potential, the actual, and the real. Already the whole numbers constitute
a set which we can only potentially construe completely but which in principle
would be actualisable as infinite procedures can be completed. Beyond the actual
lies, consequently, a realm which is not only potentially actualizable but, as Peirce
will put it, realizable: evolution does in fact realize continua in the shape of ‘real
possibilities’, as universals with real existence. Beyond that, on the other side,
remains the continuum in itself, which may never be actualized in toto. Ketner
and Putnam express this idea in terms of possible-world semantics: ‘ one can
never construct all possible points on the line, because there is no possible world
in which there are actually  [their Cantorian name for the size of S, fs] ‘distinct
individuals.’: ‘() What answers to our conception of a continuum is a possibility
of repeated division which can never be exhausted in any possible world, not even

A P P E N D I X
409
in a possible world in which one can complete abnumerably infinite processes.’
Also here, the two of them continue the ideas of Putnam 1967: ‘ it is not possible
for all possible sets to exist in any one world!’ (311)
T H E R E T U R N O F N O N - C O M P O S I T I O N A L I T Y
–
A P E I R C E A N
C O N T I N U U M H Y P O T H E S I S A S M E T A P H Y S I C A L P O S S I B I L I T Y ?
Putnam and Ketner’s Peirce interpretation forms part of the tendency to question
the Cantor-Dedekind interpretation of the reals which has been state of the art for
most of the twentieth century set theory and arithmetics. The force of that position
(R as an uncountable, connex set (which happens, that is true, to make discontinuous
real functions much more probable than continuous functions!)) has been to unite
arithmetics and spatiality, so that different geometrical and topological spaces can
be conceived as having Rn as their base. Thus cardinality and topology are unified
(because uncountability and connexity are identified), logic and mathematics are
unified (Salanskis 194). The continuum hypothesis is undecidable, that is true, but
this inconvenience has been neglegted and has had few consequences in practice.
The duality within formalism of pragmatism (we assume CH when needed) on the
one hand, and scepticism (in reality we know nothing about continuity to the extent
that it exceeds formalisations) on the other now gives way to a new obsession with
what Salanskis calls ‘the return of non-compositionality’. This has been evident,
inter alia, in the volume Le labyrinthe du continu which he edited (1992) with
the participation of a series of mathematicians and philosophers of mathematics.
Non-standard analysis with the return of infinitesimals, non-Cantorian set theory,
renewed interest in Gödelian Platonism, the search for new axioms in set theory –
all these tendencies might point in the direction of Peirce’s metaphysics of the
continuum, and in this section we shal briefly consider a bundle of these actual
deliberations on the status of the continuum.
The possible consistency of Peirce’s construction – despite all the blatant errors
in his attempts at appropriation of Cantorian set theory – lies first and foremost
in Cohen’s proof of the autonomy of the continuum hypothesis. By the so-called
‘forcing’ technique this proof shows that within standard ZFC set theory, the
continuum may be ascribed any cardinality you wish without this leading to
inconsistency.518 It could be added that Peirce’s idea of S has an interesting equiv-
alent in Cantor’s concept of the set of all ordinals  which he as mentioned
realized was an inconsistent concept, an ‘absolutely infinite set’. The proof of the
inconsistency of this set seems to be vaguely foreboded by Peirce in his ‘proof’
for the existence of S – the fact that the sum of the numbers preceding a given
number equals that number gives the consequence that ‘the set of all numbers’ is
inconsistent. Peirce commits the error of assuming the countable series of trans-
finite cardinals to constitute a superior limit to the series of transfinites, but apart
from that his argumentation takes the same course as the argument that ‘the set of
all numbers’ is inconsistent. We can add that Peirce certainly would not oppose
the idea that S is inconsistent. In his trivalent logic this could be interpreted as

410
A P P E N D I X
saying that claims involving elements of S have the third, undecided truth value
between truth and falsity – anticipating intuitionist logic. Precisely the infinitesimal
parts of the line are ascribed such a status by Peirce: he claims that the law of
excluded middle (implied, of course, by a two-value logic) does not hold for the
domain of the possible and particularly not for these points which are consequently
‘vague’. On the other hand, if falsity is taken to be the only source of inconsis-
tency in logic, S would yet be consistent in this (admittedly) more broad use of the
word.
All the time, certain voices from the past kept protesting against the scepticist
triumph of formalism in the twentieth century. On the one hand, the hyper-
scepticism of intuitionism connected to (psychological, it must be admitted) refer-
ences to intuition (Weyl, Brouwer), on the other hand, Gödel and his updating of
Platonism. Gödel kept insisting that the continuum had existence as an autonomous
object to be investigated. It just needed a more complicated and competent version
of set theory, obtained by the addition of new axioms, in order to be decidable.
Gödel claimed – and rightfully so – that formalism tends to overlook the fact that
there must always be extra-formal motivations for the assumption of new axioms –
and he claimed, moreover, that we have no reason to expect such motivation to
be particularly simple in every case. Against the formalist main current Gödel thus
interpreted his own famous 1931 proof, not as an indication that you had to stay
within formalisms (because it proved that every sufficiently complex formalism
makes possible true propositions which cannot be proved), but quite on the contrary
as an anti-formalist insight that formalisms are motivated from their outside. Thus,
a compuational theory of consciousness was impossible and the main task ought
to be the search for new and more ambitious axioms by an intuitive, phenomeno-
logical procedure, not a formal one. The older Gödel for the same reason took
a strong interest in Husserl and assumed that a ‘clarification of meaning which
does not proceed by logical definitions’ could take things further, for instance
by a phenomenological analysis of the concept of ‘set’519. Gödel shifted between
believing and disbelieving CH, but his Platonism remains a corrective to the extreme
formalism which will renounce any intuition at all (or better: Anschauung) access
to mathematics except the tiny subset of intuition needed to read finitist calculi
of symbols, a subset which is assumed to be fully controllable.520 Apart from
this, it remains undecidable (if we are to take formalism at face value) what a
formal calculus is in fact ‘about’. Opposed to this, Gödel’s point of view is an
ongoing questioning of formalism, to the extent that intuition – in this case the
primitive intuition of the continuum – is taken to be irreducible and the formalisms
are seen as vehicles for knowledge about intuitions, not for the extermination of
them.
In the last decades, Platonism and its claim that CH must be decidable because
mathematics is taken to have real, autonomous entities as its objects, have had a
renaissance, e.g. in Penelope Maddy’s philosophy of mathematics (Maddy 1990 and
1997) claiming a so-called physicalist Platonism. It takes its point of departure in
physicalism in much of recent American epistemology, as it is expressed e.g. in the

A P P E N D I X
411
classical Quine-Putnam position where the applicability of mathematics in physics
is the main argument for a kind of Platonism. This Platonism claims, at least, that
mathematics is not only a mental construct of ours nor empty logical formalisms
(even if Quine still clings to conventionalism). As Maddy rightly observes, this
position does not account for the validity of non-applied mathematics, neither for
the classical issue of the apparent evidence in simple mathematical intuitions. Yet,
she agrees in the demand for naturalization of mathematics, taken in the sense that
mathematics must be seen as a science on a par with other empirical sciences521, so
that a physical explication is needed to account for the mathematician’s knowledge
about his objects. This idea gained authority due to a classical paper by Benacerraf
(‘Mathematical Truth’, 1973, reprinted in Benacerraf and Putnam 1982) which
takes as its main argument against Platonism that it does not account for how it
should be possible to achieve knowledge about timeless, abstract entities without
any ‘causal power’. This idea is influenced by the ‘causal reference’-semantics of
its time claiming that reference in general would be explainable by causal influence
of the object on the utterance. This somewhat simplistic idea is taken up by Maddy
in her idea that sets may be perceived directly. In a certain sense, this is of course
correct as a Gestalt Theory claim, and in this sense it is important because it can
be argued that many sets have an objective, empirical existence. But its naïvety
relies in the fact that this claim is identified with the requirement that the objects
in question have a physical existence only, that is, a purely material existence.
Another problem is that this idea holds only for finite sets – nobody ever saw a
transfinite set, so taken at face value, such an idea might lead to strongly finitist
ideas which Maddy does not embrace. A more cautions expression might be to
say that the schematic aspect of perception which allows us ‘directly’ to see shape,
contour, number, sets, etc. of everyday perceptual objects is the same ability which
is active in the pure intuition of mathematics.522
But let us leave the physicalist part of Maddy’s Platonism in order to discuss
her insistence that realism demands of CH that it be decided.523 Her point of
departure is Cohen’s 1966 proof that CH is undecidable in ZFC. This proof basically
assumes a tension between the two methods for obtaining higher cardinals (by the
power of ever larger sets of ordinals; by the power sets of the preceding cardinals,
respectively). Cohen finds an incurable opposition between these two methods,
because exponentiality in the power set construction is always ‘stronger’ than the
generation through ordinals. Thus, Aleph-1 must be less than 2Aleph-0 – and CH
consequently false:
A point of view which the author feels may eventually come to be accepted is that CH is obviously
false  Aleph-1 is the set of countable ordinals and this is merely a special and the simplest way of
generating a higher cardinal. The set [of subsets of the natural numbers] is, in contrast, generated by
a totally new and more powerful principle, namely the Power Set Axiom. It is unreasonable to expect
that any description of a larger cardinal which attempts to build up that cardinal from ideas deriving
from the Replacement Axiom can even reach [a set of size 2Aleph-0]. Thus, [2Aleph-0] is greater than
Aleph-n, Aleph-, Aleph-, where  = Aleph-, etc. This point of view regards [the power set of the
set of natural numbers] as an incredibly rich set given to us by one bold new axiom, which can never be
approached by any piecemeal process of construction. (Cohen (1966), 151; quoted from Maddy 131)

412
A P P E N D I X
– a theory which just like many in our days considers the continuum large as
compared to Aleph-1 (unlike Gödel who most of his life did not believe in CH
neither, but tended to identify the continuum with Aleph-2). In this light, the
assumption of CH would be an unrealistic delimitation of the continuum, but the
matter may, as Maddy says, just as well be seen the other way around: that CH
ascribes to Aleph-1 an unrealistically large size. Cohen’s proof, however, paved
the ways for the attempts which have since then been made to construe a new and
better version of CH by reparing Cantor’s original version or by stating a version
making the continuum stronger than Aleph-1.
The former road takes its departure in Gödel’s first half of the indecidability
proof (the proof for CHs consistency in ZFC) which is built on a version of
the classical, iterative set theory with its axioms – but delimited in so far as
only those subsets are allowed which may be explicitly defined by predicative
formulae, that is, expressions which refer to sets already constructed. This so-called
constructible universe is called L, and Gödel’s proof thus adds a constructibility
axiom to ZFC which identifies the whole universe of set theory with the set
of merely constructible sets L, so that V = L. Gödel’s proof now demonstrates
that no contraditions may be derived from ZFC + V = L which were not already
in ZFC. But as it may be proved that CH follows from ZFC + V = L, CH can
not be disproved by ZFC. ZFC + V = L is thus a straw man built with this one
intention – but could it not be converted into a positive idea so that V = L is
taken as a new axiom which makes not only CH and GCH but also AC (so all
sets may be well-ordered) true? This solution has tempted many which find it an
attractive and even ‘natural’ solution, because constructibility may be seen as a
consequence of the very concept of ‘set’ (Keith Devlin). In this train of thought,
the set concept is interpreted in a way appealing to Peirce: intensionally (as an
explicitation of certain predicates referring to properties which, in turn, determine
the elements) instead of extensionally as defined by its elements. This solution,
however, is untenable, also for Maddy, because it goes against the fundamental,
combinatorial assumption of set theory by simply prohibiting the existence of certain
subsets.524
The other main road leading from Cohen 1966 receives Maddy’s support: to see
the continuum as stronger than Aleph-1. This strategy must thus seek new axioms
supporting such an idea, partly the different large cardinal axioms and so-called
‘dependency axioms’. Already Gödel rested his head on such axioms, and the first
of them, the axiom of inaccessible cardinals (going back to Zermelo as well as
Sierpinski and Tarski around 1930), is built on the simple intuition that all sets
which may be built from the other axioms in themselves constitute a set, on which
those very same procedures may in turn be used (Maddy 135) – by which procedure
otherwise inaccessible cardinals are reached (because of the infinity axiom is used
on already infinite sets, so to speak). This operation may now be repeated, which,
in turn, gives as a result the axioms of ‘measurable cardinals’ and ‘supercompact
cardinals’. The former assumes that there are inaccessibly many cardinals between
the inaccessible cardinals and the first measurable cardinal, and was proposed

A P P E N D I X
413
already by Ulam in 1930 and gaining support because of its promising implications
elsewhere in mathematics.
Unfortunately, it was quickly proved in 1967 (Solovay and Levy) that none of
these attempts decides CH. Axioms of ‘very large large cardinals’ led to the intro-
duction of so-called supercompact cardinals (there are measurably many measurable
cardinals below the first supercompact (SC) cardinal) which proves projective deter-
mination, and ZFC+SC were thus seen by many in the 1990s as an attractive
maximalist alternative to the minimalist ZFC+V = L solution. But the status of CH
has not yet been settled by this development:
If [CH] is true in L, a minimal environment, perhaps it is false in a maximized world of large cardinals.
There is some evidence in that direction [] But in Cantor’s favoured form - Aleph-1 = 2Aleph-0
- it remains false; the continuum isn’t of size Aleph-alpha for any alpha because it can’t be well-
ordered.(142–43)
No unanimous consequence for CH follows, and different positions among the
adherents of ZFC + SC seem to exist – this, in turn, because they do not agree
whether CH or its negation is the most restrictive claim (143). Even if no solution
thus is at hand, Maddy calls on a realist basis for research to continue, and she
does not hide that her sympathy lies with ZFC + SC. The strange thing is that this
preference in no clear way is connected to her physicalist Platonism.
Maddy is concerned with the question whether arguments for the different axioms
have inner or outer character, respectively, referring to whether the arguments are
related to the plausibility of axiom itself or whether they relate to intertheoretical
effects in relation to other parts of mathematics. She concludes that the arguments
for very grand cardinals do not fit easily into one of those groups, but rather follows
certain ‘rules of thumb’ which are – just like Gödel imagined, in fact – is connected
to basic intuitions about what the concept of set entails. These are intuitions like
the idea that the universe of sets continues to as large cardinals as possible or the
idea that the hierarchy of cardinals must contain subsets which looks alike – a sort
of generalisation of the axiom of replacement. The reason why Maddy refuses to
give these rules of thumb an ‘inner’ status goes as follows: ‘ because I think they
extend beyond anything that could plausibly be traced to an underlying perceptual,
neurological foundation.’ (141)
But this already goes for N taken as an actual infinity?! Maddy admits that the
idea that sets are formed from already existing elements and that they are formed
by combination without necessitating any explicit rules, does have an intuitive
basis, while the continuation of the hierarchy to infinity (cf. already the axiom of
infinity) and the continuation of it as far as possible, is based on the ‘methodology
of set theory’ rather than any simple intuition (ibid.). But is this methodology
without intuitive basis? It seems as if Maddy’s concept of intuition is constrained
by her physicalism to a small, strongly finitist inventory. It is indeed correct that
no sets larger than finite or, at most countably infinte sets, seem to have any
probable existence in the physical world. This gives rise to further questions: a
really stubborn physicalist would probably not find questions far upwards in higher
cardinals interesting (cf. ‘materialist’ Soviet mathematics refusing the ‘idealism’ of

414
A P P E N D I X
set theory), because they really only pertain to non-applied math? And, as Maddy
herself touches upon: the number of neurons and their interconnections in the brain
is vast but still finite: how could they (presupposing a computational theory of
consciousness which Maddy does not discuss further) give rise to representations of
the infinite? But there is no need to go so far as to the strong (even if yet undecidable)
arguments for the existence of non-computable processes in the physics of the
brain (like Roger Penrose) to find Maddy’s version of basic mathematical intuition
unsatisfactory. For it is indeed the case that a simple intuition of the continuum
exists which does not, it must be admitted, imply the assumption of actual infinity
but only refers to the continuum as a primitive phenomenon characterized by
homogeneity between its parts, lack of distinction between parts, etc. – to a large
extent corresponding to the Aristotelian notion of the continuum as potentiality.
The two Aristotelians Peirce and Thom refer, both of them, to the idea that the
givenness of continuity for intuition in some sense grants its reality. Thom: the
idea of the continuum can not be an illusion – it is intersubjectively verifiable and
it is even subject to commercial exploitation, as in cinema where we without any
problems interpret the presentation of 24 discontinuous pictures per second as the
continuity of time: ‘thus, it is an “objective” scientific fact and must, as such, be
“objectively” explained. If you do not have an immanentist theory of the continuum
in our neurophysiology, how will you explain to me the origin of the illusion!’525
Essentially the same argument may be found in Peirce who argues that continuity –
together with thirdness and argumentation – is not the privilege of the mind, because
it can be found already in nature: ‘Whatever unanalyzable element sui generis
seems to be in nature, although it be not really where it seems to be, yet must really
be [in] nature somewhere, since nothing else could have produced even the false
appearance of such an element sui generis. ()  the very fact that there seems
to be Thirdness in the world, even though it be not where it seems to be, proves
that real Thirdness must somewhere be. If the continuity of our inward and outward
sense be not real, still it proves that continuity there really is, for how else should
sense have the power of creating it?’ (‘Detached ideas continued’, 1898, NEM
IV, 344) The Peirce-Thom argument has a strong thrust against physicalists whether
they be nominalists, or, like Maddy, realists, because the core of the argument is
naturalist: basic existing ideas which can not be reduced to other ideas (such as
may unicorns, etc.) can not be naturalistically dismissed as illusions. They must
possess birthright in nature itself, for otherwise the naturalisation of epistemology
can not be pulled through  One can add, a propos set theory, that it is the primitive
idea of the continuum which gives rise to the rarely discussed premiss in CH that
c = R – that the real numbers (whichever vast cardinality they may possess) do in
fact exhaust the geometrical line – and hence, in turn, gives rise to the whole search
operation for grand grand grand cardinals, or, the other way around, a constructivist
constraint on the real numbers. From a Peircean point of view, the search for very
large cardinals could indirectly appear as a proof for continuity as a primitive
intuition, because the larger cardinals are being invoked in attempts at making CH
decidable, the more probable the inexhaustibility of the continuum seems to be.

A P P E N D I X
415
But Peirce’s rejection of identifying the continuum with the real numbers makes
him, on the other hand, immune to the possibility of CH being decided by some
new grand cardinal axiom: even the eventual identification of R with some mighty
cardinal will, from his point of view, never exhaust the intuitive continuum.
L A C K O F D I S T I N C T I O N
A further mathematical development which might support a consistent interpretation
of Peirce’s concept of the single elements’ lack of distinctness in uncountable sets is
Gregory Chaitin’s algorithmic information theory and its ‘random numbers’ which
follow from an extension of Gödel’s theorem. Chaitin defines a random number
as a number which can not be expressed in any shorter way than its own decimal
expansion. Many numbers may be written shorter than that, the integers, the rational
numbers (being expressible as fractions), but also many irrational reals, , e –
in short, all real numbers which may be expressed by some finite algorithm. The
interesting issue in Chaitin’s theory is that it can be proved that the random numbers
(unlike the non-random numbers) have the same power as the reals – so that ‘almost
all’ numbers on the arithmetic line are random. On the other hand, it can be proved
that it cannot be proved about one particular number that it is in fact random. It is
impossible, given a candidate random number, to exclude the possibility that some
subtle order in its decimal expansion might once be found, thereby making the
decimal expansion reducible to some shorter expression. This implies that random
numbers are uncomputable, they may not appear as the output of a computer (not
only because of the infinte amount of time printing would require) – they can not
be determined distinctly. In this interpretation, the random numbers as a vast subset
of the reals seems to satisfy Peirce’s demand for non-distinctness, vagueness: it is
impossible to pinpoint any single random number even if they are overwhelmingly
there.
Chaitin does not involve the continuum question, but a related argument is
presented by Harthong (cf. Salanskis, 207) who makes a distinction between simple,
programmable integers on the one hand and complicated, aleatoric integers on
the other hand. For sufficiently large natural numbers, the simple numbers are
surrounded by complicated numbers – just like standard reals are surrounded by non-
standard reals – and Harthong consequently proposes a metaphorical interpretation
of the continuum: it is like the integers viewed at a far distance: ‘Z vu de loin’!
Thus the question of the continuum is taken by him to be an irreducible scalar
problem: the same phenomenon may, in different blow-ups, be continuous and
discrete, respectively. In a philosophical bent, Harthong proposes that the duality
continuous/discontinuous (just like René Thoms idea of ‘apories fondatrices’ for
different sciences) constitutes a veritable antinomy for pure reason in the tradition
of Kant’s well-known four antinomies from Kritik der reinen Vernunft526, and that
it for that reason constitutes a question which remains necessarily unsolvable.
Salanskis sums up in his synthesizing paper which touches upon many of the
positions outlined here527 when he depicts the actual understanding of the continuum

416
A P P E N D I X
as a necessary surplus exceeding any possible description of it: ‘ what thus
appears in this set of works of non standardists continuing the Borelian tradition,
is that the continuum is some sort of ‘effect’ which results from an excess. If the
approach from the point of view of ‘de-setting’ the destiny of the Cantor-Dedekind
continuum emphasizes incommensurability, what is won on the other hand is the
attention towards the constructive and its place in the world of mathematical entities
and it makes us confront the philosophical theme of excess. The link between
those two terms seems clair: the excess engenders incommensurability, and the
distribution of incommensurability on the line adds to it the constitutive quality
of the continuum ’528 This excess appears, according to Salanskis, rather as an
indetermination within the finite (rather than the Gödelian idea, as a determination
of the finite calculus). This difference points towards Petitot’s reformulation of
Gödel’s position.
René Thom repeats, in the Salanskis volume, his conviction about the
irreducibility of the continuum, from a simple argument. The continuum is ontolog-
ically prior to discontinuities, measured by a simple criterion: X is ontologically
prior to Y, if X naturally takes Y as a predicate, but not vice versa. (This hypothesis
is interesting, by the way, to compare to Peirce’s ontological observations as to
the subject-predicate distinction.) By the application of this criterion he reaches the
observation that the continuum may easily be modfied discontinually – which in
some sense corresponds to taking it as a predicate (‘a broken continuum’) while the
other way around is impossible: a discontinuous entity or set of entities can not take
a continuous predicate without becoming in some way continuous itself (138). We
may imagine something like ‘merging points’ as an example.The sets of set theory
are like flour sacks (without sacks, because they are the result of the mind) in which
every flour particle is endowed with a label, Thom sarcastically says. Instead he
refers to an Aristotelian space characterised by total qualitative homogeneity where
‘rien n’y est identifiable’ (141) as a paradigm for the continuum. The points, then,
could be derived only secondarily by taking Aristotelian chora, places, and letting
them shrink to zero size. Generally, discontinuities are introduced in the continuum
by cuts. Even non-standard analysis is judged too rigid in its insistence to stay within
the confines of set theory where the continuum is supposed to be the result of an
arithmetical derivation process. Thom hints at the possibility that richer classes of
irrationals may be defined and ends up with a promising Gödelian-style hint: maybe
the concept of point has not yet revealed all its secrecies for us. We are tempted
to believe that Thom has up his sleeve a more or less vague idea that the point in
some yet unknown way will appear able to demonstrate its continuous affinities.
We shall return to Thom’s deliberations on the continuum and the subject-predicate
calculus.
The most detailed analysis of the continuum in Salanskis’ volume is undertaken
by Thom’s disciple Jean Petitot529 who, at the same time, makes a plaidoyer for
a Kantian-transcendental rehabilitation of Gödel’s Platonism. Petitot’s point of
departure is the observation of a strange duplicity, a so-called ‘bimodality’ regarding
the status of the continuum in mathematics and physics, respectively, as critically

A P P E N D I X
417
construed objectivities. While the continuum in mathematics has the status of
‘meaning’, as a thing-in-itself and consequently is endowed with the inaccessibility
of the noumenon as a mere regulative idea, the continuum in physics has the status
of an unexplained empirical phenomenon appearing in the sensuous intuition –
logically anterior to the constitution of a physical objectivity by the transcendental-
aesthetical determination of the status of form and the development of physical
concepts therein by means of schematisms. Here, the Ding an sich of physics on
the one hand becomes the ‘inner substance’ of matter, and, on the other, it refers to
forms more complicated than those which mechanical physical objectivity governs:
phenomena of self-organisation and related morphological phenomena. Petitot’s
idea now is that this constitutive duality between mathematical inaccessibility and
physical givenness is what gives rise to the constantly diverging interpretations of
the continuum. He thus separates 4 interpretations:
1. (Neo-)Aristotelian ideas of the continuum as primitive phenomenological
intuition, characterized by the merging of parts and by the merely potential
infinite point sets which may, in turn, be realised herein. This position evidently
encompasses Thom and Peirce, and, in addition to them, Brentano, Stumpf,
Husserl, Weyl, Poincaré, Gestalt Theory – they all chose different ways of inter-
preting this basic status of the continuum. Brentano, Poincaré, and the gestaltists
have a tendendy to psychologize it (and thus make of it a sort of necessary
illusion), while Peirce, Husserl, Weyl accordingly should phenomenologize
it. Naturally it is correct that the latter will refuse a psychologisation of the
continuum, and Peirce and Thom can, as we saw above, directly use basically
the same argument in this refusal530, but the question is whether it is correct
to make Peirce a phenomenologist as opposed to Thom. As we have seen,
the continuum has a basic ontological status in Peirce, and Thom’s and his
positions rather seem very close. Husserl of course takes the intuitive plurality
af continuous morphologies – ‘inexakte Essensen’ – to be irreducible, but also
as a fact distinct from scientific, purely formal symbolization so that there is
no direct road from the former to the latter.
2. A second position is the continuum as a case of actual infinity given in intuition;
this includes Kant, Neo-Kantians, Veronese and Salanskis.
3. A third interpretation is the positivist-eliminativist in Carnap and nowadays
Hartry Field who conceive of the continuum as a purely physical phenomenon.
4. A fourth interpretation is Gödel’s who as already mentioned regards it as
possible to grasp the continuum – including its inexhaustibility and poten-
tiality – by set theoretical tools, if they are enlarged with suitable stronger
axioms. To this, it must be added, despite Petitot’s placing of Gödel in ‘the
opposite end of the spectrum’ (246) that he, as already mentioned, stick to a
phenomenologically primitive intuition as a prerequisite to the formalizations
of set theory. Gödel’s position has, of course, appeared like a constant thorn
in the flesh on Hilbertians taking further Hilbert’s program (e.g. Feferman).
Feferman has approached the problem via his idea of a ‘reverse mathematics’
(250) which, given a theorem, seeks which axioms will be sufficient to prove

418
A P P E N D I X
that theorem – an abductive method which Petitot praises as ‘deflationist’ and
highly anti-Platonist. Thus is indeed the intention behind Feferman’s argument,
but the question remains whether this procedure is necessarily anti-Platonist.
Gödel’s own idea (based on CH as a theorem from which to search which
axioms may prove or disprove it) has exactly the same reverse methodology,
even if, admittedly, other expectations. We can not here go into Feferman’s
technical fight with Gödel: the decisive thing is that he sticks to the idea that
the power set construction (P(x) = 2x) is well-defined for all sets – whereas
Feferman claims that this Platonism is medieval and untenable, because CH is
essentially undecidable and thus will remain unsolved forever.
Petitot’s solution is here – as so often – to seek a middle way between the two
extremes: he wants to keep Gödel’s Platonism equipped with a criticist, transcen-
dental basis which will, on the other hand, agree with Feferman in the principal
indecidability of CH (not only in relation to ZFC). Petitot here argues on the basis
of a discussion (235) of the status of the concept of mathematical existence. Either
this concept is formalistically interpreted as referring solely to true expressions
involving existential quantifiers – or it is interpreted as referring to something extra-
mathematical (that is, something outside of the symbolic calculus). But the former
case is unsatisfactory because it is possible to reduce existential quantifiers by means
of alternative logics and the introduction of sufficiently many ideal elements (and
also, supposedly, also because this idea suffers from the constant Hilbertian problem
that a consequent ‘formale Redeweise’ exterminates any appeal to intuition). The
latter possibility is also unsatisfactory, however, because it gives the continuum the
status of an object where instead it must be maintained as a Kantian ‘pure intuition’,
that is, determined by mathematical idealities. This interpretation contributes a
classically Kantian duplicity: the continuum may be determined as objective reality –
at the same time as keeping its character of being a ‘horizon-object’ escaping
any complete determination. This Kantian have-your-cake-and-eat-it-too is made
possible in Petitot by the interpretation of mathematical existence as derivative
from a transcendental constitution of objectivity: ‘The transcendental Platonism is
‘negative’ and not ‘positive’ like the ontologically vulgar Platonism. It permits to
invert the philosophical claims of anti-Platonism and to transform the phenomena of
incompleteness and indecidability into arguments supporting Platonism.’531 These
apparently depressing results should, quite on the contrary, be taken as the very
signs that objectivity is no ontology; they are so to speak in themselves Platonist
properties, not of the object, but of the determination of the object.
Petitot runs through the series of different proposals for additional axioms which
we have already mentioned, e.g. the axiom of measurable cardinals (building on the
intuition – a sort of set theory analogue to the cosmological principle in astronomy –
that the continuum must be ‘equally dense’ on all scales. Just like the domain of the
transfinites is inaccessible from finite side and requires the axiom of infinity, there
must be greater numbers inaccessible from the transfinites, etc.). An extension of
these axioms lead to the axiom of determinacy which prohibits that certain compli-
cated sets may be ‘forced’ into being interpreted as projective532. The toughest

A P P E N D I X
419
version is the axiom of complete determination (AD) which claims that any subset
of R is determined which makes CH false because R may now be ascribed very
large cardinalities (even if there still will be no transfinite number between Aleph-0
and 2Aleph−0), because R can no longer be well-ordered (AD excludes AC). Other,
weaker versions of AD only applies this demand on projective sets and allows the
well-known ‘pathological’ sets associated with AC to unfold in the non-determined
parts of the set universe. This construction, according to Petitot, contains a suffi-
cient realisation of our intuitive idea of the continuum (258). This is what made
Gödel insist that ZFC does not contain a satisfying description of the objects of
mathematics which transgress the abilities of formal systems – and to insist on
the objectivity of mathematics, our intuitive access to it prior to formalisms, a
non-computational theory of consciousness, and a philosophy critical against pure
conventionalism, scepticism, syntax without semantics, antiplatonism, etc. These
Gödelian standards are now reinterpreted by Petitot in a criticist way as referring to
intuition, transcendental aesthetics and the synthetic a priori judgments as a charting
of it – that is, as referring to the fact that the intuition of the continuum might be
ineradicable but is, on the other hand, inexhaustible by formal descriptions.
At this point, Petitot’s new foundation for Platonism seems to support a renais-
sance for Peirce’s intuitions of the continuum as being at the same time primitive and
inexhaustible. Yet, Petitot’s position involves some open issues. In his presentation
of the ‘bimodality’ of the continuum it seems strange – also given his emphasis
on intuition in relation to Gödel – that the mathematical intuition of the continuum
is relegated to thing-in-itself while the form of manifestation of mathematical
phenomena is a pure, Hilbertian ‘littéralité symbolique’, and the form of objectivity
of mathematics correlatively purely symbolic. It seems as if Petitot in a Hilbertian
craze relegates intuition out of mathematics as such, which symptomatically gives
rise to the fact that no schematisms to production of synthetic a priori judgments are
needed here: mathematics is through and through analytic. Even if it might indeed
be plausible to relegate the continuum as object to the Ding-an-sich position, it
hardly seems reasonable that its ‘density’, ‘homogeneity’, ‘mergedness’, ‘poten-
tiality’ and so on are not represented as primitive phenomena for pure intuition.
Maybe this development in Petitot’s thought is connected to the conclusion of the
paper where he – and plausibly so – supports Roger Penrose’s claim that the non-
computationality of consciousness (Gödel) for a naturalist viewpoint must neces-
sarily lead to the claim that parts of physics are non-computational. This deep idea –
and the research program connected to it regarding a non-computational physics of
the mind, maybe even implying a Penrosean revolution in quantum mechanics –
leads Petitot to the strange claim that ‘Obviously, the riddle of pure intuition remains
unsolved, that is, of how we are affected by the outside. This problem is not first of
all mathematical, but physical and cognitive.’533 Penrose’s argument certainly leads
to the assumption of a physical and empirical foundation of consciousness – but
this refers to empirical consciousness, to which pure intuition could hardly be taken
to belong. Does Petitot here commit an advanced version of the classical mistake of
identifying the empirical and the transcendental subject to the disfavor of the latter?

420
A P P E N D I X
In the transcendental realm seems to remain only Hilbertian finitism, while all the
questions regarding intuition may be thrown to the lions of empirical cognitive
research. Even if it may be correct, as Petitot adds, that Kant vaguely anticipated
such points of view in his Opus postumum, when his idea of a ‘phenomenon of the
phenomenon’ in that work refers to a non-mechanical and non-atomistic physics,
then this as yet remains a speculative idea and no empirical physical result. Should
one really take the consequence of this unhappy partition between a Hilbertian
finitist metamathematics referring only to computational symbol strings on the one
hand and an vague ungraspable ‘meaning’ open to empirical cognitive science only,
then it might amount to something like a resurrection of parts of that ‘transcendental
Jalta’ which Petitot has himself bravely spent much of his carreer demolishing.534
Petitot’s hasty naturalisation of pure intuition probably must be seen as an insis-
tence that it is, naturally, natural and indeed highly interesting to investigate the
way any single one of the Kantian faculties are implemented in empirical subjects –
without thereby forgetting that such an ambitious piece of psychology will still
remain a special science referring to a regional objectivity, in turn to be grasped
by transcendental tools (among them the ineradicable pure intuition itself with its
inventarium of Hilbertian finitist tools as well as primitive, pre-combinatorial and
pre-constructive intuitions about the continuum.)
Still, Petitot’s delicate distinction between the continuum as thing-in-itself on
the one hand and mathematical formalizations on the other (whether they involve
Hilbertian symbolisms only or richer representations) forms a strong parallel
to Peirce’s version of an Aristotelian continuum. Peirce’s interpretation of the
continuum in terms of possibilities (firstness) and ‘real possibilities’ (thirdness)
indeed places it at a distance from any finite actualization whatsoever.
To sum up, we may say that various actual mathematical and philosophical
discussions of the continuum support the reactualization of a version of Peirce’s
continuum doctrine. The set theoretical definitions of supermultitudinous set S and
the search for its exact place in the hierarchy of cardinals must given up, while
the very idea of the continuum as a basic intuition equipped with a potentiality
exceeding any formal attempt at actualization is preserved. Moreover, the actual
initiatives seem to take further Peirce’s intution that even if set theory may not
exhaust the continuum, then it may indirectly depict it, to the extent that different
formalisation attempts in some way or other display the ‘indistinctness’ which is
a crucial property of that intuition. This goes for e.g. the indecidability of generic
subsets of reals even in R (Chaitin, Harthong), it goes for the ‘halo’ of points
in non-standard analysis (Robinson, Harthong), it goes for the different categories
of ‘inaccessibility’ regarding the axioms of ‘large cardinals’, it also goes for the
‘ungovernable’ sets which the axioms of partial determination allow for (and which
also Chaitin refers to when he points to the fact that there is no winning strategy in
the even-uneven game), it goes for the determination of the continuum as ‘excess’,
referring to the fundamental status of incommensurability in all reasoning about the
continuum (Salanskis), it goes for the arguments for the ontological anteriority of
continuity in relation to discontinuities, connected to an ontological interpretation

A P P E N D I X
421
of any predicate calculus (Thom), and it finally goes for the criticist relativisation
of Gödel’s Platonism which makes CH’s apparent indecidability to an argument for
a Platonist idea of the continuum rather than the opposite (Petitot).
P E I R C E A S P H I L O S O P H E R O F M A T H E M A T I C S
Given that Peirce’s position as reconstructed by Putnam and interpreted within
the framework of his own (partly) intuitionist logic is consistent, we may ask the
anachronistic question: to which position in the philosophy of mathematics would
it belong? We have already mentioned Kurt Gödel whose controversial philosophy
of mathematics is apt to put Peirce’s position into profile. The implication of
Gödel’s 1931 proof – proving the incompleteness of any logical system which
contains finite arithmetic – has very often been taken to constitute the definitive
farewell to Platonism – the idea that the objects of mathematics have some sort
of independent existence which our mathematical operations serve to reveal –
with the further formalist implication that mathematics must now rely upon the
tentative experiment with different axiom sets which remain our constructions,
without any claim to referring to some ideal world.535 Against this consequence,
Gödel took his incompleteness proof to show that formal methods might never make
mathematics complete, and that this fact must force mathematics to seek refuge in
non-formal, phenomenological methods able to clarify the abstract content of our
intuitive assumptions and thereby lead to new axioms which might make some of
the indecidable axioms (AC, CH, etc.) decidable. Thus he tended to regard AC as
true and CH false (so that 2Aleph-0th = Aleph-2 – even if he changed to the opposite
viewpoint late in life.)
Gödel is thus in opposition to formalism and Hilbertian finitism, claiming that
proofs may be obtained by symbolic calculi alone and let intuition about mathe-
matical objects remain on the metamathematical level where axioms are selected and
proofs interpreted – and he is also, on the other hand, in opposition to intuitionism
with its very tough interpretation of human finitude tending towards psychologism
and, in many cases, towards constructivism prohibiting infinite operations and the
principle of excluded middle.
Many aspects of Peirce’s philosophy of mathematics seem to make him quite
the opposite of Gödel: Peirce’s constructivism implies that he does not regard the
objects given in mathematical intuition (the line, for instance) as being exhaustible
by operations, so that the actually construed always exists within a modal horizon of
possibilities. His insistence, moreover, close to formalism, that we are free to choose
widely different procedures, each of them consistent, but not mutually consistent,
within this field of possibility (cf. his obsession with non-Euclidean geometries)
which might seem to give him a MacLanean affinity. Still, we find other respects in
which Peirce may express himself as a through-and-through mathematical Platonist,
just like he, in analogy to Gödel, may expect CH to be settled by future axioms –
all in all the idea that he sees the issue of the reality of mathematics as a question
which may be settled with metaphysical means. How is this strange knot to be

422
A P P E N D I X
untied? Let us consider one of the cases where Peirce declares himself Platonist. He
observes an ellipsis drawn on a blackboard as a continuous figure, ‘inheriting’ its
continuity form the plane on which it is drawn. Its continuity is actualised due to its
potentially infinite set of actual tangents governed by that habit which constitutes
the ellipsis. Then he claims:
Many such reacting systems may spring up in the original continuum; and each of these may itself act
as first line from which a larger system may be built in which it in turn will merge its individuality.
At the same time all this, be it remembered, is not of the order of the existing universe, but is
merely a Platonic world, of which we are, therefore, to conceive that there are many, both coördinated
and subordinated to one another; until finally out of one of these Platonic worlds is differentiated the
particular actual universe of existence in which we happen to be. (R&LOT 1898, 263)
Here, we are close to Peirce’s cosmology where the undifferentiated continuum
appears as a sort of ever-creative Ur-cosmos, the beginning of everything. Here we
find a surprising chain of cosmic development:
Continuum →many Platonic worlds →one Platonic world →the particular actual universe
We will not here discuss this extravagant onto-cosmological claim as a proposition
referring to an real genetic developing process, but restrict us to discussing its
implication in philosophy of mathematics, as a series of presupposition relations.
Mathematics, to Peirce, is no science of actuality, its domain is the iconic field,
formally apprehended, its point of departure hypotheses, and its task is to draw
necessary conclusions from them. No formalist would disagree. Peirce and the
formalist split, however, when Peirce’s idea of ‘many Platonic worlds’ is taken to
imply that all competing consistent axiom system have a Platonic real character,
they are not only symbolic nor human constructs from which we can demand no
further reality. Quite on the contrary, different axiom systems so to speak map
a series of different, possible Platonic worlds, and the role of mathematics is to
cover this field of possibility. ‘The particular actual universe’ as an object must of
course be covered by different empirical special scientists – what will happen, then,
with ‘the one Platonic world’? It is investigated by applied mathematics, not in the
special sciences, however, but in metaphysics. The import of mathematics in various
special sciences guarantees the validity of their deductive schemata and diagrams
and thus their generality beyond the always finite field of particular empirical
observations. It is those very empirical observations, on the other hand, which
investigates which one combination of the possible Platonic worlds we actually
live in. This is probably why Peirce may seek to let metaphysical considerations
decide CH: mathematics may supply many different consistent systems, they are
merely hypothetical – what is decisive is what metaphysics, in the Kantian way
built on logic, as a real science will chose in the mathematical candy store.536
As against Gödel, Peirce would (probably) support formalists and MacLaneists:
there are several different axiom systems for set theory, and we can not from
consistency alone decide which of them is mathematically correct – being consistent
they are equally correct. But against formalists, on the other hand, Peirce would
say: all these different systems have equal objective Platonic reality – they are true

A P P E N D I X
423
investigations in the domain of the possible and thus not only (MacLane) ‘correct’.
As regards the role of intuition, Peirce would agree with Gödel and intutionists,
each of which will claim intuition’s role to be irreducible, and against the formalist
tendency to strong reduction or even elimination of intuition. Peirce would also
agree in the intuitionists’ skepticism towards the law of the excluded middle, and
he even counts as an important forerunner to their doctrine in his characterization
of firstness and thirdness, as not obeying the law of contradiction and the law of
excluded middle, respectively. But against (at least) the constructivist aspect of
intuitionism, Peirce will argue against the idea that human finitude must constrain
us to prohibit infinite operations537 – here he would rather agree with Gödel that
intuition is nothing simply given but something which must be investigated further
with phenomenological means – diagrammatical reasoning – and potentially with
new formalist results as its consequence. Even if we are finite beings, our finitude
is indefinite, because its exact limits are not given and will only be clearer from
ongoing research.
This will also further clarify Peirce’s idea of the continuum. Its basic motivation
is metaphysical; it comes from the generality of universals in the logic of relations.
It comes from the basic fact that predicates do not possess any directives for which
existing objects they hold for. Thus, they are potentially valid for an inexhaustible
continuum of possible subjects. This is why any extensional semantics trying to
define the property expressed by the predicate by the existing subjects possessing
the property, is impossible, because these subjects may not be listed, not even in any
possible world. This Aristotelian universalism whose special Scotist background
in Peirce we covered in Chap. 2 becomes the motivation for his metaphysical
continuism, and mathematics becomes the formal apparatus to investigate it. Peirce’s
realism with respect to universals is thus the decisive basis for his continuity
doctrine: universals are would-be’s, and such phenomena may be described only
as general continua of possible events. The competing Platonic worlds which are
mapped by mathematics grow out of an original continuity which eo ipso is given
before even the mathematics supermarket of competing sets of hypotheses. Mathe-
matics thus must be continuist; even if it possesses its full rights, even duty, to
investigate discontinuous hypotheses, then it is a metaphysical premiss that they
may only be understood on the background of a more encompassing continuity. This
is due to metaphysics – which given its systematic place in Peirce’s encyclopaedia
is restricted to deal with general properties of this world (and thus much more
constrained than mathematics). But it is also due to that much more encompassing
metaphysics which is not explicitly called by that name in Peirce, but which appears
in the very shaping of Peirce’s encyclopaedic architectonics, and in which mathe-
matics is first science, dealing with a continuum of pure possibilities.538

NOTES
1 References to Peirce and Husserl are in much-used cases abbreviated (like EPII or LU) – key to
abbreviations is in the bibliography. As to Peirce’s work, references are to the Writings and Essential
Peirce when possible. If the same texts appear also in the older Collected Papers, references to that
edition are given immediately afterwards. In many cases, though, reference is possible only to Collected
Papers. In both cases, references to that work follow normal procedure: volume number followed by
paragraph number (like 3.445).
2 Lakoff and Nuñez (2003) has a similar point in investigating the metaphors and blendings used to
obtain central mathematical results – their book considerably adds to our understanding of how embodied
beings may get in touch with mathematical truths by means of the abilities charted in the cognitive
semantics tradition. I do not agree, though, in their jump from this epistemological investigation and
to reductionist ontological claims that mathematical objects simply are nothing but the result of such
mapping processes (rather than independent objectivities investigated by such processes). This seems
like a confusion of Genesis and Geltung, origin and validity, and thus reawakens that psychologism
which both Peirce and Husserl were out to bury.
3 The art historian W.J.T. Mitchell has, on a couple of occasions, used the word ‘diagrammatology’ in
a sense not wholly unlike my own, based on the plausible idea that our access to literary (and other)
form takes place by means of ‘ “sensible” and “spatial” constructs’. Mitchell first used it in a small
debate article (W.J.T. Mitchell 1981): ‘Diagrammatology’, in Critical Inquiry, Spring 1981, Vol. 7, nr. 3,
622–33, responding to Leon Surette’s critique of his own paper ‘Spatial Form in Literature’) – here, he
poses the question: ‘If we cannot get at form except through the mediation of things like diagrams, do we
not then need something like a diagrammatology, a systematic study of the way that relationships among
elements are represented and interpreted by graphic constructions’ (623). More recently, he has taken up
the notion again in an internet interview (O.N.C.Wang 1997) ‘The Last Formalist, or W.J.T. Mitchell as
Romantic Dinosaur’, Interview with Mitchell by O.N.C. Wang, in Romantic Circles Praxis Series, Series
Editors: Orrin N. C. Wang and John Morillo (http://www.rc.umd.edu/praxis/mitchell/mitch-about.html)
which does little more than refer back to the earlier, ‘strange, little article’.
4 With diagrammatology in general as its subject, this book does not contain analyses of particular
diagrammatic representation systems – however important this subject indeed is. Peirce’s general doctrine
of diagrams developed in the years after the turn of the century is motivated, to a large extent, in
his parallel development of existential graphs. The results of these developments, Alpha-, Beta-, and
Gamma-graphs for logic representation are thus discussed here only in the context of constituting an
important part of the specific material from which Peirce’s general diagram doctrine is developed.
5 Quote from the presentation of a planned work with the title The Principles of Philosophy: or, Logic,
Physics, and Psychics, considered as a unity, in the Light of the Nineteenth Century, c. 1893; the
CP bibliography Vol. 8, 283.
6 I originally planned to open this book with a thorough chapter connecting Peirce’s mathematical
attempts at understanding the continuum with his scattered outlines of a continuity metaphysics. It was,
however, judged too harsh as a starting point which might dissuade too many otherwise interested readers
from continuing – and to some extent also wildleading in relation to the overall diagrammatological aim
of the book. A more detailed discussion of these issues may now be found in this book’s Appendix – the
curious reader is encouraged to continue there. Further discussion of Peirce’s continuity concept may
be found in Parker 1998.
7 For an actual elaboration on Peircean knowledge in the limit, see Hendricks 2001.
8 Yet, one time Peirce might refer to Poncelet when talking about his continuity principle – namely in a
prospect for a book never written about nineteenth century ideas (in the bibliography of CP, Vol. 8, 283).
425

426
N O T E S
These ideas embody the principle of continuity, and among them is listed ‘modern mathematics and
its imaginaries’. This might refer to Poncelet whose generalizing interpretation of geometrical figurae
allowed them to refer not only to possibilities present but also possibilities absent (thus, the figure of
two crossing lines might refer to all such different crossings, but also to the case of the two lines being
parallel, that is, crossing at a point in infinity, cf. Greaves 2002, 46–47). This is, in fact, Poncelet’s
continuity principle – that what holds for one figure, also holds for continuous deformations of it – and
it seems likely that Peirce’s principle is influenced by him, the more so because of the evident relevance
of such general figure interpretation for Peirce’s diagram doctrine.
9 Peirce’s conception of the system of sciences is in constant development. Here, we stick to the
relatively elaborated versions which he crafts after the turn of the century, especially the 1902 Carnegie
application (MS CSP L75, i NEM IV and LCS, Joseph Ransdell’s synthesis of L75), ‘A Detailed
Classification of the Sciences’ from ‘Minute Logic’, 1902 (EPII, 115ff; 1.203ff) and ‘Syllabus’ from
1903 (EPII, 258ff; 1. 180ff).
10 Peirce takes the term ‘Grammatica speculativa’ after a treatize ascribed to Duns Scotus (properly
written by Thomas of Erfurt which Peirce was then in no position to know), meaning ‘mirroring
grammar’, that is, a grammar mirroring metaphysics. Hence its connection to epistemology: ‘Kant,
who first raised these questions to prominence, called this doctrine transcendentale Elementarlehre, and
made it a large part of his Critic of the Pure Reason. But the Grammatica Speculativa of Scotus is an
earlier and interesting attempt. The common German word is Erkenntnistheorie, sometimes translated
Epistemology.’ (‘Minute Logic’, 1902, 2.206) Thus, in Peirce semiotics and epistemology are generally
two sides of the same coin.
11 As Thirdnesses, teleologies are naturally general, vague, variable and bundle-creating (‘Minute Logic’,
1902, EPII, 118ff; 1.206–7), and we must not expect sharp, but only provisional, fallible (but gradually
improving) demarcations between the sciences.
12 Cf. Parker 1992, 67.
13 Short (2004) argues that the sign theory of the early Peirce had the consequence of making of
the concrete object a bundle of qualities only (much like the trope-bundles in present discussions),
necessitating him in 1885 to add the Scotist idea of ‘haecceitas’, ‘thisness’ and the corresponding sign
type of indices, in order to grasp actual existence without giving up the idea of the particular as not
fully determined.
14 In Peirce’s theory of perception, perceptual judgments form a borderline case of judgments because
they, as a rule, and unlike other judgments, are beyond conscious control. They judge on preceding
sensory ‘percepts’ to which we have no direct access but which must be postulated as the matter of
perceptual judgments – but the generality revealed in perceptual judgments must inhere already in these
percepts even if they are not propositional in structure.
15 Even if the phenomenological categories are logically anterior to logic, they have, in Peirce, been
discovered through logic, by generalizing abstraction from logical relations (in the three categories,
it is easy to recognize the properties of predicate (1), subject (2), and copula (3)). But here Peirce
separates what the theory of science of our days would call context of discovery from context of
justification.
16 ‘The acquiring [of] a habit is nothing but an objective generalization taking place in time. It is the
fundamental logical law in course of realization. When I call it objective, I do not mean to say that
there really is any difference between the objective and the subjective, except that the subjective is
less developed and as yet less generalized. It is only a false word which I insert because after all we
cannot make ourselves understood if we merely say what we mean.’ (‘Abstract of 8 lectures’, undated,
NEM IV, 140)
17 A tautology or a petitio principii, it might be critically argued?
18 The quotes are from ‘Abstracts of 8 lectures’, Robin-nr. 942 which is undated. Clearly, it is a rather
late text, in any case later than ‘Law of Mind’(1892), and probably also later than the ‘Reasoning and
the Logic of Things’ series (1898).
19 This is, in fact, an interpretation of the Kantian doctrine of human finitude: we are finite beings
because we do not possess intellectual intuition. Being bound to sensory experience, we must organize
this in different ways. This finitude is here seen as a result of the fact that sensory experience is limited to

N O T E S
427
certain contingently constrained senses which defines what we may imagine in intuition. As a contrast,
we might imagine a god who has the ability of sensing in the whole continuum of qualities.
20 This idea, due to the attempted definition of Firstness as that whose constituents are independent of
anything else, evidently runs counter to Peirce’s insistence on non-distinctiveness as basic property in
continua. It seems like Peirce’s determination of Firstness qualities as vague is a compromise between
these two ideas.
21 In Peirces evolutionism, he even ventures the hypothesis that Thirdness is growing as a tendency
towards the appearance of still more correlations between still more Secondness events. Thus the
relation between the three categories as presented here may be given two different interpretations.
One is structural, picturing the atemporal relation between the three. Another is temporal, supposing
that Firstness is also first in a temporal sense, so that the growth of Secondness and Thirdness are
cosmological processes empirically taking place. Here, we stick to the former interpretation; it seems
uncertain whether evolutionism prospers from the attempt at rendering it in these categories. Cf. the
discussion in the biosemiotics section.
22 The difference between ordinary modern logical use of PC and PEM, referring to propositional logic,
and Peirce’s use, referring to contradictory predicates within propositions, has only recently been clearly
outlined in Lane (1997).
23 The rain examples pertaining to both PC and PEM are from MS CSP 678, quoted from Lane
(1999), 289.
24 Modern modal logic regarding modal propositions also has necessity not obeying standard PEM and
possibility not obeying standard PC. If N is the necessity operator, then PC holds: Not both Np and N
non-p – but not PEM: Either Np or N non-p. And, conversely, if M is the possibility operator, then
PEM holds: Either Mp or M non-p but not PC: Not both(Mp and M non-p. (Øhrstrøm and Hasle 1995,
144-145). Modal propositional logic thus give parallel results to Peirce where modality is expressed
inside the S-P proposition in first order predicate logic.
25 The semiotic description is adapted from ”Pragmaticism, Prag. [4]”, c. 1905; 5.505.
26 Peirce’s introduction of a three-value logic in 1909 has no direct connection to the analysis of generals
by means of non-appliance of PEM; it rather points to discontinuous limit cases in continua (like the
status of the borderline between two coloured areas, etc.), calling for a third, limit truth-value where
PEM does apply but is false. These issues have often been confused, but is admirably sorted out by
Lane (1999).
27 Noble (1989) argues against Murphey’s (1961) idea that it was Peirce’s new conception of the
continuum which gave rise to the doctrine of real possibilities, claiming that it was rather real possibilities
which – after the abandonment of Cantorian continuity – gave rise to Peirce’s mature idea of the
continuum as inexhaustible (170). Our contention that Peirce’s continuum concept is metaphysically
rather than mathematically motivated seems to support Noble’s account. We return to ‘real possibilities’
in Chap. 2.
28 Or, more properly, the inside of the cut appears in the mode of ‘If’. Only if the cut contains a further
cut, thus constituting a ‘Scroll’, the contents of the cut are denied.
29 We shall not go further into Peirce’s three systems of logic graphs here, just notice that Peirce’s work
on them undoubtedly formed part of his motivation for a general diagrammatology. For the time being,
a fertile research into the possibilities of the Graphs is developing, cf. Barwise and Etchemendy 1995;
Øhrstrøm 2001; Pietarinen 2006; Shin 1994, 2000; Sowa 1997, 1999, etc. In Stjernfelt 2006, I argue that
the Graphs urged Peirce to add a stronger criterion of iconicity to his operational iconicity discussed in
the present book, here called ‘optimal iconicity’ – with the motivation of shaping the graphs to give as
fitting a description of logical reality as possible.
30 Cf. Stjernfelt 2006.
31 In the letters to Lady Welby, Peirce explains that he often uses the human mind as an illustration
when introducing his sign concept, but that this is only for the sake of giving a clear example - this
reference being a ‘sop to Cerberus’, as he puts it (Dec 23, 1908, EP II, 478). This implies a theory of
mind in which consciousness is not a necessary ingredient, because the mere existence of purposive
action is sufficient to grant the presence of mind in this broad interpretation: ‘I hold that purpose,
or rather, final causation, of which purpose is the conscious modification, is the essential subject of

428
N O T E S
psychologists’ own studies; and that consciousness is a special, and not a universal, accompaniment of
mind.’ (From ‘Minute Logic’, 1902, 7.366 – for a discussion, see Skagestad 2004, 247f). It must be
added that Peirce is often very unclear as to the extension of this mind concept. Does it cover all of
Thirdness, so that all regularity in the world, every abstract object which is not a mere ens rationis, has
a mind-like character – or do purposive, mental phenomena constitute special subclasses of Thirdness?
In the more extreme versions of his cosmology, Peirce without further notice presupposes the former;
we shall stay content with assuming the latter.
32 Of course, it is an open issue whether this general definition is not too general. Does it add anything
to our knowledge of a physical process to describe it in sign terminology? I tend to say there is not, cf.
below. Even if a fact shares the same structure as a proposition, as Peirce says, it is no proposition but
rather the fundamentum in re of a proposition.
33 We might imagine, as examples, that an animal species can be conceived of as the general conclusion
to an evolutionary argument, or, to take a less teleological example: the solar system will be the
conclusion to the premises constituted by mechanical laws and a set of initial conditions. In his later
years, Peirce is rather definitive on the existence of natural arguments, even to the extent of claims like
‘ the universe is a vast representamen, a great symbol of God’s purpose, working out its conclusions
in living realities. Now every symbol must have, organically attached to it, its Indices of Reactions and
its Icons of Qualities; and such part as these reactions and these qualities play in an argument that, they
of course, play in the universe – that Universe being precisely an argument.’ (Lectures on Pragmatism,
1903, EP II, 193–4, 5.119)
34 Peirce often characterizes icons and indices as ‘degenerate’ symbols. He does not use that term about
simpler symbols (propositions, rhemes) as compared to arguments, but still he has an analogous idea: ‘If
we erase from the argument every trace of monstration of its special purpose, it becomes a proposition;
usually a copulate proposition, composed of several members whose mode of conjunction is of the
kind expressed by ‘and’; which the grammarians call a ‘copulative conjunction’. If from a propositional
symbol we erase one or more of the parts which separately denote its objects, the remainder is what is
called a rhema’ (‘New Elements’, 1904, NEM IV, 244). Here, both proposition and rheme are seen
as less complete arguments.
35 The three basic trichotomies pertaining to sign, object, and interpretant, respectively, may not be
combined freely. A subtype of a higher triad may not be combined with lower subtypes of lower tirads
(as all symbols are legisigns, e.g. symbols do not combine with quail- or sinsigns). Combination of
the nine sign aspects recorded in the trichotomies thus only yield ten combined sign types, presented
by Peirce in this triangle (‘Syllabus’, EPII. 296; 2.264) with the simplest sign upper left and the most
complex upper right:
Figure 7.

N O T E S
429
It is rather rare, however, that Peirce (nor we) need to refer to the precise type of single signs – primarily
because signs rarely occur as isolated specimens but most often appear as parts or aspects of an ongoing
reasoning process where it is sufficient to highlight the sign aspect actually scrutinized.
36 These trichotomies are the basic three among the ten trichotomies which Peirce outlined in the Lady
Welby letters during the last decade of his life. Most of the others are only sketchily outlined, but some
of them merit more study, thus the trichotomy pertaining to the nature of the dynamic objects of signs,
distinguishing‘Abstractives,Concretives,andCollectives’,thatis,roughly,universals,particulars,andsets.
37 Some authors maintain that there is a decisive difference between the triads of qualisign-sinsign-
legisign and tone-token-type, respectively. This is not the case. Both are defined, as the only triad, with
respect to subtypes of the sign itself. ‘As it is in itself, a sign is either of the nature of an appearance,
when I call it a qualisign; or secondly, it is an individual object or event, when I call it a sinsign (the
syllable sin being the first syllable of semel, simul, singular, etc.); or thirdly, it is of the nature of a
general type, when I call it a legisign.’ (Letter to Lady Welby Oct 12, 1904, 8.334 – the same distinction
as used in the ‘Syllabus’ quote given here). Two years later in the ‘Prolegomenta to an Apology for
Pragmaticism’: ‘Only one division is concerned with the nature of the Sign itself, and this I now proceed
to state.’ – and then follows the tone-token-type distinction (1906, 4.536–7). Also the CP editors in a
note claim the identity of this triad with the former. Two more years pass, and in another letter to Lady
Welby, Peirce takes up a terminological discussion. Here, he prefers the triad potisign-actisign-famisign
for the same distinction, even if toying with maintaining tone-token-type with ‘mark’ substituted for
‘tone’ (EPII, 488; 8.363–64). In all cases, though, the distinction pertains to the merely potential quality
of a sign as opposed to a singular, active sign as opposed to a lawlike sign able to exist in identical
tokens. These tokens of a type or sinsigns of a legisign are tokens/sinsigns of a ‘special type’ because
governed by a legisign (not all tokens/sinsigns are so governed), and the term proposed for them is
‘replicas’ or ‘instances’.
38 Here, Peirce’s special conception of ‘set’ as intensionally defined as a unity is important, cf. his
argument with Dedekind on this issue. If sets are defined extensionally, then the unity of a set of
sinsigns becomes a fragile notion, and types, important to grant the identity of the same sign from
one occurrence to the next, become problematic. As Randall Dipert remarks, Peirce’s refusal to accept
Dedekind’s notion of ‘echter Theil’ (proper subset) can be seen as an insistence that sets be defined
intensionally and in a certain sense constructively (Dipert 1997, 62ff). If we say P is a proper subset of
W, the crucial issue is ‘How do we know a set is a proper subset of an infinite set? [] some property
or relation must hold on some of the members of the collection, W, but not others (i.e., those in P), and
we must know this. In other words, we are back, if we choose Dedekind’s method, of requiring certain
kinds of knowledge about the internal structure of the original infinite set W.’ (62–63). In order for an
infinite set to be treated as an individual, it must be somehow intensionally defined, for otherwise we
should be able to list all its elements. Thus, Peirce’s realism and intensionalism make him insist on a
constructivist idea of sets based on the reality of rules defining such sets rather than on the actuality of
each of the elements.
39 René Thom has exactly the same argument: to say that a sign is a mere ‘flatus vocis’ begs the
question, for how could a mere blow of air be absolutely identical from one occasion to the next without
assuming realism of that sign expression and thus realism about universals?
40 Douglas Hofstadter has made a strong argument for the complicated inner structures of apparently
very simple types, such as for instance letterforms. The possible token instantiations of the letter type
A is infinite and even subject to constant innovation in designer typefaces, even if the A ‘tone’ for a
superficial glance seems extremely simple. His conclusion is that attempts to make explicit all possible
A’s by an algorithm are subject to incompleteness constraints formally analogous to Gödel’s 1931 proof
(in Gödel 1986). This thus forms a strong argument against semantic extensionalisms without resting
on psychological arguments (Hofstadter 1986, see also Stjernfelt. 1992c).
41 The somewhat strange notion of ‘dynamical’ object in Peirce refers to a distinction between the
‘immediate’ object – the object as the sign presents it – on the one hand, and the object as it is in itself,
regardless of the sign, on the other. The latter is the ‘dynamical’ object.
42 At a conference in May 2005, the British philosopher Galen Strawson claimed that intentionality
must always imply consciousness, even for analytical philosophers. Thus, he argued against the idea,

430
N O T E S
also in analytical philosophy, that there is a broader type of intentionality which does not presuppose
consciousness, for instance in living organisms. Just like the Peircean idea that mind is a broader
concept than consciousness, and that only certain sophisticated types of mind are equipped with
consciousness.
Such an idea Strawson rejected. His reason was one basic argument, the so-called ‘stopping problem’.
The idea is that if we take the chain of causes connecting an object with the intention intending it, then
we lack criteria for where to ‘stop’ in the causal chain. To him, only the conscious experience can yield
such a criterion. In Peircean notions, it is the question of where to ‘stop’ in the causal chain connecting
index and object.
Strawson’s idea is that it is only consciousness which makes it possible to ‘stop’ at the right place in
that causal chain. If consciousness is not there to stop it, then any effect in the universe may be taken
as a sign of any one of its many causes – and intentionality would be everywhere. This is evidently not
an attractive consequence – even if Peirce sometimes spoke as if he was willing to accept something
like it. But if we should not accept this consequence, how should we solve the ‘stopping problem’ for
indices without ending in the opposite extreme and embracing Strawson and consciousness as the only
source of proper intentionality?
The problem is evidently a major issue for the development of biosemiotics, because the idea here
precisely is that biological processes down to biochemical detail can be understood as signs, that is, can
be understood as intentional. But how do we see what biological signs below the organism level are
‘signs for’? – in some sense they could be said to be signs for any segment in the homoeostatic process
they are part of. When von Uexküll’s famous tick waiting in its tree smells butylic acid, this chemical
releaser may be said to function as a sign for ‘mammal’, as a sign for ‘jump’, as a sign for ‘blood’, as
a sign for ‘food’ or ‘reproduction’ – because all these phenomena enter into the action chain involving
the tick smelling the chemical and acting correspondingly.
But what is the right place to stop? Strawson implies that we cannot determine any stopping place
from merely behavioral criteria. How do we frame the stopping problem in order to grant that a sign
process is going on, no matter whether the tick has any inner feeling of what’s going on? We shall
return to the index stopping problem in the biosemiotics section below as well as in the discussion of
Eco’s idea of indexicality as subject to negotiation.
43 Sometimes also known as seme, pheme, and delome; or sumisign, dicisign, and suadisign.
44 It goes without saying that this reference may point to any kind of fictituous reality. Another discussion
which we shall not go into here is the dicisign’s character of assertion which we will here take as the
default case. Of course, it is possible to consider the satiated predicate with its assertive force placed
in brackets so that the expression in itself has no reference, just like the addition of assertive force to
the expression is not the only speech act possibility. The same satiated predicate can be used in other
speech acts than assertion; questions, imperatives, wishes, etc. In his Gamma graphs, Peirce outlines the
basics of theory to cover such cases, and so qualifies as an early father of speech act theory.
45 As part of his elegant definition of the whole third trichotomy: rhemes are signs making explicit their
information, dicisigns are signs making explicit their object, and arguments are signs making explicit
their interpretant.
46 Human beings are mortal, Socrates is a human being, Socrates is mortal - this old example implicitly
refers to a law due to which a continuum of other human beings than Socrates may be inserted in the
latter part of the premiss and the conclusion - hence its law-like generality.
47 The three distinctions recur in Peirce’s abstraction theory where the three types of distinctions
dissociation, prescission, and discrimination correspond to Scotus’ real, formal, and logical distinctions,
respectively. They distinguish between res and res, res and realitas, res and ens rationis, respectively.
We shall return to Peirce’s abstraction theory below, Chap. 11.
48 ‘ grâce à laquelle homme est suffisament indéterminé pour que, par une intellection unique, il soit
conçu quidditativement en tout homme’ (Scotus, quoted by de Libera, 345).
49 Diodorus Cronus and Philo the Logician or Philo of Megara formed part of the so-called ‘Dialectical
school’ at the turn of the fourth and third centuries BC – a school which was among the initiators of
propositional logic. The latter was a pupil of the former, and we only know their work from secondary
sources. Diodorus outlined the famous ‘Master argument’ to prove the existence of actuality only

N O T E S
431
(briefly: every proposition about the past is necessary; the impossible does not follow from the possible;
it seems like possibilities exist which are not nor will ever become true. From this follows, Diodorus
argues, that nothing possible exists which is not or will not become true. Much about the details of
the argument is still unknown.) Thus, when Peirce in his later years toys with Diodoran implication,
the realism as to possibilities which he tries to articulate does not have any support from the Master
argument (As to Peirce and the Master argument, see Øhrstrøm 2001). Thus, it is rather Diodoran
implication which interests Peirce. It seems like Diodoran implication involved time: a conditional is
Diodoran true if it is never the case that P is true and Q is false – it must be Philonian true not only now
but at all times. But still it does not seem to require any connection between P and Q such as Peirce
seems to indicate (Bobzien 2004).
50 Two years later, he says similarly ‘For my part, I am a Philonian; but I do not think that justice has
ever been done to the Diodoran side of the question. The Diodoran vaguely feels that there is something
wrong about the statement that the proposition “If it is lightening, it will thunder,” can be made true
merely by its not lightening.’ (‘Types of Reasoning’ (1898), Peirce 1976, 169).
51 This would not be satisfied by what we know of Diodorus’ view of implication either, however, cf.
above.
52 Strict implication avoids the problems quoted, but involves other problems: [] p →q (it is necessary
that p implies q) gives rise to problems like the following. ‘If there are lions in South America, then
5 + 2 = 7’. As 5 + 2 = 7 in any possible world, the statement read as strict implication is true. In Peirce’s
later years, he makes some attempts to extend the Beta and Gamma logic graph systems to cover real
possibilities, cf. Stjernfelt 2006.
53 To substantiate the existence of such ontological extravaganza in Peirce, see the discussion of ‘The Law
of Mind’ (which is the earliest locus in Peirce where this tendency is given free rein) in the Appendix. The
general problem is that it is not clear how many of the phenomena subsumed under Thirdness are taken
to characterize the whole of that category. Take for instance the symbol concept. It is easily taken for a
pure sign concept only appearing at some point of biological evolution, and in Chap. 11, we shall indeed
discuss it in that way. Peirce’s cosmology, however, gives him the interesting idea that nature itself may
take habits, and from here to assuming that such habits possess the full character of symbols is a short step
which Peirce often does not hesitate to take. See, e.g. the conclusion to his magnificent discussion of his sign
theory in ‘New Elements’ (1904): ‘A symbol is an embryonic reality endowed with power of growth into
the very truth, the very entelechy of reality. This appears mystical and mysterious simply because we insist
on remaining blind to what is plain, that there can be no reality which has not the life of a symbol.’ (NEM
IV, 262). There are indeed interesting ideas in Peirce’s cosmology: ‘If we are to explain the universe, we
must assume that there was in the beginning a state of things in which there was nothing, no reaction and no
quality, no matter, no consciousness, no space and no time, just nothing at all. Not determinately nothing.
For that which is determinately not A supposes the being of A in some mode. Utter indetermination. But a
symbolaloneisindeterminate.Therefore,Nothing,theindeterminateoftheabsolutebeginning,isasymbol.’
(‘New Elements’, 1904, EPII, 322). But I do not think we can take them as proofs for the omnipresence
of symbols in the universe. Such ideas seem to be related to Peirce’s revaluation of Hegel – whom he
almost despised during the 70s and 80s – in the 90s. Hegel’s speculative dialectics and its jumps between
Nothing and Everything inspires such parts of Peirce’s cosmology: ‘With the emergence of Time, the first
book, as it might be called, of an Historical Encyclopädie, what Hegel terms “Logic” is brought to a close
and we pass to what he calls the “Naturphilosophie” ’ (‘Abstracts of 8 lectures’, undated, NEM IV, 138)
Such claims are by no means rare in the mature Peirce, take for instance this from 1898 (RLOT, NEM IV
345): ‘ I myself entertain that every true universal, every continuum, is a living and conscious being ’
Such claims imply there are not only Thirdness, habits, and signs, but also symbols, life, and consciousness
already in prebiological nature and we must assume gravitation, prime example of Thirdness in Peirce, suits
this description of a conscious, personalized symbol. Still, I hesitate to venture into these waters where all
distinctionsbetweenrealpossibilities,Thirdnessassuch,continuity,symbols,entelechy,life,evolution,etc.
vanish. I prefer to remain seeing such claims as mystical and mysterious until further notice, which is why I
onlytreatPeirce’scosmologytangentiallyinthisbook.Arelatedissuetowhichwereturninthebiosemiotics
section is the question whether there are indeed signs and life in prebiological nature, and if so, then in what
sense.

432
N O T E S
It should immediately be said that this absolute idealism tendency is not alone in Peirce - there is also a
counter-tendency, so as for instance: ‘My reply is that while I hold all logical or intellectual, interpretants
to be habits, I by no means say that all habits are such interpretants. It is only self-controlled habits that
are so, and not all of them, either’ (‘Pragmatism’ 1907, EPII, 431). Logical and final interpretants are
the same, so here Peirce delimits final interpretants to self-controlled – that is, consciously controlled,
primarily human – habits. See Chap. 11 for our development of this idea.
54 An attempt at construing a Peircean notion of causation is Hulswit (2002) with the sound aim of
elaborate ‘ an anatomy of (Peircean) events, according to which it belongs to the nature of an event,
not only that it creates a new event (Secondness) but also that it creates a new event of a certain type
(Thirdness)’ (215). Unluckily, Hulswit choses the same path as the absolute idealist tendency in Peirce,
claiming that all causations are inherently teleological: ‘ Peirce forcefully defends the position that
all natural processes are to some extent teleological, and can only be explained on the basis of final
causes, which are general principles. The empirical fact that, as far as I know all (physical, biological,
psychological, and sociological) processes show a definite tendency toward a general end state – whether
it be described as chaotic or as involving a higher level complex order – cannot be explained without
referring to certain general principles that somehow direct the process.’ (213). The error here is to
assume ‘end states’ of all processes. This begs the question, for only teleological processes could be said
to have an ‘end state’. To impose an end in a physical process is artificially splitting up its continuous
development. Thus, Hulswit’s identification of general principles (such as laws) with final causes does
not hold (even if teleological processes form a subset of general principles). We would restrict Peircean
teleology and mind to be biological properties primarily, thus occurring only locally in certain specifiable
processes, cf. the biosemiotics section below.
55 They do not imply, however, that all concepts of relations etc. have real counterparts. So the relations
between relations between relations  need not be a real would-be and basic relational realism needs
not fall victim to Ockham’s razor.
56 Thus, there is also an important link from real possibilities and to Peirce’s own method, highlighted by
Risto Hilpinen (1995, 274) who calls it ‘the method of ideal examples’ as opposed to ‘attempts to charac-
terize concepts by necessary and sufficient conditions: the latter method has often prompted philosophers
to be excessively concerned about ‘difficult’ and ‘borderline’ cases which has sometimes hampered
fruitful philosophical theorizing.’ Being obsessed with category borderlines, we may add, is precisely
an extensionalist vice, while the continuist will be rather obsessed with ‘ideal examples’ (prototypes, if
you wish, or ‘ideale Spezies’ (Husserl) ) and their bundles of interconnected real possibilities.
57 Given Peirce’s ‘extreme realism’, is it not the case that it severely conflicts with his idea of truth
as that which the scientific community asymptotically approaches in the long run – just like Hendricks
(2001, 101) says, interpreting the latter claim as anti-realist. It is true that this claim has often been
interpreted as opting for a consensus or coherence theory of truth, but I think it is equally compatible
with a correspondence theory of truth. The idea of ultimate agreement among investigators is, in fact,
an idea, it is what they would agree upon if they behaved as impeccable scientists and reasoners. So
truth is not mixed up with what actual communities of scholars may agree upon or not. On the other
hand, the idea is fallibilist: the vast majority of our current scientific views are probably true, but a few
of them may lack credibility. So overall, science as a whole corresponds to reality, apart from some
points. But we have no other means of discerning those points than further research.
58 It must be noted, however, that it is well-known that similarity within categories is psychologically
perceived in a not completely symmetrical way. Rosch’s and Lakoff’s studies show that there less
typical category members are perceived as more similar to the more typical members than vice versa.
i.e., penguins and sparrows display a range of similarities, but the penguin is seen as more like a sparrow
than a sparrow is like a penguin.
59 One could add that the opposite seems to be the case regarding transitivity. Similarity is not transitive:
if A is similar to B and B is similar to C, then A is similar to C, is generally not the case, not even if
we restrict similarity to deal with one single type of quality. One red nuance may be similar to another
which in turn is similar to a third nuance – without it being the case that the first and third are similar.
Take on the other hand transitivity in signification: if A signifies B, and B signifies C, then A signifies
C. This is, if not generally realized in discourse, then in general a possible, that is, valid construction

N O T E S
433
in the system in question, at least given certain contexts. Peirce seems to admit this principle under the
Scholastic notion ‘nota notae’: ‘The logical principle Nota notae est nota rei ipsius, that is, the predicate
of the predicate is the predicate of the subject, which is laid down in several places by Aristotle as the
general principle of syllogism.’ (a planned continuation of ‘Syllabus’, 1903, 3.590)
60 ‘Das Zeichen hat mit dem Bezeichneten inhaltlich zumeist nichts gemein, es kann ihm Heterogenes
ebesowohl bezeichnen, als ihm Homogenes. Das Bild hingegen bezieht sich auf die Sache d u r c h
Ä h n l i c h k e i t, und fehlt sie, so ist auch von einem Bilde nicht mehr die Rede. () Es wäre
eine deskriptiv unrichtige Auffassung der Sachlage, wenn man denken würde, der ganze Unterschied
bestehe darin, dass dieselbe Intention, die einmal an die Erscheinung eines dem gemeinten Objekt ä h n l i
c h e n Objektes genknüpft ist, ein andermal an die Erscheinung eines ihm u n ä h n l i c h e n
Objekts geknüpft sei. Denn auch das Zeichen kann dem Bezeichneten ähnlich sein, ja vollkommen
ähnlich. Die Zeichenvorstellung wird dadurch aber nicht zur Bildvorstellung. Die Photographie des
Zeichens A fassen wir ohne weiteres als Bild dieses Zeichens auf. Gebrauchen wir aber das Zeichen A als
Zeichen für das Zeichen A, wie wenn wir schreiben: A ist ein römisches Schriftzeichen, so fassen wir A trotz
bildmässiger Ähnlichkeit nicht das Bild, sondern eben als Zeichen.
Also die objektive Tatsache der Ähnlichkeit zwischen Erscheinendem und Gemeintem bestimmt keinen
Unterschied. Gleichwohl ist sie für den Fall der Bildvorstellung nicht belanglos. Dies zeigt sich in der
möglichen Erfüllung; und es ist ja nur die Erinnerung an diese Möglichkeit, welche uns die ‘objektive’
Ähnlichkeit hier heranziehen ließ. Die Bildvorstellung hat offenbar die Eigentümlichkeit, daß, wo immer
ihr Erfüllung zuteil wird, ihr als ‘Bild’ erscheinender Gegenstand sich mit dem in erfüllenden Akte
g e g e b e n e n Gegenstand durch Ähnlichkeit identifiziert. Indem wir dies als Eigentümlichkeit der
Bildvorstellung bezeichnet haben, ist schon gesagt, daß hier die E r f ü l l u n g d e s Ä h n l i c h e n d u r c h
Ä h n l i c h e s d e n C h a r a k t e r d e r E r f ü l l u n g s s y n t h e s i s a l s e i n e r i m a g i n a t i v e n
i n n e r l i c h b e s t i m m t.’ (LU II, 54–55)
61 ‘An icon is a representamen which fulfills the function of a representamen by virtue of a character
which it possesses in itself, and would possess just the same though its object did not exist.’ (5.73,
Lectures on Pragmatism, 1903). In general, the relation of Peirce’s sign descriptions to his pragmatism
has been undervalued cf. e.g. ‘It appears to me that the essential function of a sign is to render
inefficient relations efficient, – not to set them into action, but to establish a habit or general rule
whereby they will act on occasion.’ (8.332, Letter to Lady Welby, Oct 12, 1904). Peirce’s sign distinc-
tions are made with reference to a basically functionalist (in a pragmatic sense of the word) sign
conception.
62 The animal known as a walking stick evidently functions as a sign fooling hungry birds, but there’s
no conscious, let alone human intention behind this functioning.
63 Thus, it could be argued, Hilbert the father of formalism was no formalist (Hempel, in Benacerraf
and Putnam (1983) makes this point). He insisted not on formalism but on finitism, that is, the formal
means of proof should be finite, even if the mathematical content of the theorems proved might be
infinite, and thus it was his attempt at solving the same infinity problem as the intuitionists, not to make
formalisms the only goal of science.
64 Of course, one should not overrate the ‘turn’ fact. Many foolish ideas have presented themselves as
‘turns’.
65 A related quarrel loomed large in early Cognitive Science under the label of the ‘imagery debate’.
Do mental pictures form real parts of thought processes, and may the pictural properties of such figures
play effective roles in reasoning? Or are such pictures merely secondary to a basically symbolical,
propositional thought process having pictures as epiphenomena or taking them as objects? Stephen
Kosslyn’s and Zenon Pylyshyn’s old debate is even resurfacing these years. For a Peircean point of
view, however, iconicity and propositionality is not in any way mutually exclusive, cf. Chap. 4 on
diagrams.
66 Actually, this similarity problem involves Gödel’s well-known incompleteness theorem and entails
that the set of possible A’s may not be delimited beforehand because of being not computable. Of
course, such insights do not interest the crusader of difference.
67 Peirce makes exactly the same observation, in fact, when stating his pre-Popperian argument against
the necessity of inductive reference.

434
N O T E S
68 The reason why Goodman does not think this is the case is probably because he sees the idea of
a ‘common property’ as something which may easily be formalized in a discrete symbolic algebra. If
phenomenon 1 has the property a and phenomenon 2 has the property a, then it takes no larger amount
of insight to state that a=a. But if quality spaces are continuous, this proposition forms a mere surface
referring to continuous transformations which need not be simple.
69 Thus, there must be an internal contradiction in the theory; the idea of a ‘sémiotique naturelle’ being
impossible without the possibility to identify similar phenomena as similar. I hasten to say that this
theory has in other respects, in particular dealing with narrative issues, proved fertile cf. Chap. 17–18.
70 One can even find cooperations between the Nietzschean version and the extreme formalist version
of anti-iconism, as for instance in the Italian Hjelmslevo-Nietzscheanism of Alessandro Zinna, a direct
heir to the Ecoists’ Hjelmslevo-Marxism of the seventies. When first you get the strange idea it is easy
to see how this coupling works: Hjelmslev’s sign-function destabilizes the sign to the extent that it is not
a part of the language system, and his definition of form of expression and form of content, respectively,
as the giving form to amorphous substance yields a place for Nietzschean active nihilists to undertake
these creative acts of producing not only signs, but also expression and content forms.
71 Even if Eco does not know the Erlanger program and thinks that geometrical similarity is only
invariance to scalar transformations (and not, for instance, projections, rotations, mirrorings, topological
‘stretchings’ etc.).
72 Already Peirce, by the way, raged against the mysticist claims that the Gizeh pyramids documented
ancient Egyptian knowledge of the expansion of , of e, the precise position of the North Star etc. –
claims so well parodied in Foucault’s Pendulum.
73 The argument here is structurally analogous to Kant’s argument for the indispensability of an
Urteilsraft, an ability to judge. How can a rule be applied to a particular case? You may not propose
another rule to take care of the application, for then you run into an infinite regress: how can this second
rule be applied, then, and so on. The same goes for the attempt to get rid of similarity by means of
conventions: how do you apply the conventions to similar cases – by means of yet other conventions ?
74 We shall not go into Eco’s arguments here except to notice that his treatment of the token-type
problem is at best superficial. He obviously thinks that expression types are ‘ruled by a ratio facilis’,
that is, they are easy to produce and reproduce, even if he admits that tokens of content types may be
more difficult to handle. But even expression tokens constitute a very complicated problem, the bundle
of transformations securing the various kind of similarities between various subtypes of a type has been
investigated by Douglas Hofstadter (1986) and myself (1992).
75 In short, one could sum up, it conceives of the thing as if it was an animal. René Thom’s idea of the
semantics of the substantive as a generalized animal here receives an indirect support. It is a pity that
the consequences of this theory are not more thoroughly discussed – does this ascription of generality
and organic teleology precede categorization as such? If so, is it not a necessary corollary that animal
species categories are prototypical categories, so that other empirical concepts receive their (deceptive?)
natural-kind character from this implicit biology of meaning? (No wonder, if this be the case, that
philosophers always chose animals when talking about natural kinds, from Kant’s dog over ‘the cat is
on the mat’ and to Eco’s own platypus ).
76 Nolan 1994, 230.
77 In a variety of sources, we find indications of such a distinction, for instance Groupe ’s insistence
on the autonomous existence of visual types as distinct from their virtual linguistic denomination (1992),
Jakobson’s distinction between privative and qualitative oppositions, and Medin and Barsalou’s (1987)
distinction between prototype and boundary classifications, respectively, in categorical perception – see
Chap. 10.
78 Eco’s promising negotiation theory of semantics ought to be compared to Hintikka’s game-theoretical
semantics.
79 Rather late in the development of his theory, Peirce saw the icon as being not general, even if
the icon can be used as an icon of a continuity of objects which has the same quality: ‘ neither
icon nor index possesses generality’ (‘A Guess at the Riddle’, c. 1890, 1.372). Peirce’s development
of the notion of hypoicons, including diagrams, introduces an important change to this idea, making
general icons not only possible, but central to his epistemology (cf. Chap. 4). The existence of general

N O T E S
435
pictures has often been ridiculed in philosophy (Locke’s famous triangle), but an important undercurrent
continues a position cognate to Peirce’s, see e.g. H.H. Price’s overlooked Thinking and Experience
(written in 1953 in the midst of Wittgenstein language game ecstasy in Britain) where the importance
of ‘images as general symbols’ is emphasized. Price makes a strong case for the central role of general
images in the psychology of thought. Regarding diagrams as external representations, James Robert
Brown’s Philosophy of Mathematics (1999) makes, disguised as a phil-of-math introduction, a strong
case for the possibility of pictures to ‘provide solid evidence, too, evidence which is as rigorous as
any traditional verbal/symbolical proof’ (192). Brown’s involvement with computer aided mathematical
imagery suggests that information technology may function as a partisan in the renaissance of the
acknowledgment of general images.
80 Peirce does not identify the copula with the verb to be, rather it is the very assertion of the
predicate+subject structure. Here, he anticipates speech act theory by admitting questions, imperatives
and the like as proposition types on a par with assertions.
81 This problem of the reducibility of relations entails an enormous and still unfinished discussion.
Löwenheim and Quine have, each in their way, tried to show that all logical propositions may be
reduced to dyads, but the general validity of their results are still subject to doubt, cf. Burch 1991. As
to actants in linguistics, René Thom (1980) has argued there is a formal, topological reason for the
apparent four-actant limit in sentences.
82 Cf. Tom Short’s (1983) important observation regarding ‘How to Make our Ideas Clear’: less clear
ideas are not prevented from participating in making more general ideas clear. It suffices that the role
played by the less clear ideas in the clearer picture is, in fact, clear. Clarity is not necessarily built up
from below using crystal clear basic elements but may reside on certain levels of organization, cf. the
‘bottomlessness’ of mereology in contrast to set theory.
83 Maybe this would also provide an answer to the old Husserl’s famous problem in Ursprung der
Geometrie (1939) about how original evidence might be transferred through history by means of symbols
not containing this evidence 
84 The whole problem of the synthesis of the various profiles of the object is another, even if it possesses
interesting analogues to the diagrammatic conception of the object. One profile of the object already
contains hidden similarities in a Peircean conception.
85 See Roberts 1973, for a groundbreaking treatment of Peirce’s logic graphs. Among recent diagram-
matic scholars investigating Peirce’s logic graphs could be mentioned John Sowa, Allwein/Barwise,
Sun-Joo Shin and Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen. Shin claims the heuristic virtues of existential graphs and
aims at rearticulating Peirce’s basic graph operations for practical purposes, while Pietarinen argues
for a philosophically deeper relevance of the ‘endoporeutic’ (outside-in) interpretation direction of
Peirce’s graphs, the idea that the outermost layer of a diagram must be interpreted before going
on to its interior. To Pietarinen, Shin’s reformulation of Peirce’s conventions attempting to render
the graphs compositional goes against the outside-in reading of symbolic calculi and he points to
Hintikkan game-theoretical, dialogical intepretations of logic in order to further develop Peirce’s graphs.
The outside-in reading, to Pietarinen, is important because it makes the interpretation depend on the
context implicitly provided by the phemic sheet on which the graphs are drawn – the phemic sheet
corresponding not to the universe as such, but to the universe of discouse, depending on tacit under-
standings between the dialogue partners (Pietarinen 2006, 120–22). Maybe Pietarinen’s observation
can be generalized to Peirce’s diagram doctrine as such: the outside-in reading is preferred because
taking the diagram as a gestalt informed by a context. In specific diagram interpretation, the outside-
in reading will, of course, mix with inside-out readings in an ongoing trial-and-error process, but
it is right for Pietarinen to insist that diagrams generally may not be presupposed to be composi-
tional; compositionality rather forming a restricted subclass of special diagrams. Everyday examples of
diagrams like a map of a country or a school timetable are evidently interpreted outside-in rather than
inside-out.
86 Pure icons only exist as a limit category in Peirce – concrete signs being, as a rule, composite.
‘Hypoicon’ is Peirce’s notion, then, for signs whose mode of object reference is primarily iconic.
87 The force of this idea in metaphor analysis is obvious – and it is recognized, albeit in non-Peircean
clothing, by the cognitive semantics tradition mentioned above.

436
N O T E S
88 In the development of Peirce’s thought, the idea of a general diagrammatology thus precedes his
construction of existential graphs rather then the opposite. It is his diagrammatology and his category
phenomenology which permits him putting them to use in graphical logic representations as a special
case.
89 This fact is elaborated ingeniously in Hintikka 1997.
90 In addition to this basic, operational icon criterion, however, Peirce also has a continuous idea of
measuring different degrees of iconicity of representations. Thus, he sees his own logic graphs as more
iconic than symbolic representations because a variable is here presented by one continuous line of
identity as against the repeated occurrence of a number of xs with the same reference in a symbolic
representation. While the former preserves the unity of the variable, the latter represents it in a shattered
way untrue to the unity of the reference of the variable. Thus, in his Beta graphs, he has two different
ways of expressing identity between variables – one identifying them by means of a continuous ‘identity-
line’, another identifying them by attaching the same letter (‘selective’) to them. The former Peirce sees
as more iconical than the latter (even if the latter may be hueristically superior). This points to another,
optimal iconicity concept in Peirce in addition to the basic operational iconicity. See Stjernfelt 2006.
91 It is, for instance, not sufficient to rebaptize objects a, b, c in order to perform a formalization
if a rational transformation syntax is missing. By this criterion, hence, the infertility of some classical
formalization attempts in semiotics becomes understandable; e.g. Hjelmslev’s ambitious algebra of
glossematics (1975) which did not permit transformational possibilities of any larger interest.
92 I prefer to count such sign use as diagrammatic, notwithstanding some Peirce’s more strict definitions
demanding the presence of explicit intentional diagrams. This definition conflicts with other descriptions
of diagram use, e.g. his characterization of mental imagery experiments as diagrammatic or his ideas
of grammar as a type of diagrams, and is closer to his pragmatic in actu-requirement for sign use.
I follow the latter tendency in calling icon experimentation involving rule-bound manipulation of icon
parts diagrammatic.
93 This points to the fact that the organization of perception includes highly elaborated diagrammatic
capacities without explicit conscious representation.
94 Lakoff and Johnson’s metaphor theory thus involves that structure is mapped from one domain onto
another; Fauconnier and Turner’s generalized ‘blending’ theory (comprising also non-oriented mappings)
involve a schematic, so-called ‘generic’ space granting the coherence of the blending output.
95 For a thorough investigation of Kant’s schematism, see Frovin Jørgensen 2005.
96 Diagrams as ‘the main if not the only way we acquire new knowledge of relationships’ have been
acknowledged as a Peircean doctrine by Johansen 1993, 99.
97 It must be added, though, that Peirce’s attitude towards Kant’s famous distinction is not unanimous.
In his early and middle period, Peirce simply sees analyticity as identical to deductive necessity, while
syntheticity covers ab- and inductive probability (cf. for instance Peirce’s discussion with Dr. Carus in CP
6.595 (1893), see Otte 1997 353f), thus pertaining to ideal and real realms, respectively. Consequently,
mathematics is taken to be analytic – in contrast, of course, to Kant. Later, the issue becomes more
muddled, not less because Peirce now only rarely refers to the analytic/synthetic concepts explicitly.
Here, theorematic reasoning – corresponding to the experiment attitude in diagram manipulation – is
generally seen as synthetic. We shall return to the issue in more detail in Chap. 8.
98 Correction in the quote made from Robin (293), 59; NEM IV has ‘represented existential or experi-
ential peculiarities’.
99 The distinction between pure and applied diagrams roughly corresponds to Kant’s distinction between
a priori and a posteriori schemata.
100 Barwise and Etchemendy highlight this important feature in diagrammatic modeling: ‘5. Every
possibility (involving represented objects, properties, and relations) is representable. That is, there is
no possible situations that are represented as impossible. 6. Every representation indicates a genuine
possibility.’ (1995, 215).
101 But doesn’t this example run counter to Peirce’s observation that the grammar of natural language is
diagrammatic? No, because the contents of the words ‘round’ and ‘square’ are not defined by grammar.
The diagrammaticality of (parts of) natural language syntax rather lies in its instantiation of some basic
logic and ontological categories (argument structure, subject/predicate structure, etc.) It is important to

N O T E S
437
remember – cf. our painting example above – that concrete signs may possess both diagrammatic and
non-diagrammatic aspects, just like they may be composed of differently defined diagrams, the relation
between which need not in itself be diagrammatic. Some of the strength of natural language probably
lies in precisely this: it freely unites diagrams on different levels (expression, grammar, lexical semantics
of the different word classes, narratology), the relative independence of which constitute language’s
plasticity and its ability to talk about many things, including impossible objects.
102 Of course, this requires that the diagram is consistent. But the very syntax of a diagram forces it to
be consistent: it is impossible to draw a square circle. This does not imply, however, that it may not be in
many cases rather or extremely difficult to determine whether a given diagram is in fact consistent. For
instance, an equation – a subspecies of algebraic diagrams – may hide an inconsistency very difficult to
ascertain at first glance but which requires lot of work to determine: if you can derive a contradiction
from it (the reductio ad absurdum method), then it is false (if we do not admit intuitionist logic etc.).
The seminal difference is that you cannot derive from the mere grammar of the symbolic expression ‘a
square circle’ an analogous contradiction; in order to do so, you have to attempt to make a diagram of
its content.
103 Yet, this distinction is in many cases impossible to draw beforehand, so to speak – cf. for instance the
fact that a certain amount of empirical data shows up to yield a Gaussian distribution: on a first glance,
this result may be conceived of as an empirical law, but it might hide a deeper law, yet uncovered,
which would rather make the distribution a logical result of general mathematical principles.
104 This icon-index distinction in Peirce of course refers back to Kant’s contention that existence
(haecceity, referred to by an index) is no predicate (quality, referred to by an icon), just like it refers
forward to Kripkean reference theory’s rigid designators (as a certain class of indices).
105 Many basic proofs in mathematics may be represented in more or less immediately accessible visual
diagrams, see e.g. Nelsen 1993.
106 See Misfeldt 2006 for an empirical investigation emphasizing the change between different repre-
sentations of the same object in mathematical thought.
107 Our description of the workings of such experiment processes might give the idea that they are
psychological and thus dependent upon a person’s psychological grasping of the diagrams. This is not,
however, the case. It is a crucial part of Peirce’s pragmatism that it shares a basic anti-psychologism
with Husserlian phenomenology (cf. Chap. 6). Pragmatism insists that it is possible actions on diagrams
which count – but such actions need not be performed by psychological means (cf. Peirce’s notion of
mind being much broader than that of psyche). Diagram operations are, by their very nature, purely
formal and do not owe their validity to the psychology of those performing them. If the description
of such processes may in some cases sound as if informed by psychology, this is only for the sake of
understanding. When talking about the ‘imaginary moment’ as a phase in diagram manipulation, this
of course refers to the psychology of the manipulator, but the decisive thing is that this moment is
made possible by structural iconicity between diagram and object – not by the psychology of he or she
who contemplates that iconicity. The case is parallel to when Peirce himself refers to human minds as
bearer of signs, but immediately adds that this is only a pedagogical ‘sob to Cerberus’ to make his own
conception easier understandable (Letter to Lady Welby 23 December 1908, EPII, 478). The validity of
diagrammatical representations in general depends just as little on psychology as does the special case
of logical formalisms.
108 Peirce makes a distinction making this understandable – between corollaries and theorems. The
former are propositions directly read from a diagram; the latter propositions only to be found after some
more or less ‘ingenious’ experiment. The distinction is valid, but can not be sharp: there is a continuum
between, say, measuring a distance on a map; measuring the same distance with corrections according
to the map projection used; constructing that projection; proving that the geometry of the surface of a
sphere is isomorphous to a non-Euclidean geometry  We return to this distinction below.
109 It must be added that the truth of Kekulé’s discovery story is a matter of ongoing debate in the
history of science and has not yet been definitively settled. The story is only recorded by Kekulé himself
in 1890, in a celebration speech 25 years after the discovery was published. The case is even more
complicated from the fact that the German Chemists’ Society at a conference in 1886 published a mock-
periodical in which they appear not as the deutsche but as the ‘durstige chemische Gesellschaft’. In this

438
N O T E S
joke, the Benzene ring is depicted with the Carbon atoms as six apes grapping each others’ arms and
legs (playing on the similarity between ‘Affe’ and ‘Affinität’ (ape and affinity) in German). Hence, it is
argued, Kekulé’s 1890 memory might have been influenced by this recent joke. Thus, the story was an
object of doubt rather early, and already in 1927, Kekulé’s son stated in an article that according to his
childhood recollections, his father had often told the story many years before it appeared in print without
ever referring to any apes – thus adding to its probability (Sponsel and Rathsmann-Sponsel 2000). Also
the source of the ‘Uroboros’ motive – the snake biting its own tail – is discussed, and maybe traced to a
sign on a pharmacy door which Kekulé remembered (ibid.). On the other hand, it has been pointed out
that the German chemist Josef Loschmidt was a forerunner of Kekulé because he had, already in 1861,
described a long series of organic molecules as involving ring-shaped Carbon structures (albeit not the
simplest one, Benzene). Kekulé knew Loschmidt’s work as is evident from his dismissive references to
it already in the same year where he refuses the shapes given by Loschmidt to have any connection to
real molecule shapes (Bader and Parker 2001). This thus forms a strong argument that Kekulé’s 1863–65
discovery may have been influenced by his reading of Loschmidt some years earlier – but, on the other
hand, it does not prove this influence may not have appeared in the guise of the half-dreamt snake ring
of the original anecdote.
110 Ernst Cassirer’s concept of ‘symbolic pregnance’ may be interpreted as referring to such cases of
‘spontaneous proto-diagrams’.
111 Another example would be maps with high direction sensitivity but no metric, e.g. maps of the
starry sky as seen from the earth; distances on this map measured in minutes and seconds of arc do
not refer to real distances between stars in the universe, while directions do refer to real orientations in
space.
112 Hintikka’s distinction is most thoroughly presented in the papers collected in the volume Lingua
Universalis vs. Calculus Ratiocinator (1997).
113 The drawbacks of this tradition have large overlaps with those ridiculed by Barry Smith’s concept
of ‘fantology’ (2005).
114 In the logic-as-universal-language tradition, Peirce’s distinction will be invisible, because any chain
of reasoning will here be represented as a valid, finished symbol string post hoc, so that the theorematic,
constructive part may merely be added as further premisses among others to the inference at issue.
Peirce’s distinction, however, becomes crucial because the viewpoint of the logic-as-calculus stance
rather envisages the issues ante hoc – logic deals with the solution of problems and thus displays a
continuity with heuristics and theory of science which is absent in the language tradition. When seen
from the problem rather than from the solution aspect, Peirce’s distinction suddenly becomes pertinent:
given a set of premisses, it is of huge importance how and what to construct on their basis in order to
reach a desired result.
115 It is not so easy, however, that the universal-language and the calculus tradition are simply anti-iconic
and iconic, respectively. Hintikka, e.g. places Hilbert and Goodman firmly in the calculus tradition. Hilbert
is, according to Hintikka, no formalist, rather a fore-runner of model theory and, as discussed later, much
less anti-iconist than often assumed, while Goodman the staunch anti-iconist is a calculus supporter because
of his plurality of languages. On the other hand, the position of being universal-language and iconist at the
same time is also possible – cf. the younger Wittgenstein with his picture theory of language maintained
at the same time as the ineffability of semantics, famously making it impossible actually to point out any
particular examples of the logical atoms claimed to found the theory of Tractatus. So even if Hintikka’s
calculus-language distinction is indeed orthogonal to the iconist-anti-iconist distinction, the combination
of universal-language and anti-iconism is strong (and stronger than the combination of universal-language
and iconism) in both analytic and continental traditions.
116 See some preliminary remarks in May and Stjernfelt 1996.
117 The German mathematician Moritz Pasch explicitly noticed this geometrical error and proposed
a pure geometry in terms of purely formal manipulation of symbols with no regard to their
intuitive signification, an idea that was fully developed by his famous pupil David Hilbert’s
formalism.
118 The concept of ‘symbol’ has a history so confused that it almost ought to be completely discarded;
in any case, any use of it should be explicit about the precise signification intended, cf. Sørensen 1963.

N O T E S
439
In formalism, symbols are arbitrary, simple signs to be manipulated syntactically; in Peirce they are not
necessarily simple, and dependent on iconic meaning and indexical reference. On the symbol concept
in the Kantian tradition, see my ‘Die Vermittlung zwischen Anschauung und Denken’ (2000).
119 Greaves, in turn, quotes from a paper by Michael Hallett who provided translation and italics.
120 Greaves has even found an amazing quote by Hilbert’s close collaborator Paul Bernays in an
unpublished lecture from 1921, where the stroke counting ability is directly expressed in terms of basic
iconicity suggesting, as Greaves says, ‘a distinctly Peircean explanation’: ‘The philosopher is inclined to
speak of this representation [between sign and number] as a relation of meaning. However, one should
note that, in contrast to the usual relation between word and meaning, there is [in this example] the
essential difference that the object doing the representing contains the essential properties of the object
to be represented. Thus the relations which are to be investigated between the objects represented are
to be found in the objects doing the representing, and thus can be established through consideration of
these.’ (190–191; translated by Michael Hallett, emphases by Greaves). The intuition necessary for the
metamathematical finitism is hence (strongly restricted, it must be admitted) iconicity. Still remains, of
course, the Hilbertian distinction between these finite calculi and the potentially infinite objects they
may be taken to refer to.
121 But even if we grant the basic iconicity of any ‘symbolic’ calculus, a Peircean approach will still
be faced with the problem of evidence in cases where the ‘imaginary moment’ is precluded or where
it simply refuses to appear, cf. for instance the discussion of the computer proof of the four-color map
theorem of topology which – because of its enormous size – is hard to understand as an ordinary proof
which a skilled reader may adorn with interpretations from beginning to end. In proofs of this type,
the trust is put in the infallibility of the computer: each step in the proof is logically valid; ergo the
whole proof is valid, even if nobody has ever observed its truth in Peircean evidence or in Husserlian
‘kategoriale Anschauung’.
122 3.467, from ‘Grand Logic,’ 1893.
123 Life as such seems formally to involve simple diagrams known as ‘categorical perception,’ see
Chaps. 9–12.
124 ‘ il n’y a science qu’à partir du moment où on peut plonger le réel dans le virtuel’ (Thom 1988, 69)
125 Of course, this counterfactuality is easier to hide in experimental sciences where diagram experiments
may, in many cases, be verified by similar experiments on the object itself. When this possibility falls
away, counterfactual speculation prevails, cf. for instance cosmology or issues like the origin of life
and origin of language. It is interesting to note, however, that the insight in the connection between
counterfactual constructions and scientificity is taken up in non-experimental sciences in recent years.
For instance historiography, so long trapped in a positivist determination to record only what actually
happened, now seems (through inspiration from, among others, chaos theory and the formal concept of
phase space in general qualitative dynamics) to realize that the actual event is only made intelligible
through its juxtaposition with a rational idea of what would have happened if some central factors in
the initial conditions of the situation were changed (Ferguson 1997).
126 Nöth uses the term when describing Piaget’s structuralism, Todorov’s narratology, Jakobson’s classi-
fication of sign systems as well as in the context of more general issues such as the semiotic concept
of ‘code’ and the description of the transferral of semiotic structures into media such as theatre or gesture.
127 By ‘semiotics’ we shall here take those disciplines which in various ways investigate signs and
their meaning; we should not delimit ourselves to currents only which explicitly makes use of the term
‘semiotics’ or related expressions.
128 We shall here remain so general in order not too quickly to tie ourselves to one specific rendering
of these concepts so as for instance function as modelled by set theory as a 1-1 relation between the
elements of one set to those of another. We shall return to different versions of the function concept below.
129 The following presentations are not, of course, thorough introductions to the relevant theories’
assumptions and methods, but are centered around the transformation concepts in play. Some of the
theories I have discussed in more detail elsewhere.
130 Cf. the detailed criticism in Scubla 1998 where the different attempts at formalization of the ‘canonical
formula of myth’ is presented: the equivalence between dual opposition pairs and the mediations
between them; Boolean logic, group theory, the Klein bottle as well as Jean Petitot’s catastrophy theory

440
N O T E S
interpretation of it. I cannot here run through these vast discussions, a discussion of the last example
can be found in Stjernfelt 1992a.
131 ‘Or, la notion de transformation est inhérente à l’analyse structurale. Je dirais même que toute les
erreurs, tous les abus commis sur ou avec la notion de structure proviennent du fait que leurs auteurs
n’ont pas compris qu’il est impossible de la concevoir séparée de la notion de transformation. La
structure ne se réduit pas au système: ensemble composé d’éléments et des relations qui les unissent.
Pour qu’on puisse parler de structure, il faut qu’entre les éléments et les relations de plusieurs ensembles
apparaissent des rapports invariants, tels qu’on puisse passer d’un ensemble à l’autre au moyen d’une
transformation’ (Lévi-Strauss 1988, 159).
132 ‘Quant à la méthode comparative, elle ne consiste pas, je l’ai souvent dit, à comparer d’abort et
à généraliser ensuite. Contrairement à ce qu’on croit souvent, c’est la généralisation qui fonde et rend
possible la comparaison’ (ibid. 179).
133 D’Arcy Thompson thus is the heir to a sort of structuralism widely disregarded in the French struc-
turalism of the 60s, namely that of Goethe (see Cassirer 1945). Goethe’s theory of the ‘Urpflanze’, the
arch plant, and its metamorphoses of course transgresses – as Jean Petitot remarks – Kant’s prohibition
against intellectual intuition, as when he intuitively seeks to grasp the schema for vegetative morpho-
genesis from an inner power which modifies the arche-part of the plant, the leaf, into assuming different
functions. Yet his idea that such a schema might be possible constitutes a source for later and more
rational attempts at formalizing such schemata (cf. the unproblematic talk about ‘Baupläne’ for each of
the large groups of animals). The concept of metamorphosis in Goethe thus forms a first outline of a
biological concept of transformation.
134 If we look back on Lévi-Strauss’ inspiration from d’Arcy Thompson, it is general: he does not,
generally, use continuous transformations, but discontinuous ones only (as in the equivalence between
semantic opposition pairs), even if some of the models in which he tries to formalize these transformations
are indeed continuous (topology).
135 The discussion in this section is based on Kline 1972.
136 Many more could be mentioned, thus the concept of ‘categorical perception’ in phonetics, generalized
in Stevan Harnad (where a discontinuous partition of the continuum of perception allows that a particular,
concrete perception is transformed to the category of a typical one); Eleanor Rosch’s prototype semantics
(where a similar argument is made on the semantical level); Gestalt Theory (where stable structures in
perception may be reached by transformation from concretely perceived instantiations, often even with
apparently insufficient input in cases where a pregnant form is completed).
137 I have done that in Stjernfelt 1992a.
138 Thus, the central unfolding of a function germ in Catastrophe Theory constitutes a transformation
having the character of an eidetic variation making clear which possibilities lie in the function germ in
question.
139 I have discussed the principal aspects of this idea in Stjernfelt 1992c.
140 It may be added that the programmatic binarism of this part of the theory remains problematic.
141 As Jean Petitot argued in his catastrophe theory modeling of the basic structures of that theory, cf.
Petitot 1985.
142 See Bundgaard et al. 2006.
139 All these ideas in Husserl have a mathematical background, namely his never published dissertation
on ‘Beiträge zur Variationsrechnung’ from 1882 with references to Felix Klein. We return to eidetic
variation in Chap. 8.
140 This is a central argument in Jean Petitot’s philosophy which is strongly presented in the introduction
to Naturalizing Phenomenology (Petitot et al. 1999).
141 See Chaps. 6 and 12.
142 Jaakko Hintikka (1983) has highlighted the importance of this distinction: ‘theorematic’ reasoning
requires the introduction of a new set of quantified objects and hence, in the diagrammatic representation
of symbolic logic, a further quantifier.
143 State changes must be understood as temporal transformation invested with material ontological
categories pertinent for the field investigated. In physics, invariance refers to the constance of matter
and energy, in other sciences other invariants are picked out: political power is redistributed in political

N O T E S
441
science; intersubjectivity in sociology; meaning in semiotics; gene pool and life in biology (cf. the
centrality of ‘survival’). These transformations in real time only become understandable when they are
embedded in a more comprehensive virtual space accessible by eidetic variation, cf. René Thom’s idea:
understanding is the nesting of the real within the virtual.
144 Cf. the Goodman-Eco discussion above.
145 Thus, transformation as procedure is crucial to the enlightenment project. A decisive component
here is the giving up of any idea of metaphysically unprenetrable distinctions between domains – which
may be transgressed by the transformation of structure between them (cf. Newton’s merging together
of supra- and sublunar worlds or the search in cognitive science for neural consciousness correlates
(NCCs)). Such transformations, of course, have trial-and-error character (to avoid dogmatic assumptions
of wrong transformations), and one might assume that transformation is what realizes the otherwise
incredible step from rule to case (the necessity of judgment in Kant following from the fact that no
rule is possible to guide the use of the rule, for this should be governed by a further rule, etc.) – by a
trial-and-error transformation of rule-bound structure onto the particular case.
146 The references to English versions of Logische Untersuchungen quotes are to Findlay’s translation,
Husserl 1970.
147 Herbert Spiegelberg’s pioneering 1956 article has not given rise to much further work. Here,
Spiegelberg finds the following four basic agreements between the phenomenology of the two: the
intuitive approach to the immediately given without preconceived theories; the disregard of questions of
reality or unreality in that investigation; the radical difference between phenomenology and psychology;
and the foundational role of phenomenology for philosophy and logic (182). This indeed forms a basic
agreement, and as Spiegelberg says, makes it legitimate to talk both of them being phenomenologists.
Spiegelberg also lists a series of points in which Peirce differs from Husserl, most notably his emphasis
of the discovery of categories and the absence of intentionality as a main concern – and he concludes
a brief review of the two’s mutual knowledge of the other that the similarities primarily are based in
their common situation: two mathematicians turned philosophers who attempt to found philosophy as
a rigorous science on phenomena given in experience – in short, as two historical parallels, not unlike
Newton and Leibniz. Still we will argue that considerably more similarities may be studied than the
four mentioned in Spiegelberg’s paper – while his basic conclusion as to mutual influence remains
correct, even in the light of the further information which has appeared since his paper (NEM, Hua
XXII, etc.).
A few further papers have commented upon the relation between the two. The fine article by Dougherty
1983 on Peirce’s phenomenological defence of deduction concludes that Peirce’s phenomenological
approach is what allows him to articulate the ‘applicability of the ideal triad to the real world’ due to
his different notions of abstraction (cf. Chap. 11), and thus reconcile formal and empirical justifications
of deduction. By doing so, he has reached a result ‘ remarkably similar to that of Husserl’ (ibid.),
namely founding phenomenology as a method to attain the ideal realm of meanings.
Leila Haaparanta 2001 continues Dougherty’s observation and emphasizes the commonality between
the two in bracketing existence presuppositions and utilizing related abstraction methods in their research.
Inspired by Hintikka, she points to a commonality in Peirce and Husserl in the analogy to geometrical
method in both of them; in Peirce explicitly, of course, in Husserl, in the idea of working ‘backwards’
from experience – cf. Pietarinen 2006 on the importance of Peirce’s backwards, ‘endoporeutic’ inter-
pretation rule for his logic diagrams.
152 ‘ durch ihre besondere Originalität, Einfachkeit und Eleganz imponiert. Sie erscheint, zumal nach
der Vereinfachung, die Schröder ihr zuteil werden läßt, als eminent brauchbar, und es wäre demgemäß
ein größerer Reichtum an sie anschließender und ausgerechneter Aufgaben erwünscht gewesen’ (43).
153 Peirce thus explicitly refers to Hegel for the notion, and this takes place in a period where Perice
highly admires Hegel and Phänomenologie des Geistes especially – as against his earlier anti-Hegelianism
of the 70s and 80s. Still, the temporal coincidence with Peirce’s acquaintance with LU is striking – just
as the similarities in their way of using the concept, whereas Peirce’s ‘phenomenology’ has little to do
with the Hegelian emergence of the Geist through history.
154 Spiegelberg 1956 points to the fact that Peirce probably gave up ‘phenomenology’ for ethics-of-
terminology reasons between Oct 3, 1904 when he writes to James about his need to find a new term and

442
N O T E S
Oct 12 the same year when he writes to Lady Welby, now using the term ‘ideoscopy’. Presumably, he felt
that the Hegelian use of the word were too far from his own and that Hegel must be given primacy.
155 Rollinger 1999 (58) relates an amusing anecdote of categorial intuition: in Husserl’s copy of
Brentano’s Vom Ursprung sittlicher Erkenntnis, ‘in the margin next to the passage where it is claimed
that perceivability cannot be the same as existence since the non-real exists and yet cannot be perceived
(p. 62), it is written “categorial perception!” ’ – Kategoriale Wahrnehmung!
156 Measured against this central role in Husserlian epistemology, categorial intuition has hardly received
the interest it deserves. Among the most important contributions to its clarification count the following:
Bernet 1988, 1988a; Cobb-Stevens 1990; Lohmar 1987, 1990, 1998; Seebohm 1990; Sokolowski 1964,
1974, 1982; Ströker 1978, to which I shall refer in the following. Most of these accounts aim at a
reconstruction of Husserl’s views (and are very useful, even fertile in so doing) and do not attempt to go
into comparisons with other accounts of the problem. I suspect, however, that such comparisons might
bring us closer to the problem itself.
157 Husserl’s own examples of the higher-order objects grasped in categorial intution in the 6.LI include
the identity of an object, the relation of part to whole, relations, collections, the ‘ideierende Abstraktion’
and its intiution of essences, the determinate and indeterminate grasping of single objects (‘das A’,
‘ein A’). Sokolowski 1982 presents a thorough analysis of the steps from an unanalyzed experience to
its categorial articulation in subject and predicate. Lohmar 1998 articulates a general 3-step structure for
categorial intuition: ‘Gesamtwahrnehmung, Sonderwahrnehmungen, kategoriale Synthesis’.
158 Even if ‘Wesensschau’ is a later term, it can be seen as a successor concept to categorial intuition,
cf. Hintikka 2003, 187.
159 This is, of course, what makes transcendental phenomenology possible as a project: the idea of
taking the essences of consciousness as an object of eidetic study. It seems possible, however, to retain
the idea of the possibility of fulfilment of (certain) intentions aimed at eidetic phenomena as well as
phenomenology as an anti-psychologist science of consciousness, without assuming the constitutive
nature of the latter. This would preclude (or, at least, bracket) the possibility of a transcendental
phenomenology, but preserve eidetic phenomenology.
160 Later, in his drafts of a new version of the sixth LI, Husserl took the position that they always
involve such meaning, cf. Melle 2002.
161 ‘Le paradoxe est qu’une forme catégoriale signitive ne peut être remplie que par une intuition déjà
elle-même catégorisée.’
162 We find in the three degenerate act types (imaginative, indexical, and signitive, respectively) a not
coincidential parallel to Peirce’s three different ways of signifying an object (icon, index, symbol). This
has been noted by Münch 1993, 218.
163 As is evident, this variation procedure is modeled upon function analysis in mathematics, even in
Husserl’s terminology.
164 As to the history of the concept of ontology, see Øhrstrøm et al. 2005.
165 This point and its relation to the transcendence issue is not always clearly emphasized; a strong
exception is Willard 1982, 397.
166 In fact, if categoriality were identified with formal logic only, then some version of logical positivism
might be the outcome. But it is not necessary to identify categoriality nor the propositional stance
with language. Rather, language is one (prominent, to be sure) instrument developed on the basis
of the cognitive potentials of abstraction and categoriality. A very broad definition of categoriality –
comprising all higher-level acts founded on perception – is proposed in Smith (2000). Similarly,
Bernet (1988) points to the fact that categoriality in general ‘is about the intuitive givenness of ideal
objects’ (33).
167 The intimate connection between categorial intuition and this ‘theory of theories’ is highlighted in
Cobb-Stevens 1990.
168 In Peirce, this problem, of course, is solved by taking general meaning to have a continuum of merely
possible (but vague) referents as its extension and his idea that generality corresponds to the possibility
of choosing any one of these – close to Husserl’s idea of ‘no matter which one’. When Husserl talks
about ‘representation’ here, it must not be read symbolically as in normal Anglo-Saxon usage – in that
case, intuitive representations would lose their direct object contact (cf. Roy 1999, 111 – 147).

N O T E S
443
169 Here, Husserl is on a par with Peirce for whom the diagram is not the particular drawing on the page
nor the reader’s perception of it. Peirce thus distinguishes between the diagram token – the particular
drawing on the page, corresponding to Husserl’s ‘Anhalt’ – and the diagram type which we are able
to grasp through a reading of that token, governed by a symbolic sign (which, in Peirce’s terminology,
implies generality).
170 See Chaps. 8 and 12.
171 Lohmar (1987, 1990, 1998) highlights this example in order to correct an error which Husserl himself
later detects (1939). Husserl’s idea in the LU was that the categorial act of collection by means of
the ‘and’ operator could only reach fulfilment by a ‘reflection upon the act itself’, because it is the
very act that constitutes the collection of entities envisaged (all possible entities whatsoever may be so
collected). As an alternative to this strange idea where the performance of an act becomes the intuition
fulfilling that same act, Lohmar points to fulfilment as Deckungssynthesis – covering synthesis – between
partial intentions. Thus, collection would be so to speak a zero-Deckungseinheit and is probably involved
in all more complicated acts because it simply co-localizes its entities in one and the same categorial place.
172 This corresponds to Peirce’s semiotics where the classification of objects in types does not require
symbols, while the opposite is the case.
173 We have already remarked that a strong case can be made that the set of possible typefaces or writing
styles is so large that it cannot be exhausted by computational algorithms (cf. Hofstadter 1986; Stjernfelt
1992c). Thus, the very concept of writing style cannot be the result of a variation procedure limited to
computational strength. Thus it points to the fact that the variation implied in grasping essences does
not always – if ever – proceed to completion through all possible variants. Rather we intuit the fact that
such a variation may go on indefinitely.
174 We can ask, then, what is implied in the mere signification of the word ‘steam engine’, before the
analogical fulfilment by the general imagination of the model? ‘Steam engine’ is a composite noun,
that is, it means an engine somehow concerned with steam. Depending on the underlying schema
chosen, such an engine could work by steam, produce stem, fight against steam, etc. The syntax of
noun composition only tell us it is an engine in some way concerned with steam (thus founded upon
simpler signitive acts aimed at ‘steam’, and ‘engine’, respectively; but these are both acts concerned
with general objects and thus already presupposing categoriality in the form of generalizing abstraction).
The same structure characterizes Descartes’ famous ‘chiliogon’-example which Husserl uses to argue
against the representative use of diagrams in geometry. True, we can not imagine such a figure in its
complete shape, and thus the understanding of the P-S structure of the word, literally ‘thousand-edge’,
rests on our categorial understanding of the syntactical structure as well as our categorial understanding
of each of the composite elements: a figure with a thousand edges. A further step in the Erfüllungsreihe
may now prompt us to try and construct the figure in imagination. We still cannot imagine it as a figure,
but we may imagine the procedure to construct it (take a rectangle and subdivide the sides until you
get a number close to thousand, then add or subtract sides until you get thousand) – just like Husserl
himself, when describing eidetic variation, emphasizes that the imagination can not cover all cases,
but we can imagine the imagination act to go on  An contrast case is the well-known ‘round square’
with its impossibility of intuively construing such an object. All such composite expressions prompt
an Erfüllungsreihe prescribed both by their syntactical structure, by their founding acts. The compound
noun problem forms a center of the discussion of grammatical ‘blending’ in Turner and Fauconnier’s
cognitive semantics (Bundgaard et al. 2006; Fauconnier and Turner 2002).
175 However, a problem remains concerning the purely empirical species concepts. Husserl distinguishes
three cases: sensuous abstraction giving sensuous concepts, categorial abstraction yielding pure categorial
concepts, and a large group of mixed concepts (with the examples ‘color’, ‘house’, ‘judgment’, ‘wish’
for the first ones, ‘unity’, ‘plurality’, ‘connection’, ‘concept’ for the second ones, and ‘coloredness’,
‘virtue’, ‘parallel axiom’ as examples for the mixed group.) The latter two can of course be seen as
direct parallels to Peirce’s pure and applied diagrams, respectively. Peirce also admits the existence of
concepts not (yet?) analyzable in diagrams and mentions ‘murder’ as an example. Still, even concepts as
these are not without diagrammatic content. Both Husserl’s ‘house’ and Peirce’s ‘murder’ are founded
concepts; both presupposes a schema of wilful, human action oriented towards a goal and towards
eliminating certain factors opposing that goal (life of some person in the former case; cold, rain, theft,

444
N O T E S
etc. in the latter. The reason why Peirce will not take ‘murder’ as a diagram is that its semantics contains
no rational relations. But this only implies that it is a ‘stiffened’ diagram: it is not possible to perform
any information-yielding experiments on it. But it is still a diagram in so far it is a schematic relation
able to subsume instantiations by variation. Thus, I believe that the field of pure sensuous concepts
is probably narrower than both Husserl and Peirce suppose; they seem to be restricted to primitive
sense qualities and even then, the categorial apparatus of variation is necessary for isolating them from
phenomenological experience.
176 Thus, I perfectly agree in his insistence that it is a mistake for Husserl to claim that the ‘vague
morphologies’ principally resist mathematization. It is interesting to note that this was not unanimously
Husserl’s contention in the first version of the LU where he still claims the ideal that ‘Die vagen
Gebilde der Anschauung mittels exakter Begriffe möglichst deutlich zu charakterisieren, ist überhaupt
eine phänomenologische Aufgabe ’, even if he immediately admits that this task ‘ lange nicht genug
angegriffen und auch in Beziehung auf die vorliegende Untersuchungen nicht gelöst ist’ (3. LU, Hua
XIX, 249). The second version replaces this contention with a longer argumentation to emphasize that
‘Offenbar sind die Wesensgestaltungen aller anschauliche Gegebenheiten als solcher prinzipiell nicht
unter ’exakte’ oder ’Ideal-Begriffe’, wie es die mathematischen sind, zu bringen’ (ibid.). (Eng. ‘The
descriptive concepts of all pure description, i.e. of description adapted to intuition immediately and
with truth and so of all phenomenological description, differ in principle from those which dominate
objective science. To clear up these matters is a phenomenological task never yet seriously undertaken
and not carried out in relation to our present distinction’; 3rd LU, Vol. 2, 451).
177 Of course, discontinuous operation procedures are possible, so as e.g. the stepwise construal of (534.
But discontinuity is dependent on continuity, Peirce would argue: the only way we are able to synthesize
the single components of a discontinuous procedure into one state-of-affairs is by embedding them in
a continuous space. Thus, discontinuous phenomena are always embedded into continuous ones, and
discontinuous objects or calculi presuppose (explicitly or not), continuity.
178 Holenstein 1972, 288. Husserl’s argument is built on §22 in LU 3, where he notes that not every
whole requires a specific moment of unity, only the ‘zerstückbare’ require that. All really uniting consists
of relations of foundation, and unity is a categorial predicate, on the one hand, at the same time as this
unity is given directly, sensuously in Gestalts.
179 This fact is, of course, what gives rise to the attempts at finding a vocabulary of simple schemata, so
as e.g. the ‘kinaesthetic image schemas’ of Lakoff 1987 or the schemata in Peruzzi 1999. The precise
amount of such schemata which the human mind is able to process is no doubt governed by empirical
psychological regularities – but an a priori, phenomenological corollary is that any possible mind will
have to do with some finite vocabulary or other of such simple diagram atoms. This will, in fact, be
the phenomenological equivalent of the impossibility of ‘intellectual intuition’: if we possessed such a
faculty, infinitely complicated diagrams would be possible to process in one glance.
180 ‘Mereology’, from Greek meros, part. As a matter of fact, it might have been called ‘merology’,
but after the Polish logician Lesniewski the form quoted has become ubiquitous. Lesniewski, in his
works from the 20s and 30s, considered mereology to be one out of three basic branches of philosophy,
‘protothetic’, ‘ontology’, and ‘mereology’, respectively. Protothetic is a doctrine of propositions and
their interrelations and it forms the logical basis of his theory; ontology is based on a distributive
rendering of class membership, so that distributive class expressions are identical with general nouns
applicable to individuals. Mereology, then, considers collective class expressions understood as being
composed of parts. By the distinguishing of the two latter branches of philosophy, Russell’s paradox is
avoided, and mereology is weaker than set theory because it only admits one relation of inclusion (part
of), opposed to the two in set theory (membership relation and subset relation, which in Lesniewski’s
thought are separated as belonging to ontology and mereology, respectively). Mereology in this sense of
the word thus has the advantage of being ‘bottomless’, the compositional foundation of a class upon the
existence of ultimate Ur-elemente being avoided. This implies that mereology is ‘phenomenological’ in
so far as it may describe a given level of phenomenal existence without recourse to a bottom level of
atomistic ontology, a crucial aspect of the semiotic perspectives in mereology. This implies the possible
affinity of mereology to strongly nominalist positions claiming mereology to be without any ontological
presuppositions whatsoever (as in Lesniewski’s case, and after him, Goodman) – even if this is no

N O T E S
445
necessity, and mereology may as well be connected to neutral (the younger Husserl) or strong realist
positions (Smith). Lesniewski was influenced by the part-whole reflections of the Brentanian tradition:
Husserl’s third and fourth Logische Untersuchungen, in turn influenced by Brentano’s Deskriptive
Psychologie (1890), and Carl Stumpf’s Über den psychologischen Ursprung der Raumvorstellung (1873).
For further accounts for these developments, see Smith 1982, 1994. In this context, we shall stick to
mereological aspects of decidedly semiotic currents of thought.
Even if none of the authors discussed here use the word, I have chosen it as shorthand for ‘doctrine
of whole and parts’ and similar complicated expressions.
181 Of course, these two alternatives display, each of them, a host of subvariants of more and less
sophisticated types, ranging from a completely compositional logicist theory in the one end and to
almost mystical insistances on the autonomy of wholes in the other. Moreover, there is not necessarily a
contradiction between the two; it is perfectly possible to imagine compromises, so as e.g. an emphasis on
the primacy of the holist level giving rise to motivated, iconic syntaxes governing its parts – combined
with a recognition of the possibility for these syntaxes of assuming, once established, an autonomous
status involving local compositionality.
182 Cf. Hua XII which contains among other writings ‘Zur Logik der Zeichen (Semiotik)’.
183 Husserl’s disciple from the 1910s, Roman Ingarden, has probably developed the most ambitious
further detailing of dependency theory, distinguishing no less than four different ontological species
of dependency: autonomy/heteronomy, originality/derivation, self-sufficiency/connectivity, indepen-
dence/dependency which may further combine into eight types of signs (Ingarden 1965–74, 123). It
seems evident that dependency is in need of further subdistinctions (a head is an independent part of the
body, as an autonomous part, but it is a special part because the body ceases to function as a body if it is
in fact cut off). Ingarden’s suggestions have not, however, yet given rise to a fertile further development.
184 Fassen wir irgendein Paar von Teilen eines Ganzen ins Auge, so bestehen folgenden Möglichkeiten:
1 Zwischen beiden Teilen besteht ein Verhältnis der Fundierung.
2 es besteht diese Verhältnis nicht. Im ersteren Falle kann die Fundierung
a eine gegenseitige,
b eine einseitige sein  (LU II, 264–65)
185 After Holenstein 1976, 58.
186 Jakobson 1985, 281.
187 Jakobson 1971b, 713.
188 Jakobson 1985, 203.
189 Ibid. 189. Here, he claims that the third Logical Investigation is ‘ one of the milestones for the
initial advance of structural linguistics ’.
190 Like in ‘Parts and Wholes in Language’ where he begins: ‘In the second part of Edmund Husserl’s
Logische Untersuchungen – still one of the most inspiring contributions to the phenomenology of
language – two studies devoted to ‘Wholes and Parts’ introduce the philosopher’s meditations on ‘the
Idea of Pure Grammar’. In spite of manifold aspects of interdependence between wholes and parts in
language, linguists have been prone to disregard this mutual relationship.’ (Jakobson 1971b, 280), and
further ‘The structure of the verbal code is perhaps the most striking and intricate example of whole-part
relations that are built hierarchically’ (282–83).
191 Jakobson 1971a, 314.
192 It is a strange fact that Jakobson does not explicitly refer to the Logische Untersuchungen in his
definitions of the zero-sign or the markedness/unmarkedness distinction. Holenstein 1975, 1976 does
not mention any such direct influence either.
193 ‘Eine der wesentlichen Eigenschaften der phonologischen Korrelation besteht darin, dass die beiden
Glieder eines Korrelationspaares nicht gleichberechtigt sind: das eine Glied besitzt das betreffende
Merkmal, das andere besitzt es nicht; das erste wird als merkmalhaltig bezeichnet, das zweite – als
merkmallos ’ Jakobson 1971b, 3, with reference to Prince Troubetzkoy.
194 Jakobson 1971b, 213.
195 Even politically correct language politics, eager to avoid the asymmetry inherent in the markedness-
unmarkedness distinction, can not avoid this, cf. long marked forms like ‘African-American’ vs. short
unmarked forms like ‘African’ or ‘American’.

446
N O T E S
196 For a comparative discussion of the bases of Hjelmslev’s theory in relation to Brøndal’s, see
Jørgensen and Stjernfelt 1987.
197 The only reference to Husserl found in Hjelmslev is in the early Principes, but even if it refers to the
fourth investigation, it is pejorative: ‘ la théorie étrange du philosophe HUSSERL’ (40). None of two
recent comprehensive investigations on Hjelmslev mentions any possible relation to Husserl (Gregersen
1992; Rasmussen 1992).
198 Diderichsen returns over and over again to the fact that linguistics in general tends to focus upon ‘three
main types of grammatical connexion’, and at several occasions he mentions in that context Husserl’s
mereological analyses from Logische Untersuchungen as strikingly similar to structural linguistics
(Diderichsen 1966, 107 [1947]; 137 [1948]; 207 [1952]) but he yields no indication as to the possible
relationship between Husserl and Hjelmslev.
199 Marty, whose 1908 Untersuchungen zur Grundlegung der allgemeinen Grammatik und Sprach-
philosophie refers to the Logische Untersuchungen. Hjelmslev refers to Marty at several occasions, but
not directly in connection to the dependency algebra.
200 So, it seems like mid-twentieth century mereology has left behind some interesting ruins – or drafts
for impressive new constructions? – in Ingarden’s and Hjelmslev’s complicated mereologies, hopefully
to be developed by future research.
201 Here, Diderichsen is admirably clear in his early insistence that formal glossematic description is
impossible without a prior phenomenological sensibility for identities and differences (Diderichsen 1966,
123 (1948)).
202 This consequence is still visible in Greimasian semiotics, having inherited the whole of its metathe-
oretical apparatus from the Prolegomena. In the semiotics of the Paris school, the orthodoxy teaches
that denominations of theoretical as well as metatheoretical terms are completely arbitrary; still they are
invariably chosen so they are relatively easily understandable with reference to ordinary language or
linguistic tradition.
203 For instance Ronald Langacker at the ‘Wholes and their Parts’ conference in Bolzano, where a first
draft of this chapter was given as a paper.
204 The shortest presentation is probably: ‘For mathematical reasoning consists in constructing a diagram
according to a general precept, in observing certain relations between parts of that diagram not explicitly
required by the precept, showing that these relations will hold for all such diagrams, and in formulating
this conclusion in general terms. All valid necessary reasoning is in fact thus diagrammatic’ (‘Lessons
from the History of Science’, 1896, 1.54). The object of mathematics will be pure diagrams of any
kind, while ordinary reasoning as well as the empirical sciences will use diagrams applied in being
constrained by existing relations as well.
205 Maybe this very general notion of diagram – parts with unspecified interrelations being open to
abstraction to classes of interrelations – makes Peirce’s schema an early forerunner of category theory.
Finally, I imagine Peirce’s very wide concept of diagram may not only generalize Kant’s idea of a
schema, but also serve as a unifying concept for the various schema-like ideas that prevail in present-
day cognitive semantics (image schemas, force dynamics, landmark-trajectory, frames, scripts etc.). If
so, then the semantic processes charted in this tradition – metaphorical mapping, blending, conceptual
extension etc. – would be understandable as specific variants of diagram manipulation.
206 Austria avoided the wave of German idealism (partly due to politically motivated prohibitions) and
thus maintained a realist Aristotelian curriculum in philosophy all the way to 1918. This contributed
to the Austrian commitment to ontological issues when such issues were long since surrounded by
epistemological (on the Continent) or logical (the Anglo-Saxon world) scepticism, cf. Smith 1994.
207 Smith 1992, 1996b.
208 Peer Bundgaard (2004a, 2004b) has pointed to the fact that Husserl actually outlines two different a
priori theories in that investigation, namely of grammar and semantics respectively.
209 Cf. Barry Smith 1992
210 It is interesting to note that parts of semiotics have undertaken similar investigations, even if in
less ontological clothing, cf. Greimas’ fertile analyses of ‘challenge’ and ‘anger’ in Greimas 1982. In
Chap. 18, we shall attempt a related analysis of ‘espionage’.
211 See Caldwell 2004 and Grassl and Smith (eds.) 1986.

N O T E S
447
212 In the original, the first question was: ‘Do the empirical theories with the help of which we seek
to approximate a good or true picture of reality rest on any non-empirical presuppositions?’ We must
assume this version is a typo since it ‘turns the wrong way’. Extreme empiricists would hardly embrace
non-empirical presuppositions. In order to give meaning, we have ‘inverted’ the question to fit the
answer.
213 Cf. Cassirer’s interest in mediate concepts in, for instance, biology, cf. next chapter. It must be added
that Carnap was not unaware of the coordination problem between these two tiers – the discussion of
this problem was central in early positivism. Still, he thought to have solved it with the distinction
between analytical and descriptive parts of the logical-linguistic framework and thus lost sight of it as
a special problem (Friedman, 82n).
214 Friedman’s ideas have an independent correlate in the French Neo-Kantian Jean Petitot and his idea
of an epistemological ‘golden rule’ requiring an intermediate level of objectivity-constituting concepts
between mathematical models used in science on the one hand and empirical data on the other (see
Petitot 1992; Stjernfelt 1992a). Petitot is even, from time to time, collaborating with Barry Smith.
215 A considerable wave of interest is also palpable in analytical philosophy, cf. the Boghossian and
Peacocke volume New Essays on the A Priori. I think it is fair to say, though, that these purely
philosophical discussions are less interested in history of science – and, maybe for the same reason, less
interested in the synthetical a priori.
216 What does one do when trying to find a – conceivable or imaginable – counterexample to a synap
sentence? One varies the states of affairs mentioned, performs a diagram experiment, in short.
217 This and the following are my translations. ‘Das Eidos, das reine Wesen, kann sich intuitiv in
Erfahrungsgegebenheiten, in solchen der Wahrnehmung, Erinnerung usw., exemplifizieren, ebensogut
aber auch in bloßen Phantasiegegebennheiten. Demgemäß können wir, ein Wesen selbst und originär
zu erfassen, von entsprechenden Anschauungen ausgehen, ebensowohl aber auch von nicht erfahrenden,
nicht-daseinserfassenden, vielmehr ’bloß einbildenden’ Anschauungen.
Erzeugen wir in der freien Phantasie irgendwelche Raumgestaltungen, Melodien, soziale Vorgänge,
u. dgl., oder fingieren wir Akte des Erfahrens, des Gefallens oder Mißfallens, des Wollens u.dgl., so
können wir daran durch ’Ideation’ mannigfache reine Wesen originär erschauen und ev. sogar adäquat:
sei es die Wesen von räumlicher Gestalt, von Melodie, sozialem Vorgang, usw. überhaupt, sei es von
Gestalt, Melodie, usw. des betreffenden besonderen Typus.’ (16–17)
218 ‘1. erzeugences Durchlaufen der Mannigfaltigkeit der Variationen;
2. einheitliche Verknüpfung in fortwährender Deckung;
3. herausschauende aktive Identifizierung des Kongruierenden gegenüber den Differenzen.’ (EU 419)
219 Husserl’s theory is that empirical generals – in an analogy to the pure generals – form successive layers,
beginning with ‘concrete generals’ based on repetition of the same experience (‘gleiche’ – as it can not, of
course, be numerically identical experiences, it must be ‘same’ experiences, give and take some margin),
while generals based on similarities only form species comprising several such concrete generals. The same
two steps are repeated when it comes to partial sameness or similarity: here generals comprising abstract
aspects, and, in turn, species of such aspects, are constituted. Common to all these empirical generals on
differentlevels,however,isthattheyrefermerelyto‘realpossibilities’asdistinctfromthe‘purepossibilities’
covered by the variation manifold referred to by pure concepts. It is crucial to keep in mind, here, that the
distinction between empirical and pure does not – as in Kant – coincide with the distinction between material
and formal. This forms the very basis of the synthetical a priori in Husserl: the pure concepts may refer to a
priori structures, both in formal and material domains.
220 ‘Sie beruht auf der Abwandlung einer erfahrenen oder phantasierten Gegenständllichkeit zum
beliebigen Exempel, das zugleich den Charakter des leitenden ’Vorbildes’ erhält, des Ausgangsgliedes
für die Erzeugung einer offen endlosen Mannigfaltigkeit von Varianten, also auf einer Variation. M.a.W.
wir lassen uns vom Faktum als Vorbild für seine Umgestaltung in reiner Phantasie leiten’ (EU, 410–11).
221 ‘ das besagt nicht, daß ein wirkliches Fortgehen in die Unendlichkeit erforderlich wäre, eine
wirkliche Erzeugung aller Varianten ’ (EU, 412).
222 ‘Es kommt vielmehr darauf an, daß die Variation als Prozeß der Variantenbildung selbst eine
Beliebigkeitsgestalt habe, daß der Prozeß im Bewußtsein beliebiger Fortbildung von Varianten vollzogen
sei.’ (EU, 413).

448
N O T E S
223 ‘Zu jeder Variationsmannigfaltigkeit gehört wesentlich dieses merkwürdige und so überaus wichtige
Bewußtsein des ’und so weiter nach Belieben’. Dadurch allein ist gegeben, was wir eine ’offen
unendliche’ Mannigfaltigkeit nennen; evidenterweise ist sie dieselbe, ob wir langehin erzeugend oder
beliebig Passendes heranziehend fortschreiten ’ (EU, 413).
224 A ‘composite photograph’ was – and is – the name of a technique where different variants of a
type are superposed by subjecting the film to the light from each of the variants for exactly the same
amount of time – then differences are levelled out, and a type appears. The technique is nowadays used
to display the ‘favourite woman’ of a decade by the composite photograph of a series of actresses and
models. See Hookway 2002 for Peirce’s use of the metaphor.
225 ‘ die logische Forderung der Individualität als eines Gegenstandes, als eines identischen Substrates
für Prädikate, bzw. für objektive Wahrheiten (die unter dem Satz vom Widerspruch stehen), ist nicht
erfüllt durch die Vereinzelung eines Begriffsumfanges, sondern steht unter Bedingungen der Zeit. Das
sagt, daß wir für die individuelle Vereinzelung unter der Forderung einer Möglichkeit einstimmiger
Ausweisung in einem kontinuierlichen Zusammenhang wirklicher und möglicher (an die wirklichen
anschließbarer) Anschauungen stehen’ (431, our italics).
226 von Hayek’s (1978) idea that the whole of our perception apparatus is geared to the extraction of
abstract features of the environment and that abstractions (Peircean prescissions) are thus phenomeno-
logically primary as compared to particulars might support Peirce’s controversial idea of the direct
perception of generalities.
227 See Chap. 4.
228 Earlier, an exception to this rule made it possible to let a broken coastline signify that nothing
beyond that point had yet been explored, a sign pertaining not to geographical ontology, but rather to
that of discovery.
229 He even proposes a third interpretation: that what is synthetic is only what is theorematical in the
sharpened sense of deriving from the introduction of some new axiom (and not theorematical in the
sense of deriving form some well-known theorem which has not been mentioned in the problem at
issue). According to Levy, these two ‘degrees’ of theorematicity must generally be distinguished –
between, e.g. the introduction of an auxiliary line in a geometrical proof where the existence of such
a line is granted beforehand by the axioms of geometry even if the line has not in any way been
mentioned in context of the present problem, on the one hand, and e.g. the introduction of the Power
Set Axiom in Peirce’s proof for the claim that there is no greatest multitude, on the other. Even if this
distinction is indeed valuable, to let the analytic/synthetic distinction follow it would be to historicize it to
unrecognizability.
230 In both special sciences and everyday reasoning, diagrams and mathematics may be implicit, though –
just like is the case in syllogisms, in logical arguments more general, or in diagrams underlying grammar
according to Peirce. There is no need that we should in every single case be able actually to draw out
the diagram in question (even if it generally makes explicit what was only implicit and thus may open
up a new set of possibilities of diagram experiments). Just as being the case in many symbols (covering
both terms, propositions, and arguments in Peirce) – in most cases the content of those symbols may
rest implicit and not made the explicit object of a diagram. In this respect, diagrams may play a role
parallel to the variation procedure in the eidetic variation which, in Husserl’s terminology might remain
a result of ‘passive synthesis’ before yielding the resulting concept as an object of active intention;
Husserl’s intentionality distinction between passive and active may here be covered by Peirce’s semiotic
distinction between implicit and explicit. Such implications, however, will not be part of reasoning
proper which, in Peirce, comprises only inferences which are explicitly controllable and subject to an
ongoing scrutiny (cf. Chap. 11).
231 Another such problem is: given fallibilistic apriorism, it is possible for individuals or cultures to be
at fault regarding parts of a given synthetic a priori conceptual cluster – how does this idea fit with
the clain that synthetic a priori laws are generally tacitly known and govern common sense actions in
different domains? One answer is that the common sense world has a basic pragmatic quality which to
some extent sets it apart from scientific accounts for the same phenomena, cf. for instance the mainly
Aristotelian ‘naive physics’ sufficient for most everyday tasks but at odds with real physics. See Petitot
and Smith 1990.

N O T E S
449
232 In Stepanov 1971, cf. Sebeok 1991, 7. Around the same time, C.H. Waddington concluded his
Towards a Theoretical Biology (Vol. III, 1972, 289) with the idea that language should become ‘a
paradigm for the theory of General Biology’, and René Thom founded his biolinguistics in Thom 1972.
233 The latter half of the Kritik der Urteilskraft, 1790.
234 For instance René Thom (1972), or Emmeche and Hoffmeyer (1991).
235 Hoffmeyer has recently summed up his own work in the field in Biosemiotik (2005).
236 Translations from Kritik der Urteilskraft are my own. ‘Ich behaupte aber, dass in jeder besonderen
Naturlehre nur so viel eigentliche Wissenschaft angetroffen werden könne, als darin Mathematik ist ’
(Kant 1786, A IX).
‘ eine reine Naturlehre über bestimmte Naturdinge (Körperlehre und Seelenlehre) ist nur vermittelst
der Mathematik möglich ’ (ibid. A X)
237 ‘Dass seine Form nicht nach blossen Naturgesetzen möglich sei, d.i. solchen, welche von uns durch
den Verstand allein, auf Gegenstände der Sinne angewandt, erkannt werden können; sondern dass selbst
ihr empirischens Erkenntnis, ihrer Ursache und Wirkung nach, Begriffe der Vernunft voraussetze’ (Kant
1974 [1790], 232).
238 ‘ ein Ding existiert als Naturzweck, wenn es von sich selbst [] Ursache und Wirkung ist’ (Kant
1974 [1790], 233).
239 That is to say, it could not be mathematized with the mathematics available to Kant. But there is
no reason to accept Kant’s identification of mechanical explanation with mathematical formalization of
a given domain; the latter is far richer than the former. Whether more advanced mathematics might
do (parts of) the job is a possibility open for an historicized version of Kant’s apriorism, permitting
the synthetic a priori field to develop. As we have already mentioned, Petitot has a strong argument
for the possibility of qualitative dynamics to mathematically describe phenomenological aspects of
non-mechanical reality aspects – ‘pheno-physics’.
240 ‘dieser Begriff fürht nun notwendig auf die Idee der gesamten Natur als einer Systems nach der
Regel der Zwecke, welcher Idee nun aller Mechanism der Natur nach Principien der Vernunft ()
untergeordnet werden muss’ (op. cit. 242).
241 ‘Auch Schönheit der Natur, d.i. ihre Zusammensstimmung mit dem freien Spiele unsere Erkenntnisver-
mögeninderAuffassungundBeurteilungihrerErscheinungkannaufdieArtalsobjektiveZweckmässigkeit
der Natur in ihrem Ganzen als System, worin der Mensch ein Glied ist, betrachtet werden’ (op. cit. 243).
242 One could say that Kant admits the anthropomorphic character of the concept of organism and related
notions – but at the same time he offers a naturalistic (!) explanation of it: it because we ourselves
are animals and thus teleological beings that we are able to discern organic properties in other objects.
Thus, the tragedy of teleology is not that it is wrong or misleading, it is, rather, that we are unable to
understand its ‘inside’.
243 In this interpretation of Kant, it must be emphasized, we do not subscribe to subjectivism, nor to the
idea of a prioric regularities as a privilege of some transcendental subject. They are, rather, objective
conditions valid for, but not necessarily known by, any possible subject whatever, cf. Chap. 8.
244 On Cassirer’s Uexküll inspiration, see Stjernfelt (in press b).
245 My translation. ‘Sie setze an die Stelle des Zweckbegriffs den Ordnungs- und Systembegriff, und
sie charakterisiert das Leben dadurch, dass sie ihm die Eigenschaft des Systems zuschreibt’ (Cassirer
1957/1991, 221).
246 Of course, the problem here deals with the idea that semiotic concepts might contribute to the very
basis of biology, not, for instance, to its import into more restricted subarea like zoo-semiotics where
their use is much more unproblematic, at least for higher animals with elaborate mental representations
of the surroundings. Already phyto- and myco-semiotics investigating plants and fungi, take the problem
much deeper into the metaphysics of biology.
247 The semiotic interpretation of the behaviour of E. Coli presented here has been developed through
discussions with the biologist Claus Emmeche.
248 The illustrations are from Alberts et al. 1994.
249 Such as the fine introduction in Alberts et al. 1994, 773–85.
250 The fact that man and bacterium alike may be fooled by exactly the same chemical supports such a
hypothesis. The qualia of sweetness, somehow actualized by our gustatory system, is no doubt lacking

450
N O T E S
in the bacterium and bears witness to a much more sophisticated process of tasting in higher animals –
but still exploiting the same rather simple mechanisms. Categorial perception by means of ‘active sites’
probably plays a central role in the important transition from uni- to multicellular animals studied by
Lynn Margulis. According to her endosymbiont hypothesis, already the eucaryote cell forms a symbiosis
between simpler species: mitochondria, chloroplast, cell kern, and maybe the undilipodia facilitating
cell movement like cilia or the flagella as in E. Coli. Further symbiosis at a higher level requires the
coordinated cooperation between bacterial colonies able to communicate, and the interesting intermediate
forms behaving like single cells in some phases and environments only to change to more coordinated
behaviour in other environments are possible only through elaborate intercell communication. During
unfavorable environment constraints, e.g. the outer bacteria of the colony are able to secrete chemical
signs in order to communicate the danger to the more inner layers, causing them to take defensive action
and change into a more intert, spore-like form. Simultaneously, the whole colony changes shape forming
a sort of fruit stalk able to let these spores spread to faraway, hopefully more favorable locations. To
that extent, bacterial colonies share certain of the coordinated behaviours in much more sophisticated
multicellular organisms where intercell sign use may be harder to observe directly.
251 Even if biologists like de Loof and Broeck (1995) maintain a short definition not far from what
follows here: life as the total sum of all acts of communication performed by a compartment (an
organized, bounded whole) from the lowest to the highest level at a given moment t.
252 Rosen (1989) argues from Gödel’s incompleteness theorem for the introduction of semantic notions
in biology. Gödel’s theorem may be expressed as stating that for a given, sufficiently rich system,
syntactic truth (that is, theorems provable in the system) is but a subset of semantic truth (true theorems
not provable in the system). Rosen calls ‘complex systems’ material systems which embody this property,
in opposition to mechanic systems, and sees living beings as prototypical examples of such complex
systems. As is evident, this argument is structurally analogous to the anti-functionalist Gödel argument
in AI (from Lucas to Penrose).
253 A priori analyses of various domains’ conceptual structures still often have an ill reputation due to
empiricist prejudices or to the widespread myth that a priori analyses necessarily implies subjectivism;
see Chap. 8.
254 We also find this crucial idea in Kauffman as a property in ‘autonomous agents’, e.g. his (2000).
255 In Stjernfelt 1992b, I proposed this property as a prerequisite to all formation of signs. The notion of
‘categorical perception’ is taken from experimental phonetics (Liberman, Studdert-Kennedy etc.) where
it refers to the ability of language speakers to immediately identify and categorize different variants of
spoken phonemes, cf. Petitot 1985a.The fact that the set of macromolecules possessing the same active
site can probably not be mapped by any effective procedure supports the Robert Rosen-like idea that
the semantics inherent in this primitive categorization is subjected to undecidability limitations. The
set of macromolecules triggering a specific reaction in the organism is (just like the whole of organic
chemistry) potentially open-ended and thus can not be defined extensionally. I did not know, in 1992,
that Giorgio Prodi had some years before put forward almost exactly the same proposal (Prodi 1988).
256 This crucial difference is noted already by Pattee 1977 (‘our conceptual distinction between a
molecule and its message or interpretation depends on the physical distinction between strong and weak
forces’, 265) and more recently by Igambardiev’s (1992) distinction between information and energetic
levels (128).
257 This crucial size differences between the sign and its signification probably entails that semiotic systems
must constitute a part of what Bak (1997) calls self-organized critical systems. The idea here is that a long
range of different systems from physics and geology over biology and well into the human and social
sciences (sandpiles, earthquakes, traffic jams etc.) display a characteristical relation between the size of
events (avalanches in a sand pile, for instance) and their frequency, so that a power law holds between
event size and event frequency. Bak argues that brains must be at the self-organized critical limit by a
negative argument: if brains were subcritical, too few events would influence their behavior, rendering
them insensible; if they were supercritical, too many events would influence them and make them chaotic
(Bak 1997, 176–77). This brain argument may be generalized to all semiotic systems: they must react with
insignificant changes to most small impulses but with significant changes to few small impulses; the latter
class now constitute signs of various ‘sizes’ dependent on the size of events they trigger.

N O T E S
451
258 I borrow this use of the term from Merrell (1997).
259 These ideas resume deliberations in Thom 1975, 128f.
260 And even science – according to René Thom’s fertile definition of science as the nesting of actual
events into a space of virtuality – finds its roots here.
261 As discussed in Chap. 4, the concept of schema goes back to Kant’s first Critique (as a notion for
the possible meeting point for concepts and intuitions) and plays a central role for realist semiotics from
Cassirer to cognitive semantics. Santa Fe complexity theory school has recently realized the necessity
of the presence of schemata in complex, adaptive systems (Gell-Mann 1995; Martin 1994) and found
coarse graining and perception of regularities among their chief properties.
262 As to consciousness involving qualia, experienced selfhood, etc., we have no behavioral criteria
for determining its occurrence during evolution, but a first hypothesis might be that it appears as an
integrating factor in organisms with central nervous systems, facilitating more efficient perception-action
cycles.
263 Peirce’s pan-psychism of course implies that even inanimate matter would possess some kind of
dull ‘feeling’. A recent argument for the existence of proto-consciousness in living beings has been put
forward by Penrose (1990, 1994): the remarkable fact that most life reacts similarly to the same basic
types of anesthetic chemicals. The question of when consciousness shows up in the course of evolution,
however interesting it is, is not decisive to the discussion of the relevance of semiotics for biology, so
we shall leave it in this context.
264 Thus, the code duality (analogue/digital, cell architecture/genome) discussed by my colleagues in
the Copenhagen biosemiotic school is probably no logical necessity for life as such, even if it seems to
be for the reproduction of it.
265 Elsewhere, Peirce restricts himself to claiming that the universe is representable (because of appearing
in the three categories) – this would be a more modest, Scotean claim that symbols and arguments
may chart the universe because they mirror structures in it and thus have a fundamentum in re in such
proto-semiotic realitates, rather than claiming that the universe consists of symbols.
266 A further support for this thesis comes from Santa Fe theoretical biologist Stuart Kauffman and his
theory of ‘autonomous agents’. The idea here is that they derive from ‘autocatalytic sets’ of chemical
compounds giving rise to chemical cycles. When they become able to stabilize and reproduce, we get
‘autonomous agents’ as a general notion for (not only biological) organisms. Furthermore, by the intro-
duction of Per Bak’s ‘self-organized criticality’ into this framework, Kauffman makes the guess that the
biosphere as a whole – maybe even the whole universe – evolves at the maximum speed possible into
what he calls the ‘adjacent possible’, defined by consisting of yet unexisting chemical compounds at one-
reaction-distance from existing compounds. If this radical version of a naturalized Enlightenment optimism
is really correct, it would probably imply that biological evolution takes the shortest way possible in the
evolution of still more intelligent beings. Kauffman specifies in this context an interesting assumption
in our context: even if the biosphere (and maybe cosmos as a whole, he speculates) thus must be super-
critical with respect to the autocatalytic power of its chemical networks, the single autonomous agent
(organism, cell, or whatever) must necessarily be subcritical inside its skin – if not, autocatalytic bursts
of still new compounds (following Bak’s power law distribution of events at the critical limit) would
rapidly destroy it. This hypothesis – speculative as it is – would imply interesting semiotic consequences;
the Kantian notion of the finitude of the subject (here, the agent) in relation to the thing itself (here,
the biosphere) would have a naturalistic counterpart, as would the Hegelian idea of a ‘ruse of reason’
where the individual agent unknowingly contributes to the common best. Semiotically speaking, this
asymmetry between the agent and its environment would arithmetically necessitate categorization (by a
finite mind of an infinity of possibilities) and hence schematic signs as general and underdetermined means
of coping with an overdetermined environment, cf. our remarks on the economy of sign use above.
267 See, for instance, Emmeche et al. 1997 and 2000.
268 Thom 1990, 43: ‘Efficient causality and final causality may be subsumed under the heading of formal
causality. It should be observed that in Aristotelian theory final causality is in fact always conditional. An
‘act,’ described as a process by an analytical model, may be stopped short if some impediment intervenes
during its course. So the act may fail because of interaction with an accidental factor. When so considered,
Aristotelian finality is perfectly compatible with our modern view of (local) determinism.’

452
N O T E S
269 The fact that biosemiotic vocabulary is indispensable also for higher ontological levels does not in
any way imply that higher domains may be reduced to biology. von Uexküll’s dark Staatsbiologie – in
fact no less than a fascist biologist doctrine of state – should be sufficient as a warning against such
shortcircuits.
270 It might be argued that this privilege of biology might be a coincidence due to our biological
being. Kauffman (2000), for instance, toys with the possibility that his equivalent concept to biosemiotic
organisms, ‘coevolving autonomous agents’ may be applied on a cosmological scale (such as the
organization of galaxies) as well as on a microphysical scale (the organization of elementary particles
and below). Of course, there may be several levels of organization between the fermion-boson level and
Planck scale; we do not know and might never come to know.
271 A lineage involving scholars like Goethe, Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, von Baer, d’Arcy Thompson,
Spemann, Driesch, Waddington, Brian Goodwin, René Thom, Robert Rosen, Stuart Kauffman, inter
alia.
272 René Thom has attempted to rescue the term vitalism, claiming that it is reductionism which is a
dogmatist view, trying to repudiate the reality of the organism, evident for all to see. His insistence
on the term, however, does not include the usual assumptions of the existence of extra-physical forces
or the like, so his idea of saving the term, however sympathetical, should probably be left behind.
Nevertheless, in this connection he makes a surprising attack on Neo-Darwinism, hinted at above: it is
Neo-Darwinism which is the metaphysical theory, not at all so empiricist as it often sees itself, and what
is more, in contrast to the epigenetic tradition’s emphasis on ontogenesis, the Neo-Darwinist emphasis
on phylogenesis gives it a holism on the species level, contrary to its own reductionist claims, in so far
as it is the genome of a species which is considered the main object of research. (Thom 1990, 600)
273 ‘Umwelt’ is often quoted as von Uexküll’s own terminological neologism; in fact, it was already
used by Goethe and originates from the Danish-German Enlightenment-Early Romanticism poet Jens
Baggesen who coined it in an ode to Napoleon in the year 1800.
274 cf. von Uexküll 1973, 220.
275 The inclusion of von Uexküll in the current repertoire of semiotics is thus largely due to Sebeok. But
despite his exile status in relation to biology departments, there is a series of other local ‘rediscoveries’.
Most notably, probably, his status as ancestor to present-day ethology via Lorenz and Tinbergen. But also
his role in the biological parts of Cassirer’s theory of knowledge should be mentioned (Cassirer (1991)
quotes with approval the ‘nicht-stoffliche Ordnung’ of the Theoretische Biologie as a central concept
for an anti-vitalist biology – see Stjernfelt (in press a), in René Thom’s catastrophe theory (1975, 1990)
with his insistence of the centripetal vs. centrifugal construction principles of machines and organisms,
respectively (despite the non-mechanist teleology inherent in both), and, most elaborated, in Merleau-
Ponty of around 1957–60: in his lecture notes for that period (1995), dealing with the concept of nature,
we find a large chapter on the phenomenological importance of the Umwelt concept: its introduction
of ‘plans naturels’ making possible the ‘commencement de culture’ and its gradual evolution, being
‘moins en moins orienté vers un but et, de plus en plus, interprétation de symboles.’ (231) – see
Chap. 10. Finally, the ‘embodiment’ wave of recent cognitive studies also displays a growing von Uexküll
interest.
276 The illustration is from von Uexküll 1973, 105. Such circles are most often, in von Uexküll, connected
to individual purposes of the organism: drinking, preying, eating, mating, fighting, etc. Collective
functional circles of more complex kind, relevant to a flock or herd Umwelt must be presupposed in the
semiotically interesting cases of social animals; we shall not go into this issue here.
277 A Kantian idea, to be sure, prefigured in Kant’s idea of causal circles in ‘Kritik der teleologischen
Urteilskraft’ – see the previous chapter.
278 This goes for animals, even down to unicellular animals, but not for plants in so far they are generally
seen as possessing a truncated Umwelt all right (von Uexküll calls it a Wohnhülle, a dwelling place), but
no functional circle because of their stationary life and lack of nervous system, making them unable to
move and hence unable to perform Wirken. This distinction seems somewhat problematic (heliotropes
or carnivorous plants e.g. seem to form spectacular exceptions and not the only ones) but we shall leave
further discussion of it here.
279 An example given by several occasions, e.g. von Uexküll 1973, 1982, 56–57.

N O T E S
453
280 Prominent figures in a Neo-Kantian semiotic family tree would include Peirce, Cassirer, and in our
days Jean Petitot and the American cognitive semantics traditions; the differentia specifica will be the
assignment of a central role to schemas or schema-like concepts in the respective semiotic theory. For
a discussion of Neo-Kantian semiotics and Peirce, Cassirer, and Heidegger, see Stjernfelt 2000. Taken
in a more wide sense, of course, Neo-Kantianism as meaning merely semiotic reflections inspired by
Kant, it would include the doctrines of Nietzsche, Heidegger, brands of Lebensphilosophie as well as
evolutionary epistemology.
281 The German quote can be found in von Uexküll 1973, 9.
282 This attempt at the organism’s auto-constitution of space, however, is mysterious: a single segment
of the (in itself spatially defined) functional circle is taken to be constitutive of space  So the same
problem remains here: if the organism is taken to be a subject in the constitutive sense of the word, then
it is posited anterior to time and space, and its body remains part of the empirical world just like any
other object – if the organism, on the other hand, is taken to be the empirical animal, then its bodily
sensations are seminal to the construction of its surrounding space-time – but not of space-time as such.
283 The same is the case in von Uexküll’s famous tick example. The tick Umwelt as it is described
here, has little to do with the simplicity we must suppose pertains to the real tick Umwelt but is ripe
with concepts from the scientist’s Umwelt: the branch, the fall, the mammal etc.; and the example lives
from our intuitive grasping of a mapping from the scientist’s Umwelt to the tick Umwelt and back. But
this mapping presupposes a space in which both these Umwelten partially coincide, namely an objective
space from which scientist and tick Umwelt select each their sets of relevant signs. If no such space
is supposed, the mapping between scientist and tick Umwelt can not be presupposed, and the Umwelt
hypothesis will fall (consequently, the idea of an ontological ‘pluriverse’ of Umwelten is contradictory).
284 Merleau-Ponty finds a development in von Uexküll from an early Kantianism in which the Umgebung
behind the various Umwelten plays the role as Ding-an-sich and to a later Schellingianism, in which
Nature becomes a name for the integration of all Umwelten. (Merleau-Ponty 1995, 232)
285 Translations from Theoretische Biologie are mine. ‘Das Material, aus dem sich eine fremde Umwelt
aufbaut, besteht unter allen Umständen aus unserer objektivierten Qualität, weil uns andere Qualitäten gar
nicht zugänglich sind. Das einzige Unterschied zu unserer Umwelt besteht darin, dass sie geringer an Zahl
sind. [] Ein Ort, der für uns mehr nach links liegt als ein anderer, liegt auch in der fremden Umwelt,
wenn beide Orte als Merkmale in ihr vorhanden sind, ebenfalls weiter nach links, auch wenn die Anzahl von
örtlichen Merkmalen die sie voneinander trennen, geringer ist als in unserer Welt.’ (von Uexküll 1973, 104)
286 An analogous argument as to the possibility of inter-species Umwelt mappings due to ‘general-
purpose sensory and effector mechanisms’ can be found in Cariani 1998, 252–53. The possibility of
mappings within and between different functional circles in the same species must is in itself count as a
core contribution to the semiotic generativity in higher animals and humans especially: they constitute
metaphors, blendings, metonymies etc. and thus form part of the biological basis of cognitive semantics’
‘literary mind’, cf. Turner 1996.
287 This does not, of course, rule out the issue of the experienced qualia consciousness and its ‘inside’.
It is perfectly possible, even highly probabale, that higher animals (that is, animals possessing a central
nervous system) entertain inner states of this kind, and the question whether lower animals or even plants
share related properties remains undecided. Yet, this question must be kept apart from the functional
Umwelt definition, because the existence of a functional Umwelt in a species does not imply the presence
of qualia consciousness. As to research into the qualia consciousness issue, however, we have not, at
present, any scientifically valid method to ascertain nor investigate such states.
288 Thus it will no longer be the case, as von Uexküll quotes the radical conservative sociologist Werner
Sombart: ‘No ‘forest’ exists as an objectively prescribed environment. There exists only a forester-
, hunter-, botanist-, walker, nature-enthusiast-, wood gatherer-, berry-picker- and a fairytale-forest in
which Hansel and Gretel lose their way.’ (29). The fact that the forest is defined exactly with reference
to these and related groups (and not e.g. football players, state secretaries, unemployed, Irishmen, or
other collective subjects) is an objective fact which we – so Sombart – are able to registrate and which
thus forms part of the characterization of the forest, not its dissolution. The Nietzschean skepticism in
this quote is related to other radical conservative and irrationalist vitalist features in von Uexküll, for
instance his pessimism toward civilization, not to mention his Nazist leanings.

454
N O T E S
289 ‘Sobald die Umrisse der Körper als Merkmale auftreten, ändert sich das Bild der Merkwelt von
Grund aus, denn nun beginnt das Nebeneinander im Raum eine ausschlaggebende Rolle zu spielen. []
Erst wenn räumliche Unterschiede im Merkmal selbst auftreten, kann man von einer höheren Stufe der
Merkwelt sprechen.’ (189)
‘Voraussetzung für die Existenz von Gegenständen in der Merkwelt eines Tieres bildet die Fähigkeit
des Tieres, eigene Funktionsregel für sein Handeln zu bilden.’ (191)
290 ‘Bref, c’est la thème de mélodie, beaucoup plus que l’idée d’une nature-sujet ou d’une chose supra-
sensible qui exprime le mieux l’intuition de l’animal selon Uexküll. Le sujet animal est sa réalisation,
trans-spatiale et trans-temporelle. Le thème de la mélodie animale n’est pas en dehors de sa réalisation
manifeste, c’est un thématisme variable que l’animal ne cherche pas à réaliser par la copie d’un modèle,
mais qui hante ses réalisations particulières, sans que ces thèmes soient le but de l’organisme.’ (Merleau-
Ponty 1995, 233)
291 Probably the ability to distinguish pure from false tones (relative to a given scale) is innate in
humans: already 4-months old babies express disgust when faced with false tones (Wilson 1998, 166).
292 The place of these categorical perception examples in functional circles even anticipates a central
issue in the recent decades’ category research: Eleanor Rosch’s observation that there is a ‘basic level’ of
categorization relevant to corresponding basic motor routines involving those objects. Functional circle
categorical perception is defined with respect to the Wirken and hence on a motor routine basic level.
293 The categorical perception tradition in cognitive psychology has its roots in phonetics but has since
then spread onto other senses (e.g. color perception) and species (higher animals categorical perception).
In Stevan Harnad’s central 1987 anthology around the subject, most papers still focus upon perception
issues, but one seminal paper (Medin and Barsalou) undertakes a detailed comparison of categorical
perception research with semantic categorization and finds much more similarities than expected. Many
brands of structuralism tacitly assume the same parallel (e.g. in Hjelmslev’s thoroughgoing formal
parallelism between expression and content). The same continuity between perceptive and semantic
categorization is often tacitly assumed in the cognitive linguistics and cognitive semantics traditions in
the recent decades. Categorical perception in the Uexküllian Umwelt connection is a strong argument for
this continuity to the extent that the perceptual categorizations in primitive animals are directly linked
to semantic categorizations (namely of the corresponding Wirkmale, specific actions). Thus, we here
immediately use the categorical perception concept about animal categorization. Generally, no sharp
distinction seems to delimit perceptual and semantical categories which rather form parts of a continuum.
294 Cf. Günter Ehret and Patricia K. Kuhl in chaps. 10 and 12, respectively, in Harnad 1987.
295 It is striking how much Harnad’s model mirrors features in Peirce’s classical account for the
generality of signs, where token and type denotes the particularity and generality of the sign itself, while
the type due to its typicality in turn may be used as a symbol to signify some other general object.
296 von Uexküll even, in a lebensphilosophical gesture typical for his time, makes the specificity of the
human Umwelt a tragic problem for our species. It is strange that he can, on the one hand, claim that his
theory of meaning ‘culminates in explicating this connection’ (the relation between a human need and
the corresponding utensilia, such as coffee and coffee-cup), at the same time as he on the other hand
can state that ‘It should suffice to point out that with all our utensils we have built bridges between
ourselves and nature. In so doing, we have come no closer to nature; in fact we have removed ourselves
from her. [] In the city we are exclusively surrounded by artifacts [] The much-lauded technology
has lost all feeling for nature: Indeed, it presumes to solve the most profound questions of life – such
as the relationship between man and god-like nature – with totally inadequate mathematics.’ (66–67) It
is by no means an evident corollary to his theory that man should possess this tragic distance to nature;
quite on the contrary. If Uexküll’s concepts are removed from his creationism and lebensphilosophische
pessimism of culture, it may be integrated into evolutionism such that man’s especially malleable Umwelt
becomes a consequence of the ever more complex Umwelten of higher animals, cf. Jesper Hoffmeyer’s
idea of a gradient of growing ‘semiotic freedom’ during evolution.
297 Even if the Bedeutungslehre is sceptical against neutral objects in animal functional circles, it
admits the possibility of distinguishing properties in the object with greater or lesser relevance for
the animal. This, Uexküll argues, is what gives rise to the Aristotelian essentia/accidentia distinction,
referring to a rank-ordering of properties by importance according to the functional circle in question

N O T E S
455
(28). This distinction may receive a formal interpretation in the light of categorical perception, implying
the crucial strengthening of cross-boundary distinctions (relevant for the essentia) as well as the
weakening of the intra-boundary properties (which are hence accidental, according to the categorization in
question).
298 ‘Bei diesem Vorgang ist die Melodie der Richtungszeichen das Gestaltende, die uns aber nur in
der ‘Gestalt’ zum Bewusstsein kommt. Die gestaltende Melodie nannte Kant ein ’Schema’, und die
verborgene Kunst des Gestaltens in unserem Gemüt nannte er den ‘Schematismus’.’ (118)
299 Here, we disagree with Chebanov’s otherwise exciting paper (1999) and its claims that the concept
of Umwelt does not entail semiosis. A similar discussion which we mentioned earlier was raised at the
conference World and Mind in Copenhagen May 2005 where the British philosopher Galen Strawson
argued against the existence of non-conscious intentionality from a so-called ‘stopping problem’. If we
take the causal chain involved in a perception or other intention, then the intention selects its object
in that chain. Not so for non-conscious processes, Strawson argued: here the object intented can not
be distinguished from other segments of the chain such as the light falling upon the object or my
retina or my visual cortex. Obviously, it would be absurd to say that I see my neurons working in my
visual cortex. When consciousness is absent as stopping criterion, so Strawson, there is no criterion for
determining the object of intention and hence not for intentionality at all. Strawson’s argument begs the
question, however, in presupposing intention to be translatable into a causal chain which is, of course,
not intentional. If intention, in an Uexküllian manner, is defined by the functional circle, any further
segment of that circle is functionally intented. Even if microscopically continuous, the perception and
action signs cut up the circle in characteristic schematic segments, due to granularity, and in the circle,
a segment may serve as a sign for a later segment. Butylic acid serves as a sign for falling, serving
as a sign for warm skin (or for crawling back on a branch), serving as a sign for biting  Thus, the
stopping problem is posed in a wrong way as pertaining to linear rays of intention. It overlooks that
such lines basically constitute segments of the functional meaning circle – what is intended is intended
with respect to its virtual inclusion in this circle.
300 Here, we recognize two different sets of semiotic oppositions: contrary and contradictory relations
(in e.g. Greimas) vs. marked/unmarked (Jakobson), the former privileging boundaries over prototypes,
the latter prototypes over boundaries.
301 Niklas Luhmann’s autopoiesis theory seems to be an attempt at generalizing this insight in sociology,
seeing societies as consisting of systems with each their defined Umwelten.
302 Thus, the centrality of some version of CP in any functional circle definition points to it as being a
formal a priori prerequisite of biosemiotics – adding to the arguments connecting biosemiotics to formal
ontology in Chap. 9.
303 It should be noted that this recursive definition of symbols does not correspond to Peirce’s original
account. In Deacon, indices are made out of icons plus icons holding between icons, and symbols, in
turn, out of indices plus indices holding between indices. In Peirce, however, the three are irreducible,
and the icon-index structure rather forms the internal anatomy of the symbol without being sufficient
for its compositional definition.
304 So as for instance that the increase in brain size necessitating more protein made early man turn to
a more carnivorous behavior. While the Männerbund went hunting, the mothers nursing the children
were waiting for protein to be brought home. The hunting man’s gene pool was threatened, however, by
his woman’s possible unfaithfulness during hunt, and she and her child was correlatively threatened by
protein undernourishment if he did not return. This situation calls for stabilization by marriage which
in turn requires stable institutions guaranteed by language – in turn calling for (further) development
of symbol use. This hypothesis is interesting indeed, but it includes many specific issues and premisses
which are not our concern in this context.
305 Baldwin was primarily known as one of the pioneers of child psychology. Incidentally, he was also
one of Peirce’s acquaintances and invited Peirce to contribute his many entries to Baldwin’s influential
Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology (1901). Sometimes, Peirce expressed ideas not far from
Baldwinian evolution: ‘For we must remember that the organism has not made the mind, but is only
adapted to it. It has become adapted to it by an evolutionary process so that it is not far from correct to
say that it is the mind that has made the organism.’ (‘Abstract of 8 lectures’, undated, NEM IV, 141)

456
N O T E S
306 After The Symbolic Species, Deacon has refined the Baldwinian hypothesis assuming two phases
often interchanging in complex evolution, involving the ‘masking’ and ‘unmasking’ of selection pressure
on a specific gene (Deacon 2003). A gene may be masked by a learned behaviour which makes the effect
of that gene superfluous. Deacon’s example is early primates being introduced to fruit in the diet with
the result that the gene governing Vitamin C synthesis in early primates (as in most other mammals)
was masked against selection with the result that the gene degenerated. Now, primates were forced to
stick to a Vitamin C rich diet in order to survive, a fact which unmasked a completely different gene,
namely in the set of genes governing the anatomy of the retina. Now, colour vision all of a sudden
became an advantage in order to get Vitamin C from red, yellow, and blue fruit on the green foliage
background, and via two duplications of a retinal gene, primates became able to see colours. Genetic
degeneration facilitated by masking is thus an important factor in evolution because it loosens genetic
control over certain phenotypical features and allows self-organizing possibilities in the organism to
experiment with new properties. Thus, Deacon conjectures that early symbol use in hominids masked
genetically constrained stereotypical communication and thus allowed for the brain to self-organize
in new ways giving rise to the growth of interconnectedness of the human brain – in turn making
more complicated symbol use possible and thus unmasking other cerebral genes and exposing them to
Baldwinian selection pressure from linguistically skilled group members.
307 It may even cover lower animals as well, cf. E. coli’s ability to swim upstream in a saccharine
gradient which in Peirce’s terms must be classified as symbolic with respect to its esse in futuro – see
Chap. 9. See Harnad 1987 for a long range of investigations of categorical perception tied to behavior –
hence forming symbols – in many different species. The issue of the natural extension of Peirce’s symbol
concept is complex – as already discussed in Chap. 2. There is no agreement upon it, and Peirce’s own
idea on this point seems to find symbols even in inorganic nature – an idea nowadays supported by
John Deely. Thomas Sebeok tended to make semiotics co-extensive with biology, hence only finding
symbols in biological nature. Deacon, in turn, heightens the distinctive limit to make symbols a human
prerequisite. On this point, we support Sebeok’s middle way.
308 A further problem is that Deacon’s reconstruction of the icon-index-symbol triad as referred above
makes it compositional, so that higher sign types are presumed reducible to combinations of the lower.
But if pure icons – so Peirce – are mere possibilities, taken by themselves, then the actuality dimension
of indices can not be created by the composition of ever so many icons; correlatively, the general,
future dimension of symbols can not be the result of a composition of ever so many actual, indexical
moments. Peirce’s description faces the opposite direction: symbols are wholes, and icons and indices
are moments of the symbol’s anatomy.
309 Deacon refers at length to the famous Kanzi case where a young bonobo on its mother’s back learned
the symbolic language which scientists were trying to teach its mother. There is little doubt that Kanzi
is a symbol user, both in Deacon’s and (less surprisingly) in Peirce’s sense of the word.
310 See, e.g. ‘Minute Logic’ (1902):
‘Reasoning, properly speaking, cannot be unconsciously performed. A mental operation may be precisely
like reasoning in every other respect except that it is performed unconsciously. But that one circumstance
will deprive it of the title of reasoning. For reasoning is deliberate, voluntary, critical, controlled, all of
which it can only be if it is done consciously. An unconscious act is involuntary: an involuntary act
is not subject to control; an uncontrollable act is not deliberate nor subject to criticism in the sense of
approval or blame. A performance which cannot be called good or bad differs most essentially from
reasoning.’ (2.182)
311 Both must, furthermore, be distinguished from induction dealing with a series of related, empirical
phenomena and proposing a probable law uniting them. Induction is often by empiricists confused with
abstraction, but like Husserl (2nd LU), Peirce keeps these problems apart, and neither of the abstraction
types have anything to do with extracting regularities from a set of examples.
312 The central quote is the following:
‘The terms ‘precision’ and ‘abstraction,’ which were formerly applied to every kind of separation,
are now limited, not merely to mental separation, but to that which arises from attention to one
element and neglect of the other. Exclusive attention consists in a definite concepton or supposition
of one part of an object, without any supposition of the other. Abstraction or precision ought to be

N O T E S
457
carefully distinguished from two other modes of mental separation, which may be termed discrimination
and dissociation. Discrimination has to do merely with the senses of the terms, and only draws a
distinction in meaning. Dissociation is that separation which, in the absence of a constant association,
is permitted by the law of association of images. It is the consciousness of one thing, without the
necessary simultaneous consciousness of the other. Abstraction or precision, therefore, supposes a
greater separation than discrimination, but a less separation than dissociation. Thus I can discriminate
red from blue, space from color, and color from space, but not red from color. I can prescind red
from blue, and space from color (as is manifest from the fact that I actually believe there is an
uncolored space between my face and the wall); but I cannot prescind color from space, nor red
from color. I can dissociate red from blue, but not space from color, color from space, nor red from
color.
Precision is not a reciprocal process. It is frequently the case, that, while A cannot be prescinded from
B, B can be prescinded from A. ()’
313 We may note that in this argumentation, the three separation modes are tied to three different modes
of presentation: imagining, supposing, and representating, respectively.
314 Peirce’s definition of the distinction abstraction types connects them intimately to a part-whole
dependency calculus. This idea is exactly parallel to the connection between Husserl’s 2nd and 3rd
LU with the anti-empiricist abstraction theory of the 2nd (abstraction is not inductive generalization,
abstraction is a special idealizing focusing act related to an object’s properties) and the mereology of
the 3rd (the properties thus grasped should be seen as different parts and moments of the object, and a
calculus is possible to map these parts’ internal relationships). This connection between abstraction and
mereology is a highly original idea crucial for the possibility of a realist understanding of the cognition
of abstract objects.
315 ‘In general, prescission is always accomplished by imagining ourselves in situations in which certain
elements of fact cannot be ascertained.’ (‘Supplement’, 1893, 2.428) Prescission thus is Peirce’s version
of Duns Scotus’ famed ‘formal distinction’; it refers to a distinction made by the mind, but with a
fundamentum in re. As to the color-extension issue, Husserl and Peirce analyze it differently. To Husserl,
they are mutually dependent, to Peirce, colour is dependent upon extension (cf. Chap. 6–8); we tend to
support the latter.
316 A simple example is the train of thought as follows: a white particular thing - (P) - white things as
such - (A) - whiteness, with P for prescission and A for abstraction. A more complicated example is
hinted at in set theory and may be reconstructed as follows: elements - (P) - belonging together - (A) - a
set - (P) - bigger/smaller - (A) - multitude - (P) - relation to other multitudes - (A) - cardinal number
This example is reconstructed from ‘Consequences of Critical Common-Sensism’ (1905), 5.534. The
unlimited character of this abstraction process does not entail it is infinite.
317 So as for instance (‘Consequences of Critical Common-Sensism’ (1905), 5.534). The famous quote
stems from the third interlude in Molière’s last play, Le malade imaginaire which introduces a grotesque
ceremony of doctors dancing and singing medical latin. Here, a medicine student answers a doctor’s
question as follows:
‘BACHELIERUS/ Mihi a docto doctere/ Domandatur causam et rationem quare/ Opium facit dormire./
A quoi respondeo,/ Quia est in eo/ Virtus dormitiva,/ Cujus est natura/ Sensus assoupire. CHORUS/
Bene, bene, bene, bene respondere./ Dignus, dignus est entrare/ In nostro docto corpore.’ (Molière, 660);
in my translation: ‘Bachelor/ Me the learned doctor/ asks about the cause and reason why/ Opium puts
to sleep./ To this I answer/ That there is in it/ A sleep-inducing power/ Whose nature it is/ To weaken
the senses.// CHORUS/ Good, good, good, good answer./ Honorable, honorable is it to enter/ into our
learned society.’
318 Peirce’s theory of hypostatic abstraction thus forms a strong argument against the current fad in
rhetorics where it is claimed that abstract noun use is just a showoff strategy trying to impress the reader
with difficult wording (the opium argument of our time), while texts which express ‘the same’ in more
concrete terms are praised as more honest and easier to read. In a Danish context, the two writing styles
are even hastily connected to males and females, respectively, rhetoricians taking the party of the latter.
If this claim were true, it would do the feminist cause a questionable service, as abstractions are indeed
necessary for thought to occur.

458
N O T E S
319 Roberts, 64.
320 Peirce has a primitive mereological intuition in so far he refuses to distinguish between parthood
and elementhood (as in set theory) and sees those two as shadings of one and the same basic relation.
321 Cf. e.g. ‘ I do not think that we need have any further scruple in admitting that abstractions may be
real, - indeed, a good deal less open to suspicion of fiction than are the primary substances.’ (‘Pragmatism
Lectures’ (1903), Peirce 1997, 136.) This idea forms a very important phenomenological principle in
Peirce: the objects to which we have direct access are neither completely abstract nor concrete; they are at
different intermediate levels. Thus, both abstract objects and the concrete object are constructions reached
by abstraction, and the ladder of levels is virtually bottomless; we have no guarantee that it terminates
‘downwards’ in some elementary, atom-like entities. As collections are also abstractions, this consid-
eration also goes for scalar properties. This idea is basically a mereological idea (whole-part relations
are pertinent on all levels of observation or reflection) and fits nicely with Peirce’s proto-mereological
refusal of distinguishing element-of and part-of relations (like it was later formalized in Lesniewski).
322 T.L. Short (1983) traces roots of this idea in Peirce’s thought to the famous ‘How to Make our Ideas
Clear’ paper from 1878 where Short emphasizes the crucial idea that ‘we can use ideas that are less
clear to make other ideas more clear’ (290). Thus, the fact that the higher, more abstract terms may be
clearer than their concrete basis is a crucial insight in order to avoid infinite regresses and appreciate
the role played by abstraction in Peirce.
323 Helmut Pape: ‘ the ‘abstract in concrete form’ brought about by a ‘realistic hypostatization of
relations’ is a deductively valid form of reasoning which he at other places calls ‘hypostatic abstraction’
and which is now called class abstraction.’ (Pape 1997, 171) Pape explains in a note: ‘It is obviously
deductively valid to conclude that, if there is a red rose, the class of red things has at least one member,
namely, this rose.’ (182n). In the very same volume we read T.L. Short: ‘ neither is the inference to it
logically necessary. Rather, that inference could be deductively valid only with the additional, logically
contingent premiss that the regularity in question has an explanation () Absent that assumption, the
inference is not deductive but an extreme case of what Peirce called ‘abduction’ ’ (297).
324 This should, of course, be taken to refer to reflective self-consciousness. Pre-reflective self-
consciousness (cf. Zahavi 2000) as a moment of any conscious experience is presupposed by reflective
self-consciousness, and may probably, unlike the latter, be found in large parts of the animal kingdom
and maybe even in lower organisms.
325 The quote talks about ‘races’, but we should not take this as an indication that any idea of ‘racism’
could be found in Peirce’s thought; he is merely using the word as coextensive with ‘culture’ or ‘social
or geographical group of people’, such as was a commonplace at the time.
326 The Husserlian idea of a pure grammar – to some extent shared by Peirce – may make the Chomsky-
Deacon conflict around grammatical inneism irrelevant. If there are indeed a priori rules for grammar,
then we should expect evolution (biological as well as linguistic evolution) to conform to them in
a gradual approximation, making the riddle of possible innate chunks of universal grammar easily
understandable, because no empirical selection pressure will be needed for their articulation. This would
correspond to the fact that we have learned elementary arithmetics and performs that easily without
anybody wondering about the specific selection pressures giving rise to an ‘arithmetic module’ in the
brain. Terrence Deacon seems on the same track when toying with an ‘extraterrestrial’ grammar valid
for any speaking subjects whatever 
327 The issue of the ‘semiotic missing link’ is currently the object of intense investigation. A famous
suggestion parallel to Deacon’s is Michael Tomasello’s idea that what separates man from other higher
primates is the ability of shared attention during learning. Mother and child, for instance, may direct their
attention to one and the same object, initiated by the child understanding the mothers gaze direction or
pointing gesture, while young apes would rather look at the pointing finger than at the object indicated.
There is not, however, any common scientific language or set of criteria making us able to decide between
such proposals – or even to decide whether they are mutually exclusive, reconcilable – or even maybe
expressing related or identical ideas in different vocabularies. It would not be strange, for instance, if shared
attention necessarily involved hypostatic abstraction – the explicit control necessary for the latter being
provided by the common discursive field opened by the former. Here, further investigation, both empirical
and conceptual, is necessary.

N O T E S
459
328 A problem here, though, is that there is hardly any definite boundary separating metaphorical
projection from concept extension (both refer to the application of a concept on hitherto uncovered
domains). The difference lies in the domains rather than in the extension process.
329 The grasp of this problem depends on the understanding of ‘a priori reasoning’. If it is to be taken
in the Kantian tradition where a priori refers to validity prior to any empirical knowledge as well as
to evident givenness for any knowing subject whatsoever, it is clear that the CS tradition is right in
refusing to indulge in a priori reasoning, cf. Chap. 8.
330 See Chap. 10.
331 Doing so, Merleau-Ponty follows the example set by Ernst Cassirer – philosophizing by sifting
the results of the special sciences - rather than that of Heidegger and his irrationalist claim that the
‘Wissenschaft denkt nicht’. There are more references to Cassirer than to Heidegger in Phénoménologie
de la perception.
332 Despite the idea that the Umwelt is a subjective construction on part of the organism, von Uexküll’s
position is not necessarily subjectivist in the sense that it is a construction taking place in the organism’s
consciousness. von Uexküll’s methodology for Umweltforschung was, in fact, a sort of behaviorism:
an animal’s Umwelt should be investigated by observation of its anatomy and its interaction with its
surroundings, rather than through any sort of empathy.
333 Merleau-Ponty thus does not hesitate to solve von Uexküll’s problem with the possibility of ‘neutral
objects’: higher animals with central nervous systems do, in fact, access such objects, cf. below.
334 This idea anticipates René Thom’s idea that environment objects are prototypically conceived of as
a sort of generalized ‘animals’ so that nouns in general refer to such animal-objects.
335 In this idea, Merleau-Ponty’s concept of symbol approaches the Peircean symbol, being defined
by its esse in futuro and its ability to anticipate future action by incarnating habits. At the same time,
moreover, Merleau-Ponty anticipates Terrence Deacon’s fertile idea of symbolicity as a crucial threshold
in evolution, cf. the previous chapter.
336 Translations from La nature are mine. ‘Le corps appartient à une dynamique de comportement. Le
comportement est enlisé dans la corporéite.’ (239)
337 This importance of animal appearance not only goes for its relation to species mates and to predators,
it must be assumed, but also in relation to other species with which it competes, enters into symbioses,
etc.
338 ‘La phénoménologie dénonce l’attitude naturelle et, en même temps, fait plus qu’aucune autre
philosophie pour la réhabiliter.’ (104)
339 ‘La chose m’apparaît comme fonction des mouvements de mon corps.’ (106)
340 Do animals hunting in bands not possess a sort of shared attention? Maybe not at any conscious
level as known from human learning, but still several stages during the evolution from inter-animality
over inter-corporality and to intersubjectivity seem to await proper conceptual determination.
341 Without explicitly talking about the a priori of regional ontologies, Kauffman thus makes a parallel
argument to our charting of a conceptual cluster of biosemiotics in Chap. 9.
342 It is an interesting and strange implication of Kauffman’s work (which it shares with the organism
definitions of much romantic Naturphilosophie) that this cluster of concepts defining an autonomous
agent may not stay a privilege for biology as we know it (geomorphology in geology, galaxy clusters
in astronomy, companies in economics, states in international politics, etc. may be other candidates for
autonomous agents in Kauffman’s definition) – cf. our related discussion in Chap. 9.
343 Referring to the putting to use of a biological property for another purpose than that for which it
originally evolved.
344 This idea forms Kauffman’s suggestion for a fourth thermodynamical law - the universe invades the
‘adjacent possible’ with the highest possible speed. It remains unclear, though, against what this ‘highest
speed’ could be measured.
345 What Kauffman calls ‘clusters of concepts’, Husserl would probably call a regional ontology of a
priori concepts for any possible biology.
346 When I have presented this idea in lectures, it has been challenged by distinguished semioticians,
like Susan Petrilli and Lucia Santaella, on Peircean grounds. They claim that Peirce’s metaphysical
continuity prohibits such thresholds from having any ontological value. I would argue this is a fallacious

460
N O T E S
argument. It is perfectly possible to maintain a basic continuist ontology and at the same time search
for discontinuities segmenting this continuum. This lies already in one of Peirce’s basic arguments for
the primacy of continuity: the continuum problemlessly includes discontinuities, vice versa not so (and
all attempts at ‘building’ the continuum from discrete entities fail). Moreover, even when no apparent
discontinuity is at stake, clear differences are possible (take e.g. the continuum of color which does
not imply that there is no difference between, say, yellow and green, having each their prototype (cf.
Berlin and Kay’s classic investigation of color names)). A sharp demarcation between any two colors
will possess a certain arbitrarity but still it will possess a fundamentum in re. It is important not to let
continuity assume a role of thought prohibition, a new darkness in which all cows become grey. This
would violate Peirce’s basic motto: Do not block the way of inquiry.
The biosemiotic Scala Naturae may be conceived of on the basis of Gould’s idea of ‘punctuated
equilibrium’. Even if evolution is basically continuous, it may be segregated into long periods with little
change, separated by short periods with huge changes. Thus, the development of man’s unique semiotic
possibilities has taken place over a very short timespan on an evolutionary scale, and it may be possible
that the same thing holds for the passing of some of the other biosemiotic thresholds.
347 Some of the thresholds proposed may cross each other, e.g. some of the candidates for ‘missing
link’ thresholds, or the ‘intercellular’ threshold and the ‘Uexküll threshold’.
348 Mikkel Bogh (2002) argues that the introduction of poststructuralist theories in art history has had
double consequences. On the one hand, it heightened the level of reflection compared to the strongly
biographical traditional art history – on the other hand, it tended to leave the interest in the formal and
phenomenological properties of the artwork to oblivion in favor of mere context.
349 For a further discussion of negativism as avant garde kitsch, see Stjernfelt ‘The Vulgar Metaphysics
of Transgression’, in Text und Kontext 2001 or Thomsen and Stjernfelt 2005.
350 For a closer gaze, a certain tension thus prevails between two of the basic ideas of the historical avant
garde: anti-figuration and anti-convention. Both of them are dubious as ontological constraints on art
(why must an artwork not portray something; why could a conventional work not possess artistic value?),
but it is interesting in this context that anti-conventionalism naturally implies that the anti-conventional
artwork can not rely on purely anti-figurative mechanisms of meaning only (meaning must be either
motivated or conventional, or both). Anti-convention must thus base itself on a similarity (but maybe
one not seen before!). This lies already in the notion of ‘abstract’ art: if a picture is abstract, it does
not imply it is not figurative, only that its similarity is so general that many different objects fall under
it. The famous white square on white (to which we return below) refers to many possible concrete
squares, herein lies its abstraction, and the game of providing the abstraction with the concrete objects it
subsumes is left over to the viewer. The fact that things are hardly thus conceived by the main line of the
art history of our time has its reason elsewhere, in another reason for the scepticism towards similarity,
namely that similarity exists as a possibility before the finished artwork and thus offends the idea of
the artist as an inspired deity, creating objects never before seen nor possible. The artwork’s basis in
similarity makes, from this point of view, the artist into a copist; even if the status of a sharp-sighted
observer, seeing what nobody before him has been able to see, should not be so poor as a substitute for
radical ‘creativity’.
351 In this, the metaphor definition is in agreement with the actual tradition of cognitive semantics
where general metaphors and blendings are widespread in ordinary language, even if in an unspectacular
way because understanding them is so easy - here the spectacular metaphors and blendings of poetry
owe their effects to a sophisticated but derivative use of ordinary linguistic and conceptual material.
This forms the cognitive equivalent to the core idea of ‘deviation’ poetics highlighted by the Russian
formalists such as Shklovski.
352 At the conference ‘Thinking With Diagrams 98’, Alan Blackwell and Yuri Engelhardt gave an
overview over the many existing attempts at diagram taxonomies which all seem insufficient in some
way or another (Blackwell and Engelhardt ‘A Taxonomy of Diagram Taxonomies’, paper given at
‘Thinking With Diagrams 98’, University of Wales, Aberystwyth). As mentioned Peirce has one sketchy
attempt at a tripartition of diagrams into maps, algebra, and graphs (May and Stjernfelt 1996).
353 That is, they can be used as diagrams and are regularly so used in ordinary picture observation. It
must immediately be admitted that even if visual pictures are thus icons and diagrams among others,

N O T E S
461
their visual specificity may be pointed out referring to the special features of the visual system, cf. e.g.
the already classical Traité du signe visuel (Groupe  1992) where the visual sign is characterized by
its possible utilization of a long series of different optical transformations. These transformations are
relevant here, because they are visually specific versions of the general rule-governed manipulability
of diagrams. Visual diagrams are thus characterized by certain classes of manipulability, and it may be
expected that a rational taxonomy of visual pictures may be constructed from the classification of such
transformations.
354 It is possible to argue for a distinction between two types of pictures, those which make possible
the construction of a space for the perceiving body, and those without this possibility, cf. next chapter.
355 A further investigation of this device follows in Chap. 16.
356 Erik Fischer C.W. Eckersberg, Copenhagen 1993. I reviewed the book in the Copenhagen daily
Information (Oct. 6, 1993) where some of the reflections in this paper were originally born.
357 John 17.6–19 (King James Bible 1611):
6 ‘I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world: thine they were,
and thou gavest them me; and they have kept thy word.
7 Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are of thee.
8 For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me; and they have received them, and have
known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me.
9 I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me; for they are thine.
10 And all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them.
11 And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father,
keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are.
12 While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou gavest me I have kept,
and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition; that the scripture might be fulfilled.
13 And now come I to thee; and these things I speak in the world, that they might have my joy fulfilled
in themselves.
14 I have given them thy word; and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, even
as I am not of the world.
15 I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from
the evil.
16 They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
17 Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth.
18 As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world.
19 And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth.’
358 It is a well-known fact, dating at least from Kant’s Kritik der Urteilskraft (1790), that artworks and
biological organisms share this property, making both adequate objects for ‘teleological judgment’. For
both kinds of objects, however, we should not expect every single detail or feature to serve the whole
teleologically; this would be a misplaced and dogmatic use of the concept of artwork or organism,
respectively. Rather, artworks make use of completely ordinary structures of perception, thought, objects,
which they take over for their own purposes (as argued in Bundgaard 2004) – much like biological
organisms are built from ordinary physical structures.
359 Cf. Groupe ’s criticism of this tendency, op.cit.
360 See Esmann 1995.
361 The color white naturally plays a special role in relation to the ‘absolute’ character of the painting
because of the neutral and ‘all-encompassing’ character of this color (consisting of all visual wavelengths)
which gives it a more absolute character than the individual spectral colors. Another experiment might
thus substitute for the two white nuances two red nuances, e.g., with a larger degree of concretion as a
contrastive result.
362 An imperfect similarity relation, of course, because the infinitely thin lines of ideal geometry by
their very nature cannot be drawn.
363 Something like this naturally also occurred to Rudolf Arnheim cf. his Visual Thinking (Berkeley
1967). Sensitive phenomenologists might feel an intellectualist offense by this emphasis on diagrams,
but on a closer look it is by no means strange to the phenomenological tradition. As discussed in

462
N O T E S
Chaps. 6–8, the experimentative manipulation on a diagram is directly related to the ‘eidetic variations’
leading to phenomenological ‘Wesenserschauung’, cf. Husserl’s Erfahrung und Urteil, and the emphasis
on the body in phenomenology from the later Husserl, Merleau-Ponty and onwards (cf. ‘la chair’ in
Le visible et l’invisible, Paris 1964) may easily be reconciliated with diagrammatical reasoning. The
diagrammatical experiment forms a central part of Peirce’s pragmatism, the experiment involves the
imagination of something one could do, and this imaginable doing has a natural corporal basis: ‘It is not
a historical fact that the best thinking has been done by words, or aural images. It has been performed
by means of visual images and muscular imaginations.’ (Peirce: ‘Sketch of a new philosophy’, undated,
NEM IV, 375). In many pictures, there is a large class of diagram experiments which are immediately
bodily; in landscape pictures, the viewer involuntarily imagines himself wandering into it, cf. Anne
Fastrup’s research into Diderot’s ‘Salons’ (Fastrup, in press).
A remarkable consequence of pictures’ diagram character is the refusal of the widespread semiotic idea
that a picture is a sign to the extent that it implies a code which must be decoded directly, in an analogy to
a denotative proposition. Diagrams leave, thanks to their more or less open manipulability a considerable
initiative to the observer, and different schools of picture viewing may probably be described by their
favorite diagram manipulation types. The systematic and rule-bound character of diagrams prevents, on
the other hand, the complete handing over of initiative to the observer, as known from the different
forms of scepticist aesthetics, from reception analysis and to (de)constructionism.
364 It could be said that the analysis of pictures must give up its dogma of the concreteness of the picture
and thus make an epistemological self-criticism analogous to historiography. Here, the Rankean idea of
the description of concrete events ‘wie es eigentlich gewesen’ implied the rejection of all speculations of
the type ‘what if ’. But a semiotic analysis of these ideas demonstrates that it is impossible to describe
even the most concrete event without the use of universals, types, generalities, and as soon as reference
is made to general objects, a ‘what if?’ is implied, cf. the pragmatic maxim’s ‘would-bes’. If you say,
for instance, that the rearmament of the enemy released the war, then you claim by the same token, that
if the enemy had not rearmed, all other things being equal, then the war would not have come - a claim
which would normally be rejected out of hand as counterfactual speculation. If you should refrain from
indulging in such things, you should positivistically limit yourself to registrate events without reflecting
on their type, nor on relations of cause and effect between them. I do not think any historiography has
been written which conforms to such ideas. Younger historians (such as Niall Ferguson (ed.) Virtual
History, London 1997) are now realizing that counterfactual speculations are inevitable - and if you
think you can do without them, then you are fooling yourself. The equivalent in analysis of pictures,
I would claim, is that if you think you can see and analyze pictures without the counterfactual variations
of diagrams, then you fool yourself.
365 Translations from Hua XXXIII are my own.‘Wenn hier zwischen Sache und Bild unterschieden
wird, so merken wir bald, dass der Begriff des Bildes hier ein doppelter ist. Der abgebildeten Sache steht
nämlich ein Doppeltes gegenüber: 1) Das Bild als physisches Ding, als diese bemalte und eingerahmte
Leinwand, als dieses bedruckte Papier usw. In diesem Sinn sagen wir, das Bild ist verbogen, zerrissen,
oder das Bild hängt an der Wand usw. 2) Das Bild als das durch die bestimmte Farben- und Formgebunt
so und so erscheinende Bildobjekt. Darunter verstehen wir nicht das abgebildete Objekt, das Bildsujet
sondern das genaue Analogon des Phantasiebildes, nämlich das erscheinende Objekt, das für das Bildsujet
Repräsentant ist.’ (Hua XXIII, 19)
366 ‘Drei Objekte haben wir. 1) Das physische Bild, das Ding aus Leinwand, aus Marmor usw. 2)
Das repräsentierende oder abbildende Objekt, und 3) das repräsentierte oder abgebildete Objekt.’
(ibid.)
367 ‘Was im Inhalt des Bildobjektes repräsentativ fungiert, das ist in eigentümlicher Weise ausgezeichnet:
Es stellt dar, es vergegenwärtigt, verbildlicht, veranschaulicht. Das Sujet blickt uns gleichsam durch
diese Züge an. Diese Züge treten erst in Einzelbeachtung hervor und scheiden sich erst in ihr von
den anderen Zügen des Bildobjektes: von Momenten, Teilen, Bestimmtheiten, die entweder ausgeprägt
den gegensätzlichen Charakter, den des Widerstreits mit entsprechenden Bestimmtheiten des gemeinten
Sujets, haben, oder denen weder der eine noch der andere Charakter anhaftet. Solche charakterlosen
Züge verbildlichen nichts, es bleibt aber unbestimmt, wie sich darin das wirkliche Objekt [dar]stellt.’
(30–31)

N O T E S
463
368 ‘ das Bild muss sich klar von der Wirklichkeit scheiden, d.h. rein intuitiv, ohne alle Beihilfe von
indirekten Gedanken.’ (41)
369 ‘Which relation pertains between picture and object? Which relation pertains between pictorial object
and object?’
370 As to the issue of similarity in icon definitions in general, see Chaps. 2–3.
371 See Groupe  1992 and the chapter on the esquisse. Here they distinguish between the visual sign,
the type it signifies, and the object it refers to – where the type is the invariance kept constant in the
transformation between the sign and its object. The type thus corresponds to Husserl’s pictorial object,
and Husserl’s two-step transformation is analyzed as a one-step transformation with invariance – which
may be viewed as different ways of representing the same state-of-affairs. The type in Groupe  may
be grasped separately with transformation relations to the two poles at each end so that it subsumes both
the sign and the object as instantiations. In this idea it seems to be the case that the pictorial object is
more general (or, at least, not less general) than the picture and the object.
372 ‘Vielmehr: “Bewusstsein” besteht durch und durch aus Bewusstsein, und schon Empfindung so wie
Phantasma ist “Bewusstsein”’ (265)
373 Noema of course being the object pole in the central analysis of perception as intentional act in the
Ideen.
374 I translate ‘setzende’ by ‘assertive’; it refers to an act’s character of existence claim as to its object;
‘nicht-setzende’ correlatively refers to acts not involving such claim.
375 ThecontextmightbeMeinong’sdoctrineofnon-existentobjectswhere‘assumptions’playanimportant
role: they are non-assertive propositions (or, propositions minus existence claims) and form a much wider
category than fantasy, comprising e.g. assumptive linguistic utterances deprived of fantasy imagery.
376 ‘Ich folge den Aufführungen eines Theaterstückes, oder ich betrachte ein Gemälde. Hier unter-
scheiden sich, ähnlich wie bei der reproduktiven Phantasie, die im Bilde dargestellten (bildlich
produzierten) Vorstellungen, Wahrnehmungen, Urteile, Gefühle, etc., von den in mir, dem Zuschauer,
erregten und aktuellen. Aktuell ist die Darstellung selbst.’ (383)
377 ‘Aber nur wo ein Bildbewusstsein sich gründet in einem Wahrnehmungszusammenhang (wo eine
Perzeption eben in einem perzeptiven Zusammenhang steht, aber sich ihm nicht in Einstemmigkeit
einfügt) oder wo ein Bildbewusstsein sich in einem Erinnerungszusammenhang ebenso einfügt, haben
wir Bildbewusstsein mit Widerstreit verknüpft; was alles genauer zu fassen wäre. Ich muss mich hüten
vor unangemessener Verallgemerinerung: als ob Bild und Widerstreit notwendig zusammengehörte.’
(‘Zur Lehre vom Bildbewusstsein und Fiktumbewusstsein’, c. 1912, 494)
378 We may add that Husserl now generally sees illusion as a category where the Widerstreit is lacking,
cf. his overall wax doll – human being example (fx. 39; 490). This is analogous to that phase in picture
contemplation where the Widerstreit is suspended (in the old theory, however, the Widerstreit could be
called back). It is the close relation between these two forms, of course, which lies at the root of the
mathematical and theory-of-science disbelief in pictures as medium of thought.
379 ‘Auseinanderhalten wird man müssen die Fälle wirklichen Widerstreits, wie im Fall schaus-
pielerischer Darstellung, und die Fälle potentiellen Widerstreits, der an Umgebungsintentionen hängt, die
dem anschaulichen Gegenstand anhaften, die aber erst ‘aufgewickelt’ werden müssen, um zu wirklichen
Widerstreiten zu führen.’ (‘Zur Lehre von den Anschauungen und ihren Modis’, c. 1918,510)
380 Fantasy (incuding pictures) remains in this period fundamentally ‘modification’. This idea may puzzle,
because it does not refer to any originary sensation of which the modified is a modification. Rather,
modification refers to the fact that neither fantasy nor picture is present in ‘anschauliche Fülle’. Husserl
takes this concept of ‘fullness’ from the British psychologist Alexander Bain, and it plays a central role
in his transcendental period’s definition of perception as adequate act. The analogous problem (which
phenomenological character has the givenness of actual objects, different from phantasized, ideal, and
other objects?) is solved in a different way in Peirce: as we saw, he introduces the scholastic term
‘haecceity’, thisness from Duns Scotus as a concept for this special insistence characterizing the actually
existing object different from merely potential or phantasized objects. In both cases, Husserl and Peirce,
this difference is grounded on a ‘purified’ psychological concept, but while Husserl hints at the possi-
bility of continuous grading (objects may be given with more or less fullness), Peirce’s solution points
to an all-or-nothing solution with a certain tension to his overall metaphysical continuism.

464
N O T E S
381 Taken to the LU letter, a fairy-tale remains a purely ‘signitive’ intention, so it is striking that Husserl
without further ado may involve this example in the discussion of the species of imagination. This points
to the fact that the definition of signitive intentions only with difficulties may free itself completely
from imaginative components – just like it was argued in the chapter on categorial intuition above.
382 Ingarden enrolled as Husserl’s student in Göttingen in May 1912, only to follow him (with a few
breaks) closely in the years to come. He followed him from Göttingen to Freiburg and from around
1916 he was very close to Husserl as his personal assistant. In the summer of 1918, Ingarden returned
to the Polish state then in the process of resurrection, but he remained in close contact with Husserl
until his death in 1938, despite their well-known disagreement as to the issue of idealism/realism, cf.
Ingarden’s memories in his edition of Husserl’s letters to him (Husserl 1968).
383 Peirce has an analogous point when he points to the possible growth of information in diagrammatical
reasoning by making explicit what was only implicit.
384 Beilage VII (appr. Sept. 1906) introduces an interesting distinction between several possible types
of Widerstreit. In addition to the empirical contrast between appearing pictorial object and its physical
base, a contrast between pictorial object and sujet (that the people in a photograph are gray, but not
reality) is proposed, as well as a second contrast in pictorial context (hallucinations in the midst of the
visual field, e.g.), and a third contrast with our knowledge about the type of object depicted so that
the object depicted becomes self-contradictory, a so-called logically mediated skin. Husserl does not
provide examples on the latter, but it must be taken to refer to fallacious perceptions like the well-known
‘impossible objects’ in psychology of perception. Husserl’s idea here seems to be to refine the second
contrast, that between pictorial object and sujet, be pointing out different possibilities of the structure of
this contrast.
385 ‘Ist nicht bei aller auch reinen Phantasie Widerstreit? Mit Wahrnehmungen, mit Erinnerungen, mit
Antizipationen. Ich inhibiere alle Weltsetzung. Aber hat nicht jede Phantasie irgend eine Stelle, irgend
etwas, das sie bestreitet?’ (593)
386 As a matter of fact, most often, the object of a picture is not a particular depicted at an unextended
point of time. Even a photograph depicts its object during a short but extended timespan, and paintings
very often involves a generalization aimed at typical properties of its object over a certain period.
387 See Chap. 6.
388 In Ingarden’s theory of literature four strata are distinguished, each possessing a formal level – the
aesthetic intention may select either of them as its object, as well as any of their mutual interrelations.
See Chap. 17 on Ingarden.
389 ‘Der Inhalt des Gegenstandes selbst ist nicht ästhetisch bedeutungslos. Es ist nicht gleich, ob es
ein Kaiser ist oder nicht, ob ein bedeutendes Schicksal oder ein alltägliches etc. Handelt es sich da
um ain Anklingen von Gemütswirkungen (Ehrfurcht, Ergebenheit)? Aber auch Anderes: Jede Gegen-
ständlichkeit, die existentiale Freude motiviert, oder phantasiert, quasi-Freude. In sich ist diese Freude
nicht ästhetisch. Aber das ästhetische Gefallen, das an der Erscheinungsweise hängt, kann sich mit dieser
Freude (als einer Aktualität) verbinden, und das Ganze hat den Charakter einer erhöhten ästhetischen
Freude. Stilleben. Das Wechselspiel aktueller Freuden oder quasi-Freuden (an der Natur: Freude über
die fruchttragenden Obstbäume, Felder, etc.) und Leiden und sonstigen aktuellen Stellungnahmen ist
aber selbst ein Hauptstück wirklich ästhetischer Freude. Also auch das gehört zur ‘Erscheinungsweise’.’
390 As a matter of fact, these determinations must also hold for perception proper (and hence for natural
beauty, beauty in architecture, etc.) which does not need pictorality nor fiction, but merely a certain
weakening of the distinction between appearances and the sujet pole.
391 The connection of such indeterminacy spots to the problem solving of diagrams may be indicated by
the ideas of Otto Selz (1913) talking about the role of ‘completion on the basis of a schema’ in his treatise
of the ‘Laws of the ordered thought process’. Selz argues for the ‘Komplexergänzung’, the completion of
complexes as against ‘Konstellationsergänzung’, the completion of associative constellations of though
in James, the latter being judged too simple. Selz’s laws of complex completion are relevant here: a part
or a schema of a complex has a tendency to call forth the reproduction of the whole complex.
392 Of course, the question must be asked whether the Unbestimmtheitsstellen do not possess a foundation
in ordinary perception. When, in perception, we spontaneously endow the objects with back sides, cf. the
analysis of perception of the Ideen, then we add general backsides to those objects (we do not know nor see

N O T E S
465
where the cracks are on the back side of a wooden box), and the single perception always possesses a certain
granularitybeyondwhichweknownothingfurther.Wedoassume,thatisright,intheperceptualEinstellung,
that all unclarities might in principle be made clear by a further observation of the object (wa walk around
it, take a closer look, etc.) – but no real series of perceptions may ever exhaust the properties of the object.
Thus, even in the most meticulous observation a degree of underdetermination, that is, ideality, remains.
Peirce radicalizes this idea to the claim that the object is not in fact particular, but still possesses a certain
generality (its future, e.g. is not in all details decided), and that, conversely, the complete determination in
the individual object is an idea governing perception. We shall not go that far but merely stay by the claim
thattheexistenceofUnbestimmtheitsstelleninfictionandlanguagearesotospeakpreparedbytheexistence
of spots of indeterminacy already in ordinary perception which makes possible the strange fact that we do
not find it strange at all to meet e.g. persons with vast dimensions of indeterminacy in fiction.
393 ‘Danach kann Phantasie eigentlich kein Individuum als solches wiedergeben, sie gibt ‘etwas’, das
in der Form eines Individuellen auszugestalten ist und nur nach seinem hinsichtlich der Individualität
unbestimmten Sinnesgehalt anschaulich wird.’ (nr. 19, 1922/23, 552).
394 ‘Möglichkeiten, individuelle reine Möglichkeiten sind fliessend’ (Beilage 553).
‘Unendlich viele mögliche Wirklichkeiten, die miteinander unverträglich sind etc.’ (Beilage LXII, c.
1918, 566)
‘Prädikat ist Identisches, das in vielen, in ‘Mannigfaltigem’ identisch sein kann, das in wandelbaren und
beliebigen Möglichkeiten identisch vorkommen und das Konkretum bestimmen kann.’ (nr. 19, 1922/23,
564)
‘Und ebenso kan ich irgendein Subjekt mir denken, das das ansetzt auf Grund seiner Tatsachen.’ (570).
‘ wenn ich exemplarisch den Umfang als reinen Umfang durchlaufe, fällt es mir nicht ein, auf
die bezüglichen subjektiven individualisierenden Differenzen mich einzustellen. Vergegenwärtige ich
mir einen einzelnen Zentauren, so meine ich ‘ihn’ nicht als gerade von mir vorgestellten. Sollen wir
sagen, dass das Singuläre eines reinen Umfangs (eines Umfangs reiner individueller Möglichkeiten), das
exemplarisch Einzelne selbst schon ein Allgemeines <ist>, ein Identisches, das seinerseits einen reinen
Möglichkeitsumfang hat?’ (Beilage LXIII, c. 1920/21, 568).
395 ‘In den Unbestimmtheitshorizont, den für jedermann die gegebene Welt und gegebene Zeit hat, stellt
der Dichter, ihn bestimmend, ausfüllend, Gestalten hinein.
Leser, Dichter in einer Welt und Zeit. Zwei Extreme:
a Die gegebene Welt und Zeit kann eine so voll bestimmte sein, als für uns jetzt unsere Umwelt ist
(nicht die wirkliche Welt). Z.B. das heutige Berlin, so bestimmt, wie es für uns und selbst für die
Berliner selbst ist.
b Extremer Gegenfall. Es war einmal, irgendwo, in irgendeinem Fabelland, in irgendeiner Zeit, in
irgendeiner Welt mit ganz anderen animalischen Wesen, sogar anderen Naturgesetze etc.
Zwischen diesen beiden Extremen bewegt sich alle Kunst.’ (Beilage LIX, 1916 el. 1918, s540)
396 ‘Oder vielleicht doch noch ein wenig. Wir haben den Menschen in Deckung, die beiden überschieben
sich, aber geben weit klaffende Unterscheide. Der Unterschied ist so gross, dass wir nicht mehr uns
gestört fühlen durch das Bewusstsein der Verfälschung bei der Neigung zur Identifizierung, sondern
es fehlt die Neigung zur Identifizierung und bei dem grossen Abstand finden wir die Darstellung
lächerlich.’ (143)
397 ‘ one flows into the other and is yet again felt as different.’ (our italics)
398 ‘Warum wirkt die Natur, eine Landschaft als ‘B i l d’? Ein fernes Dorf. Die Häuser ‘kleine Häuser’.
Diese kleinen Häuser haben a) eine geänderte Grösse gegenüber den Häusern, wie wir sie gewöhnlich
sehen, b) eine geringere Stereoskopie, geänderte Färbungen etc. Sie werden ähnlich als Bilder aufgefasst
wie Spielzeughäuser. Ebenso Menschen: Puppen.’ (144)
399 As found for instance in Nelson Goodman, cf. Chap. 3. In a Danish context, this idea has been
influentially inherited in Søren Kjørup (2000, originally 1971). The conventionality hypothesis may take
the form that the ability to grasp similarities is acquired, or the form that similarities do not play any
role and must be substituted by conventions which are then what is acquired. See the discussion in
Chap. 2.
400 The fact that exactly landscape (pictures) furnish the immediate example of this duplicity in
perception is probably due to the fact that fundamental spatial orientation connects the sense of vision

466
N O T E S
with the possibility of bodily movements in space. That this is the case, is supported by the metaphor
the positivist Otto Neurath uses in the foreword to his amazing political-pedagogical book of diagrams
Modern Man in the Making (1939) where he argues that modern man may get at more direct under-
standing of the political relations of modenity by means of diagrams depicting basic social relations.
Neurath developed a set of so-called ‘isotype’ diagrams (especially making use of maps, column diagrams
and the cake diagrams which he himself invented), and he introduces them as follows: ‘An attempt has
been made to evolve for this purpose a special picture-text style which sould enable anybody to walk
through the modern world that is beginning to appear about us and see it as he may see a landscape with
its hills and its plains, woods and meadows.’ (7) The immediate accessability of landscape – in both
the concrete and abstract meanings of this word – are mapped onto the diagram wherein complicated
relations may be viewed with the same directness.
401 We do not have to wait for a Abwehrvorgang to appear such as Freud believed.
402 ‘Ich kann wohl auch mich in das Bild ‘hineinphantasieren’. Das kann aber nur sagen, dass ich
den Bildraum über mich und meinen Umgebungsraum ausdehne und mich selbst unter Ausschluss der
wirklichen Dinge, die ich sehe, mit ins Bild aufnehme, wodurch ich meine Aktualität ausschalte; ich
werde dann selbst zum modifizierten Ich, zum setzungslosen. Dann ist meine Teilnahme die Teilnahme
eines bildlichen Zuschauers (sie gehört zum Bildobjekt), nicht eines sympathisierenden vor dem Bild.’
403 ‘ Neubildung von solchen Synthesen und Analysen, welche aus den einheitlichen Erschei-
nungen Teilerscheinungen herauslösen mit den Teilmeinungen in Synthesis gebracht usw. Im
Expliziten treten also neue Stoffe (Kerne) auf. Also Explikation des in vorgegebenen Erscheinungen
verborgenen.’ (316).
404 We thus receive a category to grasp the specificity of a project like the Flemish painter Coninxloo’s
landscape painting which is probably the first to block the access of the observer by orienting the
gaze directly into brushes, bushes, and foliage and thus makes possible a distinct forest feeling for the
observer lost in the wilderness.
405 A further taxonomy of rather demanding character is constituted by the spectrum of imaginary action
possibilities which the single picture offers the observer. It is well known that books and magazines exist
which should, as Sade put it, be read with one hand only (the other hand presumably being elsewhere
occupied): pornography is a pragmatic type of picture immediately suggesting which (more or less)
imaginary action the observer may indulge in. It seems evident that enormous spectrum of possible
actions open up which we can not make an even preliminary mapping of here – of how the single type of
picture may be integrated into narratives, fictive or not. It is noteworthy, though, that these possibilities
of action – thanks to the purposive structure of actions – mostly will be pertinent in figurative pictures.
We have none or only marginally abstract pornography, and something similar holds for cookbooks,
literary illustration, comics and a series of other picture genres correlated with actions possibilities,
phantazised or real.
406 ‘Solche dargestellten Stimmungen, Gefühle etc. setzen nicht voraus eine Mitdarstellung des
Beschauers, obschon er in eigener Weise in Aktion tritt. Genauer, sicher gehöre ich mit dieser Stimmung
nicht ins Bild hinein.’
407 Many other types of experiments may suit a given type of picture, cf. Chap. 13.
408 Of course, the linguistic term has other prerequisites alongside with the visual type: knowledge of
its use, bodily experience with that use, the object’s relation to other objects, etc. – see the discussion
of Eco’s Cognitive Type and Nuclear Content in Chap. 3.
409 Cf. Chap. 3.
410 TranslationsfromtheTraitéaremyown.‘ onpeutsupprimercertaineslignespournelaissersubstister
que celles jugées importantes. On obtient ainsi l’esquisse, qui fournit du sujet une vision synthetique, et livre
souvent des tracés régulateurs utiles pour l’interpretation correcte de l’oeuvre finale.’ (310).
411 See Hintikka 1997; also Chap. 4.
412 Peirce uses various other notions for abduction during his theoretical development: hypothesis,
hypothetic inference, retroduction. Ab-, de-, and induction, being subspecies of arguments, are sub-
subspecies of symbols in Peirce’s systematic sign doctrine.
413 Michael Hoffmann (1999, 2002) has collected and discussed the various arguments pertaining to the
concept of abduction in Peirce and his most important interpreters.

N O T E S
467
414 As Hoffmann (2002, 257) comments, this forms an early version of Hempel’s induction as the
confirmation of a hypothesis by making it open for falsification.
415 In that respect, it is involved in analogy. Peirce a few times mentions analogy as a further form
of reasoning after Aristotle’s "paradeigma", composed from ab- and induction ("History of science",
1896, 1.65), but he never develops a it thoroughly, and the supposed workings of analogy seems to be
explainable by the abductive trial-and-error application of diagram structure on different materials.
416 Hoffmann 2002 argues strongly and at length for this distinction between the logical form of
abduction and its character of ‘creative perception’.
417 A basic hint lies, of course, in Peirce’s possibility realism. Among all hypotheses which are possible
in the weak sense of ’not known not to be true’, hypotheses supported by known real possibilities
(already recorded laws, tendencies, patterns, etc.) stand out as the hypotheses most promising to test.
418 Peirce’s discussions of the three different types of induction in the years after the turn of the century
(in ‘On the Logic of Drawing History from Ancient Documents,’ (1901, EPII, 75; 7.164–231); in L75
(1902); in ‘G,’ (1905, 2.755–759); in L224 to William James, (1909, EPII, 492), etc., and their respective
subtypes merit a whole separate discussion. Here, we shall stick to a short presentation aimed at the
particular problem at issue.
419 As always, other possible hypotheses abound: the appearance of death symbolism is an accident or
coincidence, it owes it existence to the fact that the poem is pieced together of two autonomous parts,
it owes it existence to the special location depicted, in which death signs naturally occur  etc.
420 Cf. Freud 1948.
421 In what sense are these observations deductions from the idea of the poem as a piece of memento
mori? They are obviously not ordinary deductions; it does not follow with necessity that a poem about
death contains these images. But they are deductions in the sense of ’probable deductions’ which differ
from induction as a probable inference. Probable deductions conclude with necessity about probabilities.
Given this piece of knowledge of cultural history, an ideal type death poem could be said to exist, of
which there is, with necessity, a certain probability that a death poem will instantiate certain features.
If no necessary consequences flowed from the fact that the poem is a death poem, on the contrary, the
claim would be empty.
422 This is one of the implications of Ingarden’s idea of a level of ’schematized aspects’ of the
literary text: the objectivities presented in the text are always seen as schemas, that is, with lots of
’Unbestimmtheitsstellen’, that is, undetermined parts. The reader’s filling-in of such parts prototypically
takes place by ’crude induction’ – if a man is introduced, he will be grasped as two-legged, until the
contrary may be suggested – cf. next chapter.
423 See Umberto Eco’s discussion volume of the same title (1992). Eco here proposes a ‘Popperian’
principle which allows not to find the best interpretations, but to ascertaining which interpretations
are ‘bad’ (Eco 1992, 52). It is an Augustinian idea: ‘any interpretation given of a certain portion of
the text can be accepted if it is confirmed by, and must be rejected if it is challenged by, another
portion of the same text’ (Eco 1992, 65). Eco picks the example of the British-Italian scholar Gabriele
Rossetti’s reading of Dante. He sets out to prove that Dante was a Rosicrucian (and, as a corollary,
that the Rosicrucian symbol of a cross in a rose with a pelican ripping its own flesh from its breast
underneath is present in his work). Rossetti finds a cross and a pelican at the same spot in Dante (not
so strange as the self-sacrificing bird is an old symbol of Christ), he also finds a rose, but unfortunately
not at the same place. His supporting hypothesis now goes that the parts of the symbol have been so
dispersed in Dante’s work for secrecy reasons. Eco, of course, points out, that this is a blatant case
of overinterpretation, made possible only by this extra, unfounded hypothesis. In relation to the early
existence of the Rosicrucians, Eco says that Rossetti adds the absurd argument of Post hoc, ergo ante
hoc: because Rosicrucian symbols, dating after Dante, seemingly can be found in his text, the order
must be even older than him. In our discussion, the theoretical assumption that the Rosicrucians are
earlier than Dante governs the whole hypothesis in the symbol reading – instead of it being explicitly
admitted as a hypothesis which may be confirmed or refuted depending on the findings of the Dante
exegesis.
424 Which is, of course, completely different from the deconstruction fad of the 80s assuming that all
texts necessarily contain deep contradictions.

468
N O T E S
425 As is evident, both deductions contain the word ‘probably’ – but this does not mean they are not
necessary inferences, quite on the contrary. Probable inferences – inductions – build on observations,
while deductions are based on idealized models. The idealized model of a catholic priest has a tonsure,
just like the idealized model of a priest ties him to the city he lives in. This does not entail that all
empirical priest are tonsured nor stick to their hometowns, but it implies that prototypical priests do so.
Thus, the word ‘probably’ here refers to the relation between the ideal model and its empirical extension,
before any empirical observation.
426 Ingarden’s whole œuvre thus forms a late flower of what is often called ‘Göttingen’ phenomenology
from the period when Husserl lectured there. Among Ingarden’s other chief influences thus count other
early realist phenomenologists from the Göttingen circle or the München phenomenologists they were
associated with: Adolf Reinach, Alexander Pfänder, Alexius Meinong, Johannes Daubert, etc.
427 ‘Idealism’ here to be taken in the sense of the construal of the real world by the subject – not
in the sense of claiming the real existence of ideal objects; in the former sense, Ingarden is an anti-
idealist, in the latter, he – just like other phenomenologists, including Peirce – is an idealist. This
turn has been the object of much discussion, ranging from the assertion that it took place somewhere
between Logische Untersuchungen (1901) and Ideen (1913), with 1906–07 as peak candidate, to the
claim that it never took place and that the internal continuity in Husserl’s work remains far greater than
the discontinuities. Ingarden was Husserl’s pupil from around 1912–18 and obviously in this period
found Husserl’s philosophy as well as his teaching basically realist (in concert with the other Göttingen
pupils), and he claims the internal tensions between realism and idealism in Husserl’s thought only
tipped to the side of idealism in the early twenties, only to be made public as late as in Cartesianische
Meditationen and Formale und transcendentale Logik. In any case, Ingarden’s experience of such a turn
was what prompted his early publications ‘Essentiale Fragen’ (1925) and ‘Bemerkungen zum Problem
“Idealismus-Realismus” ’ (1929) as well as Das literarische Kunstwerk. Indeed, Ingarden’s enormous
Der Streit (1965–74) forms the late culmination of this Auseinandersetzung. In Ingarden’s letters to
Husserl, the issue is discussed openly in detail (Husserl 1968).
428 Vom Erkennen and Der Streit are preceded by Polish versions (from 1937 and 1947–48 and 1960–
61, respectively). As I do not read Polish and as the German versions are Ingarden’s own, revised,
translations, I stick to them and the corresponding English translations.
429 In the Austrian tradition, the notion of Sachverhalte often has this duplicity or ambiguity: referring
both to the content of propositions, on the one hand, and to the objectivity referred to by those
propositions, on the other.
430 As always in the phenomenological tradition, ‘object’ here does not merely refer to physical things,
but includes everything ‘regardless of objectivity category and material essence. Thus it refers to
things as well as persons, but also to all possible occurrences, states, acts performed by persons,
etc.’ (219)
431 Thus, the beloved ambiguity and paradox of New Criticism, as well as the self-contradiction revered
by deconstruction, are already grasped by Ingarden’s theory – albeit not as indispensable properties of
the literary work, but rather as possibilities among others.
432 Ingarden gives a reference to Pfänder for the notion of ‘quasi-judgment’ as an intermediate with
respect to Pfänder’s distinction between two functions of the copula; assertive and predicative, respec-
tively. Furthermore, the two extremes between which the quasi is localised are described with reference
to Russell (the assertive judgment) and Husserl (neutrality modification), respectively (176). We may
add that the very terminology (and the basic idea) also comes from Husserl (cf. Chap. 15) who uses
‘quasi’ intensely in the 1910s when Ingarden studied by him in Göttingen.
433 In Logik der Dichtung, Käte Hamburger protests against the definition of the literary work by
quasi-judgments. Quasi-judgments possess no special formal characteristics making it possible to isolate
them – and Hamburger is on the search for such formal linguistic criteria (as the ‘erlebte Rede’ (style
indirect libre), the historical present tense, and, especially, the epic past tense ‘Tomorrow it was the first
day ’). Hamburger’s valuable work on these forms notwithstanding, they still do not constitute formal
criteria of fiction – they are neither necessary nor sufficient, for there are many fictive works without
any of these forms. So her use of these forms as weapon against Ingarden does not work – her argument
that Ingarden’s idea is circular because it only says a judgment is a quasi-judgment because it appears

N O T E S
469
in a novel would hit herself to the same degree if we were to take her formal studies as definitory
for literariness or fiction. Maybe a misunderstanding is at stake here – Ingarden does not claim that
what he finds is not circular, it is no attempt at defining the literary work by means of properties in its
constituents, it is rather a description of the status of those constituents.
434 Ingarden’s dwelling with these metaphors indirectly refers to his idealism-realism agenda and
his ongoing discussion with and of Husserl’s gradual turn to idealism. Ingarden regards Ideen as
ambiguous as regards idealism. The idealism-realism issue had not explicitly been the object of Husserl’s
published writings until the Ideen, and Husserl’s Göttingen students obviously assumed – according
to Ingarden – Logische Untersuchungen to be realist. They were thus surprised to see the much more
explicitly idealist Ideen I, especially because Husserl’s lectures was in a ‘ wenn man so sagen
darf, realistischen Ton gehalten.’ (Ingarden 1998 (1968), 407) – thus Husserl’s lectures at the same
time (summer semester 1913) on ‘Natur und Geist’ – being close to the more realist approach of the
Ideen II. (ibid.)
In the Ideen I, on the one hand, the claim is repeated that the object is ‘transcendent’ in relation to
the act, and the epistemology for ideal objects is not, unlike that of real objects, revised in the Ideen,
so that Husserl still appears as a realist in these respects. On the other hand, the whole noesis-noema
doctrine of the act is seen by Ingarden as idealist, reducing the object world of space-time to: ‘ ein
Sein, das das Bewußtsein in seine Erfahrungen setzt, das prinzipiell nur als Identisches von motivierten
Erscheinungsmannigfaltigkeiten anschaubar und bestimmbar – darüber hinaus aber ein Nichts ist.’
(Ideen I, 93, quoted in Ingarden 1998, 211 (1956)) – a quote to which Ingarden returns.
This criticism of Husserl’s position is constant in Ingarden’s many writings about the subject. He
writes – as early as in his 1918 letter to Husserl about the re-edition of the VI. investigation -: ‘Wir
kommen am Ende zu der Gleichung: Ding = ein eigentümlich gebautes Noema-Bewußtsein.’ (Ingarden
1998, 5). So the relation between the single aspects-noemas and the thing-noema constituted by them is
what recurs in Ingarden’s idea of the states of affairs forming a ‘net’ around the represented objectivity
which thus to some extent corresponds to the noema. Unlike Husserl’s noema, this objectivity is, of
course, distinct from the correlated real or ideal object itself (if it exists).
435 Here, an important difference in relation to Peirce’s metaphysics resides in the fact that Peirce would
never allow particulars of any sort to be completely determined, inter alia because of the indeterminacy
of their future states. To Peirce, thus, there are real Unbestimmtheitsstellen mirroring the case of semiotic
representations. Indeterminacy, in any case, must be far more extensive in representations.
436 Wellek says (1991, 379): ‘I find myself in wide agreement with his views and acknowledge learning
from him, on many of these questions, more than from anybody else.’ – and still ‘I find it difficult
to isolate this stratum of schematic aspects from that of represented objects ’ (383). The polemical
dialogue between the two is recorded in later editions of Das literarische Kunstwerk and in Wellek
1991.
437 ‘All so-called sensory qualities – but not only these – are self-presenting’ (196). Just like categorical
entities in Husserl may also permit intuitive access, it is not only sensory qualities which satisfy self-
presentation. We saw that occurrence states also did it to some extent (due to what – due to the schematic
character of their event type?) – and we must assume that (certain simple?) ideal objects also display
self-presentation (cf. Chap. 6). This becomes important for the stratum of schematized aspects.
438 Ingarden’s account for these qualities has hardly left the first, descriptive phase. It is evident that
reading great literature, qualities like the mentioned are often experienced, but their status does not seem
perfectly clear in Ingarden’s theory. They seem to be objective qualities dependent on temporal situations
depicted in the object level – but why is it that they are presented as extraordinary, almost quasi-religious
breaks with everyday life (cf. the word ‘revelation’ used as common denominator for them)? It is true
that literature often describes such qualities, but literature also has the power of redescribing aspects of
everyday life with an intensity which may make us experience it as with new eyes. So their ‘revelation’
character ought to be described more meticulously in order to avoid identifying them rightaway with
vitalist ecstasies or intensities. Recall, for a corrective point of view, that the doctrine of Russian
formalism with its avant garde aesthetics applauded ‘deviation’ exactly for its potential for making
us see the trivial things anew – to see again the stoneness of the stone, etc. If constructed properly,
Ingarden’s ‘metaphysical qualities’ should include this sort of aesthetic experience as well, far from the

470
N O T E S
vitalist shocks seeming to play center stage (in his examples, at least). What about the boring, the sick,
the tedious, the ordinary, the vexatious, the brooding, the slowly threatening, the contingent  it takes
a true master to make such metaphysical qualities appear with the same intensity as Ingarden’s more
vitalist examples.
439 I owe many insights in these paragraphs to my discussions with Thomas Illum Hansen who also
works with the ideas of integrating cogntive semantics insights into an Ingardenian framework (Hansen
2001, 2004).
440 This would also throw new light on Ingarden’s attempt at distinguishing the literary work of art from
the scientific literary work. Of course his principal distinction goes between literary quasi-judgments
and scientific judgments – where the latter serve the depitction of transcendent (real or ideal) objects.
More debateable is his idea that in a scientific work one must focus upon the objects represented
solely, and that the ‘ situation of the aspects which may be held in readiness in a scientific work is
analogous, unless the aspects perform a particular cognitive role in the work.’ (1968, 157). The addition
is significant, for in the scientific work, the aspects held in readiness may perform a cognitive role
akin to the aesthetic role played in the literary work – in both cases the function of making the objects
represented intuitive unites the role of the aspects. Diagrams may directly play the role of such aspects.
While we agree with Ingarden in the basic distinction (against all sorts of deconstructivism blurring
fiction and reality), we find a greater degree of relatedness betweeen the two.
441 Cf. Hayek 1978.
442 With respect to this, a myth probably exists in phenomenology about the definite concreteness of
what is perceptually given. But the concreteness of ordinary perceptual experience does not lie in it
being constantly highly detailed, but rather in the fact that we know that we could always, in a given
situation, choose to focus more attentively on this or that feature and thus bring forth further detail –
which is not possible, of course, in purely textually or diagrammatically presented objectivities.
443 This does not, however, imply that literary quality necessarily lies in the making explicit and thematic
such thought experiments in themselves. As Nils Gunder Hansen (2004) argues, Iser’s idea that the
reader’s explicit grasping of literary conventions and machinery involved therein constitutes the access
to complicated literature and its aesthetic values, is wrong. The diagram experiments here discussed are
undertaken primarily in order to co-constitute the level of represented objectivities, not to abstract from
it and seeking the work’s raison-d’être only in its ingenious use of literary devices.
444 What about literary genres like poetry or essays, do they share the basic definition by quasi-
judgments? Another of Ingarden’s famous opponents, Käte Hamburger, has a counterargument along
these lines. She famously claims that poetry is emphatically not fictive, but rather a special genre, to be
classified along with the ‘Ich-Erzählung’, the ‘I-tale’, referring to the subjective experience reality of
the lyrical ego. We shall not go into this discussion here, but Hamburger is obviously right that it seems
questionable to define the notoriously fuzzy concept of literature as a whole on the basis of fictivity.
Ruttkowski 1978, 291–92 details this argument: poetry may be fictive or not, just like epic literature
(containing both adventure novels and autobiographies). Similarly, other counterexamples can be listed:
fictional texts which are not literature (myth; scientific or other thought experiments). So most likely, it
is not the case that literature and fictionality is coextensional, and Ingarden’s theory does not hold for
the whole wide field covered by the umbrella concept of literature but only for that large prototypical
subset of it which develops fictive universes.
445 A further point to be discussed is formal ontology. Ingarden mentions the idea in a short note (302)
and says that as long as a literary work deals with objects at all, the laws of formal ontology must
be observed. Given the broad phenomenological idea of objects (covering events, states, processes,
qualities, being ideal, real, intentional; physical, psychic etc.) it may be more difficult than expected to
transgress formal ontology, so assumably, there is hardly any specific literary truth effect connected to
adherence to formal ontology.
446 This taxonomy of iconicities in literature only pertains to the level of represented objectivities and
thus does not prevent further, indirect iconicities to play a role in the literary work which are orthogonal
to the types here mentioned and may freely combine with all of them: That of experienced events being
seen through a narrator or a character; that of an indirect, symbolical or allegorical reference; that of
letting linguistic devices function iconically (word order, etc.), that of adding illustrations (maps, graphs,

N O T E S
471
diagrams, etc.) to the text or directly shape the text after such icons as in figure poems, etc. Johansen
(1996, 2003) chart some of these iconicity possibilities after Peircean mode of representation (image,
diagram, metaphor, respectively) which is, of course, independent of the five types discussed here, so a
combination will yield further subtypes to be investigated.
447 Maybe these types of truth could ease the tension between Ingarden and Hamburger. The latter
attacks fiction theories of literature with reference to the non-fictionality of poetry and first-person
narration (and a related case could be made for the literary essay) – but even if ‘quasi-judgments’
are basically fiction, the two concepts are not completely coextensive. Quasi-judgments come in many
types (they form a continuum between assertion and mere predication or assumption) and the most
assertion-like quasi-judgments, so to speak, only marginally differ from full-fledged assertions. The
personal truths experienced in poetry reading or the journalistic or philosophical truth in essayism
could thus be seen as a mixture of assertion-like quasi-judgments with pseudo-truths of the types here
listed.
To return to the discussion of interpretation in chapter 16, Ingarden’s doctrine may also permit us
to distinguish between the often mixed-up notions of reading, analysis and interpretation. Reading
is prototypically Ingardenian concretization – it is the appropriation of the work which performs the
different procedures of filling-in and of actualization of schematized aspects held-in-readiness. Analysis,
then, is the operation which – typically on the basis of a reading – attempts to get an overview of the
text’s organic structure, which parts relate to what other parts in which way. Analysis, then, makes
explicit a lot of things unthematically participating in reading – at the same time as it is, typically,
ascetic regarding the filling-in which is artificially kept back. Interpretation, finally, is the appropriation
of the text which is primarily aimed at the pseudo-truth of the work – in some or all of the five senses
here mentioned. As is evident, many empirical examples of papers about specific literary texts indulge in
combinations of all three procedures; probably the prototypical academic, informed treatment of literary
texts will do so.
448 Clausewitz’s Vom Kriege is even remarkably sparse as to observations on the role of espionage in
warfare; all is a 1-page chapter about ‘Nachrichten im Krieg’ containing little exceeding common sense:
‘Ein grosser Teil der Nachrichten, die man im Kriege bekommet, ist widersprechend, ein noch größerer
ist falsch und bei weitem der größte einer ziemlichen Ungewißheit unterworfen.’ (48)
449 In the case of espionage, we meet such structures in the recurrent, transhistorical claims about the
nature, essence, principles, or problems of espionage in spy literature. In Spys and Spymasters, e.g., we
read about twentieth century espionage that ‘Though considerate advances had been made in technology,
the basic principles and problems of intelligence remained unchanged.’ (144). In the same vein, we are
told that as to the human element of espionage ‘ nothing had changed since the days of Joshua.’ (146).
Such general ideas are subsequently applied in the analyses of specific subjects, as when the espionage
satellites of the twentieth century are seen as evolutionary heirs to the balloons of the eighteenth century
They, in turn, had the function ‘ to take one stage further the instruction Moses gave to his spies: “Go
up into the mountain, and see the land!” ’ (166).
450 Smith has thus founded a center for philosophy and geography and conceives of political geography
as an exemplary case for a priori studies, e.g., of border types. The idea of such a relation between
reality and semantics remains, though, controversial. The present chapter has thus been turned down
by several distinguished scholarly journals, not because of its quality (at least, so they claimed), but
because of the fact that it included real-world issues in the discussion of a literary genre and thus was
deemed unfit for literary studies.
451 In an arbitrarily selected dictionary, Nudansk Ordbog, Copenhagen: Politiken 1977. This procedure
in inspired by Greimas’s investigation of the concepts ‘challenge’ and ‘anger’, in Greimas 1982.
452 A prominent example is the allies’ large-scale deception operation before D-day in order to make
Hitler believe the Dunkirk area to be the invasion spot, including not only a planning of a feinted
invasion there but also the planning of a feinted feint, a more northerly invasion supposed to take place
from Scotland, thus adding further credibility to the Dunkirk possibility.
453 I believe this is not generally acknowledged, and among many literary scholars, Greimas even
counts as an especially malignant reductionist. This rests, however, upon a misinterpretation of Greimas’
‘narrative schema’ as an assumedly identical deep structure underlying all concrete texts. This idea

472
N O T E S
overlooks a crucial moment in all decent structuralisms: the concept of transformation, cf. Chap. 5. The
schema is a prototype only which must be transformed in order to grasp the single text’s specificity.
The specific features of the single text is grasped only by understanding – not only the schema – but
the specific transformation (and its motivations and implications) resulting in just that text. Moreover,
the schema may develop with the addition of further assumptions which make new aspects of the fight
appear. The schema is not a causal regularity, it is a teleological regularity, and hence it may bifurcate
at every possible joint, failing to satisfy the telos in question. The simple phases of it are not causally
determined by earlier phases; rather, later phases presuppose earlier phases.
454 Here sociological criteria enter: espionage does not seem to have been anomalous in GDR, for
instance, measured on what is known about the number of informants in the people employed by the
Stasi, and generally espionage is considerably less controversial in pre-democratic or totalitarian states.
But even here, the anomalous character is preserved in the secrecy of procedures.
455 Carl Schmitt’s personal career is highly controversial, involving extreme right wing positions and
active support for the Nazi regime in the 30s. Despite Schmitt’s dubious – to say the least – political
positions, it is possible to discuss his more general philosophical and scientific points of view on a
democratic basis. Schmitt’s notion of sovereignty is explicitly copied from theological concepts; cf.
the hypothesis of Politische Theologie that the concepts of modern political theory are constituted by
secularized theology. A corollary is that fundamental political and politological issues inherit structures
from theology; the political wars of the largely atheist twentieth century support this idea, cf. also
Vögelin’s notion of religious politics. It is easy to recognize the problems of incarnation and of theodicée
in relation to espionage: how may democratic ideas become flesh? How may democracy be morally
good when its own secret services are not?
456 Schmitt does not explicitly claim this, but the idea clearly appears, e.g. in Der Begriff des Politischen,
(34n) where the famous dictum of Clausewitz is interpreted with the conclusion that politics is determined
by the Friend-or-Foe logic of war.
457 The latter expression is, surprisingly, rather new and dates back only to American discussions in the
beginning of the Cold War.
458 We presuppose, of course, that the Prussians did not have the possibility of incarcerating the two
and keep them as prisoners of war. We may note en passant that according to John Keegan, it was the
Prussians’ victory in the Franco-German war which made Clausewitz an international hero in military
academies worldwide. This development formed part of the radical brutalization of war during the
twentieth century supported by Clausewitz’s idea of the war as tending to the utmost release of violence
and aiming at the total defeat of the enemy.
459 Brandt 1983, 129.
460 Analogous cases occurred in USA during the same period – president Kennedy’s affair with Judy
Exner whom he shared with mafioso Sam Giancana, just like his affairs with the East German girl Ellen
Rometsch and several upper class whores with connections to the Profumo case. These affairs were only
made silent due to intensive emergency work by Robert Kennedy and J. Edgar Hoover (according to
Hersh 1997).
461 With Jens-Martin Eriksen, I wrote two books about the Balkan wars of the 90s and the actual
predicaments of the region (2003, 2004).
462 According to West, 296–97.
463 Famous is the alleged refusal of the USA to perpetuate the services in the period between the World
Wars, with reference to the fact that ‘gentlemen do not read each other’s mail’.
464 The military function is the second function out of the three in Dumézil’s theory of three main
functions in Indo-European culture: justice/magic, war, fertility.)
465 From Ornicar!, Vol. 19, Paris 1979.
466 We may remark the British military historian John Keegan’s empirical claim that the Napoleonic
revolutionary armies with their general conscription played a decisive role in the democratization of
Europe.
467 Of course, military intelligence is subject to the same control, but the recurrent and delicate political
tension between state security and the human rights of the same state’s citizens is structurally relevant
for domestic services primarily.

N O T E S
473
468 Cf. the Swedish conflict researcher Ola Tunander’s work on the Palme case.
469 When senator Moynihan (cf. below), after having served under Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, and Ford,
was elected to Senate, he got admission to his own FBI file of 561 pages, naming him as a communist.
470 In one of the rare cases of principal reflection on these issues – the last chapter of former CIA-boss
Allen Dulles’s book The Craft of Intelligence (1963) – he claims that the president himself controls the
services, that Dulles himself has supported a proposal for a civil control commission, that all his own
knowledge of the services gives reason for trust: ‘After more than a decade of service, I can testify
that I have never known a group of men and women more devoted to the defense of our country and
its way of life than those who are working in the Central Intelligence Agency.’ (264). Apart from the
fact that a natural scepticism easily awakens faced with claims like these from the leader’s own lips, it
remains correct that assumptions like the ones quoted is all that you have to rest your head on. On the
other hand, Dulles adds immediately afterwards, as the very last two sentences of the book that ‘The
last thing we can afford to do today is to put our intelligence in chains. Its protective and informative
role is indispensable in an era of unique and continuing danger.’ (264). Dulles thus summarizes in a few
lines all possible points of view: control, trust, limitation of control 
471 A recent Danish example is the schoolmaster Kristian Kjær Nielsen who recently (in the Danish
daily Information March 10, 1999) told about how, as a member of the Danish Neo-Nazi Party DNSB
in the seventies, he spied on party comrades. The information he collected was delivered anonymously
by P.O. Box in Copenhagen, and the spy had never any clear idea as to who his commissioners were.
Obvious candidates included Israeli, West German, and Danish intelligence services, just like Jewish
organizations for the tracing of World War II criminals are possible.
472 Moynihan relates, not without comical effects, how general Butler, one of the main responsibles
for the American atomic strategy, visited the Soviet Union for the first time in 1988 and got a shock.
Everything is falling apart, and the chauffeur in the official limousine transporting him breaks off the
gear stick. After all these years, Butler in a split second realizes that he has been dealing all along with
a caricature (78–79). Moynihan himself tells about a parallel experience regarding the Sandinistas in
Nicaragua where he, as an official guest, is witness to the Secretary of Interior trying in vain to order
beans at a restaurant – all at the same time as the illegal Iran-Contra scandal develops on a CIA automat
idea that the Sandinist state should be a strong and dangerous enemy (208–12). Instead, Moynihan’s
proposal would be that a ‘ reasonable American response to the new Communist government in
Managua would have been a statement of condolence.’ (207)
473 Ed. Nigel West, London 1993.
474 We may note that the postmodernist sceptic Jean Baudrillard took his most salient examples for his
radical idea of the ‘disappearance of the real’ from the world of secret services. Who was responsible for
the Italian terror bombs of the seventies and eighties? – many different groupings claimed responsibility,
maybe it was instructed by one political wing in order to discredit the other, maybe by the police in
order to discredit both, maybe by foreign interests in destabilizing Italy  reality vanishes behind such
interpretations and their effects.
475 I pick these informations from Haswell 1975, 48–49.
476 The first organized use of this effect was probably Bismarck’s famous espionage chief Wilhelm
Stieber who was the father of many classical espionage inventions. He erected the so-called ‘Greenhouse’
in Berlin, an especially sophisticated and depraved whorehouse, with the intention of its use in blackmail
of its customer circle involved in international politics.
477 An explicit example supporting this idea being of course Graham Greene the Catholic.
478 Maybe this fact gives part of an explanation of the often-noticed but relatively unexplained partition
of the film and literature public into two segments: a masculine segment preferring the detectives, front
pigs, spies, thrill, and objective action of B-movies, while a feminine segment wants doctors, artists, love,
children, passion in melodramas with full possibilities of heavy psychological identification. Nobody
could possibly overlook this, least of all Hollywood, still it seems anathema for academic investigation
in most of literature and film departments.
479 ‘Metaphysics consist in the results of the absolute acceptance of logical principles not merely as
regulatively valid, but as truths of being.’ (‘The Logic of Mathematics: An Attempt to Develop my
Categories from Within’, c. 1896, CP 1.487)

474
N O T E S
480 Peirce presents several different systems of sciences, but the most developed ones stem from his
mature period, the same period in which the concept of continuity is central. In Peirce’s large application
for the Carnegie foundation from 1902 (NEM IV, 17), the system is schematically presented; in Robin
693 (op.cit. 189 ff. undated), the classification is commented upon; in CP 1.203–83 (1902) it is the
object of a thorough argumentation. Mathematics is ‘engaged solely in tracing out the consequences of
hypothesis’ (CP 1.247) – Peirce’s interpretation of his father Benjamin Peirce’s definition of mathematics
as the science which draws necessary conclusions. Its hypothetical character is important: ‘Mathematics
is the study of what is or is not logically possible, without undertaking to ascertain what actually exists.’
(‘Reason’s Conscience’, undated, NEM IV, 191). Consequently, it is left to the more empirical sciences
to ascertain which of its hypotheses may have which applications. Conversely, mathematics is the most
general science, whose results (even if they may not be unambiguous, cf. the Non-Euclidean geometries)
all the more specific sciences must apply. The philosophical sciences – in Peirce phenomenology (or
phaneroscopy), normative sciences (including logic equaling semiotics) and finally metaphysics, in that
order – hence depend on mathematics; it is, of course, their own decision which parts of mathematics
they build on. It is decided by what may appear in experience (phenomenology), by which forms valid
inferences may take (logic) and by which general properties reality possesses (metaphysics), the latter
of these sciences specifying the former, not vice versa. Only after these sciences, the special sciences
follow under the headline of ‘idioscopy’. In the series of philosophical sciences, continuity has a central
role, both in the sense of first philosophy and as a sort of connecting glue between the single domains.
481 The very first philosopher on this point is probably Bolzano (Paradoxien des Unendlichen, 1850) to
whom Peirce only refers in his late period. Peirce refers one of his main ideas (that the equivalence of
sets with respect to size should be measured by a one-to-one pairing of elements), but at the same time
he claims he has not read his work (‘Bedrock’, 1906, 6.175, and ‘Some Amazing Mazes’, 1908, 4.651).
482 Peirce claims at several occasions that Dedekind’s influential book – where the real numbers are
defined by ‘Dedekind cuts’ – should be influenced by papers sent to him by Peirce. Cf. the following
lecture note from 1903: ‘My own first contribution to this branch was made in the autumn of 1867’
(Robin 316a, NEM III, 129), and further ‘My second contribution was 1881 [] My third [] That
is all I have printed. My work has been, I believe, completely independent of Cantor. I never knew
anything definite about him until 1884. I have seen it stated in some book that I modified the statements
of Dedekind. But the truth is that Dedekind’s Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen first appeared in
[1888]. It contains not a single idea which was not in my paper of [1881?], of which an extra copy
was sent to him and I do not doubt influenced his work.’ (ibid. 130; the square brackets around the
years are Eisele’s). The unspecified reference to 1881 probably refers to ‘On the Logic of Number’
(CP 3.252–88), cf. what Peirce says a couple of years later in a footnote (‘Pragmaticism, Prag. [4]’
c. 1905, CP 5.526n): ‘C.S. Peirce’s paper On the Logic of Number, published in the spring of 1881
contained, though not in a perspicuous form, the leading results of Dedekind’s classic of 1887.’ We
shall not take that text into accout here, as it – with respect to continuity – rests upon insuffucient
definitions: ‘A continuous system is one in which every quantity greater than another is also greater than
some intermediate quantity greater than that other.’ (3.256) – which is valid already for non-continuous
objects, such as certain arrangements (after size, e.g.) of rational numbers.
483 Cantor’s decisive articles are the six-part ‘Über unendlich lineare Punktmannigfaltigkeiten’ (1879–
84) which widely transgresses the subject indicated by the title to provide a philosophical argumentation
for the basis of his theory of sets, as well as the two-part ‘Beiträge zur Begründung der transfiniten
Mengenlehre’ (1895–97) which provides a rigorous mathematical presentation.
According to Parker 1992, Peirce only knew the first of these papers through a short excerpt in French
translation (of part 6, §16), ‘Sur divers théorèmes de la théorie des ensembles de points situés dans un
espace continu a n dimensions’ (1883), just like he only knew the second part of the second paper in
addition to a final third paper ‘Mitteilungen zur Lehre vom Transfiniten’ (1887–88) which consists of a
collection of letters discussing and polemizising with various authors. The background for these claims
about Peirce’s selective reading of Cantor is not provided in Parker 1992.
Most references to Cantor in Peirce’s work are later than 1897, but e.g. CP 6.164 (The ‘Continuity’ entry
from Century Dictionary 1889) or the reference in 1892 ‘The Law of Mind’ points to the fact that Peirce
at this point must have known considerably more about Cantor than §16 (1883a); in the notes of the CP a

N O T E S
475
reference points to §10 of (1879–84). In Peirce’s draft for a letter to Cantor dating from 1900 (NEM III,
767) he says, ‘Dear Sir: Before reading your wonderfully beautiful and profound studies (in fact, I have
only just read your memoir in the Math. Annalen XLVI and XLIX, and have not had time to digest them,
and have only looked a little at the memoir in Vol. XXI, because I could not catch the idea of your ordinal
numbers) ’ According to this passage, Peirce knows both parts of Cantor 1895–97, while the reference
to a paper in the same journal’s Vol. 21 refers to ‘Grundlagen einer allgemeinen Mannigfaltigkeitslehre’
(1883) which is ‘Nr. 5’ (by far the largest) of the six parts of Cantor 1879–84, containing among other things
the first articulation of the continuum hypothesis. Thus it does not seem correct to claim that Peirce only
knew the French version of Nr. 6, §16. When Peirce says about his knowledge of these texts that he has ‘only
looked a little’, we may not be so sure he is speaking the whole truth; firstly, Peirce claims elsewhere that
he has anticipated Cantor and hence it would not be clever of him to admit much too close an acquaintance
with his early writings (even if Peirce’s decisive argument for his autonomy ‘On the Logic of Number’ (CP
3.252–88) dates from 1881); secondly, he adds that he has not really understood ordinal numbers which is
no doubt correct. The references to Cantor earlier than 1897, thus in ‘The Law of Mind’, seem to refer to a
knowledge of part 5 of Cantor 1879–84.
484 The centrality of time, however, in Peirce’s continuity argument is evident as early as in the Monist
papers from 1892 (cf. below) so Potter and Shields’ idea of a fourth period based on the 1908 note may
be subject to discussion.
485 Thereafter Peirce adds that this ambitious and romantic philosophical program might have certain
roots in his Concord childhood during the period in which Emersonian transcendentalism dominated
the intellectual climate with ideas ‘caught from Schelling, and Schelling from Plotinus, from Boehm, or
from god knows what minds stricken with the monstrous mysticism of the East.’ He is not, however,
‘conscious of having contracted any of that virus’, but he still holds it probable that ‘some cultured
bacilli, some benignant form of the disease was implanted in my soul, unawares, and that now, after long
incubation, it comes to the surface, modified by mathematical conceptions and by training in physical
investigations.’ Thus Peirce perfectly realizes the apparently strange fact that his evolutionary cosmology
introduces rather mystical ideas in the cool pragmatism. In spite of parallel formulas regarding mind and
matter, Peirce in these lectures rejects monism (6.24) in favor of an idealism making matter a derivative
phenomenon; later (6.73) he presents himself as monist, probably motivated by the continuity between
mind and matter which is a recurring idea in him. Even if Peirce is thus no neutral monist, it seems
fair to call his idealism a monism, because it refers to the metaphysical interpretation of the concept of
continuity, due to which no absolute metaphysical distinctions are allowed.
486 As Parker remarks (16, 52), the concept of continuity is here invoked at two epistemologically and
metaphysically decisive points: the beginning point of science and the ground of being of reality; both
of these solid and problematic entities are dissolved by means of continua establishing their connection
to the actual level of knowledge at any time, backwards (knowledge) as well as forwards (being). This
allows the young Peirce to cut down his category table in ‘New List’ (EPI, 6; 1.555) from five (minus
Substance and Being) to the canonical three, at the same time as he gets rid of the Kantian problem of
a Ding an sich.
487 This argument remains constant in the mature Peirce, cf. 4.641 (‘The Amazing Mazes. First Curiosity,
1908): ‘The argument which seems to me to prove, not only that there is such a conception of continuity
as I contend for, but that it is realized in the universe, is that if it was not so, nobody could have any
memory.’
488 The difference remains, of course, that Husserl’s question refers to ideal objects only, defined by
that the access to them is in principle always possible. Peirce’s argument refers to memory in general
where this principle does not hold.
489 Ketner and Putnam’s preface to Reasoning and the Logic of Things refers to this affinity between
Peirce and non-standard analysis.
490 The first occurrence of this intuition is probably Bernard Bolzano in his Paradoxien des Unendlichen
from 1850 which Peirce only later realizes, cf. ‘Notes on the Theory of Multitude’, (NEM III, 1088)
from 1903.
491 Even if equivalent to Dedekind and Cantor’s definitions, Peirce’s 1881 description of infinite sets
in terms of the syllogism of transposed quantities differs in being an intenstional description, pointing

476
N O T E S
to a seminal difference between Cantorian set theory and Peirce’s approach. Peirce later highlighted the
difference in a letter to Science in 1900 (3.563), and Randall Dipert (1997) convincingly argues that
Peirce’s criticism forms an ‘extremely subtle’ point. Peirce protests that Dedekind’s notion of proper
part (‘echter Theil’) remains undefined, and Dipert argues that this is because there is no procedure
given to determine whether a given candidate is, in fact, a proper part of an infinte set. In order to tell
whether a set A is a subset of another set B, we must have sufficient knowledge af that set in order to
determine whether each of its elements are in fact elements of B as well. But we may only possess such
knowledge of A if we know each of its individual elements by some procedure. Dipert acknowledges
the constructivist leanings of this idea – but Peirce’s obsession does not lie, as in the later constructivists
after Brouwer, with the impossibility of admitting objects defined by infinite procedures, but rather with
the distinctness of the individual elements. This is why Peirce insists on an intensional definition of
subsets in the syllogism of transposed quantities, Dipert argues: ‘One cannot legislate an ability to form
proper subsets of a given purported collection. That is, of any purportedly collective entity, one cannot
simply assert that one can, say, partition it. Rather, the ability to do so is a consequence of, and hence
required for, its being a collection in the first place. A conception of the members of the collection as
individuated entities comes first, and of the collections of such entities, the Axiom of Choice will in fact
be descriptively true.’ (65). Peirce only later, in the 1900 letter to Cantor, make explicit this idea, but its
germ is present already in the definition of infinity by means of the syllogism of transposed quantities
where the crucial subset (the subset of women in the French population) is intensionally defined. Dipert
rightly notices the connection from Peirce’s intensionality claim to his realism as to rules and laws.
492 In ‘The Logic of Quantity’ (1893, 4.126) Peirce says (almost) the exact opposite: ‘The multiplicity
of points upon a surface must be admitted, as it seems to me, to be the square of the points of the line
and so with higher dimensions.’ If you do not add the rule of calculation claiming that Aleph-n times
Aleph-n = Aleph-n, then this claim is fallacious. This only mentioned to indicate how vacillating Peirce
may be in this field, and how difficult it may be to reconstruct his changing positions.
493 Peirce later regrets his condemnation of Kant’s continuity definitions and his adherence to Cantor’s
definition of the continuum as a set of points. In L77 (NEM III, 780), a letter to Paul Carus from 1899,
he says that Kant in the first Critique does not claim that space is infinitely divisible but only that it
may not be so divided in order to reach any least part. This definition is not, of course, more correct
than the first one, but it is closer to the spirit of Peirce’s idea that points are not parts of the line but
limit values on it. Even later, Peirce returns to another and better idea in Kant: that continuity implies
that all parts have parts of the same sort.
494 Elsewhere, Peirce has a definition of the concept of ‘perfect’ deviating from Cantor’s (‘Notes on the
Theory of Multitude’, 1903?, NEM III, 1092). Peirce here comments upon Schönfliess’ ‘Die Entwick-
elung der Lehre von dem Punktmannigfaltigkeiten’ in Heft VIII of the Jahresbericht der Deutschen
Mathematiker-Vereinigung 1900, presenting Cantor’s theory. In Peirce’s note to page 32 he claims that
‘A type (or a collection) is called secluded or concluded abgeschlossen if every fundamental series in it
has its limit within it.
It is called close (in sich dicht) if every element is a capital element.
It is called perfect (perfekt) if it is both secluded and close. (That is, if you take away an element from
a perfect type it will be close just the same but will cease to be concluded. But if you add an element
it will still be concluded but will cease to be close. Hence we may translate in sich dicht by dense or
condensed or concise but as a whole, and abgeschlossen by complete.)’
Here, perfect is defined as being close plus dense, where perfect earlier was only close, but had to be
completed by density in order to yield continuity. The definitions of continuity are hence equivalent,
even if the definition of perfection has changed.
495 If you take e.g. a closed set of rationals on the number line, then the derivative set in this sense is
the same closed set (because every rational is a limit element, cf. the Dedekind cut). A set of this kind
is irreducible by this procedure, while on the other hand a convergence series is reducible to the number
towards which it converges.
496 The same Aristotelian idea plays a central role in René Thom’s Esquisse d’une sémiophysique.
497 If we go back to Cantor’s definition of a perfect point, it is not far from Peirce’s Aristotelicity.
He defines (Cantor 1872) a ‘limit point’ as one of which it holds that in any neighborhood around the

N O T E S
477
point there will be an infinity of points belonging to the set, and he furthermore defines a derived set
P’ as that which consists of the limit points of a given set. If the derived set is identical to the set itself,
then the set is perfect (Cantor 1879–84, 193), but this is only the case if it is not open (an open set’s
derived set is larger han itself, because it contains, in addition to the set itself, the points which might
close it (which is what we today would call its limit points, NB), its end points. Already in his article
about Continuity in The Century Dictionary (1889, CP 6.164), Peirce refers Cantor’s definition, here
with acclamation.
498 Cf. Maddy 1990, 110, referring Cantor’s definition of perfection as follows: ‘A closed set of reals
is one that contains all its accumulation points; a perfect set is closed, and every one of its points is an
accumulation point’, corresponding to Peirce’s version: the former requirement grants Aristotelicity, the
latter Kanticity.
499 A truism, it must be said, which Peirce does not continue claiming. In his late philosophy with
its finalist interpretation of continuity he no longer finds it strange that the future should be able to
influence upon the present now (albeit only in general terms, in opposition to the past); this is the very
definition of finality.
500 It is from arguments like these that Peirce is later able to claim that his doctrine does not exclude
the possibility of telepathy (even if it does not, on the other hand, positively imply nor argue for such a
thing ).
501 The infinitesimalist time theory very logically – but counterintuitively – leads Peirce to claim that
the energy of a perceived idea in the present must be infinite, while an idea in the past has a finite
and relative energy. This idea really claims a primacy of perception, cf. Peirce’s theory of ‘perceptual
judgment’ where generality is directly perceived.
502 Cf. Holenstein 1972 on associationism in Husserl.
503 An idea reminding of Kant’s philosophy of history, according to which we can never know whether
history has a goal – but we ought to act as if it had.
504 In this, Peirce continues Kant, for whom the finitude of man prevents us from reaching the noumenon,
which is why we must be satisfied with phenomena. But this delimitation so to speak incarcerates us in
generalia (not in particulars, as one might think); all we can do is to predicate a substance with general
predicates (but maybe even only the simpler general predicates ). Elsewhere, Peirce says: ‘ I had
long before declared that absolute individuals were entia rationis, and not realities. A concept deter-
minate in all respects is as fictitious as a concept definite in all respects.’ (A letter to Signor Calderoni,
1905, 8.208); the idea of an object determinate through and through is rather a regulative idea which
requires of us not to remain satisfied with any partial knowledge of the object. But we can not even
reach any thoroughgoing knowledge of realized generals, Peirce here adds: they are necessarily vague.
Towards the end of the article, Peirce’s speculations speed up, and in the course of the next few
paragraphs we learn that the association of ideas, just like personality, has a teleological aim, because
the future reference is a crucial element in both (just like in Peirce’s symbol category in general).
Consequently, the idea of an evolutionary universe is coextensive with the idea of a personal Creator,
Peirce all of a sudden concludes – as against determinism which is always unable to make sense of
any personal contact with the deity. The question why we have not long since received full clarity
about this personal God is answered with reference to our unability to grasp facts right before our noses
(6.162). These surprising teleological and even theological speculations are brief and do not influence
the preceding overall argument. We include them here in order to show the range of Peirce’s trust in the
continuity concept. It may be added, that Peirce’s famous personal epiphany probably took place around
this time (cf. the mystic musings in the last lines of ‘Man’s Glassy Essence’, EPI, 350–51; 6.271);
theological reflections connected to the continuity concept are not generic in Peirce’s later writings.
505 The beginning of the text in question with its rich use of these terms is so sudden because it
constitutes page 23 of a manuscript with its first pages missing.
506 Later, around 1909, Peirce realizes that not only CH but also its generalized version, the general
continuum hypothesis (GCH) may not hold: ‘ it has never been exactly proved that there are no
multitudes between two successive abnumerable multitudes, nor, which is more important, that there is
no multitude greater than all the abnumerable multitudes.’ (‘Some Amazing Mazes, Fourth Curiosity’,
4.656).

478
N O T E S
507 Discussing Peirce’s different ideas about CH, it is important to keep in mind that he omits Cantor’s
doctrine of ordinal numbers. In fact, Cantor’s Aleph series is constructed not as a power set series,
but as the series of powers of the successive sets of ordinal transfinite numbers. These two, in Cantor,
are different procedures for constructing larger cardinal numbers. Thus, Cantor’s CH basically asks
the question whether the cardinal series of ordinal number set powers is the same series as the series
obtained by power set constructions taking Aleph-0 as its point of departure. As far as I can judge,
Peirce never understood Cantor’s concept of ordinal transfinite numbers and hence did not grasp this
aspect of CH. This is probably why he – until late in his life – immediately identifies the Aleph series
with the series obtained by successive power set constructions from Aleph-0. But this identification, in
Cantorian set theory, is the whole issue of CH.
508 While Peirce insists on the existence of infinitesimals, that is, numbers smaller than any finite real
number but larger than zero, then for the infinitesimal x we may take its inverse 1/x. This number must
be larger than any finite real number, but still smaller than infinity. Since infinitesimals may assume
any infinitely small size, some of these must make 1/x an integer larger than any given finite integer
but still smaller than Aleph-0.
509 Cantor has already found that Aleph-2 must be the power of the set of all real functions (if you take
the concept of functions as referring to the formation of n-tuples between the elements of a number of
sets, then the set of real functions will of course be of the same power as the set of subsets of the reals).
Elsewhere, Peirce does not refrain from giving examples of Aleph-2 or even Aleph-3 sets.
510 Peirce here writes ‘Exp , (Exp)2, (Exp3’; supposedly, he intends the version given.
511 What may have lead Peirce to believe in this proof may be found in the alternative version found
in R&LOT. Here a decisive step in the argument is the following ‘But now let us consider a collection
containing an individual for every individual of a collection of collections comprising af collection for
every abnumeral multitude. That is, this collection shall consist of all finite multitudes together with
all possible collections of those multitudes, together with all possible collections of collections of those
multitudes, together with all possible collections of collections of collections of those multitudes, and
so on ad infinitum. This collection is evidently of a multitude as great as that of all possible collections
of its members. But we have just seen that this cannot be true of any collection whose individuals are
distinct ’ (159) The way of constructing the pseudo-set S here differs from the way just presented.
When a set of power Aleph-n + 1 is made a part of S, then at the same time it is supposed to give an
inventory of the subsets of Aleph-n. Aleph-1, e.g., constitutes a set of subsets of Aleph-0, and it is of
course correct that this is in a certain sense the case (because the decimal expansion of every single real
number constitutes a set of figures which corresponds to a subset of the natural numbers). This trick
now allows Peirce to claim that just like any Aleph is constituted by the subsets of the former Aleph,
then by the simple sum of all Aleph-n’s you get the subsets of S which will then have the same power
as all of its subsets. But here Peirce does two things at the same time: he conceives of the elements of
an Aleph as simple entities and as sets. For all these sets are naturally subsets of S but do they exhaust
its subsets? Some subsets ‘lack’, namely those that appears by the pairing of e.g. each of the elements in
Aleph-0 with each of the elements of Aleph-1. But they are included, Peirce will say (we must assume),
because Aleph-0 can make no additions to Aleph-1. But by saying so, he no longer regards the elements
as sets, but merely as elements. If we pair, e.g. 1 and √2 (1.4142 ) then Peirce may say that we may
just construct the element 1.14142  which is already a member of Aleph-1. That is correct, but not
for the set {1, √2}. In that way he conceives of S’s elements as sets, when that is called for, and as
elements when that is needed, and this is why he can abstain from taking the exponent of the whole
sum of Alephs: he so to speak divides the whole series with 2n – and so it is no wonder he may obtain
a result like n = 2n.
512 Cf. Thom’s mirror idea that the concept of ‘point’ might yet contain secrets able to solve the
continuum riddle.
513 This lecture, as it appears, is a construct on the part of the editors; it is composed by Robin 751 (as
a sort of preface) plus Robin 439 which probably is the lecture proper, because its contents correspond
to what is referred to in the other lectures. In our context, this is of little importance.
514 These signs give, by the embedding of the former in the latter, rise to the three classes of signs
which Peirce in his third tricotomy calls ‘rhema’, ‘dicisign’, and ‘argument’, respectively, – also ‘seme’,
‘pheme’, and ‘delome’. Closest to ordinary language is the names ‘term’, ‘proposition’, and ‘argument’.

N O T E S
479
This analysis, moreover, constitutes the background for Peirce’s own construction of existential graphs,
providing the verbal, predicative, iconic part of the graphs; the demonstrative-pronoun, indexical parts;
and the logical connective parts, respectively. (‘Detached Parts Continued’, 1898, NEM IV, 339). The
first form the diagram icon proper, the second form propositions connecting that icon with indices; the
third connect such propositions into inference chains and provide the possibility of controlled experiment
with the diagram icon.
515 This idea refers to Putnam’s classic paper ‘Mathematics without foundations’ (1967, reprinted in
Benacerraf and Putnam 1983) where he claims the idea that mathematics has a modal logic character
so that every proposition about mathematical objects may be read as a proposition about a possible
construction: ‘In short, if one fastens on the first picture, (the “object” picture), then mathematics is
wholly extensional, but presupposes a vast totality of eternal objects; while if one fastens on the second
picture (the “modal” picture), then mathematics has no special object on its own, but simply tells us
what follows from what.’ (300).
516 In contrast to Peirce’s metaphysics, this interpretation is too constructivist. Peirce follows Cantor
all the way as regards actual infinity; this is indeed the very metaphysical motivation for his position.
Continuity is merely potential, but it may, in turn, be actualized as ‘real possibilities’ in the general
phenomena of reality (that is, without any finitistic restriction is imposed on its actualized parts, which,
on the other hand, seems to be Putnam’s classical position).
517 It is interesting here to note that also John von Neumann’s version of set theory allows for the
construction of a multitude which is the union set of all transfinite numbers and which hence exceeds
their powers (his ‘proper class’). In his case this class lies beyond not only the series of Aleph-n’s, but
beyond any ensuing series of Aleph-Alephs etc. of classical set theory.
518 This is obviously no strong argument for Peirce’s particular doctrine of a supermultitudinous set
S (which, interpreted in standard set theory, would have the cardinality of Aleph-omega-0; all other
cardinalities might as well be invoked here). But this undecidability could, more generally, be taken as an
indication of the possibility that no formalism may exhaust the continuum and hence that the continuum
might be ‘larger’ than any formalization attempt – thus supporting Peirce’s modal interpretation of it.
519 Unfortunately many of his notes on Husserl are written in the vanishing brand of Austrian stenography
known as Gabelsberger shorthand and has not yet been transcribed and published.
520 The intuition necessary for symbolic calculi – assumed to be infallible – should amount to no more
than the ability of distinguishing 0 from 1 on the line, to count the length of finite symbol strings in
number of units, to manipulate symbols and symbol groups on the line according to certain rules, etc. In
short, this presupposes the intuition of the line, segmented in distinct places, and of the characterization
of those places measured in (at least) two different possibilities. It presupposes, moreover, the parsing
of the row of symbols into meaningful groups (dictated by the given symbol language), and, most
complicated, the substitution for certain symbol or symbol groups by others (determined by the axioms,
expressed in the same symbol language).
521 This argument is very often stated in a strangely naive manner: because physics is unthinkable
without mathematics, the two sciences are taken to be inseperable (this argument is also found in
the structuralist Resnik, cf. Resnik 1997) without considering the equally possible conclusion that a
unilateral dependency is at stake (so that mathematics is independent of physics even if physics depend
on mathematics). This would, of course, be Peirce’s position.
522 A fine example of this is the application of (parts of) mathematical group theory in everyday
perception, such as Cassirer 1944 argues. Here it is shown how a series of arch problems of the
psychology of perception can be explained by reference to the group of transformations characterizing a
group in group theory. Object constancy (why do we see objects having the same shape when it changes
contour in different perspectives and distances?), color constancy (why do we see the object having the
same color under different light conditions?) can be interpreted as referring to an invariance not affected
by transformations. As is known from the Erlanger program, different geometries can be defined by each
their group of transformations, so that the more tranformations are allowed, the more ‘empty’ and general
the corresponding invariant object will become – culminating in topology, as both Peirce and Cassirer
realize (cf. Chap. 5). But the variety of geometries is not – as it is often taken to be – an argument for
the lack of objectivity of geometry (and, consequently, for the subjectivity of perception), but quite on
the contrary an argument for the strength of the mind, possessing a differentiated series of objective

480
N O T E S
tools for the conception of space, some of which are already in play in ordinary perception. In this sense,
it becomes understandable how already everyday perception is ripe with sophisticated knowledge – as
well as how it is possible to isolate and sophisticate the evidence of mathematical basic objects on the
basis of everyday perceptions without assuming Benacerafferian causal-reference access to such objects.
In this manner, this train of thought – parallel to Peirce – runs counter to the materialist-empiristic idea
that perception ‘first’ consists of an uncoordinated aggregate of sensory stimuli which ‘later’ is put in
order by the subject. Corresponding to Peirce’s claim for the existence of infinitesimals, perception in
this perspective always treats continuous, organized phenomena – and the idea of an uncoordinated set
of pure sense impressions will be relegated to a limit case never actually realized: it is an idea, not
reality. Quite on the contrary, the object is always constituted as an invariance measured on different
sets of transformations, and perception is never limited to a present now without any extension. This is
also equivalent to Peirce to whom pure secondness, pure thisness, pure haeccity, remains a mere limit
case – any event is only minimally graspable to the extent to which it is referred to a domain in some
qualitative continuum, to which it is embedded in a more extended temporal process, to which it forms
part of a general, lawlike space.
523 The resume in the following paragraph of developments in the CH discussion from Cohen’s 1964
till now is indebted to Chap. 4 in Maddy 1990.
524 Gödel, in the period from 1938 to 1947, also changes his viewpoint in this direction (Maddy 134–35)
and in the same way Moschovakis 1980 (610), as quoted by Maddy, takes it as an unsuitable constraint
on the concept of ‘arbitrary set’, because there is no a priori reason to suppose that every subset should
be definable (definability by first order formulas is equivalent to being a finite union of open intervals
with named endpoints).
525 ‘ donc, elle est un fait “objectivement” scientifique, et à ce titre, elle doit être “objectivement”
expliquée. Si l’on n’a pas à sa disposition une théorie immanentiste du continu dans notre physiologie
neuronale, qu’on m’explique la genèse de l’illusion!’ (Thom 1992, 140)
526 Harthong, in fact, proposes four new antinomies for modern mathematical rationality (not unrelated
to Kant’s): randomness/determinism, continuity/discontinuity, simplicity/complexity, and finally a
finite/infinite number of basic rational principles. He argues that all of these antinomies spring from two
basic phenomena: 1) knowledge being approximative (corresponding to Kant’s idea of human finitude, and
2) the existence of several different size scales. The latter he views as a mathematical constraint (not only
a property in empirical nature, 354), because a scalar shift may let a discrete and complicated description
give way for a continuous and simple description (the arch example of course being thermodynamics in
Boltzmann). Naturally it is the fact that nature does present us with vast differences in size which makes
us aware of this antinomy: ‘ les antinomies de la rationalité mathématique se manifestent sur de très
grandes échelles de grandeurs; elles n’existeraient pas si les grandeurs existant dans la nature étaient toutes
du même ordre.’ (363) To Harthong, the possibility of ever making CH decidable vanishes for exactly this
reason: ‘Le débat reste métaphysique tant que la plus petite des deux échelles de grandeurs reste inacces-
sible á la perception () Les lois “utiles” sont des lois phénoménologiques qui marchent à l’échelle où
nous observons.’ – he pragmatically concludes, polemically aimed against reductionist brain science and its
assumptions that the final neuronal explanation of the mind is close at hand.
527 In Salanskis’ Continuity volume, Robinson’s non-standard analysis plays a constant role because it
reintroduces infinitesimals – even if it takes place on the base of orthodox set theory, as non-standard
points in a halo around the standard points of R, appearing in external and internal sets, respectively.
Yet, this ‘galaxy’ of non-standard points have, as Salanskis says (199) the effect of expressing the
‘richness’ of the continuum which is not present in standard analysis – this especially so in the so-called
Harthong-Reeb version of non-standard analysis.
528 ‘ ce qui apparaît ainsi dans l’ensemble de ces travaux de non standardistes reprenant la tradition
borélienne, c’est que le continu est quelque chose comme un “effet” qui résulte d’un excès. Si l’approche de
l’aspect“désensemblisation”dudestinducontinudeCantor-Dedekindmetenvedettel’incommensurabilité,
la prise en compte du regain d’attention envers le constructif et sa place dans le monde des entités mathéma-
tiques nous fait rencontrer le thème philosophique de l’excès. Le lien entre les deux termes, cela dit, nous
semble clair: l’excès engendre de l’incommensurabilité, et la distribution de l’incommensurabilité sur la
droite entière lui ajoute la qualité constitutive du continu ()’ (210)

N O T E S
481
529 Petitot’s contribution to Salanskis 1992 is complemented by the programmatical paper ‘Pour un
platonisme transcendantal’ (1994).
530 Namely this: if anything exists as a psychological primitive, this phenomenon is eo ipso also natural
(pace naturalism in psychology) and has reality which is not merely psychological, se the paragraph on
Maddy.
531 ‘Le platonisme transcendantal est “négatif”, et non pas “positif” comme le platonisme ontologique
vulgaire. Il permet d’inverser les affirmations philosophiques de l’antiplatonisme et de transformer les
phénomènes d’incomplétude et d’indécidabilité en arguments en faveur du platonisme.’ (254)
532 The axiom of determinacy states that if there is a game between two players, each in turn selecting
successive nested subsets of the unit interval, then there is a strategy for one of the players to let the
selecting process terminate in a number belonging to a given subset of the unit interval.
533 ‘Evidemment, demeure entière l’énigme de l’intuition pure, c’est-à-dire de la façon dont nous sommes
affectés par l’exteriorité. Ce problème n’est pas d’abord mathématique mais physique et cognitif.’ (261)
534 Among many possible quotes from his work see e.g. Physique du sens from 1992 where the
introduction claims that the morpho-mathematical foundation of structuralist models necessitates a
critique of the formalist position regarding language and meaning: ‘Ce dernier point pourra paraître
irrecevable aux linguistes et sémioticiens qui croient encore, suite aux dogmes du positivisme logique,
que la conception métamathématique hilbertienne (c’est-à-dire le rapport entre syntaxe et sémantique
que l’on trouve en théorie des modèles peut être transférée à l’analyse des rapports de dépendance
constitutifs des structures.’ (XXII). The fact that this critique does not aim at the semiotic domain only is
evident from, e.g., 53 where, following Cavaillès, it is claimed that in any doctrine of objectivity, formal
logic must be connected to an ontology: ‘Ses concepts doivent acquérir un contenu transcendantal –
c’est-à-dire concertant l’objet de la connaissance et non pas simplement sa forme discursive – et,
selon Kant, ils le peuvent si les catégories prennent pour “matière” le divers pur (spatio-temporel) de
l’Esthétique transcendantale (schématisme).’ Also mathematics has a content to be schematized (cf. the
schema 55).
535 For a prototypical articulation of this point of view, see the influential American philosopher of
mathematics Saunders MacLane’s (the father of category theory) antiplatonist doctrine Mathematics.
Form and Function (1986), 385: ‘These results [the proof of the independence of CH, AC, and other
axioms from set theory], and others too numerous to mention, show that many interesting Mathematical
questions cannot be settled on the basis of the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms for set theory. () This variety
and the undecideability results indicate that set theory is indeterminate in principle: There is no unique
and definitive list of axioms for sets; the intuitive idea of a set as a collection can lead to wildly different
and mutually inconsistent formulations. On the elementary level, there are options such as ZFC, ZC,
ZBQC or intuitionistic set theory; on the higher level, the method of forcing provides many alternative
models with divergent properties. The platonic notion that there is somewhere the ideal realm of sets,
not yet fully described is a glorious illusion.’ MacLane later turns the argumentation directly against
Gödel and his ‘realist view’ (449).
536 This implies, of course, problems to which we shall later return: the metaphysics (1) which operate
on the threshold between the many and the one Platonic world, how is that to be situated in relation
to that metaphysics (2) which constructs the four-part scheme above and consequently must be more
extensive than mathematics?
537 I think an account in a Peircean spirit would claim that the hierarchy of prescission and abstraction
(Chap. 11) allows us to reason with infinite procedures, because they are here taken as objects and
subjected to imaginary completions.
538 An example: ‘Pure Mathematics is the study of pure hypothesis regardless of any analogies they
may have in our universe.’ (‘Lectures on Pragmatism’ 1903, NEM IV, 149)

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alberts B, Bray D, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Watson JD (1994) Molecular biology of the cell, 3rd
edn. Garland Publ., New York
Allwein G, Barwise J (1996) Logical reasoning with diagrams. Oxford University Press, New York
Almeder R (1973) Peirce’s pragmatism and scotistic realism. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce
Society 9(1):3–23
Anderson DR (1986) The evolution of Peirce’s concept of abduction. Transactions of the Charles S.
Peirce Society 22(2):145–164
Armstrong D (1989) Universals. An opinionated introduction, Westview Press, Boulder etc.
Armstrong D (undated) Four disputes about properties, www.uni-konstanz.de/FuF/Philo/Philosophie/
Spohn/workshop/armstrong/armstrong.pdf
Arnheim R (1969) Visual thinking. University of California Press, Berkeley
Bader A, Parker L (2001) Joseph Loschmidt, physicist and chemist. Physics Today Online, March 2001;
http://www.physicstoday.org/pt/vol-54/iss-3/p45.html
Bak P (1997) How nature works. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Baldwin JM (ed) (1901) Dictionary of philosophy and psychology, vol 1–4. The MacMillan Co., New
York
Baldwin JM (1902) Development and evolution. MacMillan Company, New York
Barwise J, Etchemendy J (1995) Heterogeneous logic. In Glasgow, 1995
Bateson G (1979) Mind and nature. Fontana, London
Bell JL (preprint) Dissenting Voices. Divergent Conceptions of the Continuum in 19th and Early 20th
Century Mathematics and Philosophy
Benacerraf P, Putnam H (eds) (1983) Philosophy of mathematics. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Benoist J (1997) Phénoménologie, sémantique, ontologie. P.U.F., Paris
Berg HC (1988) A physicist looks at bacterial chemotaxis. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative
Biology, 53:1–9
Berlin B, Kay P (1969) Basic color terms: their universality and evolution. University of California
Press, Berkeley
Bernet R (1988) Perception, categorial intuition and truth in Husserl’s sixth ‘logical investigation’.
In: Sallis J, Moneta G, Taminiaux J (eds) The collegium phenomenologicum. Kluwer, Dordrecht,
pp33–45
Bernet R (1988a) Husserl’s theory of signs revisited. In: Sokolowski R (ed) Studies in philosophy and
the history of philosophy, vol 18. Catholic University of America Press, Washington, pp1–24
Bernet R, Kern I, Marbach E (1989) Edmund Husserl. Darstellung seines denkens. Felix Meiner,
Hamburg
Blackwell A, Engelhardt Y, (1998) A taxonomy of diagram taxonomies. Paper at the conference Thinking
With Diagrams 98, University of Wales, Aberystwyth
Bobzien S (2004) Dialectical school. Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy, http://plato.stanford.edu/
entries/dialectical-school/
Bogh M (2002) Formalitet og figurativitet. Fænomenologiske perspektiver i nyere kunstteori
[Formality and figurativity. Phenomenological perspectives in recent art theory]. In: Christensen HA,
Michelsen A, Wamberg J (eds) Kunstteori. Positioner i nyere kunstdebat. Borgen, København,
pp215–250
Boghossian P, Peacocke C (eds) (2000) New essays on the a priori. Clarendon Press, Oxford
Boler J (1963) Charles Peirce and scholastic realism. University of Washington Press, Seattle
483

484
B I B L I O G R A P H Y
Boler J (2004) Peirce and medieval thought. In Misak 2004, pp58–86
Brandt PA (1983) Sandheden, sætningen og døden [Truth, sentence, and death]. Sjakalen, Århus
Brentano F (1982) Deskriptive psychologie. Meiner, Hamburg
Brook A (1997) Kant and the mind. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Brøgger A (preprint) Billedernes retorik [The rhetoric of pictures]. PhD thesis
Brown JR (1999) Philosophy of mathematics. An introduction to the world of proofs and pictures.
Routledge, London
Brunning J, Forster P (eds) (1997) The rule of reason. The philosophy of Charles Sanders Peirce.
University of Toronto Press, Toronto
Bundgaard P (2004) Kunst. Semiotiske beskrivelser af æstetisk betydning og oplevelse [Art. Semiotic
descriptions of aesthetic meaning and experience]. Haase, Copenhagen
Bundgaard P (2004a) The ideal scaffolding of language: Husserl’s fourth logical investigation in the
light of cognitive linguistics. Phenomenology & the cognitive sciences 3:49–80
Bundgaard P (2004b) Configuration sémantique et combinaison syntaxique dans la IVe Recherche
logique de Husserl. Recherches Husserliennes 21:3–33
Bundgaard P, Egholm J, Skov M (eds) (2003) Kognitiv semiotik. Haase, København
Bundgaard P, Østergaard S, Stjernfelt F (2006) Water proof fire stations? Conceptual schemata and
cognitive operations involved in compound constructions. Semiotica 161(1/4):363–393
Burch RW (1991) A Peircean reduction thesis, Texas Tech University Press, Lubbock
Caldwell B (2004) Hayek’s challenge. An intellectual biography of F.A. Hayek. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago
Cantor (1872) Über die Ausdehnung eines Satzes aus der Theorie der trigonometrischen Reihen, in
Cantor 1966, 92–102
Cantor (1879–84) Über unendlich lineare Punktmannigfaltigkeiten in Cantor 1966, 139–246
Cantor G (1966) Gesammelte Abhandlungen mathematischen und philosophischen Inhalts. In: Zermelo E
(ed) Inhalts. Olms, Hildesheim
Cariani P (1998) Life’s journey through the semiosphere. Semiotica 120(3/4)
le Carré J (1965[1963]) The spy who came in from the cold. Gollancz, London
Cassirer E (1944) The concept of group and the theory of perception. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 5:1–35 (original French version 1938)
Cassirer E (1945) Structuralism in modern linguistics. Word I(II), New York
Cassirer E (1991[1957]) Das Erkenntnisproblem in der Philosophie und Wissenschaft der neueren Zeit.
Von Hegels Tod bis zur Gegenwart (1832–1932), vol IV. Georg Olms, Hildesheim
Chaitin G (1987) Algorithmic information theory. Cambridge University Press Cambridge, MA
Chalmers D (1996) The conscious mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford
von Clausewitz C (1963[1832]) Vom Kriege. Rowohlt, Hamburg
Cobb-Stevens R (1990) Being and categorial intuition. Review of Metaphysics 44:43–66
Cohen PJ (1966) Set theory and the continuum hypothesis, WA Benjamin New York
Cowan GA, Pines D, Meltzer D (1994) Complexity. Metaphors, models, and reality. Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA
Dauben J (1995) Peirce and history of science. In Ketner 1995, pp146–195
Deacon T (1997) The symbolic species. W.W. Norton & Co, New York
Deacon T (1999) The trouble with memes (and what to do about it), (unpublished working paper,
Boston)
Deacon T (2003) Multilevel selection in a complex adaptive system: the problem of language origins.
In Weber and Depew 2003, pp81–106
Deely J (1992) Semiotics and biosemiotics: are sign-science and life-science coextensive?. In Sebeok
and Umiker-Sebeok 1992, pp45–76
Deely J (2001) Four ages of understanding. The first postmodern survey of philosophy from ancient
times to the turn of the twenty-first century. Toronto University Press, Toronto
Deighton L (1986[1983]) Game, set, and match. Hutchinson, London
Diderichsen P (1966) Helhed og struktur. [‘Whole and Structure’] Gad, Copenhagen

B I B L I O G R A P H Y
485
Dipert R (1995) Peirce’s underestimated place in the history of logic: a response to Quine. In Ketner
1995, pp32–58
Dipert R (1997) Peirce’s philosophical conception of sets. In Houser et al (eds) 1997
Dipert R (2004) Peirce’s deductive logic: its development, influence, and philosophical significance. In
Misak 2004, pp287–324
Dougherty CJ (1983) Peirce’s phenomenological defense of deduction. In Freeman 1983, pp167–177
Drummond J (1988) Realism versus Anti-Realism: a Husserlian Contribution. In: Sokolowski R (ed)
Studies in philosophy and the history of philosophy, vol 18. Catholic University of America Press,
Washington, DC, pp87–106
Dulles A (1963) The craft of intelligence. Harper and Row, New York
Dumézil G (1979) Interview in Ornicar! vol 19. Paris
Eco U (1976) A theory of semiotics. Indiana University Press, Bloomington
Eco U (1989) Foucault’s pendulum. Secker and Warburg, London
Eco U (1992) Interpretation and overinterpretation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA
Eco U (1999) Kant and the platypus. Secker, London
Emmeche C (1997) Aspects of complexity in life and science. Philosophica 59(1):41–68
Emmeche C (2001) Does a robot have an Umwelt? Reflections on the qualitative biosemiotics of Jakob
von Uexküll. Semiotica 134(1/4):653–693
Emmeche C (2002) The chicken and the Orphean egg: on the function of meaning and the meaning of
function. Sign systems studies 30(1):15–32
Emmeche C (2004) Causal processes, semiosis, and consciousness. In: Seibt J (ed) Process theories:
crossdisciplinary studies in dynamic categories. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp313–333
Emmeche C (2004b) A-life, organism and body: the semiotics of emergent levels. In: Bedeau M,
Husbands P, Hutton T, Kumar S, Suzuki, H (eds) Workshop and tutorial proceedings. Ninth inter-
national conference on the simulation and synthesis of living systems (Alife IX), Boston, MA,
pp117–124
Emmeche C, Hoffmeyer J (1991) From language to nature – the semiotic metaphor in biology. Semiotica
84(1/2):1–42
Emmeche C, Hoffmeyer J (1992) Code-duality and the semiotics of nature. In: Anderson M, Merrell F
(eds) Semiotic modeling. Gruyter, Berlin
Emmeche C, Køppe S, Stjernfelt F (1997) Explaining emergence: towards an ontology of levels. Journal
for general philosophy of science 28(1):83–119
Emmeche C, Køppe S, Stjernfelt F (2000) Levels, emergence, and three versions of downward causation.
In: Andersen PB et al (eds) Downward causation. Aarhus University Press, Copenhagen, pp13–34
Emmeche C, Kull K, Stjernfelt F (2002) Reading Hoffmeyer, rethinking biology. University of Tartu
Press, Tartu
Engel-Tiercelin C (1992) Vagueness and the unity of C.S. Peirce’s Realism. Transactions of the Charles S.
Peirce Society XXVIII(1):51–82
Eriksen J-M, Stjernfelt F (2003) Hadets anatomi. Rejser i Bosnien og Serbien [‘Anatomy of hatred.
Travels in Bosnia and Serbia’] Lindhardt og Ringhof, København
Eriksen J-M, Stjernfelt F (2004) Krigens scenografi. Nye rejser i Bosnien og Serbien [‘Scenography of
war. New travels in Bosnia and Serbia’] Lindhardt og Ringhof, København
Esmann J (1995) Sort i sort - da Gud reinkarnerede i modernismen. Kandinsky, Malevich, Reinhardt
[‘Black in Black - when God reincarnated in modernism’]. Kritik 119, Copenhagen
Falk EH (1981) The poetics of Roman Ingarden. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill
Fastrup A (2007) Sensibilitetens bevægelse - Denis Diderots fysiologiske æstetik (‘The Movement of
Sensibility – the Physiological Aesthetics of Denis Diderot’) Museum Tusculanum, Copenhagen
Fauconnier G, Turner M (2002) The way we think. Conceptual blending and the mind’s hidden complex-
ities. Basic Books, New York
Ferguson N (ed) (1997) Virtual history. Alternatives and counterfactuals. Picador, London
Fisch M (1967) Peirce’s progress from nominalism towards realism, in Fisch 1986, pp184–200
Fisch M (1986) (eds. K.L. Ketner and C.J.W. Kloesel) Peirce, Semeiotic, and Pragmatism. Indiana
University Press, Bloomington

486
B I B L I O G R A P H Y
Fischer E (1993) C.W. Eckersberg. Edition Bløndal, Copenhagen
Franck D (1999) Auswirkungen der uexküllschen Umweltlehre auf die moderne Verhaltensbiologie. Fol
Baer VII, Tartu pp81–91
Freeman E (ed) (1983) The relevance of Charles Peirce. The Hegeler Institute, La Salle, IL
Freud S (1948[1912]) Ratschläge für den Arzt bei der psychoanalytischen Behandlung. In: Zentralblatt
für Psychoanalyse, vol II. s483–489; in Freud A et al (eds) (1948) Gesammelte Werke vol VIII.
S.Fischer Verlag, Frankfurt/M, s376–387
Friedman M (2000) The parting of the ways: Carnap, Cassirer, and Heidegger. Open Court, Chicago
Friedman M (2001) Dynamics of reason. CSLI Publications, Stanford
Gadamer H-G (1960) Wahrheit und Methode. J.C.B. Mohr, Tübingen
Gardies J-L (1985[1975]) Rational grammar. Analytica, München
Gell-Mann M (1995) Complex adaptive systems. In: Morowitz H, Singer J (eds) The mind, the brain,
and complex adaptive systems, Santa Fe Institute Proc. vol XXII. Addison Wesley, Reading, MA
Glasgow J et al (eds) (1995) Diagrammatic reasoning. Cognitive and computational perspectives, AAAI
Press/MIT Press, Menlo Park, CA
Gödel K (1986) Collected works I, (eds Feferman et al), Oxford University Press New York
Godfrey-Smith P (1996) Complexity and the function of mind in nature. Cambridge University Press,
New York
Goel V (1995) Sketches of thought. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Goodman N (1976) Languages of art. Hackett Publishing Co, Indianapolis
Gould SJ (1972) Punctuated equilibria: an alternative to phyletic gradualism. In: Schopf TJM (ed)
Models in paleobiology. Freeman, Cooper & Co.,San Francisco, pp82–115
Grassl W, Smith B (1986) A theory of Austria. In: Nyíri JC (ed) From Bolzano to Wittgenstein: the
tradition of Austrian philosophy, Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky and Reidel, Vienna and Dordrecht, pp11–30
Grassl W, Smith B (1986) (eds) Austrian economics. Historical and philosophical background. New
York, New York University Press
Greaves M (2002) The philosophical status of diagrams. CSLI Publications, Stanford
Gregersen F (1992) Sociolingvistikkens (u)mulighed. [‘The (Im)Possibility of Socio Linguistics’] Tiderne
Skifter, Copenhagen
Greimas AJ (1976) Maupassant. Seuil, Paris
Greimas AJ (1979) Sémiotique. Seuil, Paris
Greimas AJ (1982) Du sens II. Seuil, Paris
Groupe  (1992) Traité du signe visuel. Seuil, Paris
Haack S (1992) Extreme scholastic realism: its relevance to philosophy of science today. Transactions
of the Charles S. Peirce Society XXVIII(1):19–50
Haack S (1993) Peirce and logicism: notes towards an exposition. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce
Society XXIX(1):33–56
Haack S (1997) The first rule of reason. In Brunning and Forster 1997, pp241–261
Haaparanta L (2001) On Peirce’s methodology of logic and philosophy. In: Ylikoski P, Kiikkeri M
(eds) Explanatory connections. Electronic essays dedicated to matti sintonen (http://www.valt.
Helsinki.fi/kfil/matti/)
Haas, WP (1964) The conception of Law and the Unity of Peirces Philosophy. Fribourg, Switzerland:
University Press
Hadamard J (1954[1945]) The psychology of invention in the mathematical field. Dover, Mineola, NY
Hamburger K (1968) Die Logik der Dichtung. Klett, Stuttgart
Hansen NG (2004) Dialog mellem læsere [‘Dialogues between readers’]. Kritik 172:15–24, Copenhagen
Hansen TI (2001) Tidens øje – Rummets blik [‘The eye of time – the gaze of space’] Odense Univer-
sitetsforlag, Odense
Hansen TI (2004) Fæno  hvad for noget? Om forholdet mellem litteratur og fænomenologi
[‘Pheno  what?Ontherelationbetweenliteratureandphenomenology’].Kritik172:5–14,Copenhagen
Harnad S (ed) (1987) Categorical perception. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Harnad S (1987) Category Induction and Representation. In Harnad 1987, pp1–52
Haswell J (1977) Spies and spymasters. Thames and Hudson, London

B I B L I O G R A P H Y
487
Hawkins BS Jr (1997) Peirce and Russell: the history of a neglected ‘controversy’. In Houser et al
(1997), pp111–146
Hayek FA (1978) The primacy of the abstract. In: New studies in philosophy, politics, economics, and
the history of ideas. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London
Hayes P (1995) Section Introduction. In Glasgow 1995
Heijenoort J van (1997) Logic as calculus and logic as language. In Hintikka 1997, pp233–39.
Hendricks V (2001) The convergence of scientific knowledge. A view from the limit. Kluwer, Dordrecth
Hendricks V (2006) Mainstream and formal epistemology. Cambridge University Press, New York
Hersh SM (1997) The dark side of Camelot. Little Brown, Boston
Hilpinen R (1995) Peirce on language and reference. In Ketner 1995, pp272–303
Hintikka J (1983) C.S. Peirce’s ‘First Real Discovery’ and its contemporary relevance. In: Freeman E
(ed) The relevance of Charles Peirce. The Hegeler Institute, La Salle, IL, pp107–118
Hintikka J (1997) The place of C.S. Peirce in the history of logical theory. In: Brunning J, Forster P
(eds) The rule of reason. University of Torotno Press, Toronto, pp13–33 (also in Hintikka 1997,
pp140–61)
Hintikka J (1997a) Lingua Universalis vs. Calculus Ratiocinator. An ultimate presupposition of twentieth-
century philosophy. Kluwer, Dordrecht
Hintikka J (1998) What is abduction? The fundamental problem of contemporary epistemology. Trans-
actions of the Charles S. Peirce Society XXXIV(3):503–34
Hintikka J (2003) The notion of intuition in Husserl. Revue internationale de philosophie, no. 2, juin
2003, pp169–192
Hitchcock A (1955) The man who knew too much (screenplay John Michael Hayes), Hollywood
Hjelmslev L (1928) Principes de grammaire générale. Høst og Søn, Copenhagen
Hjelmslev L (1943) Omkring sprogteoriens grundlæggelse. Munksgaard, Copenhagen (Eng. version
Prolegomena to a Theory of Language, 2nd edn. The University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1969)
Hjelmslev L (1972[1934]) Sprogsystem og sprogforandring [‘Language System and Language Change’],
Nordisk Sprog- Og Kulturforlag, Copenhagen
Hjelmslev L (1975) Resumé of a theory of language. Nordisk Sprog- Og Kulturforlag, Copenhagen
(approx. 1943)
Hjelmslev L (1985 Nouveaux essays. PUF, Paris
Hoffmann M (1999) Problems with Peirce’s concept of abduction. Foundations of science 4:271–305
Hoffmann M (April, 2002) Erkenntnisentwicklung. Ein semiotisch-pragmatischer Ansatz, Habilitation-
sschrift an der Technischen Universität Dresden
Hoffmeyer J (1996) Signs of meaning in the universe. Indiana University Press, Bloomington
Hoffmeyer J (2003) Semiotic aspects of biology: Biosemiotics. In: Posner R, Robering K and Sebeok T
(eds) Semiotics. A handbook of the sign theoretic foundations of nature and culture. Gruyter, Berlin,
pp2643–2666
Hoffmeyer J (2005) Biosemiotik. En afhandling om livets tegn og tegnenes liv [‘Biosemiotics. A Treatise
on the Signs of Life and the Life of Signs’, English version in preparation], Ries, Copenhagen
Hofstadter D (1986) Metamagical Themas. Penguin, Harmondsworth
Holenstein E (1972) Phänomenologie der Assoziation. Martinus Nijhoff, Den Haag
Holenstein E (1975) Roman Jakobsons phänomenologischer Strukturalismus. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt/M
Holenstein E (1976) Linguistik Semiotik Hermeneutik. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt/M
Hookway C (2002) ‘ a sort of composite photograph’: Pragmatism, ideas, and schematism. Transac-
tions of the Charles S. Peirce Society XXXVIII(1/2):29–46
Houser N (1997) Introduction: Peirce as a logician. In Houser, Roberts, van Evra (eds) 1997, pp1–22
Houser N, Roberts DD, van Evra J (eds) (1997) Studies in the Logic of Charles Sanders Peirce. Indiana
University Press, Bloomington
Hulswit M (2002) From cause to causation. A Peircean viewpoint. Kluwer Academic Publications,
Dordrecht
Humphrey N (1992) A history of mind. Harper Collins, New York
Husserl E (1939) Die Frage nach dem Ursprung der Geometrie als intentional-historisches Problem.
Revue internationale de philosophie 1:203–225

488
B I B L I O G R A P H Y
Husserl E (1939a) Entwurf einer ‘Vorrede’ zu den ‘Logischen Untersuchungen’ 1913. Tijdschrift voor
philosophie 1(1, 2):106–33, 319–339
Husserl E (1968) Briefe an Ingarden mit Erläuterungen und Erinnerungen an Husserl (ed Ingarden R)
Martinus Nijhoff, Den Haag
Husserl E (1970) Logical investigations (trans Findlay JN) Routledge and Kegan Paul, London
Husserl E (1970a) Philosophie der Aritmetik, Hua XII. Martinus Nijhoff, Den Haag
Husserl E (1971) Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und Phänomenologischen Philosophie, drittes
Buch [Ideen III] Husserliana vol V. Max Niemeyer, Tübingen
Husserl E (1973) Ding und Raum, Hua XVI. Martinus Nijhoff, Den Haag
Husserl E (1973a) Experience and judgment. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London
Husserl E (1975) Logische Untersuchungen [LU] I, Hua XVIII. Martinus Nijhoff, Den Haag
Husserl E (1979) Aufsätze und Rezensionen (1890–1910), Hua XXII, Martinus Nijhoff, Dordrecht
Husserl E (1980) Phantasie, Bildbewusstsein, Erinnerung, [PBE] Hua XXIII. Martinus Nijhoff, Dordrecht
Husserl E (1980a[1913]) Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und Phänomenologischen Philosophie,
[Ideen] Max Niemeyer, Tübingen
Husserl E (1984) Logische Untersuchungen [LU] II, I.-II. Teil (Text nach Hua XIX/1-2) Felix Meiner,
Hamburg
Husserl E (1985[1939]) Erfahrung und Urteil [EU] Felix Meiner, Hamburg
Husserl E (1991) Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und Phänomenologischen Philosophie, zweites
Buch [Ideen II] Husserliana vol IV. Max Niemeyer, Tübingen
Husserl E (1993[1937]) Das Gesetz der Fortpflanzung. in Die Krisis. Ergänzungsband, Husserliana vol.
XXIX, Kluwer, Dordrecht, p317
Igambardiev AU (1992) Organization of biosystems: a semiotic approach. In Sebeok and Umiker-Sebeok
1992, pp125–44
Ingarden R (1925) Essentiale Frage. Ein Beitrag zu dem Wesensproblem. Jahrbuch für Philosophie und
phänomenologische Forschung 7:125–304, Max Niemeyer, Band, Halle a.d. Saale
Ingarden R (1929) ‘Bemerkungen zum Problem Idealismus-Realismus’ Festschrift. Edmund Husserl
zum 70. Geburtstag gewidmet. Max Niemeyer, Halle a.d. Saale, pp159–90
Ingarden R (1965[1931]) Das literarische Kunstwerk [LK], Max Niemeyer, Tübingen (Eng. version The
Literary Work of Art, Northwestern University Press(1973), Evanston)
Ingarden R (1965–74) Der Streit um die Existenz der Welt I-III. Max Niemeyer, Tübingen
Ingarden R (1968) Vom Erkennen des literarischen Kunstwerk. Max Niemeyer, Tübingen (Eng. version
The Cognition of the Literary Work of Art, Northwestern University Press(1973), Evanston)
Ingarden R (1969) Erlebnis, Kunstwerk and Wert. Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt
Ingarden R (1970) Innføring i Edmund Husserls Fenomenologi. Tanum, Oslo
Ingarden R (1976) Gegenstand und Aufgaben der Literaturwissenschaft. Max Niemeyer, Tübingen
Ingarden R (1975) On the Motives which led Husserl to Transcendental Idealism. Martinus Nijhoff, The
Hague
Ingarden R (1998) Schriften zur Phänomenologie Husserls. Gesammelte Werke, Bd. 5 (ed Galewicz W),
Max Niemeyer, Tübingen
Jakobson R (1971a) Selected writings I. Mouton, Berlin
Jakobson R (1971b) Selected writings II. Mouton, Berlin
Jakobson R (1985) Selected writings VII. Mouton, Berlin
Johansen JD (1993) Dialogic semiosis. Indiana University Press, Bloomington
Johansen JD (1996) Iconicity in literature. Semiotica 110(1/2):37–55
Johansen JD (2003) Iconizing literature. In: MüllerWG, Fischer O (eds) From sign to signing, John
Benjamins, Amsterdam
Johansson A (2001) Modern topology and Peirce’s theory of the continuum. Transactions of the
Charles S. Peirce Society XXXVII(3):1–12
Johansson I (1998) Pattern as an ontological category. In: Guarino N (ed) Formal ontology in information
systems, IOS Press, Amsterdam pp86–94
Jørgensen H, Stjernfelt F (1987) Substance, substrat, structure. Sur la controverse épistémologique qui
a opposé Brøndal et Hjelmslev. Langages 86:79–94, Paris

B I B L I O G R A P H Y
489
Jørgensen KF (2005) Kant’s schematism and the foundations of mathematics. Dissertation, Roskilde
University Center (preprint)
Joswick H (1988) Peirce’s mathematical model of interpretation. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce
Society XXIV:107–21
Kant I (1956[1781]) Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Felix Meiner, Hamburg
Kant I (1974[1790]) Kritik der Urteilskraft. Felix Meiner, Hamburg
Kant I (1993) Opus Postumum (ed Förster E), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA
Kant I (1997[1786]) Metaphysische Anfangsgründe der Naturwissenschaft. Felix Meiner, Hamburg
Kauffman S (1993) The origin of order. Oxford University Press, New York
Kauffman S (2000) Investigations. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Keegan J (1993) A history of warfare. Vintage Books, London
Ketner KL (1985) How Hintikka misunderstood Peirce’s account of theorematic reasoning. Transactions
of the Charles S. Peirce Society XXI(3):407–18
Ketner KL (ed) (1995) Peirce and contemporary thought. Philosophical inquiries. Fordham University
Press, New York
Ketner KL, Putnam H (1992) Introduction: The Consequences of Mathematics, in Peirce 1992
King James Bible 1611, http://www.biblegateway.com/
Kjørup S (2000) Kunstens filosofi: En indføring i æstetik [‘Philosophy of Art: An Introduction to
Aesthetics’], Roskilde Universitetsforlag, Roskilde
Kline M (1972) Mathematical thought, I-III. Oxford University Press, New York
Knudsen J (1999) Agent, men for hvem? [‘Agent, but for whom?’], The Copenhagen daily Information
10(3)
Kreisel G (1982) Hilbert’s programme. In Benacerraf P, Putnam H 1982
Kull K (1999) Biosemiotics in the twentieth century: a view from biology. Semiotica 127(1/4):385–414
Kusch M (1997) Husserl and Heidegger on Meaning. In Hintikka 1997, pp240–268.
Lachs J (2002) The insignificance of individuals. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society
XXXVIII(1/2):79–94
Lakoff G (1987) Women, fire, and dangerous things. Chicago University Press, Chicago
Lakoff G, Turner M (1989) More than cool reason. A field guide to poetic metaphor. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago
Lakoff G, Johnson M (1999) Philosophy in the flesh. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Lakoff G, Nuñez R (2001) Where mathematics comes from. How the embodied mind brings mathematics
into being. Basic Books, New York
Lane R (1989) Peirce’s triadic logic revisited. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society
XXV(2):284–311
Lane Robert (1997) Peirce’s “Entanglement” with the Principles of Excluded Middle and Contradiction,
in Transactions of the Cahrles S. Peirce Society, vol. XXXIII, no. 3, 680–703.
Lane Robert (1999) Peirce’s Triadic Logic Revisited, in Transactions of the charles S. Peirce Society,
vol. XXXV, no. 2, 284–311
Langton C (1997) Artificial life. An overview. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Lévi-Strauss C (1974[1958]) Anthropologie structurale. Plon, Paris
Lévi-Strauss C (1971) L’homme nu. Mythologiques IV. Plon, Paris
Lévi-Strauss C (1973) Anthropologie structurale II. Plon, Paris
Lévi-Strauss C (1988) De près et de loin. Plon, Paris
Levy SH (1997) Peirce’s theoremic/corollarial distinction and the interconnections between mathematics
and logic. In Houser et al (1997), pp85–110
Libera A de (1996) La querelle des universaux. Seuil, Paris
Lohmar D (1987) Husserls Phänomenologie als Philosophie der Mathematik. Lohmar, Köln
Lohmar D (1990) Wo lag der Fehler der kategorialen Repräsentation? Zu Sinn und Rechweite einer
Selbstkritik Husserls. Husserl Studies 7:179–197
Lohmar D (1998) Erfahrung und kategoriales Denken. Kluwer, Dordrecht
Lohmar D (2003) Husserl’s concept of categorial intuition. In: Zahavi D, Stjernfelt F (eds) (2002) One
hundred years of phenomenology. Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp125–46

490
B I B L I O G R A P H Y
de Loof A, Broeck J van den (1995) Communication: the key to defining ‘life’, ‘death’ and the force
driving evolution, ‘organic chemistry-based’ versus ‘artificial’ life. Belg J Zool 125(1):45–76
MacLane S (1986) Mathematics. Function and form. Springer, New York
Maddy P (1990) Realism in mathematics. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Maddy P (1997) Naturalism in mathematics. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Marbach E (1980) ‘Einleitung des Herausgebers’ XXV-LXXXII. In Husserl 1980
Margulis L, Sagan D (1987) Microcosmos: four billion years of evolution from our microbial ancestors.
HarperCollins, New York
Martin B (1994) The schema. In: Cowan M, Pines D, and Meltzer D (eds) Complexity. Santa Fe Institute
Proc. vol XIX. Addison Wesley, Reading, MA
de Maupassant G (2000) Deux amis. In: Textes choisis. Gallimard, Paris.
Marty A (1976[1908]) Untersuchungen zur Grundlegung der allegemeinen Grammatik und Sprach-
philosophie. Georg Olms Verlag, Hildesheim
May M (1995) Diagrammatisches Denken: Zur Deutung logischer Diagramme als Vorstellungsschemata
bei Lakoff und Peirce. In Zeitschrift für Semiotik, Band 17, Heft 3–4.
May M (1999) Diagrammatic reasoning and levels of schematization. In: Skov M et al (eds) Iconicity.
NSU, Copenhagen
May M, Stjernfelt F (1996) ‘Måling, diagram, kunst’/‘Measurement, Diagram, Art’, Danish/English
version in Billeder fra det fjerne - videnskabelig visualisering. En antologi (eds. Michelsen and
Stjernfelt) Akademisk, Copenhagen, pp63–76, 191–204
McEwan I (1997[1987]) The innocent. Picador, London
Medin DL, Barsalou LW (1987) Categorization processes and categorical perception. In Harnad 1987
Melle U (2002) Husserl’s revision of the sixth logical investigation. In Zahavi and Stjernfelt 2002
Merleau-Ponty M (1983[1945]) Phénoménologie de la perception. Gallimard, Paris
Merleau-Ponty M (1964) Le visible et l’invisible. Gallimard, Paris
Merleau-Ponty M (1995) La nature. Notes. Cours de Collège de France (ed Dominique Séglard), Seuil,
Paris
Merrell F (1992) As signs grow, so life goes. In Sebeok and Umiker-Sebeok 1992
Merrell F (1997) Peirce, signs, and meaning. University of Toronto Press, Toronto
Mitchell WJT (Spring, 1981) Diagrammatology. Critical inquiry 7(3):622–33
Misak C (2004) The Cambridge companion to Peirce. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA
Misfeldt M (2006) Mathematical writing. PhD dissertation, Danish University of Education (preprint)
Molière JP de (1962) Œuvres complètes. Seuil, Paris
Moschovakis Y (1980) Descriptive set theory. North-Holland Publishing Company, New York, NY
Moynihan DP (1998) Secrecy. The American experience. Yale University Press, New Haven
Mullin AA (1966) C.S. Peirce and E.G.A. Husserl on the Nature of Logic. Notre Dame Journal of
Formal Logic 7(4):301–304
Münch D (1993) Intention und Zeichen. Suhrkamp, Frankf./M
Murphey M (1961) The development of Peirce’s philosophy. Cambridge University Press, Harvard
Myrvold WC (1995) Peirce on Cantor’s paradox and the continuum. Transactions of the Charles S.
Peirce Society XXXI(3):508–41
Nelsen RB (1993) Proofs without words. Mathematical Association of America, Washington, DC
Nesher D (2001) Peircean epistemology of learning and the function of abduction as the logic of
discovery. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society XXXVII(1):23–58
Nesher D (2002) Peirce’s essential discovery: Our senses as reasoning machines Can quasi-prove our
perceptual judgments. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society XXXVIII(1/2):175–208
Neurath O (1939) Modern man in the making. Alfred A. Knopf, New York
Niiniluoto I (1999) Defending abduction. Philosophy of Science 66 (Supplement: Proceedings of the
1998 Biennial Meetings of the Philosophy of Science):436–451
Noble NAB (1989) Peirce’s definitions of continuity and the concept of possibility. Transactions of the
Charles S. Peirce SocietyXXV(2):149–174
Nolan R (1994) Distinguishing perceptual from conceptual categories. In: Casati R, Smith B, White G
(eds) Philosophy and the cognitive sciences. Holder-Pichler-Temsky, Vienna, pp221–231

B I B L I O G R A P H Y
491
Nöth W (2000) Handbuch der Semiotik. J.B. Metzler, Stuttgart
Øhrstrøm P (2001) Mesterargumentet i modlys [‘The Master Argument in Backlight’] In: Thellefsen
TL (ed) Tegn og betydning. Betydningsdannelse i filosofisk, biologisk og semiotisk perspektiv.
Akademisk Forlag, Copenhagen pp201–221
Øhrstrøm P, Andersen J, Schärfe H (2005) What has happened to ontology?. In: Dau F, Mugnier M-L,
Stumme C (eds) Common Semantics for sharing knowledge ICCS 2005, LNAI 3598, Springer Verlag,
Berlin-Heidelberg, pp425–438
Øhrstrøm P, Hasle P (1995) Temporal logic, Kluwer, Dordrecht
Otte M (1997) Analysis and synthesis in mathematics from the perspective of Charles S. Peirce’s
philosophy. In: Otte M, Panza M (eds) Analysis and synthesis in mathematics. History and philosophy.
Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp327–356
Panza M (1992) De la Continuité chez Aristote, sa Réponse à Zénon. In Salanskis and Sinaceur 1999,
pp3–15
Pape, H (1997) The logical structure of idealism: C.S. Peirce’s search for a logic of mental proccsses,
In Brunning J, Forster P (eds.) (1997)
Pape H (1999) Abduction and the topology of human cognition. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce
Society XXXV(2):248–269
Pattee HH (1977) Dynamic and linguistic modes of complex systems. Int J General Systems 3 pp259–266
Pattee HH (1979) The complementarity principle and the origin of macromolecular information.
BioSystems 11 pp217–226
Pattee HH (1988) Simulations, realizations, and theories of life. In: Langton C (ed) Artificial life.
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA pp63–77
Parker K (1992) The principle of continuity in Charles S. Peirce’s phenomenology and semeiotic. PhD
Dissertation, Vanderbilt University, printed from microfilm by University Microfilms International,
Ann Arbor
Parker K (1998) The continuity of Peirce’s thought. Vanderbilt University Press, Nashville
Peckhaus V (2004) Calculus Ratiocinator vs. Characteristica Universalis? The two traditions in logic,
revisited. History and Philosophy of Logic 25, pp3–14
Peirce CS (1998[1931–58]) Collected papers [CP, references given by volume number and paragraph],
I-VIII, (ed Hartshorne, Weiss, Burks) Thoemmes Press, London
Peirce CS (1976) New elements of mathematics [NEM], (ed Eisele C) I–IV, Mouton, The Hague
Peirce CS (1978) Contributions to the Nation [NATION] Texas Tech Press, Lubbock
Peirce CS (1992) Reasoning and the Logic of Things [RLOT], eds. Ketner K, Putnam H, Harvard
University Press Cambridge, MA
Peirce CS (1992) The Essential Peirce, vol I. (1867–1893) [EPI] (eds Houser N, Kloesel C), Indiana
University Press, Bloomington
Peirce CS (1997) Pragmatism as a Principle [PP], (ed Turrisi A), SUNY Press, Albany
Peirce CS (1998) The Essential Peirce, vol II. (1893–1913) [EPII] (eds Houser N, Kloesel C), Indiana
University Press, Bloomington
Peirce CS (undated) Logic, Considered as Semeiotic [LCS], constructed from manuscript L 75 by Joseph
Ransdell (http://members.door.net/arisbe/menu/library/bycsp/l75/ver1/l75v1-01.htm)
Peirce CS Manuscripts from Peirce’s unpublished papers (cited by permission of the Houghton Library,
Harvard University), manuscript numbers referring to Robin 1967 as [MS CSP XX], when discussed
in the text referred to as Robin nr. XX
Penrose R (1990) The emperor’s new mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Penrose R (1994) Shadows of the mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Peruzzi A (1999) An essay on the notion of schema. In: Albertazzi L (ed) Shapes of forms. Kluwer,
Dordrecht, pp191–244
Petitot J, Varela FJ, Pachoud B, Roy J-M (eds) (1999) Naturalizing phenomenology. Issues in contem-
porary phenomenology and cognitive science. Stanford University Press, Stanford
Petitot J (1985) Morphogenèse du sens. PUF, Paris
Petitot J (1985a) Catastrophes de la parole. Maloine, Paris
Petitot J (1992) Physique du sens. Éditions du CNRS, Paris

492
B I B L I O G R A P H Y
Petitot J (1992a) Continu et objectivité. La Bimodalité Objective du Continu et le Platonisme Transcen-
dantal, in Salanskis and Sinaceur 1992, pp239–266
Petitot J Pour un platonisme transcendantal. In: Panza M, Salanskis J-M (eds) L’objectivité mathéma-
tique. Masson, Paris
Petitot J (1999) Morphological eidetics for a phenomenology of perception. In Petitot et al (1999),
pp330–371
Petitot J, Smith B (1990) New foundations for qualitative physics. In: Tiles JE, McKee GT, Dean CG
(eds) Evolving knowledge in natural science and artificial intelligence. Pitman, London, pp231–249
Pfänder A (1921) Logik. Max Niemeyer, Halle
Pietarinen A-V (2006) Signs of Logic. Peircean Themes on the Philosophy of Language, Games, and
Communication. Manuscript (in press)
Pihlström S (1998) Peircean scholastic realism and transcendental arguments. Transactions of the
Charles S. Peirce Society XXXIV(2):382–413
Poli R (1998) Levels. Axiomathes 9(1–2):197–211
Potter V, Shields PB (1977) Peirce’s definitions of continuity. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce
Society XIII(1):20–34
Price HH (1953) Thinking and experience. Hutchinson’s University Library, New York
Prodi G (1988) Signs and codes in immunology. In: Sercarz et al (eds) The semiotics of cellular
communication in the immune system. Springer, Berlin
Putnam H (1992) Comments on the lectures. In Peirce 1992
Putnam H (1975a[1967]) Mathematics without foundations. In Putnam 1975
Putnam H (1975) Mathematics, matter and method. Philosophical papers, vol 1. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, MA
Quine WvO (1995) Peirce’s Logic. In Ketner 1995, pp23–31
Ransdell J (1989) Is Peirce a phenomenologist?. http://members.door.net/arisbe/homepage/ransdell.htm
Rasmussen M (1992) Hjelmslevs sprogteori [‘Hjelmslev’s Theory of Language’], Odense Universitets-
forlag, Odense
Resnik M (1997) Mathematics as a science of patterns. Clarendon Press, Oxford
Ricœur P (1983–85) Temps et récit I-III. Seuil, Paris
Roberts DD (1973) The Existential Graphs of Charles S. Peirce. Mouton, The Hague
Robin R (1967) Annotated catalogue of the papers of Charles S. Peirce. University of Massachusetts
Press, Worcester, MA
Robin R (1997) Classical pragmatism and pragmatism’s proof. In Brunning and Forster 1997, pp139–152
Rollinger R (1999) Husserl’s position in the school of Brentano. Kluwer, Dordrecht
Rosch E (1978) Principles of categorization. In Rosch and Lloyd (eds) 1978
Rosch E, Lloyd B (eds) (1978) Cognition and categorization. Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ
Rosen R (1989) The roles of necessity in biology. In: Casti J, Karlqvist A (eds) Newton to Aristotle.
Towards a theory of models for living systems. Birkhäuser, Boston
Rosen R (1990) Life itself. Columbia University Press, New York
Rosenthal SB (1968) The ‘Would-Be’ present of C.S. Peirce. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce
Society IV(3):155–62
Rothbard M (January, 1957) In defense of ‘Extreme Apriorism’. Southern Economic Journal 314–320
(www.mises.org/rothbard/extreme.pdf)
Roy J-M (1999) Saving intentional phenomena: intentionality, representation, and symbol. In Petitot
et al (1999), pp111–147
Ruttkowski WV (1978) Typen und Schichten. Zur Einteilung des Menschen und seiner Produkte. Franke
Verlag, Bern und München
Salanskis J-M, Sinaceur H (eds) (1992) Le labyrinthe du continu, Springer. Paris
Salanskis J-M (1992) Le Destin du Modèle de Cantor-Dedekind. In Salanskis J-M and Sinaceur H 1992,
pp190–212
Schank RC, Abelson RP (1977) Scripts, plans, goals and understanding: an inquiry into human knowledge
structures. L. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ
Schmitt C (1963[1932]) Das Begriff des Politischen. Duncker & Humblot, Berlin

B I B L I O G R A P H Y
493
Schmitt C (1993[1922]) Politische Theologie. Duncker & Humblot, Berlin
Schmitt C (1970) Politische Theologie II. Duncker & Humblot, Berlin
Scubla L (1998) Lire Lévi-Strauss. Odile Jacob, Paris
Schuhmann K (1972) Forschungsnotizen über Husserls ‘Entwurf einer ‘Vorrede’ zu den ‘Logischen
Untersuchungen’. Tijdschrift voor filosofie 34(3):513–24
Sebeok T (ed) (1986) Encyclopedic dictionary of semiotics I-III. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin
Sebeok T (1991) A sign is just a sign. Indiana University Press, Bloomington
Sebeok T (1992) ‘Tell me, where is fancy bred’: the biosemiotic self. In Sebeok and Umiker-Sebeok
Sebeok T (2001) Global semiotics. Indiana University Press, Bloomington and Indianapolis
Sebeok T, Umiker-Sebeok J (eds) (1992) Biosemiotics. The Semiotic Web 1991. Mouton de Gruyter,
Berlin
Seebohm T (1990) Kategoriale Anschauung. In: Seebohm et al (eds) Logik, Anschaulichkeit und
Transparenz. Karl Alber, München, pp9–47
Selz O (1913) Über die Gesetze des geordneten Denkverlaufs. Verlag von W. Spemann, Stuttgart
Shin S-J (1994) The logical status of diagrams. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Shin S-J (2000) The iconic logic of Peirce’s graphs. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Short TL (1983) Peirce and the incommensurability of theories. In Freeman 1983, pp119–131
Short TL (1997) Hypostatic abstraction in self-consciousness. In: Brunning J and Forster P (eds) The
rule of reason. University of Toronto Press, Toronto
Short TL (2004) The development of Peirce’s theory of signs. In Misak 2004, pp214–240
Skagestad P (2004) Peirce’s semiotic model of the mind. In Misak 2004, pp241–256
Sloman A (1995) Musings on the roles of logical and non-logical representations in intelligence. In
Glasgow 1995
Smith B (ed) (1982) Parts and moments. Philosophia, München
Smith B (1979) Roman Ingarden: ontological foundations for literary theory. In: Odmark J (ed) Language,
literature & meaning I. Johns Benjamins, Amsterdam, pp373–390
Smith B (1980) Ingarden vs. Meinong on the logic of fiction. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
16:93–105
Smith B (1983) Meinen und Vorstellen in der literarischen Gegenstandskonstitution. In: Wolandt G (ed)
Kunst und Kunstforschung. Beiträge zur Ästhetik. Bouvier, Bonn, pp49–61
Smith B (1992) An essay on material necessity. In: Hanson P, Hunter B (eds) Return of the a priori
(Canadian Journal of Philosophy, Supplementary vol 18)
Smith B (1994) Austrian philosophy. Open Court, Chicago
Smith B (1996a) The ecological niche, paper, SUNY (German version: Ontologie des Mesokosmos:
Soziale Objekte und Umwelten, Zeitschrift für philosophische Forschung, 52 (1998), 521–540
Smith B (1996b) In defense of extreme (fallibilistic) apriorism. Journal of Libertarian Studies 12:179–192
Smith B (1998a) (with Roberto Casati and Achille Varzi) Ontological tools for geographic represen-
tation. In: Guarino N (ed) Formal ontology in information systems. IOS Press (Frontiers in Artificial
Intelligence and Applications), Amsterdam, etc. pp77–85
Smith B (1998b) (with Achille Varzi) The niche. Nous 33(2):198–222
Smith B (2000) Logic and formal ontology. Manuscrito 23:275–323
Smith B (2001) Objects and their environments: from Aristotle to ecological ontology, paper, SUNY
(to appear in A. Frank (ed.) The life and motion of socio-economic units. Taylor and Frank, London)
Smith B (2003) Ontology. In: Floridi L (ed) Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Computing and
Information. Blackwell, Oxford, pp155–166
Smith B (2005) Against fantology. In: Reicher M, Marek J (eds) Experience and analysis. ÖBV & HPT,
Vienna, pp153–170
Smith B, og Smith D (eds) (1995) The Cambridge companion to Husserl. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Sokolowski R (1964) The formation of Husserl’s concept of constitution, Martinus Nijnott, The Hague
Sokolowski R (1974) Husserlian meditations. Northwestern University Press, Evanston
Sokolowski R (1982) Husserl’s concept of categorial intuition. In: Mohanty JN (1982, ed)
Phenomenology and the human sciences 1981. Norman, Oklahoma

494
B I B L I O G R A P H Y
Sokolowski R (2000) Introduction to phenomenology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
pp127–141
Sonesson G (1989) Pictorial concepts. Lund University Press, Lund
Sørensen BA (1963) Symbol und Symbolismus in den ästhetischen Theorien des 18. Jahrhunderts und
der deutsche Romantik.Munksgaard, Copenhagen
Sowa J (1997) Matching logical structure to linguistic structure. In Houser, Roberts, Van Evra (eds)
1997
Sowa J (1999) Knowledge representation: logical, philosophical, and computational foundations. Brooks
Cole Publishing Co, Pacific Grove, CA
Spiegelberg H (1956) Husserl’s and Peirce’s phenomenologies: coincidence or interaction. Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research 17:164–185
Spiegelberg H (1969) The Phenomenological Movement. A Historical Introduction, 2 vols. Martinus
Nijhoff, The Hague
Sponsel R, Rathsmann-Sponsel I (2000) Kekulés Traum. Über eine typisch-psychoanalytische
Entgleisung Alexander Mitscherlichs über den bedeutenden Naturwissenschaftler und Chemiker
August
Kekulé
(1829–1896),
Mitschöpfer
der
Valenz,
Vollender
der
Strukturtheorie
und
Entdecker
der
Bedeutung
des
Benzolrings.
Alternative
Analyse
und
Deutung
aus
allgemeiner
und
integrativer
psychologisch-psychotherapeutischer
Sicht.
IP-GIPT.
Erlangen:
http://www.sgipt.org/th_schul/pa/kek/pak_kek0.htm
Stepanov JS (1971) Semiotika. Nauka, Moscow
Sterelny K, Griffiths PE (1999) Sex and death. An introduction to the philosophy of biology. The
University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Stjernfelt F (1990) Baldr og verdensdramaet i den nordiske mytologi [The God Baldr and the drama of
the world in old norse mythology]. Museum Tusculanum, Copenhagen
Stjernfelt F (1992a) Formens betydning. Katastrofeteori og semiotik [The meaning of form. Catastrophe
theory and semiotics]. Akademisk Forlag, Copenhagen
Stjernfelt F (1992b) Categorical perception as a basic prerequisite to the formation of signs? in Sebeok
and Umiker-Sebeok 1992, pp427–454
Stjernfelt F (1992c) Buchstabenformen, Kategorien und die Apriori Position. In: Gumbrecht and Pfeiffer
Schrift. Wilhelm Fink, München, pp289–310
Stjernfelt F (1997) Rationalitetens himmel og andre essays [‘The heaven of rationality and other essays’].
Gyldendal, Copenhagen
Stjernfelt F (1997a) Wie ist Form möglich? The concept of nature in Kant: the third critique and the
opus postumum. Prismer 14(1):43–58, Århus
Stjernfelt F (1997b) Den narrative kamp og dens beskrivelse. In: Rationalitetens himmel. Gyldendal,
Copenhagen (French version: Récits de l’âgon: leur description linguistique. In: Michèle P (ed) Quand
parlent les formes, vol 2. C.N.R.S., Paris, 1995)
Stjernfelt F (2000) Die Vermittlung zwischen Anschuung und Denken bei Kant, Cassirer und Peirce.
In: Zeitschrift für Semiotik, Band 22, Heft 3–4, pp341–368
Stjernfelt F (2001) The vulgar metaphysics of transgression. Text und Kontext 23(1):144–155
Stjernfelt F (2003) Sebeotics at the threshold. Review of Ponzio and Petrilli Thomas Sebeok. An
Introduction. Semiotica 147(1/4):485–494
Stjernfelt F (2004) Traffic jam, or objectivity and interdisciplinarity in the humanities. In: Jensen JHC
(ed) The object of study in the humanities. Museum Tusculanum Press Copenhagen, pp69–78
Stjernfelt F (2006) Two iconicity notions in Peirce’s diagrammatology. In: Proceedings from 6th inter-
national conference on conceptual structures. Springer Verlag, pp70–86
Stjernfelt F (2006a) Let us not get too far ahead of the story  A history of realist semiotics? Review
of John Deely: Four ages of understanding, in Cybernetics and Human Knowing 13.1, pp91–104
Stjernfelt F (in press a) Simple animals and complex biology. The double von Uexküll inspiration in
Cassirer’s philosophy. In: Synthese
Stjernfelt F (with N Zeuthen) (in press b) The representation of consciousness in language and fiction.
A cognitive theory of enunciation. In: Semiotica 165(1/4)

B I B L I O G R A P H Y
495
Stone
A
(2004)
Heidegger
and
Carnap
on
the
overcoming
of
metaphysics,
unpublished
(http://home.uchicago.edu/∼abestone/papers.html)
Ströker E (1978) Husserls Evidenzprinzip. In: Zeitschrift für philosophische Forschung, Bd. 32:3–30
Stumpf C (1873) Über den psychologischen Ursprung der Raumvorstellung. Hirzel, Leipzig
Stumpf C (1907) Zu Einteilung der Wissenschaften, in Philos.-histor. Abh. 1906, 5.
Talmy L (2000) Toward a cognitive semantics, vol 1–2. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Thom R (1972) Stabilité Structurale et Morphogénèse. Ediscience, Paris
Thom R (1975) English version of Thom 1972: Structural Stability and Morphogenesis. Benjamin,
Reading, MA
Thom R (1980) Modèles mathématiques de la morphogenèse. Chr. Bourgois, Paris
Thom R (1988) Ésquisse d’une sémiophysique, InterEditions, Paris
Thom R (1990) Causality and finality in theoretical biology: a possible picture. In: Casti J, Karlqvist A
(eds) Newton to Aristotle. Towards a theory of models for living systems. Birkhäuser, Boston
Thom R (1992) L’Antériorité Ontologique du Continu sur le Discret. In Salanskis and Sinaceur,
pp137–143
Thompson, d’Arcy W (1961 [1917/1942]) On growth and form (abridged version, Bonner JT (ed)).
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Thomsen SU, Stjernfelt F (2005) Kritik af den negative opbyggelighed [‘A critique of negativism’].
Vindrose, Copenhagen
Tiercelin C (1993) Peirce’s realistic approach to mathematics: or, can one be a realist without being
a platonist. In: Edward CM (ed) Charles S. Peirce and the Philosophy of Science (papers from the
Harvard Sesquicentennial Congress). University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa, pp30–48
Tiercelin C (1997) Peirce on norms, evolution and knowledge. Transactions of the C.S. Peirce Society
33(1):35–58
Tiercelin C (January, 1999) L’influence scotiste dans le projet peircien d’une métaphysique scientifique.
Revue des Sciences Philosophiques et Théologiques, 83(1):117–134
Tiercelin C (2002) Dispositions and Essences, paper from the colloquium ‘Dispositions et pouvoirs
causaux’, Paris X-ENS Ulm, Sept. 2002
Tiles JE (1988) Iconic thought and the scientific imagination. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce
Society 24(2):161–178
Tomasello M (1999) The cultural origins of human cognition. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
Tunander O (1994) Den usynlige hånd og den hvide – en læsning af Palme-mordet [The invisible hand
and the white hand – an interpretation of the Palme murder]. Kritik 110, Copenhagen
Tunander O (2004) The secret war against Sweden – US and British submarine deception in the 1980s.
Frank Cass, London
Turner M (1996) The Literary Mind. Oxford University Press, New York
Uexküll Jv (1933) Staatsbiologie. Hanseatische Verlagsanstalt, Hamburg
Uexküll Jv (1973) Theoretische Biologie. Suhrkamp, Frankf/M (1920/28)
Uexküll, Jv (1982) The theory of meaning (transl. of Bedeutungslehre (1940)). Semiotica 42(1):1–24
Uexküll Tv (1982) Introduction: meaning and science in Jakob von Uexküll’s concept of biology.
Semiotica 42(1):1–24
Uldall H-J (1967) Outline of glossematics. Nordisk Sprog- og Kulturforlag, Copenhagen
Visetti Y-M (2004) Le continu en sémantique, in Texto! (online magazine), http:/www.revue-texto.net/
Inedits/Visetti_Continu.html
Waddington CH (1968–1972) Towards a theoretical biology, vol 1–3. Aldine Publishing, Chicago
Wang ONC (1997) The Last Formalist, or W.J.T. Mitchell as Romantic Dinosaur, Interview with
Mitchell by O.N.C. Wang, In: Wang ONC, Morillo J (series ed) Romantic circles praxis series.
(http://www.rc.umd.edu/praxis/mitchell/mitch-about.html)
Weber B, Depew DJ (eds) (2003) Evolution and learning. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Weber M (1972 [1921]) Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft. J.C.B. Mohr, Tübingen
Wellek R (1991) A history of modern criticism 1750–1950, vol 7: German, Russian, and Eastern
European Criticism, 1900–1950. Yale UP, New Haven
West N (ed) (1993) The Faber book of espionage. Faber, London

496
B I B L I O G R A P H Y
Willard D (1982) Wholes, parts, and the objectivity of knowledge. In Smith B (ed) 1982, p 379
Wilson EO (1998) Consilience. The unity of knowledge. Little, Brown, & Co., London
Zahavi D (1996) Husserl und die transzendentale Intersubjektivität. Kluwer, Dordrecht
Zahavi D (1999) Self-awareness and alterity. A phenomenological investigation. Northwestern University
Press, Evanston
Zahavi D, Stjernfelt F (eds) (2002) One Hundred Years of Phenomenology. Kluwer, The Hague
Zelaniec W (1996) The recalcitrant synthetic a priori. ArTom, Lublin
Zeman JJ (1968) Peirce’s graphs – the continuity interpretation. Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce
Society 4(3):144–154
Zeman JJ (1983) Peirce on abstraction. In: Freeman E (ed) The relevance of Charles Peirce. The Hegeler
Institute, La Salle, IL
Zeman JJ (1997) Peirce and Philo. In Houser et al (eds) (1997), Studies in the logic of Charles Sanders
Peirce, Indiana University Press, Bloomington pp402–417

NAME INDEX
(E. Husserl and C. Peirce are not included)
Abbott, F.E., 40
Abelson, R., 356
Ajdukiewicz, K., 164
Alberts, B., 449
Allwein, G., 435
Ambler, E., 365
Aristotle, 16, 34, 37, 184, 219, 221, 247, 257,
346, 385, 391, 407, 416, 433, 448, 454,
467, 476
Armstrong, D., 44f
Arnheim, R., 461
Arthur, B., 267
Avicenna, 35
Ayer, A., 184
Bader, A., 438
Baer, K.E.v., 226, 231, 452
Baggesen, J., 452
Bain, A., 463
Bak, P., 131, 450, 451
Bakhtin, M. 353
Baldwin, J.M., 7, 8, 18, 19, 35, 82, 233, 242f,
255, 455
Balzac, H. de, 388
Barker, R., 221
Barsalou, L.W., 238, 434, 454
Barthes, R., 51, 60, 361
Barwise, J., 427, 435, 436
Bateson, G., 212
Baudrillard, J., 473
Baxter, D., 44
Beethoven, L., 56, 58, 299, 300
Benacerraf, P.,411 433, 479, 480
Benoist, J., 148
Bennett, C., 86
Berg, H.C., 205ff, 302
Berkeley, G., 40, 150, 184, 461
Bernays, P., 439
Bernet, R., 145, 442
Bertalanffy, L.v., 204
Bismarck, O, 473
Blackburn, S., 44
Blackwell, A., 111, 460
Blake, G., 378
Boehm, J., 475
Bogh, M., 460
Boghossian, P., 447
Bohr, N., 198
Boler, J., 33–37, 45, 385
Boltzmann, L.v., 480
Bolyai, J., 125
Bolzano, B., 385, 446, 474, 475
Boole, G., 109, 328
Borel, F., 416
Brandt, P.A., 370, 472
Brentano, F., 11, 36, 161, 168, 175f, 184, 221,
442, 445
Broca, P., 242
Broeck, J.v.d., 209, 450
Brøndal, V., 118, 168f, 446
Brouwer, L.E.J., 408, 410, 476
Brown, J.R., 435
Bundgaard, P., 440, 443, 446, 461
Butler, L. 473
Calderoni, M., 37, 39, 477
Caldwell, B., 446
Cantor, G., 3–6, 386-391, 396–400, 408, 416,
427, 474–479
Cardan, G., 153
Cariani, P., 453
Carnap, R., 60, 109, 168, 182f, 417, 447
Carnot, L.N.M., 125
Cartwright, N., 44
Carus, P., 43, 191, 436, 476
Cassirer, E., xvii, 118, 182f, 203f, 222, 438, 440,
447, 449, 451–453, 459, 479
Castro, F., 378
Cavaillès, J. 481
Cayley, A., 125
Chaitin, G., 415, 420
Chalmers, D., 215
Chasles, M., 125
Chaucer, G., 379
Chebanov, S., 455
Chisholm, R, 184
Chomsky, N., 117, 119, 242, 458
497

498
N A M E I N D E X
Cicero 41
Claesz, P., 315
Clausewitz, C.v., 365, 370, 471, 472
Cobb-Stevens, R., 442
Cohen, P., 4, 396, 404, 411f, 480
Comte, A., 12
Coninxloo, G.v., 466
Conrad, J., 365
Copernicus, 61, 199
Crick, F., 203
Darwin, C., 8, 25, 60, 122, 197, 203, 215, 216,
225, 226, 231, 239, 242, 263, 267, 452
Daubert, J., 468
Deacon, T., xvii, 241–256, 258, 272, 455, 456,
458, 459, 484
Dedekind, R., 3, 5, 386, 406, 429, 474, 475,
476, 480
Deely, J., 198, 216, 456
Defoe, D., 379
Deighton, L., 376
Deleuze, G., 51
Derrida, J., 51, 110
Descartes, R., 4, 52, 183, 250, 443
Devlin, K., 412
Dewey, J., 143, 144
Diderichsen, P., 168, 446
Diderot, D., 462
Diodorus Cronus, 41, 430
Diophantus, 85
Dipert, R., 45, 47, 429, 476
Dougherty, C.J., 441
Driesch, H., 203, 233, 263, 452
Duchamp, M., 86
Dumézil, G., 372–374, 472
Duns Scotus, John, xv, 14, 33–37, 45, 77, 426,
457, 463
Eckersberg, C.W., xviii, 85, 280–285, 286,
288, 461
Eco, U., xv, 53, 60–76, 118, 207, 271f, 430, 434,
441, 466, 467
Ehrenfels, C.v., 163, 233
Ehret, G., 454
Eisele, C. 474
Eliot, T.S., 57
Emerson, R.W., 475
Emmeche, C., 198, 258, 270, 449, 451
Engelhardt, Y., 111, 460
Eriksen, J.,-M., 472
Etchemendy, J., 427, 436
Euclid, 10, 52, 93, 99, 102, 108, 112, 125–127,
236, 334
Exner, J., 472
Fastrup, A., 462
Fauconnier, G., 66, 89, 133–4, 257, 258, 359,
436, 443
Feferman, S., 417f
Ferguson, N., 439, 462
Fermat, P. de, 389
Findlay, J.N., 441
Fisch, M., 40f
Fischer, E., 85, 280–284, 461
Fleming, I., 372, 378
Foucault, M., 51, 434
Fraenkel, A., 481
Frege, G., 31, 52, 54, 109f, 142, 328
Freud, S., 336, 338, 339, 464, 466, 467
Friedman, M., xvii, 182–185, 192f, 447
Frovin Jørgensen, K., 436
Gadamer, H.G., 333
Galileo, 122
Gardiès, J.,-L., 164, 252
Gauss, C.F., 125, 437
Gell-Mann, M., 257, 267, 451
Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, E., 452
Gibson, J.J., 70, 74, 221
Glasgow, J., xxi, 89
Gödel, K., 4f, 85, 95, 107, 109, 132, 136, 209,
404, 406, 409f, 413, 415, 419–23, 429, 433,
450, 480, 481
Goethe, J.W.v., 152f, 182, 202, 232, 440, 452
Goldbach, C., 85, 152
Goodman, N., xv, 28, 44, 53–59, 64, 434, 438,
441, 444, 465
Goodwin, B., 119, 257, 452
Gould, S.J., 269, 460
Grassl, W., 446
Greaves, M., 113, 426, 439
Greene, G., 365, 378, 473
Greimas, A.J., xvi, xix, 51, 53, 60, 117, 119, 128,
133, 361, 367–370, 375, 446, 455, 471
Gregersen, F., 170, 446
Grosrichard, A., 373
Groupe , xviii, 118, 128, 131–133, 294,
321–325, 434, 461, 463
Gunder Hansen, N., 470
Haack, S., 38, 43
Haaparanta, L., 441
Haas, W.P., 385

N A M E I N D E X
499
Hadamard, J. xiii
Hallett, M., 439
Hamburger, K., 468, 470, 471
Harnad, S., 128, 236, 238, 440, 454, 456
Harré, R., 44
Harthong, J., 415, 420, 480
Hartshorne, C., 142, 143
Hasle, P., 427
Haswell, J., 473
Hayek, F.v., 175, 179f, 358ff, 448, 470
Hegel, G.W.F., 15, 40, 43, 143, 144, 394, 431,
441, 442, 451
Heidegger, M.,23, 110, 182, 262, 453, 459
Heijenoort, J.v., 108, 328
Heilmann, G., 124
Helmholtz, H.v., 163, 183, 332
Hemingway, E., 380
Hempel, C., 433, 467
Hendricks, V., 425, 432
Henrik, Prince, 135
Henry of Ghent, 35
Hering, E., 184
Hersh, S., 375, 472
Hilbert, D., xv, 52, 83, 109, 110, 112ff, 404, 417,
433, 438, 439
Hilpinen, R., 432
Hintikka, J., xv, 107–111, 114, 139, 187, 190,
328, 334, 436, 438, 440, 441, 442, 466
Hitler, A., 471
Hjelmslev, L., xvi 51, 53, 60ff, 68, 118, 161,
163–172, 436, 446, 454
Hoffmann, M., 329, 331, 466, 467
Hoffmeyer, J., xvii, 199, 258, 270f, 449, 454
Hofstadter, D., 55, 131–136, 429, 434, 487
Holenstein, E., 159, 164, 444, 445, 447, 477, 487
Hookway, C. 448
Hoover, J.E., 375, 472
Houser, N., 41
Hulswit, M., 432
Hume, D., 14, 150, 184
Hutchinson, E., 221
Igambardiev, A.U., 198, 450
Illum Hansen, T., 470
Ingarden, R., xix, 147, 178, 298, 300f, 345–363,
366, 381, 445, 464, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471
Iser, W., 351, 360, 470
Ivanov, J., 371
Jakobson, R., xvi, 118, 121, 161, 164–167,
168–170, 172, 182, 346f, 434, 439, 445, 455
James, W., 39, 143, 242, 378, 435, 441, 464, 467
Jesus, 280–285
Johansen, J.D., 436, 471
John the Baptist, 248
Johnson, M., 66, 89, 133, 134, 257, 258, 436, 473
Judas, 85, 280–282, 284
Kandinsky, W., 64, 276, 308
Kant, I., xvi, xvii, 4, 7, 12f, 29, 35, 37, 66–75,
82, 87f, 93–5, 108, 134, 146, 175–7, 184,
189, 191, 197, 199–204, 210, 214, 216, 218,
222, 228ff, 237, 263, 266, 268, 385, 389f,
415, 417f, 426, 434, 436, 437, 440, 441,
446, 447, 449, 451–453, 551, 461, 476, 477,
480, 481
Kauffman, S., xviii, 130, 131, 211, 215, 216,
240, 257, 267–271, 450–452, 459
Keegan, J., 472
Keeler, C., 371
Kekulé, A., 102, 137, 437f
Kennedy, J.F., 375, 377, 450, 472, 473
Ketner, K., 5, 405–409, 475
Kipling, R., 365
Kjørup, S., 465
Klee, P., 276
Klein, F., xvi, 119, 125–127, 439, 440, 465
Klimt, G., 319
Kline, M., 440
Koffka, K., 159
Kosslyn, S., 433
Kreisel, G., 114
Kripke, S., 67, 72, 437
Kuhl, P.K., 454
Kuhn, T., 182, 183
Kusch, M., 110
Lacan, J., 51
Lakoff, G., 57, 66, 87, 127, 133f, 257f, 272, 305,
357, 359, 425, 432, 436, 442
Lamarck, J.-B., 242
Lambert, J.H., 125
Lane, R., 427
Langacker, R., 167, 258, 446
Langton, C., 209, 257
Lavoisier, A. 117
Leibniz, G.W., 51, 75, 109, 183, 441
Lenin, V.I., 375
Lesniewski, S., 164, 171, 173, 444f, 458
Lévi-Strauss, C., xvi, 51, 117, 119–122, 125
Levy, A., 413
Levy, S.H., 191f, 448
Lévy-Bruhl, L., 169
Lewis, D., 42

500
N A M E I N D E X
Libera, A. de, 35ff, 430
Liberman, A., 450
Lipps, T., 184
Lobachevski, N.I., 52, 125
Locke, J., 62ff, 150, 155, 157, 159, 184, 435
Lohmar, D., 442, 443
Loof, A. de, 209, 450
Lorenz, K., xviii, 263, 265, 452
Loschmidt, J., 438
Lovelock, J., 201
Löwenheim, L., 109
Lucas, J.R., 450
Luhmann, N., 455
Luther King, M., 377
Lyotard, J.,-F., 51
MacLane, S., 421f, 481
Maddy, P., 410–414, 477, 480, 481
Magritte, R., 322
Malevich, K., xviii, 276, 286, 485
Marcus (apostle), 277
Margulis, L., 272, 450
Marlowe, C., 379
Martin, C.B., 44, 110, 377, 451, 472
Marty, A., 168, 446
Marx, K., 60, 61, 65, 377
Mathesius, V., 165
Maugham, S., 365, 378
Maupassant, G.de, 486
Maxwell, J.C., 182
May, M., 83, 104, 438, 460
Medin, D.L., 152, 238, 434, 454
Meinong, A., 90, 159, 349, 463, 468
Melle, U., 442
Mellor, H., 44
Menger, C., 175, 179
Menzies, S., (“C”), 372
Merleau-Ponty, M., xviii, 228, 233, 257,
262–267, 271, 272, 273, 305f, 452, 453,
459, 462
Merrell, F., 198, 451
Miller, J.-A., 372
Milner, J.-C., 373
Minsky, M., 110
Misak, C., 41
Mises, L.v., 175, 179f, 184
Misfeldt, M., 437
Mitchell, W.J.T., 425
Modotti, T., 318
Molière, 248, 457
Molnar, G., 44
Mondrian, P., 276, 308
Monge, G., 125
Montezuma, 69
Moore, E.H., 250
Morgan, A. de, 338
Morillo, J., 425
Morris, C., 61
Moschovakis, Y., 480
Moses, 471
Moynihan, D.P., 377, 473
Mozart, W.A., 233
Mulligan, K., 175
Mullin, A.A., 142
Mumford, S., 44
Münch, D., 442
Murphey, M., 172, 427
Napoleon, 452
Neckar, 332
Nelsen, R., 100, 437
Neumann, J.v., 479
Neurath, O., 97, 466
Newman, B., 276, 308
Newton, I., 51f, 57, 183, 197, 202, 204, 441
Nicholson, L., 372, 378
Nielsen, K.K., 473
Nietzsche, F., 50, 53, 57, 228, 230, 434, 453
Noble, B., 43, 427
Nolan, R., 71, 434
Nöth, W. 439
Nuñez, R., 425
Øhrstrøm, P., 427, 437, 442
Otte, M., 436
Otzen, P.M., 317
Palme, O., 375, 473
Panza, M., 391
Pap, A., 184
Pape, H., 458
Parker, K., 425, 426, 474, 475
Parker, L., 438
Pasch, M., 52, 438
Pattee, H.H., 450
Pavlov, I., 64, 236, 243
Peacocke, C., 447
Peano, G., 22
Peirce, B. 394
Penrose, R., 414, 419, 450, 451
Peruzzi, A., 444
Petitot, J., 120, 128, 133, 158f, 192, 416–421,
439, 440, 447, 480f
Petrilli, S., 459

N A M E I N D E X
501
Pfänder, A., 468
Philby, K., 378
Philo of Megara 40f, 430
Piaget, J., 439
Pietarinen, A.-V., 19, 427, 435, 441
Pines, D., 267
Piranesi, G., 88
Plato, 264, 288, 409ff, 413, 418, 419, 421,
422, 481
Plotinus, 475
Poe, E.A., 365
Poincaré, H., 183
Polanyi, M., 176
Pollock, J., 308
Poncelet, J.V., 10, 125, 133, 425f
Popov, D., 376, 378
Popper, K., 44, 182, 187, 245, 433, 467
Porphyr, 295
Portmann, A., 264
Potter, V., 4, 474
Presley, E. 41
Price, H.H., 179, 435
Prodi, G., 450
Profumo, J., 371, 472
Putnam, H., 5, 67, 258, 405–409, 411, 479
Pylyshyn, Z, 433
Pythagoras, ix, xiii, 9, 99
Quine, W.v.O., 38, 44, 53, 73, 109f, 116,
328, 435
Ransdell, J., 426
Rasmussen, A.F., 135,
Rasmussen, M., 170, 446
Rathsmann-Sponsel, I., 438
Reichenbach, H., 328
Reinach, A., 175, 178f, 184, 468
Reinhardt, A., 276
Resnik, M., 479
Richter, G., 312
Ricœur, P., 340
Riemann, B., 52, 125, 191
Roberts, D.D., 435, 458
Robin, R., 89, 93, 111, 249, 375, 426, 474,
478, 480
Robinson, A., 388, 420, 480
Rollinger, R., 442
Rometsch, E., 472
Rosch, E., 66, 70, 118, 128, 257ff, 305, 357,
432, 440, 454
Rosen, R., 209, 450, 452
Rossetti, G., 467
Roth, A., 184
Rothbard, M., 175f, 179ff
Rothko, M., 276, 287, 306
Roy, J.-M., 442
Rubin, E., 332
Russell, B., 52, 109, 184, 328, 444, 468
Russell, E.S., 264
Ruttkowski, W., 470
Ryle, G., 44
Saccheri, G.G., 125
Sarris, E.G., 233
Salanskis, J.,-M., 409, 415, 417, 480f
Santaella, L., 459
Saussure, F.de, ix, 51, 53, 62, 63, 118–120,
165, 244
Schank, R., 356
Scheler, M., 184
Schelling, F.W.J., 232, 265, 386, 394, 453, 475
Schlick, M., 184, 500
Schmitt, C., xix, 365, 369f, 374, 380, 472
Schönfliess, A.M., 476
Schröder, E., 22, 41, 52, 109, 142, 328, 441
Schumpeter, J., 131, 175, 180
Scubla, L., 439
Searle, J., 179, 272
Sebeok, T., xvii, 117, 119, 198, 217, 226, 258,
270, 272, 449, 452, 456
Seebohm, T., 442
Selz, O., 464
Sherman, C., 313
Shields, P.B., 4, 210, 475
Shin, S.-J., 427, 435
Short, T.L., 47, 252, 254, 426, 435, 458
Sierpinski, W., 412
Simons, P., 175
Skagestad, P., 428
Smith, B., xvi, xvii, 45f, 163, 171, 175–193, 221,
239, 363, 365f, 438, 442, 445, 446, 447,
448, 471, 486
Socrates, 80, 430
Sokolowski, R., 442
Solovay, R., 413
Sombart, W., 453
Sørensen, B.A., 438
Sowa, J., 427, 435
Spemann, H., 452
Spet, G., 165
Spiegelberg, H., 441
Sponsel, I., 438
Stalin, J., 66, 376
Stallone, S., 283
Stegmüller, W., 184

502
N A M E I N D E X
Steiner, R., 276
Stella, F., 288
Stepanov, J.S., 197, 449
Stieber, W., 473
Strawson, G., 429f, 455
Ströker, E., 442
Studdert-Kennedy, M., 450
Stumpf, C., 80, 88, 175f, 184, 233, 363, 445
Sweetser, E., 66, 133, 258
Talmy, L., 88, 89, 127, 133, 257, 258
Tanguy, Y., 314
Tarski, A., 412
Taurinus, F.A., 125
Tesnière, L., 76, 460
Thom, R., 6, 115, 119, 127, 128–130, 204, 222,
385, 414–417, 429, 434, 441, 449, 451,
452, 476
Thomas Aquinas, 36, 77
Thomas of Erfurt, 33, 426
Thompson, D’Arcy, xvi, 117, 119, 121–125, 130,
139, 440, 452
Thompson, I., 44
Thomsen, S.U., 460
Tiercelin, C., 44ff
Tinbergen, N., 263, 452
Todorov, T., 439
Tomasello, M., 266, 458
Troubetzkoy, Prince, 445
Tunander, O., 369, 473
Turner, M., 66, 89, 127, 133f, 139, 257f, 359,
436, 443, 453
Uexküll, J.v., xvii, 119, 204, 207, 211, 225–240,
257, 259, 261–267, 269, 272, 342, 430, 449,
452–455, 459, 460
Ulam, S., 413
Uldall, H.,-J., 167
Ungerer, E., 204
Varzi, A., 221
Vattimo, G., 67
Veronese, G., 385, 417
Voigt, A., 142
Voltaire, F., 355
Waals, J.D. v.d. 209
Waddington, C.H., 449, 452
Wæver, O., 369
Walsingham, F., 379
Wang Hui, 316
Wang, O.N.C., 425, 495
Warhol, A., 308
Watson, J., 203
Watson, J.B., 263
Weierstrass, K. 387
Weiss, P., 142f
Welby, V., 11, 13, 26, 29, 143, 427, 429, 433,
437, 442
Wellek, R., 352, 469
Wernicke, K., 242
West, N., 472, 473
Weyl, H., 385, 410, 417
Whitney, H., 128
Willard, D., 442
William of Ockham, 33
Wilson, E.O., 454
Wittgenstein, L., 109ff, 284, 293, 435, 438
Zahavi, D., 266, 458
Zelaniec, W., xvii, 176, 184f, 192, 193
Zeman, J., 41
Zermelo, E., 412, 481
Zinna, A., 434

SUBJECT INDEX
(much-used terms such as diagram,
phenomenology, ontology, semiotics, etc. are not
included)
Abduction, xxi, 11, 77f, 104f, 191f, 279–285,
288, 328–339, 366, 393, 466
Abstraction, xii, xxii, 12, 33, 34, 36f, 46, 96, 118,
121, 130, 137, 141, 148–151, 162f, 173,
188, 246–255, 278, 308, 358, 446, 456; see
also Hypostatic abstraction; Prescission
Accessibility, 306–319, 466
Action, xix, 29, 40, 178f, 207, 209, 211–214,
226–41, 254, 257, 259, 261–266, 269f, 305,
310, 357, 369, 371, 392f
Adjacent possible, 270, 451, 459
Aleph (Transfinite Cardinal), 4, 389, 396–402,
407, 411f, 419, 421, 479
Algebra, 22, 41, 52f, 60, 73f, 79–81, 83, 92, 111,
142, 153, 168, 247, 278, 285, 302, 389
Alpha graphs, 21, 89, 100, 425
Anti-psychologism, 51, 144, 162, 165, 231, 437
Anti-subject, 179, 358, 367
Apple pie, 14, 16, 42, 45
Architecture of theories, 10, 12–13, 426, 474
Argument, 23f, 31f, 328ff, 345, 428, 451, 478;
see also Abduction; Deduction; Induction
Aristotelicity, 4, 5, 391
Aspect 12, 35, 118, 139, 163 see also Moment
schematized, 300, 346–356, 358, 467, 471
Association, 28, 29, 30, 68, 98, 154, 156,
393, 477
Assumption 349, 463,
Austrian philosophy, xviii, 80, 175ff, 179f,
189, 468
Autocatalytic set, 267f, 451
Autonomous agent, 267–270, 450ff, 459
Avant garde, 276, 307, 460, 469
Avantgardism, 307
Baldwinian evolution, 233, 242f, 455
Basic-level concept, 70, 259f, 357f
Beta graphs, 21, 89, 425, 436
Bildbewusstsein, see Pictorial Consciousness
Blending, 134f, 138f, 359, 436, 443, 446
Body, 119, 122ff, 203f, 209ff, 228–232, 257–273
Catastrophe theory, 128ff, 268, 440
Categorematica, 164
Categorial intuition, xvi, 72, 135, 141, 146–162,
299f, 356, 442, 464
Categorical perception (CP), 207–209, 212,
233–240, 440, 454
Categories, 3, 5, 13–17, 23, 247, 426, 442; see
also First-, Second-, and Thirdness
Categorization xix, 71, 138, 234–240, 450f
boundary, 238
prototype, 118, 238–239
Category theory, 119, 158, 446, 481
Chemotaxis, 205–209
Code, ix, 21, 61, 65, 92, 115, 120, 197, 204, 222,
271, 372, 445, 451, 462, 485
Code duality, 271, 451
Cognitive semantics, 53, 57, 66, 70, 89, 116, 118,
119, 127, 133, 170, 203, 257–262, 267, 310,
360, 377, 425, 435, 443, 446, 451, 453,
454, 460
Cognitive type (CT), 67–69
Complex Adaptive System (CAS), 231, 239,
267–70, 451
Complexity theory, 119, 127f, 130, 257,
267–270, 451
Composite photograph, 187, 448
Consciousness, 14, 29, 38, 43, 50, 83f, 88, 112,
155, 178, 186, 211, 215, 222, 230f, 244,
289–300, 303–304, 345, 348, 387f, 391,
410, 414, 419
Constructivism, 61, 115, 240, 327, 401, 421
Continuity 3–22, 135ff, 158, 188, 325–424, 425,
444, 460, 474–481
in epistemology, 10, 47, 387
Continuum, 4–10, 27–31, 172f, 355, 385–424,
409–415
Continuum hypothesis (CH), 4, 390–391,
395–396, 398, 406, 409, 477f
general (GCH), 397–398, 412, 477
Peirce’s (PCH), 398, 401, 404
Contradiction (Widerstreit), 84, 187, 289, 291f,
297ff, 303, 305
503

504
S U B J E C T I N D E X
Convention, 28, 30f, 51f, 61–65, 92, 97, 179, 216,
276f, 279, 284, 305, 374, 388, 411, 419, 465
Convergence to Truth, 8, 91
Cosmology, 8, 12, 24, 42–43, 67, 282, 386, 392,
422, 431
Counterfactual, 42, 109, 116, 244–245, 255,
439, 462
Darwinism, 8, 122, 203, 226, 231, 263
Deduction, xxi, xxiii, 11, 78, 91, 99, 173, 245,
251, 278–285, 329, 330, 333, 441, 467f
Degenerate signs, 25, 32, 428
Dependency, 162–174, 446, 457; see also
Foundation
Designator, 29f
Destinator, 358, 367–370, 374f
Determinateness, 17ff
Diagonal proof, 3, 396
Diagrammatical reasoning, xiv, xvi, 89–116, 146,
175–193, 251, 273, 334, 339–340, 383, 423
Diamond, 38–46, 115
Dicisign, 31–32, 81, 99; see also Proposition
Dictionary/ Encyclopaedia, 67ff
Discontinuity, 5, 9f, 15, 20, 115, 188, 357, 405ff
Discretization, 132, 262, 323
Disposition, 43ff; see also Real possibility;
Would-Be
Distinction, 172, 246f, 430, 457
discrimination, 172, 246f, 430
dissociation, 172, 246, 430
formal distinction, 33–37, 44, 430
prescission, 12, 75, 96, 137f, 151, 172f, 187,
246–249, 25, 254f, 393, 456f
DNA code, 60, 197
E. coli, ix, 205–209, 211, 449f, 456
Economics, 131, 175, 179–181, 222, 267, 379
Eidetic variation, 84, 118, 130, 135–138,
147–150, 158, 171, 185–190, 192, 247,
302, 393
Embodiment, xx, 119, 225, 228, 240, 257–273
Emergence, 182, 187, 204, 218–223, 232, 257f,
263, 268, 270, 374
Endoporeutic reading, 435, 441
Espionage, xxi, 365–382, 471ff
Ethology, xix, 225, 242, 257, 261f
Evidence, 29, 85–88, 93, 112
Existential graphs, 21, 40, 79, 91, 94, 144, 386,
425, 435, 479; see also Alpha graphs; Beta
Graphs; Gamma graphs
Experiment, xviii, 47, 81ff, 92, 99–107, 112ff,
155, 158, 251, 287, 335, 343, 359, 437; see
also Gedankenexperiment
Extensionality, 6f, 37, 46, 55ff, 70, 77, 98f, 127,
136f, 186, 188, 303, 337, 391, 429, 432,
442, 450, 476
Fallibilism, 6, 9, 10, 95, 182, 187
Fallibilistic apriorism, 175–193, 255, 362,
366, 448
Fiction, 83, 87, 112, 188, 290, 301, 305f,
345–364, 366, 369, 378, 382, 430, 458, 464,
465, 468–471
Finitism, 186, 433, 439
Firstness, xvii, 10, 13–20, 22, 28, 37, 44,
246–249, 427
Formalism, 19, 60, 62, 78, 104, 109ff, 118f, 128,
130, 171, 278, 301, 327, 433, 437ff,
469, 479
Foundation (relation between moments), 177f,
247f; see also Dependency; Synthetic A
Priori
Fulfilment, 14, 146–159, 162, 442f
Function (Dumézil) 372f, 472
first, 373, 374
second, 372ff, 472
third, 374
Functional circle, xix, 207, 211, 225–240, 261ff,
269, 342, 452–455
Gamma graphs, 19, 21, 89, 145, 425, 430
Gedankenexperiment (thought experiment), 47,
74, 99, 102, 137, 154f, 260, 327–344,
359f, 470
Generality, xii, xv, 6–19, 24f, 29–33, 37, 39, 69,
72f, 75ff, 93, 97, 103, 121, 138, 145, 148f,
155, 159, 173, 186, 216f, 223, 254, 302,
334ff, 352, 355, 360, 426, 434, 442f, 454,
462, 465, 477
Gestalt, 13, 89, 121, 134, 159, 163, 171, 182,
233, 237, 259, 261, 267f, 286, 299, 303,
323, 332, 347, 352, 356ff, 435, 440, 444,
447, 455, 465
Glossematics, 167–171, 173, 436
Grammar, 11, 60, 65, 76f, 80, 117, 146, 162–165,
168, 171, 177, 242, 252, 328, 426, 428, 436,
437, 445f, 448, 458
Grammatica speculativa, 11, 24, 33, 426
Grammatology, 99, 107, 383
Granularity, xii, 29, 57, 59, 212f, 229, 236f, 239,
262f, 271, 455, 465

S U B J E C T I N D E X
505
Habit, 24, 27, 30, 38, 40, 42, 46, 62, 75, 87, 93,
98, 115, 128, 142, 144, 217, 233, 241ff, 263,
266, 286, 309, 426, 431ff, 459
Haecceity (Thisness), 14, 35ff, 45, 75, 88,
437, 463
Hypoicon, 28f, 67, 75, 90, 277, 290, 299,
322, 434f
Hypostatic abstraction, xx, 36, 46, 137–8, 151,
172, 187, 246, 248–54, 273, 353, 456ff
Icon
non-trivial icon definition, 90ff, 105, 436
Iconicity
operational, 90, 105, 436
optimal, 436
Ideal objects, 135–141, 146–156, 159, 162, 299,
300, 302, 335, 342, 348, 361, 442,
468ff, 475
Image 90, 277
Imagery debate, 433
Imaginary moment, 83, 84, 112ff, 292f, 298, 303,
305, 437, 439
Index, 27–31, 55, 70, 75, 78, 93, 241ff, 428, 437,
442, 456
Induction, xxi, 11, 57f, 94, 103ff, 187, 245, 279,
285, 433, 456
crude (or Pooh-Pooh), 335ff, 341, 355, 467
qualitative, 335, 337f
quantitative, 335
Infinite divisibility, 4, 314, 389f; see also
Kanticity
Infinitesimal, 5f, 15–18, 20, 26, 29, 405–409,
477, 478, 480
Infinity, 68, 134, 136, 150, 186, 302, 331f, 337,
350, 351, 385, 426, 433, 451, 476–479
Insecurity, 376–382
Instinct, 244, 265, 331
Intensionality, 6, 47, 58, 98, 127, 391, 429, 476
Intention (scholastic)
first, 34, 77
second, 34ff, 46, 77, 80, 248ff, 254
Intentionality, 50, 177ff, 222, 347f, 429f, 441,
448, 455
Interanimality (inter-animalité), 265ff, 273
Interpretation, xvii, 327–343
Intersubjectivity, 15, 265ff, 273, 376, 441, 459
Intuition of essence (Wesenserschauung), 118,
135, 145, 185, 187, 299, 462
Intuitionism, 401, 404, 408, 410, 421, 423
Kanticity, 4, 477
Kinaesthetic image schema, 259f, 357, 444
Kippfigur, 286, 309, 332
Language as Calculus Ratiocinator, 109
Language as Lingua Universalis, 109
Last supper, 85, 280–284
Law of mind, 386–395, 426, 431, 474, 475
Legisign, 25–28, 30, 32, 75, 97, 103, 113, 114,
428, 429; see also Type
Logic-as-calculus, 328, 438; see also Language
as ...
Logic-as-language, 328, 438; see also Language
as ...
Logic of relations, 11, 31, 328
Manipulation (of diagrams) xviii, 6, 47, 52, 74,
79, 81–84, 89–117, 149, 158f, 173, 190,
279f, 283, 286, 288f, 306, 334f; see also
Experiment, Gedankenexperiment
Map, 99, 101, 105–107, 111, 154, 190, 211, 232,
278, 438
Markedness/ unmarkedness, 165f, 169f,
445ff, 455
Material implication, 21, 40ff, 431
Material necessity, 45f, 175ff; see also Synthetic
A Priori
Mediate concepts, xix, 203f, 209, 216, 223, 447
Memory, 148, 185, 289f, 295–298, 321, 438, 475
Mereology, xvi, xxii, 145, 157, 161–174, 176,
219, 221, 223, 247, 435, 444ff
Merging (of points or parts), 4, 403f, 415ff
Metabolism, 73, 204, 207, 209–216, 218,
222f, 269ff
Metaphor, 56f, 62, 90, 92f, 102, 134, 138, 197f,
226, 231, 240, 260f, 263, 272, 277, 279,
304, 359f
Metaphysical qualities, 346, 354, 361ff, 367, 379,
381f, 469f
Methodeutic, 11, 328
Mistaking, 207, 212
Modularity, 214
Molar Content (MC), 67f
Moment (vs. instant), 6, 236, 388
Moment (vs. part), 162f, 173, 177, 249; see also
Aspect
Morphology, 122ff, 170f, 204, 264, 326, 444
Narration, 121, 133, 161, 210, 218, 269f, 358,
360, 367ff, 378
Narrative schema, 118, 133, 367–370, 471
Naturalization, xix, 228, 230, 411
Neo-Kantianism, 182, 203f, 453
Neutral objects, xix, 232, 235, 237, 261–264,
267, 454

506
S U B J E C T I N D E X
Niche, 209, 221ff, 239, 261, 271
Nominalism, 34–37, 39f, 54
Non-compositionality, 409–415, 445
Non-standard analysis, 6, 387f, 407, 409, 416,
420, 480
Non-trivial icon definition, 90ff, 105, 436
Nuclear Content (NC), 67ff
Onomatopoiea, 61
Ontology
formal, 64f, 147, 149f, 156–162, 171, 177,
197–217, 218ff, 221ff, 239f, 366
material (or regional), xxi, 45, 47, 77, 99, 118,
137ff, 147, 156–157, 174, 175–192, 209,
216, 219, 221, 223, 265, 351, 362f, 365f,
382f, 420, 459
Operator subject (Hero), 367f
Opium, 248, 253, 457
Over-interpretation, 339, 467
Peirce-Thom argument, 6, 414
Percept, 69, 93
Perception
creative, 329, 331ff, 339, 467
Perceptual judgment, 14, 67, 69, 93, 145, 148,
189, 331f, 426
Perspective, xx, 115, 280–285, 308, 341, 383
Phaneroscopy, 10, 24, 143
Physicalism, 410, 413
Pictorial consciousness (Bildbewusstsein),
289–294, 296–298, 303, 463
Pictorial object, 290ff, 305, 463f
Picture, 156ff, 275–326
Platypus, 69ff
Platonism, 416–423, 481
Polyphony, 301, 346f, 354f xx
Portrait, 32, 81, 277, 307, 313
Potentiality, 6–7, 9, 16, 57, 188, 213, 303, 353,
408, 414, 417, 419f, 423
Pragmatic maxim, 38, 40, 42, 44, 46f, 91, 115,
145, 248, 250, 329, 342, 462
Pragmatism / pragmaticism, 8, 39f, 114, 116, 141,
143, 183, 189, 211, 249f, 330, 332, 383, 409
Predicate, 31f, 76, 91, 251f; see also Rheme
Prescission, xx, 12, 75, 96, 137f, 151, 172f, 187,
246–249, 25, 254f, 393, 456f; see also
Distinction
Principle of Continuity, 3, 10f, 133, 425f
Principle of Contradiction (PC), 17ff, 26, 302
Principle of Evolution, 12
Principle of Excluded Middle (PEM), 17ff,
421, 423
Proposition, 7, 9, 21, 31f, 77, 81f, 99, 184, 428;
see also Dicisign
Proprioception, 229
Prototype, 50, 69f, 79, 118, 131, 141, 146, 166,
185, 238f, 307, 368, 432
Pseudo-truths, 362f, 471
Psychologism, 72, 90, 140, 142–145, 156, 162,
178, 381, 421
Pure intentional object, 348–351
Qualisign, 25–28, 429; see also Tone
Quantification, 22, 252, 328
Quasi-judgment, 298, 301, 346, 349, 351, 354,
361, 468, 470f
Quasi-reality, 297, 354
Reagent, 29f
Realism
extreme, xvi, xvii, 8, 23f, 26, 33, 37, 40,
394, 432
literary, 361ff
scholastic, 32–40, 95, 115
Real possibility, 8, 18, 20, 24, 32–47, 116, 183,
190f, 217, 250, 266, 353, 408, 420, 427,
431f, 447, 467, 479; see also Disposition;
Would-Be
Reasoning
case-based, 365f
corollarial, xviii, 104, 107f, 137, 190f,
252, 334
diagrammatical, xii–xv, 79, 83, 86, 89–115,
118, 146, 173, 175–193, 251, 273, 334,
339f, 383, 423
theorematical, 104, 107f, 190f, 252, 334, 339,
436f, 440, 448
Reduction thesis (Peirce’s), 20, 31, 435
Rheme, 22, 31, 347, 428, 430; see also Predicate
Scaffolding, 271
Schema, 68f, 72ff, 78, 89, 92ff, 102, 107, 118,
133f, 179, 189, 199, 213, 237, 260f, 296,
349, 351f, 356ff, 367–370, 381
Schematism, xviii, 69, 71–74, 94, 175, 201, 237,
417, 419, 436, 455
Script, 69, 356ff, 367
Secondness, xvii, 13–20, 37–38, 44f, 246f, 250,
427, 432, 480
Secrecy, 365, 367, 374f, 377, 382, 467, 472
Self-organization, 200f, 220, 240, 268, 270, 450
Semiotic freedom, 271, 454
Semiotic missing link, xix, 124, 241, 257, 272ff,
458, 460

S U B J E C T I N D E X
507
Set theory, xxi, 3f, 6, 58, 119, 221, 385–424, 474ff
Sheet (of assertion), 9f, 21f, 30, 47, 94, 101,
115, 435
Similarity, xi, 27, 49ff, 53–66, 75, 90, 138, 275ff,
290ff, 360ff, 432, 461
Singularity, 16, 35, 128ff
Sinsign, 25ff, 96, 428f; see also Token
Sketch, xx, xxii, 321–326
Smallness of signs, 212
Social acts, 178
Sovereign, 369f, 373f, 380f
Species theory of meaning, 148, 348
Spots of indeterminacy (Unbestimmtheitsstellen),
301, 306, 337, 345, 351, 360, 464–467, 469
State of affairs, 80, 86, 349–353
of appearances, 352
of essences, 352
of occurrences, 352
Structuralism, xviii, 51ff, 60, 66, 68, 115,
117–120, 138, 164f, 168, 182, 327, 346,
361, 366, 454, 472
Stylization, 75, 92f, 172, 324f
Sujet, 290–303
Supermultitudinous collection, 399–405, 479
Symbol, xix, 27–31, 52, 69, 75, 78, 93, 97, 103f,
114, 157, 216ff, 241, 255, 296, 431, 435,
438, 442, 451, 455f
Symbolic pregnance, 438
Symmetry, 64, 165, 251, 281, 325
Syncategorematica, xviii, 146f, 164, 347
Synechism, 7f, 43, 386, 394
Syntax, 52, 79ff, 91f, 101ff, 105, 109, 113, 146,
151, 161, 170f, 419, 436f, 443
Synthetic a priori, xvi, xviii, 46f, 72f, 77, 78, 82,
94f, 108, 145, 174, 175–193, 209ff, 255,
383f, 419, 436 447ff
Taxonomy, 90, 111, 145, 163, 171, 178, 289,
295, 460f, 466, 470
Teleology, 25, 42–43, 199–204, 210, 213, 216f,
222, 226, 233, 264, 268ff, 432, 434, 449,
452, 416, 472
Thirdness, xvii, 13–20, 22, 24, 30, 32f, 37f, 42,
45, 217f, 246f, 387, 394, 414, 420, 423,
426ff, 431
Tick, 227, 231, 430
Token, 25, 54f, 64, 139, 235, 237, 242, 429,
434f; see also Sinsign
Tone, 25–27, 429; see also Qualisign
Transfinite numbers, 3, 5, 389, 397, 401, 478ff
Transformation, 62, 102, 117–140, 322, 434, 440,
472
Triangle, xii–xiv, 10, 18, 94, 100, 127, 136, 146,
150f, 155, 157, 159, 435
Trigger, 92, 107, 150, 157, 207, 292, 304, 443,
450
Trope, 45
Type, xx, 25ff, 54f, 64, 69, 96f, 130f, 139, 235,
321–326, 429, 434, 462; see also Legisign
Umwelt, 211ff, 215, 221f, 226–241, 261–267,
459
Unbestimmtheitsstellen – see Spots of
indeterminacy
Universal, 27, 33–38, 44ff, 95, 102, 109ff, 115,
119, 136, 142, 151
Unlimited semiosis, 23, 25, 91
Vagueness, 6f, 10, 14, 17ff, 90, 103, 198, 302,
415
Valency, 76, 405
Variation, see Eidetic variation
Visual type, 132, 322, 326
Vitalism, xi, xxiii, 51, 115, 120, 197, 200, 202f,
225f, 233, 239, 263
Wesenserschauung, see Intuition of essence
Widerstreit, see Contradiction
Would-be, 18, 20, 38–47, 203, 423, 462; see also
Disposition; Real possibility
Writing, 12, 37, 153, 202

