Dingemanse, Mark (to appear) Ideophones. The Oxford Handbook of Word Classes, ed. 
Eva van Lier. Oxford: Oxford University Press. | Preprint doi: 10.31234/osf.io/u96zt 
Ideophones 
Mark Dingemanse  
Center for Language Studies 
Radboud University, Nijmegen 
 
 
Many of the world’s languages feature an open lexical class of ideophones, words 
whose marked forms and sensory meanings invite iconic associations. Ideophones 
(also known as mimetics or expressives) are well-known from languages in Asia, 
Africa and the Americas, where they often form a class on the same order of 
magnitude as other major word classes and take up a considerable functional load 
as modifying expressions or predicates. Across languages, commonalities in the 
morphosyntactic behaviour of ideophones can be related to their nature and origin 
as vocal depictions. At the same time there is ample room for linguistic diversity, 
raising the need for fine-grained grammatical description of ideophone systems. 
As vocal depictions, ideophones often form a distinct lexical stratum seemingly 
conjured out of thin air; but as conventionalized words, they inevitably grow roots 
in local linguistic systems, showing relations to adverbs, adjectives, verbs and 
other linguistic resources devoted to modification and predication. 
 
Introduction 
At least since the 1850s linguists have recognized that many languages have a sizable 
lexical class of words that depict sensory scenes. A commonly accepted cross-linguistic 
term for these words today is IDEOPHONES, though ‘mimetics’ and ‘expressives’ are also 
used in the prolific fields of Japanese and South-East Asian linguistics (Voeltz & Kilian-
Hatz 2001; Akita & Pardeshi 2019). Ideophones have long been studied for their striking 
phonological features, their iconic associations between form and meaning, and their 
rhetorical uses. Here I survey the topic from the point of view of word classes. How can 
we characterize ideophones as a cross-linguistic category? What is the morphosyntactic 
behaviour of ideophones across languages? And how do ideophones relate to other 
word classes such as adjectives, adverbs, and verbs?  
For comparative purposes, we can define ideophones as an open lexical class of 
marked words that depict sensory imagery (Dingemanse 2019). The definition has five 
elements. First, ideophones form an OPEN LEXICAL CLASS, i.e. a group of words open to 
new additions. Second, ideophones are MARKED: their structural make-up is distinctive 
relative to other classes of words, especially in terms of phonology and prosody. Third, 
ideophones are WORDS, or more precisely lexical items with conventional meanings. 

IDEOPHONES 
 
2 
Fourth, ideophones DEPICT: they use a mode of signification that highlights iconic 
associations between aspects of form and meaning. And fifth, their meanings lie in the 
domain of SENSORY IMAGERY, evoking rich sensory scenes in colourful ways. Each of 
these elements has been the target of much research. Here I will highlight only those 
most relevant for an understanding of ideophones in the context of word classes across 
languages.  
Defining ideophones as an open lexical class means that we can recognize them as a 
widespread linguistic phenomenon independently from their morphosyntactic status in 
particular languages. Seeing them as words with a depictive mode of signification helps 
us distinguish them from interjections and helps explain remarkable crosslinguistic 
commonalities, as we will see below. And observing that they evoke sensory imagery 
draws attention to their colourful meanings and indicates that in many languages they 
go far beyond onomatopoeia, the minor subclass of sound-imitatives that has 
historically been seen as the main example of lexicalised depictions in spoken 
languages.  
Distinguishing ideophones and interjections 
Although we will come to the relation between ideophones and other word classes, 
there is one matter we need to address up front: the difference between ideophones and 
interjections (Poggi 2009; Meinard 2015). These are formally and functionally distinct 
classes in any language for which we have good descriptions, but somehow they are 
easily conflated or even confused (Dialo 1985; Landar 1985; Hofstede 1999; Haiman 
2018). There are indeed some superficial similarities between the two. Both ideophones 
and interjections seem quite expressive. Both are said to be able to make up stand-alone 
utterances. And both are often described as having anomalous phonology and 
phonotactics. However, on closer inspection, the differences outweigh the similarities 
on all counts. 
MODE OF SIGNIFICATION. Both ideophones and interjections may seem to be broadly 
about sensory and emotional experiences. But they differ in the nature of this aboutness. 
Ideophones are typically depictions of events, while interjections are typically responses 
to them. Perhaps a slap in the face will help the reader to appreciate the difference. The 
sound of the slap is the main business of an ideophone to depict; your outcry in response 
to it is an interjection. The semiotic difference is exactly parallel to that between icon 
and index, and is also seen in the associated lexical items: ‘slap’ bears an iconic similarity 
to the sound of a strike with the open hand; whereas ‘ow!’ harkens back to an instinctive 
pain vocalization that provides indexical evidence of your feeling but is not itself iconic 
of that feeling. Each of them is non-arbitrary in its own way. 
MORPHOSYNTAX. Both ideophones and interjections are aloof from sentential syntax, 
but in different ways and for different reasons. Interjections are by definition one-word 
utterances. Ideophones tend to appear at utterance edge, but rarely on their own. One 

accepted & to appear in Oxford Handbook of Word Classes 
 
3
source of confusion may be the cross-linguistically common use of ideophones use in 
quotative-like constructions (as in “The car went vroom”). If we peel down such 
constructions it seems the kernel is a one-word utterance “Vroom” that is similar to the 
one-word utterances we call interjections (compare: “The reader went ow!”). As the car 
goes vroom, so the reader goes ow!, and we may feel there is a deeper kinship. However, 
this would be a category mistake. Quotations can incorporate just about any sensory 
scene we may wish to depict (Clark & Gerrig 1990; Keevallik 2010), including someone 
producing an interjection, as here. This does not imply that the depicted material is 
alike. Likewise, the fact that an interjection like ow! can be used to mimic being in pain 
does not warrant the conclusion that it is therefore of one kind with the lexicalised 
depictions we call ideophones. 
MARKEDNESS. Ideophones tend to use the phonological system to the fullest, 
rearranging and extending it in creative yet systematic ways. If they stray outside of 
the existing inventory, they do so by stretching or contracting it, filling  gaps, adding 
secondary articulations, or playing with tonal melodies (Mithun 1982; Nuckolls et al. 
2016; Diffloth 1979). Interjections, in contrast, under-use the larger phonological 
inventory and at the same time easily recruit elements that bear no systematic relation 
to the larger system, like the click in the disapproving tsk and the bilabial trill in the 
transition display brrr (Goffman 1978; Gil 2013; Pillion et al. 2019). Ideophones and 
interjections are each structurally distinct from other word classes in their own way. If 
we think of the phonology of ordinary words as providing the harmonic backbone to a 
jazz piece, ideophones are the solos soaring above it, and interjections the percussive 
elements that build the tight groove holding it all together. 
A century ago, ‘interjections’ formed the catch-all bin for anything with a 
complicated relation to sentential syntax, including the lexicalised depictions we now 
call ‘ideophones’. Today however we have ample theoretical and empirical reasons to 
recognize interjections and ideophones as meaningfully different. Distinguishing them 
matters in theoretical debates. When Evans & Levinson (2009) drew attention to 
ideophones as a major word class that had flown under the radar of mainstream 
linguistics, one of the replies cited “response cries such as yum, splat, hubba-hubba, 
pow!” (Pinker & Jackendoff 2009) as evidence that English had something similar. The 
cited words form a motley crew of exclamations (yum, hubba-hubba) and sound 
imitatives (splat, pow), and the notion that the latter would be “response cries” evokes 
visions of wide-eyed English speakers uttering splat! anytime something hits the ground 
and going pow! at every unexpected blast. This kind of oversimplification obscures 
meaningful distinctions between word classes and contributes to the marginalization of 
ideophones as a major word class. More generally, distinguishing ideophones and 
interjections matters for our ability to understand and explain language structure. If we 
lump them together, we lose the ability to explain how and why they differ in terms of 
markedness, morphosyntax and mode of signification. 

IDEOPHONES 
 
4 
An open lexical class that has eluded word class debates 
In one sense, the class of ideophones is quite similar to other open word classes in many 
languages: it often consists of a large set of items that fit core definitional properties 
rather well, and fuzzy edges where it shades into other word classes (Childs 1994; 
Ibarretxe-Antuñano 2017). Yet there is a telling difference. Traditional word classes like 
nouns, verbs and adjectives periodically elicit high-stakes theoretical debates focusing 
on the nature of parts of speech, their cross-linguistic distribution, and the possibility 
of recognizing language-specific stem classes as instantiating putative universal 
categories (Dixon 1977; Kinkade 1983; Wetzer 1996; Croft 2001; Croft & van Lier 2012). 
In contrast, ideophones tend to be approached from the other side as it were: they stand 
out as speech heard in a special way even before one has started to consider their 
grammatical status. 
Mundari, an Austroasiatic language of India, offers a useful example. The fluidity of 
its word class system has been a site of considerable debate ever since an early grammar 
claimed that its lexical items could function flexibly as nouns, verbs, adjectives and so 
on (Hoffmann 1903). Contributions to the debate rely on subtle distributional facts and 
intricate theoretical arguments to argue for or against recognizing distinct noun-like 
and verb-like word classes in the language (Evans & Osada 2005; Peterson 2005; 
Hengeveld & Rijkhoff 2005; Croft 2005). Amidst the theoretical skirmishes it is easy to 
overlook that one large class of content words in the language comes off scot-free: 
ideophones, or to use the regionally appropriate term of trade, expressives. Like most 
Austroasiatic languages, Mundari has long been described as having a distinct class of 
these words (Osada 1992). Nor is this a minor class: a dedicated dictionary documents 
at least 1500 unique lemmas (Badenoch & Osada 2019) and they are “found in most all 
arenas of language use” (Badenoch et al. 2019: 4). And yet the status of this considerable 
lexical stratum in the language has not featured in any word class debates. 
How does a major class elude any mention in theoretical debates focused on the 
fundamentals of word classes in a language? One reason for this touches directly on the 
nature of ideophones. In the words of Felix Ameka, “ideophones are first and foremost 
a type of words” (Ameka 2001). This statement, which may seem a bit tautological at 
first, is appropriate in talking about ideophones because they are structurally and 
semiotically recognizable as special. Mundari ideophones for instance are primarily 
identified by their reduplicative forms and highly detailed semantics (Osada et al. 2020). 
The recognizability of ideophones as a lexical class means that it is often possible to 
identify them by ostension (‘words like this’) and to forego careful description of their 
morphosyntactic profile. Paradoxically then, the fact that Mundari ideophones stand 

accepted & to appear in Oxford Handbook of Word Classes 
 
5
out as a distinct lexical class has enabled us to stop short of learning about their proper 
place in the larger system of word classes in the language.1  
Getting this right is not merely a matter of language-specific description; it also 
affects typological generalizations. Take typological work on adjectives, which 
classifies languages in terms of the kind of adjective classes they exhibit (Dixon 1977; 
Dixon & Aikhenvald 2004). Ideophones have generally been kept out of the relevant 
comparisons, despite the fact that in many languages they share semantic and 
grammatical features with word classes identified as adjectival. The surprising result is 
that languages like Igbo or Ewe are in a kind of quantum superposition with regard to 
their place in the larger typology of adjectives: they may count as having either a tiny 
closed class or an enormous open class of adjectives, depending on whether ideophones 
have been observed or not (Ameka 2001). Something similar holds for typological work 
on adverbs: ideophones are sometimes noted for their semantic and structural overlap 
with adverbs, but more often they are excluded due to scope limitations (Hallonsten 
Halling 2018). Such extreme observer dependence does not bode well for the 
generalizability of typological classifications. At the very least, this means we must 
improve our grasp of the morphosyntactic profile of ideophones within and across 
languages. 
Case study: expressive adverbials in Jamsay  
Jamsay, a Dogon language spoken in Mali, provides an instructive case study of how 
the apparent tension between cross-linguistic commonalities and language-specific 
realizations can play out (Heath 2019). Besides the usual major stem classes of noun, 
adjective, and verb, Dogon languages have an open stem class for which Heath proposes 
the descriptive term “expressive adverbials”. The items in this class form a distinct 
lexical stratum, are “uninflectable” and  “grammatically marginal”, and do not enter into 
regular processes of tonosyntax. As Heath concludes, many of them “fit current 
definitions of ideophones (marked forms, sensory imagery)” (ibid, p. 18).2 Some are 
illustrated in (1).  
 
1 
Jamsay (Dogon) (Heath 2019: 5–6). 
a 
dém→  
‘straight (object, road, trajectory)’ 
b 
gǔjn→  
‘jutting out’ 
c 
pɛ́p 
 
‘chock-full, full to the brim’ 
d 
kák 
 
‘stopping/arriving abruptly (noisily)’ 
 
1 Descriptions of Mundari expressives typically focus on word-level structural and semantic 
characteristics. Individual examples show predicative as well as loose appositional uses (Badenoch & 
Osada 2019), but their morphosyntactic profile awaits systematic description.  
2 While the cross-linguistic similarities stand out, Heath stops short of identifying Jamsay expressive 
adverbials as “ideophones” and stresses the importance of “delving into individual grammars, only loosely 
guided by crosslinguistic categories” (Heath 2019: 4). 

IDEOPHONES 
 
6 
d 
bɛ́ɾɲɛ́-bɛ́ɾɲɛ́ 
‘flickering, glimmering’ 
e 
járálálá 
‘moving (light, child’s toy kite)’ 
f 
táw-táw 
‘(very) fast’ 
 
Structurally, Jamsay expressive adverbials are characterized by final lengthening 
(marked with ‘→’), by CVC shapes with final obstruents that are otherwise disallowed 
in the language (1c), and by several forms of full and partial reduplication (1d-f). Both 
lengthening and reduplication can be varied for rhetorical purposes. These features are 
in line with what we know from ideophones across languages, and receive a 
straightforward explanation if we think of them as originating in the depictive use of 
linguistic material. Here as elsewhere, ideophones freely exploit the expressive 
resources of phonology and prosody for depictive purposes.  
At the same time, and as with all word classes, there are important language-specific 
intricacies to Jamsay expressive adverbials. At first sight they are quite similar to 
adjectives like bán ‘red’, as shown by the fact that both can be used as stative predicates 
using a copula-like auxiliary kɔ̀ (2a,b). However, their paths diverge under negation: 
whereas the predicative colour adjective is negated using a negative clitic =lá (3a), 
predicative expressive adverbials require the negative form of the locational-existential 
quasi-verb (3b).3 Moreover, to use them as adnominal modifiers, expressive adverbial 
predicates like (2b) need to be embedded into a relative clause with a participial ‘be’ 
quasi-verb (3c). From this and other evidence, Heath concludes that Jamsay expressive 
adverbials like  gǔjn→ and kin are not adjectival, but rather form one-word adverbial 
phrases.  
 
2 
Jamsay (Dogon) (Heath 2019: 7–9)4 
a 
bán kɔ̀ 
 
 
red be.NONH 
 
 
‘It is red.’ 
 
b 
gǔjn→ kɔ̀ 
 
 
jutting.EA be.NONH 
 
 
‘It is jutting out.’ 
 
3 Incidentally, the evidence from negation here allows us to nuance the view that ideophones are 
categorically “not subject to negation” (Kilian-Hatz 2006). As with many properties of culturally evolving 
linguistic systems, it is more useful to speak in terms of tendencies rather than absolutes, and to explain 
regularities rather than expect exceptionless rules. For instance, the fact that ideophones are unlikely to 
be negated in everyday language use can be straightforwardly explained by their nature as depictions 
(just as direct quotation is used more often to report what someone said rather than what they did not 
say). But this functionally motivated generalization does not preclude the occasional negative use (again, 
just as in rare cases, it may be important to stress what someone did not say). 
4 Glosses as in the original, with the only difference that I have marked expressive adverbials with “.EA” 

accepted & to appear in Oxford Handbook of Word Classes 
 
7
3 
a 
bán=lá-ϕ 
 
 
red=STAT.NEG-3SG.SJB 
 
 
‘He/she/it is not red.’ 
 
b 
gǔjn→ kɔ̀:-ɾɔ́ 
 
 
jutting.EA be.NONH-NEG 
 
 
‘It is not jutting out.’  
 
c 
kòmòL gǔjn→ kɔ̂:-ϕ 
 
 
backL jutting.EA be.NONH.PPL-NONH 
 
 
‘(a/the) back that is jutting out’ 
 
One further wrinkle can serve to display the intricate mixture of language-specific 
and cross-linguistically convergent features we find in any ideophone system. In the 
tonosyntax of Jamsay Dogon, adjectives control tone-dropping of the preceding noun. 
Expressive adverbials do not in general have the same effect, which is another reason 
to distinguish them from adjectives. However, sometimes expressive adverbials do have 
tonal effects on their immediate environment. For instance, in the example below, the 
expressive adverbial dém-dém, an expressively modified form of dém→ ‘straight’, seems 
to cause the preceding noun tègú ‘speech’ to tone-drop to tègù (4a):  
 
4 
Jamsay (Dogon) (Heath 2019: 13–14) 
a 
[á tègù] [dém-dém kɔ̀:-ɾɔ́] 
 
 
2SG.POSS speech straight.EA be.NONH-NEG 
 
 
‘Your talk is not straight (candid).’ 
 
b 
[á tègú]↓ dém-dém … 
 
Is this evidence that expressive adverbials like dém→ may be similar to adjectives 
after all, or is something else going on? In Heath’s analysis (shown in 4b), the effect is 
not tonosyntactic at all: it is “an intonationally motivated and phonetically variable 
pitch-lowering, whose effect is to make the following [expressive adverbial] more 
salient acoustically” (Heath 2019: 14). Without this lowering, the final high tone of tègú 
would distract from the following expressive adverbial; with it, the expressive adverbial 
stands out more clearly from the surrounding material. 
While this may seem to be a notable quirk of Jamsay (and a testimony to the acuity 
of the observer), it happens to be perfectly in line with cross-linguistic generalizations 
about the prosody of ideophones in relation to their depictive nature. Recent work 
recognises three non-exclusive depiction marking strategies often found in combination 
with ideophones (Akita 2020): ideophones may be marked as depictions by framing (e.g., 
with quotative markers), by foregrounding (e.g., exaggerated prosody on the 
ideophone), or by backgrounding (e.g., by deemphasizing the non-ideophonic part to 

IDEOPHONES 
 
8 
draw out the ideophone more clearly). The process described for Jamsay expressive 
adverbials by Heath appears to be a clear example of the backgrounding strategy. 
The overall picture that emerges is a combination of recurrent features that make 
ideophones recognizable as a comparative concept (Dingemanse 2019), and 
morphosyntactic intricacies that show their integration into local linguistic systems. In 
Childs’ apt formulation, this is how ideophones “reconcile the twin dicta of ‘be different’ 
and ‘be recognizably language’” (Childs 2014). Even if ideophones are structurally 
marked and recognizable as lexicalised depictions, they are not insulated from other 
aspects of the language. Nothing in language is. The mere fact of being built from 
recognizably linguistic material opens up ideophones to being coopted by 
morphosyntactic processes, undergoing semantic change, and eroded by frequent 
usage. This also means that ideophone inventories, as open lexical classes, can be as 
much in flux as other word classes: they are open to new additions but may also undergo 
attrition.  
Unity and diversity in grammatical functions 
There is an old and widespread idea that ideophones have no syntax worth speaking of, 
or even that they “cannot be generated by the grammar” (Voorhoeve 1964). This is not 
in line with current understandings of the morphosyntax of ideophones. Although 
ideophones definitely take some syntactic liberties (Diffloth 1972; Childs 1994), they 
rarely show up all on their own, and indeed the ways they “burrow into the grammar” 
(Heath 2019) are worthy of careful description. But how can we reconcile the tension 
between the notions that ideophones are prototypically aloof yet also linguistically 
integrated?   
The answer is that the diversity is not endless, and a large part of it can be captured 
in terms of a single generalization: the morphosyntax of ideophones within and across 
languages owes much to the nature and origin of ideophones as depictive words. There 
are two parts to this generalization. First, the most prototypical ideophone 
constructions show strong convergence across languages because ideophones are 
fundamentally depictive words. Second, the grammatical realization of ideophones 
within languages can be understood as a consequence of what happens when depictive 
material gets in the grip of grammar. Let’s discuss each of these in turn. 
The prototypical relation between descriptive utterances and depictive words like 
ideophones is much like that between a text and its accompanying illustrations. The 
illustrations need a degree of freedom to be recognized as images: they need to be 
framed or set apart from the text in some way. But they also need a degree of proximity 
to the text to be recognized as accompaniments. The result is that text and image are 
clearly distinct, yet support each others’ interpretations. This is, at base, how 
ideophones work (Kunene 1965; Nuckolls 1996; Güldemann 2008). They use speech in a 
special way, inviting listeners to see structural similarities —iconic associations— 

accepted & to appear in Oxford Handbook of Word Classes 
 
9
between their spoken forms and the sensory scenes they depict. In order to be 
recognizable as depictions, ideophones need some degree of freedom. In order to 
support and be supported by the surrounding descriptive material, they tend to co-occur 
with some speech. Some key cross-linguistic similarities in ideophone morphosyntax 
fall out from this: their common appearance in quotative-like constructions; their 
frequent loose appositional relation to sentential syntax; and their antipathy to 
morphological operations like inflection and negation. 
At the same time, there is room for considerable language-specificity in terms of 
morphosyntactic functions and word class status. In some languages like Zulu, Semai 
or Japanese, ideophones may be recognized as a distinct part of speech — indeed it was 
this distinctive status that moved Doke to introduce ‘ideophone’ as a novel grammatical 
category in the description of Bantu languages (Doke 1935). In others like Jamsay, 
Gbaya or Upper Necaxa Totonac, their use as predicate qualifiers motivates treating 
them as part of a larger adverbial class (Roulon-Doko 2001; Beck 2008). In yet others 
like Hausa and Tera, there are ideophonic subclasses of verbs, adverbs and adjectives 
(Newman 1968). There are also languages like Ewe and Basque in which ideophones 
show evidence of multicategoriality, allowing predicative and attributive uses while 
remaining mostly free of inflectional or derivational morphology (Ameka 2001; 
Ibarretxe-Antuñano 2017).  
Although the diversity in grammatical functions may seem bewildering at first, there 
is method to the madness, and again the depictive nature of ideophones can help us 
understand it. The key observation is that not all kinds of meanings are equally easy to 
express by means of vocal depiction. It is hard to depict an object in speech, but much 
easier to evoke aspects of its sound, the irregularity of its shape, the roughness of its 
surface, or the wobbling way in which it moves. Speech can do all these things because 
it offers a rich bundle of acoustic features, articulatory gestures and phonological 
contrasts that can ground cross-modal iconic associations (Bühler 1934; Jakobson & 
Waugh 1979; Ahlner & Zlatev 2010). It follows that ideophones, as lexicalised vocal 
depictions, lend themselves well to expressing properties and actions, and serving 
functions of predication and modification.  
We can overlay this observation about the semiotics of depiction in speech onto a 
widely used conceptual framework for grammatical categories (Croft 1990), usefully 
extended by Hallonsten Halling to make room for adverbs (Hallonsten Halling 2018: 
38). If the meanings of ideophones tend to evoke properties and actions, not objects; 
and if their discourse functions are more likely to involve modification and predication 
than reference; then those areas are the ones where we should expected to see them 
turn up. And sure enough, for each of the structural coding categories found in the 
union of these areas (Table 1) it is easy to find examples of ideophones being connected 
to, or realisable as, that category: adjectives in Ewe (Ameka 2001), adverbs in Gbaya 
(Roulon-Doko 2001), predicate adjectives in Japanese (Akita 2009), verbs in Shona 

IDEOPHONES 
 
10 
(Fortune 1971), converbs in Wolaitta (Amha 2010), and relative clauses in Jamsay (Heath 
2019). In short, the kinship of ideophones to adjectives, adverbs, and verbs emerges as 
a consequence of the affordances for depicting sensory imagery in speech. 
 
Table 1. Semantic classes and discourse functions of ideophones (Hallonsten 
Halling – Croft model). Given the semiotic affordances of depiction in speech, 
ideophones are most likely to show up in areas shown in black. 
 
Reference 
Modification 
of reference 
of predication 
Predication 
Objects 
NOUNS 
genitive, 
adjectivizations, 
PPs on nouns 
PPs on verbs 
predicate 
nominals, 
copulas 
Properties 
deadjectival 
nouns 
ADJECTIVES 
ADVERBS 
predicate 
adjectives, 
copulas 
Actions 
action nominals, 
complements, 
infinitives, 
gerunds 
participles,  
relative clauses 
converbs 
VERBS 
 
 
The best way to think about this table is as visualizing likely landing grounds for 
lexicalised vocal depictions. As vocal depictions, ideophones originate on a different 
plane, where sound and sense are intertwined. Evidence for this is that ideophone 
inventories typically form a separate stratum of original root material that shows no 
clear relations to existing vocabulary. But as linguistic signs, they inevitably intersect a 
some point with the more prosaic plane of grammatical systems that structure and 
canalize linguistic resources. Note that the point is not that ideophone-like items must 
necessarily be realised as one of the structural coding categories mentioned here; these 
are just some of the nooks and crannies that ideophones may come to inhabit when 
they become enmeshed with morphosyntax. In languages like Ewe, Basque, or Semelai, 
a separate word class of ideophones can flexibly fulfil roles of modification and 
predication in ways that partially supplant categories like adverbs and adjectives. 
Scope limitations prevent cashing out the full implications of these observations, but 
this is an area that is sure to yield important generalizations in terms of typological 
distributions, semantic maps, and pathways for language change. We can already begin 
to sketch some of them. It may be that the typological profile of a language influences 
likely landing places for ideophones. For instance, in languages that typically separate 

accepted & to appear in Oxford Handbook of Word Classes 
 
11
the lexical expression of manner from motion, ideophones may be more likely to occur 
adverbially (Schaefer 2001). From the perspective of language change, the table may 
help us understand and predict pathways for deideophonization. Bantu languages are 
generally described as featuring an open lexical class of ideophones that must be 
recognized as a distinct part of speech (Doke 1935). Certain Bantu languages show 
evidence of a process of deideophonization in which some ideophonic roots become 
more like verbs. For instance, in Tsonga a subset of ideophones appears with agreement 
morphology typical of verbs (Msimang & Poulos 2001; Marivate 1983), while others tend 
to appear in a quotative frame more typical of ideophones in Bantu. The two realizations 
exist in parallel, indicating a degree of flexibility or perhaps an ongoing process of 
deideophonization (Dingemanse & Akita 2017).  
Halfway around the world, Aslian languages of the Malay Peninsula provide a 
picture of a possible outcome of such a process of deideophonization. Semai (Central 
Aslian) and Semelai (Southern Aslian) are in many ways prototypical ideophone 
languages, with large class of ideophones (called ‘expressives’ in this part of the world) 
that are maximally free and behave in every respect as expected of prototypical 
ideophones (Diffloth 1976; Tufvesson 2011; Kruspe 2004). However, two Northern 
Aslian languages, Jahai and Maniq, show no synchronic evidence of an open lexical 
class of this kind (Burenhult & Majid 2011; Wnuk 2016). Instead, these languages have 
a minor class of stative verbs that covers some of the same semantic domains. The 
clinching evidence is that we find cognate forms that function as expressives in one 
language but function as stative verbs in another (e.g., Semai pŋũs ‘(expr) of mold; wet 
fur’ versus Jahai pʔus ‘(v) moldy or musty odour’). Given that most present-day Aslian 
languages have an open class of expressives, this may well be the ancestral state, with 
historical change bringing about their assimilation to the verb class in Jahai and Maniq. 
In closing: lessons for the typology of word classes 
Even if ideophones often come in great numbers, they have rarely been considered one 
of the major word classes, which appears to be an honour reserved for the traditional 
Latinate categories of noun, verb and adjective. This is mostly a matter of historical 
accident: an example of the “ethnocentrism” (Haspelmath 2012) that has often haunted 
the study of word class universals. Had typology started from the point of view of 
Austroasiatic or Bantu, it is likely that ideophones would have been among the classes 
recognized as major, and scholars would have tied themselves into knots over questions 
like productive reduplication in Aslian expressives, the verb-ideophone distinction in 
Southern Bantu, and the dearth of depictive vocabulary in Indo-European.  
The solution is not to elevate ideophones to the pantheon of major word classes and 
call it a day. Instead, ideophones are best seen as an enduring reminder of the path-
dependence of typological inquiry and the need to take linguistic diversity seriously. 
This path-dependence surfaces in at least two ways. First, starting points shape routes 

IDEOPHONES 
 
12 
and destinations: if a particular set of concepts is handed down from earlier work, or 
happens to have proven useful for the first bunch of languages looked at, it is likely to 
become entrenched, making later-discovered phenomena seem more exotic or 
exceptional. Ideophones help us shake off such unwarranted assumptions to some 
degree because even if we can make do with noun, verb, and adjective in Standard 
Average European languages, classes of lexicalised vocal depictions are simply too big 
to be treated as marginal in, say, Bantu or Austroasiatic.  
Second, terminological choices have a tendency to become reified and turn from 
attention-guiding hypotheses into attention-narrowing assumptions (Croft 2001). 
Research questions can easily devolve from exploring and explaining diversity into box-
ticking exercises like “does this language have category X?”. Work on ideophones has 
largely been spared this kind of exercise, in part because it has always shown a healthy 
resistance to pigeon-holing (Newman 1968; Heath 2019; Dingemanse 2019), and perhaps 
also because the prolific research traditions of Japanese and South-East Asian linguistics 
maintain their own terms ‘mimetics’ (Iwasaki et al. 2017) and ‘expressives’ (Diffloth 
2020). Terminological diversity can be confusing, but in this case it is also a sign of the 
robustness of the phenomenon: we know there is something here precisely because 
several research traditions have independently identified, in unrelated phyla, an open 
lexical class of marked words depictive of sensory imagery. Amidst the diversity, there 
is enough convergence in structural and morphosyntactic properties to warrant a 
common term like ‘ideophones’, if only to draw attention to typological explanations 
and generalizations (Akita & Pardeshi 2019; Dingemanse 2019). Typology always has to 
walk the fine line between charting linguistic diversity and achieving comparability, 
and ideophones provide us with exactly the right amount of recalcitrance to keep us on 
our toes.  
Recent years have seen a number of wide-ranging reviews and comparative studies. 
For a more complete picture of ideophones, the reader is referred to work on the 
semantic typology of ideophones (McLean 2020; Nuckolls 2019); on the typology and 
morphosyntax of depiction marking (Güldemann 2008; Akita 2020); and on the notion 
of “ideophone” as a comparative concept that can inform typological work without 
losing sight of diversity (Dingemanse 2019; Ibarretxe-Antuñano 2017). Rather than 
rehash findings from this work, here I have made an effort to highlight matters that 
have received less attention and are most relevant to the treatment of ideophones in the 
context of word classes: the distinction between ideophones and interjections, the 
delicate balance between cross-linguistic commonalities and language-specific 
peculiarities, and the place of ideophones among other word classes. 
Overlooking the themes highlighted here, one thing is abundantly clear: we need 
more high quality descriptions of the form, meaning and use of ideophones in a wide 
array of languages. Their treatment in grammar-writing is still erratic and too often 
confined to some pages lumping together “minor” word classes. A model of grammar 

accepted & to appear in Oxford Handbook of Word Classes 
 
13
that devotes more pages to comparatives and superlatives than to ideophones and 
interjections perpetuates a most peculiar view of language structure. Fortunately the 
last decades have seen an increase in work that treats ideophones in considerable detail, 
both in individual studies (Beck 2008; Ibarretxe-Antuñano 2017; Lahaussois 2018; 
Nuckolls 2019; Heath 2019) and in grammatical descriptions (Newman 2000; Nikolaeva 
& Tolskaya 2001; Kruspe 2004; Yliniemi 2019; Veikho 2019; Rüsch 2020). Equipped with 
a sketch of the morphosyntactic terrain in which ideophones find their place, and with 
a clearer view of the central roles played by depictive vocabulary in modification and 
predication, we are now in a position to appreciate new horizons in grammar writing, 
typology, and theoretical linguistics. Or to give the last word to a Siwu ideophone, the 
future is bright, wǎȷ́→ 
Acknowledgments 
Parts of this chapter have their roots in the author’s unpublished PhD dissertation, 
though the material has been so thoroughly revised that few traces remain. I dedicate it 
to Bill Samarin (1926-2020) and Tucker Childs (1948-2021), whose work has meant so 
much for the study of ideophones in African languages and beyond. Thank you to Calle 
Börstell and an anonymous reviewer for ever so helpful feedback, and to Eva van Lier 
for just the right mix of reassuring patience and gentle pressure in unprecedented times.  
Funding and license 
This work was funded by Dutch Research Council grant NWO Vidi 016.vidi.185.205. For 
the purpose of Open Access the author has applied a CC BY public copyright licence to 
any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission. 
References 
Ahlner, Felix & Zlatev, Jordan. 2010. Cross-modal iconicity: A cognitive semiotic 
approach to sound symbolism. Sign Systems Studies 38(1/4). 298–348. 
Akita, Kimi. 2009. A Grammar of Sound-Symbolic Words in Japanese: Theoretical 
Approaches to Iconic and Lexical Properties of Japanese Mimetics. Kobe: Kobe 
University. (PhD dissertation.) (http://www.lib.kobe-
u.ac.jp/handle_gakui/D1004724) 
Akita, Kimi. 2020. A typology of depiction marking: The prosody of Japanese 
ideophones and beyond. Studies in Language. (doi:10.1075/sl.17029.aki) 
Akita, Kimi & Pardeshi, Prashanto (eds.). 2019. Ideophones, mimetics and expressives 
(Iconicity in Language and Literature Volume 16). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins Publishing Company. 
Ameka, Felix K. 2001. Ideophones and the Nature of the Adjective Word Class in Ewe. 
In Voeltz, F. K. Erhard & Kilian-Hatz, Christa (eds.), Ideophones, 25–48. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. 

IDEOPHONES 
 
14 
Amha, Azeb. 2010. Compound verbs and ideophones in Wolaitta revisited. In 
Amberber, Mengistu & Baker, Brett & Harvey, Mark (eds.), Complex Predicates: 
Cross-linguistic Perspectives on Event Structure, 259–267. 
Badenoch, Nathan & Osada, Toshiki (eds.). 2019. A Dictionary of Mundari Expressives. 
Tokyo: Research Institute of Language and Cultures of Asia and Africa (ILCAA). 
Badenoch, Nathan & Purti, Madhu & Choksi, Nishaant. 2019. Expressives as Moral 
Propositions in Mundari. Indian Linguistics 80(1–2). 1–17. 
Beck, David. 2008. Ideophones, Adverbs, and Predicate Qualification in Upper Necaxa 
Totonac. International Journal of American Linguistics 74(1). 1–46. 
Bühler, Karl. 1934. Sprachtheorie: Die Darstellungsfunktion der Sprache. Jena: G. Fischer. 
Burenhult, Niclas & Majid, Asifa. 2011. Olfaction in Aslian Ideology and Language. 
The Senses and Society 6(1). 19–29. 
Childs, G. Tucker. 1994. African Ideophones. In Hinton, Leanne & Nichols, Johanna & 
Ohala, John J. (eds.), Sound Symbolism, 178–204. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Childs, G. Tucker. 2014. Constraints on violating constraints: How languages reconcile 
the twin dicta of “Be different” and “Be recognizably language.” Pragmatics and 
Society 5(3). 341–354. (doi:10.1075/ps.5.3.02chi) 
Clark, Herbert H. & Gerrig, Richard J. 1990. Quotations as Demonstrations. Language 
66(4). 764–805. 
Croft, William. 1990. A Conceptual Framework for Grammatical Categories (or: A 
Taxonomy of Propositional Acts). Journal of Semantics 7(3). 245–279. 
(doi:10.1093/jos/7.3.245) 
Croft, William. 2001. Radical Construction Grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Croft, William. 2005. Word classes, parts of speech, and syntactic argumentation. 
Linguistic Typology 9(3). 431–441. (doi:10.1515/lity.2005.9.3.351) 
Croft, William & van Lier, Eva. 2012. Language universals without universal 
categories. Theoretical Linguistics 38(1–2). (doi:10.1515/tl-2012-0002) 
Dialo, Amadou. 1985. Eléments expressifs du wolof contemporain : gestes, signaux oraux, 
unités significatives nasalisées, interjections, onomatopées, impressifs (Langues 
Nationales Au Sénégal 27). Dakar: Centre de linguistique appliquée de Dakar. 
Diffloth, Gérard. 1972. Notes on expressive meaning. Chicago Linguistic Society 8. 440–
447. 
Diffloth, Gérard. 1976. Expressives in Semai. Oceanic Linguistics Special Publications 
(13). 249–264. 
Diffloth, Gérard. 1979. Expressive Phonology and Prosaic Phonology in Mon-Khmer. 
In Thongkum, Theraphan L. (ed.), Studies in Mon-Khmer and Thai Phonology and 
Phonetics in Honor of E. Henderson, 49–59. Bangkok: Chulalongkorn University 
Press. 

accepted & to appear in Oxford Handbook of Word Classes 
 
15
Diffloth, Gérard. 2020. Foreword. In Badenoch, Nathan & Choksi, Nishaant (eds.), 
Expressives in the South Asian linguistic area (Brill’s Studies in South and Southwest 
Asian Languages 13), vii–x. Leiden: Brill. 
Dingemanse, Mark. 2019. “Ideophone” as a comparative concept. In Akita, Kimi & 
Pardeshi, Prashant (eds.), Ideophones, Mimetics, Expressives (Iconicity in Language 
and Literature 16), 13–33. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. (doi:10.1075/ill.16.02din) 
Dingemanse, Mark & Akita, Kimi. 2017. An inverse relation between expressiveness 
and grammatical integration: on the morphosyntactic typology of ideophones, with 
special reference to Japanese. Journal of Linguistics 53(3). 501–532. 
(doi:10.1017/S002222671600030X) 
Dixon, Robert M. W. 1977. Where have all the adjectives gone? Studies in Language 
1(1). 1–80. 
Dixon, Robert M. W. & Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. (eds.). 2004. Adjective Classes: A 
Cross-linguistic Typology (Explorations in Linguistic Typology 1). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Doke, Clement Martyn. 1935. Bantu Linguistic Terminology. London: Longmans, 
Green, and Co. 
Evans, Nicholas & Levinson, Stephen C. 2009. The myth of language universals: 
Language diversity and its importance for cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences 32. 429–492. (doi:10.1017/S0140525X0999094X) 
Evans, Nicholas & Osada, Toshiki. 2005. Mundari: The myth of a language without 
word classes. Linguistic Typology 9(3). 351–390. (doi:10.1515/lity.2005.9.3.351) 
Fortune, G. 1971. Some notes on ideophones and ideophonic constructions in Shona. 
African Studies 30(3). 237–258. 
Gil, David. 2013. Para-Linguistic Usages of Clicks. In Dryer, Matthew S. & 
Haspelmath, Martin (eds.), The World Atlas of Language Structures Online. Leipzig: 
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology. (http://wals.info/chapter/142) 
Goffman, Erving. 1978. Response Cries. Language 54(4). 787–815. 
Güldemann, Tom. 2008. Quotative Indexes in African languages: a synchronic and 
diachronic survey (Empirical Approaches to Language Typology 34). Berlin: Mouton 
de Gruyter. 
Haiman, John. 2018. Ideophones and the Evolution of Language. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Hallonsten Halling, Pernilla. 2018. Adverbs: A typological study of a disputed category. 
Stockholm: Stockholm University. (PhD thesis.) 
Haspelmath, Martin. 2012. Escaping ethnocentrism in the study of word-class 
universals. Theoretical Linguistics 38(1–2). (doi:10.1515/tl-2012-0004) 
Heath, Jeffrey. 2019. The dance of expressive adverbials (“ideophones”) in Jamsay 
(Dogon). Folia Linguistica 53(1). 1–24. (doi:10.1515/flin-2019-2002) 

IDEOPHONES 
 
16 
Hengeveld, Kees & Rijkhoff, Jan. 2005. Mundari as a flexible language. Linguistic 
Typology 9(3). 406–431. (doi:10.1515/lity.2005.9.3.351) 
Hoffmann, John. 1903. Mundari Grammar. Calcutta: The Secretariat Press. 
Hofstede, Gerard. 1999. De Interjectie als Illocutionaire Handeling. Toegepaste 
Taalwetenschap in Artikelen. John Benjamins 61(1). 127–135. 
(doi:10.1075/ttwia.61.11hof) 
Ibarretxe-Antuñano, Iraide. 2017. Basque ideophones from a typological perspective. 
The Canadian Journal of Linguistics / La revue canadienne de linguistique 62(2). 196–
220. 
Iwasaki, Noriko & Sells, Peter & Akita, Kimi (eds.). 2017. The Grammar of Japanese 
Mimetics: Perspectives from structure, acquisition, and translation. Routledge. 
Jakobson, Roman & Waugh, Linda R. 1979. The Sound Shape of Language. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
Keevallik, Leelo. 2010. Bodily Quoting in Dance Correction. Research on Language & 
Social Interaction 43(4). 401–426. (doi:10.1080/08351813.2010.518065) 
Kilian-Hatz, Christa. 2006. Ideophones. In Brown, Keith (ed.), Encyclopedia of 
Language & Linguistics, 508–512. Oxford: Elsevier. 
Kinkade, M. Dale. 1983. Salish evidence against the universality of “noun” and “verb.” 
Lingua 60(1). 25–39. (doi:10.1016/0024-3841(83)90045-1) 
Kruspe, Nicole. 2004. A grammar of Semelai. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Kunene, Daniel P. 1965. The ideophone in Southern Sotho. Journal of African 
Languages 4. 19–39. 
Lahaussois, Aimeé. 2018. Ideophones in Khaling Rai. Linguistics of the Tibeto-Burman 
Area 40(2). 179–201. (doi:10.1075/ltba.17005.lah) 
Landar, Herbert. 1985. Navajo Interjections. International Journal of American 
Linguistics 51(4). 489–491. 
Marivate, Cornelius Tennyson Daniel. 1983. The Ideophone in Tsonga. University of 
South Africa (South Africa). (PhD dissertation.) 
McLean, Bonnie. 2020. Revising an implicational hierarchy for the meanings of 
ideophones, with special reference to Japonic. Linguistic Typology. De Gruyter 
Mouton. (doi:10.1515/lingty-2020-2063) 
Meinard, Maruszka Eve Marie. 2015. Distinguishing onomatopoeias from interjections. 
Journal of Pragmatics 76. 150–168. (doi:10.1016/j.pragma.2014.11.011) 
Mithun, Marianne. 1982. The Synchronic and Diachronic Behavior of Plops, Squeaks, 
Croaks, Sighs, and Moans. International Journal of American Linguistics 48(1). 49–
58. 
Msimang, C. T. & Poulos, George. 2001. The Ideophone in Zulu: A Re-Examination of 
Conceptual and Descriptive Notions. In Voeltz, F. K. Erhard & Kilian-Hatz, Christa 
(eds.), Ideophones, 235–249. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 

accepted & to appear in Oxford Handbook of Word Classes 
 
17
Newman, Paul. 1968. Ideophones from a syntactic point of view. Journal of West 
African Languages 5. 107–117. 
Newman, Paul. 2000. The Hausa Language: An Encyclopedic Reference Grammar. Yale: 
Yale University Press. 
Nikolaeva, Irina A. & Tolskaya, Maria. 2001. A grammar of Udihe. Berlin/New York: 
Mouton de Gruyter. 
Nuckolls, Janis B. 1996. Sounds Like Life: Sound-Symbolic Grammar, Performance, and 
Cognition in Pastaza Quechua. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Nuckolls, Janis B. 2019. The sensori-semantic clustering of ideophonic meaning in 
Pastaza Quichua. In Akita, Kimi & Pardeshi, Prashant (eds.), Iconicity in Language 
and Literature, vol. 16, 167–198. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. 
(doi:10.1075/ill.16.08nuc) 
Nuckolls, Janis B. & Nielsen, Elizabeth & Stanley, Joseph A. & Hopper, Roseanna. 2016. 
The Systematic Stretching and Contracting of Ideophonic Phonology in Pastaza 
Quichua. International Journal of American Linguistics 82(1). 95–116. 
(doi:10.1086/684425) 
Osada, Toshiki. 1992. A Reference Grammar of Mundari. Tokyo: ILCAA, Tokyo 
University of Foreign Studies. 
Osada, Toshiki & Purti, Madhu & Badenoch, Nathan. 2020. Expanding the Model of 
Reduplication in Mundari Expressives. In Badenoch, Nathan & Choksi, Nishaant 
(eds.), Expressives in the South Asian linguistic area (Brill’s Studies in South and 
Southwest Asian Languages 13), 78–99. Leiden: Brill. 
Peterson, John. 2005. There’s a grain of truth in every “myth”, or, Why the discussion 
of lexical classes in Mundari isn’t quite over yet. Linguistic Typology 9(3). 391–405. 
(doi:10.1515/lity.2005.9.3.351) 
Pillion, Betsy & Grenoble, Lenore A. & Ngué Um, Emmanuel & Kopper, Sarah. 2019. 
Verbal gestures in Cameroon. In Clem, Emily & Jenks, Peter & Sande, Hannah 
(eds.), Theory and description in African Linguistics, 303–322. Berlin: Language 
Science Press. (doi:10.5281/zenodo.3367128) 
Pinker, Steven & Jackendoff, Ray. 2009. The reality of a universal language faculty. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 32. 465–466. (doi:10.1017/S0140525X09990720) 
Poggi, Isabella. 2009. The Language of Interjections. Multimodal Signals: Cognitive and 
Algorithmic Issues, 170–186. (doi:10.1007/978-3-642-00525-1_17) 
Roulon-Doko, Paulette. 2001. Le statut des idéophones en Gbaya. In Voeltz, F. K. 
Erhard & Kilian-Hatz, Christa (eds.), Ideophones, 287–301. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. 
Rüsch, Maren. 2020. A Conversational Analysis of Acholi: Structure and Socio-
Pragmatics of a Nilotic Language of Uganda. Brill. 

IDEOPHONES 
 
18 
Schaefer, Ronald P. 2001. Ideophonic Adverbs and Manner Gaps in Emai. In Voeltz, F. 
K. Erhard & Kilian-Hatz, Christa (eds.), Ideophones, 339–354. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. 
Tufvesson, Sylvia. 2011. Analogy-making in the Semai Sensory World. The Senses and 
Society 6(1). 86–95. (doi:10.2752/174589311X12893982233876) 
Veikho, Sahiini Lemaina. 2019. A grammar of Poumai Naga. Bern: University of Bern. 
Voeltz, F. K. Erhard & Kilian-Hatz, Christa (eds.). 2001. Ideophones (Typological Studies 
in Language 44). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Voorhoeve, Jan. 1964. The structure of the morpheme in Bamileke (Bengangté dialect). 
Lingua 13. 319–334. 
Wetzer, Harrie. 1996. The Typology of Adjectival Predication (Empirical Approaches to 
Language Typology 17). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Wnuk, Ewelina. 2016. Semantic specificity of perception verbs in Maniq. Nijmegen: 
Radboud University. (PhD dissertation.) 
Yliniemi, Juha. 2019. A descriptive grammar of Denjongke (Sikkimese Bhutia). Helsinki: 
University of Helsinki. (PhD dissertation.) 
 

