The Metaphysical Interpretation of Logical Truth 
TUOMAS E. TAHKO (www.ttahko.net) 
 
Draft of 30 September, 2013 
Final version to appear in Penelope Rush (ed.), The Metaphysics of Logic: Logical 
Realism, Logical Anti-Realism and All Things In Between (CUP, 2014). 
 
ABSTRACT 
The starting point of this paper concerns the apparent difference between what we 
might call absolute truth and truth in a model, following Donald Davidson. The notion 
of absolute truth is the one familiar from Tarski’s T-schema: ‘Snow is white’ is true if 
and only if snow is white. Instead of being a property of sentences as absolute truth 
appears to be, truth in a model, that is relative truth, is evaluated in terms of the relation 
between sentences and models. 
I wish to examine the apparent dual nature of logical truth (without dwelling on 
Davidson), and suggest that we are dealing with a distinction between a metaphysical and 
a linguistic interpretation of truth. I take my cue from John Etchemendy, who suggests 
that absolute truth could be considered as being equivalent to truth in the ‘right model’, 
i.e., the model that corresponds with the world. However, the notion of ‘model’ is not 
entirely appropriate here as it is closely associated with relative truth. Instead, I propose 
that the metaphysical interpretation of truth may be illustrated in modal terms, by 
metaphysical modality in particular. One of the tasks that I will undertake in this paper is 
to develop this modal interpretation, partly building on my previous work on the 
metaphysical interpretation of the law of non-contradiction (Tahko 2009). 
After an explication of the metaphysical interpretation of logical truth, a brief study of 
how this interpretation connects with some recent important themes in philosophical logic 
follows. In particular, I discuss logical pluralism and propose an understanding of 
pluralism from the point of view of the metaphysical interpretation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 

1. Two senses of logical truth 
The notion of logical truth has a wide variety of different uses, hence it is not surprising 
that it can be interpreted in different ways. In this chapter I will focus on one of them – 
what I call the metaphysical interpretation. A more precise formulation of this 
interpretation will be put forward in what follows, but I wish to say something about my 
motivation first. Part of my interest concerns the origin or ground of logic and logical 
truth, i.e., whether logic is grounded in how the world is or how we (or our minds) see 
the world.1 However, this is not my topic here. Rather, I will assume that logic is grounded 
in how the world is – a type of realism about logic – and examine the status of logical 
truth from the point of view of logical realism. The upshot is an interpretation of logical 
truth that is of special interest to metaphysicians.2 
My starting point is the apparent difference between what we might call absolute truth 
and truth in a model, following Davidson (1973). The notion of absolute truth is familiar 
from Tarski’s T-schema: ‘Snow is white’ is true if and only if snow is white – in the world 
and absolutely. Instead of being a property of sentences as absolute truth appears to be, 
truth in a model, that is relative truth, is evaluated in terms of the relation between 
sentences and models.3 Davidson suggested that philosophy of language should be 
interested in absolute truth exactly because relative truth does not yield T-schemas, but I 
am not concerned with this proposal here.4 
To clarify, relative truth is an understanding of logical truth in terms of truth in all 
models. One can be a realist or an anti-realist about the models, hence about logical truth. 
But there are choices to be made even if one is realist about the models, as the models 
can be understood interpretationally or representationally, along the lines suggested by 
John Etchemendy (1990). We will discuss the difference between these views in the next 
section, but ultimately none of these alternatives are expressive of the metaphysical 
interpretation of logical truth. Instead, we need a way to express absolute truth, which is 
not possible without spelling out the correspondence intuition, to be discussed in a 
moment. 
Given the topic of this chapter, one might expect that Michael Dummett’s view would 
be discussed, or at least used as a foil, but I prefer not to dwell on Dummett. The primary 
reason for this is that Dummett’s methodology is entirely opposite to the one that I use. 
Here is a summary of Dummett’s method: 
 
My contention is that all these metaphysical issues [questions about truth, time 
etc.] turn on questions about the correct meaning-theory for our language. We 
must not try to resolve the metaphysical questions first, and then construct a 
meaning-theory in the light of the answers. We should investigate how our 
language actually functions, and how we can construct a workable systematic 
1 For a recent discussion on this topic, see Sher (2011), who examines the idea that logic is grounded 
either in the mind or in the world, and defends that it is grounded in both – hence logic has a dual nature. 
See also the opening chapter of this volume. 
2 See Chateaubriand Filho (2001, 2005) for a version of the metaphysical interpretation of logical truth 
partly similar to mine. 
3 ‘Models’ are to be interpreted in a wide sense: they may for instance be interpretations, possible worlds 
or valuations. We will return to this ambiguity concerning ‘model’ below. 
4 I should mention that I will omit discussion of Carnap and Quine on logical truth, as their debate is not 
directly relevant for my purposes. However, see Shapiro (2000) for an interesting discussion of Quine 
on logical truth. 
2 
 
                                                 

description of how it functions; the answers to those questions will then determine 
the answers to the metaphysical ones. (Dummett 1991: 338.) 
 
Since I am analyzing logical truth from a realist, metaphysical point of view, 
Dummett’s methodology is obviously not going to do the trick. In my view, there is a 
bona fide discipline of metaphysics and I am interested in finding a use for logical truth 
within that discipline. I doubt there is enough initial common ground to fruitfully engage 
with Dummett. 
Let me briefly return to Davidson and Tarski before proceeding. When considering the 
distinction between absolute and relative truth, an initial point of interest is the 
characterization of absolute truth by the T-schema. One question that emerges is the 
connection between the T-schema and metaphysics. A likely approach is to explicate this 
connection in terms of correspondence. However, at least according to one reading, Tarski 
(1944) considered truth understood as a semantic concept to be independent of any 
considerations regarding what sentences actually describe, that is, independent of issues 
concerning correspondence with the world. Indeed, the T-schema is now rarely 
considered to play a crucial role in correspondence theories of truth, despite the 
appearance of a correspondence relation between sentences and the world.5 Yet, Tarski’s 
(ibid., 342–3) initial considerations on the meaning of the term ‘true’ explicitly take into 
account an ‘Aristotelian’ conception of truth, where correspondence with the world is 
central. Davidson (1973: 70) as well seems to have some sympathy for the idea that an 
absolute theory of truth is, in some sense, a ‘correspondence theory’ of truth, although he 
insists that the entities that would act as truthmakers here are ‘nothing like facts or states 
of affairs’, but sequences (which make true open sentences). 
I will not aim to settle the status of the correspondence theory here, but it will be 
necessary to discuss it in some more detail. I suggest adopting an understanding of the 
correspondence relation which is neutral in terms of our theory of truth. It is this type of 
weak correspondence intuition that I believe central to the metaphysical interpretation of 
logical truth. But it should be stressed that the correspondence intuition itself is not 
necessarily expressive of realism (Daly 2005: 96–7). For instance, Chris Daly’s suggested 
definition of the intuition is simply that a proposition is true if and only if things are as 
the proposition says they are. Daly explains the neutrality of (his version of) the 
correspondence intuition as follows:6 
 
Consider the coherence theorist. He may consistently say ‘If <p> is true, it has a 
truthmaker. <p> corresponds to a state of affairs, namely the state of affairs which 
consists of a relation of coherence holding between <p> and the other members 
of a maximal set of propositions’. Consider the pragmatist. He may consistently 
say, ‘If <p> is true, it has a truthmaker. <p> corresponds to a state of affairs, 
namely the state of affairs of <p>’s having the property of being useful to believe’. 
It is controversial whether there exist states of affairs. Let that pass. My point here 
is that the coherence theory and the pragmatic theory are each compatible with the 
5 Furthermore, the idea that the T-schema or the correspondence theory are somehow expressive of 
realism has been forcefully disputed. See for instance Morris (2005) for a case against the connection 
between realism and correspondence; in fact Morris argues that correspondence theorists should be 
idealists. See also Gómez-Torrente (2009) for a discussion about Tarski’s ideas on logical consequence 
as well as on Etchemendy’s critique of Tarski’s model-theoretic account. 
6 The angled brackets describe a proposition, following Horwich (1998). 
3 
 
                                                 

admission of states of affairs. Furthermore, each of these theories is compatible 
with the admission of states of affairs standing in a correspondence relation to 
truths. (Daly 2005: 97.) 
 
A neutral version of the correspondence intuition is desirable because I do not want to 
rule out the possibility of different approaches to truth, despite assuming realism in the 
present context. A central appeal of the correspondence intuition is, I suggest, its wide 
applicability. However, a slightly better formulation than Daly’s can be found by 
following Paolo Crivelli (2004), who interprets Aristotle as an early proponent of the 
correspondence theory. Crivelli defines correspondence-as-isomorphism as follows: ‘a 
theory of truth is a correspondence theory of truth just in case it takes the truth of a belief, 
or assertion, to consist in its being isomorphic with reality’ (Crivelli 2004: 23).7 This type 
of view, which Crivelli ascribes to Aristotle, is expressive of the correspondence intuition, 
but avoids mention of propositions, or indeed states of affairs.8 Hence, we may define the 
correspondence intuition as follows: 
 
(CI) A belief, or an assertion, is true if and only if its content is isomorphic with  
reality. 
 
This formulation preserves Daly’s idea. ‘Reality’ in CI may consist, say, of what it is 
useful to believe, as the pragmatist would have it, so neutrality is preserved. If we accept 
that CI is neutral in terms of different theories of truth, then we can characterize the issue 
at hand as follows. There is an apparent and important difference between truth 
understood along the lines of CI, and truth understood as a relation between sentences 
and models. I take this to be at the core of Davidson’s original puzzle concerning absolute 
and relative truth. We ought to inquire into these two senses of truth before we give a full 
account of logical truth. This is exactly what I propose to do, arguing that the 
metaphysical interpretation of logical truth must respect CI. 
Tarski and the model-theoretic approach may have made it possible to talk about 
logical truth in a manner seemingly independent of metaphysical considerations, but 
important questions about the metaphysical status of logical truth and the interpretation 
of models remain. One thing that makes this problem topical is the recent interest in 
logical pluralism, or pluralism about logical truth (e.g., Beall and Restall 2006). In the 
second section I will assess the metaphysical status of the notion of logical truth with 
regard to the two senses of truth familiar from Davidson. The third section takes up the 
issue of interpreting logical truth in terms of possible worlds and contains a case study of 
the law of non-contradiction. A brief discussion of logical pluralism will take place in the 
fourth section, before the concluding remarks. 
 
7 Crivelli also defines a stricter sense of correspondence, which can be found in Aristotle. But sometimes 
Aristotle’s view on truth is also considered as a precursor to deflationism about truth, so we shouldn’t 
put too much weight on the historical case. For a more historically inclined discussion, see Paul Thom’s 
chapter in this volume. 
8  Admittedly, once we explicate isomorphism, reference to propositions, states of affairs or something of 
the sort could easily re-emerge. This shouldn’t worry us too much, because it is likely that we want a 
structured mapping from something to reality. The reason to opt for isomorphism here is merely to keep 
the door open for one’s preferred (structured) ontology. 
4 
 
                                                 

2. Reconciling the two senses of truth 
Can we reconcile the two senses of truth familiar from Davidson, the absolute and the 
relative? As Etchemendy (1990: 13) notes, the obvious way to attempt this would be in 
terms of generalization: if absolute truth is a monadic predicate of the form ‘x is true’, 
then it may be helpful to analyze it in terms of a relational predicate of the form ‘x is true 
in y’, for instance ‘x is a brother’ could be analyzed by first analyzing ‘x is a brother of 
y’, thus using the generalized concept of brotherhood. However, this does not apply to 
truth: ‘[C]learly the monadic concept of truth, the concept we ordinarily employ, is no 
generalization of any of the various relational concepts. A sentence can be true in some 
model, yet not be true; a sentence can be true, yet not be true in all models’ (ibid., 14). 
Accordingly, generalization will not help in reconciling the two senses of truth.  
Another alternative that Etchemendy considers is to interpret absolute truth as a 
specification of truth in a model, namely, absolute truth could be considered equivalent 
to truth in the right model, the model that corresponds with the world. This maintains the 
correspondence intuition expressed by CI above, but note that ‘correspondence with the 
world’ already suggests a realist theory of truth, so the neutrality of the formulation is in 
question.9 
 However, there are good reasons to think that the notion of ‘model’ is not entirely 
appropriate when discussing absolute truth, as it is closely associated with relative truth. 
Hence, interesting as Etchemendy’s characterization may be, it is unlikely to result in a 
metaphysical account of logical truth. Still, Etchemendy’s account may help pinpoint the 
issue; consider the following passage: 
 
Once we have specified the class of models, our definition of truth in a model is 
guided by straightforward semantic intuitions, intuitions about the influence of the 
world on truth values of sentences in our language. Our criterion here is simple: a 
sentence is to be true in a model if and only if it would have been true had the 
model been accurate–that is, had the world actually been as depicted by that 
model. (Etchemendy 1990: 24.) 
 
There is an important requirement in the passage above, namely, it must be the case 
that the model could have been true. How do we interpret the modality in effect here? If 
we understand it as saying that it must be the case that the world could have turned out to 
be like the model depicts, then this supports the case for a metaphysical interpretation of 
logical truth, for it introduces as a requirement for the notion of ‘model’ that it is a possible 
representation of the world. This representational approach, or ‘representational 
semantics’ can be contrasted with ‘interpretational semantics’, which Etchemendy 
discusses later on: 
 
[I]n an interpretational semantics, our class of models is determined by the chosen 
satisfaction domains; our definition of truth in a model is a simple variant of 
satisfaction. (Etchemendy 1990: 50.) 
9 Note that the question concerning which model is ‘right’ is not, strictly speaking, a question for the 
logician. For instance, as Burgess (1999: 82) notes, it is the metaphysician’s task to determine the correct 
modal logic, as this depends on our understanding of (metaphysical) modality. In contrast, the question 
about the ‘right’ sense of logical validity remains in the realm of logic. 
5 
 
                                                 

 
Etchemendy claims that the Tarskian conception of model-theoretic semantics is of 
the ‘interpretational’ kind, although his interpretation of Tarski can certainly be 
questioned (e.g. Gómez-Torrente 1999). But I do not wish to enter the debate about Tarski 
or interpretational semantics. According to Etchemendy, in the representational approach 
models must represent ‘genuinely possible configurations’ of the world, and I am 
interested in the correct understanding of these possible configurations (cf. Etchemendy 
1990: 60). However, instead of developing Etchemendy’s representational account, I will 
propose a pre-theoretic account of absolute truth, which aligns nicely with Etchemendy’s 
analysis. The biggest complication is the interpretation of the modal content in 
Etchemendy’s picture; we will need to return to this issue later (in the next section). 
What I propose to draw from Etchemendy is that once we have specified the class of 
‘genuinely possible configurations’, we can define relative truth according to 
Etchemendy’s suggestion. In this regard, my analysis will not follow that of 
Etchemendy’s, as the case for absolute truth will come before Etchemendy’s account. 
Etchemendy’s representational approach notwithstanding, the notion of ‘model’ is not 
ideal for this task, as it is strongly reminiscent of relative truth.10 
Instead of ‘models’, I propose to resort to talk of ‘possible worlds’. What I have in 
mind is interpreting possible worlds as metaphysical possibilities. This is, of course, 
somewhat controversial, but as we will see, there are reasons to think that only 
metaphysical modality is fitting for the task. In any case, more needs to be said about how 
the space of metaphysical possibilities is restricted. We will return to this in the next 
section. 
We are now in the position to define a provisional sense of logical truth which I 
propose to call metaphysical: 
 
(ML) A sentence is logically true if and only if it is true in every genuinely possible  
configuration of the world. 
 
ML leaves open the criteria for a ‘genuinely possible configuration of the world’. But 
it does preserve CI and it provides us – via the possible worlds jargon – a ‘metaphysician 
friendly’ interface to the notion of logical truth. It is time to see if we can actually work 
with that interface. 
 
3. Genuinely possible configurations and the case of the law of non-contradiction 
The puzzle can now be expressed in the following form: What sort of criteria can be 
established to evaluate whether a given possible world is a genuinely possible 
configuration of the world, i.e., could have turned out to correspond with the actual 
world? Let me approach the problem with a case study. Take, arguably, one of the most 
10  It has been suggested to me (by Penny Rush) that relative truth may be problematic because of its 
underlying metaphysical commitment to relativism, rather than not being up to the job of giving a 
metaphysical interpretation of logical truth at all. This may indeed be the case. I have attempted to 
preserve ontological neutrality while at the same time making it clear that I am presently only interested 
in putting forward a realist interpretation of logical truth. But I will set this issue aside for now, whether 
or not it is possible to combine relative truth and realism. 
6 
 
                                                 

fundamental laws of logic, the law of non-contradiction (LNC). When I say that the law 
of non-contradiction is true in the ‘metaphysical sense’, I mean that LNC is true in the 
sense of absolute truth, i.e., it is a genuine constraint on the structure of reality. The 
metaphysical formulation of LNC takes a form familiar from Aristotle (Metaphysics 
1005b19–20), although my proposed formulation is somewhat weaker, defined as 
follows: 
 
(LNC) The same attribute cannot at the same time belong and not belong to the same 
subject in the same respect and in the same domain. 
 
The above formulation differs from Aristotle’s only with regard to the qualification 
regarding ‘the same domain’ – here the domain is the set of genuinely possible 
configurations of the world. How do we know whether LNC is true in this sense? I have 
previously argued (Tahko 2009) that we do have a good case for the truth of LNC in the 
metaphysical sense – the primary opponent here is Graham Priest (e.g., 2005, 2006).11 I 
will not repeat my arguments here, but it may be noted that this is not strictly a question 
for logic. For instance, Priest’s most celebrated arguments in favor of true contradictions 
(in the metaphysical sense) concern the nature of change and specifically motion, the 
paradoxical nature of which is supposedly demonstrated by Zeno’s well known 
paradoxes. Although these paradoxes can quite easily be tackled by mathematical means, 
the relevant question is whether change indeed is paraconsistent.12 The answer to this 
question requires both metaphysical and empirical inquiry. I will return to this point 
briefly below, but first I wish to say something about the methodology of logical-cum-
metaphysical inquiry. 
In terms of ML, demonstrating the falsity of LNC would first require a genuinely 
possible configuration of the world where LNC fails. That is, it is not enough that we 
have a model where LNC is not true, such as paraconsistent logic, but we would also need 
to have some good reasons to think that the world could have been arranged in such a 
way that the implications of the metaphysical interpretation of LNC do not follow. This 
point deserves to be emphasized, for it would be much easier to show that a paraconsistent 
model can be useful in modelling certain phenomena, or interpreted in such a way that it 
is compatible with all the empirical data. But what is required here is that LNC, fully 
interpreted in the metaphysical sense, can be shown to fail. 
Note that we may also ask whether LNC is necessary, i.e., are there any possible 
worlds in which LNC does not hold – even if we did have a good case for its truth in the 
actual world? In fact, this is the question we should begin with, since if LNC is necessary, 
then it could not fail in the actual world either. However, it is not clear how we could 
settle this question conclusively, given that we are dealing with the metaphysical 
interpretation of LNC. Moreover, I do think that there could (in an epistemic sense) be 
possible worlds in which LNC fails, and hence I take the debate about LNC seriously. 
Yet, I am uncertain about whether such a paraconsistent possible world is in fact a 
genuinely possible configuration, as I will go on to explain.13 In any case, if a possible 
11  See also Berto 2008 for an attempt to formulate a (metaphysical) version of LNC which even the 
dialetheist must accept. Berto’s idea, to which I am sympathetic, is that LNC may be understood as a 
principle regarding structured exclusion relations (between properties, states of affairs, etc.), and the 
world is determinate insofar as it conforms to this principle. 
12  For discussion regarding Zeno’s paradoxes, see for instance Sainsbury 2009: Ch. 1. 
13  It is worth pointing out here that in my proposed construal, the distinction between absolute truth and 
truth in a model is not quite so striking for dialetheists. The idea, which I owe to Francesco Berto, is 
7 
 
                                                 

world in which LNC is not true were genuinely possible, then LNC would obviously not 
be necessary. This should be relatively uncontroversial, but I should finally say something 
more about ‘genuine possibility’. 
As was mentioned in the previous section, there are reasons to understand genuine 
possibility in terms of metaphysical possibility, as only metaphysical modality could 
secure the correspondence between a possible world and the structure of reality – this is 
also what CI requires. The relevant modal space must consist of all possible 
configurations of the world and only them. Logical modality cannot do the job because it 
is not sufficiently restrictive. This can be demonstrated with any traditional example of a 
metaphysical, a posteriori necessity, such as gold being the element with atomic number 
79. Assuming that it is indeed metaphysically necessary that gold is the element with 
atomic number 79, we must be able to accommodate the fact that gold failing to be the 
element with atomic number 79 is nevertheless logically possible. But since we are 
interested in genuinely possible configurations of the world, we ought to rule out 
metaphysically impossible worlds, such as the world in which gold fails to be the element 
with atomic number 79. The upshot is that if we accept the familiar story about 
metaphysical a posteriori necessities of this type, then there are necessary constraints for 
the structure of reality which logical necessity does not capture.14 
The only other viable alternative in addition to metaphysical and logical modality is 
conceptual modality, i.e., necessity in virtue of the definitions of concepts. Nomological 
modality is already too restrictive, as we sometimes need to consider configurations of 
the world that are nomologically impossible but at least may be genuinely possible (e.g., 
superluminal travel). However, conceptual modality is too liberal, quite like logical 
modality, as it also accommodates configurations of the world which are not genuinely 
possible, such as violations of the familiar examples of metaphysical a posteriori 
necessities. If we accept these examples, then neither definitions of concepts or laws of 
logic rule out things like gold failing to be the element with atomic number 79. 
Accordingly, if one accepts that there are metaphysical necessities that are not also 
conceptually and logically necessary – something that most metaphysicians would accept 
– the only available interpretation of genuine possibility is in terms of metaphysical 
possibility. 
There is, however, a way to understand logical modality which may do a better job in 
capturing the relevant sense of logical truth. This type of understanding has been proposed 
by Scott Shalkowski, who suggests that ‘logical necessities might be explained as those 
propositions true in virtue of the natures of every situation or every object and property, 
thus preserving the idea that logic is the most general science’ (Shalkowski 2004: 79). On 
the face of it, this suggestion respects the criteria for genuine possibility. According to 
this approach, logical modality concerns the most general (metaphysical) truths, such as 
the law of non-contradiction when it is considered as a metaphysical principle (as in 
Tahko 2009). In this view, logical relations reflect the relations of individuals, properties, 
and states of affairs rather than mere logical concepts. Indeed, this understanding 
that the world cannot be a model, because it contains everything, and there’s no domain of everything, 
on pain of Cantor’s paradox. The result is that something can be a logical truth in sense of being true in 
all models, without being true in the absolute sense, for the world is not a model. My proposed treatment 
of this issue proceeds by understanding absolute truth in terms of metaphysical modality, but the 
dialetheist could, in principle, endorse paraconsistent set theory and posit that absolute truth is just truth 
in the world-model – the model whose domain is the world. 
14  I should add that cashing out these constraints is, I think, a much more complicated affair than the 
traditional Kripke-Putnam approach to metaphysical a posteriori necessities suggests. 
8 
 
                                                 

effectively equates metaphysical and logical modality. The idea is that the purpose of 
logic is to describe the structure of reality and so it is ‘the most general science’. As 
Shalkowski (ibid., 81) notes, denying the truth of LNC would, in terms of this 
understanding, amount to a genuine metaphysical attitude instead of, say, the fairly trivial 
point that a model in which the law does not hold can be constructed. 
Do we have any means to settle the status of LNC in the suggested sense? A simple 
appeal to its universal applicability may not do the trick, but the burden of proof is 
arguably on those who would deny LNC. One might even attempt to distill a more general 
formula from this: logical principles – which are presumably reached by a priori means – 
are prima facie metaphysically necessary principles. They may be challenged and 
sometimes falsified even by empirical means, but merely the fact that we can formulate 
models in which they do not hold is not enough to challenge their truth; it will also have 
to be demonstrated that there are possible worlds which constitute genuinely possible 
configurations of the world. However, this approach seems biased towards historically 
prior logical principles, the ones that were formulated first. It is not implausible that the 
reason why they were formulated first is because they are indeed the best candidates for 
metaphysically necessary principles: for Aristotle, the law of non-contradiction is ‘the 
most certain of all principles’ (Metaphysics 1005b22). But this is admittedly quite 
speculative – we ought to be allowed to question even the ‘first’ principles. 
It would certainly be enough to challenge the metaphysical necessity of LNC, or other 
logical principles, if empirical evidence to the effect that the principle is not true of every 
situation or every object and property would be found.15 This is what Priest has attempted 
to show with the case of change and Zeno’s paradoxes, but I remain unconvinced. As I 
have argued (Tahko 2009), Priest’s examples can all be accounted for in terms of semantic 
rather than metaphysical dialetheism – a distinction developed by Edwin Mares (2004). 
The idea is that there may be indeterminacy in semantics, but this does not imply that 
there is indeterminacy in the world. Only the latter type of indeterminacy would 
corroborate the existence of a genuinely possible paraconsistent configuration of the 
world. Since I have not seen a convincing case to the effect that such a configuration is 
genuinely possible, I take it that LNC is a good candidate for a metaphysically necessary 
principle. If I am right, this means that a paraconsistent possible world could not have 
turned out to accurately represent the actual world. The fact that there are paraconsistent 
models has no direct bearing on this question. I do not claim to have settled the status of 
LNC once and for all, but I think that a strong empirical case for the truth of LNC can be 
made, on the basis of the necessary constraints for the forming of a stable macrophysical 
world, i.e., the emergence of stable macrophysical objects. 
I have developed the preceding line of thought before with regard to the Pauli 
Exclusion Principle (PEP) (Tahko 2012), and electric charge (Tahko 2009). For instance, 
as PEP states, it is impossible for two electrons (or other fermions) in a closed system to 
occupy the same quantum state at the same time. This is an important constraint, as it is 
responsible for keeping atoms from collapsing. It is sometimes said that PEP is 
responsible for the space-occupying behavior of matter – electrons must occupy 
successively higher orbitals to prevent a shared quantum state, hence not all electrons can 
collapse to the lowest orbital. Here we have a principle which captures a crucial constraint 
for any genuinely possible configuration of the world that contains macroscopic objects. 
Whether or not there are genuinely possible configurations that do not conform to PEP is 
15 I have in mind concrete objects in the first place; see Estrada-González (2013) for a case to the effect 
that there are abstracta which violate LNC in this sense. 
9 
 
                                                 

an open question, but it seems unlikely that such a configuration could include stable 
macroscopic objects. 
Consider the form of PEP: it states that two objects of a certain kind cannot have the 
same property (quantum state) in the same respect (in a closed system) at the same time. 
Compare this with Aristotle’s formulation of LNC: ‘the same attribute cannot at the same 
time belong and not belong to the same subject in the same respect’ (Metaphysics 
1005b19–20). LNC is of course a much more general criterion than PEP – it concerns one 
thing rather than things of a certain kind – but its underlying role is evident: if any fermion 
were able to both be and not be in a certain quantum state at the same time, then PEP 
would be violated and macroscopic objects would collapse. If LNC is needed to undergird 
PEP, then we have a strong case in favor of the metaphysical interpretation of LNC in 
worlds that contain macrophysical objects, given the necessity of PEP for the forming of 
macrophysical objects. This is of course not sufficient to establish the metaphysical 
necessity of either principle, but it is an interesting result in its own regard. 
 
4. Pluralism about logical truth 
Now that we have a rough idea about the metaphysical interpretation of logical truth, we 
can consider the implications of this interpretation in a wider context. Here I would like 
to focus on the topic of logical pluralism, which has lately received an increasing amount 
of attention. Perhaps the most influential form of logical pluralism derives from pluralism 
about logical consequence, i.e., the view that there are models in which the logical 
consequence relation is different, and irreconcilably so. Beall and Restall have formulated 
and defended this type of pluralism: 
 
Given the logical consequence relation defined on the class of casesx, the logicalx 
truths are those that are true in all casesx. If you like, they are the sentences that 
are x-consequences of the empty set of premises. The logicalx truths are those 
whose truth is yielded by the class of casesx alone. Since we are pluralists about 
classes of cases, we are pluralists about logical truth. (Beall and Restall 2006: 
100.) 
 
If this is indeed what pluralism about logical truth amounts to, then it appears that 
anyone who accepts multiple classes of cases is a pluralist about logical truth. But what 
does ‘being true in a case’ mean? On the face of it, one might think that it means exactly 
the same as ‘being true in a model’, that is, we are talking about a type of relative truth 
familiar from Davidson. This would imply that anyone who accepts multiple classes of 
models will also be a pluralist about logical truth. Pluralism about logical truth would 
then mean only that there are multiple models, and we can talk about logical truth 
separately in each one of these models. But this would be a rather uninteresting sense of 
logical pluralism, at least from the point of view of the metaphysical interpretation of 
logical truth. However, as Hartry Field has recently pointed out, this cannot be what Beall 
and Restall have in mind. Moreover, Field suggests two reasons why model-theoretic 
accounts are irrelevant to logical pluralism: 
 
One of these reasons is that by varying the definition of ‘model’, this approach 
defines a large family of notions, ‘classically valid’, ‘intuitionistically valid’, and 
10 
 

so on; one needn’t accept the logic to accept the notion of validity. A classical 
logician and an intuitionist can agree on the model-theoretic definitions of 
classical validity and of intuitionist validity; what they disagree on is the question 
of which one coincides with genuine validity. For this question to be intelligible, 
they must have a handle on the idea of genuine validity independent of the model-
theoretic definition. Of course, a pluralist will contest the idea of a single notion 
of genuine validity, and perhaps contend that the classical logician and the 
intuitionist shouldn’t be arguing. But logical pluralism is certainly not an entirely 
trivial thesis, whereas it would be trivial to point out that by varying the definition 
of model one can get classical validity, intuitionist validity, and a whole variety 
of other such notions. (Field 2009: 348.) 
 
And the second reason: 
 
[I]f we were to understand ‘cases’ as models, then there would be no case 
corresponding to the actual world. There is no obvious reason why a sentence 
couldn’t be true in all models and yet not true in the real world. 
This connects up with the previous point: the intuitionist regards instances of 
excluded middle as true in all classical models, while doubting that they are true 
in the real world. (Field 2009: 348; italics original.) 
 
Field goes on to suggest that Beall and Restall must have meant that there is an implicit 
requirement for interpreting ‘truth in a case’, namely, that truth in all cases implies truth. 
Field then argues that this will not produce an interesting sort of logical pluralism as the 
pluralist notion of logical consequence suggested by Beall and Restall does not capture 
the normal meaning of ‘logical consequence’. But it should be noted that Beall and Restall 
(2006: 36 ff.) do say something about the matter. Specifically, they suggest that on one 
reading of ‘case’ (the TM account), Tarskian models are to be understood as cases. 
Another reading (the NTP or necessary truth-preservation account) takes possible worlds 
to be cases. Beall and Restall (2006: 40) add that the existence of a possible world that 
invalidates an argument entails the existence of an actual (abstract) model that invalidates 
the argument. 
So, it is not clear that Field’s critique is accurate, as Beall and Restall do suggest that 
there is a case that corresponds with the actual world – on the TM account it is a Tarskian 
model and on the NTP account it is a possible world. The latter is of immediate interest 
to us, given that the metaphysical interpretation of logical truth also makes use of the 
possible worlds jargon. Yet, Beall and Restall do not provide an interpretation of possible 
worlds, so it is not quite clear what the connection, if any, between the NTP account and 
the metaphysical interpretation of logical truth is. 
Connecting all this with the analysis provided in the previous section, one might 
suggest that classes of cases are sets of metaphysically possible worlds, distinguished in 
terms of logical truths that are true in each set of possible worlds. Only one possible world 
is actual, but the logical truths that are true in the actual world will also be true in all 
worlds which are in the same set of possible worlds, i.e., these worlds may differ in other 
regards, but they are close to the actual world in the sense that all the logical truths are 
shared. 
Accordingly, pluralists about logical truth, in the metaphysical sense, hold that there 
are distinct sets of possible worlds in which different logical truths hold. The 
11 
 

metaphysical interpretation of logical truth can accommodate this sense of logical 
pluralism, provided that possible worlds are interpreted appropriately – this also enables 
us to preserve CI.16 However, accommodating pluralism in the metaphysical 
interpretation of logical truth does require a revision in our original definition (ML), 
which defined a sentence as logically true if and only if it is true in every genuinely 
possible configuration of the world. Since in this view of logical pluralism there can be 
proper subsets of genuinely possible configurations with different laws of logic, we must 
revise ML as follows: 
 
(ML-P) A sentence is logically true if and only if it is true in every possible world of  
a given subset of possible worlds representing genuinely possible configurations of  
the world. 
 
ML-P can of course also accommodate the situation where the laws of logic are the same 
across all subsets of genuinely possible configurations, i.e., logical monism – in that case 
the relevant subset of possible worlds would not be a proper subset of the genuinely 
possible configurations. 
An alternative formulation of ML-P is possible, dismissing subsets altogether. We 
could understand logical pluralism by giving different interpretations to ‘genuinely 
possible configurations’.17 This formulation could be developed by adopting a line of 
thought from Gillian Russell (2008). Russell suggests that we can distill a sense of 
pluralism by understanding logical validity as the idea that in every possible situation in 
which all the premises are true, the conclusion is true (2008: 594), where possibility is 
ambiguous between logical, conceptual, nomological, metaphysical, or other senses of 
modality, hence producing a similar ambiguity concerning validity. A friend of the 
metaphysical interpretation of logical truth could accept this idea, but only provided that 
we prioritize the reading where possible situations reflect metaphysical possibility, as CI 
is preserved only in this reading. Nevertheless, there may still be room for a type of 
pluralism concerning metaphysical possibility and hence genuinely possible 
configurations. Unfortunately I have no space to develop this approach further. 
It may be noted that since I have been discussing logical pluralism only with regard to 
the law of non-contradiction, the resulting sense of pluralism is limited. Given that I 
consider there to be strong reasons to think that LNC holds in the actual world, we can 
define a set of possible worlds in which the law of non-contraction holds, call it WLNC. 
The assumption is that WLNC includes the actual world. But since I have made no mention 
of any other laws of logic that hold (in the metaphysical sense) in WLNC, the sense in 
which we can talk of a logic may be questioned. In other words, it may be wondered if 
the resulting sense of logical pluralism is able to support a rich enough set of logical laws 
to constitute a logic. However, I suspect that the case can be extended beyond LNC. That 
is, we can extend the metaphysical interpretation to other laws of logic as well in such a 
way that a subset of WLNC may be defined. This is not quite as straightforward in other 
cases though. 
16  Why is interpreting logical truth on the basis of metaphysical possibility the only way to preserve CI? 
Because we’ve seen that only by restricting our attention to metaphysically possible worlds can we 
preserve a sense of correspondence between logical truth and genuinely possible configurations of the 
world. Only metaphysically possible worlds are sufficiently constrained to take into account all the 
governing principles such as metaphysical a posteriori necessities. 
17  Thanks to Jesse Mulder for suggesting this type of formulation. 
12 
 
                                                 

Very briefly, consider modus ponens (𝐴𝐴∧(𝐴𝐴→𝐵𝐵)) →𝐵𝐵). If thought of as a rule, it 
is not obvious that modus ponens can be applied to the world in the sense that I have 
suggested with regard to LNC. Yet, there are clear cases of physical phenomena that 
feature a modus ponens type structure. As a first pass, causation might be offered as a 
candidate of ‘real world modus ponens’, but there are obvious complications with this 
suggestion, as it depends on one’s theory of causation. However, there are better 
candidates. Take the simple case of an electron pair in a closed system, where two 
electrons occupy the same orbital. As we’ve already observed, two electrons in a closed 
system are governed by the Pauli Exclusion Principle. In particular, since the electrons 
cannot be in the same quantum state at the same time, we know that the only way for 
them to occupy the same orbital (i.e., having the same orbital quantum numbers) is for 
them to differ in spin (i.e., to have different spin quantum numbers). Accordingly, when 
we observe electron A having spin-up, we immediately know that any electron, B, on the 
same orbital as A must have spin-down. Moreover, there can be only two electrons on the 
same orbital and they must always have opposite spin. 
If cases such as the one for a ‘real world modus ponens’ can be found, then we may 
indeed have a rich enough set of logical laws to constitute a logic, enabling the suggested 
interpretation of logical pluralism. The resulting subset could be called WLNC+MP. 
This hardly exhausts the debate about logical pluralism, but it appears that there are 
ways, perhaps several ways, to accommodate pluralism about logical truth within the 
metaphysical interpretation. 
 
5. Conclusion 
In conclusion, I have demonstrated that there is a coherent metaphysical interpretation of 
logical truth, and that this interpretation has some interesting uses, such as applications 
regarding logical pluralism. It has not been my aim to establish that this interpretation of 
logical truth is the correct one, but only that it is of special interest to metaphysicians. I 
have assumed rather than argued for a type of realism about logic for the purposes of this 
investigation, but I contend that for realists about logic, one interesting interpretation of 
logical truth is the one sketched here.18 
 
 
 
References 
Aristotle 1984. Metaphysics, trans. W.D. Ross, revised by J. Barnes. Princeton, NJ:  
Princeton University Press. 
Beebee, H. and Dodd J. (eds.) 2005. Truthmakers: The contemporary debate. Oxford  
University Press. 
Beall, J.C. and Restall, G. 2006. Logical pluralism. Oxford University Press. 
18  Thanks to audiences at the University of Tampere Research Seminar and the First Helsinki-Tartu 
Workshop in Theoretical Philosophy, where earlier version were presented. In particular, I’d like to 
thank Luis Estrada-González for extensive comments. In addition, I appreciate helpful comments from 
Franz Berto and Jesse Mulder. Thanks also to Penny Rush for editorial comments. The research for this 
article was made possible by a grant from the Academy of Finland. 
13 
 
                                                 

Berto, Francesco 2008. “Άδύνατον and material exclusion,” Australasian Journal of  
Philosophy 86 (2), 165–90. 
Burgess J.P. 1999. “Which modal logic is the right one?” Notre Dame Journal of  
Formal Logic 40: 81–93. 
Chateaubriand Filho, O. 2001. Logical forms: Part I - truth and description.  
Campinas: UNICAMP. 
Chateaubriand Filho, O. 2005. Logical forms: Part II - logic, language, and  
knowledge. Campinas: UNICAMP. 
Crivelli, P. 2004. Aristotle on truth. Cambridge University Press. 
Daly, C. 2005. “So where’s the explanation?” In Beebee and Dodd (eds.), 85–103. 
Davidson, D. 1973. “In defense of convention T,” in Leblanc, H. (ed.) Truth, syntax  
and modality. Amsterdam: North-Holland. Reprinted in his Inquiries into truth  
and interpretation. Oxford University Press, 2001. Page numbers refer to the  
reprinted version. 
Dummett, M. 1991. The Logical Basis of Metaphysics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard  
University Press. 
Etchemendy, J. 1990. The concept of logical consequence. Cambridge, MA:  
Harvard University Press. 
Estrada-González, L. 2013. “On two Arguments against realist dialetheism,”  
unpublished manuscript. 
Field, H. 2009. “Pluralism in logic,” The Review of Symbolic Logic 2 (2), 342–59. 
Gómez-Torrente, M. 1999. “Logical truth and Tarskian logical truth,” Synthese 117:  
375–408. 
Gómez-Torrente, M. 2009. “Rereading Tarski on logical consequence,” The Review of  
Symbolic Logic 2 (2), 249–97. 
Horwich, P. 1998. Truth, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press. 
Mares, E.D. 2004. “Semantic dialetheism”, in Priest, G., Beall, J.C., and Armour- 
Garb, B. (eds.) The law of non-contradiction. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 264– 
75. 
Morris, M. 2005. “Realism beyond correspondence,” in Beebee and Dodd (eds.),  
49–66. 
Priest, G. 2005. Doubt truth to be a liar. Oxford University Press. 
Priest, G. 2006. In contradiction: A study of the transconsistent, 2nd expanded ed.  
Oxford University Press. 
Quine, W.V. 1986. Philosophy of logic, 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard  
University Press. 
Russell, G. 2008. “One true logic?” Journal of Philosophical Logic 37: 593–611. 
Sainsbury, R.M. 2009. Paradoxes, 3rd ed. Cambridge University Press. 
Shalkowski, S. 2004. “Logic and absolute necessity,” The Journal of Philosophy 101  
(2): 55–82. 
Shapiro, S. 2000. “The status of logic,” in Boghossian, P. and Peacocke, C. (eds.),  
New Essays on the A Priori. Oxford University Press, 333–66. 
Sher, G. 2011. “Is logic in the mind or in the world?” Synthese 181: 353–65. 
Tahko, T.E. 2009. “The law of non-contradiction as a metaphysical principle,” The  
Australasian Journal of Logic 7: 32-47. 
URL:www.philosophy.unimelb.edu.au/ajl/2009/. 
Tahko, T.E. 2012. “Boundaries in reality,” Ratio 25 (4), 405–24. 
Tarski, A. 1944. “The semantic conception of truth,” Philosophy and  
Phenomenological Research 4: 13–47. 
14 
 

