PLAIN TEXT

This page intentionally left blank 

PLAIN TEXT
THE POETICS OF COMPUTATION
> DENNIS TENEN
STANFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
STANFORD, CALIFORNIA
 

Stanford University Press
Stanford, California
© 2017 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.  
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system without the prior written permission of Stanford University Press.
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free, archival-quality paper
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Tenen, Dennis, author.
Title: Plain text : the poetics of computation / Dennis Tenen.
Description: Stanford, California : Stanford University Press, 2017. | 
   Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016052467 (print) | LCCN 2016054558 (ebook) | 
   ISBN 9781503601802 (cloth : alk. paper) | ISBN 9781503602281 (pbk. : alk. paper) | 
   ISBN 9781503602342 (electronic)
Subjects: LCSH: Literature and technology. | Digital media--Philosophy. | 
   Electronic publications. | Electronic publishing.
Classification: LCC PN56.T37 T47 2017 (print) | LCC PN56.T37 (ebook) | 
   DDC 809/.93356--dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016052467
Designed by Bruce Lundquist
Typeset at Stanford University Press in 8.5/14 Euphemia

To Bill Todd and Elaine Scarry,  
whose influence on my thought grows with time

This page intentionally left blank 

CONTENTS
Acknowledgments
ix
Computational Poetics: An Introduction
1
Thesis and Archive
4
Theory
7
Method
15
Plan of the Present Work
18
Chapter 1: Metaphor Machines
23
Verisimilitude
26
Death and Incongruence
33
Dissimulation
36
Mimesis
42
Speculative Formalism
51
Chapter 2: Laying Bare the Device: 
The Modernist Roots of Computation
55
Technique
58
Thought Experiment I
67
Thought Experiment II
71
Thought Experiment III
79
Device
84

Chapter 3: Form, Formula, Format
93
Digital Formalisms
93
Concrete and Universal
98
Format Theory
104
Tactics of Reading
109
Composite Media
115
Smart Contracts
124
Chapter 4: Recondite Surfaces
131
Programmable Media
134
Textual Laminates
145
Legibility
157
Chapter 5: Literature Down to a Pixel
165
Digital Wake (My Two Terminators)
167
Spiritual Telegraph
172
Soap Opera Effect
179
We Have Always Been Digital
185
The Medium Is Not the Message
192
Conclusion: Human Grounds for Computation
197
Space
197
Time
199
Global Perspectives
202
Notes
205
Bibliography
231
Index
259
viii	
CONTENTS

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The book’s faults, to quote Will Durant, are all mine. Its strengths, however, 
derive from the support of a community.
This project would not have been possible without the generous support of 
Harvard University’s Comparative Literature Department. Publication was subsi-
dized in part by Harvard Studies in Comparative Literature. Initial sketches of 
the book appeared in conversation with Aleksey Berg, Jacob Emory, Anders 
Engberg-Pedersen, Elena Fratto, Natalia and Ilya Kun, Guy Smoot, Simos Ze-
niou, and many others who made Dana-Palmer House their home away from 
home. Readers will recognize the influence of Svetlana Boym, Peter Gallison, 
Richard Moran, Elaine Scarry, William Todd, and Roberto Mangabeira Unger. 
Their thought was formative in the manuscript’s early stages.
A fellowship from the Berkman Center for Internet and Society gave me 
the time and means to develop a deep research archive. I would like to 
thank Yochai Benkler, Urs Gasser, John Palfrey, Rebecca Tabasky, Jonathan 
Zittrain, and especially Jeffery Schnapp for their support. Members of the 
Cooperation Group in particular had a profound, if not an obvious, intel-
lectual impact on my work. Echoes of discussions with Mayo Fuster, Jerome 
Hergueux, Benjamin Mako Hill, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, and Aaron Shaw 
can be found on the pages of every chapter.
The book came to fruition at Columbia University. Junior colleagues Ratik 
Asokan, Emily Fuhrman, Jessica Hallock, Tobias Pester, Phil Polefrone, and 
Zachary Roberts helped with line edits and gave insightful feedback. Senior col-
leagues Sarah Cole, Nick Dames, Michael Golston, Stathis Gourgouris, ­Marianne 

x	
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Hirsch, Jean Howard, Matt Jones, Sharon Marcus, Edward Mendelson, Frances 
Negrón-Muntaner, Bruce Robbins, and Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak had a hand 
in individual chapters. The book became stronger with their guidance. Kaiama 
Glover, Bernard Harcourt, Matt Hart, Marguerite Holloway, Lydia Liu, Anupama 
Rao, Jesús R. Velasco, and Bill Worthen offered valuable advice. Columbia 
University’s seminar on comparative media provided an important forum for 
several of the book’s chapters, involving Stefan Andriopoulos, Noam Elcott, 
Brian Larkin, Reinhold Martin, Rosalind C. Morris, and Felicity Scott, among 
others. The Columbia University Summer Grant Program in the Humanities and 
a Lenfest Junior Faculty Development Grant supported the concluding stages 
of manuscript preparation. Weekly meetings with members of the Experimental 
Methods Group—Alex Gil, Susanna Allés Torrent, Grant Wythoff, and others—
grounded my thought in practice, among many inspiring projects.
Manan Ahmed and Durba Mitra, both members of our co-presence writing 
group, deserve a special mention and my heartfelt gratitude. We shared the 
same space daily for almost two years as we worked on our respective proj-
ects. Ahmed’s Book of Conquest: The Chachnama and Muslim Origins in South 
Asia (Harvard University Press, 2016) and Mitra’s “Indian Sex Life: Women and 
the New Science of Society” were at various stages of development at the 
same time. Their warmth, humor, and intelligence brightened every page.
Both Matt Gold of the City University of New York (CUNY) and Jentery 
Sayers of the University of Victoria assigned early drafts of individual chap-
ters to their students. The experience was immensely helpful in imagining my 
audience. Siddhartha Lokanandi and Ann Kay line-edited extensively. Barbara 
Herrnstein Smith and Johanna Drucker advised on individual chapters. Raja 
Adal, Janet Vertesi, and Susan Zieger were some of the most insightful 
public respondents to the text on the conference circuit. I am particularly 
thankful to Wendy Hui Kyong Chun for the opportunity to meet and discuss 
this manuscript in person.
Emily-Jane Cohen and her team at Stanford University Press expertly 
guided the book to publication. I received careful consideration and com-
ments from Matthew Fuller, Ray Siemens, and two other anonymous review-
ers. I would like to thank Micah Siegel, Anubhuti Maurya, Marthine Desiree 
Satris, Mimi Braverman, Derek Gottlieb, and Gigi Mark for their patience, hard 
work, and attention to detail.
Finally, a book extracts its heaviest toll from those closest to the author. 
My family and my partner Yoora gave it the needed time, space, and love.

PLAIN TEXT

This page intentionally left blank 

As I write these introductory remarks, a ceiling-mounted smoke detector in 
my kitchen emits a loud noise every three minutes or so. A pleasant female 
voice also announces, “Low battery.” This is, I learn, a precaution stipulated 
by the U.S. National Fire Alarm Code (NFPA 72), §11.6.6 (2013). The clause 
requiring a “distinctive audible trouble signal before the battery is incapable 
of operating” is encoded into the device. The smoke detector literally em-
bodies that piece of legislation in its circuitry. We thus obtain a condition 
where two meanings of code—as governance and as machine instruction—
coincide. Code equals code.
I am at home, but I also receive an alarm notification on my mobile 
phone. Along with monitoring apps that help make my home “smarter,” the 
phone contains most of my library. I often pick it up to read a book. The 
phrase “reading a book,” however, obscures a number of metaphors for a 
series of odd actions. The “book” is a small, thin black rectangle: three 
inches wide, five inches tall, and barely a few millimeters thick. A slab of 
polished glass covers the front of the device, where the tiny eyes of a cam-
era and a light sensor also protrude. On the back, made of smooth soft 
plastic, we find another, larger camera. At the foot of the device, a grid 
of small perforations indicates breathing room for a speaker and several 
microphones. To “open” a book, I touch the glass. The machine recognizes 
my fingerprint. I then tap and poke at the surface until I find a small image 
that represents both my library and my bookstore, where I can “buy” and 
> COMPUTATIONAL POETICS
An Introduction

2	
INTRODUCTION
“borrow” books. However, buying or borrowing books does not involve the 
possession of physical objects. Rather, I agree to a license that grants lim-
ited access to data, which the software then assembles into something re-
sembling a book on-screen. I tap again to begin reading. The screen dims to 
match room ambiance as it fills up with words. A passage on the first page 
appears underlined: other readers in my social circle must have found it 
notable. I swipe across the glass surface to turn a “page.” The device emits 
a muffled rustle to reinforce the pretense of manipulating paper. The image 
curls ever so slightly as another “page” slides into view. My tiny library meta-
phor contains hundreds of such page metaphors.
Despite appearances, this electronic metaphor-making device in my hand 
has more in common with smoke detectors than it does with the several 
paper volumes scattered on my desk. The electronic book and smoke alarm 
contain printed circuit boards, capacitors, and resistors. Both draw electric 
current. Both require firmware updates, and both are governed by codes, 
political and computational. Smoke alarms and mobile phones connect to the 
Internet. They communicate with distant data centers and with each other. 
Yet I continue to “read” these devices as though they are familiar, immu-
table, and passive objects: just books. I think of them as intimate artifacts, 
friends even, wholly known to me, comforting, and warm. The electronic 
book is none of those things. Besides prose, it keeps my memories, pictures, 
words, sounds, and thoughts. It records my reading, sleeping, and consump-
tion habits. It tries to sell me things, showing me advertisements for cars, 
jewelry, and pills. It comes with a manual and terms of service. It is my 
confidant, my dealer, my spy.
Plain Text concerns the nature of digital inscription, the material trace 
that gives rise to textual phenomena and, more broadly, to all cultural ar-
tifacts in which computers mediate. We—readers, writers, interpreters—find 
ourselves today in an unprecedented, since the Middle Ages, position of se-
lective asemiosis: the loss of signification.1 Many contemporary texts, such as 
poems inscribed into bacteria and encrypted software, exist simply beyond 
the reach of human senses.2 Other forms of writing are illegible by design, 
in ways that prevent access or comprehension. Increasingly, we write not in 
the sense of making marks on paper but in simulation. Key presses leave 
lasting traces in computer memory, which then appear on-screen redoubled 
and ephemeral. On disk, marks endure in a form legible only to those who 
possess the specialized tools and training necessary to decipher them.

	
INTRODUCTION	
3
I appeal to the idea of plain text in the title of this book to signal an af-
finity with a particular mode of computational meaning making. Plain text iden-
tifies a file format and a frame of mind. As a file format, it contains nothing 
but a “pure sequence of character codes.” Plain text stands in opposition to 
“fancy text,” that is, “text representation consisting of plain text plus added in-
formation.”3 In the tradition of American textual criticism, plain text alludes to 
an editorial method of text transcription that is both “faithful to the text of its 
source” and is “easier to read than the original document.”4 Combining these 
two traditions, I mean to build a case for a kind of a systematic minimalism 
when it comes to our use of computers, a minimalism that privileges access 
to source materials, ensuring legibility and comprehension. I do so in contrast 
to other available modes of human–computer interaction, which instead maxi-
mize system-centric ideals such as efficiency, speed, performance, or security.
The title of this book further identifies an interpretive stance that one 
can assume in relation to the making and unmaking of literary artifacts. 
Besides visible content, all contemporary documents carry with them a 
layer of hidden information. Originally used for typesetting, this layer affects 
more than innocuous document attributes such as font size or line spacing. 
Increasingly, devices that mediate literary activity also embody governing 
structures. For example, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, passed in the 
United States in 1996, goes beyond written injunction to require in some 
cases the management of digital rights at the level of hardware. An elec-
tronic book governed by digital rights may subsequently prevent readers 
from copying or sharing stored content, even for the purposes of academic 
study.5 In other contexts a device may monitor and report on reader activity.
Machine instruction thus embodies new forms of technological control. 
To speak truth to power—to retain a civic potential for critique—we must 
therefore perceive the mechanisms of its codification. Critical theory cannot 
otherwise endure apart from material contexts of textual production, which 
today emanate from the fields of computer science and software engineer-
ing. Conversely, a tighter coupling with the critical tradition can reveal tech-
nology’s often occluded political implications. For example, creating a novel 
algorithm that predicts crime by analyzing one’s reading habits also invites 
the dystopian possibility of thought policing, unless, that is, such algorithms 
remain legible, in public view, and under continual counterscrutiny. A vibrant 
discursive practice of textual exegesis is crucial for the preservation of what-
ever ideals that demand a literate populace.

4	
INTRODUCTION
THESIS AND ARCHIVE
Plain Text is a response to a particular situation of a literary scholar 
encountering the field of software engineering. For a long stretch of my 
professional life, these two areas of activity remained separate. I worked 
at one and studied the other. At the time, I simply did not think that code 
had much to do with poetry. Initially, my two selves—the scholar and the 
engineer—spoke different languages. Reconciling them was and continues to 
be a disconcerting process by which things dear and familiar to me in both 
worlds grew strange and unfamiliar, showing themselves to be sometimes 
less than and sometimes more than I comfortably expected. Nothing could 
be assumed from the start. Field-specific language, down to its foundations, 
had to be examined for hidden assumptions that prevented dialogue. With 
time, I saw that code and poetry have much to do with one another. Writing 
this book has taught me to embrace the remaining incongruence.
The idea for Plain Text came in a moment of realization after I was 
asked one of those seemingly naïve but fundamental questions that can set 
research in motion down a long and winding path.
A childhood friend who shares a love for reading asked why he could 
not lend me a digital copy of the novel that he recently purchased from a 
major online retailer.6 In my struggle to answer, I realized that some of my 
deepest intuitions about literature relied on assumptions firmly attached to 
print media. Despite my professional experience as a programmer and my 
academic training in literary studies, I could not readily explain the mecha-
nisms by which electromagnetic charges transformed into pixels and pixels 
into words. Where to begin? To recount the passage of digital text one has 
to know something about chip architecture, operating systems, file permis-
sions, networking, and encryption. I could describe parts of that system, but 
my knowledge was also riddled with unexamined gaps. It did not amount to 
a coherent story.
Worse yet, it quickly became apparent that these technical details af-
fect all higher-level interpretive activity. To read together—to form a shared 
understanding of a text—we have to convene on the same page, which was 
made difficult in my friend’s case by imposed geographic restrictions. The text 
changed as it passed hands. I had to draw on philology and sociology of 
literature to reflect on textual variants, recensions, and authorship attribution. 
Digital text is more obviously entwined with its reception history: reader re-
views and algorithmic recommendation engines. Despite the new purchase, my 

	
INTRODUCTION	
5
friend’s electronic copy of the text was already marked and highlighted. It was 
synchronized with other media: audiobooks and related television promotions. 
The work was preprocessed, in both the technical and the social senses of the 
word, to privilege certain meanings and modes of comprehension.
The task of coming to terms with these emergent contingencies entails 
an expansive research program, which can be commenced here only in part. 
The digital literary ecosystem is evolving rapidly. A historical approach to 
its development extrapolates its trajectory into the future. Crucially, digital 
knowledge ecologies are only just coming into being; they are still pliable, 
still in their formative state. Their cultural importance necessitates active 
commentary and experimentation. Without it, we risk the dominion of what 
Langdon Winner has called autonomous technology, a condition by which 
complex systems begin to irrevocably determine our politics. “Modern people 
have filled the world with the most remarkable array of contrivances,” Winner 
wrote. We are then surprised to find them resistant to change. “The human 
kind faces a woefully permanent bondage to the power of its own inven-
tions,” he concluded. And I hope, along with him, that it is still possible to 
“reconsider and reconstruct” those outcrops that in retrospect impoverish 
culture, to “learn and start again,” and to retain the “prospect of liberation.”7
To these ends, Plain Text tells a story of a major morphological shift 
affecting cultural production, particularly as it relates to the mechanics of 
reading and writing. Were I to interrupt a digital typist to ask, “Where do 
these words reside?” I would likely receive several conflicting answers in re-
sponse. In some sense, the words are on-screen, where they can be viewed. 
In another sense, they are somewhere within the machine, on remote and 
hermeneutically sealed surfaces: silicon chips, hard drives, flash memory 
cards. In yet another sense, visible signs are still further removed from the 
contexts of their production. The word is in the wires. It spreads across serv-
ers, routers, and data centers. What was once apparent takes on a more 
complex structure, stretched across planes and temporalities. The book—this 
book, any book—gains a new shape. Digital texts form a live lattice, a multi-
dimensional grid, that connects a letter’s tactile response at one’s fingertips 
to its optic and electromagnetic traces. In aggregate, these textual laminates 
incorporate the scaffolding of synthetic inscription. I cannot consequently 
pass a digital note to another person in the same sense that one passes 
notes in class, on paper. It is impossible to give the entire structure over. 
Text is irrevocably intertwined with its stratified material contexts. It means—

6	
INTRODUCTION
it becomes—something else when recreated under conditions that are not 
fully congruent to my own.
Much contemporary anxiety about the intrusion of computational culture 
into the everyday can be traced to such fundamental reshaping of the sign. 
Its fracture leads to its multivalence. The lattice expands into spaces be-
tween signs, where forces of capital and control intervene to monitor and 
monetize.8 Reading and writing are no longer solitary activities. Who shares 
the page? What entities contest newly found space bearing digital inscrip-
tion? The answers lie in our ability to perceive latent topographies.
Reflecting on the development of Morse code in 1949 in the Proceedings 
of the American Philosophical Society, Frank Halstead mentioned the difficulty 
of finding a home in either the arts or sciences for what he called code 
development: “It is a matter somewhat related to the general art of cryptol-
ogy, yet it is not wholly divorced from electrical engineering nor from general 
philology.”9 As Halstead anticipated, research into codification would lead to 
a rich multidisciplinary archive of materials on the history of literary theory, 
semiotics, telegraphy, and electrical engineering from the mid-nineteenth cen-
tury to the end of the twentieth century. That archive includes patents and 
technical manuals, formalist manifestos, studies of animal communication, 
human–computer interaction textbooks, and foundational texts in aesthetics 
and literary theory.
I deploy the archive to argue that extant theories of interpretation evolved 
under conditions tied to static print media. By contrast, digital texts change 
dynamically to suit their readers, political contexts, and geographies. Conse-
quently, I advocate for the development of computational poetics: a strategy 
of interpretation capable of reaching past surface content to reveal platforms 
and infrastructures that stage the construction of meaning. Where “distant 
reading” and cultural analytics perceive patterns across large-scale corpora, 
computational poetics breaks textuality down into its minute constituent com-
ponents. It is a strategy of microanalysis rather than macroanalysis.10
In Plain Text I also argue that some of the ideological afflictions of 
the contemporary public sphere (e.g., the acquiescence to routine surveil-
lance and censorship) relate to our failure as readers and writers to come 
to terms with the changing material conditions of digital text. A society 
that cares about the long-term preservation of complex discursive forma-
tions, such as free speech, privacy, or online deliberation, would do well to 
heed the textual building blocks at their base. The structure of discursive 

INTRODUCTION	
7
formations (documents and narratives) has long been at the center of both 
computer science and literary theory. By using primary sources from both 
disciplines, in Plain Text I uncover the shared history of literary machines, 
bringing computation closer to its humanistic roots and the humanities closer 
to their computational realities.
I make a historical case for the recovery of textual thought that is latent 
in the machinery of contemporary computing. Just as literary scholarship 
cannot survive without awareness of its computational present, the design 
of computational platforms cannot advance without greater awareness of its 
cultural contexts. The political struggle for meaning making, the very oppor-
tunity to engage in the act of interpretation, thus begins and ends with the 
material affordances of the epistemic artifact.11
The future of reading and writing is inexorably intertwined with the develop-
ment of computer science and software engineering. Even if you are not read-
ing these words on a screen, my message has reached you through a long 
chain of machine-mediated transformations: from the mechanical action of the 
keyboard on which I typed my manuscript, to the arrangement of electrons 
on magnetic storage media, the modulation of fiber-optic signal, the shimmer 
of the flowing liquid crystal display rendering the text, and on to the typeset-
ter’s shop and the printing press. Computation occupies the space between 
keyboard and screen, which in turn gives rise to higher-order cultural institu-
tions: from social media platforms to massive shared archives. Cultural tech-
niques that guide our use of such technologies are formative of the society 
as a whole.12 Daily choices such as choosing a text editor, a filing system, or 
a social networking platform cannot therefore be addressed in shallow instru-
mental, system-centric ideals. Complex computational systems do not give rise 
to ideals any more than financial markets do. From the many available visions 
of human–computer interaction, I argue for choosing ones that align with a 
humanist ethos, whatever the reader’s politics.
THEORY
Displacement
Plain Text is ultimately an exploration of textual space.13 I am thus inherently 
concerned with the dynamics of settlement and displacement, which frame 
my historical argument and form its theoretical underpinnings.
I mean “settlement” in the way one lives among and within one’s own 
notebooks, bookshelves, and archives. Smart toasters and electronic heart 

8	
INTRODUCTION
valves differ from their dumb mechanical counterparts in that they simi-
larly give grounds to inscription. Computers perform reading and writing 
operations at scale. To support that activity, engineers necessarily create 
vast, in terms of information capacity, expanses. Commercial, private, and 
public interests rush in to colonize newly opened territories. Boundaries are 
drawn. Areas of exclusion are created, even in our most intimate spaces: 
bedsides, living rooms, kitchens, the body and the mind. A diabetic is not 
able to modify her insulin pump software; the smart television contains 
proprietary firmware that is controlled at a distance and without explicit 
consent. The struggle is not one for virtual but for concrete grounds for 
inscription.
These intimate territories are remote, however, in that they unfold at 
quantum scale. Individuals who are not privy to the mechanics of micro-
molecular writing are hence in peril of unprecedented dispossession. I am 
concerned here with our basic ability to shape discourse—to read and write—
along surfaces that are not available for immediate scrutiny. Poetics—the 
affordance of literary space—physically limits the possibility of interpretation. 
An illegible sign is one that never enters the hermeneutic circuit.
In making the case for a computational poetics, I am helped by recent 
scholarship in the historically and philosophically inflected studies of media 
and technology.14 My notion of poetics also builds on the long history of 
literary theory, in the genealogy of formalist and structuralist schools. My 
approach is not limited, however, to the canonical, straight-ahead structural-
isms of Roman Jakobson or Jonathan Culler. Rather, I am borrowing from 
a more peripheral tradition represented best by such third-culture thinkers 
as Viktor Shklovsky and Vilém Flusser, consummate immigrants both, who 
extracted a methodology out of the fabric of their displacement.
Flusser in particular considered the condition of unease that comes with 
migration, both physical and mental, to be a kind of information processing. 
His thought was influential in making sense of my own displacements, first 
as a refugee fleeing the dissolution of the former Soviet Union, next as a 
transplant into Silicon Valley from a strict literary education, and now as 
a lapsed engineer among humanists. These vantage points offer a singular 
view onto the material conditions of contemporary intellectual life.
Both Shklovsky and Flusser wrote lucidly about the dynamics of settle-
ment. Their work sheds light on an irresistible compromise at the core of 
all technology by which we trade critical understanding for comfort. Habit 

	
INTRODUCTION	
9
covers the various homes we make for ourselves in the world “like a fluffy 
blanket,” Flusser wrote. “It smoothes the sharp edges of all phenomena that 
it covers, so that I no longer bump against them, but I am able to make 
use of them blindly.”15 When we sit at our desks, for example, we fail to see 
“papers and books that are lying all about.”16 We are used to them being 
there as they are. We do not, therefore, parse them as information. Like 
water that surrounds fish, habituated things pass into the background of 
experience. Mediums become media. They cease producing meaning, become 
stages for meaning making, and like a stage disappear from view.
Losing sight of the material contexts of knowledge production is politi-
cally perilous, because those who own the contexts set the terms of engage-
ment. Estrangement arrests material concealment. Exile allows the displaced 
to once again transform habituated media into meaningful information. In 
exile, “everything is unusual,” Flusser wrote.17 Migrants experience the world 
as ex-perience (er-fahrung, literally “a driving out”). Discovery, Flusser con-
cluded, “begins as soon as the blanket is pulled away,” where familiar ob-
jects can pass into view again.18
To take a simple example, one could write “a field of study” without 
much thought about figurative space. Shklovsky would have readers pause to 
consider the implications.19 In what sense do ideas resemble (or not) a field? 
A poet could take things further and elaborate: “to scythe a verdant field of 
literary study.” The verb (to scythe) and the adjective (verdant) create an un-
expected transference of new qualities not present in the original image (intel-
lectual field). These qualities overdetermine or saturate the metaphor, exposing 
its conceit. One can do to fields of grass what one cannot to ideas. Subse-
quently, we realize that the two domains, intellectual and horticultural, do not 
map onto each other perfectly; they leave a semantic remainder, the chaff. 
Readers discover intellectual “fields” for what they are: habituated metaphors, 
neither natural nor self-apparent. Metaphors are made strange again through 
purposeful defamiliarization. To take the technique to its logical conclusion, a 
writer could depict several fictional characters in the act of scything a field of 
grass while discussing the relative merits of structuralism: a discussion about 
the field on a field. Such literary artifice would make actual the implied con-
nections between fields of grass and ideas. The writer shows what was merely 
told before. The technique of defamiliarization renews the figure: discarding 
hardened clichés while suggesting novel linkages between constituent con-
cepts—ideational chaff, leaves of mental grass, combines of thought.

10	
INTRODUCTION
I would like to effect a similar sense of estrangement when it comes to 
our use of technology. The formalists understood habituated metaphors to 
lessen the vitality of experience. Shklovsky quotes from the diaries of Lev 
Tolstoy, who, while dusting his room, could not remember if he had already 
dusted his sofa. Tolstoy wrote, “Because actions like these are habituated 
and unconscious, I could not remember . . . whether I dusted and forgot 
or just did so without thinking—it was as if the action never happened. . . . 
Thus when life passes without conscious reflection, it passes as if one has 
not lived at all.”20 Shklovsky added that life so habituated disappears into 
nothingness when the automatization of experience “consumes things, cloth-
ing, furniture, your spouse, and the fear of war.”21
The formalists rarely quoted Marx directly. Yet Marx resonates through-
out. For Marx, dead metaphors marked alienation from humanity.22 The point 
at which material artifacts disappear from consciousness is also one where 
they appear within the social sphere as fetishes.
Shklovsky changed Marx’s German Entfremdung (alienation), which for 
Marx always denied life, into the Russian ostranenie (estrangement), literally 
an “othering,” of the kind that affirms it. The difference is one of agency. 
In the first case, subjects are treated like objects by others. In the second, 
subjects recognize and reject the objectified other within. Formalist estrange-
ment, which is sometimes also translated as defamiliarization, arrests the 
momentum of tacitly received habit. Once estranged and extracted like a 
splinter, ossified experience can be revitalized.
Our challenge today is to uproot ourselves from the comforts that rap-
idly descend on the dwellings of our intellectual life. By dulling the senses, 
seemingly inconspicuous conduits of agency—electronic books and smart 
desks—acquire a sense of intelligence of their own. Devices that “watch,” 
“hear,” “see,” and “think” give rise to object-oriented ontology and the Inter-
net of Things. A new generation of objects clamors for participatory intelli-
gence. They claim space in the home, near heart and hearth. Smart phones, 
smart lightbulbs, smart thermostats, smart homes, and smart watches enter 
the networked public sphere in the role of independent agents.23 A conversa-
tion begins about their personhood: their levels of trust, friendships, rights, 
and accountability.24 Marx’s table that “evolves out of its wooden brain 
grotesque ideas” becomes Microsoft Surface and PixelSense, that is, actual 
smart tables, intellect itself, commodified.25
If we hope to understand digital culture and especially literature “under 

	
INTRODUCTION	
11
conditions of high technology,” as Friedrich Kittler would write, we can do 
so only from the position of humanism. One cannot otherwise lament the 
systematic erasure of the human from the literary process and, at the same 
time, advocate for a post- or antihumanism. Unlike Kittler, who wrote that 
under conditions of high technology “literature has nothing more to say,” 
I believe that literature and literary analysis continue to have a voice in 
contemporary life.26 Technology does not—cannot be allowed to—determine 
literary silence. Rather, as the material grounds for all reflective textual 
activity recede from view, readers face the prospect of selective illiteracy.27 
The command of technologies such as networking and encryption separates 
those able to read and write under conditions of high technology from those 
who no longer are, which is another dispossession.
When we mistake things for animate actors, we further diminish our ca-
pacity for critical analysis or collective action. Objects that surround us log 
our reading habits, social interactions, and intimate conversations. Agents 
that benefit from trade in such personal data are neither cyborgs nor 
posthuman assemblages. The bargain that trades critical understanding for 
comfort benefits specific individual interests. To address objects as though 
they could respond in kind shifts our attention from seats of power to things 
powerless, inarticulate, and indifferent to our protestations. One can no more 
extract justice from a smart desk than hold a bureaucracy accountable. No-
tions of justice and accountability presuppose a robust model of agency, 
which is absent in the assemblage.
The internal exile that we must undergo for smart books and smart 
desks to come into view cannot compare in difficulty to the experience of 
physical displacement that follows natural disaster, war, poverty, or politi-
cal instability. Yet our systematic reluctance to take on even those small 
intellectual discomforts that could lead to acts of localized dissent and 
­disobedience—to write using free software, build open archives, or share 
memories in private—cannot be said to exist outside complex systems that 
perpetuate inequity and violence globally. The emotional affirmation that ac-
companies exuberant technesis (e.g., the ecstasy of constant communication) 
brings with it governing structures invoked in the name of law enforcement 
and national security. Comfort and security constitute the same ill-conceived 
bargain that leads to critical disempowerment. But where it is difficult to 
imagine or to enact strategies of digital disobedience on a universal scale, 
we can begin to address them through numerous minute local transactions 

12	
INTRODUCTION
that in aggregate brace everyday literary exchange. This we can do here and 
now. Computational poetics begins with machines in our immediate proximity, 
closest to thought and touch.
Picking up an electronic book and taking it apart may be against the law 
in some jurisdictions.28 Given the extent to which emergent thought things—­
epistemic artifacts such as electronic books and smart phones—participate 
actively in the production of meaning, we can no longer use strategies of 
interpretation at the level of ideology or representation alone.29 The praxis 
of close reading must reach down to the silicon bedrock: material entities and 
physical structures that bear the weight of interpretation. Literary theory, a 
discipline fundamentally engaged in the exegesis of figurative trope, is there-
fore crucial to the understanding of new computational environments, which 
have enveloped intellectual life through metaphoric substitution. To read the 
machine is to learn how it is made, but it is also to unpack the rich meta-
phors that guide our tactical engagement with the word: the boot in rebooting, 
the wares in software, the bug and the joystick, the interpreter and the shell.
Settlement
Estrangement cannot be practiced effectively in monologue. To produce mean-
ing, Flusser reminds us, it needs to become a dialogical, dialectical practice. 
Perpetual exile is otherwise uninhabitable.30 Without the shelter of one’s home, 
everything turns to noise. Information cannot exist without dwelling, “and with-
out information, in a chaotic world, one can neither feel nor think nor act,” 
Flusser wrote.31 Estrangement thrusts the displaced into the chaos of unsettled 
existence. With time, they make a new home, from which they can once again 
“receive noise as information” and produce meaning: “I am embedded in the 
familiar so that I can reach out toward the unfamiliar and create things yet 
unknown.”32 A dialectics of exile leads to “informed renewal” of shared space, 
through what Flusser called a creative dialogue between the settled and the 
displaced.33
In Plain Text I thus model the reciprocal movement to “making strange” 
on the diverse practices of reverse engineering. Similar in method to what 
Matthew Kirschenbaum called forensic argumentation, reverse engineering 
recalls the formalist strategy of structural decomposition.34 The function of 
case studies in an engineer’s education, as Henry Petroski explained in his 
Invention by Design, is to understand the ways by which one gets “from 
thought to thing.”35 From thought to thing would be an apt definition of 

	
INTRODUCTION	
13
poetics and an alternative subtitle to this book. Along with literary and his-
torical exposition, each of my chapters contains at least one literary thought 
thing. Each enacts a deconstruction—a literal taking apart—of that device. A 
reification of the ideal, the epistemic object is meant to augment and refine 
theory.
The reverse engineering of literary devices reveals that not all texts are 
created equal. In print, traditional distinctions between form and content 
lie flat. A printing press embeds ink into paper, leaving no space between 
type and page. Materially minded critics such as Johanna Drucker, Kather-
ine ­Hayles, and Jerome McGann have urged literary scholars to reevaluate 
textuality in its media-specific contexts.36 Their work reminds us that the 
flatness of digital text is an illusion. Low-level operational intuitions that 
govern ­textuality—ideas about form, content, style, letter, and word—change 
profoundly as texts shift their confines from paper to pixel.
A substantial gap separates visible text from its storage medium. The two 
sites of inscription, screen and electromagnetic storage, are physically incon-
gruent. One must be translated, transformed into the other. Control codes 
govern the process of transfiguration, which brings with it physical control 
at the level of platform and architecture. This is a layer where, for example, 
we can find spyware and censorship filters, digital rights management, and 
advertisement delivery.
I propose to begin, then, with this obvious sense of difference between 
paper and pixel: Where print is governed by law from without (think, for 
example, of England’s Obscene Publication Acts), digital text is governed 
by code from within.37 I go further than others to maintain that digital text 
is code, in the sense that it is always parsed and potentially executable.38 
Control binds to content inextricably to become an organ in the same uni-
fied corpus.
Changing material conditions of textual transmission alter the theoreti-
cal vocabulary of literary criticism. The ease with which some digital texts 
can be reproduced, for example, has the unexpected effect of destabilizing 
the material bases for authorship attribution. Text that is easy to copy is 
easy to cite or plagiarize. The physically diminished notion of authorship 
makes certain ways of talking about such constructs as authorial intent 
and fidelity to the original difficult to sustain. Practices of collaborative and 
­machine-assisted writing (e.g., Wikipedia, automatic news summarization) fur-
ther erode notions of authorship based on individual genius.

14	
INTRODUCTION
The author is not dead, however; authors continue to live and collect 
royalties.39 Autopoiesis (literature writing or discourse speaking itself) does 
not displace the social institution of authorship.40 Codification merely makes 
the flows of poiesis less apparent. Although it is difficult to find specific 
parties responsible for massive spam campaigns or to credit individual Wiki-
pedia writers, spammers do routinely find themselves in court just as notable 
Wikipedia contributors receive “barn stars” in recognition of their efforts.
Extant models of literary transmission assume movement through pas-
sive and immutable media. Paper constitutes the document of record, which, 
once archived, does not change its contents. Philological techniques like 
genetic criticism and forensic reading make it possible to reconstruct if not 
authorial intent, then at least a trace of an author’s hand. In some cases—
think manuscripts and folios—we may even ascribe properties such as fidelity 
to original works of art. When media are immutable, one imagines a causal 
chain of custody between works and their creators, who at some point must 
have occupied the same contiguous time and space: The closer a parchment 
to Shakespeare, the higher its evidentiary (and market) value.
The transition between the Gutenberg press and Project Gutenberg, an 
online library containing thousands of texts, complicates the linkage. Unlike 
pen and paper, which come in direct contact with each other during writing, 
the bridge between keyboard and screen passes through multiple mediating 
filters. Writing itself becomes a programmed experience. We do not write on-
screen in the conventional sense of etching marks into a static host. The act 
is a simulation displaced in time and space. We neither immediately touch 
nor see the textual conduit. The visible does not correspond to the actual. An 
erased word on paper, for example, implies the physical destruction of ink. By 
contrast, a simulated digital erasure, of the kind that happens when a writer 
presses the backspace key, does not necessarily correspond to the erasure 
of content on disk. The “erased” word could persist and even multiply across 
other storage drives and devices. Erasure in that sense no longer nullifies; 
it bears witness. It can be used to train algorithms or indicate the intent to 
conceal. The changing materialities of digital inscription thus ultimately entail 
wide-ranging political consequences.
The illusory affordances of the fractured sign, as described, require a 
poetics capable of reconstructing a sequence of willful delegation: from 
thought—someone’s thought—to thing. A discipline of close attention to the 
minute particulars of encoding, transmission, storage, and the decoding of 

INTRODUCTION	
15
texts reclaims a measure of intent and thereby authorial responsibility. In 
many cases we may not care to speak of it. One would hardly find Tolstoy at 
fault for his War and Peace. In other contexts, as when unsolicited advertise-
ments clutter bandwidth to the exclusion of other forms of speech, we must.
This may seem strange at first: to recover the subject in the physical 
minutiae of the encounter between text and machine. The point of contact 
between human, text, and device is significant because it is in the liminal 
zone of semiotic exchange where subjects disappear into machines and 
where machines step forth as animated and seemingly intelligent actors. Our 
ability to apprehend the politics of smart objects depends on the formulation 
of their poetics: how they are made.
METHOD
We cannot separate the two things: head and hand. . . . The science of life 
. . . is a superb and dazzlingly lighted hall which may be reached only by pass-
ing through a long and ghastly kitchen. . . . We shall reach really fruitful and 
luminous generalizations about vital phenomena only in so far as we ourselves 
experiment and, in hospitals, amphitheaters, or laboratories, stir the fetid or 
throbbing ground of life.41
My approach to writing Plain Text stems from the desire to enact theory 
capable of addressing the grim picture Friedrich Kittler painted at the end 
of his influential monograph Gramophone, Film, Typewriter.42 By all accounts, 
Kittler was neither a technological romantic nor a Luddite. I hence under-
stand his Gramophone, Film, Typewriter as a call to action. When Kittler 
wrote that “media determine our situation,” he challenged his readers to 
choose between complicity and defiance.43 It was not a statement of fact but 
the articulation of a question: What can one do to counteract technological 
determinism? In what follows, I outline several intellectual lineages—material-
ist, pragmatist, and experimental—that frame my answer.
Critical theory at its best aims to see “the human bottom of nonhuman 
things.”44 As such, it is one of our most powerful tools for analysis and 
resistance against technological determinism. Max Horkheimer wrote that the 
issue “is not simply the theory of emancipation; it is the practice of it as 
well.”45 My thought and practice is inspired by scholars of media and tech-
nology (Bernard Stiegler, Christina Dunbar-Hester, Tiziana Terranova, and Lilly 
Irani among others) who have turned the tools of critical theory toward the 
instrumental contexts of knowledge production.46 I join them to argue that in 

16	
INTRODUCTION
treating the instruments of intellectual production uncritically, all of us, read-
ers and writers, accumulate a debt that accrues both technical and ethical 
interest. It is one thing, for instance, to theorize about the free movement of 
literary tropes across cultures and continents and quite another to have that 
theory appear in print behind paywalls inaccessible to most global reading 
publics.47 Similarly, a theoretical distinction between form and content, when 
instantiated in specific file formats such as Microsoft Word (docx) or Adobe 
Reader (pdf), establishes divisions of labor between editors, booksellers, 
and offshore typesetting firms.48 One group trades content in an economy 
of prestige, another controls distribution for corporate profit in a market 
economy, and yet another labors invisibly on formatting in an economy of 
survival. Distinctions of labor persevere so long as theory persists in the 
abstract. A materialist critique cannot achieve its stated aims without pur-
chase on the material world. Contemporary knowledge workers stare into 
rectangular black boxes for a considerable part of their days, suspecting, in 
the absence of other feedback, that their gaze is met in bad faith. Bad faith 
points to a misalignment between thought and action.49
Connecting theories of meaning making to their practice offers a way out 
of the conundrum. The solution to connect meaning with operational meaning 
thus belongs equally to a species of pragmatism, as it does to critical theory. 
William James articulated the approach concisely when he wrote that “reality 
is seen to be grounded in a perfect jungle of concrete ­expediencies.”50 For 
James and other pragmatists, truth could not be found outside that jungle, 
in the abstract. It always entailed real consequences, causes, and effects.51 
In his essay “Pragmatism’s Conception of Truth,” James asked, “How will the 
truth be realized? . . . What concrete difference will its being true make in 
anyone’s actual life? . . . What experiences will be different from those which 
would obtain if the belief were false?”52 Frank Ramsey, the young British 
philosopher close to Ludwig Wittgenstein, would later write in a similar vein 
about meaning “defined by reference to the actions.”53
For a pragmatist, truth-carrying propositions of the shape “X is Y ” (as in 
“the author is dead” or “art is transcendent”) raise the questions of where, 
when, for whom, and what is at stake in maintaining that? Following the 
pragmatic insight of James and Ramsey, I proceed with the conviction that 
abstract categories such as literature, computation, and text cannot possibly 
be reduced to a number of essential structural features. Rather, to bor-
row from Wittgenstein’s Philosophic Investigations, categories denote a set 

	
INTRODUCTION	
17
of related practices that share some familial characteristics.54 In our case, 
imagine a tree diagram in which the branches of computation and textuality 
intersect and diverge in ways that we have yet to untangle.
In an approach to doing theory, Plain Text joins the experimental turn 
steering the academy toward critical practice, especially in fields long domi-
nated by purely speculative thought. The experimental turn represents a 
generation’s dissatisfaction with armchair philosophizing. Recall the burning 
armchair, the symbol of the experimental philosophy movement. Joshua 
Knobe and Shaun Nichols, some of the early proponents of the movement, 
explain that “many of the deepest questions of philosophy can only be 
properly addressed by immersing oneself in the messy, contingent, highly 
variable truths about how human beings really are.”55 The emergence of 
spaces where research in the humanities is done exemplifies the same trend. 
In naming the locations of their practice “laboratories,” “studios,” and “work-
shops,” humanists reach for new metaphors of labor. These metaphors aim 
to reorganize the relationship between body, space, artifact, knowledge, and 
inscription. In my lab and elsewhere, researchers have taken to calling this 
approach the experimental humanities.
As an example of what I have been calling here the experimental turn 
in the field of early modern history, consider the preface to the recent vol-
ume Ways of Making and Knowing, edited by Pamela Smith, Amy Meyers, 
and Harold Cook. They write that the “history of science is not a history of 
concepts, or at least not that alone, but a history of the making and using 
of objects to understand the world.”56 Smith translates that insight in her 
laboratory, where, together with students, she bakes bread and smelts iron 
to recreate long-lost artisanal techniques. For those who experiment, book 
knowledge and artifactual knowledge connect in practice.
Artifactual knowledge—from typesetting software to e-book readers and 
word processors—shapes our everyday encounter with literature. Such tech-
nologies should not be understood as value-neutral conduits of information. 
I follow Lewis Mumford and Langdon Winner to argue that technology affects 
the exercise of textual politics in subtle and profound ways.57 Artifacts cannot 
hold beliefs about politics. Rather, political power is exercised through them. 
For example, stairs do not discriminate against the mobility impaired; the 
human failure to enforce accessibility through specific legal and architectural 
choices does. Typesetting software, e-book readers, and word processors 
similarly embody implicit communication models: ideas about deliberation, 

18	
INTRODUCTION
ethics of labor, discursive values, and views about “natural” human aptitude 
for interpretation. The maker of the electronic book encodes how the book 
is sold and where, minimum and maximum font size, the visibility of marginal 
notation, the possibility of sharing, the availability of critical apparatus. Con-
tent in that sense is meant for further processing, in a way that maximizes 
its extracted value. Contemporary documents are capable of structuring the 
literary encounter to these ends according to a reader’s economic status, 
gender, race, age, location, or physical ability.
To what extent does the book in front of you sanction access? Whatever 
the answer, a function of understanding the text includes an explication 
of its physical affordances. The experimental approach to reading enables 
­critics to lay bare the device. A literary scholar’s version of baking bread and 
smelting iron is to make literal the archaeology of media at the level of the 
mechanism. In Plain Text we will unearth and excavate textual machines. In 
practicing archaeology, I contend that cardinal literary-theoretical concepts, 
such as word, text, narrative, discourse, author, story, book, and archive, are 
thoroughly enmeshed in the underlying physical substratum of paper and 
pixel. It follows that any attempt to articulate the idea cannot attain its full 
expressive potential without a thick description of its base particulates.
Luckily for us, reading and writing are not esoteric activities. They are 
readily available for introspection. I therefore occasionally encourage readers 
to encounter the immediate contexts of their reading anew: to put down the 
book or to lean away from a screen and to look at these textual artifacts 
with strange eyes. In this movement of the body, I want to disrupt the mind’s 
habituated intuitions, pitting them against knowledge at hand and fingertip 
knowledge, as when ruffling through the pages or typing at a keyboard. How 
ephemeral is an electronic text, for example? The pragmatic answer lies 
not in reductive universal propositions—very or not at all—but in contingent 
technological affordances attached to specific reading devices. What can 
a reader do with this text, here and now? Where is it stored? Are readers 
given dispensation to copy and paste? Do they have legal permission to 
quote at length, to perform publicly, or to otherwise transmediate? Will this 
text disappear when its reader closes the book’s cover?
PLAN OF THE PRESENT WORK
The pathways of inscription winding their way through the device exist in rela-
tion to distinct communities of computational practice. A researcher cannot 

	
INTRODUCTION	
19
for this reason expect to discover a single theoretical framework that cap-
tures the complexity of digital text in motion. An engineer’s use of the words 
code and poetry differs from that of a poet’s. The changing contexts evoke 
a corresponding shift in operational definitions. This book is thus neither a 
total history of modern computing nor a survey of literary theory. Rather, the 
argument herein progresses from the action of the alphanumerical keyboard 
switch, through copper and silicon, to liquid crystal and the floating gate, 
and on toward the reader and the community. It is but one of many possible 
passes through a cavernous black box.
The first chapter begins with a question: What does it mean to turn a 
page when neither pages nor the action of turning them corresponds to the 
implied analogy? A close reading of the metaphor leads to an intellectual 
history of human–computer interaction. It progresses from the conversa-
tional programming school of design to the direct manipulation school, the 
latter shaped by theories from cognitive linguistics and immersive theater. 
The logic of directness culminates in the rapidly developing field of brain–­
computer interfaces. The chapter concludes with a moment of speculative 
formalism, in which I consider the possibility of affective literature that es-
chews language and representation.
At the core of the book’s second chapter lies the notion of a modernist 
literary device, understood both as literary technique and thought experiment 
about intelligent machines, directly connected to the birth of modern com-
puting. A section on literary technique in the work of Percy Lubbock, Walter 
Benjamin, and Mikhail Bakhtin opens the discussion. Materialist poetics rise 
concomitantly alongside a mechanistic, rule-based view of language. In this 
chapter I reconstruct a series of thought experiments first in the writing of 
Ludwig Wittgenstein and then in Alan Turing’s seminal paper on an imaginary 
computer capable of reading and writing. The verbs to read and to write 
imply a type of cognitive processing. What does it mean to read and to 
write for a machine? What about broken mechanisms of comprehension? At 
once device and algorithm, the Turing machine blurs the boundaries between 
software and hardware, code and content, intelligence and its imitation.
In the third chapter the intellectual history of literary formalism collides 
with format theory found in both textual criticism and computer science. The 
concept of format, as I describe it, mediates between a text’s intrinsic rules 
for construction and its extrinsic shape, transforming one type of structure (a 
series of bits arranged into tracks and sectors) into another (letters arranged 

20	
INTRODUCTION
into sentences and paragraphs). A history of document formats illustrates 
the theoretical discussion. Formatting comes into being with several control 
characters, which are limited in function to actions such as carriage return 
and stop transmission. With time, formats encompass all manner of machine 
instruction, including technical means of enforcing digital rights management, 
copy protection, and other legal instruments. A manufacturer’s ability to 
censor or to surveil digital text is thereby contained in the formatting layer: 
from electronic books that modify themselves to suit the reader’s geographic 
location to smart contracts that contain the rules of their own execution.
The fourth chapter begins with an apparent paradox. A camp of media 
theorists and textual scholars in the 1990s conceived of electronic texts as 
a near immaterial phenomenon. Text shimmered and glared; it was discussed 
in terms of ephemera, hypertext, light writing, and electricity. A generation 
of theorists that came after insisted on the weighty materiality of electronic 
media. Reading began to engage the morphology of rare metals, media ar-
chaeology, hard-drive forensics. Both accounts, I argue, capture an aspect of 
the same underlying condition. The perceived image of an archived inscription 
splits from its source. The sign plausibly resides both on the screen and on 
the hard drive. It fractures in some real sense, diverging at the site of its pro-
jection from the site of the archive. Using materials from the history of teleg-
raphy in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, I chart the gradual 
fissure and ultimate illegibility of the newly composite sign. Marks made on 
punch cards and ticker tape protruded through the medium. Although difficult 
to read, these forms of machine writing were readily visible and therefore 
amenable to analysis. The advent of magnetic storage forced the composite 
inscription into an opaque conduit. Unable to perceive magnetic polarities 
without the aid of a machine, readers often manipulated text blindly. In this 
way a typist would type several sentences without seeing the printed output. 
The chapter identifies a milestone in the history of human textuality: the mo-
ment at which the inscription passed from view, giving rise to the sometimes 
conflicting but nevertheless consistent accounts of digital textuality.
The fifth and final chapter charts the emergence of screen reading. 
Screens restore a measure of visibility lost to electromagnetic inscription, 
with one major side effect: Fidelity between visible and archived inscrip-
tion cannot be guaranteed. Screen reading further happens on screens 
that refresh themselves at a rate of about 60 cycles per second (Hertz). 
The digital word is technically an animation; it moves even as it appears 

	
INTRODUCTION	
21
to stand still. This property attunes the reader to a particular mode of ap-
prehension, affecting not just the physics but also the aesthetics of digital 
media. Works by philosophers Henri Bergson, John Haugeland, and Nelson 
Goodman construe a phenomenology of screen-based digital perception. 
The digital emerges not as a medium’s intrinsic property but as a structure 
imposed from without. In the extreme, that means that a censored electronic 
text can appear in practice as a perfectly analog artifact, despite being 
digital in all other senses of the word. Conversely, texts in print are already 
born digital, in the sense that all literary works are already to some extent 
amenable to “reliable processes of copying and preservation.”58 Properties 
that make media digital or analog reveal themselves to be neither universal 
nor essential to the medium. The medium is not the message. As I argue in 
the conclusion of the chapter, reliability and preservation of textual copies 
may mean one thing to a literary scholar, another to a software engineer or 
a legal professional, and something entirely different to a librarian. It matters 
not what the text is but what we can do with it.
In a short conclusion I gesture toward the contemporary political conse-
quences of the material covered, discussing also the possibility of machine 
phenomenology in relationship to humanism. Computational poetics, I main-
tain, encourages users to become active thinkers, tinkerers, and makers of 
technology. I further encourage those who may have considered themselves 
mere users of computation to apply the same critical acuity they employ 
in the close reading of prose and poetry to the understanding of code 
and machine. For text to render on-screen properly, it must be encoded 
or translated from machine-transmittable code into human-readable shape. 
Encoding constitutes a primitive field of textual activity—a system of semiotic 
exchange—visible at the crossroads of computer science and literary theory. 
Encoding finally matters because how texts are encoded, transmitted, and 
stored decides who gets to decode, receive, and revise.

This page intentionally left blank 

Jean Baudrillard’s sometimes enigmatic comments on the genesis of simu-
lacra in the late 1980s are beginning to come into focus for me only now, 
when code has already conquered culture. Today, computers interject ubiq-
uitously. We drink our morning coffee from brewing machines that use fuzzy 
logic. At night we go to bed surrounded by smart alarm clocks and sleep ac-
tivity monitors. Baudrillard wrote, “At the limit of an always increasing elimi-
nation of references and finalities . . . we find ‘the programmatic sign,’ whose 
‘value’ is purely tactical.”1 Like good theater, we experience the machine in 
immersion, suspending disbelief. This leads to what Baudrillard called the 
“ever-increasing loss of resemblances and designations.”2 The programmatic 
sign circumvents critical reflection in favor of affect. Its value is tactical in 
the sense that it appeals to practical reason alone, by invoking purely in-
strumental terms, such as efficiency, performance, disruption, and innovation.
Code, as we encounter it here, elicits pleasure and catharsis. In this, 
the programmer and the user occupy distinct and unequal positions in the 
epistemological hierarchy. Code is not usually meant to be decoded by 
those it acts upon. Recipients of codified control are spared the friction of 
signification, remaining instead in the state of asemiosis and therefore ne-
science. In return, code compels exacting obedience. Baudrillard understands 
the essence of the programmatic sign to lie in the “micromolecular structure 
of command and control.”3 The appeal to structure at the molecular level 
CHAPTER 1
> METAPHOR MACHINES

24	
METAPHOR MACHINES
draws readers’ attention to the perils of selective illiteracy. As inscription, 
code settles within remote materialities, at strata not immediately perceptible 
to human senses. Users are thereby confronted with the choice to persist in 
the simulation pleasurably or face the difficulty of microscopic reading, which 
requires special tools and training. Value is further derived from the resulting 
imbalance of critical acumen.
The programmatic sign so conceived splits its energies between screen 
and hard drive. On the screen, at the site of projection, the programmatic 
sign simulates familiar materialities: buttons, bins, files, folders, drawers, 
desktops, windows, tiles, wood grain, drop shadows, chrome. At the site of 
storage, from which the sign emanates, the language changes to the vocabu-
lary of control: central processing units, compilation, commitment, extraction, 
command, condition, initiation, handling, function, persistence, and execution. 
In the rift between the sites of storage (what is) and projection (what appears 
to be), the programmatic sign undergoes a series of structural transforma-
tions. What originates from (1) the keyboard as the mechanical action of a 
switch becomes (2) an electric signal that (3) leaves electromagnetic marks 
in computer memory, which (4) morph into phases of liquid crystal on-screen, 
leaving behind (5) letters that emanate outward as light. Programming lan-
guages bridge the passage between bodies, archives, and screens, breaking 
thought up into differentiated units for transfer. Simulation emerges in the 
reassembly of fractured media into a seemingly continuous integrated whole, 
whereby texts dissolve into letters and pixels, which then congeal back into 
holistic literary works.
Roman Jakobson called such construction and deconstruction of mean-
ing the “profuse exchange of ritualized formulas” or the phatic function 
of language.4 Code, like the phatic utterance, facilitates the exchange of 
information through convention. The words “Hello world” on paper or in 
plain text format take up 11 bytes. In the Portable Document Format (PDF) 
they make up more than 24,000 bytes. The added information is directed 
not toward the receiver of the message but toward the channel itself. Code 
describes the rules of engagement between author and reader. It makes 
concrete and constrains the physical capabilities of the medium. The codi-
fied phatic function is more profuse than it is in speech, where it is limited 
to occasional metacommentary: Can you hear me now? It is also less ap-
parent in that it contains other (machine) languages and registers that are 
physically inaccessible to the recipient.

	
METAPHOR MACHINES	
25
Programming at its essence is a phatic activity. Code shapes and com-
mands. At the same time, it conjures fantastical metaphors to occlude the 
structure of shaping and commanding. The simulacrum created by code 
obscures the incongruence between visible signs and a medium’s under­lying 
material affordances. What you see is not always what you get. We are in-
stead confronted with a composite image, which under examination reveals a 
complex process of transfiguration between the visible sign and the sign at 
the site of its inscription.
The simulation is without a referent. It bears little resemblance to ma-
terial substrata of electronic reading. We believe we are handling books; 
our ideas about reading and interpretation subsequently rely on that initial 
physical point of contact with paper. But when reading electronically, we are 
handling something other than print material. The semblance to paper guides 
our intuitions about the medium and its associated affordances: to scroll, 
bookmark, or turn pages. We have far fewer intuitions about the affordances 
of inscription at the micromolecular level. As we “turn” simulated pages, 
electric charges embedded into a solid-state medium cross the impenetrable 
oxide barrier, reaching their destination, the floating gate, through quantum 
tunneling. Electromagnetic inscription exploits the wave-particle duality of 
matter and its corollary, the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.5 A digital text 
thus comprises numerous improbable events at quantum scale.
What can be said about practices of reading and interpretation grounded 
in such remote physicalities? For now, only that they continue to unfold 
figuratively, removed from the material conditions of knowledge production. 
Metaphor sustains our lives in digital worlds artificially by analogy to ha-
bituated media. We already know what to do with paper; electronic books 
therefore replicate paper. Replicators dull the discomfort of contact between 
human and machine. They hinder efforts to master poetics at quantum 
scale: the ability to inject electrons, draw lattices, manipulate arrays, af-
fect solid states of being. It is tempting to view media ecosystems that 
host our digital lives as a kind of a natural element like water or air. But 
we should not forget that computational ecologies are always constructed 
environments. They are not governed by laws of physics in the same sense 
that clouds or oceans are. They form part of a massive tactical effort to 
bring private spaces of inhabitance—think the Home folder on your com-
puter, your family photo album, your digital bookmarks—under the purview 
of computational control. Simulations encode political structures that should 

26	
METAPHOR MACHINES
not be naturalized, lest we succumb to the complacency of technological 
determinism.
My goal in this chapter is therefore to interrupt the frictionless advance 
of the computational metaphor, to separate resemblances from their designa-
tions, the apparent shape from a command in the imperative. What does it 
mean to turn a page in a medium that sustains neither turning nor pages? 
I rely on the language of cognitive metaphor theory to tell a story of meta-
phor’s influence on computation at a formative moment in the history of 
human–computer interaction. I approach this tradition from within, taking on 
its language and assumptions in the first few sections of the chapter. In the 
later sections I narrate the historical transition from literal computing, by 
which users gave explicit commands to their machines, to the so-called direct 
manipulation model, in which they began to occupy virtual, figurative environ-
ments. The chapter draws on archives from graphic design, literary theory, 
and computer science, fields that came into direct contact in the 1970s, 
1980s, and 1990s. The trajectory from the conversational to the direct model 
of human–computer interaction points to a speculative possibility by which 
human and machine couple in seemingly unmediated, affective ways. I ac-
knowledge and finally reject the idea outright in my conclusion.
VERISIMILITUDE
Metaphors structure human habitation within simulated environments. “Peo-
ple do not think like computers,” a group of engineers from Interval Re-
search Group wrote in a patent application describing “methods and systems 
for providing human/computer interfaces.” According to their description, 
metaphors “permit more efficient and medium independent communications 
between people and computers.”6 Metaphor mediates in the symbolic trans-
ference between human and machine, in the liminal space where two dis-
parate systems of representation meet to exchange information. “Certain 
encoded information is translated into certain decoded information,” the 
engineers concluded.7
Interfaces translate machine states (the configuration of open and closed 
circuits) into pictures, numbers, and letters, which are all species of human 
cognitive states. In essence, a computer is a system for such metaphoric 
transference of properties. “A user interface is represented on the display 
screen in the form of metaphoric objects, called icons,” wrote another group 
of engineers employed by the Xerox Corporation. An icon, they continued, 

	
METAPHOR MACHINES	
27
“may be a representation of a virtual object, such as a virtual floppy disk.” 
Crucially, a virtual object can be accessible either in what the authors re-
ferred to as a “host system world” or an “emulating processor world,” even 
when “virtual floppy disk[s] may have a filing system alien to the host system 
world.”8 An arrangement of information on-screen—the poetics of emulated 
space—are incompatible with arrangements of electromagnetic charge on 
disk—the poetics of inscription.
To reflect on metaphoric function in everyday computation, consider 
the following passage from a patent filed by Xerox in 1991. It describes an 
“electronic library metaphor,” which includes
a shared books with data base metaphor, a reference books metaphor, 
and a card catalog metaphor in one system that allows large object ori-
ented data bases to be organized and accessed in an exclusive environment 
and in addition allows access to screen icons, creates a visual hierarchy 
of related and shared objects, and allows mutually exclusive access to the 
metaphors within the library.9
The invention ultimately enables the “organizing, accessing, and query-
ing of information unique to physical libraries in an electronic workstation 
environment.”10
A related invention describes “methods, systems, and computer program 
products for the display and operation of virtual three-dimensional books.” Its 
purpose, according to the authors, “is to mitigate the limitations of the small 
screen space,” that is, to transform the constrained physical dimensions of 
screen space into an unconstrained virtual space. To achieve this effect, the 
system contains “two basic types of information: content information and 
display/manipulation information.” The authors explain that content “refers 
to the text and image data for the underlying document,” where display and 
manipulation protocols refer to the “data defining how the text and image 
data is to be presented to the user.” The separation of physical and virtual 
spaces allows users to “touch,” virtual “books and bookcases,” which “fly” 
from one “space” into another (see Figures 1.1 and 1.2).11
Set aside for the moment the peculiarity of being able to patent a meta-
phor. Note instead the ambiguity of technical language introduced by the 
split between “two types of information,” one describing the virtual space 
and the other the physical space. How does one “access” a metaphor, for 

FIGURE 1.1. Visual metaphors extend the affordances of the represented object into virtual 
space, as illustrated by this drawing from the Card et al. patent showing a sample interface 
for viewing a three-dimensional book. Source: Stuart Kent Card et al., “Methods, Systems, 
and Computer Program Products for the Display and Operation of Virtual Three-Dimensional 
Books,” Patent US7015910 B2, filed December 21, 2000, issued March 21, 2006, sheet 3.
FIGURE 1.2. Card et al. imagine “alternate display techniques for information about a big 
book.” The virtual object offers new possibilities for interaction. Source: Stuart Kent Card et 
al., “Methods, Systems, and Computer Program Products for the Display and Operation of 
Virtual Three-Dimensional Books,” Patent US7015910 B2, filed December 21, 2000, issued 
March 21, 2006, sheet 4.

	
METAPHOR MACHINES	
29
example? If someone were to “check out” a book from the electronic library, 
would she behold a book or its metaphor alone? What is lost or gained in 
the translation of library space into electronic work­stations? What mecha-
nisms would ensure the integrity between the metaphor and its underlying 
data structure? Metaphor theory strains to answer such questions.
Traditional metaphor theorists see metaphor as a linguistic phenom-
enon. To say “The day stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops” is to 
use the verb stand in a novel linguistic context. Days have no literal legs 
to stand on. In the 1980s scholars such as John Searle, George Lakoff, 
and Mark Turner argued that metaphors were broadly cognitive phenomena 
that mapped distinct ontological categories across conceptual domains.12 
In the modified view, even such basic semantic concepts as “quantity, 
state, change, action, cause, purpose, means, modality” were metaphoric 
in ­nature.13 Lakoff and others further argued that beyond figurative, lyrical 
language, metaphors also structure everyday experience.14 Thus the analysis 
of such common phrases as “Things are looking up” and “I can’t get that 
tune out of my mind” reveals the underlying figurations “Good things are up” 
and “The mind is a container.” The idea that “good things are up” generates 
a number of further metaphors, such as “Profits are going up” and “We’re 
moving on up.”15 “The mind is a container” produces “open your mind” and 
“close-minded.”
In the cognitive view, metaphors perform a number of “conventional 
mappings from one domain to another.”16 Lakoff mentions, for example, the 
common trope of “a state is a person” implicit in the ideas of “friendly” and 
“hostile” states.17 These tropes imply that ideas—about agency, emotion, and 
mental life—that are usually attached to people can also extend to state 
actors. Similarly, to say that someone is “boiling mad” instantiates the com-
mon trope of “anger is a hot liquid in a container.” In this case, familiar 
properties associated with physics transfer to emotion. Lakoff explains that 
such domain mappings tend to follow rules: “Mappings are not arbitrary, but 
grounded in the body and in everyday experience and knowledge.”18 Finally, 
domain mappings obey what Lakoff calls the invariance principle, by which 
“the image schema structure of the source domain is projected onto the 
target domain in a way that is consistent with inherent target domain struc-
ture.”19 Keep these rules in mind, as they will become important later on in 
our conversation.

30	
METAPHOR MACHINES
The kind of resemblances that we have been discussing so far (e.g., those 
between documents and their icons) are further referred to as structural 
metaphors. Structural metaphors do more than orient concepts, as Lakoff 
and Johnson wrote in the 1980s. Grounded in “systematic correlations within 
our experience,” structural metaphors transfer organizing principles from one 
domain to another.20 Thus, to say “The world is our oyster” is to suggest 
that something in our approach to interacting with oysters resembles our 
approach to life. The ease of eating one, for example, transfers to the ease 
of living in the other. The transferred property implies more than a semantic 
similarity, one of meaning; it also implies a structural similarity, one of in-
terface. The metaphor suggests an arrangement that, like an oyster, can be 
shucked, or that it might contain a tasty hidden morsel. Structural metaphors 
organize one thing in the shape of another. They are tools for extending 
insight from known domains to lesser known ones. They hold great explana-
tory and exploratory power by which simple things, like oysters, shed light on 
complex things, like worlds.
In their capacity to aid explanation and exploration, metaphor machines 
present us with a special case of conceptual domain blending. They enact 
rather than merely suggest a transference of structuring principles from one 
system to another, from physical libraries to electronic workstation environ-
ments in the earlier example. Metaphors that can be touched and handled 
in some way exist neither wholly in language nor wholly in mind. Rather, 
they are at hand, in action. John Carroll, one of the pioneers in the field 
of human–computer interaction, summarized the role of metaphors in the 
design of computing systems as follows:
Professional programmers might learn a new system X by metaphorizing at 
least initially from what they already know about system Y. More casual or 
naive end-users might rely on metaphors drawn from more distant knowl-
edge domains, e.g. on what they have already learned about electric type-
writers. . . . The implications of this proposal are simple and direct. If people 
employ metaphors in learning about computing systems, the designers of 
those systems should anticipate and support likely metaphoric constructions 
to increase the ease of learning and using the system.21
In essence, Carroll imagines the kind of human–computer interfaces that 
incorporate Lakoff and Johnson’s conceptual blending in practice. The simu-

	
METAPHOR MACHINES	
31
lacrum of a familiar gesture of discarding a crumpled piece of paper can 
thus guide the deletion of electronic documents.
Apple’s influential Human Interface Guidelines, at the core of its desktop 
interfaces in the 1980s and today, echoes Carroll’s proscriptions.
You can take advantage of people’s knowledge of the world around them by 
using metaphors to convey concepts and features of your application. Use 
metaphors involving concrete, familiar ideas and make the metaphors plain, 
so that users have a set of expectations to apply to computer environments. 
For example, people often use file folders to store paper documents in their 
offices. Therefore, it makes sense to people to store computer documents 
in computer-generated folders that look like file folders. People can organize 
their hard disks in a way that’s analogous to the way they organize their 
file cabinets.22
Apple’s designers understood that the mapping of concepts between the 
physical world and the computer-generated world is imperfect. Actual file 
folders, for example, can hold a limited number of documents. Their storage 
capacity is constrained by the physical properties of paper, cut into a particu-
lar shape. A computer folder, by contrast, holds a nearly unlimited number of 
files. To be more precise, the electronic folder metaphor is subject to different 
constraints from those that limit the use of paper files. How does one explain 
the incongruence between these physicalities to a lay computer user? The 
Apple manual advises designers to borrow some of the logic from the source 
domain (paper) while retaining new possibilities made possible in the target, 
digital domain. Designers are to “strike a balance between the metaphor’s 
suggested use and the ability of the computer to support and extend the 
metaphor.”23 In theory, users handling virtual folders can thereby recognize 
the medium’s novel capabilities beyond those suggested by iconography. A 
perceptive user realizes that some attributes of the paper domain map onto 
the virtual, whereas others do not, and that virtual objects further contain 
possibilities not conveyed by analogy.
A number of patents from IBM, Xerox, and Microsoft invoke the logics of 
structural metaphor and domain blending. Consider U.S. Patent 5,907,845 by 
Paula J. Cox and colleagues of International Business Machines. The inven-
tion describes “a library metaphor that allows a user to organize the online 
books in a manner that has meaning and utility.” Its authors continue to 

32	
METAPHOR MACHINES
explain that although “the actual books may be stored in many separate 
and distinct locations . . . the bookcase provides a familiar classification sys-
tem.” The creation of bookcase metaphors must also involve “the creation 
of appropriate links to the actual online book/bookshelf/bookcase.” Book 
metaphors ultimately provide “an easy to understand and intuitive model for 
a user who might not be familiar with on-line viewing tools.”24
Another metaphor machine can be found in the collaboration between 
the influential product design firm IDEO and Xerox in the 1990s. The two 
companies collaborated to produce an early “file manager shell” called PC 
Catalog, later renamed TabWorks. In describing the design process, IDEO de-
velopers wrote about defining “key elements of the metaphor” contained in 
the image of “tabs” and “catalogs”: “The book cover opened to display three 
rings binding a set of divider tabs, each containing one or more pages.” 
Pages, in turn contained “items” or “icons representing documents or appli-
cations.”25 In a similar binder-based software application, IBM engineers de-
scribe “contents of the notebook metaphor,” which are “displayed as a stack 
of sheets.” Thus “the interface . . . permits a user to directly manipulate the 
sheets in the notebook metaphor.”26
Note again the awkward conceptual slide between objects and their 
representations. Users cannot in fact “manipulate metaphors directly.” Meta-
phors mediate. They are precisely a method for indirect contact, through 
transference of properties. Direct manipulation suggests an object’s immedi-
ate availability to hand. Users do not handle objects immediately, however. 
They take hold of images. Actual data objects are occluded in favor of their 
mimetic representation. Paper and page metaphors substitute for the reality 
of floating gates and electromagnetic charges.
The analysis of such fundamental incongruence between physical domains 
is crucial to our contemporary political predicament, in which structures of 
digital control often advance by metaphoric substitution: The camera light is 
off, but the camera continues to record. The light, in this case, occludes a 
persistent mechanism of surveillance. Metaphor machines contain the promise 
of productive domain mapping. However, we lack the means to verify the 
success of appropriate property transference. In the following sections I ex-
amine the dynamics of this subtle sleight of hand—more closely and on its 
own terms. Because metaphor theory influenced interface design historically, 
it can also help diagnose modes of metaphoric failure. How do metaphors 
break and what happens to zombie-like dead metaphors, empty of sense yet 

METAPHOR MACHINES	
33
functional in ways that no longer honor the initial contract between incon-
gruent logics and physicalities?
DEATH AND INCONGRUENCE
Metaphors are said to be motivated when a number of concepts from one 
domain extend into another domain to produce insight.27 Lakoff explains that 
to say “to spin one’s wheels” when referring to someone who is thinking is 
to apply a reader’s knowledge of automobiles to the mental realm. Wheels 
that spin without moving the vehicle forward waste energy. The metaphor 
suggests that something similar happens mentally as well.28
In his influential essay on metaphor the English literary critic I. A. Richards 
wrote that “when we use metaphor we have two thoughts of different things 
active together and supported by a single word, or phrase, whose meaning is 
a resultant of their interaction.”29 Richards’s radical contribution to metaphor 
theory lies in the observation that metaphors operate in language, thought, 
and action ubiquitously. They do not, as previously thought, exist merely in 
the realm of poetic language. Richards believed that thought itself is meta-
phoric in that the mind continually searches for patterns and comparisons.30 
Motivated metaphors produce insight: We use them to explore and make 
sense of the world.
Some metaphors, however, are more productive than others. The poetic 
use of metaphor does not merely carry meaning across known domains; 
it produces new and unexpected connections between them. To this effect, 
Richards cited Percy Shelley, who wrote the following in defense of poetry:
[Poetic] language is vitally metaphorical; that is, it marks the before unap-
prehended relations of things and perpetuates their apprehension, until the 
words which represent them, become, through time, signs for portions or 
classes of thoughts instead of pictures of integral thoughts; and then if no 
new poets should arise to create afresh the associations which have been 
thus disorganized, language will be dead to all the nobler purposes of hu-
man intercourse.31
In highlighting the continually regenerative power of poetic metaphor, Shelley 
anticipated what the cognitive school of metaphor theory was to confirm 
by empirical means more than a century later.32 Metaphors do not “die” as 
such. They continue to live but also become naturalized, that is, understood 

34	
METAPHOR MACHINES
literally. They create connections, which with time become habituated and 
invisible. Taken for literal truth, metaphors lose their quality of mediation 
or literally “ferrying across,”33 as when the idea of dead metaphors itself 
no longer evokes death.34 Metaphors wither; once a connotation is lost, it 
becomes a denotative statement lacking any exploratory or explanatory po-
tential. In Shelley’s view, all metaphors are destined to become habituated in 
this way, only to be reborn in poetry.
At the height of their generative powers, metaphors produce new mean-
ing. At their nadir, they block judgment and perception. Creative juxtaposition 
between two previously unrelated conceptual domains brings novel aspects 
of experience to light. With time, however, metaphors fail to perpetuate 
under­standing; they become commonplace instrumental shortcuts. In the 
words of Viktor Shklovsky, we “cease to experience” the trope.35 Vilém 
Flusser similarly wrote that habituated idiom proceeds “smoothly,” giving us 
no pause, without “bumps or interruptions.”36
Lakoff famously took exception to the idea of dead metaphors, arguing 
that even those metaphors that are thoroughly habituated can play a vital 
part in structuring everyday experience. He gave an example with the follow-
ing sentence: He still can’t quite grasp the basic ideas of quantum mechan-
ics. “Grasping,” in this case, is used as a synonym for “understanding.” It 
indicates a transference of properties between physical (grasping) and men-
tal (understanding) realms. Lakoff argued that, despite being commonplace, 
the metaphor is alive, because it continues to perform a function: naming 
a mental activity that we would otherwise find difficult to explain with preci-
sion. Such metaphors are less dead than other, perhaps more novel, one-off 
poetic tropes that fail to circulate widely.37 A metaphor dies in the sense of 
being overused, but it dies also in another sense for not being used at all.
For Lakoff, truly dead metaphors are ones where the original source 
image no longer makes sense. He gives the example of the English word 
pedigree, which originally referred to the French pied de grue, “crane’s foot.” 
The foot was historically used in a typographical flourish to decorate familial 
tree diagrams.
In the previous example of metaphoric mental “grasping,” both sides 
of the domain transference were readily available to us. We understood 
something about grasping things and extended it to the mind’s capacity to 
take hold of ideas. By contrast, most English speakers no longer perceive 

	
METAPHOR MACHINES	
35
the pied de grue contained within pedigree. In the case of a commonplace, 
the metaphor is merely tired from frequent use, whereas in the crane’s foot 
example it is completely dead. All habituated metaphors such as “grasp-
ing ideas” and “pedigree” lose a measure of their symbolic connotation 
with time. Unlike “pedigree,” however, the metaphoric nature of “grasping 
ideas” is at least available for casual interpretation. It therefore retains its 
generative powers. According to Lakoff, the underlying metaphor “The mind 
is like a hand” produces other meaningful phrases, such as “You have to 
let go of this idea.” The crane’s foot in the English “pedigree” by contrast 
has stopped generating novel connections. The conventional notion of dead 
metaphors, Lakoff objects, does not appropriately differentiate between the 
two cases of metaphor dysfunction.38 Metaphors sometimes die but continue 
to produce new linkages, as is the case with grasping ideas. At other times, 
they die in the sense of one domain becoming no longer accessible to its 
user, as is the case with pedigree.
Furthermore, note that wholly unmotivated metaphors do not live at all. 
Thus the Mad Hatter poses his famous nonsensical riddle in Lewis Carroll’s 
Alice in Wonderland: How is a raven like a writing desk? The complete dis-
similarity between the domains, that of animals and that of furniture, pre-
vents any productive congruence.39 Little domain mapping happens between 
ravens and writing desks. Not having been born, the metaphor dies in yet 
another sense.
With these comments on broken and dead metaphors in mind, I return to 
computer screens and ask, How do interface metaphors live or die by these 
definitions?
When we discard a document into a trash can, to return to our recur-
ring example, we intuitively expect the computer to erase it. This would fulfill 
Lakoff’s invariance principle, which, if you recall, describes transference from 
a source domain “in a way that is consistent with the inherent structure 
of the target domain.”40 But the computer does not do this. We empty the 
trash but have no means to verify the realization of the implied transference. 
Our ability to actually erase data stands in an arbitrary relationship to the 
depicted figure. Indeed, the act of emptying trash cans often ceases to be 
metaphoric at all. When data are not erased, the icon no longer stands for 
the action it depicts. The transferred property of erasure is not simply miss-
ing in transit; it is manifestly misrepresented.

36	
METAPHOR MACHINES
DISSIMULATION
Readers know how paragraphs, pages, files, and folders relate to paper and 
would like for their digital images to behave in a similar way. The principles 
of metaphor-driven design contain an implicit model of human–computer 
interaction, which suggests that humans prefer to manipulate digital infor-
mation stored on computational media by the means of familiar mediating 
structures (paragraphs, pages, files, and folders) associated figuratively with 
the affordances of print media. 
One affordance of paper is that it can be folded. It therefore becomes 
possible to earmark a page by folding a corner. Patently, digital media can-
not (as yet) fold the way paper does. Readers seeking a mechanism for 
digital recollection may not be familiar with the affordances of the newly 
inhabited medium. Consequently, the affordances of digital media are pre-
sented through metaphor. In this way, a virtual “earmark” on a “page” rep-
resents a numerical pointer to a specific address in computer memory. A 
“page” stands for a range of related addresses that correspond roughly to 
the information visible on an analogous page in print. Similarly, one “drops a 
folder into a trash can” or “drags and drops a file” or “bookmarks a page” 
on a screen. Such metaphors rely on habituated insight where properties of 
one medium extend into another. We do not literally drag or drop bits, but 
we use metaphors of paper and trash cans to help us manipulate bits and 
bytes as though they were common household objects. The metaphor opens 
figurative possibilities. It also obscures actual physical contingencies of inter-
acting with bits and bytes, logic gates and electromagnetic traces.
Metaphoric substitution encourages readers to extend their facility with 
one sort of media (paper and ink) to another (screen and pixels). But what 
readers gain in facility, they lose in critical faculty. Alienated from the mate-
rial conditions of information storage and retrieval, readers gain access to 
metaphor alone. Thus we go through the motion of “turning pages” but in 
actuality modulate points of light on-screen. We “highlight a passage,” which 
constitutes an action that may also send information about the highlighted 
passage to a data aggregation service. We “share a book,” which really 
means assigning a temporary license to another user. “Where is my text?” I 
ask when downloading a paper from an online journal.41 It is in your Home 
folder, my colleague answers. But unless one of us is familiar with the mate-
rial contingencies of file storage, neither has a mental map of any physical 
location corresponding to the Home folder, the default location of personal 

	
METAPHOR MACHINES	
37
files on many systems. When confronted with the actual affordances of digi-
tal text, users grasp for neutered metaphors. We “reside” in such “homes,” 
“own,” “share,” and “create” only in the simulacrum.
Interface metaphors conceal structures of algorithmic governance and 
control over the transmission of symbolic goods. Print offers a relatively 
static and stable medium by comparison. Ink and paper do not change 
much in transit. By contrast, the vessels of computation are capable of alter-
ing their contents dynamically. For example, imagine my asking you to read 
Shakespeare’s Hamlet by sharing a print copy of the text. I am fairly certain 
that the text will remain unaltered as I pass it into your hands. By contrast, 
the computed sign adjusts itself to new contexts. An electronic version of 
Hamlet could change based on the new reader’s geographic location, mood, 
or consumption habits. In fact, most texts we consume today come to us 
in such a computationally constructed way. The front page of the New York 
Times viewed in Beijing will differ from that viewed in New York. The two 
“pages” or “sites” are in some sense two completely different textual vari-
ants. In another sense, the “front page” identifies the same location of the 
same text in two diverging and dynamically composed versions. Whatever 
is meant by “today’s edition of the New York Times” in that sense denotes 
differing surface phenomena that emanate from the same source.
The key to understanding the loss of resemblances that accompanies 
ubiquitous simulation lies in the inner dynamics of the metaphor machin-
ery. A functioning metaphor, according to Lakoff’s definitions, is one that 
transfers structural properties of one domain into another. Thus to say “Life 
is a stage” is to transpose something about theater onto life. In literary 
terms, theater is the “tenor” and life the “vehicle” of the composite figure.42 
Simulations work differently. Where the tenor of a literary metaphor transfers 
properties across domains, the computational tenor substitutes them, confus-
ing “signs of the real for the real.”43 It is a subtle difference that engenders 
not-so-subtle effects. For example, it would be one thing to say “You are 
the apple of my eye” and quite another to actually confuse apples for eye 
­pupils. Baudrillard gives us the example of a map that no longer corre-
sponds to any territory. He calls such a condition of pure simulation without 
a referent “hyperreality.”
Hyperreality emanates from the momentum of an expected correspon-
dence between representation and the thing being represented. One expects 
a weather simulation to model actual observed meteorological conditions. 

38	
METAPHOR MACHINES
Would it still be a weather simulation if the model was broken in some way 
or, in the extreme, if it had no correspondence to the physics of clouds, 
wind, and water whatsoever? The hyperreal model breaks further still by 
usurping rather than imitating or merely obscuring the underlying reality. 
It begins to simulate itself, according to its own rules, entering a state of 
dissimulation. Such dissimulation no longer corresponds to any conditions 
on the ground. Severed from their referent, signs attain the status of things 
represented: a map of a map, a symbol that folds onto itself, weather simu-
lation confused for weather.
We know that physical affordances of liquid crystal displays (LCDs) and 
electromagnetic storage differ drastically from those of paper, goat skins, or 
parchment. For example, an English-language character occupies eight basic 
units of information (bits) on a disk, whereas a print character occupies one 
basic unit (letter). A disk can tolerate millions of rewrites, whereas the paper 
medium wears out after only a few. Paper inscriptions are visible to the 
naked eye, whereas digital inscriptions are not. Still, simulations maintain an 
illusion of similarity. We encounter what is called skeuomorphic design, by 
which screen reading retains the ornaments of print. In this way, electronic 
book readers mimic the bent corner of a well-thumbed book. Skeuomorphic 
metaphors extend visual cues from one medium to another. A reader al-
ready knows how to turn book pages. Book devices therefore simulate page 
turning to ease the cognitive burden of transitioning from paper to pixel. In-
stead of issuing arcane commands meant for the machine, readers perform 
the more habituated motion of swiping across the screen. The gliding mo-
tion enacts a kinetic analogy (a type of a metaphor) as though transposing 
properties of paper to glass.
Our grasp on the medium weakens the more convincing its simulacrum. 
By definition, simulation “assumes a form resembling that of something 
else,” whereby one referent is exchanged for another.44 To drag and drop 
a document into a trash can on the screen should in theory correspond 
to an analogous set of data manipulations on disk. Yet discarding a file in 
this manner does not necessarily include deletion of data from the storage 
medium, as expected. The document icon disappears visually, but its electro-
magnetic trace endures. Such loss of resemblances could in theory remain 
insignificant. Does one care whether a file is actually erased or not when 
performing deletion? Perhaps not. But in some cases, when it really mat-
ters (e.g., under the threat of censorship or persecution), the incongruence 

	
METAPHOR MACHINES	
39
exposes the frailty of our alienation from the material contexts of digital 
labor. Under duress, one may demand that the thing stay deeply deleted. 
The problem of metaphoric immediacy reappears in the unfulfilled promise of 
mimesis. In many contexts the metaphoric vehicle claims to bridge domains 
and to ferry content across faithfully, without meddling or damaging its con-
tents. But if metaphors do meddle—if they mediate while dissembling and 
dissimulating—by what process can one ensure the efficacy of transference? 
What entity makes good on the promise of verisimilitude?
Readers ultimately bear the burden of confirming the appropriate trans-
ference of properties between domains. In pretending to turn virtual pages 
uncritically, we otherwise lose sight of the metaphor. If we hope to practice 
anything like interpretation or close reading of digital content, we must 
begin at the physical site of its inscription. A truly materialist poetics would 
analyze embedded representation in the context of the surrounding medium. 
More than superficial embellishment, skeuomorphic metaphors enacted at the 
digital surface affect all higher-order meaning-carrying units, from individual 
letters to words, paragraphs, chapters, pages, and books.
Why do readers tolerate misleading media metaphors then? Why not sim-
ply make use of novel interfaces afforded by new technology? The literature 
in human–computer interaction suggests a formalist answer: habituation.45 
The initial effort it takes to inhabit a new cognitive environment discourages 
curiosity. Smart designers therefore rely on acculturated practice, the turning 
of pages in our case, to minimize adaptive friction. Digital poems, novels, 
physician’s scripts, and legal contracts resemble their paper counterparts 
in order to enable familiar actions. And as they perform that mimesis, by 
imitating paper pages, reading appliances also monitor, adjust, warn, and 
control. The new affordances pass under the guise of the old.
Dissimulation conceals structuring principles large and small. Some oc-
cluded details remain inconsequential, such as the limit on how many keys 
can be pressed at once without overwhelming keyboard circuitry when typing. 
Other concealed details are of paramount importance. Digital rights manage-
ment chips and censorship filters interfere directly and in ways that are often 
purposefully hidden from the reader. For example, the U.S. Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act prohibits physical circumvention of copyright protections.46 An 
electronic book encrypted to prevent copyright infringement could also pre-
vent readers from examining codes and codices embedded into the device, 
rules governing accessibility, preservation, or freedom of speech. Material 

40	
METAPHOR MACHINES
­affordances of inscription at that deep, bottom-most meaning-bearing me-
dium influence all higher-level practices of interpretation.47
Traditional theories of textual interpretation rely on properties and as-
sumptions attached to print media. For example, Hans-Georg Gadamer fa-
mously imagined the artistic transformation of abstract “free play” into 
concrete material structure (Gebilde) that is both “repeatable” and “perma-
nent.”48 Similarly, in his Interpretation Theory, Paul Ricoeur wrote about the 
“range of social and political changes” related to the invention of writing. 
Ricoeur attributes the “birth of political rule exercised by a distant state” 
and “the birth of market relationships” to the stability of communication in 
print. The constitution of archives enables history; the fixity of law, justice. 
“Such an immense range of effects suggests that human discourse is not 
merely preserved from destruction,” Ricoeur wrote. It is also “deeply affected 
in its communicative function.”49 Digital text offers no such permanence. 
What is meant by “fixed” “durable,” and “repeatable” changes with the de-
vice. Such properties come to us under the guise of surface representation. 
Nothing is guaranteed in the passage of digital text from one pair of hands 
to another. Formatting expands its purview beyond typographical conven-
tion. It includes the capability to substitute words, summarize automatically, 
generate discourse by algorithmic means, or erase wholesale. What does 
it mean, then, to read and interpret texts that change depending on their 
contexts? How can literary analysis—close reading, philology, hermeneutics—
persist without the fixity of print?
Dissimulation is perhaps necessary, because the reading and writing 
of digital data can involve processes far outside everyday experience. For 
example, in reading data from solid-state (flash) memory, a circuit imparts 
electric charge through quantum tunneling onto a connected series of float-
ing gate transistors (Figure 1.3).50
Whatever the complexities of solid-state storage architecture, the difference 
in the structure of information on pages and floating gates is apparent. The 
arrangement of one has only an arbitrary connection to the other. Conse-
quently, changes in the structure of the symbolic domain, which manifest in 
the erasure of words on-screen, do not necessitate corresponding changes 
in the physical domain, which manifest in the discharge of the floating gate. 
Information endures despite intended erasure.
Dwellers of virtual realms believe in verisimilitude as a matter of faith. 
We hope that the analogy of turning pages or erasing words on-screen will 

	
METAPHOR MACHINES	
41
entail similar actions on disk. But we waver when asked to authenticate the 
particulars of the simulation. At times, “erased” data is simply hidden from 
view. At other times, instead of disappearing, it proliferates across deep sur-
faces, shared without consent with agents not privy to the original contexts 
of inscription. As was the case with Baudrillard’s map, metaphors of reading 
and writing digitally break in that they no longer resemble any familiar ter-
rain. Dissimulation mimics known materialities absent their actual physics. It 
suggests a structuring of one kind while enacting another.
Micromolecular writing, of the kind perceived already by Kittler and 
Baudrillard in the 1990s, today demands the corresponding practice of mi-
croscopic reading.51 I imagine here the inverse of Kittler’s literature without 
humans: cryptic, illegible, and under the conditions of high technology. The 
methodology of computational poetics insists on recovering the full shape 
of the inscription, across surfaces and domains. It makes the extent of the 
dissimulating figure available for interpretation.
What happens in the metaphoric transfer between cognitive structures 
(contracts, poems, novels) and device-things that simulate them (screens, 
drives, readers)? Estrangement, the exegesis of metaphor, reveals the rules 
that govern transference from one medium to another. A materialist poetics 
can subsequently allow one to consent to or, conversely, to resist elements 
of imposed structure. That is not to say that meaning-making structures 
can ever become fully transparent or produce plain, unambiguous meaning. 
FIGURE 1.3. Remote materialities at the site of the inscription: nonvolatile solid-state memory. 
A drawing from Boyle and Smith’s patent shows the quantum tunneling mechanism where 
an “avalanche” of particles tunnel through a classically insurmountable barrier to charge 
a floating gate, representing a single bit of information. Source: W. Boyle and G. Smith, 
“Information Storage Devices,” Patent US3858232 A, filed November 9, 1971, issued 
December 31, 1974, sheet 7.

42	
METAPHOR MACHINES
A true cipher precludes not just the ambiguity but the very possibility of 
interpretation or misinterpretation. It physically prevents access. In the con-
tinuum between total legibility and illegibility, digital text today occupies the 
space somewhere right of center. It is illegible in part and by dispensation. 
Archivists know this problem well: the simulation of print decays rapidly. Digi-
tal documents—computer games and proprietary text formats—become inac-
cessible as the platforms used to decode them themselves pass into oblivion.
MIMESIS
“An interface is by nature a form of artistic imitation: a mimesis,” Brenda 
Laurel wrote in her important 1984 essay “Interface as Mimesis.” She went 
on to argue that “if designing interfaces feels like painting on cave walls by 
flickering torchlight, it is only because we, the designers, have not availed 
ourselves of better illumination: the science of the mimetic arts, poetics.”52 
Laurel, who started her academic career in theater studies, went on to work 
for Apple, Activision, Atari, and Sun Microsystems among other companies. 
Her work, widely cited in technical literature, reminds us of the close con-
nection between poetics and human–computer interaction.
The nexus of these fields is all the more important today, because im-
mersive computational environments structure experience beyond the merely 
instrumental. Computers increasingly mediate the interface between the public 
and the private, art and politics, mind and body. The simulacrum requires 
that we advance a reflective “science of the mimetic arts” lest we lose a 
sense of what I call, channeling Michael Taussig, mimetic alterity.53 The sus-
pension of disbelief must remain, as it was in Samuel Coleridge’s original for-
mulation, a willful act, containing further a “semblance of truth” required to 
animate the shadows of imagination.54 An involuntary or, worse, forced sus-
pension of disbelief can lead only to a state of total critical disempowerment.
The history of human–computer interaction passes through several dis-
tinct stages, each defined by their relationship to semiosis. I periodize the 
development as follows:
1.	
Early computers were programmed by physically manipulating a complex
arrangement of wires and relays. With time, that configuration could be
abstracted into symbolic states, signified by visible marks on paper and
later invisible electromagnetic marks on tape.
2.	
In the next stage of development, physical arrangements of gates and

	
METAPHOR MACHINES	
43
relays were further codified into an artificial language. Programmers oper-
ated with a constrained vocabulary, sending and receiving messages to 
the machine in a dialogue, dubbed “conversational programming,” that 
resembled human communication.55
3. 	As computer use spread, the paradigm of so-called “direct interaction” 
or “direct manipulation” shifted emphasis from verbal cues to visual cues 
and from symbol to icon. Communication was and continues to be direct 
in the sense of felt immediacy and immersion. Compared to a verbal 
symbol, an icon appears to have a more direct relationship to the remote 
materialities of computational media, less arbitrary than the symbol.56
4. 	Finally, one imagines an indexical connection between human and ma-
chine by which brain states and machine states could correspond through 
a physical rather than a merely visual linkage. The so-called “direct brain 
interfaces” bypass inscription (word and picture) altogether, making use 
of neuroprosthetics (implants and surface electrodes) to connect human 
and machine.57
It would be a mistake, however, to conflate claims to directness, at any 
stage of interface development, with the absence of mediation. A morpho-
logical grammar always intercedes. The passage between disparate media, 
brains and machines, requires a rule book that specifies the dynamics of 
transformation. The grammar sets the terms of engagement.
Before the 1980s the dominant paradigm of interacting with machines 
was the dialogue.58 Already in 1950, Alan Turing imagined a conversation 
between an artificially intelligent poet and its critic.
Interrogator : In the first line of your sonnet which reads “Shall I compare 
thee to a summer’s day,” would not “a spring day” do as well or better?
Witness: It wouldn’t scan.
Interrogator: How about “a winter’s day”? That would scan all right.
Witness: Yes, but nobody wants to be compared to a winter’s day.
Interrogator: Would you say Mr. Pickwick reminded you of Christmas?
Witness: In a way.
Interrogator: Yet Christmas is a winter’s day, and I do not think Mr. Pickwick 
would mind the comparison.
Witness: I don’t think you’re serious. By a winter’s day one means a typical 
winter’s day, rather than a special one like Christmas.59

44	
METAPHOR MACHINES
The goal of conversational programming was to provide a similarly natural-
ized dialogue between operators and machines. Although machine under-
standing of informal human speech did not develop in earnest until the 
twenty-first century, interactive computing environments such as DIALOG and 
JOSS were designed to lessen the cognitive burden of speaking machine 
languages by translating them into dialogue systems that understood a lim-
ited number of English words.
JOSS, an experimental online computing system created by the Rand Cor-
poration in 1963, consisted of a typewriter connected to the JOHNNIAC com-
puter. Before JOSS, programmers would interact with the JOHNNIAC machine 
by means of keyboard and punch card, initially using octal number notation 
and then binary assembly language.60 These methods of programming were 
time-consuming and prone to error. “An octal desk calculator was nice to 
have,” a historian of the system would later quip.61
The JOSS experiment introduced the idea of an interpreter that sat be-
tween the human operator and the machine, facilitating communication in a 
friendly, conversational manner. Think of JOSS as a “user’s computing aide 
and a single contact with the computer,” wrote the system’s designers.62 
Instead of feeding punch cards into a mechanism, as was done before, op-
erators would use a typewriter. Instead of flipping switches, they typed words. 
JOSS thus referred both to a simple language for machine instruction and 
the new remote console way of interacting with computers. JOSS and the 
user would take turns controlling the typewriter. The interpreter understood 
simple commands such as Do, Go, and Type, which it would then translate 
into machine instructions. When encountering an unspecified command, the 
interpreter mimicked human confusion, responding simply, “Eh?”63
This new mode of conversational interaction could also be seen in one 
of the earliest text adventure games, the Colossal Cave Adventure, designed 
by Will Crowther in 1975.64 The following dialogue illustrates the call-and-
response game play typical of the genre:
You are standing at the end of a road before a small brick 
building. Around you is a forest. A small stream flows out of 
the building and down a gully.
> enter
You are inside a building, a well house for a large spring. 
There are some keys on the ground here. There is a shiny 

	
METAPHOR MACHINES	
45
brass lamp nearby. There is food here. There is a bottle of 
water here.
> get keys
OK
> get lamp
OK
> exit
You’re at end of road again.
Although more accessible and interactive than communication in octal or bi-
nary machine code, the conversational model posed several significant chal-
lenges. It was meant to resemble human communication in all its richness 
and variety, but in fact the machine “spoke” and “understood” only a limited 
number of words. Researchers from the U.S. Air Force academy wrote:
The lower cost of computer access and the proliferation of on-line systems 
produced a new breed of users, people whose expertise was in some area 
other than computer technology. As their initial fascination with conversa-
tional computing wore off, users reported experiencing feelings of intense 
frustration and of being “manipulated” by a seemingly unyielding, rigid, in-
tolerant dialogue partner.65
The conversational intermediary of Colossal Cave Adventure understood 295 
commands and knew about 1,600 words in response, arranged into several 
hundred canned phrases.66 Faced with an unfamiliar word, it could only re-
peat, “That’s not a verb I recognize.”
By the 1980s a new breed of metaphoric interfaces gained widespread 
prominence. If Colossal Cave Adventure epitomized the conversational model 
of computing, games like Pong, Space Invaders, and Donkey Kong heralded 
the paradigm of direct manipulation. Direct manipulation, according to Ben 
Shneiderman, the researcher who coined the term in 1982, involved three 
key principles:
1. 	Continuous representation of the object of interest.
2. 	Physical actions or labelled button presses instead of complex syntax.
3. 	Rapid incremental reversible operations whose impact on the object of 
interest is immediately visible.67

46	
METAPHOR MACHINES
The primary goal of direct manipulation therefore was to achieve accord be-
tween visual representation and the object of interest. Shneiderman mentions 
the calculus of Leibniz as a direct influence. Leibniz developed a system of 
symbolic notation, at the root of his calculus, to express, in his words, “the 
exact nature of a thing briefly and, as it were, picture it.”68 For Leibniz, the 
symbol, an accurate and portable picture of an idea, could subsequently 
reduce the mental effort required for abstract thought, leading to a “great 
advantage for discovery.”69
Symbolic notation made it possible for mathematicians to represent infi-
nitely small and infinitely large numbers in print, ideas that would not other-
wise fit on the page or in the mind.70 For Shneiderman and others, computer 
games like Pong similarly enabled the direct manipulation of complex ab-
stractions, for example making it possible for a player to control a virtual 
table tennis paddle by rotating a physical knob on a gaming console. The 
knob’s movement corresponded “directly” to the movement of the paddle—
clockwise for up and counterclockwise for down—thus achieving an analogy 
between the “operation” and its “impact on the object of interest.”71 Without 
such direct linkage the physics of game simulation would be too complex 
for players to handle effectively by writing code or by controlling the paddle 
through dialogue, in conversation.
Direct manipulators argued that the arbitrary nature of the sign to its 
signifier hindered the conversational model of human–computer interaction. 
For example, when using EMACS, a text editor commonly found on Unix 
systems of the time, one would enter the command k in combination with 
other keys to delete or “kill” a file, whereas on other systems, Shneider-
man complained, k stood for “keep a file,” the opposite of killing it.72 In the 
conversational model the command stood in a contingent relationship to 
the intended effect, whereas in the direct manipulation model the dial and 
paddle were related mimetically.
In the language of Peircean semiotics, the direct manipulation paradigm 
favors the iconic relationship between representation and object of interest, 
by which the two relate through shared elements of structure and composi-
tion.73 Consider the Pong game controller. The dial’s rotation mimics the 
movement of the paddle it represents. Like an onomatopoeic word, the one 
resembles and imitates the other. Direct manipulation interfaces like Pong in-
volve mimetic visual metaphors meant to overcome the deficiencies of purely 
symbolic conversational commands. Although there are numerous verbal ways 

	
METAPHOR MACHINES	
47
to instruct a machine to return a serve, dials constrain a player’s instru-
mental vocabulary in one dimension: clockwise or counterclockwise. These 
movements are less arbitrary than words, because they contain a direct 
topological mapping of properties.
In their field-defining work on human–computer interaction, Edwin Hutchins, 
Donald Norman, and James Hollan wrote,” “There is an economy here [refer-
ring to direct manipulation] in that the user’s knowledge of the structure of 
the surface acoustical form has a non-arbitrary relationship to meaning. . . . 
The same sort of thing can be done in the design of interface languages.”74 
Influenced by insights from cognitive metaphor theory about structural do-
main mapping, direct manipulators thought that the mimetic icon required 
less explanation than arbitrary symbol. The transference of iconic qualities 
was intuited; the icon contained its own explanation.75 Instead of querying a 
“dictionary” of arbitrary commands, the user could rely on habituated affor-
dances of real-world objects, such as table tennis paddles and paper trash 
cans. The evolution from conversational to direct models of human–computer 
interaction could thus be viewed as a shift from a symbolic system of repre-
sentation, in which signs stood in an arbitrary relationship to their referents, 
to an iconic one, in which they related mimetically.76
Crucially, direct manipulation designers aimed to suspend disbelief. The 
feeling of directness came through a complete immersion in the mimetic 
context of virtual worlds.77 The mimetic icon usurped its object of interest 
through use. Screen icons themselves became objects of interest, at the ex-
pense of the underlying physics. Direct manipulation theory imagined the han-
dling of representations, not objects, as evidenced by the somewhat strained 
language of metaphor machines in which metaphors can be “accessed,” 
“­organized,” “handled,” and “manipulated.”78 These interactions are direct in 
the sense of concealing the mediated nature of virtual experience. The goal 
is to manufacture what Laurel and others called an “interactive mimesis” 
and “first personness”—the experience of “directly living and acting within the 
world established by the computer.”79
Hutchins, Hollan, and Norman wrote, “When an interface presents world 
of action rather than a language of description, manipulating a representa-
tion can have the same effects and the same feel as manipulating the thing 
being represented.”80 Actual instruments of manipulation—keyboards, screens, 
and machine instructions—were meant to disappear, lest they puncture the 
illusion. “The user of a well-designed model world interface can willfully 

FIGURE 1.4. Metaphor-driven user interface design. The on-screen menus for the Xerox 6085 Daybreak workstation include 
“icons,” “folders,” “windows,” “drawers,” “buttons,” and “wastepaper basket.” An image of “Brother Dominick” is in reference to 
a Xerox advertisement that featured a medieval scribe who is asked to copy hundreds of pages by hand. Source: J. Johnson 
et al., “The Xerox Star: A Retrospective,” Computer 22, no. 9 (September 1989): 13. © 1989 IEEE. Reprinted with permission.

	
METAPHOR MACHINES	
49
suspend disbelief that the objects depicted are artifacts of some program 
and can thereby directly engage the world of the objects,” Hutchins and col-
leagues wrote.81 The dialogic model of tool use encouraged by Colossal Cave 
Adventure—“get keys,” “get lamp”—was seen to stand in the way. Instead of 
working with “objects of interest”—instead of being part of a story—the pro-
tagonist was “using the computer.” 82 “End users are not interested in making 
representations,” Laurel wrote. “They want to move around inside one,” favor-
ing the mimetic context over their actual, physical surroundings.83 By contrast, 
fully immersive environments could support the “sensation of ­directness,” in 
which direct (i.e., iconic) expressions “behave in such a way that a user can 
assume that they, in some sense, are the things they refer to.”84
Principles of direct interaction stood against what Laurel called the me-
diator’s ill-formed presence. Conversational computing prevented the unme-
diated “pleasure” and “catharsis” of direct engagement.85 Intermediaries of 
Oregon Train and Colossal Cave Adventure took the place of players: They 
swung swords for them, took a beating, and reported on the second-hand 
experience. Laurel wrote:
In the file management example, the intermediary takes the form of com-
mand menus that are invoked in order to activate processes in the program 
that will create the desired results. The user does not have the experience 
of pushing files around, stowing them and grabbing them, or blowing them 
away. Instead, the user has the experience of communicating with the file 
management intermediary.86
In combination, the ideas behind cognitive domain blending and direct ma-
nipulation gave rise to the now ubiquitous WYSIWYG (what you see is what 
you get) interfaces put into mass production by Apple, Xerox, and other 
companies in the early- to mid-1980s. The Xerox 8010 Star workstation, 
introduced in 1981, and the Xerox 6085 Daybreak workstation, introduced 
in 1985, heralded the era of accessible, metaphor-driven personal comput-
ing, characterized by the use of virtual graphical objects like windows, icons, 
desktops, folders, and buttons (Figure 1.4). The Star and Daybreak work­
stations were some of the earliest machines to put the principles of meta-
phoric domain blending and direct manipulation into action. The interface 
was meant to reveal the structure of simulated objects intuitively, without 
training or lengthy written explanation. Laurel wrote that mimetic interfaces 

50	
METAPHOR MACHINES
used “logic and aesthetics to create representations that engage humans 
in pleasurable ways.”87 The mimetic context is simply “the experience we 
­desire,” Laurel concluded. Immersion finally enabled actors to experience 
“the full pleasure of the mimetic form.”88
Designers advocating direct manipulation understood the compromise that 
came with an emphasis on such immersive and pleasurable experiences.89 
­Effective mimesis assumes user familiarity with a source domain. For example, 
we understand what to do with virtual folders because we know how paper 
folders behave in real life. However, direct mimetic manipulation does not 
tell us anything new about the capabilities of such virtual folders. Immersion 
precludes critical reflection beyond the predefined confines of a modeled 
world. Users gain access only to what the simulation warrants. Like a theme 
park ride, it is a scripted experience, which leads to predetermined modes of 
engagement.
Problematically, the ideas behind mimetic immersion contain a logical 
fallacy. The literature on direct manipulation often alludes to car steering. 
Steering wheels are a paradigmatic example of interfaces by which inputs 
and outputs correlate directly. Thus instead of issuing complicated com-
mands, the driver turns a wheel. A movement to the right compels a corre-
sponding rightward motion of the vehicle. A direct, causal link exists between 
a car’s steering wheel and its axle. Similarly, when interacting with a game 
such as Space Invaders by using a joystick, players experience the immedi-
ate correspondence between movements of the controlling mechanism and 
the spaceship on-screen. The car and the spaceship are the player’s direct 
objects of interest.
However, to return to our simple and recurring example, authors attempt-
ing to delete sensitive information are not interested in the virtual repre-
sentation of their documents. The direct object is not mimetic. They want 
to erase documents, not their icons. In cases such as these, inhabitants of 
a virtual world are concerned with objects outside it. Direct manipulation 
instead veils the direct object from view, suspending the rules of physical 
interaction in favor of the virtual. Far from being direct, the document’s 
inter­face (an iconic image) usurps the physical object (the file itself). By such 
circuitous logic, direct manipulation occludes the mechanisms of mimesis.
The occlusion is a loss of resemblances and designations of the kind 
described by Baudrillard. At its logical extreme, the simulacrum supplants the 
thing being simulated. It appears as hyperreality, the experience of unmedi-

METAPHOR MACHINES	
51
ated interaction without awareness or sense of the underlying referent. All 
objects of interest in such a model world are fabricated objects. They are 
thus limited to the external, artificial constraints imposed by their makers. 
Manufactured metaphors present us, the users, with compelling, possibly ca-
thartic, experiences. The metaphor eventually subsumes all spheres of social 
activity mediated by computers.
The history of human–computer interaction began with the manipulation of 
physical switches, first by hand and then by proxy, through removable storage 
media such as paper tape and punch card. The next phase was dialogic and 
conversational. Conversational computing introduced the idea of a mediating 
agent, an interpreter, which could translate a limited number of natural human 
language commands into a specialized vocabulary of signals that changed 
machine configuration states. The direct manipulation school dispensed with 
visible machine states, leading us closer to immersive mimesis in which virtual 
environments resemble real-world objects and their properties by analogy. 
Viewing that history in light of metaphor theory, I find myself ill at ease with 
the possibility of a totalizing mimesis: More compelling the simulation, more 
it is removed from its material contexts and more concealed the logistics of 
its production. 
SPECULATIVE FORMALISM
To what extent do we, as a society, need to perceive the mechanisms that 
animate such machine metaphors? One does not need to understand the 
physics of internal combustion to drive, the argument goes. Why insist on 
physics when it comes to computers? Computers, I would like to reflect in 
conclusion, are dissimilar to cars in that they are epistemic, not just purely 
instrumental, artifacts. They do not just get us from point A to point B; they 
augment thought itself, therefore transforming what it means to be human. 
They have the potential to affect all symbol-bearing fields of human activ-
ity. Contemporary automobiles are increasingly computers to the extent that 
they host inscription. They contain texts that can be interpreted, not in a 
fanciful way by which all culture is a text, but literally, by involving a succes-
sion of printed marks within a conduit. Self-driving “smart” cars differ from 
their mechanical “dumb” counterparts in that they contain symbolic content. 
A law governing pedestrian traffic embodies also a model of reading and 
comprehension; it is meant to be understood by its subjects. Codes govern-
ing self-driving vehicles do not answer to the same political ideals. They are 

52	
METAPHOR MACHINES
not always legible or open to interpretation. We must insist on reading them 
for the same reason we read books and codices. They augment not just the 
foot but our collective sense of shared intelligence. The structure of sym-
bolic representation—its storage and codification—constitutes our cognitive 
and ultimately cultural scaffolding.
In his paper “The Genesis and Speed of Telegraph Codes,” published 
in the Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society in 1949, Frank G. 
Halstead noted that “the practical upper limits of [telegraph transmission] 
speed will also be limited by the ability of some human beings to operate a 
keyboard, until such time as electrical connection [can] be made direct with 
the receiver’s central nervous system.”90 Halstead’s prognoses are well in the 
realm of contemporary technical possibility. Direct brain to computer inter-
faces are common enough today to be turned into a toy.91 Society stands 
at the threshold of a new symbolism.
Early brain–computer interfaces relied on either imprecise “noisy” elec-
troencephalographic (EEG) scalp sensors or electrode implants that required 
invasive surgery. In 2004, a team of scientists developed a way to control 
“a one-dimensional computer cursor rapidly and accurately” using electro-
corticographic (ECoG) activity recorded from the surface of the brain.92 And 
in 2015 a quadriplegic woman piloted an F-35 joint strike fighter using her 
brain in a simulation developed by the University of Pittsburgh’s Human En-
gineering Research Laboratories in collaboration with the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency (DARPA).93
On the surface, the advance of brain–computer interfaces seems to bring 
us closer to the trajectory of growing immediacy: Witness the “no interface” 
movement in graphic design and its continuing promise of ever more direct 
interaction. Golden Krishna’s The Best Interface Is No Interface, Steve Krug’s 
Don’t Make Me Think, and Nir Eyal’s Hooked: How to Build Habit-Forming 
Products are some of the best-selling titles advancing this argument. Military 
applications aside, we must prepare for a future in affective, mystical arts, 
the ultimate loss of references and resemblances, where semiotic systems are 
to be experienced emotively past the senses: literature without language or 
representation, painting beyond media, asemiosis—messages lacking a sign.
However futuristic such possibilities may seem to us today, we should 
not lose sight of the constructed nature of human–computer interaction in 
all its forms: paper, ink, code, silicon. Media mediate. But they also grow 
opaque through habituation. As technological dreams become reality, they 

	
METAPHOR MACHINES	
53
grow mundane. We neglect to marvel at the altitude of artificial flight or the 
speed of telecommunication. Habit dulls the instrument. The tool recedes 
from view. We forget its dangers. It becomes a seemingly harmless extension 
of the mind and body.
I do not mean to dismiss the mastery of those engaged in creating the 
illusion of directness. Pleasure and catharsis are important in some contexts. 
In other contexts we must privilege critical thought, analysis, and interrup-
tion. A “momentary breach”—a measure of discomfort in the fit between 
bodies, keyboards, and screens—ensures our ability to shape the encounter 
on our own, tactical terms: to opt in when useful and to opt out when nec-
essary.94 I am not concerned here with the metaphysical entailments of a 
possible posthuman future. The illusion of directness belies the very human 
mechanisms of command and control. Simulations ultimately embody specific 
power structures in an economy of exchange between physical and mental 
resources. There are those who extract rents from virtual, mimetic inhabit-
ance and those whose dwelling becomes a commodity.
Recall in this regard the Heideggerian insight into the mediated nature of 
tool use. In Being and Time Heidegger wrote about the particular handiness 
of a tool, for example, a hammer: “The less we stare at the thing . . . the more 
actively we use it, the more original our relation to it becomes and the more 
undisguisedly it is encountered as what it is, a useful thing.”95 For Heidegger, 
tools had to be understood through use. They were otherwise inaccessible to 
reason or theory alone. A hammer comes into focus through what he called 
circumspection (Umsicht), the peripheral awareness of the object ready-to-
hand (zuhanden).96 One relates to the tool in the process of manipulating it 
while concentrating on the task at hand: The seamster is not interested in 
the needle, only in the work of sewing.97 Later, Heidegger would connect his 
account of tool use with philosophy itself, as a mode of truth seeking or un-
concealment.98 When used properly, tools reveal some truth about the world, 
about the people using them, and about tool use itself. In this sense the Greek 
techne is for Heidegger related to poiesis, or bringing forth.
Contrary to the kind of technology that reveals and brings forth, Heidegger 
also describes instrument use of the kind that conceals and blocks poiesis. 
Such technologies determine rather than reveal. They are a “destined” kind of 
revealing that unfolds along a predetermined narrative, in which the answer 
is already given. A forester who walks the wood simply to cut it down can 
discover its nature only as a commodity, in what Heidegger calls a standing 

54	
METAPHOR MACHINES
reserve. The forester who measures felled timber becomes subordinate to 
the organization of cellulose. The wood is “challenged forth” by the need for 
paper, the paper by the press. The press consequently organizes the public, 
set on “swallowing what is printed, so that a set configuration of opinion 
becomes available on demand.” In following a determined path, technology 
turns humans into human resources. Modern technology is “no more a human 
doing,” Heidegger concludes.99 Proscribed tool use strips users of their powers 
of self-determination. They learn nothing new about themselves nor the world.
In closing, I would like to imagine the possibility of indexical interfaces, the 
kind of signs that connect to their objects of interest through palpable causal 
linkages: smoke and fire, tissue damage and pain. In other words, is it pos-
sible to inhabit virtual worlds in the mimetic alterity? The question is of vital 
political importance, because whether we have answers or not, implements 
of symbolic manipulation—books and pens that once lay safely at an arm’s 
length—move inevitably closer to the mind’s eye. For now, screens and hard 
drives, mechanisms of memory storage and image projection, remain extrinsic 
to the body. They are at this moment still amenable to limited circumspec-
tion. The political consequences of technology become more difficult to imag-
ine in proportion to their habituation. Today, people who forgo the use of 
electronic tablets, smart phones, laptops, and notebooks could seem merely 
whimsical or quaint. What if tomorrow they are judged mentally deficient or 
barred from participating fully in public life?
Heidegger wrote that the human is endangered not by technology but by 
its determination.100 The ability to read and write has always been politically 
fraught because of its potential to alter human experience. It is no accident 
that the struggle for universal literacy often accompanied political revolu-
tions. Poets are important to the revolution not because they create beautiful 
aesthetic objects but because they retain the noninstrumental emancipatory 
potential of reading and writing. What can be said in parallel about digital 
literacy, the poetry of embodied and embedded devices? What if we fail to 
develop a sense of computational poetics in the face of frenzied instrumen-
tal development? How would one empty the hand, the mind, in breach of 
technesis?

“The weakest point in our present day universe is the incapacity of man to 
meet the machine, the cultural conserve, or the robot, other than through 
submission, actual destruction, and social revolution.”1 So wrote the Austrian 
American psychiatrist Jacob L. Moreno in his idiosyncratic, sprawling, and 
now seldom read volume Who Shall Survive?2
Humanity, according to Moreno, faced two major threats: human aggres-
sion and the aggression of robots—“cultural conserves” and “zootechnical 
animals.” When Moreno referred to robots, he meant all devices, social struc-
tures, and products of the mind that persevere autonomously to compete 
for attention. Moreno thought that conserves diminish the human capacity 
for cultural production. Robots create the illusion of “finished, perfected 
product[s],” which substitute for creativity.3 In this way, musical records obvi-
ate musicians, just as books do authors.
An “avalanche of ghosts” from the past enters into an evolutionary con-
test for cultural survival.4 Unlike speech, which is extinguished as soon as 
conversations end, written words persist and proliferate. They survive and 
continue to shape the social and mental worlds to come. Moreno wrote:
The author is immaterial; the book goes to all places and to all people, it 
does not care where it is read and by whom. Many robots have further in 
common the attribute of comparative immortality. A book, a film, an atomic 
bomb, they do not perish in the human sense, the same capacity is always 
CHAPTER 2
> LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
The Modernist Roots of Computation

56	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
there, they can be reproduced ad infinitum. . . . Our human world is increas-
ingly filled with robots and there seems to be no end to new forms and 
new developments.5
The musician and the author struggle to survive in competition with histori-
cal records. The conserve reduces humans to “machine-addict[s]” who reside 
in a “jungle of robots” that suffocates spontaneous activity.6
Similar to King Thamus from Plato’s Phaedrus, Moreno thus distrusted 
rote mechanization of thought. Moreno believed that, in the name of com-
fort, safety, and prolonged life, technocracy disempowers the very subjects 
whose lives it claims to preserve. The zootechnical animal exchanges the 
human capacity of self-determination for the promised certainty of a better 
future. The eugenic dreamer and the technological dreamer have this one 
idea in common:
to substitute and hasten the slow process of nature. Once the creative pro-
cess is encapsulated in a book it is given; it can be recapitulated eternally 
by everybody without the effort of creating anew. Once a machine for a 
certain pattern of performance is invented a certain produce can be turned 
out in infinite numbers practically without the effort of man. . . . Once that 
miraculous eugenic formula will be found a human society will be given 
perfect and smooth at birth, like a book off a press.7
Knowledge, in Plato’s terms, is thereby replaced with the simulation or 
imitation (homoiōmata) of knowledge.8 It is given and received passively, 
bypassing the critical faculties. Robots appear to us in their perfected state, 
whereas the labor and struggle for their production is elided.
Instrumental and institutional mechanisms alike fell under Moreno’s sus-
picion: plow, pen, book, gun; central planning, corporate governance, legal 
codex.9 All robots in that sense constituted a species of autonomous agency, 
a problem long in the background of Western liberal thought.10 For Moreno, 
books and bombs resembled one another because they both embodied vo-
lition detached from its human sources. Once in motion, both books and 
bombs seem to act in the world autonomously. The projectile acts at a dis-
tance; once launched, it completes its grim mandate even if the command 
to act is withdrawn. Technologies of the word similarly decouple readers 
from writers. Books persist to mean in the absence of their authors. Once 

	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
57
de­coupled, seemingly autonomous paper agents—folders, novels, ­contracts—
clutter the social sphere, continuing to structure human experience in the 
absence of the originating accord. Agency so detached operates without 
consensus or comprehension. Books are “robot[s] par excellence,” Moreno 
wrote.11 They elongate the causal chain of agency to effect change in mental 
states across time and space. Yet books and bombs are not social actors in 
a true sense. One cannot assign blame to them. They do not figure indepen-
dently in our models of justice or responsibility.
Moreno’s claims and his language might seem archaic today, but they 
were not unusual in the larger context of early-twentieth-century post-­Kantian 
humanism. In Moreno’s work one discerns the influence of Marx’s critique of 
the fetishism of commodities, a dynamic by which “definite social relation 
between men” assumes “the fantastic form of a relation between things.”12 
Moreno arrived at a similar conclusion by way of another logic. In creating 
some of the earliest examples of social network graphs, he found (and ob-
jected to) the presence of things in the position of social actors. His objec-
tion to the automatization of human experience also echoes that of his near 
contemporaries, such as Viktor Shklovsky, Martin Heidegger, Walter Benjamin, 
and Hannah Arendt.
Moreno helps us see the book in a new light. If, as he suggested, the 
book is always a robot for enacting action at a distance, it is all the more 
robotic as a device that draws electricity, an electronic book. In the 1930s 
one could view Moreno’s rhetoric about books and bombs as fanciful, tech-
nophobic even; a century later his concerns appear prescient. The unintended 
consequences of automated and disembodied agency, from artificially intel-
ligent personal assistants to market trading algorithms, worry contemporary 
scientists, legislators, and philosophers.
Today, a machine that looks like a book can also function as a gun or a 
trigger. Electronic books read on mobile phones, tablets, and personal com-
puters make up a part of the same digital framework that powers drones and 
aircraft carriers. Computers in the service of the world’s largest purveyors of 
literature are also used by air traffic controllers and by covert intelligence 
agencies.13 Cellular phones, once devices for voice telecommunication, are 
now used both to read books and to detonate remote explosives.
These conditions compel us—historians, philologists, etc.—to reconsider the 
cozy relationship we have had with books since Gutenberg. My task in this 
chapter is to illuminate the blueprint of computation implicit in all electronic 

58	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
reading and writing devices and thereby make them strange again. In a recip-
rocal movement, I also aim to place modern computers within the long history 
of the book, to view them as technique for literary and not just mathematical 
symbolism. To do this, I construct a history of the literary device, based on 
materials drawn from the first half of the twentieth century. I am interested 
here broadly in the concepts of device and technique that emerged in the 
thought of Russian, German, and English philologists, whose work I cover in 
the first section of this chapter. Subsequent sections trace the concomitant 
emergence of literary device in another sense, as a thought experiment 
staged by Ludwig Wittgenstein and completed by Alan Turing in the 1920s 
and 1930s. These experiments lead us to consider a number of fantasti-
cal broken reading and writing machines that define the limits of symbolic 
thought. They culminate in the schematics for a specific mechanism, which 
lies at the modernist roots of contemporary computational culture.
TECHNIQUE
What kind of a thing is a literary device? The formalist concept of a device is 
in part an artifact of an unfortunate translation from the Russian priem. The 
word would be better translated as “technique,” in the sense of “method,” 
“approach,” or “procedure.” “Device” contains these meanings as well, but in 
modern usage it often carries a more concrete connotation, as an “object, 
machine, or piece of equipment that has been made for some special pur-
pose.”14 The ambiguity is instructive. A spirit of latent materialism—thingness—
haunts literary theory from Viktor Shklovsky to Percy Lubbock and Frederic 
Jameson. The critic wants to approach the work of art as a thing, akin to a 
statue, and to understand the technique of its coming into being, as a mode 
of production. But the thing recedes from view because to encounter matter 
as an object unto itself is to strip it of figurative, symbolic potential. Tech-
nique in that brute sense of the word is a matter of transformation, trans-
figuration even, of matter into idea: the way in which a novel, for example, 
is borne out of an arrangement of purely physical properties like paper and 
ink. The critic becomes a physicist of sorts. A thick description of material 
particulates lies at the basis of interpretation. Books, sensors, computers, and 
other smart objects are distinct from other forms of inorganic matter in that 
they are epistemic things.15 Unlike silicon or dead wood, they give space to 
inscription; that is, they compound with symbolic goods to become cognitive 
artifacts: objects assembled both at hand and to mind.

	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
59
I am getting ahead of myself, however. “Laying bare the device,” according 
to Shklovsky, who coined the phrase, means making explicit the implied mech-
anisms of a literary trope, particularly in cases where such tropes turn “stale,” 
“automatic,” and “naturalized,” that is, bereft of their evocative power.16
Vladimir Nabokov, a writer conspicuously aware of his literary-theoretical 
heritage, used the formal technique of laying bare the device often and with 
relentless clinical precision. In the short story “A Guide to Berlin,” to which 
D. Barton Johnson attributes our first glimpse of Nabokov’s “mature virtuoso 
style,” Nabokov wrote:
In front of the house where I live, a gigantic black pipe lies along the outer 
edge of the sidewalk. A couple of feet away, in the same file, lies another, 
then a third and a fourth—the street’s iron entrails, still idle, not yet lowered 
into the ground, deep under the asphalt. For the first few days after they 
were unloaded, with a hollow clanging, from trucks, little boys would run on 
them, up and down, and crawl on all fours through those round tunnels, 
but a week later nobody was playing anymore and thick snow was falling 
instead; and now when, cautiously probing the treacherous glaze of the side-
walk with my thick rubber-heeled stick, I go out in the flat gray light of early 
morning, an even stripe of fresh snow stretches along the upper side of each 
black pipe. . . . Today someone wrote “Otto” with his finger on the strip of 
virgin snow, and I thought how beautifully that name, with its two soft o’s 
flanking the pair of gentle consonants, suited the silent layer of snow upon 
that pipe with its two orifices and its tacit tunnel.17
This tightly wound vignette dramatizes a distinctly formalist concern. The 
pipes embody the literary device. Usually found beneath the street, they now 
sit idle and visible on the surface. Even when exposed, the structure fails 
to captivate for long. Disused, it once again passes out of sight, covered in 
snow. Concerned with surfaces, the narrator “probes the glaze” of the street 
and finds a palindrome written in snow. The inscription “OTTO” not only 
resembles the pipes visually but is in itself a surface-revealing inscription that 
makes the pipes visible again. The mimetic surface inscription draws atten-
tion to the word’s visual shape and acoustics. It invites readers to perform 
the symmetry of its consonance as they pronounce the word. The round 
vowels and the interrupting obstruents of “OTTO” contort the body in ac-
cordance with the sound image: reverse mimesis, the body as sound pipe. 

60	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
The moment of corporeal reenactment transcends the representational and 
paper-bound confines of the medium. The pipes reach beyond page. The 
performance makes the “making of the literary technique obvious,” obvi-
ous. The metaphor implicit in the idea of laying bare the device is thereby 
revealed. In this lies the prevalent characteristic of Nabokov’s mature work, 
which often seeks to transcend the diegetic, fictional world through sheer 
recursion of literary technique, where each successive turn of abstraction 
pushes the buried symbol closer to the reader.
Despite such emphasis on devices, formalist poetics (both in art and in 
scholarship) fell short of producing an explicit theory of technique. In this 
section I reconstruct the notion of technique in the thought of three major 
literary theorists of the interwar period: Viktor Shklovsky, Percy Lubbock, 
and Mikhail Bakhtin. I do not mean to suggest that the group amounts to a 
coherent school of thought. Rather, I am interested in observing the develop-
ment of technique as a concept in parallel traditions at a formative time in 
the history of literary technology. I am consequently going to do something 
unusual in this chapter: juxtapose relevant patches of literary theory and 
material culture, which converge on a mechanistic view of reading, writing, 
and interpretation. These observations evidence fragments of a larger his-
tory. The reader should not mistake them for a complete canvas. I arrange 
them in this way to provoke a response and to find curious early inter­
sections between disparate intellectual traditions—literary theory, philosophy, 
and electrical engineering—that entwine to form the fabric of contemporary 
computational culture.
Viewed in the context of technological development, the emergence of 
technique as a critical category illustrates the broader concerns of the 
machine age. The notion of technology itself does not fully find its place 
in the critical literature until the 1950s–1970s, judging by the rash of titles 
like Martin Heidegger’s Die Frage nach der Technik (1954), Jacques Ellul’s 
La technique ou l’enjeu du siècle (1954), Lynn White’s Medieval Technology 
and Social Change (1966), and Viktor Fekiss’s The Technological Man (1969). 
Calling for the institution of a new field in 1959, editors of the inaugural 
issue of Technology and Culture wrote about the “neglect of the study of 
technology” amid a body of extant work that has “scarcely constituted” 
a systematic scholarly discipline.18 “Technology is a word whose time has 
come,” Langdon Winner would write in 1978 in his influential Autonomous 
Technology.19

	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
61
Seen in this light, the pre–World War II concern with literary technique 
anticipates the postwar turn toward technology as a field of cultural analy-
sis. Before technology, there was technique.20 The formalist period in literary 
theory signaled a turn away from history and philosophy of literature toward 
the mechanics of literary production. The technical turn entailed a mechanistic 
understanding of language, in which linguistic phenomena were viewed as a 
system of moving parts, whose relationship to one another was determined 
by discoverable laws. The turn to technique also meant that the mechanisms 
of meaning production, on the sides of both authorship and apprehension, 
were made accessible to a mass audience. Russian formalists in particular un-
derstood their task as one of radical democratization of the literary sphere.21 
High literature, once the purview of a select few, could belong to the prole-
tariat at large.22 This also meant that literature was composable: It could be 
distilled into discrete and reproducible rules—technique over art—to be learned 
and shared widely.
The turn to technique gains significance in its instrumental context. The 
rise of formalist and consequently structuralist thought (along with philoso-
phy’s linguistic turn, which saw language as a system of rule-based games) 
parallels the rise of rule-based programmable media: punch cards, magnetic 
drums, and ticker tape. This is not to imply that thought and technology 
stand in a reductive causal relationship to one another. Rather, they form 
a feedback loop, in which instruments, practices, and explanatory models 
evolve through mutual reciprocation. Locating the literary-theoretical con-
struct of the device within its technological context allows us to witness 
the contemporaneous evolution and mutual interdependence among art, 
engineering, and philosophy. The origins of computer science and literary 
formalism can be traced back to shared theoretical assumptions and tech-
nological contingencies coming to the fore of telecommunications in the first 
few decades of the twentieth century.
It is at this time that the formalist concept of technique began to abstract 
the idea of literary production from its irreproducible contexts. The emphasis 
on craft over art implied primarily a change in the artist’s relationship to 
labor. Walter Benjamin had this view in mind when he wrote, decades later, 
about works of art that could no longer be thought of as “rigid, isolated 
object[s].” Rather, they had to be “inserted into the context of living social 
relations,” determined by their relation to literary production.23 For Benjamin, 
technique made literary works “accessible” to materialist analysis.24 Whereas 

62	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
artistic genius was unique, craft carried with it a model of inheritance. 
Whereas genius was born, technique was shared. Whereas artists labored 
alone, craftsmen learned their trade in workshops, as part of a collective.
In a more general sense, the turn to technique could be seen as a re-
jection of Romanticism: for example, Schopenhauer’s aesthetics emphasized 
individual creative genius that reached “beyond the objects which actually 
present themselves” toward the transcendent ideal.25 Formalism dispelled 
the myth of lone genius creators, orienting artists instead toward discovery 
through handicraft. In his “Art as Device,” Shklovsky wrote, “The work of po-
etic schools amounts to the aggregation and the discovery of new ­devices/
techniques [priem] for the arrangement and the processing of linguistic ma-
terial, and, in particular, more so with the rearrangement of figure [obraz] 
rather than with its creation.”26
Influenced by Herbert Spencer, the formalists imagined language to make 
up a natural, physics-based system, which tended toward the conservation of 
energy.27 In his influential 1852 essay The Philosophy of Style, Spencer wrote 
about the limited reserves of the “recipient’s mental energy”:28 “A reader 
or listener has at each moment but a limited amount of mental power 
available. . . . Hence, the more time and attention it takes to receive and 
understand each sentence, the less time and attention can be given to the 
contained idea.”29 The ideal writer thus strove to minimize mental exertion, 
following the law of what Spencer called the economy of composition: to 
say as much as possible in the most concise and direct way possible. Poetry 
for Spencer was exemplary in that regard; it habituated those “symbols of 
thought” and “methods of using them” that had proved themselves to be 
the most effective through continuous use.30 Spencer’s ideal of literature was 
of the most thrifty, economical kind. His emphasis on efficiency in language 
prefigured principles of industrial management, the goal of which was gen-
eral competency, not genius. Rather than searching for some “unusual or 
extraordinary man,” Frederick Taylor would later write, optimal production 
outcomes should rely on “clearly defined laws, rules, and principles as foun-
dation,” in other words, technique.31
Shklovsky agreed with Taylor and Spencer about the dynamics of every-
day language, but not poetry. Poetry does not facilitate communication, he 
argued; it disrupts it. Poets arrange and process habituated material with 
the view of resurrecting the vitality of the word lost to everyday ­habituation. 
For Shklovsky, the deprogramming of received trope constituted the primary 

	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
63
technique of specifically aesthetic language. Poetic estrangement counterbal-
anced prosaic habituation, by which complex things and ideas were replaced 
by shorthand. Thus, whereas everyday language (and industrial management) 
followed the laws of energy conservation, poetic language, according to 
Shklovsky, expended energy. It literally belabored (zatrudnenie) and made 
language difficult again. It prolonged rather than shortened apprehension 
(vospriiatie).32 If, for Spencer, language was a labor-saving device and po-
etry its most economical expression, Shklovsky’s idea of poetry was labor-­
intensive and extravagant.
Any literary innovation was, in the formalist view, bound to follow a 
cycle of habituation and renewal. With time, images once able to capture 
the imagination lost their vitality. Consequently, the evolution of aesthetic 
periods followed a course of arbitrary differentiation, in what Jean Moréas 
(a symbolist poet and art critic important in the history of formalism) called 
a cyclical evolution (évolution cyclique), by which dominant tropes in one 
period become clichés in the next. Art depletes itself, Moréas wrote, “from 
copy to copy, from imitation to imitation.” What seems fresh today “dries 
up and shrivels” tomorrow.33 Technique, in that sense, was seen by the 
formalists as a kind of information processing at the metalinguistic social 
level. The mechanics of the arrangement and the rearrangement of figure 
produced new meaning in habituated contexts. Such give and take powered 
the engine of literary development.
Reflecting critically on Shklovsky’s materialist aesthetics, Mikhail Bakhtin 
would write in the 1920s that such an overly formal model of aesthetic 
genre formation was capable only of establishing a “chronological table of 
variance in the evolution of technical devices,” because “in isolation tech-
nique cannot have a history.”34 The formalist model of literary development 
seemed meandering and meaningless to the more teleologically oriented 
critic. Bakhtin was also less inclined toward materialism. For example, he was 
careful not to reduce technique to questions of material arrangement alone, 
independent of the “aesthetic idea”: “I am quite ready to join in the senti-
ment that ‘in art technique is everything,’ provided we understand that the 
aesthetic object cannot exist independent of the artistic work.”35 For Bakhtin, 
the work existed neither in the mind nor in the configuration of matter alone. 
Any immanent text—for example, an edition of Shakespeare’s Hamlet—could 
not, for Bakhtin, exhaust the possibility of Hamlet as a transcendent work 
of art. Neither could works be reduced to pure ideas. Any notion of Hamlet 

64	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
the play must rest on firm material foundations—the textual witness—be it 
an original folio or a critical edition. “In art, technique is not ­mechanistic,” 
Bakhtin wrote; rather, “technique animates and motivates the aesthetic ob-
ject at every point.”36 Bakhtin thus rejected the dualism between ideational 
content and physical form. Idea and objects enter into a continual dialectic.
For Bakhtin, technique was that force which at any point of a text was 
capable of translating ideas into things and things into ideas; the mental con-
ception of the word materialized into a specific arrangement of ink and paper. 
Within the ontological indeterminacy of art, which exists simultaneously as an 
object and idea, Bakhtin approximated the following formula: “Audiences are 
equivalent to creators, minus technique.” Alternatively, authors “equal the au-
dience plus technique.”37 Audiences experience art’s coming into being, though 
they lack in craft. Technique in that sense is a “method of processing content 
through material.”38 We return to the notion of labor or procedure, which 
transforms raw material—things—into art, no longer mere objects limited by 
their physical manifestations. The goal of ­poetics becomes, in Bakhtin’s words, 
the analysis of the “technical apparatus of aesthetic creation”: the movement 
between works and objects of art and back from things to ideas.39 Hence he 
arrives at the notion of aesthetics as a kind of dialectics between immanent 
and transcendent realms.
Even as formalism flirted with the idea of a materialist poetics, the “mat-
ter” of formal analysis was limited to the abstract notion of language, which, 
as is the case with any abstraction, can exist only in a categorical sense, for 
example, in a way that all whales are mammals. Mammals are not a thing 
in that sense. The category of language similarly comprises a theoretical ag-
gregate of specific vernaculars. In giving names to literary phenomena (e.g., 
genres and periods), literary critics similarly move from material specifics 
to categorical abstractions. In this light, it becomes possible to view Nabo-
kov’s recursive metapoetics as a response counter to the critical method of 
induction. His prose works deductively, in that it attempts to convert ideas 
back into things. Nabokov reifies. His pipes and surface inscriptions protrude 
through the diegetic limits of a fictional world.
On the way to becoming things, words necessarily encounter their me-
dium. Whatever the diegetic limits of fictional worlds, language is firmly con-
strained by paper. Nabokov’s prose often reveals that outermost conceit of 
any novel, the book, where a literary device in its ideational sense meets the 
literary device in its proper, physical sense. Fictional worlds bump against 

	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
65
the real at the bounds of a page. Recall, for example, the conclusion of 
Nabokov’s 1936 Invitation to a Beheading, which ends with one such imag-
ined dissolution of diegetic boundaries, at which point the novel’s characters 
glimpse the material reality on the other side of the page. Nabokov wrote:
Everything was falling. A spinning wind was picking up and whirling: dust, 
rags, chips of painted wood, bits of gilded plaster, pasteboard bricks, 
­posters; an arid gloom fleeted; and amidst the dust, and the falling things, 
and the flapping scenery, Cincinnatus made his way in that direction where, 
to judge by the voices, stood beings akin to him.40
The passage gestures toward the real, arresting mimesis. In this way ­Nabokov 
exposes the incapacity of literature to actualize and to assume physical 
form. His characters are often dimly aware of their fictional predicament and 
struggle hopelessly to escape.
On the other side of the page, the material contexts of literary produc-
tion similarly escape a reader’s grasp. Critics endeavor to articulate the 
transition from thought to object. But the linkage between pen and paper, 
technique itself, disappears in reception. Echoing his Soviet colleagues in the 
influential Craft of Fiction, the English critic Percy Lubbock, who I do not 
think would mind being called a formalist, wrote, “To grasp the shadowy and 
fantasmal form of a book, to hold it fast, to turn it over and survey it at 
leisure—that is the effort of a critic of books, and it is perpetually defeated. 
. . . Nothing, no power, will keep a book steady and motionless before us, 
so that we may have time to examine its shape and design.”41 Note that the 
author’s use of object-oriented vocabulary does not quite refer to objects. 
Lubbock’s “grasping,” “holding,” and “keeping the book motionless” are still 
metaphors. The reader holds and keeps the thing before the mind’s eye. 
Books escape the reader’s mental, not physical, grasp. Nor do Lubbock’s 
“books,” “forms,” “shapes,” and “designs” refer to the outward material as-
pects of the literary artifact. These are again mental constructs, not mate-
rial ones. When Lubbock mentions a book, he usually means the novel. His 
materialism is latent rather than explicit.
This confusion is not to Lubbock’s detriment—it further underscores his 
thesis. Readers’ unfamiliarity with what Lubbock calls the novel’s “technical 
aspects” hampers their ability to understand how the novel comes to present 
itself to the mind in its entirety.42 Critics grasp other more plastic art forms, 

66	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
such as sculpture or painting, whole and at once.43 These exist synchronically 
in space limited to their physical dimensions. By contrast, narratives unfold in 
time, diachronically. To perceive a book, to read a novel, readers must 
therefore abstract from the physical object and extend it in working memory, 
past immediate perception. Meaning making of this sort involves the mental 
assemblage of linguistic minutiae, which eventually constitute a literary whole.
Critical reading in Lubbock’s sense entails an account of the transforma-
tion from things to ideas: from words and sentences to stories, novels, and 
verse. Echoing Boris Eichenbaum in “How The Overcoat Is Made,” Lubbock 
was interested in the mechanics of literary craft—how the thing is made. 
He promised to view “a few familiar novels . . . with some particularity” but 
without judgment or critique. “How they are made is the only question I shall 
ask,” he wrote.44 The book’s author is ultimately a craftsman. It is therefore 
the critic’s role to “overtake him [the author] at his work and see how the 
book was made.”45 The mechanics of intellectual production are here again 
central to the project of literary criticism. Books, however, “vanish” when we 
“lay our hands” on them, Lubbock wrote.46 Critics must therefore choose to 
see either trees or forest. As the totality of the work comes into view, the 
technical details of craft—books as objects—disappear. Conversely, when 
viewed up close, technical particulates obscure sight of the work as a whole.
“The real heart and substance of the book,” Lubbock wrote, “stands 
out more clearly for the obscurity into which the less essential parts of it 
subside.”47 To read in this mode is to deny books their materiality. When 
reading for pleasure, lay readers lose themselves in the elements of narrative 
immediately available for observation. For Lubbock, to read novels for plea-
sure is to “forget, if we can, that the book is an object of art.”48 By “object 
of art” Lubbock means the transcendent idea of the novel as opposed to 
the immanent work itself. To “objectify” elements of the novel that “strike us 
more keenly,” as Lubbock phrases it, therefore means quite the opposite of 
what is usually meant by objectification. The complete mental idea of the 
novel congeals only at the conclusion of reading, that is, at the limits of 
the book as a thing: “Far from losing ourselves in the world of the novel, 
we must hold it away from us, see it all in detachment, and use the whole 
of it to make the image we seek, the book itself.”49 But to hold books away 
in this sense means also to internalize them completely. And by “books” 
Lubbock means the idea of a novel, not at all the thing itself. Thus to read 
critically is, paradoxically, also to arrest the coming-into-being of the work. 

LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
67
The difficulty of materialist poetics is reflected in its language, which continu-
ally conflates mental and physical constructs.
The Craft of Fiction ends on an ambivalent note. Lubbock sensed the 
inadequacy of his materialism: “If only there were one single tangible and 
measurable fact about a book.” If only it could be “weighed like a statue” 
or “measured like a picture—it would be a support in a world of shadows.”50
I want to end the section here, with a momentary failure of materialist 
poetics, to pick up another concomitant thread, one that will take us through 
some of the same concerns about the nature of symbolic representation and 
its relationship to the physical world. My aim is to disconnect the history of 
modern computing from its expected contexts of calculating machinery and 
to join it with literary theory, where, as we will see, it also finds a measure 
of congruity. I do so in the absence of direct evidence for an explicit intel-
lectual connection.51 My goal is not to prove that such a linkage exists, but 
rather to irreparably entwine the nominally discordant intellectual and mate-
rial genealogies in a way that sheds light on our ­modern predicament, where 
books and bombs indeed share the same semiotic infrastructures. Along with 
such critics of contemporary computational culture as Bernard Harcourt and 
Frank Pasquale I would like to ask, How did we get here?52 The thought of 
Ludwig Wittgenstein and Alan Turing leads to a number of broken reading 
and writing machines, which in aggregate suggest a possible answer to the 
quandary of materialist poetics, posed in the liminal space between thought 
and thing.
THOUGHT EXPERIMENT I
Modern computers, and by extension the electronic book, harken back to a 
cluster of related thought experiments prevalent in the philosophy of Ludwig 
Wittgenstein and subsequently Alan Turing, his longtime student and col-
league. The story of Turing machines has been told before in many contexts 
but never with an eye to literary machines. The history of literary interpre-
tation nevertheless occupies a central place in the early development of 
modern computing. To confront computers as literary devices, one must first 
understand their peculiar relationship to universal Turing machines. I would 
like to frame that discussion by drawing two further as yet unexplored his-
torical genealogies that culminate in Turing’s seminal essay on computable 
numbers: the first is intellectual and stems from Turing’s tutelage under Witt-
genstein, and the second is material and highlights the physical similarities 

68	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
between Turing’s design and a number of attendant developments in printing 
and communication.
To read Shklovsky, Bakhtin, Lubbock, Turing, and Wittgenstein together 
is to recover a legacy of humanities computing that often gets overlooked 
in the history of computer science and software engineering. The literary 
perspective is important because it allows us to see the computer in a 
new light: more than a by-product of quantification, a metaphor machine. 
Turing machines should interest literary scholars because they embody a 
minimally viable model for generalized symbolic manipulation: reading and 
writing. ­Poetics should interest electrical and software engineers because 
it grounds computation in the long history of the written word. Turing’s 
thought experiments were meant to solve a mathematical problem, but 
their pedigree lies also in the study of textual meaning making and inter-
pretation. Wittgenstein and Turing posed a problem similar to that of the 
formalists and arrived at a similar conclusion: a generalized algorithm for 
language manipulation.
In his seminal 1936 paper on computable numbers, Alan Turing proposed 
a peculiar (for a mathematical treatise) thought experiment that addressed a 
problem in the field of elementary number theory.53 His solution involved 
more than a formula. Instead, he imagined a machine that would substitute 
for calculation. Ultimately, Turing described a device that was meant to 
embody the symbol: It transformed external abstractions into physical states 
internal to the device. In doing so, his imagined device breached the bound-
ary between idea and matter. It was exactly an instrument for transforming 
thoughts into shapes, of the kind approached by formalist poetics. In that 
sense, Turing’s hypothetical machine was an advancement in the develop-
ment of a long-standing thought experiment concerning the nature of human 
understanding and the beginning of a new, machine-assisted philological 
practice.
The question of an automated hermeneutics echoes through the canon 
of Western philosophic tradition. What does it mean to read and to under-
stand something? Is it enough to repeat another’s words, as Phaedrus did in 
response to Socrates? Could students be said to possess reason when they 
merely parrot thoughts, without actively thinking on their own? What of ani-
mal or machine intelligence? The question had been posed by Descartes, who 
wrote that it would not be sufficient for the “rational soul” to be “lodged in 
the human body like a pilot in his ship, except perhaps for the moving of its 

	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
69
members” but that intelligence must be “joined and united more closely with 
the body in order to have sensations and appetites similar to our own.”54 
Magpies and parrots can appear to speak, Descartes wrote, but can they 
show us that they understand? And what would that showing entail?
Recall also the experiments with combinatorial poetics of the seventeenth-
century German Jesuit scholar Athanasius Kircher, the inventor of Arca 
Musurgicae, a music composition device, by which a composer not versed 
in music could combine predetermined musical phrases written on wooden 
planks to compose a score. In correspondence with Kircher, the German 
­Baroque poet Quirinus Kuhlman argued that using a similar instrument to 
compose poetry would amount to sed versus, non poema (mere versification, 
not poetry). Would we call a naïve child using such a contraption a com-
poser or a poet? No, he answered:
Sed lusus est ingeniosus, Ingeniose Kirchere, non methodus, prima fronte 
aliquid promittens, in recessu nihil solvens. Sine cista enim puer nihil potest 
respondere, & in cista nihil praeter verba intelligit; tot profert, quot audit, 
sine intellectu.
But [the poetry box] is just an ingenious game, ingenious Kircher, not a 
method, promising something on the surface, but solving nothing deep 
down. For without the box the boy can answer nothing, and with the box 
he understands nothing but words. He produces whatever he hears, without 
understanding, like a parrot.55
The child cannot create without mechanical assistance. Like the parrots of 
Plato, Kuhlman, and Descartes, it mimics creation on the surface. Nothing 
“deep down” in an automaton’s mind corresponds to the outward appear-
ance of thought. The child composes poetry without thinking—that is, without 
the appropriate deep structure that should accompany proper poiesis. If 
technique alone is to guide the creation of poetry in a way that was sug-
gested by the formalists, would we recognize purely formal creation as art, 
or thought, or language? Or would it be for us mere versification? In other 
words, does technique matter? Do we care how the thing is ­produced—by 
machines or aliens—or do we care only about its effects?
The philosopher John Searle would later pose a similar question in his 
famous Chinese room thought experiment.56 Can a contraption be said to 

70	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
“speak” a language if inside it contains only a dictionary for looking up the 
correct answers to any given query? A man inside the room sorts the an-
swers blindly. He does not understand the language (Chinese, in the original 
thought experiment), yet the contraption appears to respond appropriately. 
But is it again enough to appear to understand, or should we say that un-
derstanding must always involve an analogous movement inward?
Searle argued that his room, a kind of robot for automated responses 
in a foreign language, does not properly speak a language in the way a 
fluent speaker does. For Searle and other so-called internalists, the exter-
nal signs of whatever is meant by “speaking” and “understanding” must 
correspond to some appropriate internal mental states.57 Plato, Descartes, 
Kuhlman, and Searle all pose a variation on the same thought experiment, 
which, in opposition to mere functionalism, aims to identify deep structure 
that characterizes cognitive phenomena, apart from their surface manifes-
tation. Reading and writing should leave something behind, these thinkers 
intuit. Functional outward appearances are not sufficient. A text is assimili-
ated. It leaves a trace. It is joined and united with the body, to paraphrase 
Descartes. Moreover, the trace must correspond in some way to the origi-
nating inscription. The two—text and body—achieve a measure of structural 
accordance.
Recall the famous pharmakon passage from Plato’s Phaedrus, which ex-
plores the relationship between writing and its impression on the mind. At 
the conclusion of the dialogue, King Thamus objects to the technology (ta 
tekhnēs) of the written word, because he believes it will foster forgetfulness 
in the people who use it. Plato writes, “Their faith in extrinsic writing [graphō 
exōthen], by means of foreign impressions [allotrion tupōn], will diminish their 
intrinsic [endothen autous] capacity to remember.”58 Plato thus contrasts the 
exterior figure of the inscription with memory, an intrinsic cognitive ability. The 
Greek tupōn, related to the English “type,” literally means an impression. It 
is, in this case, also “foreign” or “othered” (allotrion). It comes from without. 
Like Moreno after him, Thamus finds thought externalized through typography 
problematic. For him, true memory and thought come from within. They are 
once again properly internalized.
For this reason, in the beginning of the dialogue Socrates asks his young 
collocutor to stop reciting a speech that the latter has learned by heart. 
Recitation is worth little for him. He wants Phaedrus to think for himself and 
not merely regurgitate another’s ideas. The student must not perform as a 

LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
71
mere parrot or an automaton would. To truly comprehend something and 
to make a show of it, readers assimilate, absorb, and make their own. Much 
can go wrong in that process. We expect that reading will ultimately leave an 
appropriate impression (tupōn) on the reader’s mind. These typographic im-
prints presumably correspond to the stamp. For understanding to take place, 
writing must produce “true,” in Descartes’s words, feelings and appetites. 
But what is true, appropriate, or proper? What shapes does type (tupōn) 
impress onto the soul? It cannot be a letter’s literal form. How, then, does 
one convert external images (graphō exōthen) into internal impressions? How 
can we incorporate foreign (allotrion) to us states of mind? How does one 
ingest inscription in a way that leaves an appropriate trace? Even the most 
mundane acts of reading contain such profound mysteries of comprehension.
THOUGHT EXPERIMENT II
Turing machines, which will come into view shortly, embody a stark solu-
tion to the problem of “appropriate comprehension.” Complementary and 
somewhat contrary to well-settled narratives of early computing, which place 
Alan Turing’s work in conversation with other computer pioneers such as 
Charles Babbage, Ada Lovelace, Konrade Zuse, and John von Neumann,59 
I propose considering the Turing machine, first, within the broad tradition 
of formalist poetics and, second, more narrowly, in response to a series of 
thought experiments proposed by Wittgenstein in the 1930s.60 What follows 
is a reconstruction of a remarkably persistent idea that regularly resurfaced 
in Wittgenstein’s writings for the duration of his career.
Wittgenstein broached the problem of reading machines and compre-
hension initially in his Blue Book, Brown Book and Philosophical Grammar 
(all compiled in the early 1930s), then in his lectures and remarks on the 
foundations of psychology and mathematics from the late 1930s, and finally 
in Philosophical Investigations, written between 1945 and 1949. 
The earliest of these documents, The Blue Book, opens with a question 
of semantics: “What is the meaning of a word?” Wittgenstein cautions his 
students against choosing the easy answer, which holds that meaning re-
sides in the head.
It is misleading then to talk of thinking as of a ‘mental activity.’ We may say 
that thinking is essentially the activity of operating with signs. This activity is 
performed by the hand, when we think by writing; by the mouth and larynx, 

72	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
when we think by speaking; and if we think by imagining signs or pictures, 
I can give you no agent that thinks. If then you say that in such cases the 
mind thinks, I would only draw your attention to the fact that you are using 
a metaphor, that here the mind is an agent in a different sense from that 
in which the hand can be said to be the agent in writing.61
Wittgenstein explains that when we see a sentence on paper, we assume 
that some structure analogous to that sentence exists in the mind. Perhaps, 
he speculates, we could even observe the brain directly in the process of 
writing, to check whether mental states correspond to the inscription. Both 
mental and written thought structures embody thought. Yet neither exists in 
isolation. Rather, we are witnessing the workings of a metaphor: the transfer-
ence of properties between two distinct physicalities, one in the head and 
one on paper. Neither physical nor mental descriptions alone are sufficient 
for Wittgenstein to locate cognition. The subject escapes depending on our 
point of view. When the hand writes, it is the brain that thinks. But when 
the hand thinks, it is the brain that writes. Meaning thus lies in the transi-
tion from hand to head and from mind to paper. We might say that thinking 
takes place “on paper, in our head, in the mind,” Wittgenstein writes, but, 
crucially, “none of these statements of locality gives the locality of think-
ing.”62 Thought is distributed throughout the body and among its extensions. 
We think by the sign, head, hand, and pen.
“Could a machine think?” Wittgenstein asks later in the first notebook.63 
The challenge, as he explains it, is not one of finding a machine that can 
do the job of manipulating signs. It lies in its ability to enact both sides of 
the metaphoric equation. “Doing the job” (manipulating external signs) must 
correspond to something else. Severed from its analogical structure, the 
chance manipulation of signs is a meaningless activity. Meaning, Wittgenstein 
suggests, resides in the metaphoric transference between something (symbol) 
and something else (machine state). Therefore a better question is, Can a 
machine hold private mental states? Can it feel pain in the sense of pain 
being the state of internal affairs not accessible to others?64 If we believe ma-
chines to be capable of holding intrinsic states, then we can imagine some-
thing akin to machine intelligence, by which a spoken word or letter finds the 
appropriate inward representation. Understanding, in that sense, lies simply 
in the structural accord between something internal and something external.

	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
73
Wittgenstein engages the question of automated semantics again in his 
Brown Book. He first defines reading mechanically as an activity devoid of 
meaning that involves “translating script into sounds,” “writing according 
to dictation,” or “copying in writing a page of print.” What happens when 
a naïve child reads a newspaper? Wittgenstein asks, echoing Kuhlman and 
Descartes. The child’s eyes, he answers, “glide along the printed words, he 
pronounces them aloud or to himself,” but “other words he pronounces after 
having seen their first few letters only, others again he reads out letter by 
letter.” Children act as “reading machines” when they pay no attention to 
what they read. A child reads “faultlessly like a reliable machine,” Wittgen-
stein repeats, emphasizing the mechanical property of colloquially “mechanis-
tic” reading.65 Another hypothetical child merely pretends to read. The child 
guesses at the words and on occasion repeats things by heart without actu-
ally seeing them on the page.66 Would any of these hypothetical scenarios 
rise to our conventional understanding of reading?
Wittgenstein continues to complicate such edge cases. He considers, 
for example, the case of a hallucinating patient who “reads” what to others 
looks like gibberish. Another fakes reading Cyrillic by memorizing the lines 
phonetically. Wittgenstein further imagines reading machines, which produce 
random sounds that occasionally, by accident, correspond to some existing 
texts. In each case, Wittgenstein writes, we envision two mechanisms: one 
visible and external and one hidden and internal. The reader eventually does 
more than mimic the mechanical motions of reading. Outward signs are in-
sufficient to indicate comprehension. A body’s motions—of gliding one’s eyes 
across the page and saying the words out loud—must connect in some way 
to appropriate internal, mental representations.
We are tempted, then, to privilege the inward-facing signs of comprehen-
sion as the “real criterion for a person’s reading or not reading.”67 However, 
no such internal mechanisms can be known to us or communicated to oth-
ers properly. One can only intuit another’s intimate experience of reading. 
Absent the ability to convey private mental states directly, reading pupils 
must verbally convince their teachers that a scanned sign had the intended 
effect. How can Phaedrus convince Socrates? How can he explain his com-
prehension? He could write an essay, perhaps. Texts beget texts. But what 
if his explanations are memorized as well? What can be done to convince 
others definitively of our having understood a text properly? This requires 

74	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
even more words, which are themselves subject to the same suspicions. The 
hermeneutic circuit is thus perpetually frustrated.
The Blue and Brown books conclude without a clear resolution. Wittgen-
stein describes something akin to affective hermeneutics, an “indirect way 
of transmitting [a] feeling.” Communication, we would say today, is always 
mediated. Wittgenstein finally imagines the possibility of “direct” commu-
nication, capable of transmitting feelings immediately from one person to 
another in a way that “obviate[s] the external medium.”68 Barring that pos-
sibility, we are ultimately limited by our private sensations of knowledge. 
“Something which we can never know happens at the end,” Wittgenstein 
writes.69 Any sense of affirmation, the phatic utterance—Can you hear me 
now? Did you understand?—comes through further expression, entailing 
further uncertainty.
Philosophical Grammar, written around the same time as the Blue and 
Brown books, develops such reading experiments further. It begins with a 
problem of understanding and not understanding. “To understand a lan-
guage,” Wittgenstein writes, means “to take in a symbolism as a whole.”70 
A word is always a part of a larger system. Similarly, a pass in soccer only 
makes sense as part of the game. It is meaningless in isolation. To appre-
ciate soccer, one must internalize its rules and regulations. Only then do 
the individual elements begin to make sense. Consequently, the rule book 
cannot be understood in its own terms. One must begin with an analogy 
from another domain. Understanding the game’s grammar therefore always 
involves transmediation of some kind. In comparing language to music, he 
writes, “For explanation I can only translate the musical picture into a pic-
ture in another medium and let the one picture throw light on the other.”71 
And elsewhere: “How curious: we should like to explain the understanding 
of a gesture as a translation into words, and the understanding of words 
as a translation into gestures.”72 In Philosophical Grammar, Wittgenstein at-
tempts to break out of the hermeneutic circuit by appealing to analogical, 
transmedia processes. Proper understanding ultimately involves the “trans-
lation from one symbolism into another; tracing a picture, copying some-
thing, or translating into another mode of representation.”73 To understand 
something said is thus akin to modeling it in clay or drawing it. Similarly, 
we imagine explaining basketball rules to someone who only knows how 
to play hockey by analogy: pucks bear grammatical resemblance to balls, 

	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
75
goals to basketball hoops. The symbolic grammar of one game explains 
the other.
However, it is insufficient to merely paraphrase. To show understanding, 
one must draw a picture or a model in a way that reveals a correspondence 
of equivalent structures. In this view, language cannot be explained by more 
language. We must trade symbolisms to create a model that explains one 
representational system in terms of another. The symbolisms cannot diverge 
completely either. There must be some productive overlap to account for 
the structural similarities between balls and pucks. We would have to explain: 
Take note of these similarities, but not these; these are incidental. Language 
cannot be modeled like clay exactly. The rules of a game unfold by logics 
connected to its distinct physicalities: air and clay, ice and asphalt.
In thinking of the various ways in which the translation between diver-
gent symbolisms breaks, Wittgenstein continually returns to the pianola, a 
type of a player piano (Figure 2.1). The pianola joins music score to mecha-
nism in a rigid way. Mechanism and symbolic notation become one. The ma-
chine does not interpret, in that sense. Perforated paper physically actuates 
the appropriate pins and gears and always in the same manner, leaving no 
room for interpretation. So long as the mechanism functions properly, musi-
cal notation and internal arrangement of instrument parts stand in perfect 
accord. The rigidity of the connection ensures a correspondence of symbol-
isms. The machine enacts an exacting translation from one medium to the 
next by mechanical means, as the actuating mechanisms of the player piano 
fit into the grooves of a music roll.
The idea of such rigid correspondence seems to bring Wittgenstein 
closer to solving the challenge of “proper” comprehension. What if reading 
could become similarly rigid, in a way that is impossible to misinterpret? The 
pianola is promising in that regard, but, like other, less exacting mechanisms 
of comprehension, it too can malfunction. Early in Philosophical Grammar 
Wittgenstein explains, “Aren’t our sentences parts of a mechanism? As in a 
pianola? But suppose it is in bad condition?”74 Later, Wittgenstein expands 
on this thought:
The sentences that we utter have a particular purpose, they are to produce 
certain effects. They are parts of a mechanism, perhaps a psychological 
mechanism, and the words of the sentences are also parts of the mechanism 

FIGURE 2.1. A page from Clyde Coleman’s patent for an electrically operated musical 
instrument. Wittgenstein frequently returned to images of a pianola in his thought experiments. 
The perforated music sheet (labeled Fig. 3) is an example of a “symbolic language,” which 
elicits the appropriate “rigid” response from the mechanism, not subject to interpretation. 
Source: Clyde Coleman, “Electrically-Operated Musical Instrument,” Patent US1107495 A, filed 
August 22, 1898, issued August 18, 1914, sheet 1.

	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
77
(levers, cogwheels and so on). The example that seems to illustrate what 
we’re thinking of here is an automatic music player, a pianola. It contains 
a roll, rollers, etc., on which the piece of music is written in some kind of 
notation (the position of holes, pegs, and so on). It’s as if these written signs 
gave orders which are carried out by the keys and hammers.75
As was the case with reading automata in the Blue and Brown books, Witt-
genstein again substitutes a physical mechanism for the process of symbolic 
interpretation. Words and music notation alike contain a “purpose,” in his 
words. They elicit specific “effects” in the mechanism.
As before, we cannot always expect the mechanism of interpretation to 
function properly, nor do we have a reliable way to verify its correct opera-
tion. “Suppose the pianola is in bad condition,” Wittgenstein repeats. The 
device might hiss and bang instead of playing music, for example. One could 
object that notes are always “meant” to play on a mechanism in perfect 
working order. But to explain what is meant by a “perfect working order,” 
we would need to draw yet another diagram or build another machine. 
Characteristically, Wittgenstein resorts to yet another analogy. The “sense of 
an order,” he writes, lies in its “effect on an obedient man.”76 What looked 
initially like an infallible machine for comprehension once again requires the 
presence of a reasonable and therefore subjective human interpreter.
When drawing such analogies between mental and mechanical processes, 
Wittgenstein consistently rejects the model of language as a “psychophysical” 
mechanism.77 Rather, as the title Philosophical Grammar suggests, Wittgen-
stein is in search of “grammars” governing the engagement: between speak-
ers and listeners, readers and writers, player pianos and musical scores. But 
what is a grammar? It is a kind of a cheat sheet, a set of conventions or 
protocols, similar to the dictionary inside Searle’s Chinese room. The gram-
mar contains the smarts. Neither the room nor the person inside speaks the 
language. If anything “knows” the language, it is the dictionary, which allows 
the system to function. The grammar ensures proper translation between 
diverging symbolisms.
Wittgenstein imagines a layer of rules that mediate between symbol and 
machine or mental state. Two parties can agree on a ­protocol: a chart of 
appropriate correspondences that describes the exact rules of engagement. 
It then becomes possible to imagine a “part of the mechanism which re-
sembles a chart, [which is] inserted between the language-like part of the 

78	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
mechanism and the rest of it.”78 Such instructions enforce whatever is meant 
by “proper” compliance. I imagine, for example, a warning bell that sounds 
when a musical score falls out of alignment or, in a more complicated case, 
a command line “interpreter” that checks entered input for syntactical errors.
Wittgenstein writes, “Can one say that grammar describes language? If we 
consider language as part of the psycho-physical mechanism which we use 
when we utter words—like pressing keys on a keyboard—to make a human 
machine work for us, then we can say that grammar describes that part of 
the machine.”79 The grammar creates a “connection between a word and ‘a 
thing’ ” in order for the mechanism to function in a certain way: “The defini-
tion can make it work properly, like the connection between the keys and 
the hammers in a piano.” Crucially, it is that “connection and not the effect 
which determines the meaning.”80 A programmer would say that Wittgenstein’s 
grammatical layer resembles modern programming language interpreters and 
compilers, exactly the parts of the machine that connect codified instructions 
to their execution.81 Similarly, Wittgenstein’s grammar “means” in the sense of 
specifying rules by which meaning succeeds or fails. In this way, we can move 
away from speaking of “intended effects” or “proper obedience” and rather 
concentrate on this interpretive and mediating layer, which describes the rules 
of engagement.82 To learn a language in that sense is not to learn individual 
words but to understand the mechanical linkages of meaning making.
We say that the mechanism is rigid or that the law is inexorable when the 
results of an action are fixed. Wittgenstein calls such a relationship “super-
hardness.”83 Where a judge can be lenient, he explains, the law is compulsory. 
What we would now call an algorithm compels predictable execution, not sub-
ject to the vagaries of interpretation.84 Parts of the mechanism subsequently 
exist in a causal relationship to one another. Pushing this or that lever will 
always result in such and such a movement because of the way the me-
chanical parts are connected.
We are tempted, as before, to privilege the inner workings of a symbolic 
mechanism, which is also at the core of meaning making in mathematics. “If 
I show you the mechanism behind the [watch] dial, you will be able to pre-
dict the movement of the hour hand for any given movement of the minute 
hand,” Wittgenstein writes. But once again, how do we know if a mechanism 
is functioning properly? “For instance, I may drop the clock so that the ma-
chinery is broken, or lightning may strike it.”85 To check the mechanism for 
damage, we need a picture, a diagram, or schematics that describe what 

LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
79
the properly functional mechanism looks like. As a schema, the mechanism 
in good order is itself a type of a symbol for the perfected behavior of 
the sort that we expect. We could, to take another example, compare a 
broken clock with clocks that work. Whereas we tried to find a mechanism 
behind the symbol, we found also a symbol behind the mechanism. Again, 
we struggle to complete the circuit of interpretation between intent and ef-
fect, which never quite manage to explain and to verify each other. How do 
we know that our “gold standard” clock schematics are themselves golden, 
that is, that they lead to the construction of properly functioning clocks? We 
are once more faced with a series of receding analogies: a diagram that 
explains a diagram that explains a diagram.
In his lectures on mathematics, Wittgenstein never finds a way out of this 
recursive conundrum. The foundations of mathematics rely on some such 
mutually dependent relationship between the physical and symbolic worlds. 
Whether it is in math or ordinary language, some magic happens at the cou-
pling of matter and sign. The precise point of contact concerns Wittgenstein in 
all fields of human activity, from literature to psychology and mathematics. In 
all these fields he finds an implicit analogy between symbol and mechanism. 
The analogy itself is atomic. It cannot be split further into something such 
as sign and referent, tenor and vehicle, or signifier and signified. Considered 
apart, the two halves of the metaphor are strictly meaningless. In his lectures 
on aesthetics, Wittgenstein describes the dependency as the “concomitance 
between mechanism and its trace.” The best we can do in formalizing aesthet-
ics is therefore to “trace [its] mechanism,” Wittgenstein concludes.86
Wittgenstein’s thought experiments do not amount to a cohesive model 
of language, communication, art, or mind. However, they do contain the 
seeds of reading and writing machines later imagined by Alan Turing in 
the formative period of contemporary computing. Wittgenstein’s experimental 
thought machines prefigure a contemporary conversation about machine 
intelligence. Wittgenstein conjures his fantastical broken mechanisms to test 
the limits of our intuitions about reading, writing, and comprehension.
THOUGHT EXPERIMENT III
In 1939 Alan Turing attended Wittgenstein’s lectures on mathematics at 
King’s College.87 From the notes on Wittgenstein’s lectures compiled and 
published by Cora Diamond, it is clear that Turing was a vociferous presence 
in the class. His name is mentioned eighty-six times in the text, more than 

80	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
any other student by a wide margin. At some point during the course Witt-
genstein concluded his lecture by saying, “Unfortunately Turing will be away 
from the next lecture, and therefore that lecture will have to be somewhat 
parenthetical. For it is no good my getting the rest to agree to something 
that Turing would not agree to.”88
One expects Turing’s seminal paper on computable numbers, where he 
first proposed his universal computing machine, to contain a strictly techni-
cal discussion in the narrow field of number theory.89 Instead, we encounter 
a number of surfeit features. These account for the perplexing undercurrent 
of cognitive theory always present in Turing’s writing.90 His machines “think,” 
they are “aware,” and they “remember,” whereas his humans “calculate” 
and “compute.” The cognitive language reflects a heritage of Wittgenstein’s 
thought, which was concerned more broadly with theory of mind and the 
passage of inscription into understanding. Turing’s machine thinks in a par-
ticularly literate way: by ingesting and regurgitating symbols. Turing inherits 
these traits from Wittgenstein’s menagerie of comprehension automata in 
various states of disrepair. In the wilderness of Wittgenstein’s thought Turing 
locates the concise coordinates for a universal mechanism, placed in the 
liminal space between thing and symbol.
Turing machines mediate in the metaphoric transference from intrinsic 
“hard” states to their extrinsic “soft” representations. Like their dysfunctional 
predecessors, they concern the grammar of that transformation. They are, 
ultimately, mechanisms of exacting obedience: fully deterministic systems 
that nevertheless exceed their formal limitations. “How can the rules of op-
eration of the machine change?” Turing asked in “Computing Machinery and 
Intelligence.”91 His answer, which began as a mathematical proposition in the 
1930s, developed by the 1950s into a dramatized conversation between a 
poet and her critic; into the possibility of an evolving artificial intelligence; 
and into an imitation game, by which computers misrepresent their assigned 
gender. The very theoretical formulation of a Turing machine poses a num-
ber of questions related to the problem of free will and determinism more 
broadly. How can a machine escape its programming? How can a poem 
transcend the rules of its composition? How do humans become more than 
the sum of their nature and nurture?
Turing’s universal machine finally distills the diversity of Wittgenstein’s 
experiments into a single concise formula. It needs the following three com-
ponents to function: (1) a notational system that represents machine states, 

	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
81
(2) storage media capable of bearing inscription, and (3) a mechanism to 
transform symbolic notation into machine states. Given these three charac-
teristics, a machine becomes a universal mechanism capable of assuming 
the function of any other symbolic system.
To understand Turing machines in practical terms, think about the lower 
limits of computation. A Turing machine can simulate the physics of using 
a hammer, for example, but it cannot ever become one. A smart hammer is 
intelligent to the extent that it contains inscription: rules and instructions for 
hammering. Turing machines open a space of interiority by which mechanical 
actions (hammering, in our case) can be traced into their notational equiva-
lents (instructions for hammering). A smart hammer, or any other smart 
thing for that matter, presupposes a system of symbolic exchange within the 
instrument.
Once assimilated in this way, symbols are subject to grammatical trans-
formation. Turing machines unfold the logic of instrument use, that is, their 
technique. More complicated symbolic logics, which represent higher-level 
activity like solving physical formulas or writing poetry, are similarly amenable 
to Turing simulation, provided a grammar. Technique, if you recall from our 
earlier discussion, is a mode of production abstracted from its material 
contexts. The extent to which Turing machines penetrate everyday life belies 
their involvement in the general mechanisms of such abstraction, beyond 
computation. The computer extends its reach broadly not because it quanti-
fies life but because much of human cultural and cognitive activity is already 
symbolic in nature. The Turing machine is ultimately a tool for universal 
symbolic manipulation.
Let us examine the mechanics of a Turing machine more closely. Turing 
begins his paper with a typically Wittgensteinian provocation: “We may com-
pare a man in the process of computing a real number to a machine which 
is only capable of a finite number of conditions.”92 From the start, Turing 
treats computation, which we normally consider a complex cognitive process, 
as a simple mechanism. To these ends, he proposes a machine “supplied 
with a ‘tape’ (the analogue of paper) running through it, and divided into 
sections (called ‘squares’) each capable of bearing a ‘symbol.’ ”93 Much like a 
movie reel, tape moves through the mechanism one section at a time.
At each point, only one section bearing one symbol is in the machine: “We 
may call this square the ‘scanned square.’ The symbol on the scanned square 
may be called the ‘scanned symbol.’ The ‘scanned symbol’ is the only one of 

82	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
which the machine is, so to speak, ‘directly aware.’ ”94 The scanned symbol be-
comes a part of the machine’s internal configuration, or, to slide into Turing’s 
cognitive vocabulary, a part of its “awareness.” Turing argues that the machine 
can “effectively remember” the symbols it has “seen” and scanned previously.95 
Its initial configuration (the arrangement of tape and scanning apparatus) plus 
the scanned symbol determines its behavior. The scanned symbol becomes 
a part of machine “memory,” whereby symbols are translated into machine 
states. Today we would say that the mechanism transforms software into 
hardware, and vice versa.
Imagine, then, a device not unlike a telegraph or a film projector, which 
ingests reels of tape. Unlike telegraphs or film projectors, the ingested sym-
bolic representation becomes, by definition, a part of the machine’s internal 
state in a way that telegraph tape or film reels do not when they pass 
through telegraphs and film projectors. The film reel and ticker tape leave 
the machine without a trace and do not signify machine states. By contrast, 
Turing’s tape alters the machine’s internal configuration in a way that lasts 
beyond its discharge from the mechanism.
In his earlier thought experiments, Wittgenstein also spoke of humans in 
the process of reading or doing mathematics as ingesting symbols, of the 
need to internalize external symbolic states, and of effecting a change in 
mental states on some real and empirically observable neurological level, 
which correlates to the symbol. Turing’s machine is capable of such inges-
tion. It “thinks,” “reads,” and “remembers” to the extent of its capability to 
scan and internalize symbolic notation. In addition to reading, Turing’s ma-
chine writes: “In some of the configurations in which the scanned square is 
blank (i.e. bears no symbol) the machine writes down a new symbol on the 
scanned square.”96 It is also capable of erasing and moving symbols to ad-
jacent squares, one square at a time. In effect, the Turing machine provides 
a concise and minimally viable definition of “reading,” “writing,” and “becom-
ing aware.” These states for Turing involve the appropriate internalization 
and subsequent externalization of the symbol, for both human and machine.
More than a simple scanner, a Turing machine alters the very rules of 
reading and writing. If we take reading to initially entail moving our eyes 
from left to right, we can also imagine notation that stands for directives 
such as “Now move from right to left” or “Skip every other character.” 
Such directives become a part of the mechanism to determine the internal 

	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
83
movement of the reading and writing apparatus. Unlike an analog watch, 
the Turing mechanism is not set in stone. It is capable of altering its own 
inner works, where some of the scanned characters represent symbols to be 
manipulated and yet others represent machine instructions, which define the 
rules for manipulation. Data and instructions mix into the same input stream. 
The instructions are “meant” for the machine, in the sense that they direct 
the movement of the reading and writing heads, which “write,” “scan,” or 
“erase” symbols. Today, we would call such instructions programs, applica-
tions, or software. 
Just as Turing machines are able, in theory, to convert extrinsic signs 
into intrinsic machine states, they can conversely enact the opposite move-
ment, by representing machine states symbolically. This remarkable property 
allows for what Turing calls a class of universal machines, distinct from mere 
single-purpose computers. Single-purpose Turing machines perform singular 
actions such as addition or multiplication. However, a multiplication machine 
cannot perform other types of symbolic manipulation (e.g., spell-check) be-
cause the physical movement of its internal parts is fixed. An electronic 
weight scale, to take another example, cannot process text or calculate mis-
sile trajectories. The universal Turing machine by contrast has the ability to 
internalize other machine configurations wholesale. Such a machine can, in 
Turing’s words, “compute any computable sequence.”97 In being able to inter-
nalize physical configuration as symbol, the universal Turing machine gains 
the ability to simulate all other single-purpose Turing machines, so long as 
the logic of these machines is amenable to symbolic representation. For this 
reason, Turing computation excludes nonsymbolic mechanical actions such 
as hammering nails or harvesting grain. The universal Turing machine is a 
tool for ubiquitous symbolic manipulation; it is a trace of a trace, a diagram 
of diagrams.
The transition of symbols into machine states (and the other way 
around) defines modern programming. Unlike other definitive single-purpose 
and ­limited-state mechanisms (e.g., a clock), a universal machine contains 
the ability to take on differing internal symbolic configurations. It can imitate 
a clock, an abacus, a scale, a book. In a later paper that links computing 
machinery to intelligence, Turing implied also that his machine could eventu-
ally simulate human thought, because he saw the mind as another mecha-
nism for manipulating symbols.98

84	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
Are minds just types of Turing machines, or are Turing machines a kind of 
mind? Turing leaves the door open for either possibility. The universal Turing 
machine finally encapsulates a model of computation itself. It is capable of 
computing anything computable. In substituting the concept of computability 
with effective computability, Turing’s paper belongs to the annals of mathemat-
ical theory. It continues to elicit conflicting responses widely because much of 
it contains also the excess of symbolic thought related to our more general 
sense of what it means to read, write, and interpret. Besides offering math-
ematical proofs, Turing’s work embarks on an experimental, ludic even, enter-
prise in the spirit of Wittgenstein’s playful experimentation, which often involved 
altered states of mind, drugs, delirium, madness, and outright deception.
DEVICE
Literature in computer science tends to treat Turing machines as algorithms: 
logical, not necessarily physical constructs.99 However, it is impossible to dis-
sociate the idea from the implementation. The historian Thomas Haigh wrote 
that Turing machines “abstract away from the complexity of real computer 
architectures.”100 The Turing machine appeals to a theorist because it is a 
theory. Haigh also notes that “hardware and software are interchangeable to 
the theorist, but not to the historian.”101 In his 1937 review of Turing’s “On 
Computable Numbers” paper, Alonzo Church, the American mathematician 
whose work anticipated Turing’s (independently) in several important as-
pects, similarly acknowledged the material foundations of Turing computing: 
A “human calculator, provided with pencil and paper and explicit instructions, 
can be regarded as a kind of Turing machine.”102 Disregarding the broader, 
metaphysical consequence of that statement, note for now the persistence 
of two implements required for the minimally viable operation of the Church-
Turing human and machine calculators. Pen and paper assert themselves 
through the abstraction.103
To encounter digital books and therefore Turing machines as devices, 
media and book historians will find that they borrow from a number of extant 
designs, which, together and incrementally, give universal Turing machines 
their physical form. What are their technological antecedents? What would 
happen, for example, if Turing attempted to patent his device? What prior art 
would he cite in his patent application?
Most of the minimal technical requirements needed to build a universal 
Turing machine were within reach in the 1930s, when Turing wrote his influ-

	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
85
ential paper. In practice, his proposal required, first, an apparatus capable of 
scanning and erasing a finite number of symbols. Second, it called for what 
Turing described as “one-dimensional paper,” divided into discrete squares 
“like a child’s arithmetic book.”104 Furthermore, Turing specified a mechanism 
to advance tape through the machine, or, alternatively, to propel the scan-
ning mechanism along a length of tape. Having assembled these elements, 
our creation would look roughly like a cross between a telegraph, a film 
projector, and a typewriter.105
Were one to patent a Turing machine in the United States, these ele-
ments would find prior art in mechanisms such as the Numeral Adding or 
Subtracting Attachment for Typewriting Machines, the Combined Typewriting 
and Computing Machine, the Computing Attachment for Typewriters, the 
Computing Mechanism, and the Combined Typewriting and Adding Machine, 
among others.106 All these patented devices contain some combination of 
reading and writing heads, storage tape, and a movement mechanism cor-
responding to Turing’s specifications. A number of inventions at the end of 
the nineteenth century relate specifically to “circuit-controlling devices con-
trolled by a traveling perforated strip or tape,” as in the case of the Tape-
driven Telegraph Transmitter filed by Charles ­Cuttriss in 1893.107
Before perforated tape, the transmission of messages by telegraph re-
quired the presence of a skilled operator, who would be able to transcribe 
messages from text to Morse code and into the physical motion of a lever-
operated circuit. Early telegraphy required human operators to act as mute 
interpreters between text and telegraph. Perforated tape decoupled humans 
from machines. In U.S. patent 1187035 (1916) on “Telegraphy,” brothers 
Albert and Ralph Bumstead explain, “The object of our invention is to pro-
vide a system of telegraphy which does not require skilled operators for 
the transmission and reception of messages.”108 Instead, the message was 
transcribed into perforation using mechanical means and then fed into the 
mechanism. Typewriter tape movement could then be connected to tele-
graph electronics, where perforated tape mediated between the two worlds 
of mechanics and electricity. A number of contraptions emerged at the 
time with the aim of transfiguring mechanical action into perforation and, 
consequently, perforation into script, completing the circuit between auto-
mated encoding and decoding. These included machines for tape-controlled 
telegraphic transmission, tape-controlled printing, printing telegraphs, and 
remote broadcast programming devices for radio and television content.109

86	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
With the invention of punch cards and perforated tape (also used in 
textile looms as early as 1725), a message meant for another human 
became also a physical medium—bumps and holes—used to animate the 
mechanical movement of the transmission apparatus, the kind of rigid link-
age that Wittgenstein described in his thought experiments. Indeed, of the 
thirty-three asserted claims in the “Telegraphy” patent by the Bumstead 
brothers, the first thirteen relate to the transmission of intelligence including 
a transmitter:
adapted to initiate a succession of electrical impulses all of which have 
a character representing significance, a receiver adapted to detect varia-
tions in the time intervals elapsing between successive impulses, a plurality 
of interpreting relays selectively actuated by said receiver, and a printing 
mechanism responsive to the combined action.110
What begins as a description of a communication mechanism concludes with 
a claim about hermeneutics of control. Starting with clause 14, the ­brothers 
describe a telegraph system capable of transmitting impulses at varying 
time intervals. In the language of the patent, the length of a time interval 
“represent[s] significance,” involving an automated receiver responsible for 
“distributing, interpreting, and recording.”111 The printing mechanism is further 
“arranged to print the interpretation of the signals.”112 Interpreting relays 
thus transform time intervals into typography, representing letters, figures, 
and other characters in “accordance with a code.”113 Initially, the telegraph 
“interprets” with the aim of “transmitting intelligence.”114 Subsequently, the 
Bumsteads understood also that a length of transmitted time interval could 
also signify information used to actuate a variety of devices. The brothers 
thus refer to their invention in broad terms, calling it a “controlling medium” 
capable of regulating remotely everything from typesetting machines to ge-
neric sunflower switches: “Indeed, the detector and interpreting relays could 
be made to actuate a set of sunflower switches for an indicator . . . without 
including a printer at all.”115 By the end of the patent the brothers generalize 
their telegraph into a universal control mechanism.
Driven by ticker tape and connected to printers, automated telegraphs 
contained all the necessary Turing features: a discrete symbolic language, 
removable storage media, and a mechanism capable of altering its physical 

	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
87
state according to instruction. These proto-computers read and wrote; they 
ingested tape and converted extrinsic symbols into intrinsic configurations. 
By 1905, Donald Murray, inventor of the popular Murray telegraph, could 
write that “if we disregard the small class of telegrams that merely express 
emotions, the essence of telegraphy is control ” (emphasis mine). He stressed 
that telegraph systems “belong, not to the class of producing or distributing, 
but to the class of controlling mechanisms.”116 For the automated telegraph, 
control code and message are one. The mechanism “interprets” some sig-
nals as data to be manipulated and others as control code, or rules for 
such data manipulation. The first type of symbols holds significance for hu-
mans, whereas the second holds significance for the mechanism itself. The 
mechanism “transmits intelligence” in the sense of rarefying machine states; 
it “interprets” in the sense of mechanical embodiment.
Computing scales, dial recorders, electric tabulating machines, and com-
puting typewriters were widely available on the market, made by such 
­companies as Underwood Computing Machine, Electromatic, and Interna-
tional Business Machines (IBM). Rather than a single eureka moment, the 
invention of the computer should be viewed as a gradual historical process 
that culminates in Turing’s universal and minimally viable specifications.
The limits of physical engineering pull the Turing machine back to the 
sphere of the applied.117 What are we to make of universal Turing machines 
implemented in virtual worlds such as Wireworld (a cellular automaton simu-
lation), or Minecraft (a procedurally generated sandbox world-exploration 
game)? In the least, we must admit that such simulations do not rest on 
immaterial “turtles all the way down,” unless one believes the universe itself 
to be a type of Turing computation.118 At some point, a Turing machine 
in the virtual world meets the material limits of the physical. Simulation 
engines such as Minecraft and Wireworld do in some sense exist in the 
abstract, as code or even rules written on paper. In another sense, they do 
not. They come fully into being when instantiated within first-order physical 
systems that involve actual circuit boards and relay switches, or, at least, 
pen and paper. For this reason, the performance (in terms of cycles per 
second, instructions per cycle, or the maximum number of instructions) of 
a Turing machine simulated within a virtual world like Minecraft cannot logi-
cally exceed the performance of the machine running Minecraft itself. The 
physical capabilities of the bottommost device limit the computational power 

88	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
of all (n + 1) order Turing simulations. The bottommost turtle may have its 
head in the clouds, but its feet rest firmly on the ground.
The exact plane where the symbolic meets the material is difficult to 
identify. At some imperceptible point software disappears into hardware. 
Such ambiguity leads to controversy in the critical literature, as evidenced 
by Lev Manovich’s playful response to Kittler’s “There is no software” argu-
ment, in which Kittler posited the postmodern writing scene. Kittler wrote, 
“We do not write anymore. . . .  Human-made writing passes through micro-
scopically written inscriptions which, in contrast to all historical writing tools, 
are able to read and write by themselves.”119 Kittler sees the paper-bound 
blueprints of the first integrated microprocessor as the last real piece of 
writing. Everything written after that point is hardware, because all digital 
modes of representation, including text, ultimately rest on physical circuit 
architecture. In this view, the inability to understand hardware precludes all 
higher modalities of reading, writing, and interpretation.
Manovich inverts Kittler’s argument into “There is only software,” by which 
he means that in a pragmatic sense, software determines the properties of 
any media object. The inversion participates in the perpetual dialectics be-
tween idealism and materialism: Hegel and Marx, Marx and Gramsci, Gramsci 
and Kittler, Kittler and Manovich.120 “What you can do with the same digital 
file can change dramatically,” depending on the software, Manovich writes.121 
When it comes to digital photographs, to use his example, one application 
may allow the photographer to crop the image, whereas another may not. 
From this property-determining aspect of software (and in reference to the 
work of Alan Kay), Manovich adopts the concept of the metamedium: “a 
medium that can dynamically simulate the details of any other medium.”122 
Software defines the properties of digital manipulation, determining the phys-
ics of all higher-order media it simulates.123
Kittler would perhaps object that all such higher-order simulated physics 
still rest on the bedrock of silicon. In opening a series of nested software 
black boxes, the post-silicon writer and scholar of software hits the impen-
etrable casket of chip architecture. Manovich’s observations hold true for all 
simulated media but not for the simulation itself; hardware that gives rise to 
simulation is not in itself one. Base media ultimately determine the properties 
of software, their derivative metamedia. Wittgenstein’s thought experiments 
do not let us fall definitively into the software or hardware camp. The Turing 
machine remains in flux in the transformation of signs into physical states.

	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
89
We return finally to the sheer alienness of the book as a piece of tele-
communication technology, captured in the struggle to grasp the epistemic 
object—recall Shklovsky, Lubbock, and Bakhtin in the earlier sections. Writ-
ing already converts mental states into arbitrarily externalized marks on 
paper. Such inscriptions persist, through time, beyond their biological origin. 
They are then conveyed remotely and through ingestion, commonly called 
“­reading”: an action that transforms inscriptions back into mental states. The 
intellectual history of Turing machines leads us to a series of thought experi-
ments about the nature of such transformations. The question of technique 
continues to haunt contemporary poetics. In the process of reading, the book 
escapes the interpreter’s grasp as a thing, presenting itself only as an idea.
What does the material history of computers mean for the history of 
the book? In viewing the book as a precursor to a generalized machine for 
symbolic manipulation, we discover that it belongs to a class of controlling 
devices. The nature of Turing machines implies an irreversible admixture of 
matter, content, and control structure. When reading a paper-and-cloth book, 
one can definitively isolate (1) the medium from (2) content and from (3) the 
legal and political structures governing its production. To separate these 
components, one could, for example, tear out the copyright notice along with 
the ISBN number, copy the words into a notebook, and recycle the paper.
The digital literary device, by contrast, ingests both symbolic represen-
tation and control code through the same input stream. Where images of 
governance (such as trademark and copyright symbols) signify control, com-
puted text embodies it. We are not able to fully separate the mechanism 
from its message. Mechanisms of copyright enforcement are embedded into 
the artifact. The content is inextricably intertwined with the medium. One 
could copy and paste it, but the action would miss layers of meaning not 
accessible at the surface.
In asking “How is it made?” we arrest the advance of symbolism in an 
attempt to find the thing behind the process of signification, which always 
dissembles to conceal its material foundations. Signification ultimately ter-
minates at the physical boundaries of its establishing medium. Base mate-
rial conditions differ from paper to screen. Paper pages contain no internal 
states to speak of. The kind of symbolism they support therefore proceeds 
from surface inscription toward the reader. Reading, as Moreno reminds us, 
is already an invasive procedure. Absent human contact, we take on the 
mental states of others through a vehicle that conveys a remote kind of 

90	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
agency, displaced in time and space. It should be held in view all the more 
because the electronic book, unlike paper, does contain internal states of its 
own that further interject in the process of signification. How it is made be-
comes a question not only for the poetics but also for the politics of letters.
The question of technique seeks to expose the rules of symbolic trans-
ference between at least three discrete systems: one inorganic, the book; 
one symbolic, text; and one biological, body. There is of course a way in 
which the three are one: We are all cyborgs in a sense—an assemblage 
of organs, instruments, and inscriptions. In another sense, poetics asks us 
to consider the constructed nature of the coupling, the point of contact 
being governed by rules of engagement, protocols, grammars, and transla-
tion tables. These constructed entities grow and proliferate in a seemingly 
organic, ad hoc manner. They make up a part of our received technological 
a priori. This does not mean, however, that they should be naturalized or 
treated with a reverence afforded to endangered species or to nature itself. 
Decoupling ourselves from inscription, if only momentarily—to reject the graft 
or to let it wither—must remain an option. If poetics lays the groundwork for 
interpretation, we must acknowledge that today such grounds lie past the 
visible simulacrum of a digital page.
Whereas literary technique is concerned with the passage of ideas to ink, 
computational technique extends the chain of signification also to pixel and 
transistor. Techniques of the body and literary techniques intertwine in the 
process of conventional reading. The two couple ever tighter when reading 
electronically. Miniaturized, the Turing machine passes into the body—think 
of a digital pacemaker that contains inscription within the machine within the 
body. These linkages are deeply embedded. They require explication.
In the process of production, printing, and typesetting of this book, it is 
certain that my message was mixed with with control codes that, in turn, 
have changed hardware structures at hand or near the eye. I could believe 
that I bear no responsibility for extending the reach of machine languages 
so close to the reader; I only wrote the content I could object; I am not 
responsible for those other inscriptions. But that would be factually incorrect. 
The choice of our writing implements and channels of communication deeply 
affect the contexts of interpretation. Such choices, in aggregate, define the 
shared ecosystem of knowledge production. Traditional strategies of close 
reading, which limit interpretation to the parsing of visible content, risk miss-
ing the concealed machinations of naked circuit control. It looks as though 

	
LAYING BARE THE DEVICE	
91
we are reading books, but this book may change depending on the reader’s 
race, gender, ethnicity, geography, or political affiliation. Who authors or 
authorizes these transformations? If books were also pills or were fused with 
the brain’s neural circuitry, would we know what and whom we were reading?

This page intentionally left blank 

DIGITAL FORMALISMS
Text shapes the human body in strange ways. A lifetime of reading stoops 
the shoulders as though books were exerting pressure against the solar 
plexus. Continual exertion deteriorates eyesight. Tendons and other support-
ing structures in the wrist swell from the repetitive stress of striking keys. 
The word takes its toll. A further profound change happens when we read 
and write along with the machine. As we interpret it, it interprets us.
Machine learning algorithms track the speed by which readers advance 
from paragraph to paragraph, creating a fingerprint that points to markers of 
gender, age, race, ethnicity, and economic status. Algorithmic agents follow the 
movement of eye and finger to direct the reader’s attention and to understand 
how the human brain connects topics. Heat maps are drawn to represent the 
dynamics of boredom, fatigue, focus, and desire. Supervised training algorithms 
use our collective philological output—sorting and commenting—to classify 
information autonomously and to curate content suited to our predilections.
Deep neural networks mimic the brain to build models of human behav-
ior. These models are notoriously difficult to interpret because they are not 
intended for human comprehension.1 A vast archive of texts written by and 
for machines support the tiny, in comparison, corpus of human-compatible 
literature.
Despite its formative effect on practices of comprehension, code, the 
programmatic sign, does not often figure in our theories of meaning making. 
CHAPTER 3
> FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT

94	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
Instead, we consign it to the ornamental formatting layer of document struc-
ture. We do so at our peril. Unlike passive decorative elements—fleurons, 
daggers, and pilcrows—the programmatic sign actively molds text to context. 
Words find their topography.
At the maximally blunt limit of its capabilities, format governs access. 
Commands render some words and sentences visible on-screen while sup-
pressing others. The ability to hide text from view completely or to make 
it so small as to be illegible affects not just the style but also the politics 
of text. Code determines its audience, privileging certain voices and modes 
of reading. In this sense, the programmatic sign acquires its nonrepresenta-
tional, tactical character. Stripped of references, resemblances, and designa-
tions, it commands and controls.2
Unlike figurative description, machine control languages function in the 
imperative. They do not stand for action; they are action. More binding than 
what J. L. Austin has called speech acts—edicts such as “I pronounce you 
husband and wife” and commitments such as “I do”—control codes ensure 
regulation. Code is an exercise of power, not its representation. The differ-
ence between representation and control is one of brute force. It lies in the 
distinction between a restraining order and physical restraint. A restraining 
order signifies the calling forth of codified power. Physical restraints, for ex-
ample, handcuffs, enact the exercise of codified power. Like all violence, they 
do not stand for anything. The handcuffs simply contort the body into the 
shape of submission. Absent a body, the restraints draw an empty shape. 
Code similarly shapes the written word. Located somewhere between screen 
and storage medium, formats relate matter to content. They are techniques 
by which immanent inscriptions, the electromagnetic charge, are transformed 
into transcendent digital objects: novels, songs, films, poems. Formatting 
imposes structure.
Think of a paragraph, for example. Writers use them to break up the 
flow of thoughts on a page. Paragraphs contain information. Can one imag-
ine an empty paragraph? Could the shape of a paragraph persist outside 
the material confines of a page or screen? Can one imagine paragraphs 
that unfold spatially not in two dimensions, a rectangle, but in one, along a 
straight line, or in three, in the shape of a cube? These questions confound 
because paragraphs draw a singular figure. They are textual containers of 
a type. Any other shape less or more than the paragraph would go by 

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
95
another name; it would constitute another format. To imagine something 
like a one-dimensional paragraph is akin to imagining a flat shoebox. A 
flat shoebox cannot contain shoes. It can hold only images of footwear. 
A paragraph embodies a similarly singular arrangement of elements. It is 
a container or a data structure of a kind, made to hold a certain amount 
of sentences.
We may liken books, paragraphs, and sentences to nesting dolls: data 
structures that contain within them further smaller arrangements of informa-
tion. A word fits inside a sentence, the sentence within a paragraph, the 
paragraph within a chapter, the chapter within a book, the book within an 
archive, and so on.
Formats such as the book or the broadsheet newspaper are known enti-
ties. We understand how they are made and how to unfold them in space. 
By contrast, computational formats change rapidly and proliferate. They con-
tain further, as yet unexplored structural possibilities: shapes similar to the 
paragraph on paper but native to new media. What you see is what you get 
on the page. On-screen, what you see is but a small part of what you could 
get. We are presented with thick content, beyond visible image: the composite 
of all that is contained. In print, content can be gleaned from surface; there 
is nothing but surface expanse on a page. Screens are laminates. Light and 
liquid crystal, the conduits for digital media, surge between substrates in 
response to electric signal. Screen surfaces conceal further strata of codifi-
cation, inscribed onto recondite planes of inscription: hard disks, solid-state 
drives, platters, drums, memory sticks, layers of copper and oxide.
A byte, made up of eight binary bits, holds a letter. The string of let-
ters spelling out “hello world,” occupies eleven bytes on a hard drive: ten 
bytes for the letters and one byte for the space character. A file in the 
Portable Document Format (PDF) containing the same “hello world” takes 
up 24,335 bytes on my system. What sort of information do these extra 
bytes contain? Historically, such data have included machine instructions 
for the viewing and printing or even clandestine ciphers. The PDF specifica-
tion describes features that include “accessibility of content to those with 
disabilities,” “digital signatures to certify authenticity,” “electronic forms to 
gather data,” “preservation of document fidelity independent of the device, 
platform, and software,” and “security and permissions to allow the creator 
to retain control of the document and associated rights.”3

96	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
These capabilities mediate between visible image and stored information: 
one surface facing the human; the other, the machine. The formatting layer 
specifies the affordances of electronic text. More than passive conduits of 
meaning, electronic texts thus carry within them rules for engagement between 
authors, readers, and devices. In our example, the PDF encodes, among other 
things, ideas about reading, authenticity, fidelity, preservation, and authorship. 
Whatever literary-theoretical framework the reader brings to the process of in-
terpretation must therefore meet the affordances encoded into the electronic 
text itself.
Jonathan Sterne, a media scholar who pioneered the study of audio for-
mats, writes that format theory “invites us to ask after the changing forma-
tions of media, the contexts of their reception, the conjunction that shaped 
their sensual characteristics, and the institutional politics in which they were 
enmeshed.”4 Attending to the affordances of format, to paraphrase Caroline 
Levine, “opens a generalizable understanding of political power.”5 Constraint, 
what Levine calls the collision of forms, happens not on the level of repre-
sentation or ideology but on the level of the physical, the phatic, and the 
imperative, where formatting and control codes reside.
Format and content compose what may be called thick content, which 
accounts for the disparity between plain and fancy text.6 Its explication re-
quires thick description that draws on material particulates.7 These further 
acquire tactical significance in practice: Texts that edit themselves or collect 
their own fees necessitate new formalisms and strategies of interpretation. In 
his monograph on audio formats, Sterne argues for a study of formats that 
“highlights smaller registers like software, operating standards, and codes as 
well as larger registers like infrastructures, international corporate consortia, 
and whole technical systems.”8
A familiar paper paragraph structure already presents several interesting 
problems for analysis. A paragraph, we intuit, corresponds to a unit of thought. 
But there is nothing inherently paragraph-like in the neural arrangement of 
thoughts in our brains. Physiologically, the brain arranges information in hexa-
gons, along the entorhinal grid.9 There is also nothing inherently paragraph-like 
in the arrangement of bits along the surface of electromagnetic storage. For-
mats thus translate between disparate systems of ordering and signification.10 
We are presented with metaphors of order on-screen: paragraphs, pages, files, 
folders. These resemble their paper counterparts, but they represent other, 
less familiar and nonequivalent ordering structures on disk.

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
97
Formats mediate between data structures, transforming one into the 
other according to predefined rules. Mental images, information stored in 
the head, become inscription, information stored in the machine, which turns 
into a projection, content arranged on-screen (Figure 3.1). The complexities 
of transformation stem from a fundamental incompatibility between incom-
mensurate languages and physicalities. Format specifications govern the 
transference of data structures from one medium to another at the point of 
contact between human, symbol, and machine.
In this chapter I move us toward a systematic study of textual formats. 
I argue that the history of formalism contains within it at least these two 
contradictory intuitions about the nature of literary form. Going back to the 
reception of Plato, Hegel, and the Russian formalists, the English “form” ren-
ders at times the material, outward, and apparent shape of something said, 
written, or pictured. Just as often, it is used in the sense of a Platonic ideal: 
abstracted from matter, inward-facing, and in need of explication. Form in 
this sense is closer to the idea of an algorithm or formula; it signifies ac-
cording to implicit rules.
I augment these two concepts of form with a third “format.” In the pro-
cess I show how formats developed historically from simple machine instruc-
tions for typographical layout into complex metaliterary directives related to 
the protection of intellectual property rights, constraints on speech, trade 
agreements, the politics of surveillance, and clandestine communication. In 
the second half of the chapter, an intellectual history of form, drawn from 
the annals of literary theory, meets the material history of format, drawn from 
computer science. I end the chapter with a discussion of smart documents, 
increasingly common instruments of record capable of policing their own en-
coded mechanisms of reader engagement: what can be read, how, and where.
FIGURE 3.1. Formats change with the medium, as shown in the arrangement of data in the 
brain (left), on a page (middle), and on disk (right). Image adapted by Emily Fuhrman from 
author’s sketches.

98	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
CONCRETE AND UNIVERSAL
The intellectual history of literary theory contains at least two contradic-
tory ideas about form: the sign’s outward shape and its inward structure or 
formula that governs semiosis. The distinction leads to diverging strategies 
of interpretation. In the sense of outward shape, form suggests the affec-
tive aesthetics or even “erotics” of art.11 According to this view, the sign is 
firmly embedded in the specific contexts of inscription, or, alternatively, in 
the contexts of its reception. The individual peculiarity of a word in context 
renders it forever different from the same word used elsewhere. Formalism in 
this sense is concerned with the distinctive, palpable, and outward physical 
attributes of text.
As formula, form suggests a more analytical approach, one that expli-
cates the inward structures (universal rules, patterns, or archetypes) that 
shape textual production from within. Formal analysis so conceived studies 
not specific traces or utterances but rather the development of ideal forms, 
which exist somewhat independently of their specific instantiations.12 Form 
in the sense of formula embodies an abstraction, leading to generalized 
historical categories such as genre and period. Our ideas about, for ex-
ample, “the novel” or “modernism” or “science fiction” reflect formal group-
ings of the kind Lisa Gitelman called “a mode of recognition instantiated in 
discourse.”13 Where palpable form leads to immanent material artifacts, the 
abstracted notion of form leads to transcendent ideal categories.
The notion of format occupies the conceptual space somewhere be-
tween form as intrinsic formula and form as extrinsic shape. In what re-
mains, to my knowledge, a singular article-length treatment of the topic in 
literary studies, G. Thomas Tanselle approached the concept of formatting 
from the perspective of textual criticism—the practice of compiling, editing, 
annotating, preserving, and publishing scholarly critical editions of canoni-
cal texts. For Tanselle’s narrow purposes, formatting encompassed some-
thing like the “number of page-units placed on the press at one time.”14 He 
acknowledged, however, that formats refer also to the “nature and order 
of the contents.”15 The genre of soap opera, for example, evokes both a 
medium (daytime television) and the specific kind of story told in that me-
dium (melodrama and pulp). Journal formats include “broadsheet dailies” 
and “tabloids.”
A format identifies matter of both particular shape and content. The soap 
opera, for example, is a kind of daytime melodrama of a certain length. It 

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
99
also has a certain audience in mind. Formats thus address both a thing’s 
physical properties and its ideational subject matter. The novel is a genre, 
where the paperback is its common format. The novel is infinitely malleable, 
whereas the paperback is fixed by its methods of manufacturing and distri-
bution. We do not usually expect scientific textbooks to appear in paperback, 
for example, just as we would not expect tabloids to be printed on expen-
sive stock or to support long-form investigative journalism. Formats capture 
something about the shape, design, style, and thematics of subject matter; 
they connect the where to the what, when, and how.
Whatever the tradition of writing about form, the concept is usually 
contraposed to some idea of content, as in “form and content.” Content in 
this sense refers to the stuff being shaped or arranged, whether by intrinsic 
law or extrinsic forces. R. G. Collingwood famously described the distinction 
between Classical and Romantic art in terms of the form-content divide: 
“Classical art stands for form; romantic art for content.”16 The distinction 
is invoked in other fields as well. In her recent work on computational text 
generation, Kathleen McKeown, a renowned computer scientist, wrote that 
to produce discourse, writers and speakers “must decide what to say and 
how to present it effectively.”17 Similarly, in her influential essay “Print Is Flat, 
Code Is Deep,” Katherine Hayles discussed “the interplay between a text’s 
physical characteristics and its signifying strategies.”18 Content and form 
often refer to what the text signifies and how it physically does it.
A distinction between text (content) and presentation (form) can also 
entail the distinction between the work of art in the abstract sense and the 
object of art in the sense of the material artifact. In this way, two slightly 
diverging editions of the same text—the various editions of King Lear, for 
example—nevertheless refer to the same work of art. The work of art is a 
transcendent idea; the individual editions are contained within its immanent 
formal characteristics.
As an aside, note that what counts as matter belonging to a text’s con-
tingent physical characteristics and what counts as content belonging to its 
signifying strategies differ from object to object. For example, when reading 
a novel, we commonly ignore variations in line length. The length of an 
average line in Herman Melville’s Moby Dick changes with each edition. Line 
lengths are not usually important in novels, we would say; they carry no 
meaning. But when reading poetry, readers do value line length. In poetry 
it carries meaning, being an integral part of a text’s “signifying strategies.”

100	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
Distinctions between form and content therefore often entail value judg-
ments, by which we separate those textual attributes that are meaningful 
from those that are not. Form, in that sense, identifies a text’s superfluous 
physical attributes, which can thereby be omitted from interpretation and 
reproduction of the text. A printer can discard information about the color 
of a manuscript’s ink, for example, or do away with the idiosyncrasies of a 
writer’s handwriting when typesetting a manuscript.
However, the concept of form can also refer to the essence of the text. 
Under canonical Platonic definitions, forms denote an object’s essential, not 
merely contingent, superfluous properties. For Platonists, the essence of some-
thing (e.g., a chair) exists in an ideal metaphysical state somewhere beyond the 
confines of the material universe. By contrast, a physical instantiation of that 
object (a specific chair) embodies a more limited, corrupted even, version of 
that perfect idea. The philosopher’s task, then, becomes one of reconstructing 
the single ideal chair from its many imperfect exemplars.
Computer scientists will recognize in this chain of reasoning some of the 
principles behind object-oriented programming: a way of building software 
that works by defining abstract object classes and which are then put to 
use—“invoked” or “instantiated”—in specific contexts.19 An abstract class can 
be further modified or extended when called into action. In this way, the 
abstract category of chairs becomes a given chair, complete with individual 
flaws and imperfections. I could, for example, modify the chair by attaching 
a lamp. The modified chair remains a species of chairs. As before, flaws and 
emendations are considered insignificant compared to the perfected class. 
In the idealist tradition, ideas similarly provide us with lasting universal tem-
plates for instantiation within the contingent and always changing physical 
confines of the material world.20
Ernst Gombrich, the prominent twentieth-century British art historian, fa-
mously proposed to look for “schemata” of art in educational materials: 
textbooks and primers that acculturate young artists to canonical blueprints 
of representation: “The schemata . . . represents the first approximate loose 
category which is gradually tightened to fit the form it is to reproduce.” One 
learns “how to classify and catch it [a motif] within the schematic form.”21 
What he called “the-will-to-form” is an “assimilation of any new shape to 
the schemata and patterns an artist has learned to handle.”22 Form, in the 
sense used by Gombrich, thus refers to universal formulas—laws, templates, 
­schemas, patterns—which gave rise to individual, concrete artworks.23

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
101
The conflicting meanings of formalism—one in the sense of outward 
shape, and the other in the sense of inward formula—become more apparent 
in translation of classic Greek, German, and Russian texts. In Plato’s dia-
logues, for example, we find a number of words that are reasonably rendered 
into the English “form.” These include eidos (essence), idea (idea), morphe 
(shape), and phainomena (appearance). Compare, as an exercise, the follow-
ing several translations from Plato’s Timaeus. In a passage that anticipates 
the famous molten wax analogy in Descartes, Timaeus notices that some 
natural elements, like water, change their appearance (phantazomenōn) while 
remaining essentially the same substance. Benjamin Jowett translates the 
passage as follows:
Thus, then, as the several elements never present themselves in the same 
form [phantazomenōn], how can anyone have the assurance to assert posi-
tively that any of them, whatever it may be, is one thing rather than an-
other?24
Compare Jowett’s translation with the following translation of the same 
passage by W. R. M. Lamb, who renders the Greek phantazomenōn as the 
English word appearance:
Accordingly, since no one of these ever remains identical in appearance 
[phantazomenōn], which of them shall a man definitely affirm to be any one 
particular element and no other without incurring ridicule?25
Both translations of the Greek phantazomenōn, “form” and “appearance,” 
capture the plain meaning of the passage: the essence of a thing remains 
even as its outward appearance changes, taking on a phantasmal, fantastic, 
ghostly, imaginable, and even “virtual” shape and appearance (all reasonable 
English approximations of the Greek phantazomenōn). Accordingly, Jowett 
translates phantazomenōn—that which is changeable—as “form” and Lamb 
as “appearance.”
Contrast the Timaeus passages with the ones in Cratylus, on the topic of 
name giving. In Cratylus Socrates and Hermogenes discuss the ways in which 
words signify things by convention. “What has the carpenter in view when he 
makes a shuttle?” Socrates asks. “Is it not something the nature of which 
is to weave?” Hermogenes answers, “Well, then, if the shuttle breaks while 

102	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
he is making it, will he make another with his mind fixed on that which is 
broken, or on that form [eidos] with reference to which he was making the 
one which he broke?” Hermogenes agrees that the carpenter would fix his 
mind on the ideal form. In this case, Socrates concludes, we should properly 
call that the real shuttle, his point being that the exact outward appearance 
of individual shuttles does not matter as much as the abstracted idea of 
shuttles. The abstraction endures even as given instantiations shatter. There 
exist different types of shuttles, some for weaving wool and others, linen. All 
of them, however, in Jowett’s translation, “must contain the form or ideal 
[eidos] of shuttle.”26
In Cratylus, eidos thus stands for the “universal lasting ideal” of all 
shuttles, exactly the opposite of phantazomenōn as “ephemeral instantiation” 
in the previous passage! Yet both eidos and phantazomenōn were reason-
ably translated into the English word form, indicating the way in which the 
concept is overdetermined to carry both of these conflicting meanings.27
The overdetermination of form similarly persists in many English transla-
tions of G. W. F. Hegel, whose discussion of Platonic forms is also canonical 
in the formalist tradition. His Lectures on Aesthetics contain the paradig-
matically Hegelian distinction between Classical and Romantic art periods, 
which hinges on the distinction between form and content. Classical art, for 
Hegel, reaches an equilibrium between its ideational, spiritual content and 
what he calls “the configuration of sensuous material.”28 Characteristically, 
Hegel’s prose is marked by technical and sometimes idiosyncratic vocabulary. 
Rather than define his terms precisely, Hegel saturates his text with semantic 
cognates. On the side of content (Inhalt, Gehalt), he uses words such as 
inner life (Innere Lebendigkeit), feeling (Empfindung), soul (Seele), and spirit 
(Geist). All these convey a movement inward to a location, if it can be called 
such, beyond the physical world, accessible only to the spirit (Geist) or mind 
(­Gedanken, Verstand). On the side of form (Form in German), Hegel accumu-
lates words such as expression (Ausdruck) and presentation (Darstellung) but 
also lines, curves, surfaces, carvings, colors, tones, word sounds, and gener-
ally matter or material (Linien, Krümmungen, Flächen, Aushöhlungen, ­Farben, 
Tönen, Wortklängen, Material).29 The semantic cognate cluster of words re-
lated to the word form conveys physical (palpable, of this world) and out-
ward-facing properties available for examination by the senses (Sinne).
These terms help Hegel contrast the dominant aesthetic modes of Clas-
sical and Romantic periods. He subsequently paints Romanticism as an 

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
103
art that seeks to disengage itself from matter, reaching the realm of pure 
self-reflective Spirit. Romanticism, in his words, is “freed from this immedi-
ate existence which must be set down as negative, overcome, and reflected 
into the spiritual unity.”30 Further, “Poetry is the universal art of the spirit 
which has become free in itself and which is not tied down for its realiza-
tion to external sensuous material; instead, it launches out exclusively in the 
inner space and the inner time of ideas and feelings.”31 Finally, “Inwardness 
celebrates its triumph over the external and manifests its victory in and on 
the external itself, whereby what is apparent to the senses alone sinks into 
worthlessness.”32 Romantic art can, in this way, triumph over the external 
material world, reaching at its apex what Hegel calls the stage of “free 
concrete spirituality” (freie konkrete Geistigkeit).33 The idea overcomes matter 
to become both free from physical and determinate constraints yet gains a 
measure of solidity in its tangible instantiation.
Several lines in Hegel’s exposition of Plato’s idealism give us a glimpse 
of his struggle with the Platonic concept of form. In his “Lectures on Phi-
losophy,” Hegel writes that the “idea is nothing but what is current with us 
under the name of the Universal, when this word is not taken in the sense 
of formal Universal [formell Allgemeine].” For Hegel, the formal universal is 
“merely a property of things,” whereas Plato is concerned with the “implic-
itly” universal (by contrast with explicitly, or formally universal). This internal 
“essence” and “in-and-for-itself existent” lays a claim to truth alone: “We 
translate the Greek word eidos by ‘genus’ or ‘species,’ ” but when “genus” 
or “species” is “seized as a number of similar determinations collected by 
reflection from several individuals, to serve as a mark for the convenience of 
the understanding, then we have the Universal in quite an external form.”34 In 
other words, as soon as eidos is instantiated, it moves from being an ideal 
form into an apparent shape, an epistemological category.
I understand Hegel’s problem with formal universals as follows. ­Imagine 
that someone wrote “All these cats are subsumed under the category of 
‘feline.’ ” The labeled category captures a snapshot of what it means at the 
moment of its naming. But for Hegel, the true ideal does not exist in the 
name alone; it must merely continue to exist and develop in the real world. 
In other words, it is not a socially constructed category but something that 
“internally distinguishes itself ” while remaining “free in its infinitude and 
independent” from all attempts to fix it categorically. Evolutionary forces 
continue to change the species, even as the taxonomy describing that 

104	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
evolution remains fixed. The biological family evolves no matter what zoolo-
gists call cats. New and radically different feline species may come into 
existence, ones no longer covered by the “external mark” of being “feline,” 
that is, by our taxonomical categories. Yet, in Hegel’s terms, this would only 
mean that the feline ideal has expanded beyond its arbitrary categorical 
confines. Zoologists could, at that point, simply adjust their taxonomies to 
include new forms of feline being. A new vocabulary would fix the category 
in its altered state. It would become outmoded almost immediately, how-
ever, as the ideal feline being would continue to develop from underneath 
it, leaving behind only a snapshot of what it meant to be a cat in times 
already past. Hegel therefore cautions his reader against confusing that 
static categorical snapshot with the actual animate ideal. The formal is 
finally a mere husk of the concrete, living ideal. In contrast to such formal 
universals, Hegel’s concrete universals exist in the real physical world. They 
are more than categories. We can understand them as capturing both eidos 
and phantazomenōn—idea and appearance—both reasonably transcribed as 
form in English.35
FORMAT THEORY
Plato and Hegel point to a series of related folds and creases in the for-
malist tradition. W. K. Wimsatt once observed that literary theorists often 
persist in making statements that understand a work of literary art to be, in 
a peculiar way, “a very individual thing or a very universal thing or both.”36 
A work of art, a poem, understood as something that “cannot be expressed 
in other terms,” leads to the kind of criticism that emphasizes the contem-
plation of a text’s outward affective and palpable elements. The function of 
such criticism, according to Wimsatt, is to create “approximate descriptions 
of poems” and “multiple restatements of their meaning,” which aid readers in 
coming to their own “intuitive and full realization” of literature.37 By contrast, 
the analysis of literary forms understood as formula or schema seeks to 
recover latent universal mechanisms, laws, and deep structures that produce 
surface phenomena.
The dual motion of literary criticism, at once toward the extrinsic shape 
and the intrinsic formula—poetics and hermeneutics—is perhaps most starkly 
visible in the intellectual legacy of early-twentieth-century Russian formal-
ism. The influential series of publications by OPOYAZ (Society for the Study 
of Poetic Language) gave voice to a collective of literary scholars that 

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
105
included Viktor Shklovsky, Osip Brik, Lev Yakubinsky, Boris Eichenbaum, and 
Roman Jakobson. The group struck out in two distinct but complementary 
directions.
Several essays by Brik, Shklovsky, Yakubinsky, and others contraposed 
sound (zvuk) to symbol (obraz). Brik wrote, “I believe that elements of 
symbolic and sonic [zvukovoi] art exist simultaneously, and that every given 
piece of [poetic] work comprises an equilibrium of these two heterogeneous 
poetic impulses.”38 Of the sixteen or so unique essays that appeared in the 
three collected volumes, thirteen contain the word sound (zvuk), or some 
variation of it, in the title, in combinations such as “sound image,” “sound 
gesture,” and “sound repetition.” To this cluster of essays we can attribute 
the Russian formalist concern with zaum (literally “beyond sense”) or beyon-
sense, transrational, nonsensical sounds that nevertheless elicit an affective, 
lived response, expressing ideas that are difficult to explain rationally.39
Poetry in the symbolic mode encodes meaning inwardly: an elephant 
“stands for” memory, or the like. Zaum poetics instead evokes feeling 
through external shape, sensually. Velimir Khlebnikov wrote that “mystical 
incantation and beyonsense are appeals ‘over the head’ of government 
straight to the population of feelings, a direct cry to the predawn of the 
soul.”40 Shklovsky similarly defined zaum as expression “without words but 
with sound,” appealing to the senses rather than the intellect. He wrote:
Thought and speech cannot keep up with inspired experience, and for this 
reason artists are free to express themselves not only in language of com-
mon understanding, but also in private language—language that has no 
settled sense. . . . Lilies are beautiful, but how deformed [bezobrazno] the 
word “lily,” plundered and exhausted. This is why I call lilies “uao,” restoring 
their primal clarity.41
Bezobrazno, in the meaning of “hideous” or “deformed,” literally translates 
as “without an image.” The word lily has lost its unique shape, I under-
stand ­Shklovsky to mean. Its very idea has become vulgar. Formalism of 
the outward kind thus aims to restore the sensation of an image, returning 
form, in the sense of shape, to habituated content. Formal techniques like 
chanting or neologism helped revitalize the external sound image. In repeti-
tion, the word loses its sense—lily, lily, lily, lily—but gains a distinct sound 
signature, which otherwise goes unnoticed. The flower’s new name similarly 

106	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
takes the object out of its usual linguistic context. How strange the newly 
discovered uao!
Three of the sixteen essays in the OPOYAZ volumes strike in another direc-
tion, away from shape and toward formula. Shklovsky’s “Art as Technique” and 
“Linkages Between Plot and Style Device” and Eichenbaum’s “How the Overcoat 
Is Made” deal with narrative structure rather than phonetic image.42 Both writ-
ers attribute their work to the influence of Alexander Veselovsky, a ­little-known 
(in the West) nineteenth-century historian of literature, whose scholarship nev-
ertheless had a profound impact on the history of Russian letters.
An early pioneer of comparative literature, Veselovsky advocated philology 
as a “historical” and “genetic” study of “poetic consciousness and its forms.”43 
Citing literary explorations by Goethe, Friedrich Schiller, and Georges Polti as 
inspiration, Veselovsky almost always used the word form in the sense of 
“formula” and not at all in the sense of “shape” or “sound.” In this, he imag-
ined a Hegelian model of literary evolution, which develops through universal 
constants and narrative plot sequences. These ideal forms in turn influence 
the development of literary particulars. Veselovsky called his genetic constants 
“vagabond formulas” and “nerve centers” of culture.44
Somewhere, someone gave these plots [siuzhety] an apt expression, a for-
mula, elastic enough to fit, if not new content, then new interpretations of 
plots rich in their associative possibilities. The formula endures. Writers will 
return to it, altering its significance, expanding its meaning, and adopting it 
to new types. As the formula of “desire” was and continues to be repeated, 
so also are repeated the plots of Faust and Don Juan across the distance of 
centuries. . . . We are connected to a tradition. We expand within it—not to 
create new forms, but to attach to them new sentiments and concerns. This 
dynamic could be considered a kind of a law of conservation of energy.45
The Hegelian influence is unmistakable in these lines. Like the world spirit, 
Veselovsky’s vagabond formulas exist and develop across time and space. 
They are a kind of a concrete universal, which develops independently of 
individual texts. Formulas in that sense have a life of their own, in trans- 
or metahuman ways, not fully accessible to an individual author or reader. 
They are invoked indirectly. They exist in the ether of culture, attaining his-
torical momentum through a process of gradual evolutionary development. 
As such, they again mean exactly the opposite of form in the sense of a 

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
107
private utterance, by which an individual author breaks with ossified tradi-
tion, as was the case with Shklovsky’s idiosyncratic renaming of the flower. 
In ­Veselovsky’s model, authors participate in the formation of shared culture 
by attaching new meaning to stable idioms; in Shklovsky’s model, the author 
uniquely dissents from a shared cultural norm.
The tension between extrinsic shape and intrinsic rule lies at the heart 
of literary theory, manifesting at times under differing yet essentially related 
vocabularies. The emphasis on extrinsic shape implies a poetics of affective 
reading, of the kind that privileges apparent surface phenomena. By contrast, 
the emphasis on intrinsic rules implies a hermeneutics or an archaeology of 
text, by which a critic’s role becomes to discover implicit, nonapparent deep 
structural regularities.
The reader of hidden formulas reaches beyond ephemeral external appear-
ances of a cultural artifact to explicate internal and eternal universal truths 
within. For a Marxist critic such as Terry Eagleton or Fredric Jameson, that 
latent meaning may have something to do with hidden machinations of capital 
and ideology. The psychologically minded critic reads in search of hidden 
drives or desires. The very words explication and exegesis imply an outward 
movement. For example, Jameson, who seems to be channeling Heidegger 
through the Russian formalists, wrote:
The process of criticism is not so much the interpretation of content as it 
is a revealing of it, a laying bare, or restoration of the original message, the 
original experience, beneath the distortions of the various kinds of censor-
ship that have been at work upon it, and this revelation takes the form of 
an explanation of why the content was so distorted and is thus inseparable 
from a description of the mechanisms of this censorship itself.46
Language is again seen to be corrupted through use. The critic of depth, 
however, reveals a word’s originating sense. Like scratches on a piece of fur-
niture, superfluous distortions are polished away. Texts are to be restored to 
their original condition. The business of such a restorative philosophy, in Hei-
degger’s formulation, is to protect the power of elemental words flattened by 
use. The philologist-philosopher reveals words prior to use somehow: prephilo-
sophically, before they are “covered over” and “sink back into concealment”47
In contrast to such circumspect, symptomatic strategies of reading, Ste-
phen Best and Sharon Marcus describe a constellation of reading practices 

108	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
concerned with “what is evident, perceptible, apprehensible in texts; what is 
neither hidden nor hiding; what, in the geometrical sense, has length and 
breadth but no thickness, and therefore covers no depth.”48 The authors iden-
tify a constellation of related interpretation practices at the surface: reading 
for material surface, reading for verbal structure, reading for affect, reading for 
description, reading for pattern, and finally, reading for literal meaning or “just 
reading.”49
In making an argument for surface reading, Best and Marcus gesture 
toward the kind of formal poetics advocated by Susan Sontag in the late 
1960s. At the time, Sontag wrote about the need for “more attention to 
form in art.”50 Interpretation can be liberating, she wrote, but it can also 
stifle creativity. It “depletes” the world in some way, placing the critic in a 
privileged and unnecessarily meddling position between reader and text: “If 
excessive stress on content provokes the arrogance of interpretation, more 
extended and more thorough descriptions of form would silence. . . . The 
best criticism, and it is uncommon, is of this sort that dissolves consider-
ations of content into those of form.”51
For Sontag, interpretation at the level of meaning alone is an intellectual 
and ultimately reactionary activity. It aims to find the “maximum amount 
of content” within.52 It is reactionary because it serves only to multiply the 
available levels of analysis. In explicating a work of art, the critic merely cre-
ates alternative copies that diverge from the original. Each layer of criticism 
thus adds to the content of the work, placing additional burden on future 
readers. Sontag thought that designing a work of art that could be experi-
enced in this way—always on multiple and diverging levels of ideation—might 
have been creative and revolutionary in the age of aesthetic paucity, when 
creativity and interpretation were limited to a few privileged individuals. But 
she believed that her epoch was one of creative abundance: “Think of the 
sheer multiplication of works of art available to every one of us.” Contempo-
rary culture had become based on “excess” and “material plenitude,” which 
dull the senses.53 Under such conditions the production of further critical 
variations on the theme only adds to the dulling clutter.
By “interpretation,” Sontag meant a “conscious act of the mind” that il-
lustrates a “certain code” or “certain rules” of literary engagement. It was, 
for her, “virtually” a type of translation. The critic “transforms” and “re-
vamps” the text: X turns out to be A, Y turns out to be B, and so on.54 By 
“form,” Sontag meant the apparent perceptual properties of the work; one 

FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
109
sentence is long, for example, another short. A critic could make something 
out of the variation, but Sontag wanted to stop us short of meaning mak-
ing. A discipline of careful perception, of paying attention to, could sharpen 
sensibilities, allowing readers to interpret independently. There is no need 
to explain under this model, only describe. The history of interpretation that 
Sontag objected to was one that privileged content over form. Form in the 
sense of outward shape suggests an emphasis on what Sontag deemed the 
sensory experience or the erotics of art. In “Against Interpretation,” Sontag 
mentions the ideal of “transparence” as the “highest, most liberating value 
in art—and in criticism—today. Transparence for her meant experiencing the 
luminousness of the thing in itself, of things being what they are.”55 Rather 
than show what a work of art means, Sontag urged critics to show “how it 
is” and “that it is.”56 Form, as she saw it, mirrors McKeown’s shape and the 
“text’s physical characteristics” of Hayles.
Marcus and Best remind us that Sontag’s manifesto was also an “affec-
tive and ethical stance.”57 Strategies of deep interpretation carry with them 
a claim to authority as well as an imbalance of interpretive acumen. Critics 
assert to uncover what lay readers cannot without expert guidance. As an 
ethical stance, reading for external forms flattens the hierarchy between 
lay readers and professional interpreters. In this sense, Best, Marcus, and 
Sontag continue in the liberal, Lutheran tradition of vernacular exegesis. All 
readers are priests at the surface; all readers are capable, the critics sug-
gest, of forming their own interpretation.58
TACTICS OF READING
If reading for sensory experience implies an erotics of art and reading for 
hidden formulas implies a hermeneutics, what would it mean to read for 
format? Formats, to borrow from Tanselle, bridge the “physical structure 
of finished books” and their “intellectual content” through what he calls 
“printing-shop routines,” or techniques for the transformation of ideas into 
inscription-things.59
Textual scholars have traditionally arbitrated the conflict between diver-
gent editions of the same text.60 They reveal how works become texts, and 
vice versa. It is in this sense of arbitration that C. Deirdre Phelps described 
the notion of physical form. When instantiating the ideal text into its con-
crete being, publishers introduce changes that may not correspond to autho-
rial intent. For example, an inexpensive edition of Blake’s poetry could be 

110	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
printed without his illustrations to save costs, though we know them to be 
integral to the text. If all other editions of Blake’s poetry were lost, textual 
critics would reconstruct the text’s genealogy from extant remnants. They 
could, for example, infer the missing illustrations based on reception history. 
“The textual critic,” Phelps wrote “is concerned mainly with the fact of the 
[textual] change itself.”61 Reading for format similarly involves a series of 
value judgments about what the text should be and what it is.
Different schools of textual criticism emphasize differing aspects of the 
publication process. Some privilege the notion of authorial intent; others, criti-
cal reception. Whatever the choices, they determine value by separating those 
physical attributes meaningful to the work from those that are not. Peter 
Shillingsburg writes that “textual awareness requires . . . that readers demand 
to know which of the possible texts of a work is in hand, to know what the 
choices [that determine it] are and why a particular choice matters.”62 In other 
words, Shillingsburg again reminds us that judgments about formatting are 
value judgments. For example, in a contemporary online edition of Claude 
McKay’s Harlem Shadows, the editors encode for indentation, thus preserving 
the poem’s visual line structure. They have also allowed the text to wrap when 
viewed on small devices, thus “soft wrapping” those lyrical lines too long for 
a small screen.63 The end result is a compromise between authorial intent and 
reader convenience. The layout respects line indentation but not line length.
Other solutions were possible, of course. The editors could have recre-
ated an exact facsimile of a particular print edition, but that would not fit on 
small screens because of the disparity in size between the printed page and 
a mobile device. In an extreme case, the editors could have tried to pre-
serve all the text’s details, down to its molecular structure. Such a text could 
be accompanied by a potentially unlimited amount of metadata describing 
the precise physical contexts of the universe surrounding the authoritative 
version. Reproducing the text faithfully would also mean reproducing the 
world around it. Contingent stains or scratches in the manuscript, typos in 
the critical edition, printer errors, pages inadvertently bound upside down, 
and other flaws are usually discarded in reproduction. They are not seen 
as meaningful for the understanding of a text. To decide on the formatting, 
then, is to commit the work of art as an ideational construct to a medium, 
that is, to convert it into an object of art.
Format thus belongs neither wholly to a text’s physical medium (pixel or 
paper) nor to a work’s ideational content. It lies somewhere between the two 

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
111
worlds: in a letter’s shape, a novel’s narrative structure, and spoken patterns 
of stress and intonation. Some formatting features matter to readers (e.g., 
line breaks in poetry), whereas others usually do not (e.g., font kerning). 
Textual criticism reminds literary theorists of the transition that happens 
between literary works and literary objects. It is always a fraught process, 
because a theorist’s beliefs must be continually weighed against the material 
affordances of a concrete textual witness. A word or a comma omitted or 
a forgotten line cannot ever become a part of the meaning-making process. 
Format stands at the gates of hermeneutics.
In an essay on pictographs and pictographic logic, Johanna Drucker 
and Jerome McGann discuss how the “presentational form of texts” usually 
masks their “logical operations in a surface rhetoric that dominates and 
controls our conscious attention.” At the same time, what the authors call 
the “holistic repleteness of images” also keeps us from perceiving their “con-
ceptual order . . . as if the graphic character of the work were completely 
obvious.”64 Their insight captures the dual movement of formatting: at once 
toward the physical and the mental characteristics of text, toward matter 
and content.
The reader understands text as an idea that takes shape in the mind. 
Book-things thus continually retreat from grasp, as Percy Lubbock wrote 
in The Craft of Fiction.65 Subsequently, readers treat texts as disembodied 
artifacts—surface rhetoric—reading past the material structures that support 
mental phenomena. As an object, a unified image, the page presents itself in 
its entirety at once—hence holistic repleteness. It is as though it was always 
so: These words were always in this order, at these coordinates. Printers and 
book designers understand otherwise. They know the image to be a carefully 
constructed composite. Dealing with formats directly reveals the particulates 
of page composition invisible to a lay reader. Drucker and McGann conclude 
that “systems of graphic presentation are operational, not merely passive 
schematic structures.” They are instead “active agents for creating mean-
ing, instructions for reading, viewing, comprehending information.”66 In other 
words, choices were made that would later affect meaning making. Apprehen-
sion precedes comprehension. Interpretation commences and in some cases 
concludes before readers ever lay eyes on a page.
Technical differences between print and digital text amplify the impor-
tance of format. Print editors and textual scholars negotiate a text’s shape 
in advance of publication. The choice to exclude certain words, versions, or 

112	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
­visual elements is fixed in the final proof, where it remains static for the 
duration of a book’s existence. Books are stable platforms that support a 
range of reading practices, which include the annotation, copying, and pres-
ervation of written work. To the extent that books determine the affordances 
of reading, those affordances exhibit historical continuity. To read a book in 
print, one must possess certain physical capacities, for example, manual dex-
terity, a level of cognitive development, and eyesight within a specific range 
of vision. Readers who fall outside these normalized ranges are prevented 
from accessing the text in the manner specified. Books further afford abili-
ties such as highlighting and the taking of notes. Empty space around the 
text on a page facilitates marginalia. For the highlighter or pen to function 
well, the print medium must be made of a porous material, not, for example, 
plastic, which would make marking the page difficult while affording other 
capabilities, such as reading underwater.67
The affordances of the electronic book are more diffuse. These exist in 
a multitude of competing digital formats, each vying to supplant print as 
the singular, unified reading platform. For example, software made by Adobe 
Systems, the company behind the popular Portable Document Format, in-
cludes Adobe Digital Editions, which the reader can use “to download and 
purchase digital content, which can be read both online and offline.” The 
platform’s features include the ability to “download and transfer books be-
tween devices” and to “search eBooks.” It supports multiple languages, the 
ability to borrow books, printing, limited support for visually impaired read-
ers, bookmarking, highlights, notes, and file organization.68 The company’s 
own competing Adobe Document Cloud reading platform includes the Free, 
Standard, and Pro versions of Acrobat Reader, the “global standard for reli-
ably viewing, printing, and commenting on PDF documents.”69 Only the most 
expensive Pro version allows one to “create and validate PDFs to meet ac-
cessibility standards for people with disabilities.” The free version does not 
support bookmarks or document editing. The Pro version enables readers 
to “redact and permanently remove sensitive information in PDFs” and to 
“compare two versions of a document to see what’s changed.”70
Another popular electronic book format, the Amazon Kindle reader, in-
cludes a feature called “Public Notes,” which allows Kindle customers to 
“make public their highlights and notes” for “any other customer who follows 
them . . . to see.”71 Kindle’s Frequently Asked Questions page further explains 
that if “someone you follow has highlighted a passage in a book and has 

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
113
turned on Public Notes for the book, you’ll see that passage highlighted 
along with the name of the person who highlighted it.” The FAQ continues to 
tout the platform’s benefits:
Now authors, thought leaders, passionate readers, professors and all Kindle 
users can opt-in to share their notes with other readers, helping friends, 
family members, and other Kindle users who choose to follow them to get 
more from their reading. If someone you follow has highlighted a passage 
in a book and has turned on Public Notes for the book, you’ll see that pas-
sage highlighted along with the name of the person who highlighted it. You’ll 
also see the notes that they made in the book.72
Google’s Play Books software, to take another example, does not facilitate 
public notes, nor does it support book editing. It does, however, allow read-
ers to translate words and passages and look up phrases using the com-
pany’s search engine.73
Imagine reading the same novel on these four different platforms, four 
formats, four books. The experience would differ drastically in each case. 
What initially seems like one thing, an electronic book, falls apart under ex-
amination. The electronic book is in reality a multitude of dynamic formats. 
Each requires specialized strategies of reading and interpretation.
Encoded ideas about intellectual property are another stark manifesta-
tion of interplatform incompatibility. Whatever its interpretive affordances, 
reading software also emulates the logic of ownership. To own a book elec-
tronically means to access the bits that bring the simulation of that book 
into existence. At some lower level of abstraction, however, the variety of 
reading platforms rests on the same computational substratum. Both Ama-
zon and Adobe books rely on the capabilities of the personal computer. 
This “hypermedia,” as Lev Manovich has called it, lies at the base of all 
competing e-book formats.74 Owning a book on that level entails the ma-
nipulation of hardware device states. A common act of epistemic disobedi-
ence, to borrow a phrase from Walter Mignolo, therefore includes accessing 
the book bits directly, through channels not afforded by the publisher.75 
Such acts disentangle the mechanisms of book ownership, as defined by 
Google or Amazon, from the book’s content proper. The so-called ripping of 
proprietary book libraries involves reformatting individual books into other 
file formats, which could hypothetically enable unconstrained copying and 

114	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
circulation of texts. The activity need not be illicit. The extraction of plain 
text from a PDF file commonly constitutes the initial step in corpus-based 
natural language processing. Readers routinely liberate content in other 
ways as well: They lend books to friends, read them out loud, and make 
photocopies.
These examples illustrate that electronic books, unlike print, are not a 
single format but many. Software, governed by specific socioeconomic exi-
gencies, determines the broader affordances of reading, sharing, and storing 
books. Thus a book available in North America might not be available on 
other continents, or it could be available elsewhere in a redacted form, its 
content dynamically tailored to a reader’s geography. The aforementioned 
platforms supplant the affordances of print with a range of other, compet-
ing affordances particular to their proprietary digital document formats, 
which are incompatible with other formats. Furthermore, the potentialities of 
electronic reading change dynamically with each software update. Whereas 
print has remained a relatively stable medium for centuries (we have no 
trouble operating a several hundred years old book), digital text changes on 
a monthly, if not daily, basis. A careful book history of electronic formats 
would proceed in much shorter evolutionary stages to keep pace with the 
medium’s rapid development.
These examples confront us with aspects of instrumental formatting: 
copying, analysis, and preservation. Even the lay digital reader is forced to 
become textually aware, to ask, after Peter Shillingsburg, why this version of 
the text and how? What does it mean to reproduce this text? Which physi-
cal aspects of this digital edition are crucial to interpretation and which 
are not? Are these marks mere artifacts of layout? Were they introduced to 
advertise a product? Did the author intend them to be shown this way? Do 
they belong to the form or content of the work?
Answers to such questions—in reading for format explicitly—involve the 
deconstruction, both literal and figurative, of the textual laminate. Whatever 
interpretive activity readers hope to enact at a book’s surface is grounded 
in its deep material affordances. The conflicted properties of electronic text 
entail the added burden of materialist poetics. One cannot take the stability 
of print for granted when reading digitally. A number of agents intercede in 
the transformation between form and content, the inscription as information 
on disk and its representation as pixels on-screen. These intercessions may 
prove benign, as when the electronic book adjusts layout to fit a smaller 

FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
115
screen. Conversely, they could involve complex social mechanisms of censor-
ship and surveillance, enacted for commercial or political purposes.
COMPOSITE MEDIA
Reading for format involves the delamination of media composites. It con-
cerns the grammar of transformation between disparate conduits of infor-
mation. Formats govern and control in the sense of shaping the encounter 
between otherwise incommensurate physicalities, the hardware and the 
­wetware—storage, screen, and brain.76
Format necessitates a notion of document depth, distinct from the meta-
phoric uses of the word in the discussion on surface reading, where it 
refers to concealed structures of meaning, literary formulas, signification, or 
­ideology.77 In another, more literal sense, depth refers to the formation of 
literary laminates that hold inscription in suspense between layers of glass, 
plastic, liquid crystal, aluminum, iridium, and oxide.
The following case studies from the history of the Document Object 
Model (DOM) illustrate format theory in practice.
EDIT was one of the first text editors, designed for the GE635 36-bit main-
frame computers in use at Bell Labs in 1968. I look to its blueprints to re-
cover a model of digital document structure, which continues to shape most 
electronic texts today. “The publication editor is divided into three related 
sections,” wrote Arthur Kaiman, one of the system’s engineers. These included 
the “facilities” for “document layout,” “editing,” and “printing.”78 “Layout,” in 
the language of EDIT, facilitates the justification, indentation, and spacing 
of text. “The user types the document layout file and the text file,” Kaiman 
explained, and “then produces a proof or master copy of the text by printing 
the text according to the directions of the layout file. The text file contains 
layout marks to be interpreted by the document layout file.”79 In this schema, 
text constitutes content that is meaningful only to the user, whereas “layout” 
contains some elements that are meaningful to humans and others intended 
for machine instruction. Crucially, “no document text may appear in the lay-
out file,” Kaiman wrote.80 Layout in his schema asks the human editor to 
distinguish between semantic and spatial units: words and their coordinates. 
These two separate streams of data are then stored in two discrete locations, 
in effect embodying the dichotomy between form and content (Figure 3.2).
The creators of QED, another influential early text editor (made for 
the SDS-930 time-sharing system at the University of California, Berkeley) 

116	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
similarly encouraged writers to separate the “input stream” from its layout 
instructions. A sequence of reserved characters was “interpreted as directives 
to the stream” and as “editor commands.” These included sequences such 
as A for “append” at a specified address, D for “delete,” and S for “sub-
stitute.”81 Given that control characters A, D, and S are also a part of the 
input stream, the writer prefaced control commands with the aptly named 
“control” key. Thus pressing the control key together with D would result 
in the deletion of the selected line. “Control characters do not have any 
printed characters normally associated with them,” the manual explained.82 
Writers could also enter the “command mode,” in which the machine inter-
preter recognized nothing but machine instructions. By these means, the text 
and layout instructions could occupy different buffers on-screen, which would 
then be combined for printing operations.83
Separate from the aims of text editors such as EDIT and QED, a text 
formatter was meant to arrange text spatially. To the small number of editing 
instructions, the formatter added instructions for typesetting: size, position, 
stroke width, transparency. The authors of IBM’s FORMAT program, written in 
Fortran IV for OS/360 devices in 1968, explained that “all input to FORMAT 
FIGURE 3.2. A schematic view of the EDIT textual composite consisting of multiple document 
layers. Source: Arthur Kaiman, “Computer-Aided Publications Editor,” IEEE Transactions on 
Engineering Writing and Speech 11, no. 2 (August 1968): 66. © 1968 IEEE. Reprinted with 
permission.

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
117
is free-form,” in that it contained “no positional constraints.”84 The FORMAT 
system enabled further instructions for “layout control,” which included P for 
“begin new paragraph,” T for “tab,” and U for “underline.” It also contained 
more complex “command operands” such as “Capitalize automatically,” “Jus-
tify the text,” and “Repeat the title on every page.”85 Finally, FORMAT had the 
capability of building an index, in effect listing all the unique words in any 
given document, along with a rudimentary facility for search, “locating text 
words, phrases, and strings in the input stream” (Figure 3.3).86
In another important paper from the history of digital text, Brian Ker-
nighan and Joseph Ossanna described TROFF, a text processor written 
around 1973 for the PDP-11 output to the Graphic Systems Cat typesetter. 
In 1979 Kernighan modified the original program to produce output for a 
greater variety of typesetters. He explained that “TROFF produces its output 
in a device-independent form” and that its output “must be processed by a 
driver for that device to produce printed output.”87 The program made no 
ontological claims about the textual artifact. Rather, it embodied the idea of 
text independent of its medium and free of form. The digital writer edited 
text in one “virtual” location, without knowing its output in another physi-
cal one. Screens, machine memory, and pages hold inscription in different 
formats, which do not physically correspond to one another. For this reason, 
the program’s designers were forced to differentiate between document 
FIGURE 3.3. A portion of the input stream for the layout of paper citations using FORMAT. 
Code is interlaced with content to control output. Source: Gerald M. Berns, “Description of 
FORMAT, a Text-Processing Program.” Communications of the ACM 12, no. 3 (March 1969): 
144.

118	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
content and its spatiotemporal characteristics. Some elements were to be 
represented in the final version, whereas others controlled representational 
structure and were ultimately omitted from view. For example, input machine 
instructions for italicized text would not themselves become visible in the 
output document.
More than a decade later, in reflecting on the proliferation of text edi-
tors, a group of computer scientists from the University of Washington, led 
by Richard Furuta, advanced the following unified theory of format: “A docu-
ment is an object composed of a hierarchy of more primitive objects.”88 
The objects are further divided into abstract or logical objects and their 
concrete instantiations. In this way, a chapter is made up of paragraphs and 
sentences, which can be rendered on pages of different dimensions. In each 
case the hierarchical relationship between chapters, paragraphs, and sen-
tences persists even as the specific dimensions of a page change. A chapter 
in Tolstoy’s War and Peace remains a chapter containing the same ar-
rangement of paragraphs and sentences despite layout differences between 
editions. The class identifier (chapter, paragraph, sentence) thus denotes an 
abstract object, whereas concrete objects, in Furuta’s model, occupy “one 
or more two-dimensional page spaces and represent the possible formatted 
images of abstract objects.”89 The concrete object gives physical shape to 
the instantiation of abstract universal classes.
The entirety of a document (e.g., a book) can subsequently be expressed 
as a hierarchical ordering of such primitive objects as words, sentences, 
paragraphs, and chapters. A document of a different type, say, a research 
paper, contains another set of primitive elements not always found in a 
book: footnotes and an abstract, for example. One may describe a novel 
in terms of an abstract succession of chapters that, in turn, encapsulate 
paragraphs, which contain sentences and words, which further comprise 
characters. These abstract units find their physical manifestation on a page. 
They stand in a hierarchical relationship to each other because paragraphs 
contain sentences, and sentences words, and not the other way around. To-
gether, a set of primitive object classes defines more complex formats, such 
as letters, articles, books, and journals.90
The class-instance distinction gives us the means to discuss editing and 
formatting tasks in terms of state transformations. In this way, editing a 
document involves multiple transitions between abstract states, as when an 
author corrects spelling errors or deletes a word. Concrete-to-concrete state 

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
119
transformations rearrange abstract objects in space, as when an author jus-
tifies text or changes the order of document sections (Table 3.1). Crucially 
for our discussion, Furuta and colleagues defined formatting as the reifica-
tion of abstract classes, for example, applying font styles. Formatting in this 
sense converts what they called the “intended document” into the “visible 
concrete document,” according to which the abstract idea of “emphasis” in 
our example is reified into the concrete representation of “bold stroke.”91 
Another typesetter might stylistically prefer to represent emphasis in italics 
instead of bold letters. Both convey the same idea in visually different ways.
Document description, in Furuta’s model, specifies the rules for turning 
abstract objects into concrete objects. In typesetting, content and physical 
text specifications are mixed together and laid out for viewing on a particu-
lar device.92 However, the formatter does not know the exact dimensions of 
the target medium in advance. One may decide to print the same document 
on legal- or letter-size paper, for example. Nothing in the code guarantees 
the dimensions of the visible concrete document. We are assured only of 
their appropriate positioning relative to one another: that the bold text will 
appear thicker than regular text, whatever the regular stroke; or that the 
footnotes will appear after the main body of the text and not before, regard-
less of the layout.
One can think of other formatting operations that move in the oppo-
site direction: from concrete to abstract. This happens in optical character 
recognition (OCR) as part of a process by which images of physical pages 
are converted into an intended abstract structure, the content thereby lifted 
from the physical page. A text in the portable document format remains a 
graphic image—a concrete, indivisible object—until it is recognized. One can 
read it, of course, but it does not, from a machine’s perspective, contain 
abstract objects as such. Recognition implies more narrowly the transforma-
tion of images into text and shape into content. In that sense, text lies at 
the innermost location within a series of nested outer containers. Lacking 
TABLE 3.1. Object Transformation Types Based on the Document Object Model
Transformation
Type
Example
Abstract to abstract  
or concrete to concrete
Edit
Spelling correction; justify the document 
Abstract to concrete
Format
Apply font; break into pages 
Concrete to abstract
Recognize
Optical character recognition; page layout analysis 

FIGURE 3.4. Format devoid of content. Researchers describe a method for extracting 
document structure based on the nearest-neighbor clustering of page components. Source: L. 
O’Gorman, “The Document Spectrum for Page Layout Analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern 
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 15, no. 11 (November 1993): 1164. © 1993 IEEE. Reprinted 
with permission.

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
121
a model of comprehension or understanding, the machine posits text as 
content in the sense of it being the innermost object of human recognition. 
Machine recognition happens only when the text is delaminated from its 
composite medium.
The recognition of letters does not exhaust the variety of abstract 
document objects gleaned from the bibliographic image. Besides letters and 
words, these also include paragraphs, tables, titles, and footnotes. Such 
arrangements are also content in some sense of the word, because they 
incorporate semantic rather than purely graphic units. They also could mean 
something to the reader. But it is also essential where they mean it, because 
the meaning of semantic elements changes depending on their location. For 
instance, a proper name in the author field means something distinct from 
other names mentioned in the body of a document. Lawrence O’Gorman, an 
influential researcher in the field of document image processing, called such 
spatial recognition at the intersection of concrete and universal “document 
lay-out understanding,” which consists of “functional labeling of blocks . . . 
distinguished in some way by their physical features (such as by font size) 
and by the ‘meaning’ of the block.”93 A footnote, for example, is a block of 
text that gains specialized meaning in specific spatial contexts (Figure 3.4). 
Layout, or the arrangement of concrete objects on a page, can also contain 
meaningless (to humans) structures, such as the incidental rivers of empty 
space between words. The incidental concrete structure goes unrecognized 
because it does not correspond to any abstract objects in the available 
document object taxonomy.94
Finally, I am able to understand document viewing or printing as a chain 
of formatting operations that transform one type of concrete object, bits 
arranged spatially on the disk, into another type of concrete object, pixels 
arranged on-screen or in ink on a page. The DOM describes that chain of 
transformations in detail, containing in essence an intermediary map or a 
blueprint of the intended document. The blueprint is not itself a fully formed 
concrete object, however, because the machine must anticipate a number 
of possible two-dimensional spaces, such as pages and screens of differing 
sizes. The DOM therefore signifies a range of possible relationships, which 
can result in a number of distinct concrete possibilities: on a large screen or 
small, on legal- or letter-size paper. In order for text to materialize, a com-
mitment to an actual medium must be made according to predefined rules 
specified in the model. In this way, a footnote that the model places “at 

122	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
the bottom of the page” can then be rendered one way at the bottom of a 
specific page of a certain size, for example, A1 (841 mm × 1,189 mm), and 
in another way at the bottom of another specific piece of paper of a much 
smaller size, A4 (210 mm × 297 mm).95 Viewing and printing operations thus 
constitute a movement opposite to that of OCR. In printing a document, the 
machine creates a static image, which flattens out the previously stratified 
layers of content and visual style. Abstract objects specified by the model 
are then reified into a set of relationships between specific concrete objects 
on the page.96
The resulting laminate contains content appropriately formed and fused 
into its medium. SCRIPT and the related Generalized Markup Language (GML), 
developed in the late 1960s by IBM (originally for use on the CP67/CMS 
time-sharing system) and now at the basis of the ubiquitous XML and HTML 
markup languages,97 describe a number of such text transformations that 
occur to “generat[e] the correct output form.” In the process of formatting, 
SCRIPT represents the “logical topology” of text in its “canonical form” to 
produce an “intermediate data structure,” which is then “ ‘unfolded’ all at 
once” by “ ‘peeling’ the data structure one level at a time.”98
The schematics show that formatting involves more than simple applica-
tion of visual style to words. Rather, formatter designers from TROFF to 
FORMAT describe their programs in terms of instrumental control. Richard 
Berns, the IBM engineer and developer of FORMAT, wrote that text control 
accomplishes four basic tasks: “to read the input; to interpret and convert 
the input as required; to keep the document flowing smoothly from line to 
line, column to column, and page to page, unless otherwise instructed; and 
to break this automatic flow as directed.”99
The TROFF User’s Manual analogously describes text processing in terms 
of accepting “lines of text interspersed with lines of format control informa-
tion.”100 The TROFF and FORMAT languages are thus a species of Turing 
computation.101 They interpret input mixed with machine instruction, including 
codes that halt the process of interpretation. Text control can involve opera-
tions such as “replace word,” “make invisible,” or “insert file.” Commands 
intertwine with free-form content at the formatting level. They become appar-
ent in the viewing stage of text processing, where the layers flatten across 
two-dimensional space. Formats envelop the text instrumentally. They govern 
the reification of abstract content models into document objects. They shape 
ideas in the process of becoming a thing.

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
123
The move from paper to such composite media carries with it a pro-
found shift in the physical affordances of the everyday document. Not much 
space separates ink from paper. There, text lies flat, in two dimensions. What 
you see is truly what you get. Not so on screens connected to other drives, 
keyboards, and screens. Composite media extend into the third dimension, 
away from the reader and deep into the bowels of the machine.
For example, the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) reference model 
of communication, implemented in every computer, including electronic book 
readers, describes no less than seven layers of communication involved in 
the simple act of sending an e-mail, taking notes in the margins of a net-
worked book, or reading a newspaper online.102 It includes:
•	 The Application Layer, which is concerned with the semantics of “all ser-
vices directly comprehensible to the user.”
•	 The Presentation Layer, which defines the syntax for the “representation 
and manipulation” of data to be transferred.
•	 The Physical Layer, which provides “mechanical, electrical, functional, and 
procedural” characteristics of communication.103
Apart from technical intricacy, consider the practical complexity of the onion-
like composite (Figure 3.5). Whatever one designates as core content is envel-
oped within a multiplicity of standards, references, models, and formats, which 
in aggregate define the medium—the physical preconditions—of laminate text.104
In his book on protocols, Alexander Galloway discussed the OSI model in 
reference to what he calls distributed and decentralized networks of control.105 
The OSI standard is distributed to be sure, although to what extent it is de-
centralized is a matter of some debate. Like a good soldier, each device in a 
network of textual machines internalizes dozens if not hundreds of protocols 
that enable the system to function seamlessly as a whole, in the way, for 
example, that our mobile phones connect to multiple transmitting towers with 
minimal loss of connectivity. Communication protocols and DOM hierarchies 
are densely consolidated to ensure such interoperability. They are governed 
by international bodies such as the World Wide Web Consortium, an organiza-
tion that encompasses national as well as corporate bureaucracies.106
Stretched between the sites of storage and projection—screens and solid-
state drives—the inscription travels along a lengthy pipeline of protocols, 
undergoing arbitrary transformations throughout. On one device that pipeline 

124	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
may extend just a few inches, connecting disk storage to a screen. On a 
networked device that pipeline can stretch across continents, spanning widely 
divergent regions of legal and administrative governance. The data that make 
up an electronic book may be stored on a server on the other side of the 
country. Readers encounter that elongated protocol stack from without, on 
the periphery of the stratified structure. For example, when paging through 
an electronic book, itself usually an OSI-compliant device, readers access 
only the outputs emanating from the application layer and then only at the 
exposed “window” level of the DOM. What you see is far less than what you 
get. The perceived content exposes only a small fraction of the underlying 
formal topology. Reader interaction happens at the superficial application 
layer, which at best conceals the dynamics of deep text transformation. In 
more acute cases, access to deep structures is made illicit outright.
SMART CONTRACTS
Text at a document’s surface is subject to professional rules of conduct 
governing practices of sharing, quotation, and attribution. The North Ameri-
FIGURE 3.5. The onionlike layering of the OSI network envelops most connected devices. 
Readers apprehend digital text at the outermost “application” layer. Mechanisms of 
governance and control are within and beyond user comprehension. Source: J. D. Day and 
H. Zimmermann, “The OSI Reference Model,” Proceedings of the IEEE 71, no. 12 (December
1983): 1335. © 1983 IEEE. Reprinted with permission.

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
125
can reader may further be familiar with those portions of U.S. copyright 
law that codify these practices more formally, entailing a degree of legal 
accountability. For example, U.S. Code Title 17 extends “exclusive rights” to 
“owner[s] of copyright” of “literary” works. Such rights include the ability to 
“reproduce,” “prepare derivative works,” “distribute copies,” “perform,” and 
“display . . . publicly.”107 The easy reproducibility of digital media has eroded 
the efficacy of legal copyright restrictions. The work of art in the age of 
digital reproduction has lost much of its already tenuous hold on the mate-
rial substratum.108 Photocopiers, desktop printers, inexpensive digital storage 
drives, and peer-to-peer file-sharing networks reduce the barriers to mass 
copying and the dissemination of media.109
The response from the film, game, music, and publishing industries has 
been to shift mechanisms of copyright enforcement from legal structures 
into the medium itself. Charles Clark, a prominent British copyright attorney, 
wrote, “The answer to the machine is in the machine.”110 He went on to 
argue for the efficacy of copyright enforcement at the device level and to 
propose that the International Standards Organization (ISO), the same legis-
lative body responsible for maintaining the DOM and the OSI specifications, 
create standards for digital rights management.111 As an example of how 
such hard-coded copyright enforcement could work in the real world, Clark 
refers to the Copyright in Transmitted Electronic Data (CITED) report, which 
imagines books and music players attached to a kind of a tamper-proof 
“meter” for the collection of “commercially viable material.” To prevent 
“unauthorized” use of copyrighted material, the report proposes a device 
that would include “a tamper-proof software module which acts rather like 
indestructible tachometers installed on long-distance coaches and lorries, 
recording everything that happens to the copyrighted or commercially valu-
able material. . . . The basic idea is to link the ‘valuable material’ of intel-
lectual property to a specific piece of software and hardware.”112
The emergence of such embedded contractual enforcement mechanisms 
can be subsumed under the broader idea of smart contracts. In his seminal 
article “Formalizing and Securing Relationships on Public Networks,” Nick 
Szabo explained that “smart contracts combine protocols, user interfaces, 
and promises expressed via those interfaces, to formalize and secure rela-
tionships over computer networks.”113 Clark, CITED, and Szabo were instru-
mental in the rise of smart contracts in the 1990s. The technology was 
meant to redress the fading efficacy of legal copyright protections.114

FIGURE 3.6. Control code is injected into the document (an audio-video file) “to comply 
with predetermined conditions of usage.” The resulting “data object” is further encrypted 
to deter circumvention, thus obscuring the mechanisms of control. The pictured technology, 
from a patent by Benson and colleagues, is central to the idea of smart contracts, that is, 
documents capable of enforcing contractual compliance, in this case, between users and 
content owners. Source: Greg Benson, Gregory H. Urich, and Christopher L. Knauft, “Method 
and System for Managing a Data Object so as to Comply with Predetermined Conditions for 
Usage,” Patent US8479305 B1, filed October 1, 1998, issued July 2, 2013, sheet 10; quotes 
on p. 1.

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
127
U.S. patent 5845281, for example, proposed a method and system for 
managing a data object so that it would comply with “predetermined condi-
tions for use.” The text reads:
The data object owner may want to have permanent secure control over 
how, when, where, and by whom his property is used. Furthermore, he may 
want to define different rules of engagement for different types of users and 
different types of security depending on the value of particular objects. The 
rules defined by him shall govern the automated operations enabled by data 
services and networking. The owner may also want to sell composite objects 
with different rules governing each constituent object.115
A data object in this case stands for any media content, from books to 
music, video, or software. Similar to the CITED mechanism, it embodies a 
contract between the object’s true “owner,” that is, the copyright holder, and 
its “user,” that is, its reader, viewer, or listener, who has only a temporary 
and limited possession of the object. The medium sets the conditions of use 
predetermined by its creator (or, more likely, distributor). Crucially, the smart 
document can enforce the rules of engagement without revealing them to the 
reader. The codified contract is in fact tamper–proof; it is resistant to physical 
access and therefore interpretation.116
The managed data object described in the patent concatenates content 
and control code (Figure 3.6). For example, if one meant to transmit a string 
of numbers, “123456789 . . . ,” by means of the smart object, the numbers 
would be mixed with instructions for access—how, when, where, and by 
whom. These instructions would then be encrypted, that is, made inacces-
sible, to prevent tampering. Decryption would require a special proprietary 
key available only to the manufacturer of the composite. By such means, the 
seemingly innocuous text control layer that we saw emerge in the 1960s, 
originally used to specify layout, was extended to carry legal instruments 
responsible for enforcing contractual obligations, extracting economic value, 
and ensuring compliance.
Increased security, as always, involves a compromise with freedom. To 
the extent that a document’s control data are legible to the interpreter, they 
are also open to “abuse and circumvention.” Encryption and other physi-
cal tamper proofing mechanisms are essential features of a smart contract. 
The reader must be prevented from accessing deep structure. The 1998 

128	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) and similar initiatives criminalize the 
circumvention of such systems, even when the reader owns the smart docu-
ment outright.117 The smart document limits reading practice to the manner 
specified. Readers hold no rights to comprehension at depth. Unsanctioned 
modes of access and interpretation are deemed illicit. Contrast this with the 
ownership of a conventional paper document, which places no such restric-
tions on the reader.
The DMCA in particular stipulates that “no person shall circumvent a 
technological measure that effectively controls access to a work protected 
under this title.”118 The letter of the law further specifies that to “circumvent 
a technological measure” means in this case “to descramble a scrambled 
work, to decrypt an encrypted work, or otherwise to avoid, bypass, remove, 
deactivate, or impair a technological measure, without the authority of the 
copyright owner.”119 A technological measure that “effectively controls ac-
cess” is further defined as a measure that “in the ordinary course of its op-
eration, requires the application of information, or a process or a treatment, 
with the authority of the copyright owner, to gain access to the work.”120 
For a literary scholar this means that, when encountering a text on a digital 
device, reading sometimes must limit itself to surface phenomena. An at-
tempt at reading for depth—to discover the implemented terms of a smart 
contract, for example—may carry censure or reprobation.121
The short-lived legal history of the DMCA anticircumvention provisions 
is already littered with ambiguous case law, which the Electronic Fron-
tiers Foundation believes to have the effect of “stifl[ing] a wide array 
of legitimate activities,” “chilling free expression and scientific research,” 
“jeopardiz[ing] fair use,” and “imped[ing] competition and innovation.”122 
Several incidents relate to the practice of literary interpretation directly. In 
one case a security researcher exploring the activity of censorship filters 
on public library computers was forced to seek DMCA exemption from the 
Librarian of Congress.123 In another case a Russian programmer speaking at 
a security conference was jailed and detained for several months for devel-
oping software that converts Adobe electronic book files into PDFs using a 
process that could potentially remove embedded digital rights management 
protections.124 Finally, in 2005 the Agfa Monotype Corporation took Adobe 
Systems to court in a dispute over Adobe’s Acrobat Free Text tool, which 
allowed users to “change text annotations using Plaintiff’s TrueType fonts” 
without a license.125

	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT	
129
In each case the interpretive activity that readers usually take for 
granted—the ability to take notes, to mine data from a corpus, or to access 
information on a public computer—is brought into question. These cases set 
a dangerous precedent that could be used to further limit the efficacy of 
reading digital texts.
The lack of access to deep structure exposes a glaring problem at the 
heart of smart contracts. The spirit of contract law demands explicit consent 
on the part of both parties. In the language of English common law, contracts 
involve promises that are “manifestation[s] of intention” and adopt an “exter-
nal or objective standard for interpreting conduct.”126 By extension, contracts 
between authors, publishers, and readers must exist in an objectively verifi-
able manner that is mutually accessible for analysis.
Smart contracts purposely obscure the terms of such agreements. Read-
ers lack the physical means to examine their obligations or to analyze inter-
ests embedded within the document’s encrypted, tamper-proof layer. Worse 
yet, when presented with documents that describe the terms of a smart 
contract in writing—the terms of service, for example—readers have no way 
to verify their appropriate concrete form. The written terms of service could 
in any detail differ from their software- or hardware-enforced implementation. 
Moreover, on networked devices code is routinely updated independently 
of the originating accord. A book purchased on a proprietary platform may 
become unavailable at a later date; private information related to a reader’s 
search habits may be shared with third parties; screen aids for the visually 
impaired that “read” the text out loud may suddenly cease to function. The 
affordances of the medium and its terms of engagement can change with 
every software update.
The idea of tamper-proof smart contracts stands in stark opposition to 
a tradition of contract law—and textual interpretation more generally—tied 
to models of deliberation and consent that involve expressed, mutual, and 
uncoerced forms of acquiescence. The contract is meaningless if its imple-
mentation is enacted beyond scrutiny in the form of hidden, encrypted, or 
otherwise purposefully illegible code.
The impact of smart contracts on the practices of reading, writing, and 
literary analysis is potentially immense. In the language of the DMCA, the 
electronic book is not a book at all but a “copyrighted work” composed of 
“content” and “standard technical measures,” such as “copy control technol-
ogy.”127 An essay in the Yale Journal of Law and Technology explains that 

130	
FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
“while e-books and their print counterparts embody essentially identical con-
tent,” they differ considerably from a transactional standpoint:
Books are tangible goods that can be owned, sold, and passed on without 
express limitation—the Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) governs their sale, 
while copyright law protects their content. But despite appearances, Kindle 
­e-books are not, according to Amazon, sold at all: they are distributed under 
restrictive license terms, similar to downloaded software.128
Under these conditions, literature is forced to relinquish its ontological status 
of the indeterminate. The DMCA arrests the movement of texts between the 
concrete and the universal. Reified into objects, books morph into devices—no 
longer lasting and transcendent but rather immanent and ­contingent—firmly 
determined by their instrumental affordances. The literary device adapts itself 
to the situation—to the needs of both the owner and the user of the book—
by hidden logics.
For a textual critic such instability of medium means analysis cannot be 
confined to reading for surface meaning alone. How can close or distant 
reading practices persist when the reading device reconfigures a text dynam-
ically to fit individual taste, mood, or politics?129 Or when it simply prevents 
access to some of the content? Formats shape the very structure of inter-
pretation. The seemingly innocuous formatting layer contains the essence 
of control over the mechanisms of representation. Long a marginal concept 
in literary theory, formatting is therefore central to the contemporary prac-
tice of computational poetics. More than embellishment, formats govern the 
interface between meaning and matter, thought and page. Formats embody 
governance. Some prevent simple copy and paste operations. Others are 
used to censor and surveil.

The scholar Wendy Hui Kyong Chun views magnetic storage as an “enduringly 
ephemeral” medium that “creat[es] unforeseen degenerative links between hu-
mans and machines.”1 If the floating-gate transistor where my text now lives 
can be called enduring and ephemeral, I can call my liquid crystal display 
where the text shows itself fading and persistent.2 This is not to suggest that 
digital text transcends its material contexts, only to observe that it drifts from 
surface to surface, beyond the field of vision, in ways that erode trust its 
general permanence. If we are to dwell on surfaces, I do not know where to 
look: the screen or the floating gate.
Where does text reside? We know the answer for print: It is there, stuck 
to a page. Computational media complicate our ability to situate inscription. 
We point at screens without certainty; their surfaces remain in flux. They are 
sites of fleeting projections that emanate from hidden storage media. Digital 
text passes through multiple filters and transformations on the way to the 
surface. Although we observe the inscription on-screen only, it embodies a 
complicated figure, stretched across at least two sites. The sign strains and 
splits between the configuration of magnetic pulse and circuit state at one 
end and in the phases of liquid crystal on-screen at the other. Both locations 
afford distinct constraints to interpretation. Familiar actions such as reading 
and writing imply distinctly differing operations depending on the surface.
Thus when Michael Heim refers to the “ephemeral quality” of the elec-
tronic text or when Pamela McCorduck describes it as “impermanent, flimsy, 
CHAPTER 4
> RECONDITE SURFACES

132	
RECONDITE SURFACES
malleable, [and] contingent,” they are correctly identifying a facet of digital 
inscription at its site of projection.3 McCorduck tells the story of a rabbinate 
court that, when interpreting a law that prohibits observant Jews from eras-
ing God’s name, deemed that words on a screen do not constitute writing 
and therefore sanctioned their erasure.4
Conversely, when such scholars as Johanna Drucker, Katherine Hayles, 
or Matthew Kirschenbaum respond to Heim and company with hardened 
materialism, they are also rightly locating properties of digital inscription 
at the site of its archival immanence. The two schools of thought disagree 
because they speak neither of the same phenomenon nor at the same site. 
One group highlights ephemeral, transcendent qualities of the projected 
word; the other foregrounds the “uniquely indelible nature of magnetic 
storage,”5 “drives, tracks, and disks,” “fundamental physical supports,” and 
“material substrates of computing.”6 Screen and hard drive partition the sign 
between surface and depth, projection and archive. At the site of projection 
one speaks of texts that are—I have kept a list of adjectives when reviewing 
the literature—ephemeral, shimmering, electric, flimsy, contingent, malleable, 
impermanent, flowing, transcendent, ghostly, and radiant. At the archival site 
scholars describe inscription as enduring, solid, persistent, permanent, indel-
ible, hard, immanent, lasting, palpable, and concrete.
The seeming immateriality of digital media has real-world effects; for ex-
ample, the costs of replication plummet. Computational text can be copied 
effortlessly, with minimal cost and near-perfect fidelity. Hyperreproducibility 
of this sort was unthinkable for most of the twentieth century. Lowered 
costs of copying further reduce barriers to access and conveyance. Sym-
bols that adhere lightly to their medium are easy to store and transport. 
Public knowledge works like search engines and massive open online en-
cyclopedias subsequently claim to organize all the world’s knowledge. Such 
projects unfold by the logics of immateriality: total archives, big data, and 
universal accessibility.7 When the sign appears to weigh nothing, one imag-
ines its weightless aggregate, available immediately and everywhere. The 
perceived weightlessness of text also has other side effects. A text that 
adheres lightly to its medium is difficult to contain. Bureaucracies struggle 
to restrict it in transit.
Despite appearances, text cannot be unmoored from its material founda-
tions. Rather, the sign splits in two, with one half arising visibly, a weight-
less and apparent screen simulation, and the other half remaining opaque, 

	
RECONDITE SURFACES	
133
etched into hefty and hidden material contingencies. The material substrates 
of computational text likewise carry real-world consequences. First and fore-
most, they are hidden from view. Drives and tapes reside inside boxes made 
of plastic and aluminum. If only because they carry electric current and are 
thus flammable, they are regulated. They contain heavy and rare metals and 
are often hazardous to touch or ingest. They become toxic when discarded. 
Flash memory cards, USB sticks, solid-state storage devices, and magnetic 
disk drives contain circuitry to prevent unauthorized access and to resist 
tempering. Inside, text intertwines with machine internals, sealed hermetically 
and hermeneutically in a way that resists human interpretation. The laminate 
is not fully compatible with humans: machine literature, a hazard.
Form and content lie flat in print. Print interfaces are paper thin. Ink 
adheres to paper in a way that pixels do not to screens. Textual fissure 
complicates traditional structuralist distinctions between form and content. 
Digital inscription occupies at least two distinct sites, each entailing drasti-
cally different affordances for interpretation. If we were to untangle the 
tightly wound coil of the circuit, we would find ample distance between hard 
drive and screen. Some readers measure that distance in inches, as when 
reading documents locally, stored on their own computer; other measure 
it in miles when reading documents remotely, stored on faraway cloud 
servers. Where print is flat, digital inscription is stratified across multiple 
incongruent planes.8
How did this multiplicity come to be? And what effect does it have on 
the life of the mind? In this chapter I make visible the gap between pro-
jected sign and archived inscription. I begin by providing a historical account 
of a letter’s passage from paper to pixel. My narrative arc proceeds in three 
stages, which I summarize here and expand on later.
First, with the advance of telecommunications, we observe an emerging 
divide between human-readable text and machine-readable code. Removable 
storage media such as ticker tape and punch cards embodied a machine in-
struction set meant to actuate mechanisms, which in turn produced human-
legible inscriptions. Unintelligible (to humans without special training) control 
codes were thereby mixed with plain text, the content of communication. In-
scription split between sites of storage, which archive an expanded machine 
instruction set, and projection, which displays human alphabets.
Second, whereas ticker tape and punch cards were legible to the naked 
eye, magnetic tape storage made for an inscrutable medium, inaccessible 

134	
RECONDITE SURFACES
without instrumentation. In the 1950s and 1960s machine operators worked 
blindly, using complicated workarounds to verify equivalence between input, 
storage, and output. Writing began to involve multiple typings or printings. 
Specialized magnetic reading devices were developed to make inscription 
more apparent and to establish a correspondence between input, storage 
content, and output of entered text. The physical properties of electromag-
netic inscription have placed it, in practice, beyond human sense.
Finally, the appearance of cathode-ray tube (CRT) displays in the late 
1960s restored a measure of legibility lost to magnetic storage media. The 
sign reemerged on-screen. Crucially, it framed a simulacrum of archived in-
scription. Typing a word on a keyboard produced one sort of a structure on 
tape or disk and another on-screen. The two relate contingently, without nec-
essary equivalence. The lay reader has no means to ensure the correspon-
dence between visible trace and stored mark. An opaque black box intercedes 
between simultaneous acts of writing and reading what one has written.
A number of textual machines illustrate this history. Three mechanisms 
mark the journey: the Controller patented by Hyman Goldberg in 1911; the 
Magnetic Reader introduced by Robert Youngquist and Robert Hanes in 
1958; and, for a lack of a better name, the Time Fob, introduced by Doug-
las Engelbart in 1968. 
Goldberg’s device was designed to bridge the rift between human and 
machine alphabets in that it was a mechanical punch card that could move 
minds and levers alike. His Controller traced an alphabet understood by 
both humans and machines. Youngquist and Hanes attempted to give human 
operators a glimpse into the hidden world of magnetic polarities and elec-
tric charges. Engelbart’s Time Fob finally belongs to what Peter Denning, a 
prominent computer scientist, calls the third generation of computer systems. 
It is an assemblage of storage, input, and output technologies that continue 
to shape our encounter with texts.9 Together, these devices tell a story of a 
fissure at the heart of our contemporary textual predicament.
PROGRAMMABLE MEDIA
To begin, we need some background on telegraphy. The turn of the twen-
tieth century was a pivotal period in the history of letters. It saw the lan-
guages of people and machines enter the same mixed communications 
stream. Artificial fixed-length alphabets, such as the Baudot code, paved 
the way for the automation of language. The great variety of human scripts 

	
RECONDITE SURFACES	
135
was reduced to a set of discrete and reproducible characters. So regular-
ized, type was converted into electric signal, sent over great distances, and 
used to program machines remotely. These expanded textual affordances 
came at a price of legibility. Initially, a cadre of trained machine operators 
was required to translate human language into machine-transmittable code. 
Eventually, specialized equipment automated this process, removing humans 
from the equation. Machines could communicate with other machines without 
human intervention, triggering a chain of cascading events that reverberate 
today, from algorithmic financial trading to the war between junk mail (spam) 
generators and their filters.
The advent of programmable media (punch cards and ticker tape) cou-
pled human-compatible alphabets with machine control code.10 Reduced to 
a discrete and reliably reproducible set of characters, natural languages 
could be conveyed as electric signals. In such a transitive state, language 
became more mobile than ever before. It was transmitted efficiently across 
vast distances. The mechanization of type also introduced new control char-
acters into circulation that were capable of affecting machine state changes 
at a distance. Initially, such state changes were simple: “begin transmission,” 
“sound error bell,” or “start new line.” With time, they developed into what 
we now know as programming languages. Content meant for people was 
being routinely intermixed with code meant to control machine devices. Such 
early remote capabilities were quickly adapted to control everything from 
radio stations to advertising billboards and knitting machines.11
Language compressed and pushed through the wires underwent a num-
ber of transformations. Donald Murray, the inventor of the popular Mur-
ray telegraph alphabet, conceived of telecommunications in terms of time 
and space. Advancing a self-professed “metaphysics of telegraph signalling 
alphabets,” he described spatial writing symbols that “appeal to the eye” 
and temporal “telephonic” signals that “appeal to the ear.”12 Paradoxically, 
space signals (e.g., words on a billboard) occupy little space but persist in 
time: “For instance, a signboard may extend over 10 feet and 100 years.”13 
By contrast, time signals dilate in space, whereas they contract in time: 
“A Morse signal in a wire may extend over half a second” and 500 miles, 
Murray wrote.14
Physical structures such as sentences and paragraphs that appear on 
a page take shape in the reader’s mind. Unlike a painting, a paragraph 
cannot be perceived wholly and at once; it must be reassembled mentally. 

136	
RECONDITE SURFACES
The printed word extends in time. By contrast, the electric signal is nearly 
instantaneous. However, it claims space in transmission. A perceptive reader 
of electric letters reconstructs a sign’s spatial characteristics along with its 
temporal characteristics. The digital inscription gains a new dimension, which 
extends away and beyond a reader’s field of vision. Elongation in space 
compounds elongation in time to complicate the tactics of reading.
The emergent physics of electric language presented new technological 
and administrative challenges. As telegraphy spanned national boundaries, 
agreements were needed to standardize conventions for equipment and mes-
sage encoding. These were handled on a regional, ad hoc basis until 1865, 
when the International Telegraph Union (ITU) was created. The International 
Telegraph Conference (ITC), held in Paris between March 1 and May 17, 
1865, adopted, among other things, the use of a modified Morse code char-
acter set, containing thirty-three Latin letters (including characters from the 
French, German, and Spanish alphabets), ten numbers (0–9), fourteen punc-
tuation marks (including a fraction bar), and ten control codes (including “end 
of service,” “attention,” and “error”).15 In specifying the conversion tables for 
the Morse alphabet, the 1865 ITU rules required a silence equal to three dots 
(or one dash) to indicate a space between two letters and a silence equiva-
lent to four dots (later changed to seven) to indicate a gap between words.
Although Morse code is commonly imagined as a binary code, it is tech-
nically a ternary notation, because it uses three elements: dots, dashes, and 
silences. Morse code encapsulates characters into strings of variable length, 
for example, one dash for t and six dots for the number 6. The transmis-
sion of variable-length codes consequently required the presence of human 
operators who could translate from natural to machine language using 
keys, which when depressed vertically would complete the electric circuit to 
produce a signal. A key interfaced between disparate conduits—paper and 
wire—to translate between human- and machine-meaningful encodings.
Writing in 1929 for the journal American Speech, Hervey Brackbill pre-
served some of the specialized language associated with Morse code culture: 
“Morse telegraphy is commonly referred to as a ‘game,’ and the operator 
‘works a wire.’ ” Operators tapping keys used “bugs,” which where insectlike 
machines that had “long slender levers and springs.” Bugs had trade names 
such as Lighting Bug, Gold Bug, and Cootie (for a small model).16
Operators using straight keys achieved speeds upward of 25–30 words 
per minute, limited by the shortest possible length of the smallest transmit-

	
RECONDITE SURFACES	
137
ted unit (a dot), fixed by the American and International Morse Code con-
ventions to 1/24 of a second in duration.
At the time, companies like Vibroplex began manufacturing semiautomatic 
keys, which made use of horizontal switches capable of emitting a rapid suc-
cession of dots to one side of the action and dashes to the other.17 A semi-
automatic bug was said to “run away” when adjusted for too high a speed. 
Vibroplex keys would also greatly alter the “fist,” or the operator’s individual 
transmission style, by which telegraphers could be previously recognized. 
They allowed for speeds approaching 50 words per minute when not follow-
ing the minimum signal length specifications.18 Despite such improvements, 
Morse code was showing its age. Although the convention stipulated a fixed 
length, the actual length of silences between meaning-carrying units varied 
greatly with the vagaries of transmitting media. Cross-talk between wires 
and weather interference were common; communicating in Morse code still 
required a human operator for efficient ciphering and deciphering. In the 
long chain of time-sensitive transformations between the message and its 
recipient, the human posed a limiting factor.
Telegraph operators working a “hand sender” often developed partial 
paralysis in their wrists or arms. The condition was commonly known as 
“glass arm.”19 Senders were called “hams” or “bums” when they “fell down,” 
or made frequent errors.20 To “put someone under the table” in sender’s 
lingo was to transmit faster than a receiver could transcribe. The “reader” 
was “burnt up” when he fell behind. He had to “break,” or interrupt, the 
sender to ask for repetition.21 To “paste” someone was to deliberately burn 
him up.22
The 1908 ITC, held in Lisbon, ratified two additional alphabet standards 
for international use: Hughes and Baudot. Both were developed in response 
to the limitations of Morse code and allowed for fully autonomous telegraph 
operation. The Hughes telegraph, an 1855 design modification of the 1846 
American Royal E. House model, was a capricious machine that relied on a 
tuning mechanism to transmit individual characters. It was inspired by the 
player piano and even looked like one, complete with a keyboard and rotat-
ing drum. Its sending device struck a tone that, when transmitted by electric 
current, initiated the rotation of a similar drum in the receiving apparatus 
“at the pleasure of the distant operator.”23 The length of time between the 
initial synchronization signal and the struck chord corresponded to a letter, 
which the machine then printed to tape using a letter wheel. Hughes referred 

138	
RECONDITE SURFACES
to his invention as a “Compound Magnetic and Vibrating Printing Instrument,” 
a name that hints at its fragility.24 When the sending and receiving drums 
fell out of sync, the message became impossible to decipher. Precise co-
ordination between the various drums and their operators was therefore of 
paramount importance.
The number and size of telegraph cables further limited the system’s 
capacity to carry information. Independent developments in communication 
technology led to a range of techniques for sharing the same wire to send 
multiple messages, known as multiplexing. These fell into two categories: 
time-division modulation and pulse-amplitude modulation.25 Pulse-amplitude 
modulation involved filling the available space (bandwidth) with simultaneous 
signals of different types. Imagine someone speaking loudly and quietly at 
the same time into the same channel. In this way, all the loud messages 
could be sorted to one side and all the quiet ones to the other side which 
would effectively utilize the whole sonic spectrum.26 Initially, pulse-amplitude 
modulation was difficult to implement. Cross-channel noise and device sensi-
tivity hampered reliable reception and decoding across multiple simultaneous 
wave frequencies.
Emile Baudot, among others, noticed that the prevailing Morse and 
Hughes telegraph systems also failed to make full use of the time allotted 
for message transmission. Hughes telegraphs in particular relied on the use 
of long silences, which could have been condensed to improve bandwidth ca-
pacity. Baudot-type time multiplexers used synchronized rotating mechanisms 
at the sending and receiving ends (Figure 4.1). These mechanisms distributed 
units of time among multiple operators. For example, one operator could 
send messages at the top of the minute and the other at the bottom. In this 
way, receivers could sort messages based on their time signatures: all those 
sent at the top of the minute would go into one pile, and all those sent at 
the bottom would go into another. A duplex printing telegraph, of the Murray 
type, involved a complicated synchronization device, known as the distribu-
tor, that was capable of orchestrating two distinct streams of transmission 
along the same channel. By taking turns to transmit to the regular tolling of 
a tuning bell, two operators could send separate messages along the same 
channel. The receiving machine would then sort the messages based on their 
time signatures.27
It was important to maintain unison in such multiplexed systems. Time-
shared device operators had to know when it was their turn to type. The 

	
RECONDITE SURFACES	
139
Baudot multiplexer used time, or cadence, tapper mechanisms to indicate 
turns. In some devices the keyboards would lock to prevent out-of-turn input. 
In a quadruplex system, up to four operators could engage in an intricate 
dance of fingers, keys, tappers, and signals, synchronized by the rotation of 
the telegraph distributor.
Synchronization was also needed to decipher Morse code transmis-
sions, to better distinguish non-meaning-carrying silence (the receiver is 
turned off) from meaning-carrying silence (the receiver pauses between 
signals). Telegraph operators had to agree on a unit of measure, a dura-
tion of silence, to differentiate between dots and spaces between words, 
which was indicated by silences of a different length. When two devices fell 
out of sync or if communication lagged for some reason, the coherence 
of the message faltered. Sending and receiving machines had to be tuned 
to a cadence of common information exchange. The system of operators, 
transmitters, and receivers was, in aggregate, tuned to a specific but ar-
bitrary rhythm by which certain messages made sense only in particular 
(also arbitrary) units of time. In early telegraphy these units of time were 
slower than natural human time, enough so for the operator to remain idle. 
Later systems increased the pace to a rhythm beyond natural human abili-
ties of comprehension, to a point where human operators could no longer 
decipher signals without machine assistance. In the language of wiremen, 
bugs were running away with the whole game. A human operator examining 
FIGURE 4.1. Schema for a “multiple printing telegraph,” used to send multiple messages at 
different time intervals along a single channel (line). Synchronization between the two devices 
was crucial for transmission. Source: Donald Murray, “Setting Type by Telegraph,” Journal of 
the Institution of Electrical Engineers 34, no. 172 (May 1905): 574.

140	
RECONDITE SURFACES
wire signals directly would find a jumble of data. This, in fact, is a decent 
provisional definition of data: information beyond human time, not amenable 
to unmediated interpretation.
Hundreds of alphabet systems vying to displace Morse code were devised 
to speed up automated communications. These evolved from variable-length 
alphabets such as Morse and Hughes codes, to fixed-length alphabets such 
as Baudot and Murray codes. The systematicity of the signal—always the 
same length, always at the same time—shifted text encoding further away 
from natural human languages, which rely on affect and variation, toward 
artificial languages, which prioritize other attributes, such as consistency and 
reproducibility.
The discovery of binary arithmetic belongs, in part, to Gottfried Leibniz, 
who, influenced by hexagrams of the I Ching, articulated his own system in 
his 1979 Explication de l’arithmétique binaire.28 Francis Bacon deserves credit 
for articulating some of the earliest examples of a fixed-length binary code. 
In the sixth book of his De augmentis scientiarum, an encyclopedic treatise 
on the “partition of sciences,” Bacon mentioned a “highest degree of cipher” 
that could signify “all in all” (omnia per omnia).29 He proceeded to describe 
a “fivefold” “bi-literarie” alphabet that encoded each letter of the English 
language using a five-character string of a’s and b’s. The letter A, became 
aaaaa, B became aaaab, C aaaba, and so on to Z, rendered into babbb. 
Unlike other known cipher systems, all of Bacon’s characters took up exactly 
five spaces. He wrote: 
Neither is this a small matter. These Cypher-Characters have, and may per-
forme: For by this Art a way is opened, whereby a man may expresse and 
signifie the intentions of his minde, at any distance of place, by objects 
which may be presented to the eye, an accommodated to the eare: pro-
vided those objects be capable of a twofold difference only; as by Bells, by 
Trumpets, by Lights and Torches, by the report of Muskets, and any instru-
ments of like nature.30
Writing more than two centuries before electric telegraphy, Bacon eloquently 
described its essence, which lay in expressing and signifying the human mind 
at a distance.
The fixed-length property of Bacon’s cipher, later implemented in the 
5-bit Baudot code, signaled the beginning of the modern era of serial 

	
RECONDITE SURFACES	
141
communications.31 The Baudot and Murray alphabets were designed with 
automation in mind.32 Both did away with the “end of character” signal 
that separated letters in Morse code. Signal units were to be divided into 
letters by count, with every five codes representing a single character. 
Temporal synchronization was unnecessary given the receiver’s ability to 
read a message from the beginning. A character became a unit of space 
divisible by 5.
The Murray code was more compact than Morse and especially more 
economical than Hughes, which, in the extreme, used up to fifty-four mea-
sures of silence to send a signal representing double quotes.33 The signal for 
“zero” in Morse code occupied twenty-two measures. By contrast, all Baudot 
and Murray characters were a mere five units in length, with the maximum of 
ten used to switch the receiving device into “figure” or “capital letter” states, 
for a total of ten units (Figure 4.2).34
Fixed-length signal alphabets drove the wedge further between human 
and machine communication. Significantly, the automated printing telegraph 
decoupled information encoding from its transmission. Fixed-length encoding 
of messages could be done in advance, with more facility and in volume. 
Prepared messages could then be fed into a machine without human as-
sistance. In 1905 Donald Murray wrote that the “object of machine teleg-
raphy [is] not only to increase the saving of telegraph wire . . . but also 
to reduce the labour cost of translation and writing by the use of suitable 
machines.”35 Baudot and Murray codes were not only shorter but also sim-
pler and less error-prone and thus resulted in less complicated and more 
durable devices.
With the introduction of mechanized reading and writing techniques, 
telegraphy diverged from telephony to become a means for truly asynchro-
nous communication. It displaced signal transmission in time as it did in 
space. The essence of algorithmic control, amplified by remote communi-
cation devices, lies in its ability to delay execution; a cooking recipe, for 
example, allows novice cooks to follow instructions without the presence of 
a master chef. Similarly, delayed communication could happen in absentia, 
according to predetermined rules and instructions. A message could activate 
a machine that prints and another that trades stocks and another that re-
plies with a confirmation.
A new generation of printing telegraphs was programmed using removable 
storage media, similar to the way player pianos were programmed to play 

FIGURE 4.2. A comparison of fixed- and variable-width encodings: Baudot, Murray, and Morse 
alphabets. Source: William B. Vansize, “A New Page-Printing Telegraph,” Transactions of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers 18 (January 1901): 23.

	
RECONDITE SURFACES	
143
music by means of music rolls. Just as perforated music rolls decoupled 
music making from its live performance, programmable media decoupled 
inscription from transmission. In both cases, one could strike keys now, only 
to feel the effects of their impact later. Programmable media conserved 
the logic of desired effects for later execution. Decoupled from its human 
sources, that logic could then be compressed and optimized for speed and 
efficiency. Prepared ticker tape and punch cards were fed into a mechanism 
for transmission at rates far exceeding the possibilities of hand-operated 
Morse telegraphy. 
Besides encoding language, the Baudot schema left space for several 
special control characters. The character space was therefore expanded by 
switching the receiving mechanism into a special control mode in which every 
combination of five bits represented an individual control character, instead 
of a letter. In this manner, human content and machine control became in-
tertwined and began to occupy the same spectrum of communication.
By the 1930s devices variously known as printer telegraphs, ­teletypewriters, 
and teletypes displaced Morse code telegraphy as the dominant mode of 
commercial communication. A 1932 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics report 
estimated a more than 50 percent drop in Morse code operators between 
1915 and 1931. Morse operators referred to teletypists on the sending side 
as “punchers” and those on the receiving side as “printer men.”36 The printer 
men responsible for assembling pages from ticker tape were called “pasters” 
and sometimes, derisively, as “paperhangers.”37 Teletype technology auto-
mated this entire process, rendering punchers, pasters, and paperhangers 
obsolete. Operators could enter printed characters directly into a machine, 
using keyboards similar to typewriters, which, by that time, were widely avail-
able for business use. The teletype would then automatically transcode the 
input into transmitted signal and then back from signal onto paper on the 
receiving end.
As Bacon’s early writings on the language arts suggest, the roots of 
telegraphy lie in cipher making and cryptography. It is no surprise, then, 
that the encoding of human languages for machine use was intimately con-
nected to wartime, diplomatic, and otherwise clandestine communications. 
The seemingly innocuous problem of machine translation was therefore inex-
tricable from questions of access and legibility: Who gets to understand the 
encoded message and when? To comprehend the effects a message would 
have in transmission, one had to understand its encoding.

144	
RECONDITE SURFACES
For example, the Final Protocol to the Telegraph Regulations, ratified in 
Madrid in 1932 by the governments of more than seventy countries, included 
a special provision delineating the difference between transmitting plain and 
secret language. The protocols grouped secret languages into “code” and 
“cipher” categories. Plain language was defined as words that present “an 
intelligible meaning in one or more of the languages authorized for inter-
national telegraph correspondence, each word and each expression having 
the meaning normally assigned to it in the language to which it belongs.”38 
By contrast, code language was defined as “composed either of artificial 
words, or real words not used in the meaning normally assigned to them in 
the language to which they belong and consequently not forming intelligible 
phrases.”39
The terms of the convention were binding. Codes were not permitted to 
contain more than five bits per character and were charged, by contrast with 
plain text, at six-tenths of the agreed tariff rate. Upon request, senders were 
required to “produce the code from which the text or part of the text of 
the telegram has been compiled.”40 Otherwise, the language was considered 
a secret cipher, defined as “groups or series of Arabic figures with a secret 
meaning.”41 Participants agreed to accept and pass telegrams in plain lan-
guage through their jurisdictions. They were not obliged, however, to accept 
or help deliver secret messages.
Machine code thus occupied a gray area between plain text and cipher. 
Theoretically, it was considered intelligible only when its compilation sources 
were available to the transmitter. Without its sources it became equivalent 
to secret communication. In practice, the proliferation of encodings and ma-
chine instructions had the effect of selective illiteracy. Telegraph operators 
carried with them multiple cheat sheets, small cards that reminded them of 
each system’s particularities. Telegraphy reintroduced a pre-Lutheran problem 
of legibility into human letters. 
To speak in telegraph was to learn arcane encodings, which required 
specialized training. A number of failed communication schemas conse-
quently attempted to bridge the rift between human and machine alphabets. 
“You must acknowledge that this is readable without special training,” Hymen 
Goldberg wrote in the patent application for his 1911 Controller.42 The de-
vice was made “to provide [a] mechanism operable by a control sheet which 
is legible to every person having sufficient education to enable him to read.” 
In an illustration attached to his patent, Goldberg pictured a “legible control 

RECONDITE SURFACES	
145
FIGURE 4.3. Goldberg’s control cards. Machine language and human language coincide on 
the same plane. The perforations that actuate levers can also be read “without special 
training,” in contrast to other text encodings. Source: Hyman Eli Goldberg, “Controller,” Patent 
US1165663 A, filed January 10, 1911, issued December 28, 1915, sheet 3; quote on p. 1.
sheet . . . in which the control characters are in the form of the letters 
of the ordinary English alphabet.”43 Goldberg’s perforations did the “double 
duty” of carrying human-readable content and mechanically manipulating 
machine “blocks,” “handles,” “terminal blades,” and “plungers.”44 Unlike other 
schemas, messages in Goldberg’s alphabet could be “read without special 
information,” effectively addressing the problem of code’s apparent unintel-
ligibility (Figure 4.3).45
The inscription remained visible at the surface of Goldberg’s control 
sheet, as a perforated figure punched through the conduit. Whatever chal-
lenges punch cards and ticker tape presented for readers, these were soon 
complicated by the advent of magnetic tape.
TEXTUAL LAMINATES
“Historically unforeseen, barely a thing, software’s ghostly presence pro-
duces and defies apprehension,” Wendy Chun wrote in her Programmed 
Visions, an influential monograph that continues to shape the field of soft-
ware studies.46

146	
RECONDITE SURFACES
One could hardly call early programmable media ephemeral. Anecdotes 
circulate about Father Roberto Busa, an early pioneer of computational phi-
lology, who in the 1960s carted his punch cards around Italy in his truck.47 
Codified inscription, before its electromagnetic period, was fragile and un-
wieldy. Just like writing with pen and paper, making an error on ticker tape 
entry required cumbersome corrections and sometimes wholesale reentry of 
lines or pages. On the surface of ticker tape, inscription still made a strong 
commitment to paper. Once committed, it was nearly immutable. Embossed 
onto ticker tape or punched into the card, early software protruded through 
the medium.
In the age of telegraphy encoding stood in the way of code comprehen-
sion. Morse code and similar alphabet conventions at least left a visible 
mark. They were legible if not always intelligible. Once the machine encoding 
was identified (as Morse, Baudot, or Murray), it could be translated back into 
natural language using a simple lookup table.
Magnetic tape changed the commitment between inscription and medium. 
It provided a temporary home, where the word could be altered before being 
embossed into paper. At the 1967 Symposium on Electronic Composition in 
Printing, Jon Haley, staff director of the Congressional Joint Committee on 
Printing, spoke of “compromises with legibility [that] had been made for the 
sake of pure speed in composition and dissemination of the end product.”48 A 
new breed of magnetic storage devices allowed for the manipulation of words 
in “memory,” on a medium that was easily erased and rewritten. A magnetic 
charge adhered lightly to tape surface. This light touch gave the word its 
newfound ephemeral quality. But it also made inscription illegible. In applica-
tions such as law and banking, where the fidelity between input, storage, 
and output was crucial, the immediate illegibility of magnetic storage posed 
a considerable engineering challenge. After the advent of teletype but before 
cathode-ray screens, machine makers used a variety of techniques to restore 
a measure of congruence between invisible magnetic inscription and its paper 
representation. What was entered had to be verified against what was stored.
The principles of magnetic recording were developed by Oberlin Smith 
(among others), an American engineer who also filed several patents for in-
ventions related to weaving looms. In 1888, inspired by Edison’s mechanical 
phonograph, Smith made public his experiments with an “electrical method” 
of sound recording using a “magnetized cord” (cotton mixed with hardened 
steel dust) as a recording medium. These experiments were later put into 

	
RECONDITE SURFACES	
147
practice by Valdemar Poulsen of Denmark, who patented several influential 
designs for a magnetic wire recorder.49
Magnetic recording on wire or plastic tape offered several distinct advan-
tages over mechanical perforation. Tape was more durable than paper; it could 
fit more information per square inch; and it was reusable. “One of the impor-
tant advantages of magnetic recording,” Marvin Camras, a physicist with the 
Armour Research Foundation, wrote in 1948, “is that the record may be erased 
if desired, and a new record made in its place.”50 Most early developments in 
magnetic storage were aimed at sound recording. The use of magnetic me-
dium for data storage did not take off in earnest until the 1950s.51 However, 
early developers of electromagnetic storage and recording technology already 
imagined their work in dialogue with the long history of letters (and not just 
sound). In an address to the Franklin Institute on December 16, 1908, Charles 
Fankhauser, the inventor of the electromagnetic telegraphone, said:
To transport human speech over a distance of one thousand miles is a 
wonderful achievement. How much more wonderful, then, is the achievement 
that makes possible . . . its storage at the receiving end, so that the exact 
sentence, the exact intonation of the voice, the exact timbre, may be repro-
duced over and over again, an endless number of times.52
Comparing magnetic recording to the invention of the Gutenberg press, 
Fankhauser added:
It is my belief that what type has been to the spoken word, the telegra-
phone will be to the electrically transmitted word. . . . As printing spread 
learning and civilization among the peoples of the earth and influenced 
knowledge and intercourse among men, so I believe the telegraphone will 
influence and spread electrical communication among men.53
In that speech Fankhauser also lamented the evanescence of telegraph and 
telephone communications. The telephone, he rued, fails to preserve “an 
authentic record of conversation over the wire.”54 Fankhauser imagined his 
telegraphone being used by
the sick, the infirm, [and] the aged. . . . A book can be read to the sight-
less or the invalid by the machine, while the patient lies in bed. Lectures, 

148	
RECONDITE SURFACES
concerts, recitations—what one wishes, may be had at will. Skilled readers or 
expert elocution teachers could be employed to read into the wires entire 
libraries.55
Anticipating the popularity of twenty-first-century audio formats like podcasts 
and audiobooks, Fankhauser spoke of “tired and jaded” workers who would 
“sooth [themselves] into a state of restfulness” by listening to their favorite 
authors.56 Fankhauser saw his “electric writing” emerge as “clear” and “dis-
tinct” as “writing by hand,” “an absolutely legal and conclusive record.”57 
Whereas written language was lossy and reductive, Fankhauser hoped that 
electromagnetic signals would hold high fidelity to the original.
In 1909 Fankhauser thought of magnetic storage primarily as an audio 
format that would combine the best of telegraphy and telephony. Magnetic 
data storage technology did not mature until the 1950s, when advances in 
composite plastics made it possible to manufacture tape that was cheaper 
and more durable than its paper or cloth alternatives. The state-of-the-art 
relay calculator, commissioned by the Bureau of Ordinance of the Navy De-
partment in 1944 and built by the Computation Laboratory at Harvard Uni-
versity in 1947, still made use of standard-issue telegraph “tape readers and 
punchers” adapted for computation with the aid of engineers from Western 
Union Telegraph Company.58 It was equipped with a number of Teletype 
Model 12A tape readers and Model 10B perforators, using 11/16-inch-wide 
paper tape, partitioned into “five intelligence holes,” where each quantity 
entered for computation took up thirteen lines of code.59 Readers and 
punchers were capable of running 600 operations per minute. Four Model 
15 Page-Printers were needed to compare printed characters with the digits 
stored on the ticker tape print register. The numerical inscription in this 
setup was therefore already split between input and output channels, with 
input stored on ticker tape and output displayed in print.
The Mark III Calculator, which followed the Computation Laboratory’s 
earlier efforts, was also commissioned by the Navy’s Bureau of Ordinance. 
It was completed in 1950. Its organization or “floor plan” (“system archi-
tecture,” we would say today) did away with punch cards and ticker tape, 
favoring instead an array of large electromagnetic drums coupled with reel-
to-reel tape recorders. The drums, limited in their storage capacity, revolved 
at much faster speeds than tape reels. They were used for fast, temporary 
internal storage. A drum’s surface was coated with a “thin film composed of 

	
RECONDITE SURFACES	
149
finely divided magnetic oxides of iron suspended in a plastic lacquer, and 
applied to the drums with an artist’s air brush.”60 The Mark III Calculator 
used twenty-five such drums, rotating at 6,900 rpm, each capable of storing 
240 binary digits.
In addition to the fast “internal storage” drums, the floor plan included 
eight slow “external storage” tape-reader mechanisms. Tape was slower than 
drums but cheaper. It easily extended to multiple reels, approaching the archi-
tecture of an ideal Turing machine, which called for tape of infinite length. In 
practice, tape was in limited supply, merely long enough to answer the needs 
of military computation. Unlike stationary drums, tape was portable. Operators 
could prepare tape in advance, in a different room, at the allotted instruc-
tional tape preparation table. The information on tape would then be synced 
with and transferred to a slow drum. In the next stage the slow drum acceler-
ated to match the higher rotating speeds of the more rapid internal storage 
drums, at which point the information was transferred again for computation. 
Mark III was further equipped with five printers “for presenting computed re-
sults in a form suitable for publication.” The printers were capable of deter-
mining the “number of digits to be printed, the intercolumnar and interlinear 
spacing, and other items related to the typography of the printed page.”61 
In reflecting on these early “supercomputers,” one imagines the pathway of 
a single character as it crosses surfaces, through doorways and interfaces, 
gaining new shapes and temporalities with each transition.
Electromagnetic signals had to be transcoded into binary numerical no-
tation. To transfer characters onto tape, operators sat at a numerical tape 
preparation table, yet another separate piece of furniture. Data were stored 
along two channels, running along the tape’s length. Operators entered each 
number twice, first into channel A and then into channel B. This was done 
to prevent errors, because operators worked blindly, unable to see whether 
the intended mark registered properly upon first entry. An error bell would 
sound when the first quantity did not match the second, in which case an 
operator would reenter the mismatched digits. To “ensure completely reliable 
results,” one of the five attached Underwood electric teletypes could further 
be used to print all channels and confirm input visually.62
Before screens, the potential for incongruence between recondite data for-
mats and their apparent representation posed a significant problem. In a 1954 
patent, filed on behalf of Burroughs Corporation, Herman Epstein and Frank 
Innes described an “electrographic printer” involving an “electrical method and 

150	
RECONDITE SURFACES
apparatus for making electrostatic images on a dielectric surface by electrical 
means which may be rendered permanently visible” (Figure 4.4).63 The electro-
graphic printer anticipated the modern photocopier in that it proposed to use 
dusting inks to reveal the static charge. Rather than encoding its data into 
another representation, such as the Baudot code, the printer traced human-
legible letter shapes directly onto tape. A small printing head would convert 
binary input into a five-by-seven grid of electromagnetic charges, rendering the 
English alphabet. Such magnetic shapes were then made apparent by combin-
ing them with a “recording medium” that had the “correct physical properties 
FIGURE 4.4. Another attempt to bypass encoding in favor of drawing magnetic images in the 
shape of a human alphabet. The diagram illustrates “images formed by a negative voltage” 
in a device that prefigures modern photocopy machines. Source: Herman Epstein and Frank 
Innes, “Electrographic Printer,” Patent US3012839 A, filed July 15, 1954, issued December 12, 
1961, sheet 3; quote on p. 5.

	
RECONDITE SURFACES	
151
to adhere to the electrostatic latent images.”64 A light dusting of powder ink 
would reveal the otherwise imperceptible magnetic inscription. Tape and paper 
configurations could thus achieve a measure of literal analogy.
Advances in magnetic storage found their way into small businesses and 
home offices a decade later. In 1964 IBM combined magnetic tape (MT) stor-
age with its Selectric line of electric typewriters (ST). Selectric typewriters were 
popular because they were ubiquitous, relatively inexpensive, and could be 
used to reliably transform a keyboard’s mechanical action into binary electric 
signal. Consequently, they became the common input interface in a number 
of early computing platforms.65 Because it combined electromagnetic tape 
storage with keyboard input, the MT/ST machine could be considered one of 
the first personal “word processing” systems. Built on a simpler architecture 
than its supercomputer cousins, the machine used a single tape reading and 
writing mechanism. An advertisement in the American Bar Association Journal, 
circa 1966, called it the “$10,000 typewriter,” “worth every penny.” Where 
typists previously had to stop and erase every mistake, the IBM MT/ST setup 
allowed them to “backspace, retype, and keep going.” Mistakes could be cor-
rected in place, on magnetic tape, “where all typing is recorded and played 
back correctly at incredible speed.”66
Despite its advantages, MT/ST architecture inherited the problem of leg-
ibility from its predecessors. Information stored on tape was still invisible to 
the typist. In addition to being encoded, electric alphabets were written in 
magnetic domains and polarities, which lay beyond human sense.67 One had 
to verify input against stored quantities to ensure correspondence. But the 
stored quantity could be checked only by transforming it into yet another 
inscription. Like Wittgenstein’s broken hermeneutic circuit, magnetic tape was 
insufficient to close the loop. To verify what was stored, an operator was 
forced to redouble the original inscription, in a process that was prone to 
error, because storage media could not be accessed directly without special-
ized instruments.68
Users of the Mark III Calculator were therefore asked to input quantities 
several times over. Another class of solutions involved making the magnetic 
mark more apparent. For example, Youngquist and Hanes described their 
1962 magnetic reader as a 
device for visual observation of magnetic symbols recorded on a magnetic 
recording medium in tape or sheet form. Magnetic recording tape is often 

152	
RECONDITE SURFACES
criticized because the recorded signals are invisible, and the criticism has 
been strong enough to deny it certain important markets. For example, this 
has been a major factor in hampering sales efforts at substituting magnetic 
recording tape and card equipment for punched tape and card equipment 
which presently is dominant in automatic digital data-handling systems. 
Although magnetic recording devices are faster and more trouble-free, po-
tential customers have often balked at losing the ability to check recorded 
information visually. It has been suggested that the information be printed in 
ink alongside the magnetic signals, but this vitiates major competitive advan-
tages of magnetic recording sheet material, e.g., ease in correction, economy 
in reuse, simplicity of equipment, compactness of recorded data, etc.69
The magnetic reader consisted of two hinged plates (Figure 4.5). Youngquist 
and Hanes proposed to fill its covers with a transparent liquid that would 
host “visible, weakly ferromagnetic crystals.” When sandwiched between the 
plates, a piece of magnetic tape incited the crystal medium, which would in 
turn reveal a signal’s “visibl[e] outline.”70
FIGURE 4.5. “Magnetic recording tape is often criticized because the recorded signals are 
invisible.” Youngquist and Hanes imagined a solution: a device that physically reveals the 
magnetic inscription. Source: Robert Youngquist and Robert Hanes, “Magnetic Reader,” Patent 
US3013206 A, filed August 28, 1958, issued December 12, 1961, sheet 1; quote on p. 1.

	
RECONDITE SURFACES	
153
I have yet to find an account of a magnetic reader in use. The problem 
they were designed to solve remained: Tape and paper were fundamentally 
incompatible media. Data plowed into rows on the wide plains of a broad 
sheet had to be replanted along the length of a narrow plastic groove. To 
aid in that transformation, the next crop of IBM Magnetic Selectric typewrit-
ers added a composer control unit, designed to preserve some of the for-
matting lost in transition between paper and plastic. It could change margin 
size or justify text in memory. The original IBM Composer unit justified text 
(its chief innovation over the typewriter) by asking the operator to type each 
line twice: “one rough typing to determine what a line would contain, and 
a second justified typing.”71 After the first typing, an indicator mechanism 
calculated the variable spacing needed to achieve proper paragraph justifica-
tion. The formatting and content of each line required separate input passes 
to achieve the desired result in print.
IBM’s next-generation Magnetic Tape Selectric Composer (MT/SC) built 
on the success of its predecessors (see Table 4.1 for the evolution of the 
MT/ST line). It combined a Selectric keyboard, magnetic tape storage, and 
a Composer format control unit. Rather than having the operator type each 
line twice, the MT/SC system printed the entered text twice: once on the 
input station printout, which showed both content and control code in red 
ink, and a second time as Composer output, which collapsed the layers 
into the final typeset copy. Output operators still manually intervened to 
load paper, change font, and include hyphens. The monolithic page unit was 
thereby further systematically deconstructed into distinct strata of content 
and formatting. 
Like other devices of its time, the IBM MT/SC suffered from the problem 
of indiscernible storage. Error checking of input using multiple printouts was 
aided by a control panel consisting of eleven display lights. The machine’s 
TABLE 4.1. Generations of the IBM Selectric Line of Word Processors
Model
Year
Technologies
Selectric Typewriter
1961
Electric, binary code, replaceable font element
MT/ST
1964
Magnetic tape, Selectric typewriter
Selectric Composer
1966
Justification, spacing, typesetting
MT/SC
1968
Magnetic tape, Selectric typewriter, Selectric Composer
MC/ST
1969
Magnetic card, Selectric typewriter

154	
RECONDITE SURFACES
manual suggested that the configuration of lights be used to peek at the 
underlying data structure for verification.72
In an attempt to achieve ever greater congruence between visible outputs 
and data archived on a magnetic medium, IBM briefly explored the idea of 
storing information on magnetic cards instead of tape. On tape, information 
had to be arranged serially, into one long column of codes. Relative ar-
rangement of elements could be preserved, it was thought, on a rectangular 
magnetic card, which resembled paper in its proportions. The 1968 patent 
“Data Reading, Recording, and Positioning System” describes a method for 
arranging information on a storage medium “which accurately positions each 
character recorded relative to each previous character recorded.”73 In 1969 
IBM released a magnetic card–based version of its MT/ST line, dubbed the 
MC/ST. Fredrick May, whose name often appears on word-processing-related 
patents from this period, would later reflect that a “major reason for the 
choice of a magnetic card for the recording of medium was the simple re-
lationship that could be maintained between a typed page and a recorded 
card.” The card approximated a miniature page, making it a suitable “unit of 
record of storage for a typed page” (Figure 4.6).74 Although it offered a mea-
sure of topographic analogy between tape and paper, the “mag card” was 
short-lived partly because of its limited storage capacity, capricious feeding 
mechanism, and persistent inscrutability.75 [fig4.6]
FIGURE 4.6. An opaque slate: the IBM Mag Card II, introduced in 1969 for use in the Magnetic 
Card/Selectric Typewriter (MC/ST). Unlike tape, cards preserved the topography of print. A 
simple analogy could be achieved between document elements on card and page. Source: F. 
T. May, “IBM Word Processing Developments,” IBM Journal of Research and Development 25, 
no. 5 (September 1981): 743. Image scanned by Pointillist, Wikimedia Commons.

	
RECONDITE SURFACES	
155
The structure of textual artifacts—from a simple leaflet to a novel in multiple 
volumes—has remained remarkably stable since the invention of movable type. 
One rarely finds a sentence that spans several paragraphs, for example. Nor 
would a contemporary reader expect to find pages of different sizes in the 
same tome. Long-standing historical conventions guide the production of printed 
text. Likewise, semantic and decorative units on a page exist within a strict 
hierarchy. No book of serious nonfiction, for example, would be typeset in a 
cursive font. Unless something out of the ordinary attracts their attention, read-
ers tend to gloss the inconsequential details of formatting in favor of content. 
The material contexts of a well-designed book fade from view during reading.
For a few decades after the advent of magnetic storage media but before 
the arrival of screen technology, the sign’s outward shape disappeared alto-
gether. It is difficult to fathom now, but at that time—after the introduction of 
magnetic tape in the 1960s but before the widespread advent of CRT displays 
in the 1980s—typewriter operators and computer programmers manipulated 
text blindly. Attributes such as indent size and justification were decided be-
fore ink was committed to paper.
In the 1980s an engineer reflected on the 1964 MT/ST’s novelty: “It 
could be emphasized for the first time that the typist could type at ‘rough 
draft’ speed, ‘backspace and strike over’ errors, and not worry about the 
pressure of mistakes made at the end of the page.”76 The MT/SC further 
added a programmable control unit to separate inputs from outputs. Final 
printing was then accomplished by
mounting the original tape and the correction tape, if any, on the two-
station reader output unit, setting the pitch, leading, impression control and 
dead key space of the Composer unit to the desired values, and entering 
set-up instructions on the console control panel (e.g., one-station or two-
station tape read, depending on whether a correction tape is present; line 
count instructions for format control and space to be left for pictures, etc.; 
special format instructions; and any required control codes known to have 
been omitted from the input tape). During printing the operator changes type 
elements when necessary, loads paper as required, and makes and enters 
hyphenation decisions if justified copy is being printed.77
The tape and control units intervened between keyboard and printed page. 
The “final printing” combined “prepared copy,” “control and reference 

156	
RECONDITE SURFACES
codes,” and “printer output.”78 Historical documents often mention three dis-
tinct human operators for each stage of production: one entering copy, one 
specifying control code, and one handling paper output. These three could 
hypothetically work in isolation from one another. The typist would see copy; 
the typesetter would enter formatting and control codes; and the printer 
would output the interpolated results.
Researchers working on these early IBM machines considered the sepa-
ration of print into distinct strata a major contribution to the long history 
of writing. One IBM consultant went so far as to place the MT/SC at the 
culmination of a grand “evolution of composition,” which began with hand-
writing and continued to wood engraving, movable type, and letterpress: 
“The IBM Selectric Composer provides a new approach to the printing pro-
cess in this evolution.” He concluded by heralding the “IBM Composer era,” 
in which people would once again write books “without the assistance of 
­specialists.”79 Inflationary marketing language aside, the separation of the 
sign from its immediate material contexts and its new composite constitution 
must be considered a major milestone in the history of writing and textuality.
The move from paper to magnetic storage had tremendous social and 
political consequences for the republic of letters. Magnetic media reduced 
the costs of copying and disseminating the word, freeing it, in a sense, from 
its more durable material confines. The affordances of magnetic media—its 
very speed and impermanence—created the illusion of light ephemerality. Yet 
the material properties of magnetic tape itself continued to prevent direct 
access to the site of inscription. Magnetic media created the conditions for 
a new kind of illiteracy, which divided those who could read and write at the 
site of storage from those who could only observe its aftereffects passively, 
at the shimmering surface of archival projection.
The discussed schematics embody textual fissure in practice. The path 
of a signal through the machine leads to a multiplicity of inscription sites. 
These are not metaphoric but literal localities that stretch the sign across 
manifold surfaces. Whereas pens, typewriters, and hole punches transfer in-
scription to paper directly, electromagnetic devices compound them obliquely 
into a laminated aggregate. The propagation of electric signal across space 
continues to require numerous phase transitions between media: from one 
channel of tape to another, from tape to drum, from a slow drum to a fast 
one, and from drum and tape to paper. On paper the inscription remains 
visible in circulation; it disappears from view on tape, soon after key press. 

RECONDITE SURFACES	
157
Submerged beneath a facade of opaque oxide, inscriptions thicken and 
stratify into laminates.
LEGIBILITY
The contemporary textual condition took its present form in the late 1960s. 
Computers subsequently changed in terms of size, speed, and ubiquity. 
However, they have retained the same essential architecture to this day: 
programmable media, electromagnetic storage, screen.
The addition of a screen to the floor plan could finally address the prob-
lem of electromagnetic legibility. In the first stage of its digital development, 
language became “programmable.” Fused with machine instruction, it could 
be used to automate devices remotely. Language itself became automated. 
Coupled with electromagnetic storage in the second stage, programmable 
media were freed, to an extent, from their immutable contexts. They were 
“lighter,” faster, more portable, and therefore more iterant and malleable 
than print or punch. Ferric oxide became the preferred medium for digital 
storage: memory. That new memory layer was also beyond the reach of 
human senses. It was difficult to access and manipulate mentally.
Screens added a much needed window onto the abstraction. On-screen, 
machine memory could be mapped and represented visually, obviating the 
need for double entry or frequent printouts. Screens interjected to mediate 
between input and output. They flattened stratified complexity to facilitate use. 
Textual laminates were still invisible in part. Screen simulacra restored the 
appearance of a single surface, as they obscured the dynamics of mediation.
On December 9, 1968, Douglas Engelbart, then the primary investigator 
at the NASA- and ARPA-funded Augmentation Research Center at the Stan-
ford Research Institute, gave what later became known as the “mother of 
all demos” to an audience of roughly 1,000 or so computer professionals 
attending the Joint Computer Conference in San Francisco.80 The flier adver-
tising the event read as follows:
This session is entirely devoted to a presentation by Dr. Engelbart on a 
computer-based, interactive, multiconsole display system which is being de-
veloped at Stanford Research Institute under the sponsorship of ARPA, NASA 
and RADC. The system is being used as an experimental laboratory for 
investigating principles by which interactive computer aids can augment intel-
lectual capability. The techniques which are being described will, themselves, 

158	
RECONDITE SURFACES
be used to augment the presentation. The session will use an on-line, closed 
circuit television hook-up to the SRI computing system in Menlo Park. Follow-
ing the presentation remote terminals to the system, in operation, may be 
viewed during the remainder of the conference in a special room set aside 
for that purpose.81
The demo announced the arrival of almost every technology prophesied by 
Vannevar Bush in his influential 1945 Atlantic essay, “As We May Think.” 
During his short lecture, Engelbart presented functional prototypes of the 
following: graphical user interfaces, video conferencing, remote camera moni-
toring, links and hypertext, version control, text search, image manipulation, 
windows-based user interfaces, digital slides, networked machines, mouse, 
stylus, and joystick inputs, and “what you see is what you get” (WYSIWYG) 
word processing.
In his report to NASA, Engelbart described his colleagues as a group 
of scientists “developing an experimental laboratory around an interactive, 
multiconsole computer-display system” and “working to learn the principles 
by which interactive computer aids can augment the intellectual capability 
of the subjects.”82 CRT displays were central to this research mission. In one 
of many patents that came out of his “intellect augmentation” laboratory, 
Engelbart pictured his “display system” as a workstation that combines a 
typewriter, a CRT screen, and a mouse. The schematics show the worksta-
tion in action, with the words “now is the time fob” prominently displayed 
on-screen. The user was evidently in the process of editing a sentence, likely 
to correct the nonsensical “fob” into “for” (Figure 4.7).83
Reflecting on the use of visual display systems for human–computer in-
teraction, Engelbart wrote, “One of the potentially most promising means for 
delivering and receiving information to and from digital computers involves 
the display of computer outputs as visual representations on a cathode ray 
tube and the alteration of the display by human operator in order to deliver 
instructions to the computer.”84 The first subjects to read and write on-
screen reported feeling freedom and liberation from paper. An anonymous 
account included in Engelbart’s report offered the following self-assessment: 
1B2B1  “To accommodate and preserve a thought or
piece of information that isn’t related to the work
of the moment, one can very quickly and easily

	
RECONDITE SURFACES	
159
insert a note within the structure of a file at such
a place that it will neither get in the way nor get
lost.
1B2B2  “Later, working in another part of the file,
he can almost instantly (e.g. within two seconds)
return to the place where he temporarily is storing
such notes, to modify or add to any of them.
1B2B3  “As any such miscellaneous thought develops,
it is easy (and delightful) to reshape the structure
and content of its discussion material.85
Writing, which this typist previously perceived as an ordered and continuous 
activity, subsequently was performed in a more disjointed way. The typist 
could delight in shaping paragraphs that more closely matched her mental 
activity. Screens restored some of the fluidity of writing that typewriters 
denied. Writers could pursue two thoughts at the same time, document-
ing both at different parts of the file as one would in a notebook. Not 
constrained by the rigidity of a linear mechanism, they moved around the 
document at will.
FIGURE 4.7. Schematics for Engelbart’s display system. The arrangement of keyboard, mouse, 
and screen will define an epoch of human–computer interaction. Source: Douglas Engelbart, 
“X-Y Position Indicator for a Display System,” Patent US3541541 A, filed June 21, 1967, 
issued November 17, 1970, sheet 1.

160	
RECONDITE SURFACES
Engelbart recorded what must count as some of the most evocative pas-
sages to appear in a NASA technical report. His “Results and Discussion” 
section contains the following contemplation by an anonymous typist: 
1B4 “I find that I can express myself better, if I can
make all the little changes and experiments with wording
and structure as they occur to me. [Here the user
experiments a little with using structural decomposition
of a complex sentence.]86
A decomposition follows indeed. The author deviates dramatically from techni-
cal writing conventions. Numbered passages along with unexpected enjambment 
heighten the staccato quality of prose, which attains an almost lyrical quality: 
1B4A “I find that I write faster and more freely,
1B4A1 “pouring thoughts and trial words onto the
screen with much less inhibition,
1B4A2 “finding it easy to repair mistakes or wrong
choices
1B4A2A “so while capturing a thought I don’t
have to inhibit the outpouring of thought and
action to do it with particular correctness,
1B4A3 “finding that several trials at the right
wording can be done very quickly
1B4A3A “so I can experiment, easily take a look
and see how a new version strikes me—and often
the first unworried attempt at a way to express
something turns out to be satisfactory, or at
least to require only minor touch up.
1B4A4  “Finding that where I might otherwise
hesitate in search of the right word, I now pour out
a succession of potentially appropriate words,
leaving them all there while the rest of the
statement takes shape. Then I select from among
them, or replace them all, or else merely change the
list a bit and wait for a later movement of the
spirit.87

	
RECONDITE SURFACES	
161
When input and output coincide in time, as they do on paper, mistakes 
are costly. Once inscribed, the sign gains permanence; it becomes dif-
ficult to emend. An eraser can help remove a layer of physical material. 
Alternatively, writers use white ink to restore the writing surface. Engelbart’s 
anonymous typist reports the feeling of freedom from such physical commit-
ment. She can simply backspace and start over. Words come easily because 
there are no penalties for being wrong. Virtual space seems limitless and 
endlessly pliable.
The feeling of material transcendence—the ephemeral quality of digital 
text—is tied directly to the underlying physical affordances of electromag-
netic storage. Screens expose the pliability of the medium, where erasure is 
effortless. Content can be addressed in memory and copied at the stroke 
of a key. The numbered paragraphs suggest a novel system for recollection. 
Data storage units become, in a sense, mental units. I am struck by the 
distinctly phenomenological quality of technical description: The editor does 
not merely resemble a page; it is, for the writer, a newly discovered way 
of thought that changes the writer’s relation not only to text but also to 
her own thoughts. The highly hierarchical and blocky paragraph structure, 
along with its repetitive refrain (“finding” and “I find that”), gives the prose 
a hypnotic drive forward. The cadence matches the reported experience of 
discovery.
The writer continues: 
1B4B “I find that
1B4B1  “being much more aware of
1B4B1A  “the relationships among the phrases of a
sentence,
1B4B1B  “among the statements of a list,
1B4B1C  “and among the various level and members
of a branch,
1B4B2  “being able
1B4B2A  “to view them in different ways,
1B4B2B “to rearrange them easily,
1B4B2C “to experiment with certain special
portrayals,

162	
RECONDITE SURFACES
1B4B2C1  “not available easily in unstructured
data
1B4B2C2  “or usable without the CRT display,
1B4B3  “and being aware that
1B4B3A  “I can (and am seeking to) develop still
further special conventions and computer aids
1B4B3B to make even more of this available and
easy,
1B4B4  “all tend to increase
1B4B4A  “my interest and experimentation
1B4B4B  “and my conviction that this is but a
peek at what is to come soon.88
The passages appear too contrived to be spontaneous. Despite their experi-
mental structure, these phenomenological reflections advance key elements 
of Engelbart’s research program, which aimed to develop new data structures 
in combination with new ways of displaying them. Yet I cannot help but be 
moved by the fluency of the prose and by the sheer audacity of the project.
Engelbart’s research into intellect augmentation created tools that aug-
ment research. In an image that evokes Baron Münchhausen pulling himself 
out of a swamp by his own bootstraps, Engelbart called his group’s meth-
odology “bootstrapping,” which involved the recursive strategy of “developing 
tools and techniques” to develop better tools and techniques.89 The “tangible 
product” of such an activity was a “constantly improving augmentation sys-
tem for use in developing and studying augmentation systems.”90
It was an appealing vision, but only so long as it remained recursive. 
Engelbart’s group benefited from creating their own tools and methods. 
Engelbart also hoped that his system could be “transferred—as a whole or 
by pieces of concept, principle and technique—to help others develop aug-
mentation systems for many other disciplines and activities.”91 Undoubtedly, 
Engelbart’s ideas about intellect augmentation have had a broad effect on 
knowledge work across disciplines. However, his vision loses the property of 
self-­determination when transferred outside the narrow confines of a labora-
tory actively engaged in the transformation of material contexts of their own 
knowledge production. Word processing today rarely involves communities 

	
RECONDITE SURFACES	
163
pulling themselves up by their own bootstraps: using tools and techniques of 
their own design. Augmentation enforced from without advances values and 
principles no longer comprehensible to the entity being augmented.
To bring his system into being, Engelbart convened a community that 
through recursive self-improvement could lift itself up toward a smarter, 
more efficient, more human way of doing research. The group crafted 
novel instruments for reading and writing. They engineered new program-
ming languages, compilers to interpret, and debuggers to troubleshoot them. 
The system shows care and love for the craft of writing. But there is also 
complexity. “This complexity has grown more than expected,” Engelbart wrote 
in conclusion.92 The feeling of transcendence that the anonymous typist de-
scribes in using the system engages a sophisticated mechanism. The mecha-
nism was not, however, the primary instrument of augmentation. Rather, it 
was the process of designing, making, and experimenting with tools that 
enhanced the intellect. Engelbart wrote, “The development of the Bootstrap 
Community must be coordinated with the capacity of our consoles, computer 
service, and file storage to support Community needs, and with our abil-
ity to integrate and coordinate people and activities.”93 In other words, the 
development of the community must form a feedback loop with software 
development. It involves training, practice, critical self-reflection, and thought-
ful deliberation.
Modern word processors enable us to drag and drop passages with 
unprecedented facility. We live in Engelbart’s world, to the extent that we 
use his lab’s complex systems daily and in a similar configuration: screens, 
keyboards, storage. Today’s computer users rarely form a self-determined 
bootstrapping community. The contemporary writer is bootstrapped passively 
to the prevailing vision of intellect augmentation. The very metaphor of boot-
strapping suggests the impossibility of using one’s bootstraps to pull others 
out of the Platonic cave. Engelbart’s liberatory research program therefore 
left another less lofty imprint on the everyday practice of modern intellectual 
life. Text, which before the advent of CRTs was readily apparent on the page 
in all its fullness, finally entered a complex system of executable code and 
inscrutable control instruction. The material lightness of textual being came 
at the price of legibility.
Short-lived screenless word processors of the early 1960s (e.g., the MT/ST) 
were difficult to operate, because typists had no means to visualize complex 
data structures on tape. Screens helped by representing document topography 

164	
RECONDITE SURFACES
visually, restoring a sense of apparent space to otherwise opaque media. The 
contemporary digital document resembles a page on-screen, but beneath, it 
is a jumble of bits, split into the various regions of internal memory. Screens 
simulate document unity by presenting holistic images of paragraphs, pages, 
and books. The simulation seems to follow the physics of paper and ink: One 
can turn pages, write in margins, and insert bookmarks. But the underlying 
inscription remains in fracture. Simulated text does not transcend matter. 
Screens merely conceal its material properties while recreating other, more 
seemingly transcendent ones. The act of continual dissemblage, one medium 
imitating the other, manufactures an ephemeral illusion by which pages fade 
in and out of sight, paper folds in improbable ways, and words glide effort-
lessly between registers of copy and paste.
In the rift between input and output, programmable media inject arbitrary 
intervals of time and space. Forces of capital and control occupy the void 
as the sign acquires new dimensions and capabilities for automation. Code 
and codex subsequently sink beneath the matte surface of a synthetic stor-
age medium. Screens purport to restore a sense of lost immediacy, of the 
kind felt on contact between pen nib and paper as the capillary action of 
cellulose conveys ink into its shallow conduit.
Screens are meant to open a window onto the unfamiliar physicalities 
of electromagnetic inscription. They obviate the need for multiple typings or 
printouts. Projected image should, in theory, correspond to its originating 
keystroke. The gap separating inputs and outputs appears to close. Crucially, 
the accord between archived inscription and its image cannot be guaranteed. 
The interval persists in practice and is actively contested. Deep and shallow 
inscriptions entwine. Laminate text appears weightless and ephemeral at some 
layers of the composite, allowing for rapid remediation. At other layers its af-
fordances are determined by its physics; at still other layers they are carefully 
constructed to resist movement or interpretation. Alienated from the base 
particulates of the word, we lose some of our basic interpretive capacities to 
interrogate embedded power structures.

Screens have this one major peculiarity: They refresh themselves multiple 
times per second. Even those shapes that appear to stand still continuously 
move at a speed beyond the threshold of human perception. We are vaguely 
aware of this movement; it is commonly visible when a screen appears on 
another screen, as it does in documentary films that show someone typing 
at a computer terminal or watching television. The difference in flicker rates 
between the projector showing the image and the projector in the frame is 
what produces the characteristic horizontal interference pattern. Such glitches 
give us a glimpse into the nature of the simulation.
Signs are no longer immutable, as though etched in stone or absorbed 
into wood pulp. Rather, we observe them in motion. The illusion of digital 
textuality is a consequence of the dynamic property of projection. To place 
texts on a screen is to bring them closer to the moving image. What does 
it mean to perceive seemingly static words through a fundamentally dynamic 
medium? What happens to literature that takes place on cinema screens?
In this chapter, I present a short meditation on the digital commonplaces 
in popular culture before focusing on two case studies, one from the mate-
rial history of telegraphy and the other from the history of modern display 
technology. Archival material—patents, blueprints, phenomenological accounts 
from the early history of word processing—are brought to bear on a debate 
concerning the nature of digital representation and perception in the phi-
losophy of aesthetics.
CHAPTER 5
> LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL

166	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
Digital. The adjective is used everywhere, but it is still poorly felt and 
under­stood. One intuits that it has something to do with numbers or fingers, 
yet something more is always at stake in its distinction from analog things. 
That something—a remainder, a trace—is my focus here. Several case studies 
will test our theoretical intuitions against the material realities of digital repre-
sentation. As always, I advance a materialist, formal, and historically grounded 
analysis. In this chapter I engage the elemental particulates of two fundamen-
tal media conduits: electric ether and liquid crystal. The first is a primary host 
for telegraphy; the second filters light on-screen.
I am also concerned here with a phenomenological description of human 
perception. My goal is to disrupt the naturalized congruity between organ 
and device. The quality of something being digital, I argue, might initially ap-
pear to be an intrinsic attribute of the medium. Under closer examination, it 
reveals itself as a political construct that lays claims on the body, structur-
ing the physical affordances of communication. The change of the medium 
from paper to pixel entails a series of corresponding changes in the mode 
of perception. The mode attunes viewers to its message. By “attunement” I 
mean something analogous to what Marcel Mauss has called the “techniques 
of the body”: the way in which we sit down to read, for example, the posi-
tion of head and hands, eye movement, and posture.1 Attunement structures 
apprehension. It answers the “how” of perception.
It would be wrong to conflate the medium with the message in this con-
text. At stake in the digital-analog divide is rather a reader’s ability to do 
something with texts. Throughout this chapter I use the word medium to nar-
rowly identify the physical conduits of representation.2 Thus the medium of 
painting is paint and canvas; the medium of books is paper and ink.
A change in medium often implies a corresponding change in the mode 
of perception. At some level of music production, for example, classical 
music may involve a family of brass or woodwind instruments, shaped to 
move and vibrate air. Brass, wood, wind, and air are media through which 
sound and vibration travel to reach a listener’s ear. The mode of music 
appreciation is listening, which involves a set of conventional cultural tech-
niques: the buying of tickets, dress code, and proper comportment at a 
concert. These modalities are not rigidly determined. For example, members 
of the deaf community may use other modes of listening, such as lean-
ing against sound-amplifying speakers or touching an instrument while it is 
being played.

LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL	
167
Yet at another stage of music production, classical music involves nota-
tion. A whole system of distribution is built around the printing and circula-
tion of sheet music. Modalities of reading sheet music involve other body 
postures, strategies of interpretation, and cultural and financial institutions.
We confuse the conversation when we conflate the modality of informa-
tion (music, image, text) with the physical channels of its transmission (air, 
liquid crystal, paper). Modality influences the message to a much greater 
extent than medium. In fact, in most communication systems, the medium 
is a relatively neutral conduit. One can use a violin to transmit a concerto 
or a secret message. The medium remains the same, whereas the mode 
of apprehension changes. To decode a secret violin message, listeners 
might attune themselves to a different pitch. Modality shapes apprehension, 
whereas media—air, wood, and strings—remain agnostic to the information 
being transmitted.
Initially, we must know how to perceive and which senses to use: when 
to look, touch, or listen. Modalities further contain the register of a message. 
Register identifies the signifying elements: I need to understand which of the 
sounds are a part of the composition and which are incidental. In more re-
fined arts, the register also governs bodily technique; for example, one must 
neither speak nor cough during a classical recital, one can look at but not 
touch artwork in a museum. The modality of communication ultimately de-
mands corporal compliance; it is a claim on the body.
Therein lies the starkest difference between analog and digital media. 
The shift from one to the other affects not the message but the mode 
of perception. It is as though someone has asked you to read a book or 
watch a film in a stranger’s armchair. It feels off in a way that is difficult 
to explain. The mode of digital perception similarly contorts the body into 
new and unfamiliar shapes, which often give discomfort. Something happens 
when digital media subsume their analog counterparts. An electronic device 
uses other sensualities, modes of signification, and ways of listening and 
understanding.
DIGITAL WAKE (MY TWO TERMINATORS)
What does the digital look like? It looks blue for one—not just any kind of 
blue, but a particularly cool shade of pure blue, which passes from dark to 
white to translucent with starburstlike overtones. An online image search for 
the word digital produces many sharp, sterile visuals of that kind. Abstract 

168	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
geometric patterns predominate in the first dozen or so search results: 
curved, three-dimensional tunnels or lines that resemble circuit boards. There 
are other things too, of course: cheap and expensive consumer items such 
as scanners, memory cards, circuit boards, and backup drives. But most of 
all there are cameras—digital cameras, which stand in stark contrast to tradi-
tional film photography. Few marketplace objects exhibit such a strong sense 
of the opposition between the digital and the analog as a consumer camera.
These search pages also contain the outdated clichés of yesterday’s 
digital detritus: digital clocks, purple lightning bolts, and the abstract chrome 
landscapes made widely available by graphic editing software in the 1990s. 
There are numbers. The preferred arrangement is in a torrential grid—the 
matrix—descending in the background, behind a generic humanoid form, also 
translucent. Or better yet: alphanumeric characters arranged to create a globe 
or a face. Ones and 0’s are best arranged as an unending string that runs 
at a slight angle on the z-axis and beyond the frame, foregrounding whatever 
object is meant to take on the digital as a property: the digital wake.
When we constrict the image search to the twenty-first century, we see 
these cool-blue images give way to a more varied palette: bright greens, 
yellows, and reds in retrogeometric pixelated shapes. Pixels take the place 
of numbers here—not the small, invisible pixels of contemporary computer 
screens, but the large and boxy pixels that by their pronounced boxiness 
flaunt their digital being. These images allude to a time when pixels really 
did stand out as individual units, when technology was not refined enough to 
produce the illusion of visual continuity. This faux low-fidelity aesthetic likely 
appeals to the romantic nostalgia many feel for the early days of comput-
ing, and yet it also asserts its independence from that history. No longer 
will the digital serve to emulate reality or be judged merely by its degree of 
lifelike verisimilitude. The blocky world of Markus Persson’s Minecraft (2011) 
stands in antithesis to the magical realism of Cyan’s Myst (1993), the best-
selling graphic-adventure PC game of the twentieth century. Whereas critics 
lauded Myst for its moody and atmospheric photorealistic environments, they 
embraced Minecraft for its playful low-bit, low-fidelity aesthetic of gaming 
consoles from the 1980s. The pseudo-pixelated world of Minecraft encour-
ages its inhabitants to experiment with deconstruction, producing cuboid 
landscapes that foreground discontinuity of form and surface.
Digital iconography also works in another direction, by approaching and 
challenging the perceived continuity of the analog world. Liquid-metal Photo­

	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL	
169
shop font effects are supplanted by hyperrealistic renderings of fire, smoke, 
and water—fluid elements that are difficult to render digitally, especially in 
movement. Digital alchemy approaches the boundaries of technological pos-
sibility, but, absent the constraints of realism, it pushes past reality, past 
nature, and past mere fidelity to the natural world. A real-world explosion 
caught on film looks cheap in comparison to its cinematic “special effects” 
simulacrum. A blazing corporate logo rendered digitally would lose much of 
its appeal if it were produced by literally lighting a logograph on fire. The 
burning digital logograph does not just say, “We are hot!” or “We are on 
fire!” (that would be too naive); it says that our fire is better than fire, more 
vivid and more lifelike. The digital fire is the ideal Platonic image of fire, an 
image that all actual fires should emulate.
I am evoking these commonplaces to get at the conflicting popular intu-
itions about “the digital” as something at once discrete, angular, and there-
fore reductive and deterministic but also shiny, smooth, perfect, and liquid in 
a way that drowns out or transcends everything susceptible to time, every-
thing that has a distinct shape and anatomy. Consider the transition between 
The Terminator and Terminator 2. In the former film, the bad robot that sets 
out to destroy humanity is an animatronic mechanism. In the latter, it is an 
amorphous puddle of mercury that makes the original mechanical Arnold 
seem like a friend and savior.3 The original robot terminates with shotguns 
and tire irons; the second morphs into human shapes and pours itself inside, 
threatening life from within.
Like the terminators of yesteryear, digital sprites and bogeymen have lost 
their hold over popular imagination. Digital photography, digital clocks, and 
digital humanities already ring archaic in their futuristic ambition, going the 
way of e- or i- anything, the way of retrosuffixes such as -bot, -mat, -lux, 
and -tron. The digital dissolves into the everyday as all clocks, all books, all 
texts, in short, all human activity passes through some form of digital being.4 
My aim here and throughout has been to understand what is meant by its 
evocation—to come to terms, to make visible, to denature, and to make it 
appear strange again.
Digital media, digital humanities, digital divides—these constructions share 
a word that suggests entirely differing qualities depending on the context. 
In some cases digitality stands in opposition to a notion of naturally ana-
log human experience. Digital media reduce fuzzy and indeterminate human 
experience to something binary, discrete, and deterministic. In his influential 

170	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
monograph The Cultural Logic of Computation David Golumbia insists that 
“languages are not codes.” For Golumbia, human language practice therefore 
should not be reduced to a “single correct interpretation” or “at the abso-
lute limit, a determinate number of discrete interpretations”:5 “To submit a 
phenomenon to computation is to striate otherwise-smooth details, analog 
details.”6 Following Deleuze, Golumbia conceives of “striated space” in op-
position to “smooth” and “analog” spaces, such as brains, society, politics, 
language, and baseball.7 For Golumbia, striated and digital phenomena fall 
under suspicion because “our society is already oriented towards binarisms, 
hierarchy, and instrumental rationality.”8 In this view, human experience is 
continuous and analog. The digital threatens it by breaking it apart into 
individual and, by implication, computable units.
In his essay against digital humanities, Stephen Marche similarly worries 
about the digitization of human experience, but for the opposite reason. 
Smoothness, in his view, is a property of the machine.
Meaning is mushy. Meaning falls apart. Meaning is often ugly, stewed out of 
weakness and failure. It is as human as the body, full of crevices and prey 
to diseases. It requires courage and a certain comfort with impurity to live 
with. Retreat from the smoothness of technology is not an available option, 
even if it were desirable. The disbanding of the papers has already occurred, 
a splendid fluttering of the world’s texts to the winds. We will have to gather 
them all together somehow. But the possibility of a complete, instantly ac-
cessible, professionally verified and explicated, free global library is more 
than just a dream. Through the perfection of our smooth machines, we 
will soon be able to read anything, anywhere, at any time. Insight remains 
handmade.9
In this worldview, digital artifacts fall under suspicion for smoothing out dif-
ferences and thereby for betraying some essential and wonderfully messy 
property of being human.
Stanley Fish, another prominent critic of the digital humanities, writes in 
a similar vein. For Fish, the traditional humanities exist within the “linear, 
temporal medium in the context of which knowledge is discrete, partial and 
situated—knowledge at this time and this place experienced by this limited 
being.” By contrast, the digital humanities imagine a “steady yet dynamic 
state where there is movement and change, but no center, no beginning and 

	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL	
171
end, just all middle.”10 The digital vision is meant to deliver us from linear-
ity and from time itself. Indeed, the digital fails because it does not offer 
enough of a difference. He writes:
Delivered from linearity, from time-bound, sharply delineated meanings, from 
mortality, from death, everyone, no longer a one, will revel in and participate 
in the universal dance, a “mystical dance” of “mazes intricate, / Eccentric, 
intervolved, yet regular / Then most when most irregular they seem, / And in 
their motions harmony divine / So smooths her charming tones, that God’s 
own ear / Listens delighted. (John Milton, “Paradise Lost,” V, 620, 622–627)11
Whether too discrete or too continuous, critics agree on the danger of 
digitization. Digital being follows determinism and mechanization as another 
opponent to humanism. Whether it is Plato discussing the role of writing in 
Phaedrus or Fish discussing the development of digital humanities through 
Milton, critics worry that emergent modes of representation will fail to weave 
the human experience into their fabric. New media are often depicted as 
departing from some previously constructed category of the human, with one 
audience applauding its transhuman potential for liberation and the other 
lamenting its antihuman potential for demise and destruction. A conversa-
tion about media modalities, unlike any other, is quick to slide into ethics, 
aesthetics, politics.12
Because apprehension is grounded in the physical capabilities of human 
perception, new media affect the very notion of what it means to be human. 
I am interested first and foremost in the challenge that digital media pose to 
humanity as a determined, a priori category.13 The repeated contradictions in 
debates around digital media expose a historically contingent anxiety. Both 
orthodoxies of humanism and the futuristic ambition of posthumanism are 
displaced onto the same digital-analog spectrum. However, the material con-
ditions of media production do not allow for social constructivism unmoored 
from the senses. Technology evolves along the lines of human perception. 
For example, the illusion of continuity disappears when screen projection flick-
ers much slower than 60 frames per second. A historical account of digital 
media must therefore acknowledge both their contingent and their essential 
characteristics.14
In what follows I offer two case studies that challenge commonly ex-
pressed intuitions about digital media. They show that whatever is meant by 

172	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
the digital-analog distinction is tied not to some essential properties of a me-
dium but to its affordances. A text that can be copied and preserved is more 
digital, in a sense, than one limited in its circulation, whether by nature or 
design. A philosophical consideration of the terms digital and analog informs 
the media archaeology that follows.
SPIRITUAL TELEGRAPH
The contemporary attempt to fix human experience on the spectrum between 
discrete and continuous representation echoes a similar conversation that 
occurred at the turn of the twentieth century. The parallels suggest that our 
present belief in the essentialism of corporeal technique (e.g., writing by hand) 
in fact constitutes an arbitrary ideal of the human.
Consider the historical connection between telegraphy and spiritualism. 
Before the standardization of telegraph alphabets, multiple ways of trans-
lating language into electric signal competed for their share of the rapidly 
growing telecommunications market. A well-publicized feud emerged between 
proponents of direct current (DC) and alternating current (AC) systems. A 
few technical details are necessary to understand how an argument about 
engineering design gained metaphysical significance.
Telegraph systems based on DC designs converted electric current flow 
into dashes and the absence of current into dots.15 Systems based on AC 
designs converted Morse code (and other encoding systems) into pulses of 
alternating positive and negative current, where positive current could stand 
for dashes and negative current for dots. Direct-current designs preferred 
the use of the sawtooth or square periodic waveforms to represent binary 
states. The signal was either on or off with nothing in-between. By contrast, 
proponents of AC designs often argued for the use of the rounder sinusoidal 
signal, which covered a more organic range of amplitudes. The sinusoidal 
wave could be modulated into a multitude of intermediary states.16 Instead 
of being just on or off, points of current intensity could be measured along 
the curve of the sine wave. Consequently, AC designs tended toward the 
transmission of continuous quantities, such as images and cursive handwrit-
ing. The sinusoidal curve itself resembled natural, organic shapes, like hand-
writing. The alternating current suggested a visual analogy between the thing 
being transmitted (picture or text) and the electric signal.
The Pollak-Virag telegraph, which the media theorist Bernhard Siegert 
mentions briefly in his essay on cacography, was one such device.17 A closer 

	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL	
173
look reveals the reductive idea implicit in the digital-analog distinction. The 
Pollak-Virag telegraph purported to transmit handwritten curves, which were, 
despite appearances, broken down into its discrete constituent components 
in transit. The original Pollak-Virag machine patented in 1900 sent regular 
Morse encoding by means of alternating current of two different polarities 
and two different strengths, for a total of four types of signals.18 Other than 
the irregular signal shape and the use of alternating current, Pollak-Virag 
encoding differed little from single-Morse systems. By 1901, the authors 
were issued an American patent for the “Writing Telegraph,” which built on 
their previous design in an interesting way. Rather than using a wave in four 
steps, Pollak and Virag proposed an “automatic transmitter . . . capable of 
sending current impulses over the line which correspond to the direction and 
the size of a single letter element.”19 In other words, they wanted to bend 
the sinusoidal wave to correspond roughly to the shape of a letter. In this 
way, the letter s, to pick an easy example, could be transmitted by means 
of an s-shaped wave (Figure 5.1).
Pollak-Virag design aimed to constitute an electric alphabet analogous to 
cursive writing: “to trace in a substantially continuous unbroken outline the 
written letters composing the matter transmitted.”20 To achieve this, the engi-
neers broke cursive script down into distinct vertical and horizontal elements. 
Pollak-Virag encoding thus represented a continuous quality (cursive script) 
FIGURE 5.1. Illustration from Pollak and Virag’s patent for the “Writing Telegraph” showing the 
reproduction of Gothic characters (top) and the transmission strip with suitable perforations 
for influencing the receiver (bottom). The cursive script is represented by the means of 
vertical and horizontal perforations. Made up of discrete atomic elements, the system is 
not as “analog” as it first appears to be. Source: Anton Pollak and Josef Virag, “Writing-
Telegraph,” Patent US675495 A, filed June 28, 1900, issued June 4, 1901, sheet 3.

174	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
through discrete atomic elements, as punches that moved the writing stylus 
in cardinal directions (up, down, left, or right). It was not, in other words, a 
purely analog device. The analogy was rather achieved through a process 
of discrete analytic atomization of script on ticker tape and its subsequent 
reconstitution into a continuous shape. The cardinal directions formed an 
intermediate discrete description of smooth handwriting curves. Pollak and 
Virag believed that their sine-wave telegraph had the distinct advantage of 
transmitting messages “recorded in ordinary written or script characters.” In 
the language of the patent, other forms of “facsimile” telegraph transmitted 
merely the “conventional form” of the letter, not the letter itself, whereas 
the Pollak-Virag system was “non-autographic.”21 The autographic telegraph 
claimed to preserve the particularity of the human hand, an individual’s 
signature. It was the humane telegraph in the sense that it preserved the 
human trace.
The metaphysics accompanying telegraph communication at the time 
were often concerned with the possibility of human erasure in communica-
tion. Notions of material discreteness and continuity represented not mere 
physical attributes of encoding or electricity but higher-order cultural and 
even ethical or theological categories. Beneath the technical conversations 
about the advantages of discrete or continuous electric signal lay a philo-
sophical concern with the fundamental makeup of the universe itself.
Henri Bergson, for example, wrote about the “real whole of the universe,” 
which constituted an “indivisible continuity.”22 In his thought, science, tech-
nology, and other “artificial systems” imposed discrete “partial views” on the 
whole.23 Bergson wrote that these partial views resembled the operation of 
the cinematograph, which divides continuous motion into distinct frames. By 
running the frames through a projecting apparatus, telegraphs reconstituted 
“the individuality of each particular movement”: “Such is the contrivance of 
the cinematograph. And such is also that of our knowledge.”24 The intel-
lect, in this view, continually partitioned undifferentiated reality into discrete 
states of time and space.25 But these states were virtually, not actually, 
discrete. According to Bergson, the evolution of life proceeded “rather like 
a shell,” which “bursts into fragments,” which are themselves again shells.26 
The new differentiated unit, a part of the indivisible universe, contained the 
kernel of the whole. It did not split from but subsumed the totality.
In Bergson’s view of the universe, the brain and the central nervous 
system act as a “central telephonic exchange,” which communicates be-

	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL	
175
tween the extrinsic continuous world and the intrinsic “memory-shot[s]” of 
our perception.27 The mind receives images of the world that it compares 
with existing stored images to produce a new composite image that is once 
again stored into memory. Bergson thus denied the “flashlight” model of 
perception. The mind, according to him, did not shine a light to bring atten-
tion to this or that hidden feature of the world: “Metaphor for metaphor, we 
would rather compare the elementary work of attention to that of the tele-
graph clerk who, on receipt of an important dispatch, sends it back again, 
word for word, in order to check its accuracy.”28 The object in the world was 
therefore neither an independent thing nor purely a product of the mind. By 
this telegraphic model of perception, Bergson avoided both fully relativistic 
and fully essentialist accounts of perception.
To agree with Bergson is to imagine the mind as a cinematographic fram-
ing device. It is to accept that the world is a priori continuous in nature. In a 
damning evaluation of Bergson’s philosophy, Bertrand Russell noted that such 
assumptions were merely poetic images, not subject to verification.29 They 
hold the truth of poetry, not physics or philosophy, Russell wrote. To this 
day, it is difficult to find scientific consensus on such topics as the digital 
makeup of the physical world or the continuity of consciousness. There was 
certainly no consensus on the matter at the time. The nature of telegraphy 
itself was disputed. The property of being electric, similar to digitality today, 
was seen as both more smooth and more discrete than human experience.
Consider the following passages from Samuel Brittan’s Swedenborg-­
inspired Spiritual Telegraph in 1854, in which an anonymous author ex-
pounds a theological media theory that hinges on what he or she assumes 
to be the ultimately discrete nature of the universe:30 “Whenever two per-
sons are brought into sympathetic relations, either by corporeal contact or 
through those refined media which pervade the Universe and serve as the 
airy vehicles of thought, they mutually feel the presence of each other.”31 In 
this relationship “the mind which is gifted with the greater degree of activ-
ity and power” at once attains a hierarchical relation to the lesser intellect, 
becoming “the proximate cause and fountain of inspiration to the other.”32 
God naturally occupies the highest point of such a pyramid: “From sources 
superior to ourselves, the very elements of life and thought flow into us, and 
every living thing, according to its nature and discrete degree, derives a kind 
of inspiration from that which is above.”33 In other words, the discrete degree 
must be preserved, because without it the hierarchy would lose meaning. To 

176	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
facilitate the “transmission of impressions,” “the recipient” of the vital flow 
“must be willing to receive instruction, and assume the passive or negative 
relation of a learner.” Without discreteness and without hierarchy he or she 
will resist “the infusion of foreign impressions and Divine ideas.”34
In this essentially telegraphic model of the universe, to deny the stepwise 
hierarchy of refined media is to close oneself off from the transmission of 
impressions in a communication act (consisting of a contact and the ex-
change of signifying “thought vehicles”) between a “source superior” and the 
receiver of instructions, who are placed in a binary and opposing relation 
(negative but without resistance) to the idea of the divine.
Unlike Golumbia and Fish today, telegraph spiritualists associated deter-
minism with continuity, not discreteness. Witness George Henry Dole writing 
in his Philosophy of Creation in 1906:
Scientists have prosecuted research on the plane of continuous degrees of 
the ultimates, and they have thereby failed to penetrate to interior things of 
discrete degree [emphasis mine]. Consequently they derive life as not from 
the Lord, but from nature, of which they have no other idea than that it is 
something mechanical.35
Telegraph spiritualists shunned continuity because it confused the sacred 
and the profane. They believed that a truly Christian order would remain 
digital in essence. To claim otherwise would be to propagate the Gnostic 
heresy, by which the divine and the profane were one.36
Whereas Bergson believed that telegraphy translated continuous analog 
experience into discrete digital snapshots, the Swedenborgian mystic saw it 
as a model of communication that maintained fidelity to the hidden order 
of a well-differentiated and fundamentally discrete universe. Their intuitions 
were diametrically opposed. Arguing against sine-wave telegraphy in 1905, 
Donald Murray, whose alphabet would become the basis for modern char-
acter encodings (ASCII and UTF-8), displayed a similar bias against analog 
quantities, which, for him, could encode complex human activity, like writing 
or dance. He wrote: 
About ten years ago there was a brisk discussion in some of the electrical 
journals in regard to the advantages of the simple harmonic curve or sine 
wave for the transmission of power by the alternating current. . . . If Smith 

	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL	
177
wants to make Jones spin round like a dancing dervish, the best way might 
be for Smith to transmit sine waves . . . but in practice, Smith always wants 
to make Jones perform an excessively complicated and irregular series of 
motions, and for this purpose it is essential to transmit similar motions 
by introducing upper harmonics in a fragmentary, non-periodic, and very 
irregular way.37
Murray, again contrary to Bergson, assumed that human experience was dis-
crete at its core. For him, the regular and continuous sine wave fell under 
metaphysical suspicion, just as the discrete nature of computation would 
fall under suspicion for such contemporary critics as Golumbia and Fish. In 
Murray’s view, human experience was analogous to the sawtooth wave: frag-
mentary, nonperiodic, and irregular. By contrast, the sine wave had the exotic 
and orientalist characteristics of being cyclical, repetitive, and continuous. 
The shape of the square wave more closely resembled Murray’s own norma-
tive vision of human culture.38
The appeal to a normative model of human experience in this context 
belies a kind of a technological essentialism, reductive of both technology 
and human nature. Neither can be definitively reduced to universal notions of 
discrete or continuous qualities. Under close examination, human perception—
cognition, consciousness, existence—involves a complex synthesis of analog 
and digital processes. Telegraphs and computers also function in the digital 
mode at some layers of the system and in the analog mode at others. The 
distinction between digital and analog, as I continue to challenge it in this 
chapter, comes under increasing doubt.
It is tempting to think of the telegraph as a digital apparatus, created 
to convert analog input into electric signal.39 The innards of the Pollak-Virag 
telegraph, to return to our example, reveal complex dynamics that involve 
long chains of transcoding and transmediation that oscillate between dis-
crete and continuous qualities. To be transmitted, a signal travels from bio-
logical brain wetware, onto ink and paper, to the mechanical action of cogs 
and wheels, and finally, through copper wire by means of an electric signal. 
In the process, language, already a discrete and portable representation of 
thought, undergoes a number of further material-phase transformations. In 
the writing telegraph this involves what I have been calling, borrowing from 
the language of concrete poetry, inter- or transmediation: from notebook to 
paper tape to the movement of an electromagnetic vibrator to the recording 

178	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
mirror galvanometer into the copper wire to the receiving vibrator and into 
the machinations of the printing apparatus that once again produce ink and 
alphabet.40 This entire system further participates in the complexities of the 
human neurological apparatus, involving haptic, visual, and cognitive feed-
back. Neither wholly digital nor wholly analog, the signal undergoes multiple 
encoding and phase changes in transmission.
By “encoding,” if we could pause again to define the terms, I mean a 
controlled mode of representation. Representation in its unrestrained form 
(as in “pictorial representation”) differs from encoding in the size of its 
vocabulary. Painting and other forms of uninhibited representational con-
ventions offer limitless expressive possibilities. The language of painting, we 
might say, is infinite. Encoding, by contrast, reduces the universe of expres-
sive possibilities to a limited number of salient codes, an alphabet. These 
codes obey formal rules of composition, a grammar. Although the expres-
sive potential of written language is limitless in some combinatorial sense 
of the word, language and other codes can break, that is, be reduced to 
nonsense, in a way that painting strictly cannot. An artificial computer lan-
guage constrains the vocabulary even further. Finally, contrast the infinitude 
of possible brush strokes with the hundred or so “reserved words” available 
to a programmer.
Media, modes, and encodings are logically related in nonobvious ways. 
Changes in the media conduit (e.g., from sound, wire, or paper) necessi-
tate the corresponding modal change. Consider a Morse code transmission 
coaxed out of a violin, written on paper, or transmitted by wire. In each 
case, the encoding remains formally the same: dots and dashes. But the 
dots and dashes are expressed alternatively in ink, as sound waves, and as 
electric charge. The encoding changes when human speech is transferred 
into Morse code. In reading and playing music, a musician furthermore trans-
forms musical notation (a controlled, paper-bound vocabulary) into sound 
waves, which are unlimited in their expressive potential.
Blueprints for the writing telegraph reveal a device that mixes discrete 
and continuous modes of representation through multiple acts of transcoding 
and transmediation. Digitality defined by those terms is not a helpful reduc-
tion. More precisely, the telegraph is a device that pushes language, which 
is normally bound to brains (as thought), air (as speech), or paper (as a 
writing system), through metal wire.41 To fit into the wire, a thought changes 
its conduit media. It undergoes a number of modal transformations in the 

LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL	
179
process: from the hexagonal grid patterns at regions of cortical anatomy, to 
ripplelike sound waves, to rectangular sentences and paragraphs arranged 
spatially on paper, to the chain of charged electrons arranged serially along 
the length of a wire. An arrangement of cells changes into an arrangement 
of air molecules, ink, and copper, each entailing its own system of encoding 
and mechanisms of storage, retrieval, and transmission. The affordances of 
the medium change with the conduit. A sound wave dissipates momentarily. 
Ink dries and endures. The electric signal travels at the speed of light.
If I imagine, for a moment, human bodies as a kind of a medium and 
persistent data structure—an arrangement of elements of a given time signa-
ture and shape—I could say that they outlast the sound wave but not paper, 
that they move at a pace slower than light, that they exhibit more spatial 
continuity than Morse code, that they are less ordered and less heteroge-
neous on a microscopic scale than copper or liquid crystal. The modalities 
of human media intersect with technology along multiple dimensions, in parts 
congruent to and in other parts divergent from books, computers, screens, 
and telegraphs.
SOAP OPERA EFFECT
Consider another case study at the human–machine, digital–analog divide. 
Modern televisions began shipping with a feature called motion-compensated 
frame interpolation (MCFI) in 2010. It caused some viewers to report what 
was dubbed the soap opera effect. Everything looks cheap to a viewer ex-
periencing the soap opera effect. Even critically acclaimed footage, featuring 
top acting talent and expensive camera work, looks unnatural, as though 
produced on home video. I am almost always able to recognize the symp-
toms. Under the MCFI effect, a shot’s dynamics look somehow fabricated. 
The actors, even in films that I know and love, appear to be faking it. Their 
acting seems forced and over the top. I notice their makeup and props. It 
is like watching bad silent cinema of the kind that prevents the suspension 
of disbelief and immersion. I am no longer susceptible to the conventions of 
the medium.
MCFI was developed to correct the motion blur that occurs on flat-
panel liquid crystal displays (LCDs). LCDs work by passing light through a 
liquid crystal medium that is sandwiched between two polarized light filters 
positioned at 90 degrees to one another. As light enters through one side, 
it twists, following the slightly curved molecular structure of the crystal, 

180	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
­allowing the beam to rotate and pass through both filters. The structure 
unwinds when it receives electric current, which effectively blocks light from 
passing through the medium (Figure 5.2). The gates close, so to speak, as 
the second filter prevents light from exiting. By these means, a series of 
small pinholelike pixels can be turned on and off to create shapes, letters, 
and images on the screen.42
In addition to filtering light, modern displays also flicker at a precisely 
calibrated rate. What we observe as a static image on screen is in reality 
a highly dynamic projection. Traditional film projectors advance through 24 
frames every second. The film camera’s shutter similarly moves up and down 
24 times per second, capturing a static snapshot at each turn. Projectors 
and cameras therefore act in unison to produce the illusion of time that 
feels objectively real to the viewer.
Furthermore, a projector’s light flickers 2 or 3 times per frame, giving it 
a refresh rate of 48–72 cycles per second (Hertz; Hz), which produces the 
effect of continuous motion. Without this strobe effect, under continuous 
light, the succession of frames would appear as a blurry streak of undif-
ferentiated images.
An image persists in the human visual field for about 16 milliseconds after 
the stimulus passes, giving humans the temporal resolution of about 60 im-
ages per second. Consequently, an average person reaches the state of “criti-
cal flicker fusion,” in which the strobe light becomes unnoticeable, at refresh 
rates equal to or greater than 60 Hz. At the limits of flicker fusion, the image 
begins to persist through the gaps between frames, creating the appearance 
of continuous motion.43 Below the threshold of flicker fusion the viewer would 
notice the strobe effect, which hinders viewing.
FIGURE 5.2. Digital text moves even as it appears to stand still. Textual laminates are 
suspended in liquid crystal. Illustration from Land’s patent showing a method for controlling 
the passage of light through a material medium. Source: Edwin Land, “Light Valve,” Patent 
US1963496 A, filed January 16, 1933, issued June 19, 1934, sheet 1.

	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL	
181
LCDs mimic the action of an analog projector by refreshing the screen 
at intervals between 60 Hz and 120 Hz. This happens even when the image 
is wholly static, such as the page of an electronic book.
To complicate matters, humans are more sensitive to rapid motion at the 
periphery of vision, in a mechanism that likely evolved to detect predatory 
threats.44 As we move closer to our screens (e.g., when sitting in front of a 
computer monitor), more of the image enters our field of peripheral vision, 
making us more sensitive to screen flicker. When sitting close to a screen, 
flicker can become more noticeable because more of the moving image enters 
the sensitive area of peripheral vision adept at perceiving rapid movement.
Furthermore, being closer to a screen increases the angular velocity of 
any depicted moving object. When viewed from afar, a movement of several 
inches on-screen corresponds to a few degrees’ change in the sight angles 
and a few millimeters of iris movement. When viewed up close, the same 
several inches on-screen correspond to a much larger angle, forcing the iris 
to move farther laterally.
The human visual system is particularly adept at tracking smooth hori-
zontal movement. The brain anticipates the perceived trajectory of a laterally 
moving object and stabilizes the retinal image appropriately while keeping it 
at the center of the fovea in what is called smooth-pursuit lateral eye move-
ment.45 To put it simply, we are good at tracking things that move horizon-
tally—an antelope running across the plains, for example. Even though our 
brain cannot capture such movement smoothly, it fills in the gaps to create 
the illusion of smooth movement sideways. This makes us good at anticipat-
ing the trajectory of laterally moving objects, another likely adaptation that 
favors self-defense and hunting. But beyond some threshold, and particularly 
when things move rapidly up and down, the motion begins to appear fitful. 
Think of tracking a fly, for example, which seems to skip from one place to 
another as our visual system struggles to process its erratic trajectories at 
threshold-crossing speeds.
The “sample and hold” nature of LCDs frustrates the cognitive assump-
tion of smooth movement. The brain assumes that moving objects move 
smoothly. But on-screen the object’s anticipated location does not always 
correspond to its actual trajectory, because the motion of a represented 
­object-image in the frame does not follow the anticipated physics of a simi-
larly sized real-world object. The image moves inches, whereas our brain 
tells us it should move yards. Trajectories of moving objects on-screen are 

182	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
further subject to the quirks of technology used to edit and record video. 
Because of the flicker, the movement is actually intermittent; it is missing 
frames. The moving object appears at discrete stationary locations punctu-
ated by gaps in on-screen movement. This mismatch between what is ex-
pected and what is perceived appears to the eye as blur. Shapes become 
fuzzy in motion under certain unfavorable viewing conditions.46 To complicate 
matters, the on-off phase transitions of the liquid crystal medium are not 
instantaneous. The individual pixel fades instead of vanishing at once, leav-
ing a physical (and not merely a perceptual) trail of not quite transitioned 
pixels in the wake of object movement.47 Digital television runs into analog 
limitations of the liquid crystal medium.
To put all these factors together: We observe film shot at 24 frames per 
second on LCD screens that redraw the screen 60–120 times per ­second. 
The disparity between the low sampling rate of traditional film and the 
high sampling rate of modern monitors confounds human perception, which 
evolved to process motion in a particular way. The liquid crystal is also not 
a perfectly digital medium. It exhibits analog trailing artifacts. Moreover, we 
increasingly watch television on small hand-held devices, close to our field 
of vision. The combination of these factors leads to motion blur, an effect 
that has made early LCDs unsuitable for home entertainment.
To compensate for motion blur, LCD manufacturers introduced MCFI 
technology, by which the television itself inserts artificially computed frames 
in-between the images of original stock footage. Like a brain, the algorithm 
anticipates movement and fills in missing information. First, it averages the 
position of a moving object between two frames, then it creates an approxi-
mation of the object’s computed position, and finally it inserts the computed 
frame into the action. The extra frames should, in theory, make the motion 
appear more natural, filling in the gaps that confuse the brain. Unfortunately 
for the viewer, the effectively higher sample rates carry a major unintended 
side effect. Most viewers associate sampling rates of 40 Hz and above with 
daytime soap operas, which were, for a time, shot on lower quality (but 
more modern) video equipment, as opposed to expensive legacy film equip-
ment used by the big-budget film industry.
Film is expensive because film cameras work by fixing the image onto the 
medium through a photochemical process. Like traditional film photography, 
raw footage must be developed and processed properly before it can be used 
for editing, playback, and distribution. By contrast, video and more ­modern 

	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL	
183
digital recorders transform light into fluctuations of the electromagnetic field, 
storing the results on tape or solid-state storage. The transducer (tape head) 
reads and writes directly from and to tape, making magnetic storage sig-
nificantly more compact and less expensive than film, because it does not 
require chemical processing for playback.48
Crucially for our story, video recorders operate at 60 frames per second, 
a recording resolution that together with the distinctive video color profile 
and audio aberration signatures gives rise to what viewers perceive as that 
“cheap video” “soap opera” look. By inserting extra frames into the moving 
image, modern televisions in effect alter the apparently expensive, discrete, 
slow film format to match its faster, more continuous, and cheaper video al-
ternative. The net objective improvement in sampling degrades the perceived 
subjective quality of the original. The motion may be smoother, but it looks 
unnatural, in that it differs subtly from acculturated practice. MCFI gives the 
eye too much detail. Minutiae of costume and makeup, previously hidden by 
the low sampling quality of film, become more readily apparent. An actor’s 
micromovements and expressions, not usually perceptible to the eye, come 
to the fore and highlight the contrivance of the proceedings. The extrapo-
lated detail breaks the spell of acting.49
The soap opera effect undercuts some of our most ingrained intuitions 
about perceptual phenomena on the digital-analog spectrum.
First, it challenges the easy equivalence between digital and discrete 
properties of the medium so often found in critical literature. According to 
accepted intuitions, film (the more discrete format of representation) more 
closely approaches the analog (continuous) nature of observed phenomenon, 
despite being the more fragmentary medium. Under closer examination, 
however, it reveals itself to be the more digital medium (in some respects) 
than digital video, if we take “digital” to mean “discrete” and “differentiated” 
sampling of reality. The incongruity between theory and practice points to a 
confusion in terms.
Second, it seems that the material properties of the medium involved 
in our understanding of digital and analog formats are also implicated in 
higher-level functions of aesthetic judgment. Perception of quality in a given 
recorded performance drifts with the vagaries of encoding. Good acting in-
explicably falls apart with the introduction of extra frames. This should worry 
the critic unfamiliar with artifacts of digital conversion. Even an introductory 
examination of the soap opera effect reveals sensory glitches and ­distortions 

184	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
that affect the coupling between organ (sight) and device. The illusion 
of cinematic motion takes advantage of the idiosyncratic particularities of 
human vision. A more perfected visual apparatus would perceive flicker at 
much higher rates and have no persistent visual trail artifacts. The socially 
constructed aesthetic object is shown to contain physiologically determined 
qualities, undermining the strong version of social constructivism.50 Screens, 
at the viewing end of most digital media—film and text—operate at the 
nexus of physiology and culture.
Finally, where theory often places artificial digital discreteness in opposi-
tion to natural analog continuity, a thick description of our perceptual ap-
paratus reveals a complex patchwork of fragmentary cognitive mechanisms, 
already digital and discrete in their operation. The human-screen coupling 
is deeply heterogeneous throughout. At some level of analysis, gaps in the 
encoding format relate to gaps in human visual processing. Neither can be 
said to represent reality with perfect fidelity. Instead, brains, cameras, and 
screens stitch together landscapes from unevenly sampled visual topogra-
phies, achieving a measure of arbitrary synchronicity in viewing.
Critical literature often conflates the discrete nature of digital represen-
tation with human debasement, following the logic by which the perceived 
material impoverishment in one sphere leads to the implied spiritual impover-
ishment in the other. The sentiment is everywhere in the popular press and 
has deep intellectual roots in the history of thinking about technology. Phi-
losophers of technology from Heidegger to Kittler advance a powerful herme-
neutics of suspicion toward mechanization, digitization, and the subsequent 
computability of human experience. To take that tradition seriously is to 
direct hermeneutic suspicion to aspects of digital being that have meaningful 
sociopolitical consequences. If, as the case of motion blur suggests, human 
experience is already and always born digital (i.e., it is discrete and differ-
entiated throughout), then we must find ways of advancing critique along 
theoretical distinctions that better capture the instrumental reality of media 
practice. Nostalgia for analog oneness and continuity should itself fall under 
the critical gaze, examined alongside media marketing slogans that advertise 
gapless playback and lossless file formats. To long for the analog is to long 
for the experience of oneness, which was never attainable in the first place.
Indeed, it appears that the whole matter of digital representation rests on 
arbitrary and contingent assumptions. If language and literature are already 
digital and discrete systems of representation, why should it bother us when 

LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL	
185
it is otherwise digitized or transcoded into other controlled vocabularies? 
The Latin letter already comprises an atomic and indivisible unit. When it is 
further broken down into pixels, the smallest indivisible units on screen, it 
undergoes only a subtle ontological change. Just as one learns to translate 
an alphabet’s arbitrary shape into distinct sounds, one can learn to translate 
arbitrary digits into letters and back into sounds and thoughts. The language 
of machines is merely another language. 
Neither do media evolve independently of human sensory constraint. Hu-
mans cannot perceive the ultraviolet spectrum, for example. Nor would it 
be practical to create books that are so heavy as to prevent readers from 
turning their pages. Media modalities are tuned to average human capabili-
ties, which mature in their socially constructed media modal environments.51 
Sensory constraints shape media, just as media constraints shape perception.
WE HAVE ALWAYS BEEN DIGITAL
A thick description of the human–machine interface at the point of contact 
exposes our frequent misunderstanding of the term digital. What does it 
mean, for example, to digitize film, if it is already a digital medium? What 
properties are being brought forth through digitization if the digital cannot 
simply be equated with discreteness? We can now revisit our initial intuitions 
in light of the physics of digital apprehension.
The conversation about digital media often begins with the difference 
between discrete and continuous quantities.52 For example, in a popular book 
about what a “well-informed person should know about computers,” Brian 
Kernighan describes analog quantities as those conveying “the idea of values 
that change smoothly as something else changes.”53 Much of the world is 
analog, Kernighan explains. A water tap, a pen, or a car steering wheel are 
all examples of analog interfaces. For example, when riding a bicycle, turning 
the handlebars one way results in a corresponding motion of the machine. 
This motion is smooth. Compare that with the action of a light switch. A 
properly functioning light switch takes on two discrete states only: on or 
off. A range of pressure applied to the switch does not correspond to any 
mechanical action of the lever. But once a certain threshold is reached, the 
switch flips to change states. “Digital systems,” as Kernighan writes, “deal 
with discrete values.”54 The switch contains a limited number of state possi-
bilities, whereas the bicycle handlebars can be rotated in an infinite number 
of minutely differing gradations.

186	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
Nelson Goodman was one of the first philosophers to examine digital 
representation in the context of aesthetic theory. In the late 1960s, drawing 
on technical intuitions about devices like pressure gauges and computers, he 
proposed to call those notational systems analog, which are “dense” and “un-
differentiated in the extreme.” By contrast, he called “digital” systems those 
that are “discontinuous” and “differentiated throughout.”55 By these defini-
tions, written language and music notation are digital systems par excellence, 
having the property of reducing the undifferentiated analog input (human 
thought) into discrete semantic units (text or musical notation).56 Following 
Goodman’s logic, one can reasonably maintain that the art of painting, unlike 
music or language, cannot be reduced to the production of discrete semantic 
units and would be more of an analog system under the proposed definitions.
In this light, the language of pointillist painting, which breaks shapes 
down into their modular atomic components, transforms an analog art form 
into a digital one. Similarly, in the cuboid world of Minecraft, players interact 
with blocks, the smallest differentiated units that constitute all other more 
complex things in the game. The world of Minecraft is sparse and therefore 
digital. By contrast, the world of the hyperrealistic Myst depicts the paint-
inglike, semantically irregular reality that cannot be broken down into neat 
components. Myst, a digital game, depicts a dense, undifferentiated, and 
analog world.
Goodman’s definitions strain under closer examination. Plainly, Myst is 
also a digital game. All digital images (and worlds) follow the logic of cubism 
to its deconstructive conclusion in that they atomize analog quantities into 
discrete and differentiated points of light. The world of Myst, like the world 
of Minecraft, is made of pixels. At some deeper level of analysis, both worlds 
are sparse and differentiated throughout. Could we not say the same thing 
about all rule-based analog games, such as chess? On the level of syntax, 
chess is also a sparse game, discrete and differentiated throughout like its 
computer counterparts. One plays on top of a grid with pieces that move 
according to rigidly prescribed rules and along binary color distinctions. At 
another scale of analysis, however, chess is an analog game. The wood 
grain of the chess board is part of a dense, undifferentiated world. At a 
deeper level still, at the atomic scale of observation, the chess board again 
begins to appear sparse, discontinuous, and differentiated throughout. We 
are left without the critical means to tell wood and (faux) ivory chess pieces 
apart from the block and pixel pieces of Minecraft.

	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL	
187
The quality of being digital seems to depend on our perspective. Density 
and sparseness change with the viewer’s ability to perceive differentiation. Ul-
timately, these qualities belong not to the object of representation (chess or 
computer game) but to the viewer. In the 1980s philosophers engaging with 
Goodman’s earlier work began to move away from discussing digital rep-
resentation in terms of properties of the medium. The conversation moved 
toward a more process-based, viewer-dependent understanding of the terms.
For example, an interesting corollary to the continuous property of analog 
systems is our inability to duplicate their states exactly. I can approximate the 
pressure someone else puts on their bicycle handlebars with some arbitrary 
measure of precision that never reaches perfect reproducibility. This means 
also that, although more digital art forms such as literature are, in some 
sense, perfectly reproducible, analog forms, such as painting, are not. Follow-
ing similar reasoning, the American philosopher John Haugeland proposed to 
consider the quality of being reproducible as essential to our understanding 
of digital representation. For Haugeland, reproducibility involved “flawless copy-
ing . . . and preservation.”57 To Goodman’s criteria of the digital, he there-
fore added the notion of “feasible procedures,” which led to “positive” and 
“­reliable” processes for reading and writing digital tokens.58
Let us consider Haugeland’s addendum in relation to some of our previ-
ous case studies. Chess movements are patently reproducible. Several nota-
tional conventions exist to ensure the perfect preservation and reproducibility 
of chess games. These include the descriptive and standard algebraic chess 
notations. Individual chess sets, by contrast, are not perfectly reproducible. 
Each is a somewhat unique version of the same regulation ideal. The gram-
mar and the medium of chess answer to differing definitions, depending on 
the context of analysis. The sometimes drastic differences in the shape of 
the figures or the materials used to make chess sets are not meaningful in 
the context of the game. They do become meaningful to those collectors 
who prize certain chess sets for their rarity or craftsmanship. However, crafts-
manship and rarity are not in themselves signifying properties that figure in 
the game of chess. They are meaningful only in the game of collecting.
For some chess players, chess pieces are therefore perfectly exchange-
able; for others they are not. Similarly, at the other extreme, we know that 
no amount of copying can reproduce an original Rembrandt. Every aspect 
of the painting is meaningful, including those not visible to the naked eye, 
such as traces of other paintings or sketches hidden under the surface rep-

188	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
resentation. This would hold true even if an invented technique could make 
a perfect, molecule-by-molecule reproduction of a Rembrandt painting. The 
rules of fine art collection demand an original work of art that preserves the 
artifact’s provenance, including incidental bumps, scratches, and patina ac-
crued through history. Such marks carry no meaning by the rules of painting, 
but they do carry meaning by the rules of collecting.
From that perspective, painting is an analog genre. But if we were to 
disregard the rules of collecting—if we simply enjoyed looking at beautiful 
­pictures—we would be justified in treating painting as a perfectly reproducible 
art form. Painting would, in essence, become more similar to chess, that is, 
a reproducible digital medium. Similarly, our newly found ability to reproduce 
something pushes the artifact closer to the digital side of the spectrum, even 
though the object itself has not changed. Its ontological status shifts with the 
viewer’s attitudes and technological capabilities: to perceive or to reproduce.
With regard to discreteness, moving images lie somewhere between the 
extremes of competitive chess and fine art. In the case of the soap opera 
effect, we may think of analog film as a series of still shots. For some 
purposes these still shots are reproducible in mass quantities, although not 
perfectly. Multiple copies of each film reel are routinely distributed to mul-
tiple cinemas. Each is authentic in the sense that it is sanctioned by the film 
studio. From another perspective, each frame is also an irreproducible work 
of art, which, like a painting, can accrue the patina of time and in some 
context attain value based on such unique properties as belonging to this or 
that prominent film director. 
Could magnetic tapes become unique works of art by similar logic? Imag-
ine a collectible videotape that was handled by the late Elvis Presley. One 
could object that humans cannot observe magnetic traces directly; whatever 
sense of valuable degradation or patina particular to magnetic storage 
media is lost on the average collector. An objection could also be raised 
that videotapes were produced in much greater quantities than film. Should 
we then impose an arbitrary cutoff point, a certain number of copies that, 
once exceeded, take the work of art out of the aesthetic realm? What about 
the obverse movement? In 2014, Wu-Tang Clan, a New York–based musical 
collective, released an album digitally on CD-ROM, but only in a single copy 
that cannot, by contract, be reproduced by its buyer.59 Given the restrictions, 
does the album retain its digital properties, or does it become, in effect, an 
analog work of art?

	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL	
189
These thought experiments show that qualities such as reproducibility, 
originality, patina, and authenticity depend on an observer’s capacities to per-
ceive or enact them and not solely on any intrinsic property of the medium. 
Film and video are reasonably irreproducible series of paintings and, from 
another perspective, perfectly copyable facsimiles.
In 2008, the philosopher Matthew Katz proposed two further important 
theoretical qualifications to the digital-analog debate. First, he distinguished 
between format and medium. Second, he proposed that the digital-analog dis-
tinction often depends on the observer. To illustrate these two amendments, 
Katz imagined a measuring system that involves a supply of marbles in a 
large beaker. We can thereby agree to use a “handful” as an approximate unit 
of measurement in that system. One can imagine a situation in which a bea-
ker contains three handfuls of marbles, for example. Katz’s system is analog, 
even though marbles themselves are a perfectly discrete medium, because it 
establishes no precise convention to reproduce handfuls. The marble-beaker 
system violates Haugeland’s requirement for positive and reliable standards of 
reproducibility. My two handfuls might be different from yours because of the 
difference in the size of our hands. Whereas the medium (marbles) is discrete, 
the format (handfuls) is analog.
The mechanism of measuring depends on the measurer. It is analog when 
we cannot accurately perceive approximate quantities. If humans were able to 
magically discern the exact number of water molecules in a beaker, previously 
analog systems (such as unmarked beakers) would in effect become digital. 
Similarly, if humans were endowed with hands of a definite size and volume, 
handfuls would be counted as discrete and therefore digital quantities. From 
similar thought experiments, Katz concluded that the physical, perceptual, and 
cognitive capabilities of users (readers, audience, perceivers) affect the onto-
logical status of the system, a handful of marbles or a work of art.60
Katz’s seemingly minor amendments to Haugeland entail several radi-
cal consequences in practice. The physics of the medium, he reveals, are 
significant insofar as they are tied to our ability to impose order, to format 
something. Whether a beaker is full of marbles or water is irrelevant. What 
matters is our ability to structure the medium into exactly reproducible units. 
We can do that with marbles by counting. To format water, we would need 
more precise instruments. Undifferentiated matter like cake is analog only 
until someone cuts it into pieces. A “piece of cake” is already a format and 
a unit of measurement. And the technique of cutting is important. The on-

190	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
tological status of cake changes depending on the agent doing the cutting. 
For someone armed with a laser cutter and a microscope, the cake is, on a 
spectrum, a near perfect digital medium. Alternatively, it is an analog medium 
for those who eat with their hands.
Our confusion about the dual status of Myst resolves when we introduce 
the distinction between medium and format. Myst is digital for those who 
can access the game’s code, to take an obvious example. This binary layer 
is not normally accessible at the site of the projection. Players cannot ac-
cess the game’s discrete bits, which produce surface images. Players there-
fore perceive computed scenery as indivisible analog representation. The 
property of being digital indicates the systematic ability to impose structure. 
Myst is digital for a programmer and analog for the player. The quality of 
something being digital in that sense separates those able to differentiate 
from those who apprehend the differentiated structure in the “holistic re-
pleteness of images.”61
Further, note that from an instrumental point of view, to make something 
digital, in Katz’s final formulation, implies the separation of structure and 
medium. The painting is wholly analog so long as it remains irreproducible. 
It becomes digital when the viewer is able to impose structure, by which 
the visual form is lifted from the medium of canvas. When taken outside 
their theoretical contexts, the affordances of reproduction—flawless copying 
and preservation through positive and reliable means—acquire an immediate 
practical significance. For example, it is important to a librarian that a docu-
ment is preserved reliably and that it continues to be accessible to the pub-
lic. By contrast, a copyright holder may be invested in preventing digitization. 
Reliability and accessibility are thus social, technological, and institutional 
properties of the medium. They vary by cultural and political contexts.
Once we understand the terms analog and digital as instrumental prop-
erties, which we impose on media from without, we can better perceive their 
political and not vaguely metaphysical import. Truly digital text can be cop-
ied and placed into other hands and minds, feasibly and reliably. The pos-
sibility of enacting such procedures is what ultimately gives representation 
its digital form. Our senses limit our ability to format, to impose structure 
onto media. We cannot, for example, communicate in the infrared spectrum 
without proper instrumentation. Our ability to format media, to make it digi-
tal, is often limited from without by political means. A classified document, 
for example, loses some of the necessary digital preconditions. One is liter-

	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL	
191
ally not allowed to copy it. It has to remain embedded within this particular 
piece of paper on this particular desk.
Technologies like digital rights management, which limit a reader’s ability 
to copy books, similarly transform digital content into its media-dependent, 
irreproducible, and ultimately analog forms. Paradoxically, a paper and ink 
book that places no restrictions on copying and transmediation is, in a 
sense, a more digital format than a restricted electronic book. Arbitrary re-
strictions on digital formatting create class distinctions between those with 
and those without permissions to copy, share, and transform.
The word, already a discrete quantity, comes into digital being as form 
when coupled loosely to its material contexts. Ontologically, text is by na-
ture a digital format: first, because it represents discrete units of informa-
tion about the world and, second, because it allows for some measure of 
flawless copying and preservation. Flawless copying and preservation are in 
themselves contingent, not essential, properties of writing. Human language 
operates in the digital mode, then, so long as it continues to participate in 
the unhindered transmediation of thought—from mind states to voice, from 
voice to paper, from paper to wire, and then on to other mind states. With-
out such chains of transmission and transmediation there can be no culture, 
in the sense that culture constitutes a shared intellectual achievement. I 
participate in that collective endeavor insofar as I am free to unburden 
my thoughts from their natural medium, my brain. I speak out loud; I write 
thoughts down on paper; I pass notes to others.
In the extreme, analog logic entails total censorship. Purely analog 
thoughts would be ones that could never leave their origins. Media inde-
pendence in that sense transcends the intellectual confines of an individual. 
Without digital portability, all representation—art and knowledge—attaches 
itself irrevocably to untranslatable and irreproducible conditions of their 
production.
Imagine a world in which ideas forever adhere to their brain-bound 
media. Imagine also a society that positively prohibits the transmediation of 
thought, on paper or between brain cells. Envision extreme forms of thought 
control that restrict fundamental basics of speech and literacy, prohibiting 
the manufacture of pens, paper, computers, photocopiers, voice recorders, 
and word processors—language and communication itself. Such prohibitions 
would amount to total censorship. A radically analog society would also be 
a radically mute one.

192	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
Understanding digitality as a kind of order—a format that arranges mat-
ter in certain ways tied to particular affordances of specific devices—recasts 
the history of computing into something other than simple “mathesis,” the 
idea that computation reduces the world into more discrete and therefore 
computable elements. That notion would be true if the computer was simply 
a glorified calculator. But computers are more than that. In practice, they re-
veal themselves to be self-amending machines for universal ­transmediation—
machines that, depending on the user’s acuity and dispensation to access 
deep structure, separate readers into those for whom texts and images exist 
as a fixed analog given and those for whom they exist in a fluid form. Digiti-
zation implies the ability to impose structure onto the world, a liberty to ex-
change one symbolic order for another among signs, people, and machines.
THE MEDIUM IS NOT THE MESSAGE
In examining the material conditions of digital representation, we find ­format— 
a quality distinct from both medium and content—to emerge as a political 
construct that governs the physical affordances of communication. We began 
this chapter with popular intuitions about the essence of digital representa-
tion. We end on firmer ground, on which formatting identifies the tactical abil-
ity to impose structure onto a medium. Formatting matters because it frames 
the mode of media apprehension. How the cake is cut also determines how 
we eat it. To format text without margins, for example, is also to deny margi-
nalia. And to format text in a way that prevents further remediation is to deny 
the formation of shared culture.
Circumspect critics, like Fish and Golumbia, are rightfully suspicious of 
unexamined claims about digitization, but for the wrong reasons. Digitiza-
tion threatens humanity only insofar as it lays claim on the recipient of the 
message. Paragraphs facilitate understanding by structuring undifferentiated 
text into units that more closely correspond to our mental ability to retain 
information. Margins give space to annotation. Conversely, formats can hin-
der comprehension. A poorly formatted text discourages or prevents critical 
thought outright.
In his influential essay on the political quality of technological artifacts, 
Langdon Winner famously argued that in modern times “people are often 
willing to make drastic changes in the way they live to accord with tech-
nological innovation,” but at the same time they would “resist similar kinds 
of changes justified on political grounds.”62 The insight is yet to filter into 

	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL	
193
literary studies. Readers, writers, and critics who would be pained to support 
laws in favor of censorship or surveillance effectively promote such systems 
in daily use. The mismatch between political belief and practice comes from 
the lack of critical engagement with technology, which, as Winner writes, re-
quires “both the study of specific technical systems and their history as well 
as a thorough grasp of the concepts and controversies of political theory.”63 
Winner elucidated this dynamic through the case study of Robert Moses 
and his twentieth-century highway-building projects in New York. Moses built 
low overpasses with an eye toward discouraging bus travel, which reflected 
his social and racial biases. These in effect carried the force of legislation, 
­Winner argued, denying the poor access to public spaces.64
Similarly, in our case, claims on a reader’s attention can happen through 
legislation, by social convention, or through specific material affordances—
the inability to take notes, for example, or to share books among family 
and friends. Such technological constraints disproportionately affect those 
most reliant on informal knowledge networks, which exist outside economies 
of wealth and prestige. Digitizing the public archive without a thorough un-
derstanding of the platforms and technologies involved risks committing the 
public to an empty and impoverished vision of social knowledge production. 
Technologies that hinder feasible procedures for reliable copying and pres-
ervation create textual artifacts that are less, not more, digital than paper 
books. They push us toward privatized knowledge economies. To “read” be-
comes to “purchase temporary reading rights”; to “take notes” becomes to 
train supervised learning algorithms; personal reading habits, long protected 
by our libraries, become a matter for bureaucratic control.
Consider the seemingly innocuous decision to distribute scientific litera-
ture formatted in the ubiquitous Portable Document Format (PDF). Adobe, the 
American company responsible for introducing the file format into circulation, 
describes it as “allow[ing] the faithful, high-quality reproduction of printed 
matter in electronic form.”65 Text, when transmitted without formatting speci-
fications, loses its shape to some extent. Think about writing an e-mail, for 
example. What appears to you as lines of a certain width may appear to the 
recipient in a completely different form. You may have written your e-mail 
on a large stationary monitor, for example, whereas your recipient reads on 
a small portable device. Because formatting is not fixed, e-mail programs 
are able to reflow the lines appropriately. You have in essence delegated 
the responsibility of formatting the text to the reader’s device. Readers are 

194	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
then free to apprehend it in a manner most convenient for them, tailored 
to their specific needs, attention spans, geographies, and body types. The 
downside of having this freedom is that the sender cannot ensure excellence 
in formatting. The reader’s software may render the text poorly or make it 
outright unreadable.
The PDF solves this problem by guaranteeing that its recipient receives 
the message exactly as written, without delegating the responsibility of ren-
dering it to the reader. In essence, the format mimics the constraints of 
a printed page, which similarly preserves the shape of the message during 
transmission. When writing a letter by hand, you know that your recipient will 
see what you see, in the same shape and form. But to achieve the effect, 
the PDF must also limit the document’s viewing possibilities. If the sender 
fixes the width of the page to the standard letter size, the reader would be 
pained to read such a document on a smaller portable device. The PDF con-
verts digital formats into analog in the name of visual consistency. Strictly 
speaking, PDF documents do not contain text in the way that an e-mail 
does. Rather, they contain text like a photograph of a printed page does, as 
an image. Such constraint is useful for business communication, for example, 
when writing contracts. The party responsible for drafting a contract wants 
to know that it will be signed without alteration.
Yet for other purposes, such fixity of formatting is detrimental to commu-
nication. Whereas reading paper contracts sent by mail is free, the reading 
of PDF documents requires specialized software, which may cost money. PDF 
documents further hinder the copying and preservation of text, the formal 
prerequisites for digital media. The simple act of taking notes becomes a 
paid feature of the Adobe Acrobat software. What was gained in a minor (for 
scholarly communication) convenience of formatting is lost in a major con-
cession to the privatization of public knowledge. We have in effect instituted 
a document format less flexible than paper. Because copying and preserva-
tion are key values for university libraries, the loss of unimpeded copying 
and preservation should outweigh any gains in purely ornamental stability 
of document format. This does not mean that we should not use Adobe 
Acrobat files, only that we must, in all cases, be intellectually invested in the 
compromises involved.
Technology does not determine literature. Loosely coupled to its material 
contexts, text continues its relentless drive from matter to idea and onto 
other matters so long as its passage is not hampered by regimes that pro-

	
LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL	
195
hibit further sharing, remixing, and transmediation. Under certain conditions, 
in the name of privacy, security, or property rights, it may become necessary 
to flatten out and to treat text as more of an analog, media-bound modality 
of communication, limited in its ability to move across minds and cultures. 
It is also in our broadly human, civic interest to keep such mechanisms of 
constraint visible to view, under continual scrutiny of critical, close, and clos-
est possible reading.

This page intentionally left blank 

SPACE
The politics of inscription are not simply a matter for academic discussion. 
In the time that it took me to finish this book, a coalition of U.S. “data dis-
sidents” won a temporary exemption from the Digital Millennium Copyright 
Act to allow them to modify their medical implants. This group included 
Hugo Campos, who wanted to access data collected by his Implantable 
Cardioverter Defibrillator, and Ben West and Jay Radcliffe, who fought for 
rights to modify their implanted insulin pumps. Marie Moe, of Norway, simi-
larly struggled to rewrite her heart implant’s software: “I want to know what 
code is running inside of my body. . . . Medical devices are black boxes. . 
. . You can’t look into them, there’s no transparency, we don’t know how 
they work.”1
Legal scholars from the Harvard Law School’s Berkman Center for Inter-
net and Society presented the coalition’s concerns before the United States 
Copyright Office. They wrote:
The purpose of a medical device company’s source code is to enable the 
function of a medical device; researchers like the members of this Coalition 
use the code in order to publish criticism on how safe, secure, and effec-
tive these products actually are. The use therefore resembles that of a book 
critic quoting excerpts of a book in her critique, a paradigm case of fair use.2
> CONCLUSION
Human Grounds for Computation 

198	
CONCLUSION
In Pakistan the Skynet program, sponsored by the U.S. National Security 
Agency, has placed people on the U.S.-sanctioned “disposition matrix” or “kill 
list” based on predictive analytics: social network analysis, cellular machine 
learning, patterns of travel, and telephone use. Automated tools with names 
such as Smart Tracker, Smart Chart, and Cloud Travel Analytic select people 
for targeted strikes by unmanned aerial vehicles.3 Our ability to interpret 
codes that kill on our behalf also stems from our capacity to access, read, 
understand, modify, and publish criticism on them.
Readers everywhere are engaged in a political struggle to control and 
deploy codified resources. The heart and the sky are sites at which the 
tactics of inscription are increasingly contested. They require a capacity to 
meet the machine and a poetics capable of new emendations.
A media archaeology of digital inscription recovers the stratified depths 
extant in all meaning-bearing literary devices. Files deep within an implant or 
on a military command-and-control server recapitulate the history of lami-
nate semiotics. Even print, which seems to escape computational complexity, 
can fracture at the point of origin. Most contemporary texts still voyage from 
keyboard to screen and electromagnetic storage, where they diffuse, mul-
tiply, and resist comprehension. The screen subsequently simulates extinct 
interpretive affordances. 
In its advanced form the simulation usurps the simulated. The avatar 
continues to mimic its object, even as the object passes from use. Scrolling 
text, for example, has no basis in our experience of handling scrolls. The 
page may go the same way. Readers who have never seen paper pages—­
recall the viral image of a child trying to “swipe” a magazine cover—will 
cease to identify it with a material unit of information. But like the scrolling 
of scrolls, word processors and e-books will continue to simulate paper. 
No longer connected to any recognized physics, reading will pass into the 
realm of dead metaphor. Consider the possibility of interpretation as we 
know it being a historical anomaly, connected to the contingencies of print.
The gap between input and output is what makes digital texts appear 
ephemeral. Temporary storage media, located between keyboard and screen, 
allow for rapid remediation. They keep ink in motion, across surfaces, un-
attached to sticky media like paper. Such spatial elongation comes at a 
cost: The inscription passes from view. The sign reappears again on-screen, 
already processed, that is, altered by the intervention of control units. Read-
ing no longer identifies solitary, self-directed activity. Machine operators far 

CONCLUSION	
199
removed from the site of interpretation intervene between readers, writers, 
and texts.
The consequences of their persistent intervention are immense. Supple-
mental control characters, originally used for formatting, fuse with pro-
gramming languages capable of generalized Turing-complete control and 
computation. Technological and legal fictions rise to restore a measure of 
stickiness to ephemeral text. Digital rights management circuits are routinely 
embedded into video-streaming devices to artificially limit the duplication of 
broadcast material. Similarly, e-book sellers often prevent their readers from 
copying and pasting content. Such measures mimic the constraints associ-
ated with static paper-and-ink-bound media regimes.
I began this book by noticing the duplicity of digital text, which splits its 
energies between sites of storage and projection. The revealed complexity 
of that state belies our alienation. Not since premodern times have we been 
so removed from the material contexts of knowledge production. The aver-
age reader today is privy only to surface phenomena. To meet the machine, 
we must base our strategies of interpretation on newly emergent computa-
tional realities. Technologies that govern literacy cannot be allowed to de-
velop apart from the humanities. Such detachment threatens the legacy of 
interpretive practice, enacted on page or pacemaker. Whatever their politics, 
literary scholars, philosophers, and historians must negotiate the tactics of 
reading alongside lawmakers and software engineers. The right to access 
embedded inscription—to share, repair, remix, modify—underlies the very 
possibility of interpretation.
TIME
I am tempted to believe, like others before me, that I have enacted here 
something akin to systems phenomenology: a glimpse into the assemblage 
of people, texts, and technologies. In such cases, astute readers often reach 
for Jakob von Uexküll’s Foray into the Worlds of Animals and Humans to 
draw on his notion of perceptual worlds (umwelten).4 In his forays Uexküll 
saw our world from the perspectives of sea urchins, pea weevils, and 
­ichneumon wasps. Uexküll believed that the biologist’s task is to imagine 
such alien life-forms.5 Consequently, Uexküll insisted on the ultimate sub-
jectivity of perceptual experience. A tick projects its own sense of time and 
space onto the world, which the biologist recovers in thick description of the 
animal’s perceptual apparatus.

200	
CONCLUSION
Uexküll was also a pioneer of systems theory, advancing an organism-
based model of meaning making. An oak tree’s canopy, he wrote, acts in 
unison with rain to capture and distribute liquid down to its roots. According 
to his model, capturing and distributing liquid to the roots established the 
meaning of the oak-rain circuit. “Meaning” in this sense is a property of the 
system, not the subject. It emerges from environmental interaction. A circuit 
of meaning is thereby created between the organism and its surroundings. 
Neither make sense in isolation. The subject and object are brought into 
harmony:
If the flower were not bee-like
If the bee were not flower-like
The harmony would never succeed.6
Posthumanism privileges moments of such alien subjectivity because they 
destabilize an anthropocentric worldview. What gets lost in the shift of per-
spectives is the apparent contradiction at the core of what Dorion Sagan has 
called the Gaia sciences.7 An idea ascendant in diverse fields from literary 
studies to information theory and free-market economics shifts the capac-
ity for meaning making from subject to assemblage and from individual to 
complex system. Meaning in that model is always an aggregate: oak plus 
rain, bee plus flower. Consequently, it is never available to the subject alone: 
oak, bee, or biologist. The quest for alien semiotics leads to, in Uexküll’s own 
words, “mute interaction” that is meaningful only from some vantage point 
outside the system.8 The forest always understands more than the tree, the 
planet more than the forest, and so on to the universe. The quest to dimin-
ish human import paradoxically leads to the most grandiose point of view 
possible.
In his essay on the subjective experience of bats, the philosopher Thomas 
Nagel argued against such presumption. He wrote that there must be some-
thing about the experience of being a bat for a bat that remains inacces-
sible to human description.9 To accept the complex systems worldview is 
therefore to acknowledge the limits of human imagination. An organ cannot 
speak for the organism. From the human perspective, to encounter bats (or 
dogs or trees or machines) for what they are is to retain a measure of the 
other’s ineffable alienness.

	
CONCLUSION	
201
There is a quiet humanism in Nagel’s insistence on empirical phenom-
enology.10 It would be wrong to confuse imagination for lived experience, 
he argued: “Certainly it appears unlikely that we will get closer to the real 
nature of human experience by leaving behind the particularity of our human 
point of view and striving for a description in terms accessible to beings 
that could not imagine what it was like to be us.”11 Nagel continued, “In 
discovering sound to be, in reality, wave phenomenon in air or other media, 
we leave behind one viewpoint to take up another.”12 This gets us no closer 
to understanding the common reality of the external world.
A media history derived from Nagel’s insight does not proceed in isolation 
from the human condition. We know technology only through based habita-
tion, tied to our culture and physiology. I therefore advance a descriptive 
history from the only perspective available to me. As humanists struggle to 
theorize digital modes of being, I find a need to reexamine the category of 
the human. No other point of view can sustain analysis or critique. Posthu-
man humanities are an apparent contradiction. One can purport to speak for 
neither things nor assemblages.
In refracting the technological other’s gaze, we see only ourselves. In a 
fragmentary contemplation of otherness, Bakhtin wrote:
Falsehood and deception unavoidably peering out of their own correlation. 
The external image of thought, feeling, the external image of the soul. It is 
not I who looks out from the inside, but I look at myself with the eyes of the 
world, strange eyes; I am possessed by another. There is no integrity of 
internal and external here. To glimpse my own preocular image. The naïve 
confluence of self and the other in the mirror image. The surplus of the 
other. There is no point of view outside of myself; I cannot access my own 
internal image. From my eyes stare a stranger’s eyes.13
An act of imagination accompanies analysis, but not in a way that exhausts 
extrinsic perspective. The difficulty is one of retaining a “surplus of the other.” 
To encounter one’s own “preocular” image is to inquire into the nature of 
mediation.
I return, then, to the subject of time, continually in the background of 
this book. The tick lies in wait for its next warm meal for decades (Uexküll 
reports up to eighteen years). Species time advances only by such remark-

202	
CONCLUSION
able events. Although it seemed objective and universal, we now see it as 
relative to the subject and its environment.14 Popular reception of digital 
technology belies a deep sense of anxiety about the pace it sets for our 
existence. Throughout, one observes the delicate negotiation of synchronicity 
between human and machine. A complex chain of transfiguration (encoding 
and decoding) connects incongruent media (wetware and hardware). Homeo­
stasis is found at some arbitrary point, incidentally attached to human biol-
ogy in a state of technical augmentation. The resulting cyborg can either 
acquiesce to contingent timelines or project its own. The question of what 
constitutes a moment, when watching television or reading a book, can fi-
nally be better rephrased into what it should constitute.
Integrated crystal oscillators pace all forms of digital life: poetry, drone, 
and heart implant. Against this rhythm we advance a computational poetics, 
the study of temporal arrangements: prosody, meter, enjambment, disso-
nance, and syncopation.
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
A history of digital text undoubtedly reflects the legacy of European and, later, 
North American colonialism. Treaties that negotiated early character encodings 
initially did so in the dominant diplomatic languages, French and ­English.15 
Even though modern character encodings such as UTF-8 render many more 
international scripts, the overall camber of digital literacy still skews toward 
English. Speaking English is a requirement for software practice. The challenge 
and consequence of the book will be in exposing such technological bias.
It is easy to forget the blunt effectiveness of physical restraints to speech 
in the global northwest. Books that are burned or redacted cannot be read 
at all. Elsewhere, inequities of access to knowledge compel readers to print 
their own books and build their own libraries. Witness the so-called shadow 
libraries of Eastern Europe and Central Asia, the street book vendors of 
India and Pakistan, and the gray market presses of Nigeria arising from the 
country’s “book famine.”16 More than mere piracy, such samizdat-like prac-
tices preserve the literary sphere.17 Informal book exchange networks create 
reading publics that own the means of textual production and dissemination. 
Under duress, readers build homemade knowledge infrastructures; they dupli-
cate, distribute, catalog, and archive.
By contrast, in wealthier economies, such infrastructures are commodi-
fied. Readers consequently receive the material contexts of their meaning 

	
CONCLUSION	
203
making passively. The costs of knowledge production and barriers to its 
distribution disappear from view. For many readers, technologies that sup-
port reading, writing, and interpretation further pass from tools to fetishes. 
They are swaddled in protective vestments and given a prominent place in 
the home. They are imbued with animate spirits. We form emotional rather 
than intellectual bonds with them, on aesthetic rather than ethical grounds. 
Thus we exist in a state of profound alienation from mechanisms closest to 
our mental activity.
I look east and south, then, to see that whatever the technology, the 
choice to wield an epistemic thing—word processor or character set—is 
never neutral. Technology embodies power in nonobvious ways. One must 
insist on dragging it into a dialectic, by which ideals are shown to reify into 
specific technological commitments.
I want to ask in parting, How do we, as a society, escape the quietly 
smothering embrace of technology? A multitude of microscopic prosthetics 
in aggregate exert an enormous pressure on the mind’s centers of pleasure 
and satiation. A quietude descends on the dwellings of our intellectual life. 
The digitally displaced hold on to the discomfort of the encounter with the 
machine. Estrangement, always at the heart of immigrant or queer poet-
ics, reconciles without seeking wholeness or integration. I dedicate this 
book, then, to queers and immigrants, literal and figurative—spatial, literary, 
­technological—to those being displaced unwillingly, to those exiled within and 
without, to those who understand the need for self-displacement, to those 
who transgress purposefully, and to those who continue to trespass.

This page intentionally left blank 

INTRODUCTION
1.  Patricia MacCormack often uses the term asemiosis in a more evocative,
Deleuzian sense. See, for example, MacCormack, “Cinema of Desire.” I use it here in 
a direct, Peircean sense as an antonym to semiosis, the alignment of sign, object, 
and interpretant. See Peirce, “Pragmatism in Retrospect,” 282.
2.  Christian Bök writes: “I have been striving to write a short verse about lan-
guage and genetics, whereupon I use a ‘chemical alphabet’ to translate this poem 
into a sequence of DNA for subsequent implantation into the genome of a bac-
terium (in this case, a microbe called Deinococcus radiodurans—an extremophile, 
capable of surviving, without mutation, in even the most hostile milieus, including 
the vacuum of outer space)” (Bök, “Xenotext Works,” n.p.). See also Bök, Xenotext.
3.  Unicode Consortium, Unicode Standard, 9, 10.
4.  Cook, “Some Considerations,” 91.
5.  See Fry, “Circumventing Access Controls”; Ginsburg, “Legal Protection”; and
Ku, “Critique.”
6.  The retailer has since introduced a program that allows for limited sharing of
materials, restricted by time and geography.
7.  Winner, Autonomous Technology, 335.
8.  Scholars such as Alexander Galloway, David Golumbia, and Bernard Harcourt
have advanced critiques along similar lines. See Galloway, Protocol; Golumbia, Cul-
tural Logic; and Harcourt, Exposed.
9.  Halstead, “Genesis and Speed,” 456.
10.  I borrow the term microanalysis from Boris Iarkho, a largely forgotten (in
the West) Russian literary scholar and member of the Moscow Linguistic Circle. In 
his Methodologies of Exact Literary Study (circa 1935–1936) he wrote: “I understand 
NOTES

‘atomism’ as a sort of an ideal aspiration, an orientation toward the liminally small. 
But under no circumstances do I advocate working with hypothetical quantities, 
like molecules, atoms, positrons, and so on, which are located beyond the limits 
of perception. That this applied mythology gave us such splendid results in chem-
istry should not conceal its true nature. Tomorrow, all such explanations of visible 
through the invisible could give way to other hypotheses, as was the case with 
their no less fertile predecessors (elemental spirits, phlogiston, and light ether). But 
the cell, the nucleus, and the chromosome endure as lasting accomplishments of 
microanalysis. I suggest moving as far as a microscope can reach, and no further” 
(Iarkho, Metodologia, 363–64; translation mine).
11. Affordances, as Caroline Levine explains, “describe the potential uses or 
actions latent in materials and designs.” For example, “glass affords transparency,” 
whereas “steel affords strength” (C. Levine, Forms, 6). See also Hutchby, “Technolo-
gies,” 447.
12. Leroi-Gourhan, Gesture and Speech, 83–84; Siegert, Cultural Techniques. 
13. I am influenced in this regard by the philosophical poetics of Gaston Bach-
elard and Henri Lefebvre, extended into the realm of everyday computation. See 
Bachelard, Poetics of Space; and Lefebvre, Production of Space.
14. Works by Finn Brunton, Wendy Chun, Lisa Gitelman, Yuk Hui, Helen Nissen­
baum, John Durham Peters, Mary Poovey, and Jonathan Sterne, among many others, 
left their mark on this text.
15. Flusser, Freedom, 13. See also Finger et al., Vilém Flusser, 132. 
16.  Flusser, Freedom, 13. 
17. Flusser, Freedom, 81. 
18. Flusser, Freedom, 82–83. 
19. Shklovsky et al., Sborniki, 7. 
20. Shklovsky et al., Sborniki, 7.
21. Shklovsky et al., “Isskustvo, kak priem,” 104. Translations are mine unless 
source cited is explicitly in English.
22. For more on alienation, see the relevant discussion in Marx, Economic and 
Philosophic Manuscripts; and Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value.
23. For example: “Writers concerned with problems of technology-out-of-control 
have frequently echoed Hobbes in suggesting that such an artifact—the Leviathan of 
interconnected technical systems—has a soul of its own. . . . A ghost appears in the 
network. Unanticipated aspects of technological structure endow the creation with 
an unanticipated telos” (Winner, Autonomous Technology, 280).
24. Atzori, “Smart Objects”; Bohn et al., “Living”; Calverley, “Android Science”; 
Hildebrandt, “Ambient Intelligence”; and Ma et al., “Towards a Smart World.” 
25. Marx, Capital (1906), 82; Wigdor et al., “Designing User Interfaces.” 
26. Kittler, Gramophone, 263. 
27. See, for example, C. N. Davidson, Now You See It; Negroponte, Being Digital; 
Obama, “2016 State of the Union Address”; and Postman, Technopoly.
28. Fry, “Circumventing Access Controls.” 
206	
NOTES TO INTRODUCTION

29. I am influenced here by the discussion of epistemic things in Rheinberger, 
History of Epistemic Things, 24–37.
30. Flusser, Freedom, 81. 
31. Flusser, Freedom, 12. 
32. Flusser, Freedom, 12. 
33. Flusser, Freedom, 84. 
34. Kirschenbaum, Mechanisms, 15. On the role of reverse engineering in media 
studies, see also Fuller and Goffey, Evil Media, 9.
35. Petroski, Invention by Design, 3–7. See also Conti et al., “Visual Reverse 
Engineering.”
36. Drucker, “Digital Ontologies”; Hayles, “Print Is Flat”; McGann, Radiant Textuality.
37. On the Obscene Publication Acts, see McCalman, “Unrespectable Radical-
ism”; and Roberts, “Morals.” 
38. See discussion in Chun, “On Software,” 27–28; Galloway, “Anti-Language”; 
and Manovich, Language, 48.
39. See Barthes, “Death of the Author”; Foucault, “What Is an Author?”; and 
Nesbit, “What Was an Author?”
40. See, for example, Martin Heidegger: “For the phenomenon most worthy of 
thought and questioning remains the mystery of language—wherein our entire reflec-
tion has to gather itself—above all when it dawns on us that language is not a work 
of human beings: language speaks” (Heidegger, Pathmarks, 57). See also Barthes, 
Rustle of Language, 5; Blanchot, Work of Fire, 41; Nuttall, New Mimesis, 6–25; and 
Varela et al., “Autopoiesis.”
41. Bernard, Introduction, 3, 15. On Bernard, see Petit, “Claude Bernard”; Mc­
Luhan, Gutenberg Galaxy, 4, 206; and Sattar, “Aesthetics.”
42. Kittler’s Gramophone, Film, Typewriter ends as follows: “And while profes-
sors are still reluctantly trading in their typewriters for word processors, the NSA 
is preparing for the future: from nursery school mathematics, which continues to 
be fully sufficient for books, to charge-coupled devices, surface-wave filters, digital 
signal processors including the four basic forms of computation. Trenches, flashes 
of lightning, stars—storage, transmission, the laying of cables” (Kittler, Gramophone, 
263).
43. Kittler, Gramophone, xxxix. 
44. Horkheimer, Critical Theory, 143. 
45. Horkheimer, Critical Theory, 233. 
46. Fitzpatrick, Planned Obsolescence; Scholz, Digital Labor; Terranova, Network 
Culture. 
47. See Brouillette, “Unesco”; Brouillette, “Wither Production?”; and English, Econ-
omy of Prestige.
48. See Freeman, High Tech; and Patel, Working the Night Shift.
49. Sartre would write “transcendence” and “facticity.” See Sartre, Being and 
Nothingness, 86–119.
50. James, “Pragmatism’s Conception,” 233. 
	
NOTES TO INTRODUCTION	
207

51. For a more thorough discussion on the topic, see Pihlström, Structuring the 
World; Putnam, “James’s Theory”; and Seigfried, James’s Radical Reconstruction.
52. James, “Pragmatism’s Conception,” 200. 
53. Ramsey, Foundations of Mathematics, 155. 
54. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, 67–77. For more on the connection 
between Wittgenstein and James, see R. B. Goodman, “James on the Nonconceptual.”
55. Knobe and Nichols, Experimental Philosophy, 3. 
56. P. H. Smith et al., Ways of Making and Knowing, 12. 
57. Mumford, “Authoritarian and Democratic Technics”; Winner, “Do Artifacts 
Have Politics?” 
58. Haugeland, “Analog.” 
CHAPTER 1: METAPHOR MACHINES
1. Baudrillard, “Symbolic Exchange,” 139–40.
2. Baudrillard, “Symbolic Exchange,” 139. 
3. Baudrillard, “Symbolic Exchange,” 140. 
4. Jakobson, “Linguistics and Poetics,” 355; see also Malinowski et al., “Problem 
of Meaning,” 146.
5. Aaron and Leburton, “Flash Memory”; Bez et al., “Introduction to Flash Mem-
ory”; Pavan et al., “Flash Memory Cells.”
6. Boyden et al., “Methods and Systems,” 1. 
7. Boyden et al., “Methods and Systems,” 1. 
8. Beard et al., “Data Processor,” 1. 
9. Pajak, “Electronic Library,” 1. 
10. Pajak, “Electronic Library,” 1. 
11. All quotes from Card et al., “Methods,” 2.
12. Lakoff, “Contemporary Theory of Metaphor”; Lakoff and Johnson, Metaphors 
We Live By; Searle, “Metaphor”; M. Turner, Death.
13. Lakoff, “Contemporary Theory of Metaphor,” 212. See also Lakoff and John-
son, “Metaphorical Structure.”
14. It bears mentioning at the outset that in the language of cognitive metaphor 
theory, all figurative tropes of comparison—hyperbole, metonymy, synecdoche, or 
simile—fall under the category of metaphor.
15. Lakoff and Johnson, “Metaphorical Structure,” 195–98. 
16. Lakoff, “Contemporary Theory of Metaphor,” 239. 
17. Lakoff, “Contemporary Theory of Metaphor,” 243. 
18. Lakoff, “Contemporary Theory of Metaphor,” 245.
19. Lakoff, “Contemporary Theory of Metaphor,” 245. See also Lakoff, “Invari-
ance Hypothesis”; Ruiz de Mendoza Ibáñez, “Nature of Blending”; and M. Turner and 
Fauconnier, “Conceptual Integration.”
20. Lakoff and Johnson, Metaphors We Live By, 61; see also the discussion on 
pp. 61–68.
21. J. M. Carroll and Thomas, “Metaphor,” 107–8. 
208	
NOTES TO INTRODUCTION AND CHAPTER 1

22. Apple Inc., Apple Human Interface Guidelines, 4. 
23. Apple Inc., Apple Human Interface Guidelines, 5. 
24. Cox et al., “Method and System,” n.p. 
25. Moll-Carrillo et al., “Articulating a Metaphor,” 572; emphasis mine. 
26. Glaser and Leung, “Graphical User Interface,” abstract. 
27. Lakoff, “Contemporary Theory of Metaphor,” 210–11. 
28. Lakoff, “Contemporary Theory of Metaphor,” 211. 
29. Richards, Philosophy of Rhetoric, 95. 
30. Richards, Philosophy of Rhetoric, 94. 
31. Shelley, Essays, 5; quoted in Richards, Philosophy of Rhetoric, 90–91. 
32. Billig and MacMillan, “Metaphor”; Mojtabai, “Delusion as Error.”
33. In modern Greek metaphor is the ordinary word for “transportation,” often 
inscribed on trucks and shipping containers.
34. For a book-length discussion of dead metaphors, see Müller, Metaphors Dead 
and Alive.
35. Shklovsky, Voskreshenie Slova, 3.
36. Flusser, Freedom, 13, 82. 
37. Lakoff, “Death of Dead Metaphor.” 
38. Lakoff, “Death of Dead Metaphor”; Müller, Metaphors Dead and Alive. 
39. L. Carroll, Annotated Alice, 55. For a range of possible answers, see Huxley, 
The Raven; and Susina, “Raven.” Here is Carroll’s own answer: “Because it can pro-
duce a few notes, though they are very flat; and it is nevar [sic] put with the wrong 
end in front” (L. Carroll, Alice’s Adventures, xv; also Susina, “Raven,” 16–17).
40. Lakoff, “Contemporary Theory of Metaphor,” 215. 
41. The notion of digital text is itself a metaphor. Files do not really hold texts. 
The idea of a text identifies a segment of stored memory coupled with control 
codes that govern layout and projection in specific material context. Together, these 
diverse signals and physical affordances create the illusion of a single text.
42. Richards, Philosophy of Rhetoric, 96–97. 
43. Baudrillard, Simulacra and Simulation, 2. 
44. Oxford English Dictionary (online), s.v. “Simulation,” definition 1b. December 
2016. www.oed.com/view/Entry/180009?redirectedFrom=simulation& (accessed Decem-
ber 14, 2016). 
45. See J. M. Carroll and Thomas, “Metaphor”; J. M. Carroll et al., Interface 
Metaphors; and Spolsky, User Interface Design. 
46. See Fry, “Circumventing Access Controls”; Ginsburg, “Legal Protection”; Ku, 
“Critique”; Perzanowski, “Rethinking Anticircumvention’s Interoperability Policy”; and 
von Lohmann, Unintended Consequences.
47. Ricoeur says: “The most obvious change from speaking to writing concerns 
the relation between message and its medium or channel. At first glance, it con-
cerns only this relation, but upon closer examination, the first alteration irradiates 
in every direction, affecting in a decisive manner all the factors and functions” 
(Ricoeur, Interpretation Theory, 26).
	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 1	
209

48. Gadamer, Truth and Method, 110. 
49. Ricoeur, Interpretation Theory, 28. See Ricoeur’s discussion at pp. 26–29.
50. See Bez et al., “Introduction to Flash Memory”; and Pavan et al., “Flash 
Memory Cells.”
51. Kittler, “There Is No Software.” 
52. Laurel, “Interface as Mimesis,” 67.
53. See Taussig, Mimesis and Alterity, 129–44. 
54. Coleridge, Collected Works, 7: 6–7. 
55. S. H. Cameron et al. “DIALOG”; Gaines, “Technology of Interaction”; Orr, 
Conversational Computers.
56. Beatty et al., “Interactive Documentation System”; Coltheart, “Iconic Memory”; 
Gaines and Shaw, “Timesharing”; Hutchins et al., “Direct Manipulation Interfaces.”
57. Hotson et al., “Individual Finger Control”; Leuthardt et al., “Brain-Computer 
Interface”; S. P. Levine et al., “Direct Brain Interface”; Wolpaw et al., “Brain-Computer 
Interface Technology.” 
58. S. H. Cameron et al., “DIALOG”; Gaines and Shaw, “Timesharing”; J. Martin, 
Design of Man-Computer Dialogues; J. Martin and Norman, Computerized Society; 
J. C. Shaw, “JOSS.” 
59. Turing, “Computing Machinery,” 446. 
60. Gruenberger, “History of the JOHNNIAC.” 
61. Gruenberger, “History of the JOHNNIAC,” 58. 
62. J. C. Shaw, “JOSS,” 456. 
63. J. C. Shaw, “JOSS,” 456. 
64. Montfort, Twisty Little Passages. 
65. Walther and O’Neil, “On-Line User-Computer Interface,” 379. See also Gaines 
and Shaw, “Timesharing,” 15.
66. Rick Adams maintains the source code for a number of the game’s early 
versions at rickadams.org/adventure/e_downloads.html. I ran tr, uniq, and wc Unix 
utilities against the PDP-10 Fortran sources to calculate vocabulary. Later versions 
of the game contain a slightly enriched lexicon.
67. Shneiderman, “Future of Interactive Systems,” 251. See also Hutchins et al., 
“Direct Manipulation Interfaces,” 91.
68. Shneiderman, “Direct Manipulation,” 57. See also Leibniz, Der Briefwechsel, 
1: 375.
69. Shneiderman, “Direct Manipulation,” 57. See also Leibniz, Der Briefwechsel, 1: 
375.
70. Cajori, “History of Notations”; Grabiner, “Mathematical Truth”; Thurston, 
“Leibniz’s Notation.”
71. Shneiderman, “Direct Manipulation,” 60. 
72. Shneiderman, “Direct Manipulation,” 65. 
73. Jakobson, “A Few Remarks”; Norman and Draper, User Centered System 
Design, 110; Peirce, “Algebra of Logic.”
74. Norman, “Cognitive Artifacts,” 123. 
210	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 1

75. I am using the traditional Peircean distinction between symbol, icon, and 
index. Peirce writes, “Icons are so completely substituted for their objects as hardly 
to be distinguished from them” (Peirce, “Algebra of Logic,” 226).
76. Charles Sanders Peirce, a philosopher of language whose vocabulary I have 
been using here, suggests simulacra as a possible synonym for icon, citing also 
Plato’s Phaedrus in relation to the Greek omoiōma or imitation. See Peirce, “Excerpts,” 
481; and Plato, “Phaedrus,” 483–85, ll. 250a–b.
77. Laurel, “Interface as Mimesis,” 76. 
78. See Glaser and Leung, “Graphical User Interface”; and Pajak, “Electronic 
Library.”
79. Laurel, “Interface as Mimesis,” 67–86. See also Norman and Draper, User 
Centered System Design, 490–91. 
80. Hutchins et al., “Direct Manipulation Interfaces,” 98–99. 
81. Hutchins et al., “Direct Manipulation Interfaces,” 99. 
82. Laurel, “Interface as Mimesis,” 74. 
83. Laurel, “Interface as Mimesis,” 75. 
84. Hutchins et al., “Direct Manipulation Interfaces,” 110. 
85. Laurel, “Interface as Mimesis,” 75. 
86. Laurel, “Interface as Mimesis,” 75. 
87. Laurel, “Interface as Mimesis,” 85. 
88. Laurel, “Interface as Mimesis,” 75. 
89. Hutchins et al., “Direct Manipulation Interfaces,” 118. 
90. Halstead, “Genesis and Speed,” 451. 
91. The American toy giant Mattel makes a game called Mindflex. The Fre-
quently Asked Questions page includes the following prompt: “Have you ever 
dreamed of moving an object with the power of your mind? Mindflex Duel™ makes 
that dream a reality! Utilizing advanced Mindflex Duel™ technology, the wireless 
headset reads your brainwave activity. Concentrate . . . and the ball rises on a 
cushion of air! Relax . . . and the ball descends. It’s literally mind over matter!” 
(Mindflex, “Mindflex,” n.p.).
92. Leuthardt et al., “Brain-Computer Interface”; K. J. Miller et al., “Spectral 
Changes.” 
93. Collinger et al., “Collaborative Approach”; Prabhakar, “Future of War.” 
94. Heidegger says: “When something at hand is missing whose everyday pres-
ence was a matter of course that we never even paid attention to it, this con-
stitutes a breach in the context of references discovered in our circumspection. 
Circumspection comes up with emptiness and now sees for the first time what the 
missing thing was at hand for and at hand with. Again the surrounding world makes 
itself known” (Heidegger, Being and Time, 70).
95. Heidegger, Being and Time, 65. 
96. Heidegger, Being and Time, 69.
97. Heidegger, Being and Time, 65. 
98. Heidegger, “Question Concerning Technology,” 319. 
	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 1	
211

99. Heidegger, “Question Concerning Technology,” 323–24. 
100. Heidegger, “Question Concerning Technology,” 331–34. 
CHAPTER 2: LAYING BARE THE DEVICE
1. Moreno, Who Shall Survive, 233. 
2. Moreno is remembered today as a pioneer of group therapy and an early critic 
of Freud and socialism. Sociologists have also recently rediscovered his formative 
work on network analysis. His books contain beautiful diagrams, sprouting nodes and 
edges, with titles such as “Structure of a Cottage Family,” “A Handicraft Group,” and 
“The Civilian Social Atom.” Moreno was also a humanist and a philosopher of tech-
nology and culture. In opposition to eugenics, a popular philosophy at the time, his 
answer to “who shall survive?” was “everyone.” See Moreno, Who Shall Survive, 245.
3. Moreno, Who Shall Survive, 233. 
4. Moreno, Who Shall Survive, 234. 
5. Moreno, Who Shall Survive, 238–39. 
6. Moreno, Who Shall Survive, 235, 239. 
7. Moreno, Who Shall Survive, 236. 
8. Plato, “Phaedrus,”  (250a). 
9. Moreno, Who Shall Survive, 233–52.
10. Lapsed consent is a common theme in the works of Thomas Hobbes, John 
Locke, and John Stuart Mill. To paraphrase, they ask, What makes whatever volun-
tary compacts made by past generations still valid today?
11. Moreno, Who Shall Survive, 238. 
12. Marx, Capital (1967 ed.), 72. 
13. See Logicworks, “Government Cloud”; and Soyata et al., “COMBAT.”
14. Merriam-Webster Online, s.v. “Device,” 2015. https://www.merriam-webster.com 
/dictionary/device (accessed December 15, 2015).
15. I am influenced here, in part, by the discussion on epistemic things in Rhe-
inberger, History of Epistemic Things, 11–37.
16. I rely on the Russian originals throughout but cite the English translations 
where possible as well. See Shklovsky, “Art as Technique”; Shklovsky, Voskreshenie 
Slova; and Shklovsky, “Isskustvo, kak priem.”
17. Nabokov, “Guide to Berlin,” 27; See also D. B. Johnson, “Guide,” 354.
18. Kranzberg, “At the Start,” 5, 6. 
19. Winner, Autonomous Technology, 4. 
20. Technology overtakes technique around 1979, judging by the relative fre-
quency of occurrence in the Google Books n-gram corpus. Michel et al., “Quantita-
tive Analysis of Culture.”
21. See, for example, the essays by Osip Brik (“Against Creative Individualism,” 
76–79) and Viktor Shklovsky (“On Authorship and Production,” 194–99) in Chuzhak, 
Literatura Fakta. 
22. What can be said about literature here also applies to culture more generally.
23. Benjamin, “Author as Producer,” 87. 
212	
NOTES TO CHAPTERS 1 AND 2

24. Benjamin, “Author as Producer,” 87. 
25. Schopenhauer, World as Will, 1: 249, 1: 217–346. 
26. Shklovsky, “Isskustvo, kak priem,” 102.
27. Shklovsky, “Isskustvo, kak priem,” 105. 
28. Spencer, Philosophy of Style, 7. 
29. Spencer, Philosophy of Style, 3. 
30. Spencer, Philosophy of Style, 32. 
31. Taylor, Principles of Scientific Management, 7.
32. Shklovsky, “Isskustvo, kak priem,” 103–4.
33. Moréas, “Le symbolisme,” 150. 
34. Bakhtin, “K voprosam,” 270–71. 
35. Bakhtin, “K voprosam,” 308.
36. Bakhtin, “K voprosam,” 310. 
37. Bakhtin, “K voprosam,” 373, 374. 
38. Bakhtin, “K voprosam,” 249. 
39. Bakhtin, “K voprosam,” 275. 
40. Nabokov, Invitation to a Beheading, 223. 
41. Lubbock, Craft of Fiction, 1. 
42. Lubbock, Craft of Fiction, 272. 
43. Lubbock collapses the difference between painting and sculpture. See, by 
contrast, the extended discussion in Herder, Sculpture.
44. Lubbock, Craft of Fiction, 12, 28. See also Eichenbaum, “Gogol’s Overcoat”; 
and Shklovsky, “Isskustvo, kak priem.”
45. Lubbock, Craft of Fiction, 274. 
46. Lubbock, Craft of Fiction, 273. 
47. Lubbock, Craft of Fiction, 4. 
48. Lubbock, Craft of Fiction, 6. 
49. Lubbock, Craft of Fiction, 6. 
50. Lubbock, Craft of Fiction, 273, 274. 
51. Evidence suggests that Wittgenstein read Russian and that he visited the 
Soviet Union in the 1930s. Both he and Shklovsky fought in Galicia at the Eastern 
Front. Nothing in the sources suggests that they met or knew of one another’s work. 
See Moran, “Wittgenstein and Russia.”
52. Harcourt, Exposed; Pasquale, Black Box Society. 
53. Church and Turing, “Computable Numbers.” 
54. Descartes, Discourse, 36. 
55. Gillespie, “Primal Utterance,” 32. 
56. Searle, “Minds.” 
57. Searle, “Minds.” 
58. See Plato, Plato in Twelve Volumes. I translate the passage into literal 
English to preserve characteristics notable in the original. In particular, note the 
parallelism between exōthen and endothen, the ambiguity of allotrion, as a foreign 
other, and the subtle slide between graphō (letter, figure, writing) and tupōn (type, 
	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 2	
213

impression, trace). I extend my gratitude to Stathis Gourgouris, Simos Zenios, and 
Guy Smoot for their help with Greek translations.
59. See, for example, Ceruzzi, Computing.
60. To give you a sense of the timeline, Turing entered King’s College in 1931. 
See Hodges, Alan Turing, 78. Turing’s paper on computable numbers appeared in 
print in 1936. It is likely that Turing and Wittgenstein met at the Moral Science 
Club, where by the 1930s Wittgenstein “monopolized the discussion,” even in the 
presence of such prominent philosophers as George Edward Moore. See Duncan-
Jones, “G. E. Moore,” 25. Turing attended Wittgenstein’s lectures on the foundations 
of mathematics in 1939.
61. Wittgenstein, Blue and Brown Books, 6–7. 
62. Wittgenstein, Blue and Brown Books, 16. 
63. Wittgenstein, Blue and Brown Books, 16. See also the related discussion in 
Dennett, “Can Machines Think,” 297.
64. Wittgenstein, Blue and Brown Books, 16, 46–49. 
65. Wittgenstein, Blue and Brown Books, 119. 
66. Wittgenstein, Blue and Brown Books, 121–22. 
67. Wittgenstein, Blue and Brown Books, 120. 
68. Wittgenstein, Blue and Brown Books, 185. 
69. Wittgenstein, Blue and Brown Books, 185. 
70. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Grammar, 5. 
71. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Grammar, 41. 
72. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Grammar, 42; emphasis mine. 
73. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Grammar, 45. 
74. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Grammar, 10. 
75. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Grammar, 69. 
76. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Grammar, 69–70. 
77. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Grammar, 70. 
78. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Grammar, 190. 
79. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Grammar, 187–88. 
80. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Grammar, 190. 
81. I am forgoing the distinction between interpreters and compilers for simplicity’s 
sake. See Bashkow et al., “System Design”; Elbourn and Ware, “Evolution of Concepts,” 
1060; McCarthy, “LISP Interpreter System”; and Neuhold, “Formal Description,” 95.
82. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Grammar, 194–96. 
83. Wittgenstein, Wittgenstein’s Lectures, 197. 
84. Wittgenstein, Wittgenstein’s Lectures, 282. 
85. Wittgenstein, Wittgenstein’s Lectures, 195. 
86. Wittgenstein and Barrett, Lectures and Conversations, 13, 16. 
87. Not much is written on the intellectual connections between Turing and 
Wittgenstein. See Copeland and Proudfoot, “What Turing Did”; and Wagner, 
“Wittgenstein.”
88. Wittgenstein, Wittgenstein’s Lectures, 67–68. 
214	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 2

89. The intellectual history of the Turing machine follows works by Diophantus, 
René Descartes, Georg Cantor, David Hilbert, Gottlob Frege, Bertrand Russell, Kurt 
Gödel, and Ludwig Wittgenstein. See Grattan-Guinness, “Development of Logics”; 
Herken, Universal Turing Machine; and Petzold, Annotated Turing.
90. Turing’s later work suggests that his use of cognitive language throughout 
“On Computable Numbers” was not accidental and that he meant it to define sen-
tience more generally. See Turing, “Computing Machinery.”
91. Turing, “Computing Machinery,” 458. 
92. Turing, “On Computable Numbers,” 231. 
93. Turing, “On Computable Numbers,” 231. 
94. Turing, “On Computable Numbers,” 231. 
95. Turing, “On Computable Numbers,” 231. 
96. Turing, “On Computable Numbers,” 231. 
97. Turing, “On Computable Numbers,” 241. 
98. “We may hope that machines will eventually compete with men in all purely 
intellectual fields” (Turing, “Computing Machinery,” 460).
99. To what extent a personal computer is a Turing machine is matter of con-
tention. The Turing machine is a thought experiment that imagines a machine. The 
PC is a machine simulating the thought experiment. See Chalmers, “Does a Rock 
Implement”; Petzold, Code; and Putnam, Representation and Reality, 121–25.
100. Haigh, “Actually,” 241. 
101. Haigh, “Actually,” 241. 
102. Church and Turing, “Computable Numbers,” 42–43; also cited in Petzold, 
Annotated Turing, 63. 
103. This is a topic of some contention in the literature. James Moor includes 
software immateriality as one of the “three myths” of computer science: “As a 
practical matter what we regard as computer instructions, and consequently what 
we regard as computer programs, is determined by the computers available” (Moor, 
“Three Myths,” 215). Nurbay Irmak argues that software is instead a purely abstract 
artifact, akin to a musical work. See Irmak, “Software.” See also Colburn, “Software”; 
and R. Turner, “Programming Languages.” 
104. A true universal Turing machine would require a tape that is infinitely long. 
See Turing, “Computable Numbers,” 249.
105. Mike Davey built and displayed a similar instrument at Harvard University’s 
Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments in 2012. He writes: “My goal in building 
this project was to create a machine that embodied the classic look and feel of 
the machine presented in Turing’s paper. I wanted to build a machine that would 
be immediately recognizable as a Turing machine to someone familiar with Turing’s 
work” (Davey, “Turing Machine Overview,” n.p.).
106. Daugherty, “Numeral Adding”; Degener, “Combined Type-Writing and Adding 
Machine”; Ellis, “Combined Type-Writing and Adding Machine”; Wright, “Computing 
Attachment”; Wright, “Computing Mechanism.”
107. Cuttriss, “Telegraphy.” 
	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 2	
215

108. Bumstead and Bumstead, “Telegraphy,” 1. 
109. Brown, “Automatic Program System”; Brown, “Selective Program System”; 
Bumstead and Bumstead, “Telegraphy”; Creed, “Printing Apparatus”; Hallden, “Print-
ing-Telegraph System”; Murray, “Tape-Controlled Telegraphic Transmitting Appara-
tus”; Vriendt, “Program Distribution System”; Wheatstone, “Improvement.” 
110. Bumstead and Bumstead, “Telegraphy,” 13–14. 
111. Bumstead and Bumstead, “Telegraphy,” 14. 
112. Bumstead and Bumstead, “Telegraphy,” 6. 
113. Bumstead and Bumstead, “Telegraphy,” 13. 
114. Bumstead and Bumstead, “Telegraphy,” 12. 
115. Bumstead and Bumstead, “Telegraphy,” 12. 
116. Murray, “Setting Type,” 556. 
117. The institutional distinctions between software engineering and computer sci-
ence often hinge on the extent to which the discipline pays heed to the physical limi-
tations of computing. As usual, the situation on the ground is much more complicated, 
and the boundaries between software engineering and computer science are fast erod-
ing. Still, North American students often have the choice to major in computer science 
or software engineering. It would not be unusual for the one faculty to be located in 
the School for Liberal Arts and Sciences and the other in the School of Engineering. 
Consider also the two major professional organizations: the Institute for Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). See 
Glass, “Comparative Analysis”; Glass et al., “Analysis of Research”; Parnas, “Software 
Engineering Programs”; and Vessey et al., “Unified Classification System.”
118. Deutsch, “Quantum Theory”; Lloyd, “Ultimate Physical Limits”; Piccinini, 
“Computational Modelling.” 
119. Kittler, “There Is No Software,” opening paragraph. 
120. There is a long-standing joke in Marxist literature that involves flipping 
Hegel, who prioritized the transcendent spiritual over the physical and material 
forms of life, “back to his feet.” For example: “The form of wood, for instance, is 
altered, by making a table out of it. Yet, for all that, the table continues to be that 
common, every-day thing, wood. But, so soon as it steps forth as a commodity, it 
changes into something transcendent. It not only stands with its feet on the ground, 
but, in relation to all other commodities, it stands on its head, and evolves out of 
its wooden brain grotesque ideas, far more wonderful than ‘table-turning’ ever was” 
(Marx and Engels, Marx-Engels Reader, 320). Or this example: “Thereby the dialectic 
of the concept itself became merely the conscious reflex of the dialectical motion 
of the real world and the dialectic of Hegel was placed upon its head; or rather, 
turned off its head, on which it was standing before, and placed on its feet again” 
(Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach, 44).
121. Manovich, “There Is Only Software,” 273. 
122. Kay, “Computer Software,” 59, quoted in Manovich, Software Takes Com-
mand, 105–6. 
123. Manovich, Software Takes Command, 150–51. 
216	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER 3: FORM, FORMULA, FORMAT
1. Andrews et al., “Survey and Critique”; Karim and Zhou, “X-TREPAN.” 
2. Baudrillard, Simulacra and Simulation, 139–40.
3. ISO, “Document Management,” vii. 
4. Sterne, MP3, 11.
5. C. Levine, Forms, 7. 
6. The Unicode Consortium defines fancy text as “text representation consisting 
of plain text plus added information” (Unicode Consortium, Unicode Standard, 9–10).
7. Sterne wrote of the need for format theory that “demands greater specificity 
when we talk in general terms about media.” See Sterne, MP3, 11.
8. Sterne, MP3, 11.
9. Stensola et al., “Entorhinal Grid Map.” 
10. See Wittgenstein, Philosophical Grammar, 45. On incommensurate languages, 
see also D. Davidson, Essays, 187–99.
11. Sontag, Against Interpretation, 14 
12. For example, see the Introduction to C. Levine, Forms.
13. Gitelman, Paper Knowledge, 2.
14. Tanselle, “Concept of Format,” 113. 
15. Tanselle, “Concept of Format,” 67. 
16. Collingwood, “Form and Content,” 335. 
17. McKeown, Text Generation, 1 (emphasis mine). 
18. Hayles, “Print Is Flat,” 72. 
19. Hoare, “Record Handling”; Nygaard and Dahl, “Development of the SIMULA 
Languages.” 
20. It is difficult to resist quoting from Descartes’s Meditations on First Philosophy 
when discussing idealism. He wrote: “Let us take, for instance, this piece of wax. It has 
been taken quite recently from the honeycomb. . . . It retains some of the scent of the 
flowers from which it was collected. Its color, shape, and size are manifest. It is hard 
and cold; it is easy to touch. . . . But notice that, as I am speaking, I am bringing it 
close to the fire. The remaining traces of the honey flavor are disappearing; the scent 
is vanishing; the color is changing . . . it is becoming liquid and hot. . . . Does the 
same wax still remain? I must confess that it does” (Descartes, Meditations, 21 (30).
21. Gombrich, Art and Illusion, 60.
22. Gombrich, Art and Illusion, 62.
23. “What I have called the ‘schema’ refers to universals,” Gombrich writes in 
reference to Plato. See the discussion in Gombrich, Art and Illusion, 123–25.
24. Plato, Timaeus (trans. Jowett), 469 (49d). 
25. Plato, Timaeus (trans. Bury), 115 (49d). 
26. Plato, Dialogues, 389a–b. 
27. My reading of Plato would be impossible without help from the Perseus 
Digital Library Project, which allows the reader to explore the Greek originals side by 
side with translations, maps, dictionaries, and other parallel texts. Sources consulted 
on Plato’s theory of forms include Dixsaut, “Ousia”; Hegel, “Philosophy of Plato”; 
	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 3	
217

Rist, “Plato’s Earlier Theory”; and Woods, “Form.” I would also like to thank Stathis 
Gourgouris for his generous comments on these passages.
28. Hegel, Hegel’s Aesthetics, 70. 
29. German words collected from the introduction to volume 13 of Hegel, Werke.
30. Hegel, Hegel’s Aesthetics, 81. 
31. Hegel, Hegel’s Aesthetics, 89. 
32. Hegel, Hegel’s Aesthetics, 81. 
33. Hegel, Werke, Introduction (Einleitung) to volume 13.
34. Hegel, “Philosophy of Plato,” 249. 
35. In an essay on Hegel’s formalism, John Crowe Ransom likens the concrete 
universal to a “formula of a chemical reaction,” a “recipe for a dish,” and a “blue-
print of a machine.” Crucially, the Hegelian universal becomes concrete when the 
machine “has been materialized” and is “working” properly. Turing machines from 
the previous chapter are concrete universals to the extent that they embody an 
idealized algorithm and a specified device. See Ransom, “Concrete Universal,” 387. 
36. Wimsatt, “Structure of the Concrete Universal,” 262. 
37. Wimsatt, “Structure of the Concrete Universal,” 280. 
38. Shklovsky et al., Sborniki, 1: 25.
39. Khlebnikov, Collected Works, 179; Khlebnikov, King of Time, 151; LaBelle, 
Lexicon of the Mouth, 63. 
40. Khlebnikov, King of Time, 152. 
41. Shklovsky et al., Poetika, 13. 
42. To this strain of formalism one could also adduce Vladimir Propp’s well-
known Morphology of the Folktale, a text that finds a limited number of universal 
principles of composition in the multiplicity of folktale traditions.
43. Veselovsky, “O metode i zadachah,” 16–17; and Veselovsky, “Tri glavy,” 227.
44. Veselovsky, “Psihologicheskii paralelism,” 185; Veselovsky, “Tri glavy,” 475. 
45. Veselovsky, “Tri glavy,” 475–76. 
46. Jameson, Marxism and Form, 404. 
47. Heidegger, Being and Time, 202 (220). For a defense of Heidegger’s etymo-
logical methods, see King, “Heidegger’s Etymological Method.” 
48. Best and Marcus, “Surface Reading,” 9. 
49. Best and Marcus, “Surface Reading,” 12. 
50. Sontag, Against Interpretation, 12.
51. Sontag, Against Interpretation, 12.
52. Sontag, Against Interpretation, 14.
53. Sontag, Against Interpretation, 9, 10. 
54. Sontag, Against Interpretation, 3. 
55. Sontag, Against Interpretation, 9. 
56. Sontag, Against Interpretation, 10. 
57. Best and Marcus, “Surface Reading,” 10. 
58. Martin Luther said, “Not only are we the freest of rulers, we are also priests 
forever, which is far more excellent than being kings, for as priests we are worthy to 
218	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 3

appear before God to pray for others and to teach one another divine things” (Luther, 
“Freedom,” 43).
59. Tanselle, “Concept of Format,” 67.
60. See, for example, the discussion on the limits of the inductive method in 
bibliographic study in McKenzie et al., Making Meaning, 16–17. See also McGann, 
“Socialization of Text”; and Tanselle, “Textual Instability.”
61. Phelps, “Edition as Art Form,” 65. 
62. Shillingsburg, “Being Textually Aware,” 171. 
63. McKay, Harlem Shadows. 
64. Drucker and McGann, “Images as the Text,” n.p. 
65. Lubbock, Craft of Fiction, 1.
66. Drucker and McGann, “Images as the Text,” n.p. 
67. See Blair, “Note Taking”; Daston, “Taking Note(s)”; and Piper, “Of Note.”
68. Adobe Systems Inc., “Plans and Pricing.” 
69. Adobe Systems Inc., “Adobe Acrobat Reader.” 
70. Adobe Systems Inc., “Plans and Pricing.” 
71. “Amazon Kindle: Welcome.”
72. “Amazon Kindle: FAQ.” 
73. Google Inc., “Read Books.” 
74. Manovich, Software Takes Command, 71, 79–80. See also Nelson, “File 
Structure.” 
75. On epistemic disobedience, see Mignolo, “Epistemic Disobedience.” 
76. On the movie theater as the intersection of incommensurate media, see 
Galloway, Gaming, 39.
77. See Best and Marcus, “Surface Reading.” 
78. Kaiman, “Computer-Aided Publications Editor,” 65–66. 
79. Kaiman, “Computer-Aided Publications Editor,” 66. 
80. Kaiman, “Computer-Aided Publications Editor,” 68.
81. Ritchie and Thompson, QED Text Editor. 
82. Angluin and Deutsch, Reference Manual, 1–2. 
83. Angluin and Deutsch, Reference Manual, 3-1.
84. Berns, “Format Program,” 85; Berns, “Description of FORMAT,” 141. 
85. Berns, “Description of FORMAT,” 141–42. 
86. Berns, “Format Program,” 91. See also Berns, “Description of FORMAT,” 145.
87. Kernighan and Ossanna, “Troff User’s Manual,” 1. 
88. Furuta et al., “Document Formatting Systems,” 418.
89. Furuta et al., “Document Formatting Systems,” 418. 
90. Furuta et al., “Document Formatting Systems,” 417–19; A. C. Shaw, “Model 
for Document Preparation Systems.” 
91. Furuta et al., “Document Formatting Systems,” 421.
92. Furuta et al., “Document Formatting Systems,” 419–22. 
93. O’Gorman, “Document Spectrum,” 1162–63. See also O’Gorman and Kasturi, 
Document Image Analysis, 82–99. 
	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 3	
219

94. There are also genres of literature where the rivers do become meaningful, 
as in concrete poetry, for example.
95. A series of paper sizes are governed by the international standard ISO 216. 
In the Imperial System these equate to 33.1 in. × 46.8 in. for A1 paper and 8.27 in. 
× 11.7 in. for A4 paper. See ISO, “Writing Paper.”
96. Furuta et al., “Document Formatting Systems,” 419–20; Kimura and Shaw, 
“Structure of Abstract Document Objects.” 
97. See ISO 8879:1986.
98. Madnick and Moulton, “SCRIPT,” 92, 97. 
99. Berns, “Description of FORMAT,” 141. 
100. Kernighan and Ossanna, “Troff User’s Manual,” 1. 
101. TROFF at least is actually Turing complete, according to Raymond, Art of 
UNIX Programming, 195.
102. Drafted in 1978 as ISO/TC97/Sc17/N46 and adopted by the International 
Organization for Standardization in 1984 as ISO 7498.
103. Quotes in this list are from L. J. Miller, “ISO Reference Model,” 285–86. 
The full OSI protocol stack is composed of the following layers: Application, Pre-
sentation, Session, Transport, Network, Data Link, and Physical. See also Day, “(Un)
Revised OSI Reference Model”; Day and Zimmermann, “OSI Reference Model”; and 
Piatkowski, “ISO-ANSI Open Systems Reference Model.”
104. The DOM technically exists at the application layer of the OSI model.
105. Galloway, Protocol, 28–54. 
106. The International Standards Organization (ISO) in the case of OSI, the 
Internet Engineering Task Force in the case of TCP/IP, and the World Wide Web 
Consortium (W3C) in the case of the DOM.
107. See U.S. Code, Title 17, §106.
108. Matthew Kirschenbaum writes: “Computers are unique in the history of writ-
ing technologies in that they present a premeditated material environment built and 
engineered to propagate an illusion of immateriality; the digital nature of computa-
tional representation is precisely what enables this illusion—or else call it a working 
model—of immaterial behavior” (Kirschenbaum, Mechanisms, 135).
109. For a more extended discussion about the impact of sharing technologies 
on the distribution of cultural goods, see Lessig, “Free(ing) Culture.”
110. Clark, “Copyright Environment,” 81.
111. Clark, “Copyright Environment,” 84. 
112. Clark, “Copyright Environment,” 83–84. See also CITED Consortium, CITED 
Final Report.
113. Szabo, “Formalizing,” abstract. 
114. For examples, see Grundy, “Information Distribution System”; Robshaw, 
“Abuse-Resistant Object Distribution System”; and Takayuki and Naoya, “Licensee 
Notification System.”
115. Benson and Urich, “Method and System,” 1–2. 
116. See Robshaw, “Abuse-Resistant Object Distribution System.”
220	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 3

117. See U.S. Code, Title 17, §1201.
118. See U.S. Code, Title 17, §1201.a.1.A.
119. See U.S. Code, Title 17, §1201.a.3.A.
120. See U.S. Code, Title 17, §1201.a.3.B.
121. DMCA 1201 provides for a number of complicated exemptions that might, 
under some interpretations, sanction limited use for academic purposes. See Arm-
strong, “Digital Rights Management”; Herman and Gandy, “Catch 1201”; Ku, “Critique”; 
Liu, “DMCA”; and Stoltz, “Is It Illegal.”
122. Von Lohmann, Unintended Consequences, 1. 
123. Fry, “Circumventing Access Controls.” 
124. Ferullo, “Major Copyright Issues”; Mueller, “Reinventing Media Activism”; 
Postigo, “Information Communication Technologies.” 
125. Agfa Monotype Corp. v. Adobe Systems, Inc., 404 F. Supp. 2d 1030 (N.D. 
Ill. 2005). See also; Lipton, “To (C) or Not to (C)?”; and von Lohmann, Unintended 
Consequences. 
126. American Law Institute, Restatement, secs. 1–2. 
127. Digital Millennium Copyright Act, 112 Stat. 2864-6, 2884 (web.archive.org/
web/20161222002713/https://www.copyright.gov/legislation/pl105-304.pdf). See also 
Pike & Fischer Inc., Digital Millennium Copyright Act, 20–22, 34.
128. Seringhaus, “E-Book Transactions,” 150. 
129. Note that these effects are not necessarily limited to contemporary docu-
ments. Medieval texts often involved locking mechanisms, locks, and hidden com-
partments that would similarly alter the nature of the textual encounter, depending 
on the reader.
CHAPTER 4: RECONDITE SURFACES
1. Chun, “Enduring Ephemeral,” 148. 
2. Solid-state memory technology (e.g., flash memory) stores information in 
capacitor “circuit states,” as opposed to electromagnetic storage, which works by 
modulating electrical charge over a magnetic surface. Solid-state capacitor storage 
was used in the earliest computers but was prohibitively expensive to manufacture 
until well into the twenty-first century, when solid-state drives began to replace elec-
tromagnetic storage in consumer electronics. See Kahng, “Semipermanent Memory,” 
1296. In an earlier paper Kahng and Sze explain: “A structure has been proposed 
and fabricated in which semipermanent charge storage is possible. A floating gate 
is placed a small distance from an electron source. When an appropriately high 
field is applied through an outer gate, the floating gate charges up. The charges 
are stored even after the removal of the charging field due to much lower back 
transport probability. . . . Such a device functions as a bistable memory with nonde-
structive read-out features. The memory holding time observed was longer than one 
hour” (Kahng and Sze, “Floating Gate,” 1288). On floating-gate avalanche injection, 
see also Frohman-Bentchkowsky, “Fully Decoded”; and Horton, “Experimental Study.”
3. Heim, Electric Language, 211; McCorduck, Universal Machine, 51.
	
NOTES TO CHAPTERS 3 AND 4	
221

4. McCorduck, Universal Machine, 51; also quoted in Heim, Electric Language, 192. 
5. Kirschenbaum, Mechanisms, 51.
6. Drucker, “Performative Materiality,” para. 2.
7. “Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and make it universally 
accessible and useful” (Google Inc., “About Google”). See also Johanna Drucker’s 
discussion on “the totalizing drive of the digital” in Drucker, “Digital Ontologies,” 145.
8. See Hayles, “Print Is Flat.”
9. These stages correspond roughly to the “three generations of electronic 
computing” outlined in Peter Denning’s “theory of operating systems.” See Denning, 
“Third Generation Computer Systems.”
10. Programmable media more generally have multiple origins, worthy of their 
own extended history. The French textile worker Basile Bouchon used “drill paper” 
to automate industrial drawlooms. The invention of the loom could also be attrib-
uted to the Banū Mūsā brothers, ninth-century automata inventors from Baghdad; 
to Jacques de Vaucanson, who delighted the public with his lifelike mechanisms in 
the mid-eighteenth century; or to Joseph Charles Marie Jacquard, who improved on 
and popularized Bouchon’s looms on an industrial scale around the same time. See 
Koetsier, “Prehistory of Programmable Machines,” 593–95; Randell et al., “History of 
Digital Computers”; and Riskin, “Defecating Duck.” 
11. Adler and Albertman, “Knitting Machine”; Casper, “Remote Control Advertis-
ing”; Hough, “Wired Radio Program Apparatus.” 
12. Murray, “Setting Type,” 36.
13. Murray, “Setting Type,” 36. 
14. Murray, “Setting Type,” 86. 
15. ITU, Documents diplomatiques. 
16. Brackbill, “Some Telegraphers’ Terms,” 288. 
17. Boyd, “Telegraph-Key”; H. G. Martin, “Telegraphic Transmitter.” 
18. Halstead, “Genesis and Speed”; McNicol, American Telegraph Practice, 207; 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Displacement of Morse Operators.” 
19. Brackbill, “Some Telegraphers’ Terms,” 288; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
“Displacement of Morse Operators.” 
20. Brackbill, “Some Telegraphers’ Terms,” 288. 
21. Brackbill, “Some Telegraphers’ Terms,” 289. 
22. See Brackbill, “Some Telegraphers’ Terms,” 288–89. Operators at the time 
were all almost exclusively male.
23. Hughes, “Improvement in Telegraphs,” 2.
24. Hughes, “Improvement in Telegraphs,” 1. See also Hayles, “Print Is Flat,” 
145–47; and Noll, Evolution of Media, 20–21. 
25. Hausmann, Telegraph Engineering; Rowland, “Multiplex Printing-Telegraph.”
26. Technical literature makes a distinction between space- and frequency-
division multiplexing. On some level, space-division multiplexing simply involves the 
splitting of a signal into multiple physical channels (wires). Frequency-division multi-
plexing better “fills” the space of a single channel.
222	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 4

27. Murray, “Setting Type.” 
28. Leibnitz, “Explication.” 
29. Bacon, Advancement of Learning, 265. 
30. Bacon, Advancement of Learning, 266. 
31. Jennings, “Annotated History.” 
32. The Australian Donald Murray improved on the Baudot system to minimize 
the amount of holes needing to be punched, allotting fewer perforations to common 
English letters. See Murray, “Setting Type,” 567.
33. Twenty-eight measures indicate the numerical “figure space” and twenty-six 
indicate double quotes, which share the encoding length with the letter z.
34. Beauchamp, History of Telegraphy, 380–97; Murray, “Setting Type.” 
35. Murray, “Setting Type,” 557. 
36. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, women made up 24 per-
cent of the Morse operators in 1915 (before the widespread advent of automated 
telegraphy). By 1931 women made up 64 percent of printer and Morse manual 
operators. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Displacement of Morse Operators,” 514.
37. Brackbill, “Some Telegraphers’ Terms,” 290. 
38. ITU, Telegraph Regulations, 12. 
39. ITU, Telegraph Regulations, 12. 
40. ITU, Telegraph Regulations, 13. 
41. ITU, Telegraph Regulations, 13. 
42. Goldberg, “Controller,” 3.
43. Goldberg, “Controller,” 1.
44. Goldberg, “Controller,” 1–4. 
45. Goldberg, “Controller,” 1.
46. Chun, Programmed Visions, 3. 
47. Susan Hockey writes, “Father Busa has stories of truckloads of punched 
cards being transported from one center to another in Italy” (Hockey, “History of 
Humanities Computing,” n.p.).
48. Lee and Worral, Electronic Composition, 48. 
49. Daniel et al., Magnetic Recording; Engel, “1888–1988”; Poulsen, “Method of 
Recording”; O. Smith, “Some Possible Forms”; Thiele, “Magnetic Sound Recording”; 
Vasic and Kurtas, Coding and Signal Processing.
50. Camras, “Magnetic Recording Tapes,” 505. 
51. Dee, “Magnetic Tape,” 1775. 
52. Fankhauser, “Telegraphone,” 37–38. 
53. Fankhauser, “Telegraphone,” 40. 
54. Fankhauser, “Telegraphone,” 39–40. 
55. Fankhauser, “Telegraphone,” 44. 
56. Fankhauser, “Telegraphone,” 45. 
57. Fankhauser, “Telegraphone,” 41. 
58. The staff of the Computation Laboratory of Harvard University wrote: “Two 
means are available for preparing the functional tapes required for the operation of 
	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 4	
223

the interpolators. First, when the tabular values of f(x) have been previously published, 
they may be copied on the keys of the functional tape preparation unit . . . and the 
tape produced by the punches associated with this unit, under manual control. Sec-
ond, as suitable control tape may be coded directing the calculator to compute the 
values of f(x) and record them by means of one of the four output punches, mounted 
on the right wing of the machine” (Computation Laboratory, Relay Calculator, 33).
59. Computation Laboratory, Relay Calculator, 30. 
60. Computation Laboratory, Magnetic Drum Calculator, 1. 
61. Computation Laboratory, Magnetic Drum Calculator, 34–35. 
62. Computation Laboratory, Magnetic Drum Calculator, 35, 143–88. 
63. Epstein and Innes, “Electrographic Printer,” 1. 
64. Epstein and Innes, “Electrographic Printer,” 2. 
65. Eisenberg, “Word Processing.” 
66. American Bar Association, “$10,000 Typewriter,” 416.
67. See Ohmori et al., “Memory Element”; and Stefanita, Magnetism, 1–69.
68. Recall Wittgenstein’s broken reading machines, which exhibited a similarly 
recursive problem of verification. To check whether someone understood a message, 
one has to resort to another message, and so on.
69. Youngquist and Hanes, “Magnetic Reader,” 1. 
70. Youngquist and Hanes, “Magnetic Reader,” 1. 
71. Morgan and Norwood, “IBM Selectric Composer,” 69. 
72. Bishop et al., “Development,” 387.
73. Clancy et al., “Data Reading,” 1. 
74. May, “IBM Word Processing Developments,” 743. 
75. May, “IBM Word Processing Developments,” 743. 
76. May, “IBM Word Processing Developments,” 742. 
77. Bishop et al., “Development,” 382. 
78. Bishop et al., “Development,” 382. See also May, “IBM Word Processing 
Developments.” 
79. Frutiger, “IBM Selectric Composer,” 10. 
80. Rogers, “The Demo”; Tweney, “Mother of All Demos.” 
81. Engelbart, “Doug Engelbart 1968 Demo.” 
82. Engelbart, Human Intellect Augmentation Techniques, 1. 
83. The source of the cryptic phrase is likely Charles Edward Weller: “We were 
then in the midst of an exciting political campaign, and it was then for the first time 
that the well known sentence was inaugurated—‘Now is the time for all good men 
to come to the aid of the party’; also the opening sentence of the Declaration of 
Independence, . . . which sentences were repeated many times in order to test the 
speed of the machine” (Weller, Early History of the Typewriter, 21, 30).
84. Weller, Early History of the Typewriter, 1. 
85. Engelbart, Human Intellect Augmentation Techniques, 48–49. I have reproduced 
the text verbatim, preserving the line breaks, because formatting is an important part 
of the reported experience. 
224	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 4

86. Engelbart, Human Intellect Augmentation Techniques, 50. 
87. Engelbart, Human Intellect Augmentation Techniques, 50–51. 
88. Engelbart, Human Intellect Augmentation Techniques, 51. 
89. Engelbart and English, “Research Center,” 396. 
90. Engelbart, Human Intellect Augmentation Techniques, 6. 
91. Engelbart, Human Intellect Augmentation Techniques, 6. 
92. Engelbart, Human Intellect Augmentation Techniques, 67. 
93. Engelbart, Human Intellect Augmentation Techniques, 67. 
CHAPTER 5: LITERATURE DOWN TO A PIXEL
1. Mauss, Techniques, 78. 
2. One definition of medium in the Oxford English Dictionary is “any physical ma-
terial (as tape, disk, paper, etc.) used for recording or reproducing data, images, or 
sound” (OED Online, s.v. “Medium,” December 2016; www.oed.com/view/Entry/115772 
[accessed December 26, 2016]).
3. J. Cameron, The Terminator; J. Cameron, Terminator 2. 
4. The term digital being was made popular by Nicholas Negroponte in the 
1990s. See Negroponte, Being Digital.
5. Golumbia, Cultural Logic, 19. 
6. Golumbia, Cultural Logic, 11. 
7. Golumbia, Cultural Logic, 22, 130–35. 
8. Golumbia, Cultural Logic, 222. 
9. Marche, “Literature Is not Data,” n.p. 
10. Fish, “Digital Humanities,” n.p. 
11. Fish, “Digital Humanities,” n.p. 
12. For a summary of digital physics and metaphysics, see Floridi, “Against Digi-
tal Ontology”; and Steinhart, “Digital Metaphysics.” 
13. I say “a priori” because one must already inhabit the category (of being 
human) to engage in its analysis.
14. Gregory Hickok, a prominent University of California, Irvine, cognitive scien-
tist wrote: “The brain samples the world in rhythmic pulses, perhaps even discrete 
time chunks, much like the individual frames of a movie. From the brain’s perspec-
tive, experience is not continuous but quantized. . . . This is not to say that the 
brain dances to its own beat, dragging perception along for the ride. In fact, it 
seems to work the other way around: Rhythms in the environment, such as those 
in music or speech, can draw neural oscillations into their tempo, effectively syn-
chronizing the brain’s rhythms with those of the world around us” (Hickok, “It’s not 
a Stream,” n.p.). 
15. Also known as the “single current” or “single Morse” system. See Weik, 
“Neutral Direct-Current Telegraph System.” The later International Telegraph Al-
phabet No. 2 (ITA2), a convention that preceded ASCII, could also be adapted to 
work with “double current” devices, in which case 0 represented “negative current” 
and 1 “positive current” (ITU, Telegraph Regulations, 36).
	
NOTES TO CHAPTERS 4 AND 5	
225

16. Crehore and Squier, “Practical Transmitter”; Hausmann, Telegraph Engineer-
ing, 374. 
17. Siegert, “Cacography.” 
18. Siegert takes the Pollak-Virag telegraph as an “apocryphal” emblem of a 
“systemic . . . logic” in the “dominant cultural technique,” representative of the 
“order of digital signals” (Siegert, “Cacography,” 41). Although not concerned with 
the history or philosophy of digital media explicitly, Siegert suggests that the writ-
ing telegraph symbolizes the cleansing of “the noise of all graphic form” (32). His 
theory of cultural techniques instead creates “an awareness for the plenitude of a 
world of as yet undistinguished things, that, as an inexhaustible reservoir of pos-
sibilities, remain the basic point of reference for every type of culture” (35). The 
world of undistinguished things hints that his position is on the analog side of the 
continuous-discrete dichotomy of human experience.
19. Pollak and Virag, “Writing-Telegraph,” 3. 
20. Pollak and Virag, “Writing-Telegraph,” 1. 
21. Pollak and Virag, “Writing-Telegraph,” 1. 
22. Bergson, Creative Evolution, 36. 
23. See Bergson, Creative Evolution, 36. On the rather complex topic of discrete 
versus continuous multiplicities in Bergsonian thought, see also Deleuze, Bergsonism; 
and James, Pluralistic Universe.
24. Bergson, Creative Evolution, 332. 
25. Bergson, Creative Evolution, 167–82; Russell, Philosophy of Bergson, 4. 
26. Bergson, Creative Evolution, 109. 
27. Bergson, Matter and Memory, 19, 280. 
28. Bergson, Matter and Memory, 123. 
29. Russell, Philosophy of Bergson, 24. 
30. Regarding the “gross error of those who assert the materiality of the soul, 
affirming it to be homogeneous, and continuous with the body; whereas it is hetero-
geneous, and discrete,” see Swedenborg, Treatise, 24. It is otherwise in the “Angelic 
Idea of Creation”: “The question was asked, ‘Whence, then, is hell?’ They [the an-
gels] said, ‘From man’s freedom, without which a man would not be a man,’ because 
man, from that freedom, broke the continuity in himself; and this being broken, 
separation took place; and the continuity, which was in him from creation, became 
like a chain, or a piece of linked work, which falls to pieces when the hooks above 
are broken or torn out, and then hangs down from small threads. Separation or 
rupture was brought about, and is brought about, by the denial of God” (Sweden-
borg, Apocalypse, 290).
31. Brittan, Spiritual Telegraph, 169. 
32. Brittan, Spiritual Telegraph, 169. 
33. Brittan, Spiritual Telegraph, 169. 
34. Brittan, Spiritual Telegraph, 169. 
35. Dole, Philosophy of Creation, 236–37. 
36. Edwards, “Neglected Texts”; Shaked, Dualism in Transformation, 52–71. 
226	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 5

37. Murray, “Setting Type,” 559. 
38. One could make more of Dervish orientalism here. Murray himself was an 
empire outsider, born in the small, remote town of Invercargill, New Zealand (a town 
that also happens to be one of the southernmost cities in world): “I am a child of 
the Southern Cross, and I have no preordained respect for geniuses born under the 
Northern constellations” (Murray, Philosophy of Power, 51).
39. See, for example, Dale Angell: “The telegraph is a digital device, send-
ing only high and low pulses through the wire” (Angell, Pro Tools, 233). Thomas 
C. Jepsen says, “The telegraph was a digital device that used dots and dashes 
in a manner similar to the ones and zeroes of digital logic” (Jepsen, My Sisters 
Telegraphic, 195). And Douglas E. Comer writes, “The telegraph is a digital device 
because instead of sending a continuous signal that is an exact analog of the input, 
the telegraph clicks to send the individual characters” (Comer, Internet Book, 32).
40. On intermedia in concrete poetry, see Higgins, “Intermedia” and Wendt, 
“Sound Poetry.” 
41. For a detailed description of contemporary internet infrastructure, see Staro­
sielski, Undersea Network.
42. See Mishima and Itoh, “Novel Frame Interpolation Method.” See also Lehmann, 
Flüssige Kristalle; and Reinitzer, “Beiträge zur Kenntniss des Cholesterins.”
43. Brannan, Applications of Parallel Processing; Coltheart, “Iconic Memory”; 
Efron, “Conservation.” 
44. Burr, “Temporal Summation”; Didyk et al., “Perceptually-Motivated Real-Time 
Temporal Upsampling.”
45. Didyk et al., “Perceptually-Motivated Real-Time Temporal Upsampling”; Purves 
et al., “Types of Eye Movements”; Rottach et al., “Comparison.”
46. Har-Noy and Nguyen, “LCD Motion Blur Reduction”; Klompenhouwer and 
Velthoven, “Motion Blur Reduction.”
47. Kurita, “35.1”; Pan et al., “LCD Motion Blur Modeling.” 
48. Edgerton, History of American Television. 
49. It would be interesting to create the reverse effect by reducing the fidelity 
of a “cheap” soap opera video feed to the more “expensive” look of film shot at 24 
frames per second.
50. For a primer on both sides of social constructivism, see Boghossian, Fear of 
Knowledge; and Hacking, Social Construction of What.
51. Yet other techniques of apprehension are socially constructed. Thus al-
though all opera is in the human audible frequency range, acculturation to opera 
listening helps greatly in its enjoyment. Some aspects of opera appreciation are 
learned (such as knowing the plot), whereas others are physiologically determined 
(such as the ability to hear sounds).
52. Corey J. Maley writes, “The received view is that analog representations 
vary smoothly, while digital representations vary in stepwise manner. In other words, 
‘digital’ is synonymous with ‘discrete,’ while ‘analog’ is synonymous with ‘continuous’ ” 
(Maley, “Analog and Digital,” 117). Friedrich A. Kittler writes, “Confronted as they are 
	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 5	
227

with a continuous environment of weather, waves, and wars, digital computers can 
cope with this real number-avalanche only by adding element to element” (Kittler, 
“There Is No Software,” n.p.).
53. Kernighan, D Is for Digital, 21. 
54. Kernighan, D Is for Digital, 22. 
55. N. Goodman, Languages of Art, 161.
56. Goodman differentiates between “syntactic” and “semantic” density. Some 
notational systems such as writing and the decimal system are, according to Good-
man, “syntactically differentiated but semantically dense.” The key distinction for 
him seems to be a “limit on the length of message,” by which I think he means 
something related to infinite divisibility. The decimal system as a whole can continue 
to approach a quantity indefinitely, reaching an arbitrary point of precision. The 
computer limits decimal precision to some arbitrary depth of approximation, making 
it semantically discrete. I find this part of the argument unconvincing. See N. Good-
man, Languages of Art, 161–64.
57. Haugeland, “Analog,” 213. 
58. Haugeland, “Analog,” 214. 
59. Wu-Tang Clan, Once Upon a Time in Shaolin. See Budnik, “Copyright”; 
Cohen, “For What It’s Worth”; and Morris, Selling Digital Music.
60. Katz, “Analog and Digital Representation.” 
61. Drucker and McGann, “Images as the Text,” n.p. 
62. Winner, “Do Artifacts Have Politics,” 135. 
63. Winner, “Do Artifacts Have Politics,” 135. 
64. Winner, “Do Artifacts Have Politics.”
65. Shore, “Acrobat 2.0,” 379. 
CONCLUSION:
1. McGowan, “I Want to Know,” n.p. See also Sellars, “Petition.” 
2. Sellars, “Petition,” 4. See also U.S. Copyright Office, “Exemption.”
3. McNeal, “Targeted Killing”; Weber, “Keep Adding.” 
4. See, for example, Agamben, The Open, 39–49; and Hayles, “Print Is Flat,” 
16–17.
5. Uexküll, Foray, 44–53. 
6. Uexküll, Foray, 198. 
7. Uexküll, Foray, 12. 
8. Uexküll, Foray, 148. 
9. Nagel, “What Is It Like,” 439. 
10. Nagel, “What Is It Like,” 449. 
11. Nagel, “What Is It Like,” 444. 
12. Nagel, “What Is It Like,” 445–46. 
13. Bakhtin, “Man at the Mirror,” 71; translation mine. 
14. Uexküll, Foray, 52. 
15. ITU, Documents diplomatiques.
228	
NOTES TO CHAPTER 5 AND CONCLUSION

16. Bodó, “Russian Digital Shadow Libraries”; Elsevier Inc. et al. v. Sci-Hub et al., 
New York Southern District Court, Case 1:15-cv-04282-RWS; Liang, “Piracy”; Mahmood 
and Ilyas, “Copyright”; Nkiko, “Book Piracy in Nigeria”; Okiy, “Photocopying.”
17. Tenen and Foxman, “Book Piracy.” 
	
NOTES TO CONCLUSION	
229

This page intentionally left blank 

Aaron, V. Y., and J. Leburton. “Flash Memory: Towards Single-Electronics.” IEEE Po-
tentials 21, no. 4 (October 2002): 35–41.
Adler, Alfred, and Harry Albertman. “Knitting Machine.” Patent US1927016 A, filed 
August 1, 1922, issued September 1933. 
Adobe Systems Inc. “Adobe Acrobat Reader DC Install for All Versions.” 2016. web.
archive.org/web/20160308071105/https://get.adobe.com/reader/otherversions/ 
(accessed March 8, 2016).
———. “Plans and Pricing: Compare Plans Adobe Acrobat Dc.” 2016. web.archive.org/
web/20160308075809/https://acrobat.adobe.com/us/en/pricing/pricing-compare 
-plans.html (accessed March 8, 2016).
Agamben, Giorgio. The Open: Man and Animal, trans. Kevin Attell. Stanford, CA: Stan-
ford University Press, 2003.
“Amazon Kindle: FAQ.” Amazon.com, 2016. web.archive.org/web/20160304133525/
https://kindle.amazon.com/faq#PublicNotes0 (accessed March 4, 2016).
“Amazon Kindle: Welcome.” Amazon.com, 2015. web.archive.org/web/20160305181603 
/https://kindle.amazon.com/ (accessed March 5, 2016).
American Bar Association. “The $10,000 Typewriter.” ABA Journal 55, no. 5 (May 
1966): 416.
American Law Institute. Restatement of the Law Second: Contracts. St. Paul, MN: 
American Law Institute Publishers, 1973.
Andrews, R., J. Diederich, and A. B. Tickle. “Survey and Critique of Techniques for Ex-
tracting Rules from Trained Artificial Neural Networks.” Knowledge-Based Systems 
8, no. 6 (December 1995): 373–89. 
Angell, Dale. Pro Tools for Film and Video. Boston: Focal Press, 2009. 
Angluin, D. C., and L. P. Deutsch. Reference Manual: Q.E.D Time-Sharing Editor. Wash-
ington, DC: Office of the Secretary of Defense, March 1968.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

232	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Apple Inc. Apple Human Interface Guidelines: The Apple Desktop Interface. Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1987.
Armstrong, Timothy K. “Digital Rights Management and the Process of Fair Use.” 
Harvard Journal of Law and Technology 20, no. 1 (fall 2006): 50–121. 
Atzori, L., A. Iera, and G. Morabito. “From ‘Smart Objects’ to ‘Social Objects’: The 
Next Evolutionary Step of the Internet of Things.” IEEE Communications Magazine 
52, no. 1 (January 2014): 97–105.
Bachelard, Gaston. The Poetics of Space, trans. Maria Jolas, reprint ed. Boston: 
Beacon Press, 1994.
Bacon, Francis. Of the Advancement and Proficience of Learning; Or, The Partitions 
of Sciences, IX Bookes. Written in Latin by the Most Eminent, Illustrious Lord 
Francis Bacon, interpreted by Gilbert Wats. Oxford: L. Lichfield for R. Young & 
E. Forrest, 1640.
———. The Oxford Francis Bacon, vol. 4, The Advancement of Learning, ed. Michael 
Kiernan. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Bakhtin, Michail. “K voprosam metodologii estetiki slovesnogo tvorchestva” [On the 
Questions of Methodology of the Language Arts]. In Michail Bakhtin, Sobranie 
Sochineniy: Filosofskaia Estetika 20-h Godov [Collected Works: Aesthetic Philoso-
phy of the 1920s], ed. S. G. Bocharov and N. I. Nikolaev, 1: 265–325. Moscow: 
Russkie Slovari, 2003.
———. “Man at the Mirror” [Chelovek u Zerkala]. In M. M. Bakhtin Sobranie Sochinenii 
v Semi Tomakh, vol. 5, Raboty 40-X: Nachala 60-X Godov, 71. Moscow: IMLIRAN, 
Iazyki Slovianskikh Kultur, 1997. 
Barthes, Roland. “The Death of the Author.” In Roland Barthes, Image, Music, Text, 
trans. Stephen Heath, 142–49. New York: Hill & Wang, 1977.
———. The Rustle of Language, trans. Richard Howard. Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1989.
Bashkow, T. R., A. Sasson, and A. Kronfeld. “System Design of a FORTRAN Machine.” 
IEEE Transactions on Electronic Computers 16, no. 4 (August 1967): 485–99.
Baudrillard, Jean. Simulacra and Simulation. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 
1994.
———. “Symbolic Exchange and Death.” In Jean Baudrillard, Selected Writings, trans. 
Mark Poster, 119–47. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1988.
Beard, Marian H., Perry A. Caro, Jennifer B. Hsiao, Kevin J. Mackey, James G. Sand-
man Jr., Gary R. Steinbach, and Donald R. Woods. “Data Processor Having a 
User Interface Display with Metaphoric Objects.” Patent US4899136 A, filed April 
28, 1986, issued February 1990.
Beatty, John C., Janet S. Chin, and Henry F. Moll. “An Interactive Documentation 
System.” In SIGGRAPH ’79: Proceedings of the 6th Annual Conference on Com-
puter Graphics and Interactive Techniques, 71–82. New York: Association for 
Computing Machinery (ACM), 1979.
Beauchamp, K. G. History of Telegraphy. London: Institution of Engineering and 
Technology, 2001.

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
233
Benjamin, Walter. “The Author as Producer.” In Walter Benjamin, Understanding 
Brecht, trans. Anna Bostock, 105–22. London: Verso, 1983.
Benson, Greg, and Gregory H. Urich. “Method and System for Managing a Data Object 
so as to Comply with Predetermined Conditions for Usage.” Patent US5845281 A, 
filed January 31, 1996, issued December 1998. 
Benson, Greg, Gregory H. Urich, and Christopher L. Knauft. “Method and System for 
Managing a Data Object so as to Comply with Predetermined Conditions for 
Usage.” Patent US8479305 B1, filed October 1, 1998, issued July 2, 2013.
Bergson, Henri. Creative Evolution, trans. Arthur Mitchell. New York: Modern Library, 
1944.
———. Matter and Memory, trans. Nancy Margaret Paul and William Scott Palmer. 
London: G. Allen; and New York: Macmillan, 1929.
Bernard, Claude. An Introduction to the Study of Experimental Medicine. New York: 
Dover, 1957.
Berns, Gerald M. “Description of FORMAT, a Text-Processing Program.” Communica-
tions of the ACM 12, no. 3 (March 1969): 141–46.
———. “The Format Program.” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Writing and Speech 
11, no. 2 (August 1968): 85–91.
Best, Stephen, and Sharon Marcus. “Surface Reading: An Introduction.” Representa-
tions 108, no. 1 (November 2009): 1–21.
Bez, R., E. Camerlenghi, A. Modelli, and A. Visconti. “Introduction to Flash Memory.” 
Proceedings of the IEEE 91, no. 4 (April 2003): 489–502.
Billig, Michael, and Katie MacMillan. “Metaphor, Idiom, and Ideology: The Search for 
‘No Smoking Guns’ Across Time.” Discourse and Society 16, no. 4 (July 2005): 
459–80.
Bishop, D. A., R. S. Heard, R. E. Hunt, J. E. Jones, and R. A. Rahenkamp. “Development 
of the IBM Magnetic Tape Selectric Composer.” IBM Journal of Research and 
Development 12, no. 5 (September 1968): 380–98.
Blair, Ann. “Note Taking as an Art of Transmission.” Critical Inquiry 31, no. 1 (2004): 
85–107.
Blanchot, Maurice. The Work of Fire. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1995.
Bodó, Balázs. “A Short History of the Russian Digital Shadow Libraries.” November 4, 
2014. dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2616631 (accessed December 26, 2016).
Boghossian, Paul. Fear of Knowledge: Against Relativism and Constructivism, 1st ed. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2007.
Bohn, Jürgen, Vlad Coroamă, Marc Langheinrich, Friedemann Mattern, and Michael 
Rohs. “Living in a World of Smart Everyday Objects: Social, Economic, and Ethical 
Implications.” Human and Ecological Risk Assessment: An International Journal 
10, no. 5 (October 2004): 763–85.
Bök, Christian. “The Xenotext Works.” Harriet: The Blog, 2011. web.archive.org/save 
/_embed/https://www.poetryfoundation.org/harriet/2011/04/the-xenotext-works/ 
(accessed December 26, 2016). 
———. The Xenotext: Book I. Toronto: Coach House, 2015.

234	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Boyd, Walter Anderson. “Telegraph-Key.” Patent US1192270 A, filed July 29, 1914, 
issued July 25, 1916. 
Boyden, James H., Daniel E. Cummings, Jesse L. Dorogusker, Thomas J. Dougherty, 
S. Joy Mountford, Brygg A. Ullmer, and Allen Philip A. Van. “Methods and Sys-
tems for Providing Human/Computer Interfaces.” Patent WO1999019823 A3, filed 
October 8, 1988, issued August 19, 1999. 
Boyle, W., and G. Smith. “Information Storage Devices.” Patent US3858232 A, filed 
November 9, 1971, issued December 31, 1974. 
Brackbill, Hervey. “Some Telegraphers’ Terms.” American Speech 4, no. 4 (April 
1929): 287–90.
Brannan, J. R., ed. Applications of Parallel Processing in Vision. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 
1992.
Brittan, Samuel Byron. The Spiritual Telegraph. New York: Partridge & Brittan, 1854.
Brouillette, Sarah. “Unesco and the World-Literary System in Crisis.” Amodern, 2015. 
web.archive.org/web/20161226230728/http://amodern.net/article/unesco-brouil 
lette/ (accessed December 26, 2016). 
———. “Wither Production?” Historical Materialism 23, no. 4 (November 2015): 
197–209.
Brown, Scheibell Gordon. “Automatic Program System.” Patent US2031074 A, filed 
March 12, 1931, issued February 18, 1936. 
———. “Selective Program System.” Patent US2031075 A, filed March 12, 1931, issued 
February 18, 1936. 
Budnik, Ruslan. “Copyright and the Value of Attention.” Journal of Intellectual Prop-
erty Law and Practice 11, no. 5 (2016): 355–59.
Bumstead, Albert H., and Ralph W. Bumstead. “Telegraphy.” Patent US1187035 A, 
filed May 1, 1911, issued June 13, 1916. 
Burr, D. C. “Temporal Summation of Moving Images by the Human Visual System.” 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 211, no. 1184 
(March 1981): 321–39.
Bush, Vannevar. “As We May Think.” The Atlantic (July 1945): 101–8. 
Cajori, Florian. “The History of Notations of the Calculus.” Annals of Mathematics 
25, no. 1 (1923): 1–46.
Calverley, David J. “Android Science and Animal Rights: Does an Analogy Exist?” 
Connection Science 18, no. 4 (December 2006): 403–17.
Cameron, James, dir. The Terminator. Santa Monica, CA: MGM Home Entertainment, 
2001. 
———, dir. Terminator 2: Judgment Day. Santa Monica, CA: Artisan Home Entertain-
ment, 2003. 
Cameron, Scott H., Duncan Ewing, and Michael Liveright. “DIALOG: A Conversational 
Programming System with a Graphical Orientation.” Communications of the ACM 
10, no. 6 (June 1967): 349–57.
Camras, Marvin. “Magnetic Recording Tapes.” Transactions of the American Institute 
of Electrical Engineers 67, no. 1 (January 1948): 503–6.

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
235
Card, Stuart Kent, Richard Carl Gossweiler III, Allison Gyle Woodruff, and Jock Doug-
las MacKinlay. “Methods, Systems, and Computer Program Products for the Dis-
play and Operation of Virtual Three-Dimensional Books.” Patent US7015910 B2, 
filed December 21, 2000, issued March 21, 2006. 
Carroll, J. M, R. L. Mack, and W. A Kellogg. Interface Metaphors and User Interface 
Design. San Jose: IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Division, 1987.
Carroll, J. M., and John C. Thomas. “Metaphor and the Cognitive Representation of 
Computing Systems.” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 12, 
no. 2 (March 1982): 107–16.
Carroll, Lewis. Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland: And, Through the Looking-Glass and 
What Alice Found There, ed. Roger Lancelyn Green. London: Oxford University 
Press, 1971.
———. The Annotated Alice: Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland and Through the Look-
ing Glass, ed. Martin Gardner. New York: C. N. Potter, 1960.
Casper, Louis. “Remote Control Advertising and Electric Signalin[g] System.” Patent 
US1953072 A, filed September 9, 1930, issued April 3, 1934. 
Ceruzzi, Paul. Computing: A Concise History. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012.
Chalmers, David J. “Does a Rock Implement Every Finite-State Automaton?” Synthese 
108, no. 3 (September 1996): 309–33.
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. “The Enduring Ephemeral, or the Future Is a Memory.” Criti-
cal Inquiry 35, no. 1 (September 2008): 148–71.
———. “On Software, or the Persistence of Visual Knowledge.” Grey Room 18 (2004): 
26–51.
———. Programmed Visions: Software and Memory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011.
Church, Alonzo, and A. M. Turing. “On Computable Numbers, with an Application to 
the Entscheidungsproblem.” Journal of Symbolic Logic 2, no. 1 (March 1937): 
42–43.
Chuzhak, N. F., ed. Literatura Fakta: Pervyi Sbornik Materialov Rabotnikov Lefa. Mos-
cow: Zakharov, 2000. 
CITED Consortium. CITED Final Report: Copyright in Transmitted Electronic Docu-
ments. Boston Spa, UK: British Library Publishing Division, 1994.
Clancy, Douglas, George Hobgood, and Frederick May. “Data Reading, Recording, 
and Positioning System.” Patent US3530448 A, filed January 15, 1968, issued 
September 22, 1970. 
Clark, Charles. “The Copyright Environment for the Publisher in the Digital World.” 
Paper presented at the Joint ICSU Press/UNESCO Expert Conference on Elec-
tronic Publishing in Science, UNESCO, Paris, February 19–23, 1996. web.archive.org 
/web/20161226231600/http://www.library.illinois.edu/icsu/clark.htm (accessed 
December 26, 2016). 
Cohen, Dan. “For What It’s Worth: A Review of the Wu-Tang Clan’s ‘Once Upon a Time 
in Shaolin.’ ” Blog post, January 4, 2016. web.archive.org/web/20161019050405/
http://www.dancohen.org/2016/01/04/for-what-its-worth-a-review-of-the-wu-tang 
-clans-once-upon-a-time-in-shaolin/ (accessed October 19, 2016). 

236	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Colburn, Timothy R. “Software, Abstraction, and Ontology.” The Monist 82, no. 1 
(January 1999): 3–19.
Coleman, Clyde. “Electrically-Operated Musical Instrument.” Patent US1107495 A, 
filed August 22, 1898, issued August 18, 1914. 
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor. The Collected Works of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, vol. 7, 
Biographia Literaria or Biographical Sketches of My Literary Life and Opinions, 
ed. James Engell and Walter Jackson Bate. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1983 [1917].
Collinger, Jennifer L., Michael A. Kryger, Richard Barbara, Timothy Betler, Kristen 
Bowsher, Elke H. P. Brown, Samuel T. Clanton et al. “Collaborative Approach in 
the Development of High-Performance Brain-Computer Interfaces for a Neuro-
prosthetic Arm: Translation from Animal Models to Human Control.” Clinical and 
Translational Science 7, no. 1 (February 2014): 52–59.
Collingwood, R. G. “Form and Content in Art.” Journal of Philosophical Studies 4, no. 
15 (July 1929): 332–45.
Coltheart, Max. “Iconic Memory and Visible Persistence.” Perception and Psychophys-
ics 27, no. 3 (May 1980): 183–228.
Comer, Douglas E. The Internet Book: Everything You Need to Know About Computer 
Networking and How the Internet Works. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Addison-Wesley, 
2006.
Computation Laboratory, Harvard University. Description of a Magnetic Drum Cal-
culator. Annals of the Computation Laboratory of Harvard University, vol. 25. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1952.
———. Description of a Relay Calculator. Annals of the Computation Laboratory of 
Harvard University, vol. 24. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1949.
Conti, Gregory, Erik Dean, Matthew Sinda, and Benjamin Sangster. “Visual Reverse 
Engineering of Binary and Data Files.” In Visualization for Computer Security, ed. 
John R. Goodall, Gregory Conti, and Kwan-Liu Ma, 1–17. Berlin: Springer, 2008. 
Cook, Don L. “Some Considerations in the Concept of Pre-Copy-Text.” Text 4 (1988): 
79–91.
Copeland, B. Jack, and Diane Proudfoot. “What Turing Did After He Invented the 
Universal Turing Machine.” Journal of Logic, Language, and Information 9, no. 4 
(October 2000): 491–509.
Cox, Paula J., Dana L. Gillihan, Donald Ray Hyatt, Paul T. Leone, Kenneth M. Nordby, 
Victor Edward Pullizzi, Thyra Lynne Rauch, and Robert W. Rinda. “Method and 
System for Organizing On-Line Books Using Bookcases.” Patent US5907845 A, 
filed July 26, 1996, issued May 25, 1999. 
Creed, Frederick George. “Printing Apparatus Controlled by Perforated Tape.” Patent 
US985402 A, filed April 6, 1908, issued February 28, 1911. 
Crehore, Albert C., and George O. Squier. “A Practical Transmitter Using the Sine 
Wave for Cable Telegraphy; and Measurements with Alternating Currents Upon 
an Atlantic Cable.” Transactions of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers 
17 (January 1900): 385–444.

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
237
Cuttriss, Charles. “Telegraphy.” Patent US500226 A, filed February 21, 1893, issued 
June 27, 1893. 
Daniel, Eric D., C. Denis Mee, and Mark H. Clark, eds. Magnetic Recording: The First 
100 Years. New York: Wiley-IEEE Press, 1998.
Daston, Lorraine. “Taking Note(s).” Isis 95, no. 3 (2004): 443–48.
Daugherty, Denny. “Numeral Adding or Subtracting Attachment for Type-Writing Ma-
chines.” Patent US517735 A, filed July 5, 1893, issued April 3, 1894. 
Davey, Mike. “A Turing Machine Overview.” web.archive.org/web/20161215072157/
http://www.aturingmachine.com/ (accessed December 15, 2016). 
Davidson, Cathy N. Now You See It: How the Brain Science of Attention Will Trans-
form the Way We Live, Work, and Learn. New York: Viking, 2011.
Davidson, Donald. Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford: Clarendon Press and Ox-
ford University Press, 1980.
Day, John. “The (Un)Revised OSI Reference Model.” SIGCOMM Computer Communica-
tion Review 25, no. 5 (October 1995): 39–55.
Day, J. D., and H. Zimmermann. “The OSI Reference Model.” Proceedings of the IEEE 
71, no. 12 (December 1983): 1334–40.
Dee, R. H. “Magnetic Tape for Data Storage: An Enduring Technology.” Proceedings 
of the IEEE 96, no. 11 (November 2008): 1775–85.
Degener, Gustave O. “Combined Type-Writing and Adding Machine.” Patent US990238 
A, filed October 20, 1909, issued April 25, 1911. 
Deleuze, Gilles. Bergsonism, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Barbara Habberjam, reissue 
ed. New York: Zone Books, 1990.
Dennett, Daniel. “Can Machines Think?” In The Turing Test: Verbal Behavior as the 
Hallmark of Intelligence, ed. Stuart M Shieber. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.
Denning, Peter J. “Third Generation Computer Systems.” ACM Computing Surveys 3, 
no. 4 (December 1971): 175–216.
Descartes, René. Discourse on the Method and Meditations on First Philosophy, ed. 
David Weissman. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1996.
———. Meditations on First Philosophy, trans. Donald A. Cress, 3rd ed. Indianapolis: 
Hackett, 1993.
Deutsch, D. “Quantum Theory, the Church-Turing Principle, and the Universal Quan-
tum Computer.” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, 
Physical, and Engineering Sciences 400, no. 1818 (July 1985): 97–117.
Didyk, Piotr, Elmar Eisemann, Tobias Ritschel, Karol Myszkowski, and Hans-Peter Seidel. 
“Perceptually-Motivated Real-Time Temporal Upsampling of 3D Content for High-
Refresh Rate Displays.” Computer Graphics Forum 29, no. 2 (2010): 713–22.
Dixsaut, Monique. “ ‘Ousia,’ ‘Eidos’ et ‘Idea’ dans le ‘Phédon.’ ” Revue Philosophique de 
la France et de l’Étranger 181, no. 4 (October 1991): 479–500.
Dole, George Henry. The Philosophy of Creation: The System of Philosophy from the 
Standpoint of the Christian and of the Word. New York: New-Church Board of 
Publication, 1906.
Drucker, Johanna. “Digital Ontologies: The Ideality of Form in/and Code Storage: 

238	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Or, Can Graphesis Challenge Mathesis?” Leonardo 34, no. 2 (January 2001): 
141–45.
———. “Performative Materiality and Theoretical Approaches to Interface.” Digital 
Humanities Quarterly 7, no. 1 (2013).
Drucker, Johanna, and Jerome McGann. “Images as the Text: Pictographs and Pic-
tographic Logic.” 2010. web.archive.org/web/20161220221532/http://www2.iath 
.virginia.edu/jjm2f/old/pictograph.html (accessed December 20, 2016). Originally 
published in Information Design Journal 10, no. 2 (2000): 95–106. 
Duncan-Jones, Austin. “G. E. Moore: Some Impressions.” Analysis 19, no. 2 (Decem-
ber 1958): 25–26.
Edgerton, Gary R. The Columbia History of American Television. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2009.
Edwards, M. J. “Neglected Texts in the Study of Gnosticism.” Journal of Theological 
Studies, n.s., 41, no. 1 (April 1990): 26–50.
Efron, Robert. “Conservation of Temporal Information by Perceptual Systems.” Per-
ception and Psychophysics 14, no. 3 (October 1973): 518–30.
Eichenbaum, Boris. “How Gogol’s ‘Overcoat’ Is Made.” In Gogol from the Twentieth 
Century: Eleven Essays, ed. Robert A. Maguire, 267–92. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1995.
Eisenberg, Daniel. “Word Processing, History of.” In Encyclopedia of Library and Infor-
mation Science, ed. Allen Kent, 49: 268–78. New York: Dekker, 1992.
Elbourn, R. D., and W. H. Ware. “The Evolution of Concepts and Languages of Com-
puting.” Proceedings of the IRE 50, no. 5 (May 1962): 1059–66.
Ellis, Albert H. “Combined Type-Writing and Adding Machine.” Patent US1091820 A, 
filed August 8, 1905, issued March 31, 1914.
Engel, Friedrich K. “1888–1988: A Hundred Years of Magnetic Sound Recording.” 
Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 36, no. 3 (March 1988): 170–78.
Engelbart, Douglas. “Doug Engelbart 1968 Demo.” December 1968. web.archive.org/
web/20161226233225/http://web.stanford.edu/dept/SUL/library/extra4/sloan/
mousesite/1968Demo.html (accessed December 26, 2016). 
———. Human Intellect Augmentation Techniques. NASA Contractor Report, NASA CR-
1270. Washington, DC: NASA, January 1969.
———. “X-Y Position Indicator for a Display System.” Patent US3541541 A, filed June 
21, 1967, issued November 17, 1970. 
Engelbart, Douglas C., and William K. English. “A Research Center for Augmenting 
Human Intellect.” In AFIPS ’68: Proceedings of the December 9–11, 1968, Fall Joint 
Computer Conference, Part I, 395–410. New York: ACM, 1968.
Engels, Friedrich. Ludwig Feuerbach and the Outcome of Classical German Philoso-
phy, ed. C. P. Dutt. New York: International Publishers, 1941.
English, James F. The Economy of Prestige: Prizes, Awards, and the Circulation of 
Cultural Value. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008.
Epstein, Herman, and Frank Innes. “Electrographic Printer.” Patent US3012839 A, filed 
July 15, 1954, issued December 12, 1961.

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
239
Eyal, Nir. Hooked: How to Build Habit-Forming Products, ed. Ryan Hoover. New York: 
Portfolio, 2014.
Fankhauser, Charles. “The Telegraphone.” Journal of the Franklin Institute 167 (Janu-
ary 1909): 37–70.
Ferullo, Donna L. “Major Copyright Issues in Academic Libraries.” Journal of Library 
Administration 40, nos. 1–2 (May 2004): 23–40.
Finger, Anke, Rainer Guldin, and Gustavo Bernardo. Vilém Flusser: An Introduction. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011.
Fish, Stanley. “The Digital Humanities and the Transcending of Mortality.” Opinionator, 
January 9, 2012. web.archive.org/web/20161119093440/http://opinionator.blog.ny 
times.com/2012/01/09/the-digital-humanities-and-the-transcending-of-mortality/ 
(accessed November 19, 2016).
Fitzpatrick, Kathleen. Planned Obsolescence: Publishing, Technology, and the Future 
of the Academy. New York: NYU Press, 2011.
Floridi, Luciano. “Against Digital Ontology.” Synthese 168, no. 1 (May 2009): 151–78.
Flusser, Vilém. The Freedom of the Migrant: Objections to Nationalism, ed. Anke K. 
Finger; trans. Kenneth Kronenberg. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2003.
Foucault, Michel. “What Is an Author?” In Michel Foucault, Language, Counter-
Memory, Practice: Selected Essays and Interviews, 113–38. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1980. 
Freeman, Carla. High Tech and High Heels in the Global Economy: Women, Work, and 
Pink-Collar Identities in the Caribbean. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2000.
Frohman-Bentchkowsky, D. “A Fully Decoded 2048-Bit Electrically Programmable 
Famos Read-Only Memory.” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits 6, no. 5 (October 
1971): 301–6.
Frutiger, A. “The IBM Selectric Composer: The Evolution of Composition Technology.” 
IBM Journal of Research and Development 12, no. 1 (January 1968): 9–14.
Fry, David. “Circumventing Access Controls Under the Digital Millennium Copyright 
Act: Analyzing the Securom Debate.” Duke Law and Technology Review 8 (2009): 
1–25. web.archive.org/web/20161226234530/http://scholarship.law.duke.edu/dltr 
/vol8/iss1/4/ (accessed December 26, 2016). 
Fuller, Matthew, and Andrew Goffey. Evil Media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012.
Furuta, Richard, Jeffrey Scofield, and Alan Shaw. “Document Formatting Systems: 
Survey, Concepts, and Issues.” ACM Computing Surveys 14, no. 3 (September 
1982): 417–72.
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. Truth and Method. New York: Seabury Press, 1975.
Gaines, Brian R. “The Technology of Interaction: Dialogue Programming Rules.” In-
ternational Journal of Man–Machine Studies 14, no. 1 (January 1981): 133–50.
Gaines, Brian R., and Mildred L. G. Shaw. “From Timesharing to the Sixth Generation: 
The Development of Human–Computer Interaction. Part I.” International Journal 
of Man–Machine Studies 24, no. 1 (January 1986): 1–27.
Galloway, Alexander R. “The Anti-Language of New Media.” Discourse 32, no. 3 (2010): 
276–84.

240	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
———. Gaming: Essays on Algorithmic Culture. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 2006.
———. Protocol: How Control Exists After Decentralization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2006.
Gillespie, Gerald. “Primal Utterance: Observations on Kuhlmann’s Correspondence 
with Kircher.” In Wolfgang Fleischhauer: Wege der Worte—Festschrift für Wolfgang 
Fleischhauer, ed. Donald Riechel, 27–46. Cologne: Böhlau, 1978.
Ginsburg, Jane C. “Legal Protection of Technological Measures Protecting Works of 
Authorship: International Obligations and the U.S. Experience.” Columbia Public 
Law and Legal Theory, Working Paper 05-93. Rochester, NY: Social Science Re-
search Network, August 2005. web.archive.org/save/https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3 
/papers.cfm?abstract_id=785945 (accessed December 26, 2016). 
Gitelman, Lisa. Paper Knowledge: Toward a Media History of Documents. Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2014.
Glaser, Howard Justin, and Tony Kai-Chi Leung. “Graphical User Interface for Binder 
Notebook Control.” Patent EP0657799 A1, filed October 10, 1994, issued June 
14, 1995. 
Glass, Robert L. “A Comparative Analysis of the Topic Areas of Computer Science, 
Software Engineering, and Information Systems.” Journal of Systems and Software 
19, no. 3 (November 1992): 277–89.
Glass, Robert L., V. Ramesh, and Iris Vessey. “An Analysis of Research in Computing 
Disciplines.” Communications of the ACM 47, no. 6 (June 2004): 89–94.
Goldberg, Hyman Eli. “Controller.” Patent US1165663 A, filed January 10, 1911, issued 
December 28, 1915. 
Golumbia, David. The Cultural Logic of Computation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 2009.
Gombrich, Ernst. Art and Illusion: A Study in the Psychology of Pictorial Representa-
tion. London: Phaidon Press, 1960.
Goodman, Nelson. Languages of Art: An Approach to a Theory of Symbols. Indianapo-
lis: Hackett, 1968.
Goodman, Russell B. “James on the Nonconceptual.” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 
28, no. 1 (September 2004): 137–48.
Google Inc. “About Google.” Google.com, August 2015. web.archive.org/web 
/20150827155059/http://www.google.com/about/ (accessed August 27, 2015).
———. “Read Books on Google Play: Computer—Google Play Help.” Google Play, 
2016. web.archive.org/web/20160308195659/https://support.google.com/google 
play/answer/185545 (accessed March 8, 2016).
Grabiner, Judith V. “Is Mathematical Truth Time-Dependent?” American Mathematical 
Monthly 81, no. 4 (1974): 354–65.
Grattan-Guinness, I. “On the Development of Logics Between the Two World Wars.” 
American Mathematical Monthly 88, no. 7 (August 1981): 495–509.
Gruenberger, F. J. “The History of the JOHNNIAC.” Annals of the History of Comput-
ing 1, no. 1 (January 1979): 49–64.

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
241
Grundy, Gregory. “Information Distribution System.” Patent US5375240 A, filed April 
7, 1992, issued December 20, 1994. 
Hacking, Ian. The Social Construction of What? Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1999.
Haigh, Thomas. “Actually, Turing Did not Invent the Computer.” Communications of 
the ACM 57, no. 1 (January 2014): 36–41.
Hallden, Frederick G. “Printing-Telegraph System.” Patent US1721952 A, filed January 
21, 1928, issued July 23, 1929. 
Halstead, Frank G. “The Genesis and Speed of the Telegraph Codes.” Proceedings of 
the American Philosophical Society 93, no. 5 (November 1949): 448–58.
Harcourt, Bernard E. Exposed: Desire and Disobedience in the Digital Age. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2015.
Har-Noy, Shay, and T. Q. Nguyen. “LCD Motion Blur Reduction: A Signal Processing 
Approach.” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 17, no. 2 (February 2008): 
117–25.
Haugeland, John. “Analog and Analog.” Philosophical Topics 12, no. 1 (1981): 213–25.
Hausmann, Erich. Telegraph Engineering: A Manual for Practicing Telegraph Engineers 
and Engineering Students. New York: Van Nostrand, 1915.
Hayles, N. Katherine. “Print Is Flat, Code Is Deep: The Importance of Media-Specific 
Analysis.” Poetics Today 25, no. 1 (March 2004): 67–90.
Hegel, G. W. F. Hegel’s Aesthetics: Lectures on Fine Art, Volume I, trans. T. M. Knox. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
———. “The Philosophy of Plato.” Journal of Speculative Philosophy 4, no. 3 (Janu-
ary 1870): 225–68.
———. Werke in 20 Bänden und Registerband, ed. Eva Moldenhauer, Vol. 13, Vor-
lesungen über die Ästhetik I. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1986.
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time, trans. Joan Stambaugh. Albany: State University 
of New York Press, 1996.
———. Pathmarks. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
———. “The Question Concerning Technology.” In Martin Heidegger, Basic Writings: 
From Being and Time (1927) to The Task of Thinking (1964), ed. David Farrell 
Krell, 307–42. New York: Harper & Row, 1977.
———. Sein und Zeit. Tübingen: M. Niemeyer, 1967.
Heim, Michael. Electric Language: A Philosophical Study of Word Processing. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1987.
Herder, Johann Gottfried. Sculpture: Some Observations on Shape and Form from 
Pygmalion’s Creative Dream, trans. Jason Gaiger. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2002.
Herken, Rolf, ed. The Universal Turing Machine: A Half-Century Survey. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press, 1988.
Herman, Bill D., and Oscar Gandy. “Catch 1201: A Legislative History and Content 
Analysis of the DMCA Exemption Proceedings.” Cardozo Arts and Entertainment 
Law Journal 24 (2006): 121–90.

242	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Hickok, Gregory. “It’s not a ‘Stream’ of Consciousness.” New York Times, May 8, 2015. 
web.archive.org/web/20161225153038/http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/10/
opinion/sunday/its-not-a-stream-of-consciousness.html (accessed December 25, 
2016).
Higgins, Dick. “Intermedia.” Leonardo 34, no. 1 (2001): 49–54.
Hildebrandt, Mireille. “Ambient Intelligence, Criminal Liability, and Democracy.” Crimi-
nal Law and Philosophy 2, no. 2 (October 2007): 163–80.
Hoare, C. A. R. “Record Handling.” ALGOL Bulletin 21 (November 1965): 39–69.
Hodges, Andrew. Alan Turing: The Enigma. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1983.
Horkheimer, Max. Critical Theory: Selected Essays. New York: Continuum, 1982.
Horton, J. W. “Experimental Study of Electron-Beam Driven Semiconductor Devices 
for Use in a Digital Memory.” IBM Journal of Research and Development 6, no. 
4 (October 1962): 437–48.
Hotson, Guy, David P. McMullen, Matthew S. Fifer, Matthew S. Johannes, Kapil D. 
Katyal, Matthew P. Para, Robert Armiger et al. “Individual Finger Control of a 
Modular Prosthetic Limb Using High-Density Electrocorticography in a Human 
Subject.” Journal of Neural Engineering 13, no. 2 (2016): 026017.
Hough, Clinton. “Wired Radio Program Apparatus.” Patent US1805665 A, filed April 
27, 1927, issued May 19, 1931. 
Hughes, H. B. “Improvement in Telegraphs.” Patent US14917 A, issued May 20, 1856. 
Hutchby, Ian. “Technologies, Texts, and Affordances.” Sociology 35, no. 2 (2001): 
441–56.
Hutchins, Edwin, James Hollan, and Donald Norman. “Direct Manipulation Interfaces.” In 
User Centered System Design: New Perspectives on Human–Computer Interaction, ed. 
Stephen W. Draper and Donald A. Norman. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates, 1986.
Huxley, Francis. The Raven and the Writing Desk. New York: Harper & Row, 1976.
Iarkho, Boris. Metodologia tochnogo literaturovedenia [Methodologies of Exact Literary 
Study]. Moscow: Philologica, 2006.
Irmak, Nurbay. “Software Is an Abstract Artefact.” Grazer Philosophische Studien 86 
(January 2013): 55–72.
ISO (International Organization for Standardization). “Document Management: Porta-
ble Document Format, Part 1, PDF 1.7.” ISO 32000-1:2008. Geneva: International 
Organization for Standardization, July 1, 2008. 
———. “Information Processing: Text and Office Systems—Standard Generalized 
Markup Language (SGML)” ISO 8879:1986. Geneva: International Organization for 
Standardization, July 29, 2008.
———. “Writing Paper and Certain Classes of Printed Matter: Trimmed Sizes, A and 
B Series.” ISO 216:1975. Geneva: International Organization for Standardization, 
May 1, 1975.
ITU (International Telegraph Union). Documents diplomatiques de la Conférence Télé-
graphique Internationale de Paris. Paris: Imprimerie impériale, 1865.
———. Telegraph Regulations and Final Protocol. Madrid: International Telegraph 
Union, 1932.

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
243
Jakobson, Roman. “A Few Remarks on Peirce, Pathfinder in the Science of Language.” 
MLN 92, no. 5 (1977): 1026–32.
———. “Linguistics and Poetics.” In Style in Language, ed. Thomas A Sebeok, 350–
77. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1960.
James, William. A Pluralistic Universe: Hibbert Lectures at Manchester College on the 
Present Situation in Philosophy. New York: Longmans, Green, 1909.
———. “Pragmatism’s Conception of Truth.” In William James, Pragmatism, a New 
Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking: Popular Lectures on Philosophy, 197–238. 
New York: Longmans, Green, 1907.
Jameson, Fredric. Marxism and Form: Twentieth-Century Dialectical Theories of Lit-
erature. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1972.
Jennings, Tom. “An Annotated History of Some Character Codes, or ASCII: American 
Standard Code for Information Infiltration.” October 2004. web.archive.org/web/ 
20120113050309/http://wps.com/projects/codes/index.html (accessed March 
14, 2015).
Jepsen, Thomas C. My Sisters Telegraphic: Women In Telegraph Office 1846–1950. 
Athens: Ohio University Press, 2001.
Johnson, D. Barton. “A Guide to Nabokov’s ‘A Guide to Berlin.’ ” Slavic and East Eu-
ropean Journal 23, no. 3 (October 1979): 353–61.
Johnson, J., T. L. Roberts, W. Verplank, D. C. Smith, C. H. Irby, M. Beard, and K. Mackey. 
“The Xerox Star: A Retrospective.” Computer 22, no. 9 (September 1989): 11–26.
Kahng, D. “Semipermanent Memory Using Capacitor Charge Storage and Igfet Read-
Out.” Bell Labs Technical Journal 46, no. 6 (July 1967): 1296–1300.
Kahng, D., and S. M. Sze. “A Floating Gate and Its Application to Memory Devices.” 
Bell Labs Technical Journal 46, no. 6 (July 1967): 1288–95.
Kaiman, Arthur. “Computer-Aided Publications Editor.” IEEE Transactions on Engineer-
ing Writing and Speech 11, no. 2 (August 1968): 65–75.
Karim, Awudu, and Shangbo Zhou. “X-TREPAN: A Multi Class Regression and Adapted 
Extraction of Comprehensible Decision Tree in Artificial Neural Networks.” 
ArXiv:1508.07551 [Cs], August 30, 2015. arxiv.org/abs/1508.07551 (accessed 
March 16, 2016). 
Katz, Matthew. “Analog and Digital Representation.” Minds and Machines 18, no. 3 
(September 2008): 403–8. 
Kay, Alan. “Computer Software.” Scientific American 251, no. 3 (September 1984): 
53–59.
Kernighan, Brian W. D Is for Digital: What a Well-Informed Person Should Know About 
Computers and Communications. Mountain View, CA: DisforDigital.net, 2011. 
Kernighan, Brian, and Joseph Ossanna. “Troff User’s Manual.” Computer Science 
Technical Report 54. Murray Hill, NJ: AT&T Bell Laboratories, 1992.
Khlebnikov, Velimir. Collected Works of Velimir Khlebnikov: Letters and Theoretical 
Writings, ed. Ronald Vroon. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987.
———. The King of Time: Selected Writings of the Russian Futurian, ed. Charlotte 
Douglas; trans. Paul Schmidt. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990.

244	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Kimura, Gary D., and Alan C. Shaw. “The Structure of Abstract Document Objects.” In 
COCS ’84: Proceedings of the Second ACM-SIGOA Conference on Office Informa-
tion Systems, 161–69. New York: ACM, 1984.
King, Matthew. “Heidegger’s Etymological Method: Discovering Being by Recovering 
the Richness of the Word.” Philosophy Today 51, no. 3 (2007): 278–89.
Kirschenbaum, Matthew G. Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagination. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008.
Kittler, Friedrich A. Gramophone, Film, Typewriter, trans. Geoffrey Winthrop-Young and 
Michael Wutz. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999.
———. “There Is No Software.” Ctheory.net, a032 (October 18, 1995). web.archive.org 
/web/20161227002554/http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=74 (accessed 
December 26, 2016). 
Klompenhouwer, Michiel A., and Leo Jan Velthoven. “Motion Blur Reduction for Liq-
uid Crystal Displays: Motion-Compensated Inverse Filtering.” Proceedings of SPIE: 
The International Society for Optical Engineering 5308 (January 2004): 690–99.
Knobe, Joshua Michael, and Shaun Nichols. Experimental Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2008.
Koetsier, Teun. “On the Prehistory of Programmable Machines: Musical Automata, 
Looms, Calculators.” Mechanism and Machine Theory 36 (2001): 589–603. 
Kranzberg, Melvin. “At the Start.” Technology and Culture 1, no. 1 (1959): 1–10.
Krishna, Golden. The Best Interface Is No Interface: The Simple Path to Brilliant Tech-
nology. San Francisco: New Riders, 2015.
Krug, Steve. Don’t Make Me Think, Revisited: A Common Sense Approach to Web 
Usability, 3rd ed. Berkeley, CA: New Riders, 2014.
Ku, Vicky. “Critique of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act’s Exception on Encryption 
Research: Is the Exemption Too Narrow?” Yale Journal of Law and Technology 
2 (2004): 465–90.
Kurita, Taiichiro. “35.1: Moving Picture Quality Improvement for Hold-Type AM-LCDs.” 
SID Symposium Digest of Technical Papers 32, no. 1 (2001): 986–89.
LaBelle, Brandon. Lexicon of the Mouth: Poetics and Politics of Voice and the Oral 
Imaginary. New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2014. 
Lakoff, George. “The Contemporary Theory of Metaphor.” In Metaphor and Thought, 
ed. Andrew Ortony, 201–52. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
———. “The Death of Dead Metaphor.” Metaphor and Symbolic Activity 2, no. 2 
(June 1987): 143–47.
———. “The Invariance Hypothesis: Is Abstract Reason Based on Image-Schemas?” 
Cognitive Linguistics 1, no. 1 (2009): 39–74.
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. “The Metaphorical Structure of the Human Con-
ceptual System.” Cognitive Science 4, no. 2 (April 1980): 195–208.
———. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980.
Land, Edwin. “Light Valve.” Patent US1963496 A, filed January 16, 1933, issued June 
19, 1934. 
Laurel, Brenda. “Interface as Mimesis.” In User Centered System Design: New Perspec-

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
245
tives on Human–Computer Interaction, ed. Donald A. Norman and Stephen W. 
Draper, 67–85. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates, 1986.
Lee, Richard W., and Roy W. Worral, eds. Electronic Composition in Printing: Pro-
ceedings of a Symposium, National Bureau of Standards, June 15–16, 1967. 
National Bureau of Standards Special Publication 295. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, February 1968.
Lefebvre, Henri. The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell, 1991.
Lehmann, Otto. Flüssige Kristalle und die Theorien des Lebens. Leipzig: Johann Am-
brosius Barth, 1906.
Leibnitz, Godefroy-Guillaume. “Explication de l’arithmétique binaire, qui se sert des 
seuls caractères o et i avec des remarques sur son utilité et sur ce qu’elle 
donne le sens des anciennes figures chinoises de Fohy.” Mémoires de Mathéma-
tique et de Physique de l’Académie Royale des Sciences (1703). 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm. Der Briefwechsel von Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz mit Math-
ematikern, Bd. 1, ed. Carl Immanuel Gerhardt. Berlin: Mayer & Müller, 1899.
Leroi-Gourhan, André. Gesture and Speech. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993.
Lessig, Lawrence. “Free(ing) Culture for Remix.” Utah Law Review 2004 (2004): 961–76.
Leuthardt, Eric C., Gerwin Schalk, Jonathan R. Wolpaw, Jeffrey G. Ojemann, and 
Daniel W. Moran. “A Brain-Computer Interface Using Electrocorticographic Sig-
nals in Humans.” Journal of Neural Engineering 1, no. 2 (June 2004): 63–71.
Levine, Caroline. Forms: Whole, Rhythm, Hierarchy, Network. Princeton, NJ: Prince-
ton University Press, 2015.
Levine, S. P., J. E. Huggins, S. L. BeMent, R. K. Kushwaha, L. A. Schuh, M. M. Rohde, 
E. A. Passaro, D. A. Ross, K. V. Elisevich, and B. J. Smith. “A Direct Brain Interface 
Based on Event-Related Potentials.” IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation Engineer-
ing 8, no. 2 (2000): 180–85.
Liang, Lawrence. “Piracy, Creativity, and Infrastructure: Rethinking Access to Cul-
ture.” July 20, 2009. ssrn.com/abstract=1436229 (accessed August 17, 2015).
Lipton, Jacqueline D. “To (C) or Not to (C)? Copyright and Innovation in the Digital 
Typeface Industry.” UC Davis Law Review 43, no. 1 (2009): 143–92. ssrn.com/
abstract=1311402 (accessed May 4, 2015).
Liu, Joseph P. “The DMCA and the Regulation of Scientific Research.” Berkeley 
Technology Law Journal 18 (2003): 501–37.
Lloyd, Seth. “Ultimate Physical Limits to Computation.” Nature 406, no. 6799 
(August 2000): 1047–54.
Logicworks. “Government Cloud on the Rise: NSA and DOJ Move to Amazon 
Web Services.” Cloud Tech News (July 2015). web.archive.org/web/2015 
0911050911/http://www.cloudcomputing-news.net/news/2015/jul/01/govern 
ment-cloud-on-the-rise-nsa-doj-move-to-amazon-web-services/ (accessed Sep-
tember 11, 2015).
Lubbock, Percy. The Craft of Fiction. New York: Scribner’s Sons, 1921.
Luther, Martin. “The Freedom of a Christian.” In The Protestant Reformation, ed. 
Hans J. Hillerbrand, 31–58. New York: Harper, 2009. 

246	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ma, Jianhua, Laurence T. Yang, Bernady O. Apduhan, Runhe Huang, Leonard 
Barolli, and Mokoto Takizawa. “Towards a Smart World and Ubiquitous Intel-
ligence: A Walkthrough from Smart Things to Smart Hyperspaces and Ubick-
ids.” International Journal of Pervasive Computing and Communications 1, no. 
1 (February 2005): 53–68.
MacCormack, Patricia. “A Cinema of Desire: Cinesexuality and Asemiosis.” In Patri-
cia MacCormack, Cinesexuality, 23–38. Farnham, UK: Ashgate, 2012.
Madnick, S. E., and Allen Moulton. “SCRIPT, an On-Line Manuscript Processing Sys-
tem.” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Writing and Speech 11, no. 2 (August 
1968): 92–100.
Mahmood, Khalid, and Muhammad Ilyas. “Copyright and Book Piracy in Pakistan.” 
IFLA Journal 31, no. 4 (December 2005): 324–32.
Maley, Corey J. “Analog and Digital, Continuous and Discrete.” Philosophical Stud-
ies: An International Journal for Philosophy in the Analytic Tradition 155, no. 
1 (August 2011): 117–31.
Malinowski, Bronislaw, I. A. Richards, F. G. Crookshank, and J. P. Postgate. “The 
Problem of Meaning in Primitive Languages.” In The Meaning of Meaning: A 
Study of the Influence of Language upon Thought and of the Science of 
Symbolism, ed. C. K. Ogden, 146–52. London: K. Paul, Trench, Trubner, 1923.
Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media, rev. ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2002.
———. Software Takes Command. New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2013.
———. “There Is Only Software.” In FILE: Electronic Language International Festival 
(2011): 272–74. web.archive.org/web/20150402014145/http://manovich.net/
index.php/projects/there-is-only-software (accessed April 2, 2015). 
Marche, Stephen. “Literature Is not Data: Against Digital Humanities.” Los Angeles 
Review of Books, October 28, 2012. web.archive.org/web/20161122111616/
https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/literature-is-not-data-against-digital-human 
ities/ (accessed November 22, 2016).
Martin, Horace G. “Telegraphic Transmitter.” Patent US767303 A, filed May 7, 
1904, issued August 9, 1904. 
Martin, James. Design of Man-Computer Dialogues. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall, 1973.
Martin, James, and Adrian R. D. Norman. The Computerized Society: An Appraisal 
of the Impact of Computers on Society over the Next Fifteen Years. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1970.
Marx, Karl. Capital: A Critique of Political Economy. New York: Modern Library, 
1906.
———. Capital, a Critique of Political Economy, ed. Friedrich Engels. New York: 
International Publishers, 1967.
———. Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. New York: International 
Publishers, 1964.
———. Theories of Surplus-Value. Moscow: Progress, 1963.

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
247
Marx, Karl, and Friedrich Engels. The Marx-Engels Reader, ed. Robert C. Tucker, 2nd 
rev. and enlarged ed. New York: W. W. Norton, 1978.
Mauss, Marcel. Techniques, Technology, and Civilization, ed. Nathan Schlanger. 
New York: Berghahn, 2006.
May, F. T. “IBM Word Processing Developments.” IBM Journal of Research and 
Development 25, no. 5 (September 1981): 741–54.
McCalman, Iain. “Unrespectable Radicalism: Infidels and Pornography in Early 
Nineteenth-Century London.” Past and Present 104 (1984): 74–110.
McCarthy, John. “The LISP Interpreter System.” In LISP 1.5 Programmer’s Manual, 
by John McCarthy, Paul W. Abrahams, Daniel J. Edwards, Timothy P. Hart, and 
Michael I. Levin, 15–19. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1962.
McCorduck, Pamela. The Universal Machine: Confessions of a Technological Opti-
mist. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1985.
McGann, Jerome. Radiant Textuality: Literature After the World Wide Web. New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2001.
———. “Socialization of Text.” In Jerome J. McGann, The Textual Condition, 69–87. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991.
McGowan, Kat. “ ‘I Want to Know What Code Is Running Inside My Body.’ ” Back-
channel, February 11, 2016. backchannel.com/i-want-to-know-what-code-is-run 
ning-inside-my-body-ff9a159da34b#.35rpokuaz (accessed February 16, 2016). 
McKay, Claude. Harlem Shadows: An Electronic Edition, ed. Chris Forster and 
Roopika Risam. December 2015. web.archive.org/web/20161002143046/http:// 
harlemshadows.org/ (accessed October 2, 2016).
McKenzie, Donald Francis, Peter D. McDonald, and Michael Felix Suarez. Making 
Meaning: “Printers of the Mind” and Other Essays. Amherst: University of Mas-
sachusetts Press, 2002.
McKeown, Kathleen. Text Generation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 
1992.
McLuhan, Marshall. The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man. To-
ronto: University of Toronto Press, 1962.
McNeal, Gregory S. “Targeted Killing and Accountability.” Georgetown Law Journal 
102 (2014): 681–794. 
McNicol, Donald Monroe. American Telegraph Practice: A Complete Technical 
Course in Modern Telegraphy. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1913.
Michel, Jean-Baptiste, Yuan Kui Shen, Aviva Presser Aiden, Adrian Veres, Mat-
thew K. Gray, The Google Books Team, Joseph P. Pickett et al. “Quantitative 
Analysis of Culture Using Millions of Digitized Books.” Science 331, no. 6014 
(January 2011): 176–82.
Mignolo, Walter D. “Epistemic Disobedience, Independent Thought, and Decolonial 
Freedom.” Theory, Culture, and Society 26, nos. 7–8 (December 2009): 159–81.
Miller, K. J., E. C. Leuthardt, G. Schalk, R. P. N. Rao, N. R. Anderson, D. W. Moran, J. W. 
Miller, and J. G. Ojemann. “Spectral Changes in Cortical Surface Potentials During 
Motor Movement.” Journal of Neuroscience 27, no. 9 (February 2007): 2424–32.

248	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Miller, Leslie Jill. “The ISO Reference Model of Open Systems Interconnection: A 
First Tutorial.” In ACM ’81: Proceedings of the ACM ’81 Conference, 283–88. 
New York: ACM, 1981.
Mindflex. “Mindflex: Frequently Asked Questions.” March 2015. web.archive.org/web 
/20150310195631/http://mindflexgames.com/faq.php (accessed March 10, 2015). 
Mishima, N., and G. Itoh. “Novel Frame Interpolation Method for Hold-Type Displays.” 
In ICIP ’04: 2004 International Conference on Image Processing 3: 1473–76. New 
York: IEEE, 2004.
Mojtabai, Ramin. “Delusion as Error: The History of a Metaphor.” History of Psychia-
try 11, no. 41 (January 2000): 3–14.
Moll-Carrillo, Hector J., Gitta Salomon, Matthew Marsh, Jane Fulton Suri, and 
Peter Spreenberg. “Articulating a Metaphor Through User-Centered Design.” In 
CHI ’95: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems, 566–72. New York: ACM Press/Addison-Wesley, 1995.
Montfort, Nick. Twisty Little Passages: An Approach to Interactive Fiction. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.
Moor, James H. “Three Myths of Computer Science.” British Journal for the Phi-
losophy of Science 29, no. 3 (1978): 213–22.
Moran, John. “Wittgenstein and Russia.” New Left Review 1, no. 73 (June 1972): 
85–96.
Moréas, Jean. “Le symbolisme.” Le Figaro, Supplément Littéraire (September 
1886): 150–51.
Moreno, J. L. Who Shall Survive? Foundations of Sociometry, Group Psychotherapy, 
and Sociodrama. Beacon, NY: Beacon House, 1953.
Morgan, J. S., and J. R. Norwood. “The IBM Selectric Composer: Justification Mecha-
nism.” IBM Journal of Research and Development 12, no. 1 (January 1968): 
68–75.
Morris, Jeremy Wade. Selling Digital Music, Formatting Culture. Oakland, CA: Uni-
versity of California Press, 2015.
Mueller, Milton. “Reinventing Media Activism: Public Interest Advocacy in the Mak-
ing of U.S. Communication-Information Policy, 1960–2002.” Information Society 
20, no. 3 (July–August 2004): 169–87. 
Müller, Cornelia. Metaphors Dead and Alive, Sleeping and Waking: A Dynamic View. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008.
Mumford, Lewis. “Authoritarian and Democratic Technics.” Technology and Culture 
5, no. 1 (1964): 1–8.
Murray, Donald. The Philosophy of Power. London: Williams, 1939.
———. “Setting Type by Telegraph.” Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engi-
neers 34, no. 172 (May 1905): 555–97.
———. “Tape-Controlled Telegraphic Transmitting Apparatus.” Patent US794242 A, 
filed January 5, 1905, issued July 11, 1905. 
Nabokov, Vladimir. “A Guide to Berlin,” trans. Dmitri Nabokov. The New Yorker 
(March 1976): 27–28.

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
249
———. Invitation to a Beheading. New York: Putnam’s Sons, 1959.
Nagel, Thomas. “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” Philosophical Review 83, no. 4 
(October 1974): 435–50.
NCS (National Communications System). “Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) 
Reference Model (August 1981): ISO Second Draft Proposal (DP) 7498.” Wash-
ington, DC: National Communications System, September 1981.
Negroponte, Nicholas. Being Digital. New York: Knopf, 1995.
Nelson, Theodore H. “A File Structure for the Complex, the Changing, and the 
Indeterminate (1965).” In The New Media Reader, ed. Noah Wardrip-Fruin and 
Nick Montfort, 133–46. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.
Nesbit, Molly. “What Was an Author?” Yale French Studies 73 (1987): 229–57.
Neuhold, E. J. “The Formal Description of Programming Languages.” IBM Systems 
Journal 10, no. 2 (1971): 86–112.
Nkiko, Christopher. “Book Piracy in Nigeria: Issues and Strategies.” Journal of 
Academic Librarianship 40, nos. 3–4 (May 2014): 394–98.
Noll, A. Michael. The Evolution of Media. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2007.
Norman, Donald A. “Cognitive Artifacts.” In Designing Interaction, ed. John M. Car-
roll, 17–38. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Norman, Donald A., and Stephen W. Draper. User Centered System Design: New 
Perspectives on Human-Computer Interaction. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associ-
ates, 1986.
Nuttall, Anthony David. A New Mimesis: Shakespeare and the Representation of 
Reality. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007.
Nygaard, Kristen, and Ole-Johan Dahl. “The Development of the SIMULA Lan-
guages.” In History of Programming Languages I, ed. Richard L. Wexelblat, 
439–80. New York: ACM, 1981.
Obama, Barack. “The 2016 State of the Union Address,” January 12, 2016. 
Washington DC: White House, 2016. web.archive.org/web/20160328052623/
https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/01/12/remarks-president 
-barack-obama-%E2%80%93-prepared-delivery-state-union-address (accessed 
March 28, 2016).
O’Gorman, L. “The Document Spectrum for Page Layout Analysis.” IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 15, no. 11 (November 1993): 
1162–73.
O’Gorman, Lawrence, and Rangachar Kasturi. Document Image Analysis. Edition 
reconstructed from book source files. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Soci-
ety Press, 1995.
Ohmori, Hiroyuki, Masanori Hosomi, Kazuhiro Bessho, Yutaka Higo, Kazutaka Ya-
mane, and Hiroyuki Uchida. “Memory Element, Method of Manufacturing the 
Same, and Memory Device.” U.S. Patent Application 20150097254 A1, filed 
September 4, 2014, issued April 9, 2015. www.freepatentsonline.com/y2015/ 
0097254.html (accessed April 15, 2015).
Okiy, Rose B. “Photocopying and the Awareness of Copyright in Tertiary Institu-

250	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
tions in Nigeria.” Interlending and Document Supply 33, no. 1 (March 2005): 
49–52.
Orr, William D. Conversational Computers. New York: Wiley, 1968.
Pajak, Henry G. “Electronic Library.” Patent EP0472070 A2, filed August 9, 1991, 
issued February 26, 1992. 
Pan, Hao, Xiao-Fan Feng, and S. Daly. “LCD Motion Blur Modeling and Analysis.” In 
ICIP 2005: IEEE International Conference on Image Processing, 2005, 2: 21–24. 
New York: IEEE, 2005.
Parnas, D. L. “Software Engineering Programs Are not Computer Science Pro-
grams.” IEEE Software 16, no. 6 (November 1999): 19–30.
Pasquale, Frank. The Black Box Society: The Secret Algorithms That Control 
Money and Information. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015.
Patel, Reena. Working the Night Shift: Women in India’s Call Center Industry. Stan-
ford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2010.
Pavan, P., R. Bez, P. Olivo, and E. Zanoni. “Flash Memory Cells: An Overview.” 
Proceedings of the IEEE 85, no. 8 (August 1997): 1248–71.
Peirce, Charles Sanders. “Excerpts from Letters to Lady Welby.” In Charles Sand-
ers Peirce, The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, Volume 2, 
1893–1913, ed. Peirce Edition Project, Nathan Houser, Jonathan R. Eller, 
Albert C. Lewis, André de Tienne, Cathy L. Clark, and D. Bront Davis, 477–91. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1998.
———. “On the Algebra of Logic: A Contribution to the Philosophy of Notation.” 
In Charles Sanders Peirce, The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writ-
ings, Volume 1, 1867–1893, ed. Nathan Houser and Christian Kloesel, 225–28. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992.
———. “Pragmatism in Retrospect: A Last Formulation.” In Charles S. Peirce, Philo-
sophical Writings of Peirce, ed. Justus Buchler, 269–289. New York: Dover, 1955.
Perzanowski, Aaron. “Rethinking Anticircumvention’s Interoperability Policy.” UC 
Davis Law Review 42 (2009): 1549–1620. 
Petit, Annie. “Claude Bernard and the History of Science.” Isis 78, no. 2 (1987): 
201–19.
Petroski, Henry. Invention by Design: How Engineers Get from Thought to Thing. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996.
Petzold, Charles. The Annotated Turing: A Guided Tour Through Alan Turing’s His-
toric Paper on Computability and the Turing Machine. Indianapolis: Wiley, 2008.
———. Code: The Hidden Language of Computer Hardware and Software. Red-
mond, WA: Microsoft Press, 2000.
Phelps, C. Deirdre. “The Edition as Art Form in Textual and Interpretive Criticism.” 
Text 7 (1994): 61–75.
Piatkowski, Thomas F. “The ISO-ANSI Open Systems Reference Model: A Proposal 
for a Systems Approach.” Computer Networks 4, no. 3 (June 1980): 111–24.
Piccinini, Gualtiero. “Computational Modelling vs. Computational Explanation: Is 

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
251
Everything a Turing Machine, and Does It Matter to the Philosophy of Mind?” 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 85, no. 1 (2007): 93–115.
Pihlström, Sami. Structuring the World: The Issue of Realism and the Nature of 
Ontological Problems in Classical and Contemporary Pragmatism. Helsinki: 
Philosophical Society of Finland, 1996.
Pike & Fischer Inc. Digital Millennium Copyright Act: Text, History, and Caselaw. 
Silver Spring, MD: Pike & Fischer Inc., 2003.
Piper, Andrew. “Of Note.” In Andrew Piper, Book Was There: Reading in Electronic 
Times, 63–82. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012.
Plato. The Dialogues of Plato, ed. Benjamin Jowett. New York: Random House, 
1937.
———. Euthyphro. Apology. Crito. Phaedo. Phaedrus, trans. Harold North Fowler. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999.
———. “Phaedrus.” In Plato, Euthyphro. Apology. Crito. Phaedo. Phaedrus, trans. 
Harold North Fowler, 405–580. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999.
———. “Timaeus.” In Plato, Timaeus; Critias; Cleitophon; Menexenus; Epistles, trans. 
Robert Gregg Bury, 1–254. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999.
———. “Timaeus.” In Plato, The Dialogues of Plato, trans. Benjamin Jowett, 339–
516. London: Macmillan, 1892.
Pollak, Anton, and Josef Virag. “Writing-Telegraph.” Patent US675495 A, filed June 
28, 1900, issued June 4, 1901. 
Postigo, Hector. “Information Communication Technologies and Framing for Back-
fire in the Digital Rights Movement: The Case of Dmitry Sklyarov’s Advanced 
E-Book Processor.” Social Science Computer Review 28, no. 2 (May 2010): 
232–50.
Postman, Neil. Technopoly: The Surrender of Culture to Technology. New York: 
Knopf, 1992.
Poulsen, Valdemar. “Method of Recording and Reproducing Sounds or Signals.” 
Patent US661619 A, filed July 8, 1899, issued November 13, 1900. 
Prabhakar, Arati. “How Will Technology Shape the Future of War?” March 3, 2015. 
web.archive.org/web/20160729194906/http://www.newamerica.org/interna 
tional-security/future-war/events/future-of-war/ (accessed July 29, 2016). 
Propp, Vladimir. Morphology of the Folktale, 2nd ed. Austin: University of Texas 
Press, 1971.
Purves, Dale, George J. Augustine, David Fitzpatrick, Lawrence C. Katz, Anthony-
Samuel LaMantia, James O. McNamara, and S. Mark Williams. “Types of Eye 
Movements and Their Functions.” In Neuroscience, ed. Dale Purves, George J. 
Augustine, David Fitzpatrick, Lawrence C. Katz, Anthony-Samuel LaMantia, James 
O. McNamara, and S. Mark Williams, 2nd ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associ-
ates, 2001. www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK10991/ (accessed December 26, 
2016).
Putnam, Hilary. “James’s Theory of Truth.” In The Cambridge Companion to 

252	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
William James, ed. Ruth Anna Putnam, 166–85. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 1997.
———. Representation and Reality. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988.
Ramsey, Frank Plumpton. The Foundations of Mathematics and Other Logical Es-
says, ed. R. B. Braithwaite. Eastford, CT: Martino Fine Books, 2013.
Randell, Brian, Maurice V. Wilkes, and Paul E. Ceruzzi. “History of Digital Comput-
ers.” In Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 4th ed., ed. Anthony Ralston, Edwin 
D. Reilly, and David Hemmendinger, 545–70. Chichester, UK: Wiley, 2003.
Ransom, John Crowe. “The Concrete Universal: Observations on the Understand-
ing of Poetry. II.” Kenyon Review 17, no. 3 (July 1955): 383–407.
Raymond, Eric S. The Art of UNIX Programming. Indianapolis: Addison-Wesley 
Professional, 2003.
Reinitzer, Friedrich. “Beiträge zur Kenntniss des Cholesterins.” Monatshefte für 
Chemie und Verwandte Teile Anderer Wissenschaften 9, no. 1 (May 1888): 
421–41.
Rheinberger, Hans-Jörg. Toward a History of Epistemic Things: Synthesizing Pro-
teins in the Test Tube. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1997.
Richards, I. A. The Philosophy of Rhetoric. London: Oxford University Press, 1965.
Ricoeur, Paul. Interpretation Theory: Discourse and the Surplus of Meaning. Fort 
Worth: Texas Christian University Press, 1976.
Riskin, Jessica. “The Defecating Duck, or the Ambiguous Origins of Artificial Life.” 
Critical Inquiry 29, no. 4 (June 1, 2003): 599–633.
Rist, J. M. “Plato’s ‘Earlier Theory of Forms.’ ” Phoenix 29, no. 4 (December 1975): 
336–57.
Ritchie, D. M, and K. L. Thompson. QED Text Editor. Murray Hill, NJ: Bell Tele-
phone Laboratories, June 1970.
Roberts, M. J. D. “Morals, Art, and the Law: The Passing of the Obscene Publica-
tions Act, 1857.” Victorian Studies 28, no. 4 (1985): 609–29.
Robshaw, Matthew J. B. “Abuse-Resistant Object Distribution System and Method.” 
Patent US5400403 A, filed August 16, 1993, issued March 21, 1995. 
Rogers, Rosemary. “The Demo.” MouseSite, 2005. web.archive.org/web/201504152 
03743/http://web.stanford.edu/dept/SUL/library/extra4/sloan/MouseSite 
/1968Demo.html (accessed April 14, 2015).
Rottach, K. G., A. Z. Zivotofsky, V. E. Das, L. Averbuch-Heller, A. O. Discenna, 
A. Poonyathalang, and R. J. Leigh. “Comparison of Horizontal, Vertical, and 
Diagonal Smooth Pursuit Eye Movements in Normal Human Subjects.” Vision 
Research 36, no. 14 (July 1996): 2189–95.
Rowland, Henry A. “Multiplex Printing-Telegraph.” Patent US689753 A, filed July 26, 
1897, issued December 24, 1901. 
Ruiz de Mendoza Ibáñez, Francisco José. “On the Nature of Blending as a Cogni-
tive Phenomenon.” Journal of Pragmatics 30, no. 3 (September 1998): 259–74.
Russell, Bertrand. The Philosophy of Bergson. Cambridge, UK: Bowes & Bowes, 
1978 [1914].

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
253
Sartre, Jean-Paul. Being and Nothingness, trans. Hazel E. Barnes, reprint ed. New 
York: Washington Square Press, 1993.
Sattar, Atia. “The Aesthetics of Laboratory Inscription: Claude Bernard’s Cahier 
Rouge.” Isis 104, no. 1 (2013): 63–85.
Scholz, Trebor. Digital Labor: The Internet as Playground and Factory. New York: 
Routledge, 2013.
Schopenhauer, Arthur. The World as Will and Idea, trans. R. B. Haldane and J. 
Kemp. London: Paul, Trench, Trübner, 1906.
Searle, John R. “Metaphor.” In Metaphor and Thought, ed. Andrew Ortony, 83–112. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
———. “Minds, Brains, and Programs.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3, no. 3 (Sep-
tember 1980): 417–24.
Seigfried, Charlene Haddock. William James’s Radical Reconstruction of Philoso-
phy. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1990.
Sellars, Andrew. “Petition of a Coalition of Medical Device Researchers for Ex-
emption to Prohibition on Circumvention of Copyright Protection Systems 
for Access Control Technologies.” Petition before the U.S. Copyright Office, 
Library of Congress, Docket No. 2014-07. Cyberlaw Clinic, Berkman Center for 
Internet and Society, Harvard Law School, Cambridge, MA, July 2014. clinic.
cyber.harvard.edu/files/2014/11/Medical-Device-Research-Coalition-Petition.pdf 
(accessed July 14, 2016). 
Seringhaus, Michael. “E-Book Transactions: Amazon ‘Kindles’ the Copy Owner-
ship Debate.” Yale Journal of Law and Technology 12, no. 1 (January 2010): 
article 4.
Shaked, Shaul. Dualism in Transformation. London: Routledge, 2005.
Shaw, A. C. “A Model for Document Preparation Systems.” Technical Report 80-
04-02. Seattle, WA: Department of Computer Science, University of Washing-
ton, April 1980.
Shaw, J. C. “JOSS: A Designer’s View of an Experimental On-Line Computing 
System.” In AFIPS ’64: Proceedings of the October 27–29, 1964, Fall Joint 
Computer Conference, Part I, 455–64. New York: ACM, 1964.
Shelley, Percy Bysshe. Essays, Letters from Abroad, Translations, and Fragments, 
ed. Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. London: Edward Moxon, 1840.
Shillingsburg, Peter. “On Being Textually Aware.” Studies in American Naturalism 
1, no. 1/2 (2006): 170–95.
Shklovsky, Viktor. “Art as Technique.” In Russian Formalist Criticism: Four Essays, 
ed. Lee T. Lemon, 3–24. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2012.
———. “Isskustvo, kak priem.” In Viktor Shklovsky, Osip Brik, Yevgeny Polovanov, 
Boris Eichenbaum, and Lev Yakubinsky, Poetika, 101–14. Petrograd: State Typog-
raphy #18, 1919.
———. Voskreshenie Slova [Resurrection of the Word]. Petrograd: Tip. Zh. Sokolin-
gaskago, 1914. 

254	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Shklovsky, Viktor, Osip Brik, Yevgeny Polovanov, Boris Eichenbaum, and Lev Yaku-
binsky. Poetika. Petrograd: State Typography #18, 1919.
Shklovsky, Viktor, Lev Yakubinsky, Osip Brik, and Boris Kushner. Sborniki (Po Teorii 
Poeticheskogo Iazyka), vol. 1. Petrograd: Typographer #3, 1917.
Shneiderman, Ben. “Direct Manipulation: A Step Beyond Programming Languages.” 
Computer 16, no. 8 (August 1983): 57–69.
———. “The Future of Interactive Systems and the Emergence of Direct Manipula-
tion.” Behaviour and Information Technology 1, no. 3 (July 1982): 237–56.
Shore, Andy. “Acrobat 2.0.” In Compcon ’95: Technologies for the Information 
Superhighway, Digest of Papers, 379–82. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer 
Society Press, 1995.
Siegert, Bernhard. “Cacography or Communication? Cultural Techniques in German 
Media Studies.” Grey Room 29 (fall 2007): 26–47. 
———. Cultural Techniques: Grids, Filters, Doors, and Other Articulations of the Real, 
trans. Geoffrey Winthrop-Young. New York: Fordham University Press, 2015.
Smith, Oberllin. “Some Possible Forms of the Phonograph.” Electrical World (Sep-
tember 1888): 116–17.
Smith, Pamela H., Amy R. W. Meyers, and Harold J. Cook, eds. Ways of Making 
and Knowing: The Material Culture of Empirical Knowledge. Ann Arbor: Univer-
sity of Michigan Press, 2014.
Sontag, Susan. Against Interpretation, and Other Essays. New York: Farrar, Straus 
& Giroux, 1966.
Soyata, Tolga, Rajani Muraleedharan, Jonathan Langdon, Colin Funai, Scott Ames, 
Minseok Kwon, and Wendi Heinzelman. “COMBAT: Mobile-Cloud-Based Compute/
Communications Infrastructure for Battlefield Applications.” SPIE Proceedings 
8403 (May 7, 2012). dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.919146 (accessed May 12, 2016). 
Spencer, Herbert. The Philosophy of Style: Together with an Essay on Style. Bos-
ton: Allyn & Bacon, 1892.
Spolsky, Joel. User Interface Design for Programmers. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2001.
Starosielski, Nicole. The Undersea Network. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 
2015.
Stefanita, Carmen-Gabriela. Magnetism: Basics and Applications. New York: 
Springer Science and Business Media, 2012.
Steinhart, Eric. “Digital Metaphysics.” In The Digital Phoenix: How Computers Are 
Changing Philosophy, ed. Terrell Ward Bynum and James Moor, 117–34. Ox-
ford: Blackwell, 1998. 
Stensola, Hanne, Tor Stensola, Trygve Solstad, Kristian Frøland, May-Britt Moser, 
and Edvard I. Moser. “The Entorhinal Grid Map Is Discretized.” Nature 492, no. 
7427 (December 2012): 72–78.
Sterne, Jonathan. MP3: The Meaning of a Format. Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 2012.
Stoltz, Mitch. “Is It Illegal to Unlock a Phone? The Situation Is Better—and 
Worse—Than You Think.” Electronic Frontier Foundation, January 28, 2013. 

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
255
web.archive.org/web/20150414213427/https://www.eff.org/is-it-illegal-to-un 
lock-a-phone (accessed April 14, 2015).
Susina, Jan. “ ‘Why Is a Raven Like a Writing-Desk?’: The Play of Letters in Lewis 
Carroll’s Alice Books.” Children’s Literature Association Quarterly 26, no. 1 
(2001): 15–21.
Swedenborg, Emanuel. The Apocalypse; or, Book of Revelations, Explained Accord-
ing to the Spiritual Sense, Wherein Are Disclosed the Arcana Therein Foretold 
Which Have Been Hitherto Hidden. London: J. & E. Hodson, 1901 [1812].
———. A Treatise Concerning Heaven and Hell, Containing a Relation of Many 
Wonderful Things Therein, as Heard and Seen by the Author, trans. William 
Cookworthy and Thomas Hartley. London: James Phillips, 1778.
Szabo, Nick. “Formalizing and Securing Relationships on Public Networks.” First 
Monday 2, no. 9 (September 1, 1997). web.archive.org/web/20150414075111/
http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/548 (accessed April 14, 
2015). 
Takayuki c/o Fujitsu Limited Hasebe, and Naoya c/o Fujitsu Limited Torii. 
“­Licensee Notification System.” Patent EP0766165 B1, filed July 10, 1996, is-
sued November 19, 2003. 
Tanselle, G. Thomas. “The Concept of Format.” Studies in Bibliography 53 (2000): 
67–115.
———. “Textual Instability and Editorial Idealism.” Studies in Bibliography 49 
(1996): 1–60.
Taussig, Michael T. Mimesis and Alterity: A Particular History of the Senses. New 
York: Routledge, 1993.
Taylor, Frederick Winslow. The Principles of Scientific Management. New York: 
Harper, 1919.
Tenen, Dennis, and Maxwell Foxman. “Book Piracy as Peer Preservation: Computa-
tional Culture.” Computational Culture 4 (November 9, 2014). web.archive.org/
web/20150825131658/http://computationalculture.net/article/book-piracy-as 
-peer-preservation (accessed August 25, 2015).
Terranova, Tiziana. Network Culture: Politics for the Information Age. Ann Arbor, 
MI: Pluto Press, 2004.
Thiele, Heinz H. K. “Magnetic Sound Recording in Europe up to 1945.” Journal of 
the Audio Engineering Society 36, no. 5 (May 1988): 396–408.
Thurston, H. A. “Leibniz’s Notation.” Mathematical Gazette 57, no. 401 (1973): 
189–91.
Turing, A. M. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.” Mind 59, no. 236 (October 
1950): 433–60.
———. “On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem.” 
Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, ser. 2, 42, no. 1 (January 
1937): 230–65.
Turner, Mark. Death Is the Mother of Beauty: Mind, Metaphor, Criticism. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1987.

256	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Turner, Mark, and Gilles Fauconnier. “Conceptual Integration and Formal Expres-
sion.” Metaphor and Symbolic Activity 10, no. 3 (September 1995): 183–204.
Turner, Raymond. “Programming Languages as Technical Artifacts.” Philosophy 
and Technology 27, no. 3 (February 2013): 377–97.
Tweney, Dylan. “Dec. 9, 1968: The Mother of All Demos.” Wired (December 8, 2008). 
web.archive.org/web/20150430043803/http://www.wired.com/2010/12/1209 
computer-mouse-mother-of-all-demos (accessed April 30, 2015). 
Uexküll, Jakob von. A Foray into the Worlds of Animals and Humans: With A 
Theory of Meaning, trans. Joseph D. O’Neil. Minneapolis: University of Minne-
sota Press, 2010.
Unicode Consortium. The Unicode Standard: Worldwide Character Encoding, Ver-
sion 1. Boston: Addison-Wesley, 1990.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Displacement of Morse Operators in Commercial 
Telegraph Offices.” Monthly Labor Review 34, no. 3 (March 1932): 501–15.
U.S. Copyright Office, Library of Congress. “Exemption to Prohibition on Circum-
vention of Copyright Protection Systems for Access Control Technologies.” 
Federal Register, October 28, 2015. web.archive.org/web/20161227024042/
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2015/10/28/2015-27212/exemp 
tion-to-prohibition-on-circumvention-of-copyright-protection-systems-for-access 
-control (accessed December 26, 2016).
Vansize, William B. “A New Page-Printing Telegraph.” Transactions of the American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers 28 (January 1901): 5–43.
Varela, F. G., H. R. Maturana, and R. Uribe. “Autopoiesis: The Organization of 
Living Systems, Its Characterization, and a Model.” Biosystems 5, no. 4 (May 
1974): 187–96.
Vasic, Bane, and Erozan M. Kurtas. Coding and Signal Processing for Magnetic 
Recording Systems. London: CRC Press, 2004.
Veselovsky, Alexander. “O metode i zadachah istorii literatury kak nauki” [Aims 
and Methods of Literary History as a Science]. In Alexander Veselovsky, So-
branie sochinenii [Collected Works], 1–17. St. Petersburg: Imperial Academy of 
Sciences, 1913.
———. “Psihologicheskii paralelism i ego formy v otrazheniah poeticheskogo stilia” 
[Psychological Parallelism and Its Forms in Reflections of Poetic Style]. In Alex-
ander Veselovsky, Sobranie sochinenii [Collected Works], 130–225. St. Peters-
burg: Imperial Academy of Sciences, 1913. 
———. “Tri glavy is istoricheskoi poetiki” [Three Chapters from Historical Poetics]. 
In Alexander Veselovsky, Sobranie sochinenii [Collected Works], 226–484. St. 
Petersburg: Imperial Academy of Sciences, 1913. 
Vessey, Iris, V. Ramesh, and Robert L. Glass. “A Unified Classification System for 
Research in the Computing Disciplines.” Information and Software Technology 
47, no. 4 (March 2005): 245–55.
Von Lohmann, Fred. Unintended Consequences: Twelve Years Under the DMCA. 
Electronic Frontier Foundation, March 3, 2010. web.archive.org/web/201504 

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
257
28051638/https://www.eff.org/wp/unintended-consequences-under-dmca (ac-
cessed April 28, 2015).
Vriendt, Charles de. “Program Distribution System.” Patent US1974062 A, filed 
July 8, 1933, issued September 18, 1934. 
Wagner, Pierre. “Wittgenstein et les machines de Turing.” Revue de Métaphysique 
et de Morale 2 (April 2005): 181–96.
Walther, George H., and Harold F. O’Neil Jr. “On-Line User-Computer Interface: 
The Effects of Interface Flexibility, Terminal Type, and Experience on Perfor-
mance.” In AFIPS ’74: Proceedings of the May 6–10, 1974, National Computer 
Conference and Exposition, 379–84. New York: ACM, 1974.
Weber, Jutta. “Keep Adding: On Kill Lists, Drone Warfare, and the Politics of Da-
tabases.” Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 34, no. 1 (February 
2016): 107–25.
Weik, Martin. “Neutral Direct-Current Telegraph System.” In Computer Science and 
Communications Dictionary, by Martin Weik, 1096. New York: Springer, 2000.
Weller, Charles Edward. The Early History of the Typewriter. La Porte, IN: Chase 
& Shepard, 1918. 
Wendt, Larry. “Sound Poetry. I. History of Electro-Acoustic Approaches; II. Connec-
tions to Advanced Electronic Technologies.” Leonardo 18, no. 1 (1985): 11–23.
Wheatstone, Charles. “Improvement in Receiving-Instruments for Electric Tele-
graphs.” Patent US158156 A, filed November 13, 1874, issued December 22, 
1874. 
Wigdor, Daniel, Joe Fletcher, and Gerald Morrison. “Designing User Interfaces for 
Multi-Touch and Gesture Devices.” In CHI ’09: Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, 2755–58. New York: ACM, 2009.
Wimsatt, W. K., Jr. “The Structure of the ‘Concrete Universal’ in Literature.” PMLA 
62, no. 1 (March 1947): 262–80.
Winner, Langdon. Autonomous Technology: Technics-Out-of-Control as a Theme 
in Political Thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1978.
———. “Do Artifacts Have Politics?” Daedalus 109, no. 1 (January 1980): 121–36.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. The Blue and Brown Books. New York: Harper Torchbooks, 
1965. 
———. Lectures and Conversations on Aesthetics, Psychology, and Religious Belief, 
ed. Cyril Barrett. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966.
———. Philosophical Grammar, ed. Rush Rhees. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1974.
———. Philosophical Investigations: The German Text, with a Revised English 
Translation, trans. G. E. M. Anscombe. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell, 2001.
———. Wittgenstein’s Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics, Cambridge, 
1939: From the Notes of R. G. Bosanquet, Norman Malcolm, Rush Rhees, and 
Yorick Smythies, ed. R. G. Bosanquet and Cora Diamond. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1976.
Wolpaw, J. R., N. Birbaumer, W. J. Heetderks, D. J. McFarland, P. H. Peckham, G. 

258	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Schalk, E. Donchin, L. A. Quatrano, C. J. Robinson, and T. M. Vaughan. “Brain-
Computer Interface Technology: A Review of the First International Meeting.” 
IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation Engineering 8, no. 2 (June 2000): 164–73.
Woods, Michael. “Form, Species, and Predication in Aristotle.” Synthese 96, no. 3 
(September 1993): 399–415.
Wright, Walter. “Computing Attachment for Type-Writers.” Patent US1162730 A, 
filed January 17, 1908, issued November 30, 1915. 
———. “Computing Mechanism.” Patent US1105170 A, filed September 28, 1908, 
issued July 28, 1914. 
Wu-Tang Clan. Once Upon a Time in Shaolin. 2014. Cilvaringz and RZA, producers.
Youngquist, Robert, and Robert Hanes. “Magnetic Reader.” Patent US3013206 A, 
filed August 28, 1958, issued December 12, 1961. 
Zimmermann, H. “OSI Reference Model: The ISO Model of Architecture for Open 
Systems Interconnection.” IEEE Transactions on Communications 28, no. 4 
(April 1980): 425–32.

abstraction, 16, 40–46, 60–68, 81, 84, 
97–102, 157. See also form; per-
ception; symbolism
access, 2–3, 17–18, 27, 42, 94, 
113, 124, 127–30, 190, 199. 
See also affordance, legibility, 
interpretation,
Adobe Systems, 112, 128; Acrobat 
Reader, 16, 112; Adobe Acrobat, 
193–94
aesthetics, 21, 50, 62–64, 98, 102, 
108, 186
affect, 19, 74, 98, 105–108
affordance, 25–40, 47, 111–14, 123–
35, 156–72, 179, 190–93, 206n11. 
See also media; metaphor
algorithm, 93, 141, 193, 198
Alice in Wonderland (Carroll), 35
alienation, 10, 203
alphabets, 134, 136, 140–42, 145, 
150, 172–78
alternating current (AC), 172, 176
Amazon, 113
Amazon Kindle, 112
analog systems, 166, 176–77, 182–83, 
185–90
analogy, 77, 79, 186. See also meta-
phor; symbolism
appearance, 101. See also 
phantazpmenōn
Apple Inc., 31, 42, 49
apprehension, 33, 61–63, 111, 166–71, 
192–94, 227n51
Arca Musurgicae, 69
archive, 6–14, 18–26, 40, 63, 93–95, 
132–34, 193, 205
art, 63, 65–66, 98–100, 103, 105, 108, 
110
Art as Technique (Shklovsky), 62, 106
artifacts, 2–21, 56, 65, 98–99, 107–17, 
155–56, 170, 192–93
ASCII, 176
asemiosis, 2, 23, 205n1. See also 
illiteracy
atomism, 79, 186, 205n10
augmentation, 162, 202
Austin, J. L., 94
authorship, 13–14, 55–56, 64, 107, 110
automation, 55–60, 93
Autonomous Technology (Winner), 60
autopoiesis, 14, 207n40
avalanche injection, 41
INDEX

260	
INDEX
awareness, 82
Bacon, Francis, 43, 140
Bakhtin, Mikhail, 63–64, 201
Baudot, Emile, 138, 142
Baudot code, 134, 140–41, 143, 150. 
See also alphabets; coding; Morse 
code
Baudot multiplexer, 128, 139, 223n32
Baudrillard, Jean, 23, 37, 41, 50
Bell Labs, 115
Benjamin, Walter, 61
Bergson, Henri, 174–75, 177
Berkman Klein Center for Internet and 
Society at Harvard University, 197
Best, Stephen, 107–9
binary code, 44, 95, 136, 140, 149–
53, 190
Blake, William, 109–10
blending, 30–31, 49. See also metaphor
Blue and Brown Books (Wittgenstein), 
71–72, 74, 77
Bök, Christian, 205n2
body, 17–18, 29, 59, 68, 70, 72, 90, 
93–94, 167, 194, 197. See also 
embodiment
books (artifacts), 1–2, 6, 27, 32–58, 
112–18, 130, 166–69, 191. See 
also devices; media; programmable 
media
Bootstrap Community, 163
bootstrapping, 162–63
Bouchon, Basile, 222n10
Brackbill, Hervey, 136
brain–computer interface, 43, 52, 
210n57
Brik, Osip, 105
Brittan, Samuel, 175
Bumstead brothers, 86
Busa, Father Roberto, 146
Bush, Vannevar, 158
Carroll, John, 30
Carroll, Lewis, 35, 209n39
categorization, 98, 103–6
cathode-ray tubes (CRT), 134, 155, 
158, 162–63
censorship, 6, 115, 193
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong, 131, 145
cipher, 42, 126–127, 137–140, 143. 
See also encryption, legibility.
Clark, Charles, 125
classification, 32
codification, 3, 52, 95
code, 1–24, 42–58, 85–99, 135, 144–
46, 170, 197. See also formatting; 
representation
cognition, 29, 72, 225n14
Coleman, Clyde, 76
Coleridge, Samuel, 42
Collingwood, R. G., 99
colonialism, 8, 202
Colossal Cave Adventure, 44–45, 49
communication, 40–45, 62, 89, 123, 
134, 143, 167
comparative literature, 106
complex systems theory, 200
composite media, 20, 115–116, 121, 
123, 127, 148, 156, 164, 175. See 
also fracture, laminate text
comprehension, 3, 73–75, 93, 111, 
121, 167, 181
computational culture, 60, 67
computational poetics, 6, 8, 12, 54, 
130, 202
computer science, 7, 97, 100, 118, 
215n103, 216n117
Computing Machinery and Intelligence 
(Turing), 80
consent, 8, 41, 129, 212n10
constraint, 25–31, 43–51, 87, 96–97, 
113–17, 178, 185, 193–95. See 
also formatting
construction, 24
content, 96, 99–100, 102, 114, 119, 
133. See also formatting; text

	
INDEX	
261
control, 19–25, 32, 40–41, 89, 91, 
122–28, 131, 191, 198–99, 221n2. 
See also constraint; governance
Controller, the, 134
conversion, 121–23, 156
conversational computing, 43–51
copyright, 3, 89, 125, 129, 197. See 
also intellectual property
Copyright in Transmitted Electronic 
Data (CITED), 125, 127
coupling, 184
The Craft of Fiction (Lubbock), 67, 111
Cratylus (Plato), 101–2
critical theory, 3, 14–17, 53, 193. See 
also specific theorists
Crowther, Will, 44
CRT screen, 158
cryptography, 6, 41, 126–127, 143–44. 
See also cipher, legibility
Culler, Jonathan, 8
The Cultural Logic of Computation 
(Golumbia), 170
data, 2, 5, 11, 27–41, 87, 122–64, 
179, 197
Davey, Mike, 215n105
decoding, 14, 23
deconstruction, 13, 24, 114, 168
decoupling, 56–57, 85, 90, 141–43
defamiliarization, 9, 56–63
Denning, Peter, 134
Descartes, René, 68–69, 71, 73, 
217n20
determinism, 15, 18, 25, 54, 80, 88, 
91, 102, 127. See also control; 
governance
devices: books as, 1–2, 6, 27, 32–58, 
112–18, 130, 166–69, 191; de-
familiarization of, 56–63; literary 
theory and, 67–68, 84–89, 198; 
programming of, 110–12, 116–17, 
129; psychological predicates of, 
10, 13; reading practices and, 2–3, 
18, 38, 54, 110–12, 157, 182, 186; 
as waste products, 133–34. See 
also media
DIALOG, 44
Diamond, Cora, 79
Die Frage nach der Technik 
(Heidegger), 60
digital-analog divide, 166, 171–73, 
179, 183, 189
Digital Millennium Copyright Act 
(DMCA), 3, 128–30
digital poetics, 4–19, 40, 58–67, 
97–98, 104, 193. See also literary 
theory
digital systems, 4, 25–31, 39, 166–77, 
183–92, 201, 227n52; humanities 
and, 169–71. See also analog sys-
tems; format theory; technology
direct current (DC), 172
direct manipulation, 45–47, 49–50, 53
disbelief, suspension of, 49, 51
discreteness, 184–85, 189, 228n56
dissimulation, 38, 40. See also simula-
crum; simulation
DMCA, 130, 221n121
Document Object Model (DOM), 115, 
121, 123–25
Dole, George Henry, 176
Don’t Make Me Think (Steve Krug), 52
drill paper, 222n10
Drucker, Johanna, 111, 132
Eagleton, Terry, 107
EDIT, 115–16
editing, 118–19
Eichenbaum, Boris, 66, 105
electronic books, 2, 12, 20, 29, 67, 
112–14, 130, 199. See also elec-
tronic devices
electronic devices, 58, 112, 167
embodiment, 54, 87. See also body
encryption, 11, 126–27, 129. See also 
cryptography, cipher

262	
INDEX
Engelbart, Douglas, 134, 157–58, 159, 
160–63, 224n85
ephemera, 2, 20, 102, 107, 131–32, 
146, 161, 198–99. See also 
transcendence
epistemology, 5, 7, 13, 51, 89, 203. 
See also knowledge
Epstein, Herman, 149
erasure, 14, 35–41, 50, 83–85, 131, 
151, 161, 174
estrangement, 7, 9–10, 12, 41, 203
experimental turn, 15–18
Fankhauser, Charles, 147–48
figuration, 36–37. See also metaphor
Fish, Stanley, 170–71, 176, 192
fissure, 133–34, 156. See also fracture
flicker, 182. See also refresh rate
Flusser, Vilém, 8–9, 12
Foray into the Worlds of Animals and 
Humans (Uexküll), 199
FORMAT, 116–17, 122
form, 56, 64, 133; formatting, 189, 
191–92, 194; formalism, 19, 61, 
63–64, 96, 97, 101, 104, 218n35, 
218n42; format theory, 16, 19, 37, 
40, 47; formation, 8–10, 20, 59–
64, 69, 71, 157–59, 175, 190–93, 
218n45. See also constraint; mor-
phology; structuralism; symbolism
Fortran IV, 116
fracture, 6, 14, 20, 164, 198. See also 
fissure, laminate text, composite 
media
Furuta, Richard, 118
Gadamer, Hans-Georg, 40
Gaia sciences, 200
The Genesis and Speed of Telegraph 
Codes (Halstead, Frank G.), 52
genre, 63, 98–99, 179
Gitelman, Lisa, 98
Gnosticism, 176. See also mysticism
God, 175, 226n30. See also Universe, 
the
Goldberg, Hymen, 134, 144–45
Golumbia, David, 170, 176, 192
Gombrich, Ernst, 100
Goodman, Nelson, 186–87, 228n56
Google, 113
governance, 11, 13, 123–25, 191. See 
also control; determinism
A Guide to Berlin (Nabokov), 59
grammar, 43, 74, 77–78, 81, 115
Gutenberg, 57
Gutenberg press, 14, 147
Haigh, Thomas, 84
Haley, Jon, 146
Halstead, Frank G., 6, 52
Hanes, Robert, 134, 151–52
Harcourt, Bernard, 67
hardware, 3, 82–88, 113–15, 125, 129, 
202
Harlem Shadows (McKay), 110
Haugeland, John, 187, 189
Hayles, Katherine, 99, 132
Hegel, G.W.F., 102–4, 216n120, 218n35
Hegelianism, 105–6
Heidegger, Martin, 53–54, 107, 211n94
Heim, Michael, 131–32
Heisenberg uncertainty principle, 25
hermeneutics, 68, 74, 86, 107, 109, 
111. See also interpretation
Hermogenes, 101–2
Horkheimer, Max, 15
“How The Overcoat Is Made” 
(Eichenbaum), 66
Hughes, David Edward, 138
Hughes telegraph, 137–38. See also 
telegraphy
Human–computer interaction, 7, 13, 
26, 42–44, 47, 51, 53, 159, 184
Human Intellect Augmentation 
Techniques (Engelbart), 224n85

	
INDEX	
263
Human Interface Guidelines, 21
humanism, 7, 11, 21, 55, 57, 171, 
200–201. See also posthumanism
Hutchins, Edwin, James Hollan, and 
Donald Norman, 47, 49
hyperrealism, 38, 50, 113, 169, 186
Iarkho, Boris, 205n10
IBM, 31, 116, 151; IBM Composer, 
153; IBM Mag Card II, 154; IBM 
Magnetic Selectric, 153; IBM MT/
SC, 153, 155; IBM MT/ST, 151, 
154–55; IBM Selectric Composer, 
156
icons, 26, 35, 43, 47–48, 50, 169, 
211n76. See also symbolism
idealism, 97, 102, 217n20. See also 
Platonism
IDEO, 32
illiteracy, 11, 144, 156. See also 
asemiosis
images, 25, 106, 111, 150
imitation game, 43, 80, 68–72
incompatibility, 27, 93, 97, 113–14, 
133, 135
Innes, Frank, 149
input, 134, 161, 164
inscription, 2, 17–25, 40, 89, 97, 131–
34, 161–64, 197–99
intellectual property, 125–27, 188
Interface of Mimesis (Laurel), 42
interface, 19, 26–54, 125, 133, 149–
51, 158
International Standards Organization 
(ISO), 125
The International Telegraph 
Conference (ITC), 137–38
International Telegraph Union (ITU), 
136
interpretation, 6–7, 18, 42, 108–9, 
122, 129, 133, 167, 199. See also 
hermeneutics, legibility
Interpretation Theory (Ricoeur), 40
Invention by Design (Petroski), 12
Invitation to a Beheading (Nabokov), 
65
Jacquard, Joseph Charles Marie, 
222n10
Jakobson, Roman, 8, 24
James, William, 16
Jameson, Frederic, 58, 107
Johnson, Barton, 59
Johnson, Mark and George Lakoff, 
30, 48
JOSS, 44
Jowett, Benjamin, 101–2
justice, 11, 40, 57
Kaiman, Arthur, 115
Katz, Matthew, 189–90
Kernighan, Brian, 117, 185
Khlebnikov, Velimir, 105
Kircher, Athanasius, 69
Kirschenbaum, Matthew, 12, 132, 
220n108
Kittler, Friedrich, 11, 15, 41, 88, 
207n42, 227n52
Knobe, Joshua, 17
knowledge, 15–18, 25–33, 47, 56, 
191–203. See also epistemology
Kuhlman, Quirinus, 69, 73
Lakoff, George, 29–30, 33–35
Lamb, W.R.M., 101
laminate text, 95, 114–15, 122–23, 
129–30, 157, 164, 180. See also 
composite media, fracture
language, 4, 29–30, 42–43, 51–62, 
70–80, 86–90, 143–45, 177–78, 
186–91; electronic, 136; gram-
mar and, 80–81; machine, 24. See 
also alphabets; coding; metaphor; 
telegraphy
La technique ou l’enjeu du siècle 
(Ellul), 60

264	
INDEX
Laurel, Brenda, 42, 49–50
Lectures on Aesthetics (Hegel), 102
Lectures on Philosophy (Hegel), 103
legibility, 42, 134–35, 144–46, 157, 
163; illegibility, 1, 41, 94, 129. See 
also access, affordance
Leibniz, Gottfried, 46, 140
Levine, Caroline, 96, 206n11
Linkages Between Plot and Style 
Device (Shklovsky), 106
literary theory, 4, 7–19, 40, 58–61, 65–
67, 97–98, 104, 193. See also po-
etics; specific theorists and works
logograph, 169
looms, 222n10
Lubbock, Percy, 19, 58–60, 65–68, 
111, 213n43
Luther, Martin, 218n58
machines, 1, 15, 67, 72, 81–82, 93, 
119, 135, 199; bugs, 136–37. See 
also computer science; robots
Magnetic Reader, the, 134
magnetic readers, 151–52
Manovich, Lev, 88, 113
mapping, 29, 31, 47
Marche, Stephen, 170
Marcus, Sharon, 107, 109
Mark III Calculator, 148–49, 151
Marx, Karl, 10, 57
Marxism, 216n120
materialism, 9, 12, 41, 58, 63–64, 67, 
166
mathesis, 192
McCorduck, Pamela, 131
MCFI, 183
McGann, Jerome, 111
meaning making, 16, 66, 68, 72, 170, 
200
mechanisms, 8, 75–79, 81, 83, 87, 134
media: analog, 166–68, 176–90; digital, 
20–25, 36–43, 84, 88–89, 114–33, 
161–85, 188–92; magnetic storage 
and, 7, 13, 20, 24–42, 61, 72, 81, 
94–96, 131–38, 145–57, 164, 177, 
188, 198, 221n2; screens and, 5, 
7, 19–20, 24, 38, 95, 131, 157, 
163–66, 179–82, 184, 198. See 
also devices; programmable media
media archaeology, 18, 107, 172, 198
media theory, 20, 175
mediation, 7, 26
Medieval Technology and Social 
Change (Lynn White), 60
memory, 2–5, 24, 36, 95, 146, 161–
68, 175, 221n2. See also storage
metamedium, 88
metaphor, 2, 9–12, 25–41, 47–51, 
60, 68–72, 207n14, 209n33. See 
also figuration; language; mimesis, 
symbolism
metaphysics, 84, 100, 174
microanalysis, 6, 205n10
Microsoft (company), 31
Mignolo, Walter, 113
mimesis, 42, 47, 50, 54, 59, 61, 65, 
198–99. See also imitation game, 
metaphor
Mindflex, 211n91
Minecraft, 87, 168, 186
Mircosoft Word, 16
Moby Dick (Melville), 99
modalities of communication, 195
Moor, James, 215n103
Moréas, Jean, 63
Moreno, Jacob L., 55–57, 70, 89, 
212n2
morphology, 5, 20, 43. See also form
Morphology of the Folktale (Popp), 
218n42
Morse code, 6, 136–37, 139–41, 143, 
146, 172–73, 178–79. See also al-
phabets; language; telegraphy
Moses, Robert, 193
motion-compensated frame interpola-
tion (MCFI), 179

	
INDEX	
265
multiplexers, 138, 222n26. See also 
Baudot
Murray, Donald, 87, 135, 176–77, 
223n32, 227n38
Murray alphabet, 135, 140–41. See 
also alphabets; telegraphy
Myst, 168, 186, 190
mysticism, 176. See also God; 
Universe, the
Nabokov, Vladimir, 59–60, 65
Nagel, Thomas, 200–201
NASA, 157–58
Nichols, Shaun, 17
objects, 2, 10–17, 26–36, 47–70, 118–
27, 140, 168, 181. See also books 
(artifacts); materialism; media
O’Gorman, Lawrence, 121
ontologies, 66, 117, 169, 171, 185, 
188, 190–91, 201. See also 
phenomenology
OOO (object-oriented ontology), 10, 
65, 100
Open Systems Interconnection (OSI), 
123–25, 220n103
operators, 44, 85, 133–44, 153–
58, 199. See also machines; 
programmers
optical character recognition (OCR), 
119–20
organization, 37
Ossanna, Joseph, 117
ownership, 2, 32, 113, 125, 127. See 
also governance
parroting, 69–71. See also imitation 
game
Pasquale, Frank, 67
patents. See copyright; intellectual 
property
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 
211n75–211n76
perception, 6, 20–21, 37, 66, 165–67, 
174–75, 179–85
Persson, Markus, 168
Petroski, Henry, 12
Phaedrus, 70, 73
Phaedrus (Plato), 56, 68, 171
phantazpmenōn, 101–2, 104. See also 
appearance; simulation
Phelps, C. Deirdre, 109
phenomenology, 21–23, 161–62, 165, 
170–77, 184, 199–201. See also 
ontologies
philology, 5–6, 58, 66, 106–10
Philosophical Grammar (Wittgenstein), 
71, 74–75, 77
Philosophical Investigations 
(Wittgenstein), 16, 71
Philosophy of Creation (Dole), 176
Philosophy of Style (Spencer), 62
Photoshop, 169
pianola, 75–77
plagiarism, 13
Plato, 56, 70, 104, 171, 217n27. See 
also Socrates
Platonism, 97, 100–103, 163, 169, 
213n58. See also idealism; 
Socrates
poetics, 4, 13–19, 27–33, 41–68, 90, 
99–110, 175, 177, 205n2
poetic language, 33, 63
poiesis, 53
Pollak, Anton and Josef Virag, 174
Pollak-Virag telegraph, 172–73, 226
Pong, 45–46
Portable Document Format (PDF), 24, 
95–96, 112, 193–94
posthumanism, 171, 200. See also hu-
manism; object-oriented ontology
Poulsen, Valdemar, 147
pragmatism, 16, 18
preservation, 95, 191
priem, 58, 62
Print Is Flat, Code Is Deep (Hayles), 99

266	
INDEX
programmable media: electromagnetic 
drums, 148–49, 156; electromag-
netic tape, 42, 151; prehistory of, 
222n10; punch cards, 20, 44, 61, 
86, 133–35, 143–46, 151–53; ticker 
tape, 20, 42, 51, 81–85, 133–35, 
143, 148–55, 223n58. See also de-
vices; media
Programmed Visions (Wendy Chun), 
145
programmers, 30, 42, 155. See also 
operators
programming, 2, 14, 23–25, 43, 62, 
88, 94, 161–62, 190
Propp, Vladimir, 218n42
protocol, 27, 77, 90, 123–24, 144, 
220n103
Public Notes, 112–13
QED, 115
quantum mechanics, 8, 25, 34, 40–41, 
198
Ramsey, Frank, 16
Ransom John Crowe, 218n35
recording, 26, 33, 86, 125, 147–54, 
183, 191
recursion, 162–63, 224n68
refresh rate, 165, 180–82. See also 
flicker
representation, 14, 21–25, 96, 110–13, 
130, 140–42, 176–78, 223. See 
also coding; language; mimesis
reproduction, 13, 25, 38, 61, 97, 
110–14, 125, 187–89, 191
Richards, I. A., 33
Ricoeur, Paul, 40, 209n47
robots, 55–57, 70. See also machines
Romanticism, 99, 102–3
Russel, Bertrand, 175
Sagan, Dorion, 200
Schopenhauer, 62
scripts, 202
Searle, John, 29, 69–70, 77
security, 11, 128
semantics, 71, 73, 102, 121.
semiosis, 98
sensation, 105–6, 109
settlement, 7–8
Shakespeare, William, 37, 63, 99
shape, 19, 71, 105, 111
Shelly, Percy, 33
Shillingsburg, Peter, 110, 114
Shklovsky, Viktor, 8–9, 34, 58–59, 62, 
105, 107
Shneiderman, 46
Siegert, Bernhard, 172, 226n18
signal, 132, 135–36, 140–143, 149, 
152, 156, 172–77
signification, 89, 94
simulacrum, 25, 37–38, 42, 50, 90, 
134, 157. See also dissimulation
simulation, 37–38, 46, 53, 81, 164–65
skeuomorphic design, 38–39
smart devices, 7–12, 15, 23, 51, 54, 
198
smart documents, 20, 97, 126–29, 198
Smith, Oberlin, 146
soap opera effect, 98, 182–83, 188, 
227n49
Society for the Study of Poetic 
Language (OPOYAZ), 104, 106
Socrates, 70, 73, 101–2. See also 
Plato
software, 112–14, 122, 146, 168, 194, 
216n117
Sontag, Susan, 108–9
space, 7–14, 17, 25, 27, 57, 81, 135–
36, 170, 197–99. See also virtual 
space
Space Invaders, 50
Spencer, Herbert, 62
spiritualism, 172
Spiritual Telegraph (Samuel Brittan), 
175

	
INDEX	
267
Sterne, Jonathan, 96
storage, 14, 20, 40, 81–82, 87, 96, 
134, 157, 221n2; magnetic, 134, 
148, 151–52, 154–56, 183; mem-
ory and, 157, 161, 164
structuralism, 8, 26–34, 94–95, 121–
24, 133, 192. See also formalism
surveillance, 6, 115, 193
surface reading, 108, 115, 128, 
130–32
Swedenborg, 175–76
symbolism, 37–46, 52–58, 68, 74–90, 
105, 132, 192; semiotics, 21, 46, 
52, 200; signs, 14, 52, 54, 98; 
simulacrum, 25, 38, 42, 50, 169, 
206n23; symbols, 46–47, 79, 81–
83. See also icons; metaphor
synchronization, 139, 141. See also 
time
Szabo, Nick, 125
Tanselle, G. Thomas, 98, 109
Taussig, Michael, 42
technique, 7, 9, 58–65, 69, 81, 90, 
162, 172, 189, 212n20, 226n18
The Technological Man (Viktor Fekiss), 
60
technology, 60, 171, 212n20
Technology and Culture, 60
telecommunications, 133, 172
telegraphone, 147
telegraphy, 85–89, 134–39, 141–48, 
166, 172–77, 227n39. See also 
alphabets; Baudot code; commu-
nication; Hughes telegraph; Morse 
code
teletypes, 143
The Terminator, 169
The Terminator 2, 169
text, 5, 21, 73, 93, 107–16, 119, 193; 
criticism and, 3, 66, 110–11; digi-
tal, 6, 96, 111, 114–15, 131, 172, 
190, 198. See also content
Timaeus (Plato), 101
time, 66, 135–36, 138–40, 199–202. 
See also synchronization
Time Fob, the, 134
Tolstoy, Leo, 10, 15, 118
tools, 53–54
Towards a History of Epistemic Things 
(Hans-Jorg Rheinberger), 207n29
transcendence, 60, 63, 161, 216n120
transference, 37, 39, 90
translation, 26, 44, 51, 73–75, 96, 
101, 108, 135–36, 143, 146, 185
transmedia, 74, 177–78, 191
transmission, 14, 138, 172, 177
TROFF, 117, 122, 220n101
truth, 34, 39
Turing, Alan, 19, 43, 58, 67–68, 71, 
79–80, 82–85, 122, 199
Turing machine, 71, 80–85, 87–90, 
215n89, 215n99. See also Turing, 
Alan
Turner, Mark, 29
typography, 70, 86, 149
Uexküll, Jakob von, 199–200
universals, 103–4, 106, 218n35
Universe, the, 175
UTF-8, 176
value, 10, 14, 18, 23–24, 100, 110, 
206n22.
Vaucanson, Jacques de, 222n10
Veslovsky, Alexander, 106–7
video recorders, 182–83
virtual space, 27, 31, 50–51, 161. See 
also digital
Ways of Making and Knowing (Smith, 
Meyers, and Cook), 17
Weller, Charles Edward, 224n83
Who Shall Survive? (Jacob Moreno), 
55
Wimsatt, W.K., 104

268	
INDEX
Winner, Langdon, 5, 60, 192–93
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 19, 58, 67–68, 
71–75, 77–80, 88, 151
word processors, 161–63
writing telegraph, 178
Xerox 8010 Star, 49
Xerox Corporation, 26, 31
Yakubinksy, Lev, 105
Youngquist, Robert, 134, 151–52

