
Iain McGilchrist is a former Consultant Psychiatrist and Clinical Director at the Bethlem Royal &
Maudsley Hospital, London, and has researched in neuroimaging at Johns Hopkins University
Hospital, Baltimore. He taught English at Oxford University, where he has been three times elected a
Fellow of All Souls College. He works privately in London and otherwise lives on the Isle of Skye.
He is the author of The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the
Western World (2009).
Praise for The Master and His Emissary:
‘A seminal book’–Professor Ervin László, Huffington Post
‘A landmark new book…it tells a story you need to hear, of where we live now’–Bryan Appleyard,
Sunday Times
‘A fascinating book…[McGilchrist] is a subtle and clever thinker, and unusually qualified to range
with such authority over so many different domains of knowledge'—Harry Eyres, Financial Times
‘McGilchrist's careful analysis of how brains work is a veritable tour de force, gradually and
skilfully revealed. I know of no better exposition of the current state of functional brain
neuroscience’–Professor W.F. Bynum, Times Literary Supplement
‘This is a very remarkable book…McGilchrist, who is both an experienced psychiatrist and a shrewd
philosopher, looks at the relation between our two brain-hemispheres in a new light, not just as an
interesting neurological problem but as a crucial shaping factor in our culture…clear, penetrating,
lively, thorough and fascinating…splendidly thought-provoking’–Professor Mary Midgley, Guardian

EDITOR'S NOTE
Iain McGilchrist's The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western
World was published in 2009, to worldwide acclaim. Clearly The Master and His Emissary’s
combination of fascinating neurological research with a deep knowledge of Western culture and a
profound insight into what it is to be human struck a chord, and, ever since, Iain has been deluged
with follow-up questions and suggestions, and invitations to speak at events and conferences.
Inevitably, one of those questions has been, ‘When are you going to write another book?’, but,
given that The Master and His Emissary draws on more than twenty years of research, a new full-
length book would be a significant undertaking. Instead, to coincide with the new paperback edition
of The Master and His Emissary, Yale invited Iain to write one of the first in a new series of short,
lively e-books by some of our most popular authors, in which he draws on his research into the role
of the right and left hemispheres to address the crucial question: just why are modern Westerners so
unhappy? We hope you enjoy it.
Phoebe Clapham
Editor, Yale University Press

How is it that the more able man becomes to manipulate the world to his advantage, the less he can perceive any meaning in it?
This is a paradox that has often been noted, and has sometimes been attributed to a fundamental perversity, a sort of ‘pure
cussedness’, in human nature.
The world has changed since the philosopher Owen Barfield wrote those words thirty-five years ago.
But the paradox, as he calls it, has got no nearer being resolved, while the evidence has continued to
accumulate that his hunch was right. Our increasing ability to manipulate the world does indeed
appear somehow connected with its loss of meaning for us. Why? And does it even matter?
An influential strand in contemporary thinking suggests that the quest for meaning is itself
meaningless. Nowadays, it is said, we see things more clearly than was hitherto possible. The world
has become comprehensible in ways that offer new possibilities for freedom and the exercise of
human ingenuity. Instead of resorting to myths to explain what we cannot understand, we now know
that it is only a matter of time before science will offer us the answers. Concepts such as the sacred or
spiritual, which we invented in an attempt to find meaning in the world, are obviously outmoded, the
product of misplaced guilt and primitive animism, and have no place in the lives of mature human
beings in the twenty-first century. In fact the whole idea that there might be meaning in life, like the
idea that we have something called ‘consciousness’, emerged during evolution in order to dupe us
into performing better. The beliefs, habits and customs of our ancestors are just fragments of
superstition and the sooner they are forgotten the better, since they stand in the way of progress, and
obstruct our ability to remould the world according to a rational assessment of our needs.
Our intuitions may be uneasy about some of this, but then is there really a place for intuition any
longer? It is often demonstrably misguided, as is bound to be the case, being no more than the relic of
an instinctual existence which has outlived its usefulness now that we are able to break free of the
world of myth.
Ultimately, we have come to believe that, whatever I or anyone else may say – really – when the
chips are down, when the rhetoric fades, and we have stopped trying to cheer ourselves up by
believing in sentimental ideas such as virtue, love and courage, the possibility of truly unselfish
behaviour, or a realm of spiritual value – really, we are nothing but blind mechanisms, the dupes of
our equally blind genes, with no choice but to play out the sorry farce that the force of evolution, so
much bigger and greater than we are, dictates. But at least now we have the dignity of knowing that
we are not deceiving ourselves.
So far, so familiar. Nonetheless, I want to suggest to you that this vision is less compelling than it
looks. Logically, scientifically, less compelling. I think there is in fact evidence that it may itself be a
cruel deception, one that we have been far too gullible in swallowing. And I think the explanation
may have something to do with the evolution of our brains.
We are right to be wary when we are offered the brain and its workings as an explanation of
experience. A lot of nonsense is talked about the brain and its ability to explain this and that. People
got terribly excited a while ago when they found what they took to be the ‘neural circuitry’ that lights
up when you fall in love. So? What did they expect? That your brain would be a blank when you fell
in love? Something lights up in my brain when I eat a cheese sandwich. It doesn't taste of cheddar. We
were being asked to believe palpable nonsense: that love was ‘nothing but’ an overexcitement in the
ventral pallidum. However it never was, nor ever will be. Enough of this nothing-buttery. I am not

asking you to listen to what I have to say about the brain on such flimsy pretexts. I am asking you to
consider the facts: that what we experience is mediated by neural tissue, a lot of it in the brain, and
that that neural tissue inevitably governs the nature of, indeed places constraints upon, what it is we
are able to find in the world, in predictable ways. That's all. It doesn't tell us what we are – or how,
or why, we are what we are: but it may tell us what we are missing.
It would be crazy to suppose that our brains were so perfectly constructed that they could
understand and make us aware of everything in the universe. Such a belief (though it is implied by
scientism, with its dogma that we can in principle understand everything, given time and a bit more
research) is irrational. We believe we understand so much more than other animals because our
brains have evolved. Why suppose this moment in evolution to have offered us everything that could
be needed to understand the world? The fact that it may look that way to us now does not prove
anything, except the impossibility of conceiving what it is that one cannot conceive. If a squirrel could
reflect, it would look that way to a squirrel.
So let me go back to the brain, but with a degree of scepticism. My aim will be to illuminate not so
much what we are, which no brain can tell us, but what we, and the world we create, are not – which
it can. It gives us tangible evidence of what might shape our thinking. Looking at the brain may,
funnily enough, even help us get a clearer view of the folly of trying to reduce mind to matter. It may
show us that only half our brains would think that way.
If we take a look at the brain, lying there on the pathologist's slab [fig 1], the first thing that will
strike us is that, despite millions of years of evolution, it has remained deeply divided. And that is
odd, since the whole purpose of the brain as we understand it is to make connections. How can this
be? Evolution would never have sacrificed the apparent advantages of massively greater
interconnectivity, unless there were a commanding advantage in, at the same time, keeping some
things apart.
In conceiving and writing a book called The Master and his Emissary: The Divided Brain and the
Making of the Western World, I spent twenty years amassing, studying and reflecting on whatever
research I could find that concerned the difference between the brain hemispheres. This was not an
easy task. The first problem was one of prejudice. In the early days after the first split-brain
operations carried out for the control of intractable epilepsy by Sperry and Bogen in California in the
1960s, it seemed that we were onto something big. The left hemisphere, we learnt, was rational and
linguistic, while the right hemisphere was pink and

Fig. 1   The brain viewed from above, with right hemisphere displaced to reveal the corpus callosum.
fluffy, emotional, creative, vague and given to painting pictures. So this – the story went – was why
we often seemed in conflict over how to see, and how to respond to, the world. But the excitement
waned as we found that the story was more complicated. Gradually, with unfolding research, it
became obvious that both hemispheres seemed to contribute to language, both to visuospatial
imagery: both were involved in reason and both in emotion, which were inextricably involved with
one another. In fact it didn't matter what it was our brains were engaged in doing, both hemispheres
were in it up to the neck (or whatever a hemisphere has for a neck). Then there was a Volvo ad about
the car for your right brain. That did it. From then on, no self-respecting scientist could be found to
touch the topic.
There developed, in reaction to this, a dogma that it was not worth looking at the issue, because
there simply was no difference between the two hemispheres. A dogma is not too strong a word: even
now you will sometimes hear the emphatic, confident, dismissive tones in the pronouncements of
those who have never bothered to look. The enquiry was closed down. And this, too, is fascinating –
particularly in the light of what I want to come onto shortly. Because this belief has nothing to do with
observable facts – indeed it flies right in the face of them. It is purely an article of faith, one that leads
us to turn away from a truly scientific approach. Because the brain is not only profoundly divided, but
profoundly asymmetrical. There are clear, subtle but significant, observable differences at every
level. The two hemispheres are different sizes, shapes, and weights (the right hemisphere is bigger
and heavier in all social mammals); have different gyral conformations on the surface, and in places
different cytoarchitecture – that is to say the arrangement of the cells; different proportions of grey
matter to white, different sensitivity to neuroendocrine influences, and rely on different
preponderances of neurotransmitters. And in psychometric testing they consistently yield different
results, which is in keeping with something any clinician could tell you: when there is damage to one
hemisphere or the other, through injury, tumour or stroke, there are consistent differences in what

happens to the subject and his world depending on which hemisphere suffers the lesion.
Right at the core of our being, staring us in the face, is a massive fact or set of facts, which science
should have been investigating, not denying. How had this strange dogma, this strange case of denial,
come about?
I think it can be attributed to adopting the wrong model in our attempts to understand what we were
looking at. We can only ever understand anything by comparing it with something else that we think
we already understand better. All understanding is in this sense provisional, a matter of observing
similarities and differences with something we already think we know. We had modelled the brain as
part of a machine, the hemispheres as mechanical parts of a mechanical body. There are, of course,
only two possible models: seeing it as part of a machine or as part of a person. So we had a 50 per
cent chance of getting it right. But we managed to make the wrong choice. Because if instead we had
seen it as part of a person, we would immediately have noticed that we were asking the wrong
question. Instead of asking, as of a machine, what it does – does it ‘do’ reason, emotion, language,
imagery? – we should have asked – as of a person – what's he or she like? How, in other words –
with what values, goals, interests, in what manner and in what way – did it do what it did.
If we ask this question – what sort of a way of engaging with the world, each hemisphere has, and
thus what sort of a world each hemisphere engages with – we find a pervasive pattern, giving rise to
an entirely coherent picture.
I should say that I do not adopt the naïve realist view of scientific materialism that there just is a
world ‘out there’ unaltered by our experience of it, which like so many Geiger counters or
photosensitive plates we can do no more than register. For one thing, whatever we know, we cannot
know what it would be like in the absence of our knowing it, and different people find different things
in the world. Even the same person finds different things on different occasions, when the context or
the type of attention changes. That does not mean, of course, that everything that exists owes its nature
and existence solely to us. But it does mean that, whether we are scientists or not, we can only know
the world as we have inevitably shaped it by the nature of our attention.
More than that, physics teaches us that, at the most fundamental level of existence, there simply are
no discrete pieces of inert matter. Instead there are clusters of interrelated probabilistic events that
change their nature when observed. In the words of the great physicist Richard Feynman, quantum
mechanics deals with ‘nature as she is – absurd’, that is she presents the left hemisphere with what it
would call a set of ‘paradoxes’. (More of that later.) Matter is precisely as hard to explain as
consciousness, so that trying to reduce one to the other would not help, even if it were not a strictly
meaningless exercise. In fact for more than a hundred years physicists have understood that matter is
not separable from consciousness. The mechanical universe is dead, in both senses. Strangely,
practitioners of the ‘life’ sciences, many of whom are very vocal about the mechanistic nature of life,
consciousness and our selves, carry on as if nothing had happened since the mid-nineteenth century,
when such views were last sustainable.
On the other hand I am just as sceptical of the naïve idealist view, espoused by some post-
modernists, that reality is all in our heads – we make it all up. For one thing there would be no point
in my writing this, since you don't exist to read it. I take it that we bring about a world in
consciousness that is partly what is given, and partly what we bring, something that comes into being
through this particular conjunction and no other. And the key to this is the kind of attention we pay to
the world.

Of course what we find will govern what kind of attention we deem it appropriate to pay. But just
as importantly, how we attend to the world in the first place governs what it is that we find. We make
the world we live in by attending to it in a certain way, by our disposition towards it. Having done so,
our experience of it then determines how we attend, and so on. There is no royal road to certainty
about what the world is, or what it is like. We all, whether we are poets or scientists, or just going
about the business of daily life, have to begin somewhere, by a leap of intuition, as to what kind of
thing it might be we are dealing with – not just any leap, of course, always a guided one, but
nonetheless fallible and uncertain. Depending on where and how we leap is what we find. And
depending on what we find is what we will find in due course, since it begins the process of
hardening things up into what we call a certainty. What we do not expect to find, we just will not see:
much elegant research demonstrates that we are essentially blind to what we do not think is there.
What does this have to do with the division of the brain? Birds and animals – for they, too, all have
divided brains – have to solve a conundrum every moment of their waking lives. In order to make use
of the world, to manipulate it to their own ends, they need to pay narrowly focussed attention to what
they have already prioritised as of significance to them. A bird needs to be able, for example, to pick
out a seed against the background of grit on which it lies, to pick up a particular twig to build a nest,
and so on. But if that is the only attention it is paying, it will soon end up as someone else's lunch
while it is getting its own, because it needs at the same time to pay a quite different type of attention
to the world – a broad, open, sustained vigilance, without any preconception of what it is that may be
found, be it predator or mate, foe or friend. How to pay such contrary types of attention to the world
at once? It is like patting your head and rubbing your stomach at the same time – but worse, because
one consciousness can't be committed to two kinds of attention simultaneously.
The solution appears to have been the brain's separate hemispheres. Each of these neuronal masses
is sufficient in itself and on its own to sustain consciousness. And since attention is an aspect of
consciousness (a machine can carry out tasks, but it cannot attend) each can therefore attend to the
world in a different way. What we call our consciousness moves back and forth between them
seamlessly, drawing on each as required, and often very rapidly. For in humans, too, it turns out, the
hemispheres pay different types of attention to the world – reach out a hand towards it (for that is
what the word ‘attention’ means, the reaching out of a hand) in a different way or with a different set
of priorities and values: to grasp and take for our own use, or to forge a connection and explore. The
left hemisphere, as in birds and animals, pays the narrow-beam, precisely focussed, attention which
enables us to get and grasp: it is the left hemisphere that controls the right hand with which we grasp
something, and controls the aspects of language (not all language) by virtue of which we say we have
‘grasped’ the meaning – made it certain and pinned it down. The right hemisphere underwrites
sustained attention and vigilance for whatever may be, without preconception. Its attention is not in
the service of manipulation, but in the service of connection, exploration and relation. That is, after
all another reason why we reach out a hand – to connect, to create, to share in another's fate, or to
explore the world for what it is.
I am not here going to attempt a summary of the differences in the kind of world that each
hemisphere brings about. The list is very extensive, as must be the case, since each hemisphere plays
a part in everything we experience. We would need to cover differences in the ways of conceiving
and construing knowledge itself, what we mean by newness, by wholeness, by types and aspects of
reason and emotion, types and aspects of language, music, space, depth and time, as well as morality

and the self. Here I can present only some conclusions. To see all the evidence and the argument laid
out in comprehensive detail, you'll need to go to The Master and His Emissary where there is space
and time enough to show exactly why, and on the basis of what evidence, those conclusions are
reached.
What are the key distinctions? One way of looking at the difference would be to say that while the
left hemisphere's raison d'être is to narrow things down to a certainty, the right hemisphere's is to
open them up into possibility. In life we need both. In fact for practical purposes, narrowing things
down to a certainty, so that we can grasp them, is more helpful. But it is also illusory, since certainty
itself is an illusion – albeit, as I say, a useful one.
There is no certainty. The more closely one pins down one measure (such as the position of a
particle), the less precise another measurement pertaining to the same particle (such as its momentum)
must become. It is not possible to know the values of all of the properties of the system at the same
time. Mechanical systems, even at their simplest, are likely to produce highly complex outcomes. Not
infrequently their behaviour is intrinsically unpredictable and unknowable (the simple double
pendulum – one pendulum attached to the bottom of another – is a classical example of ‘chaotic
dynamics'). The old, fallacious belief that the behaviour of all systems was fundamentally predictable
arose because the systems studied were abstracted from their real world complexity and studied very
close to equilibrium, where the parts had settled into a balanced state. It goes without saying that most
of the real world is operating far from equilibrium. Elements of matter are neither isolated nor
certain, but interconnected and probabilistic. Particles separated by a universe exhibit entanglement.
Even the fact of our observation alters the behaviour of matter.
I sometimes think of the right hemisphere as what enables Schrödinger's cat to remain on reprieve,
and the left hemisphere as what makes it either alive or dead when you open the box. It collapses the
infinite web of interconnected possibilities into a point-like certainty for the purposes of our
interaction with the world.
Although ‘seeing clearly’ is an image of grasping the truth, there is no such thing. At what level of
magnification, at what level of description can you be said to have seen something clearly? Is a book
seen clearly when it is seen as a whole in your hand, or when you read it, or when you take a
magnifying glass to the paper and see the hills and dales of the paper, or when you go further and see
the filamentous threads of which the paper is composed, or under electron microscopy, or when it
finally resolves into probabilities of the presence of subatomic particles, and reveals itself to be
mostly – nothing at all? When we say we see something clearly, we are not talking about perception
but about a special kind of knowledge: when we can say we know that it is one of those. We have
placed it.
An important consequence of this narrow-focus attention, aiming for certainty, is that it renders
everything explicit. Just as a joke is robbed of power when it has to be explained, metaphors and
symbols lose their power when rendered explicit. And metaphor is not a decorative turn, applied on
top of the serious business of language in order to entertain: all thinking, most obviously
philosophical and scientific thinking, is at bottom metaphorical in nature, though we are so familiar
with the metaphors that we don't notice their existence. It is the metaphors which provide the
‘something else’ which we know more intimately from our embodied, preconceptual experience, and
to which we are, in every word we use, properly understood, making a comparison. It is metaphors
that carry us across (that is what the word ‘metaphor’ means) the implied gap between language and

the world, and make what would otherwise be a hermetically sealed system of signs capable of
meaning something in terms of embodied experience. They are how we understand everything. It
follows that limiting the possible meaning of language by rendering it explicit also limits the possible
meaning that could be found in the world.
Explicitness kills, renders lifeless. An act of sexual love, or an act of worship, reveal little of their
true selves in the lab, seen through an observation window. But neither would a football match, a
meal with friends, or a comedy show. I first wrestled with this when I was involved with the study
and teaching of literature. The meaning and the structure are not like a body and its clothes. Once you
have taken the apparent ‘message’ out of its context, and examined the language of a poem like a cast-
off coat, you are left with a handful of tatters.
Only a man harrowing clods
In a slow silent walk
With an old horse that stumbles and nods
Half asleep as they stalk…
A poem of Hardy, which, if it had not existed could never have been imagined, and which cannot be
substituted by anything else in the universe, is reduced to a heap of general sentiments I could have
found anywhere else a hundred times over, apparently clothed in language that is clunky, quirky and
far from properly polished. And yet when understood and experienced implicitly, his poetry
inescapably alters your life.
Another way of thinking of the difference between the hemispheres is to see the left hemisphere's
world as tending towards fixity, whereas that of the right tends towards flow. All systems in nature,
from particles to the greater universe, from the world of cellular processes to that of all living things,
depend on a necessary balance of the forces for stasis with the forces for flow. All existing things
could be thought of as the product of this fruitful tension. But again, stasis itself is an illusion, helpful
though it is in grasping the world on the wing. There is an intriguing condition called palinopsia,
which follows damage to the right hemisphere. Here vision becomes atomised, broken down like the
successive stills of a juddering cine film, a series of static moments, rather than a seamless flow.
The left hemisphere's take on things comes from assessing thousands of points of information in
turn and trying to reach a conclusion about the whole picture that way. This has the profoundest
consequences for the way it sees the world, when contrasted with the take of the right hemisphere,
which sees things as a whole, never as isolated particles independent of a context. Of course we do
not actually build things up in the way that the left hemisphere imagines. That illusion comes from the
fact that when we ask ourselves, after the event, how we understood something, our linear-processing
left hemisphere comes up with the only way it knows, the way it would have had to do it if asked. But
fortunately we don't often ask it. We grasp the whole and only later choose to survey such particular
parts as we prioritise for their interest or relevance. By seeing isolated points, the left hemisphere
imagines that there are atomistically distinct entities, rather than seeing everything embedded in its
context, which radically changes its nature: part of a web of interconnections.
This partwise method of understanding, and resistance to the idea of things flowing and changing,
together go some way to explain the left hemisphere's affinity for what is mechanical or inanimate.
Only the left hemisphere encodes tools and machines – you will remember that the purpose of the left

hemisphere is to allow us to manipulate the world, not to understand it. Six separate studies have
examined the issue, and each has found this to be the case. One found a complete divide, animate in
the right, inanimate in the left. So marked is this effect that even the left-hander, who in daily life is
using his or her right hemisphere to manipulate tools and machines, nonetheless encodes them in the
left.
In the past we would naturally model the world according to organic metaphors – the tree, the
river, the family. Now we model everything the left hemisphere's way, mechanically. Once again no-
one could pretend that this is more true to the world; it is just a handy shortcut, which enables us to
model very well some aspects of its behaviour for practical purposes, but radically excludes others.
This way of thinking brings us to a further related issue: differences over the unique and the
general, quality versus quantity. The right hemisphere seems to be involved more with new
experience, new events, things, ideas, words, skills or music, or whatever it may be, while they are
still fresh, original and unique, and so to speak present, to the mind. The right hemisphere's world is
present – or more precisely ‘presences’ to us, as Heidegger puts it. By contrast the left hemisphere's
world takes over once whatever it is is represented – literally ‘re-presented’ after the fact: once it is
familiar and known, as an instance of something, a concept. You can actually see this process
happening using brain imaging. The left hemisphere abstracts and generalises, where the right
hemisphere's world remains truer to each embodied instance, and appreciates the unique. As things
are present in all their particularity, with all their individual, incarnate qualities, they are mediated by
the right hemisphere: as they become general, abstract quantities, they are mediated by the left. Of
course these abstractions and categories are once again less true to the world of experience, where no
two things at all are ever the same, fixed, certain, or equal to anything else. But the process is a rough
and ready take on the world, a way of helping us interact with the world swiftly and efficiently. The
neuroscientist V.S. Ramachandran calls the right hemisphere the devil's advocate, because it is
always interested in the particular, upsetting the left hemisphere's tendency to collapse unlike into
like, and see only what it is expecting to see.
The left hemisphere's world is a representation only. It is like a map, useful precisely because
almost all the information about the land to which it refers has been left out. For some purposes less
is more. If I am travelling from London to Edinburgh, I really don't need to know all about the houses
along the way, and what the people there like for supper, and how they treat their dogs, and what sort
of plants they have in their gardens. This is vital for an understanding of the real world, the terrain,
but not good for mastering the territory. It's no use for making a road trip.
To give you some idea of what I mean in practical terms, take a look at these pictures. Here [fig 2]
you see in turn a tree as conceived by both hemispheres, by the left hemisphere alone, and then by the
right. You will notice that, compared

Fig. 2   Tree drawn by the same subject: under normal conditions; with the right hemiphere inactivated; and with the left hemisphere
inactivated.
Fig. 3   The author as if suffering from hemineglect, from an animation by Cognitive Media for the RSA: see
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dFs9WO2B8ul
with the flowing form of the right hemisphere's tree, seen whole and alive, the left hemisphere's tree
is a fairly shrunken affair. And I want you to notice two features. In the first place, it is more like an
icon of a tree, a token or representation of a tree, than a tree in the world as we know it. But this
picture reveals another feature of the left hemisphere's world, which becomes particularly clear after
a right-hemisphere stroke. Under such circumstances one has only the left hemisphere to go on, and,
true to its proper function, it is interested only in the part of space that is of use to it, the right half of
space. It is not interested in understanding the world as a whole, only with having control of the bit it
manipulates. You can see this remarkable phenomenon on almost any general medical ward.
Following a right-hemisphere stroke, the patient may cease to attend to anything on the left, whether it
be a person, the left-hand page of a book, or the left half of the page, and in extreme circumstances
may forget to dress or shave the left half of the body [fig 3]. This has nothing to do with blindness –
the visual system is intact. And it doesn't happen the other way round: following a left hemisphere
stroke, the right hemisphere delivers a complete world, not a half-world.
If you look at these representations of a flower [fig 4], you see that in the left hemisphere it has
been reduced to a stereotyped, geometric symbol of a flower. Look at these [fig 5], all this time

produced by the left hemisphere: again the
Fig. 4   Flower as drawn by the same subjects: in normal conditions; with right hemisphere inactivated; and with left hemisphere
inactivated.
Fig. 5   Everyday objects drawn ‘according to the left hemisphere’, with right hemisphere inactivated.
complexity of the living world is reduced to a set of simple geometric figures. Take a look at the
column that shows a ‘person’. I am reminded of Emerson's pessimism about what was happening to
human beings in the modern world. ‘Man’, he wrote, ‘is a dwarf of himself.’ In the world of the left
hemisphere, this is true. The left hemisphere is not in touch with reality but with its representation of
reality, which turns out to be a remarkably self-enclosed, self-referring system of tokens.

I'd say the defining quality of the right hemisphere's world is that it is all in relations, what I call
‘betweenness’. This starts with its having a relationship with the world at large, not seeing it as a
separate object, ripe for manipulation. What do I mean by ‘betweenness'? Think about the nature of
music. Music does not exist in one particular note – which is in itself meaningless; or in a lot of such
single notes, each in itself meaningless. I am tempted to say it exists more in the spaces than in the
notes: the spaces between successive notes in pitch that creates the melody, the spaces between
simultaneously sounding notes, that is the harmony, the spaces in time between the beats, that makes
the rhythm. But that too is wrong, because the spaces are just silence, apparently nothing. It is not in
the spaces or the notes, but in the spaces and the notes together, plus whatever it is that comes about
from their union: much as electricity isn't in the positive pole, or the negative pole, or for that matter
just in the space between them, or the sum of all those, but in the whole taken together. This is what I
mean by betweenness, and it is also what mathematics consists in as much as music. It is what
physics, too, tells us the world is made of – not a universe of billiard balls pinging off one another in
predictable ways. And it is what the human world, rightly understood is made of, too. We are not
atoms, nor mixtures, but compounds with rich emergent properties, nowhere dreamed of in the single
human heart.
Some people have thought I might be subtly decrying reason or exalting emotion. But I should
remind you that both hemispheres are involved in reasoning and in emotion. The left hemisphere is
especially good at voluntary and social expressions of emotion and one of the most clearly lateralised
emotional registers is that of anger, which lateralises to the left hemisphere. Deeper and more
complex expressions of emotion, and the reading of faces, are best dealt with, however, by the right
hemisphere. As far as reason goes, the left hemisphere is better at carrying out certain procedures that
involve manipulating numbers, but has less of a grasp than the right hemisphere of what those numbers
mean. Much of mathematics is dependent on the right hemisphere: most of its great discoveries were
perceived as complex patterns of relationships, and only later, often much later, translated
painstakingly into linear sets of propositions. Deductive logic, it turns out, depends on the right
hemisphere.
Reason is, after all, a complex concept. Some kinds of rationality can be unreasonable. Rationality,
the schematic carrying out of algorithmic procedures in the way that a machine would, is better done
by the left hemisphere, it is true. But other kinds of reason, including the reason that tells you the
limits of reason, depends on the right hemisphere. There is a kind of reasoning, and an extent of
reasoning, that is in many circumstances not only irrational, but actually one of the signs of madness.
And as Aristotle emphasised, there are different kinds of reasoning, different kinds of knowledge, and
different modes of understanding appropriate to different areas of life. We do not understand a poem
as a doctor understands a patient, and that, in turn, is different from how an accountant understands a
business plan. This is not a flaw in poetry, or medical practice, that could be remedied if only it were
all rationalised mechanically. The arts and humanities need to remember this: they don't have to feel
inferior to science, and try to model themselves on them. Like physicists, but in a quite different way,
they are in the ultimately important business of understanding the world and making sense of it, not
just learning how to manipulate it.
But the most curious aspect of the story of the left hemisphere is yet to come. It turns on how a self-
consistent system of signs, such as the left hemisphere's world, can come to seem more real than the
lived world itself.

The first evidence of this comes from about the fourth century BC – just as Greek culture was
beginning to pass its peak. For the first time in Western civilisation the left hemisphere's take on the
world started to dominate. Until that point, from the sixth century BC onwards, we had seen an almost
unparalleled flowering of science and the arts based on the best of what both right and left
hemispheres in conjunction can offer. From the right hemisphere came careful observation of the
natural world (the pre-Socratic philosopher Thales correctly predicted an eclipse of the sun); a sense
of the uniqueness of the individual, with interests that needed to be harmonised with those of the
community, which itself was seen as a living, changing entity that was more than the sum of its parts;
and there arose, for the first time, wonderful, expressive depictions of the human face, narratives of
human lives, and poetry rich in metaphor. It gave rise to the phenomenon of drama, whereby we see
ourselves more clearly at a distance, but not in some detached and lifeless way – able more than ever
to empathise. There was a keen sense of what needed to remain implicit, an understanding of the all-
important conjunction of opposites, and, perhaps most strikingly, a sense of proportion and a sense of
humour. From the left hemisphere came the working out of the fruits of natural observation into useful
predictions of behaviour of natural bodies, the codification of laws, the creation of maps, the
development of some aspects of mathematics, the introduction of monetary currency, the further
evolution of written language (at this point starting for the first time to be written, as now in the West
only, from left to right), and in general the systematisation of knowledge.
But gradually, with the rise of the Law of Non-Contradiction, which limited our ability to
appreciate important truths that are not necessarily mutually compatible, the way of seeing the world
characteristic of the left hemisphere began to obtrude. The ideal, theoretical world began to triumph
over that of experience. We find Plato saying that the right way to do astronomy is not to look at the
stars, but to look inside ourselves. And suddenly there is a flurry of interest in what was called
paradox – when our theories about the world, our ways of thinking, come face to face with reality and
show themselves to be inadequate to understanding the world.
You may know the ‘Ship of Theseus’ paradox, also known as the ‘Growing Paradox’, because it
arises in the case of all living things. It goes like this: the ship in which Theseus returned to Athens
from his exploits in Crete was preserved there in the harbour as a memorial. With time the timbers
perished one by one and were replaced, so that after thirty years none of the original timbers
remained. Was this still the Ship of Theseus? This is an analogue of the problem that few of the cells
in my body were there a year ago – so is it still my body? To anyone seeing the whole, and who
realises that everything flows, the answer is clearly ‘yes’. As Novalis remarked, our body is a
moulded river. However, to someone who sees only parts and believes that permanence is stasis, the
answer is ‘no’.
Or take the paradox called ‘The Division’. It reduces flow to a series of still frames. It is similar to
Achilles and the tortoise, only it goes one step further. It states that movement is impossible, because
before I go from here to the door, I must first go half the way, and before half, I must go a quarter, and
before a quarter, an eighth and…this is an infinite series. So I am condemned to sit here for ever.
What is fascinating is the rationalistic left hemisphere's conclusion: not that this kind of logic has its
limits in understanding the world, but that the experiential world somehow doesn't measure up to
logic. The real world isn't the way we think it is because logic says so, and, in reality, Achilles can,
apparently, never overtake the tortoise. Beautifully designed experimental research, which I detail in
The Master and His Emissary, shows that the left hemisphere sees truth as internal coherence of the

system, not correspondence with the reality we experience. Again there is always a tension between
these perspectives, and we need to be able to learn from either of them, but there is a serious problem
when we begin to see truth as being, in the words of one of the experimental subjects with her right
hemisphere inactivated, just ‘what it says here on this piece of paper’.
I am constantly reminded, as I go about life in the modern Western world, of a story by Yuri
Tynyanov, called Lieutenant Kizhe. Published in 1927, the story concerns an error of transcription in
an official list of the Imperial army, whereby the word poruchiki, lieutenants, gets conflated with a
subsequent syllable zhe, seeming to refer to a certain poruchik Kizhe, a Lieutenant Kizhe – who never
existed. Despite this apparent drawback, Lieutenant Kizhe plays a starring role in subsequent military
reports, rises through the ranks, where he never gets into trouble and is known for his dependability,
marries, fathers a child, is decorated for bravery, and finally finds himself promoted by the Tsar to the
rank of General. Mysteriously, when the Tsar demands to meet this human paragon, he cannot be
found. The Tsar, in despair, mutters ‘Sic transit gloria mundi’, and accords him a state funeral.
Meanwhile a Lieutenant Sinyukhaev, who was years ago wrongly recorded as dead, struggles
fruitlessly to assert that, contrary to received opinion, he is very much alive, and ends up a vagabond
on the highways of Russia, relying on the charity of strangers.
In the contemporary world, where I fear we are currently in thrall to the left hemisphere's way of
thinking, this problem, that the piece of paper has become more important than the reality that it refers
to, is endemic. Surgeons have a saying that is, I sometimes think, only half-facetious: ‘the operation
was a success, but the patient died’. At least there was an operation. Nowadays the operation is
scarcely required, as long as the box was ticked. That way success is assured, because ‘that's what it
says on this sheet of paper’.
In life we need the contributions of both hemispheres. As Kant memorably put it, concepts without
intuitions are empty, intuitions without concepts are blind. We need the contributions of both, but for
different purposes. An uncritical following of intuition can lead us astray, but so can an uncritical
following of logic. The reasoning of those who have spent their lives attending wisely to their
intuitions is better than that of those who have never done so, and the intuitions of someone who has
spent a life attending to reason will be better than those of someone who has not. Here again we come
up against one of the defining differences between the two hemispheres: the right hemisphere is
perfectly happy with ‘both/and’ – sees in fact how necessary that is in understanding the world. The
left hemisphere, by contrast, says: ‘What's the matter? Can't you make up your mind?’ It has to be
‘either/or’, black or white, never a life within the full colour spectrum.
Do we just have to shrug our shoulders and say: ‘there are these two views of the world, choose
which one suits you best?’ That would be at least a step forward, because at the moment, we are
increasingly discounting one of these world views, that of the right hemisphere, altogether, and, as
they say, half a loaf is better than no bread. Fortunately we don't have to choose: there is something of
supreme value which each contributes to our experience of the world. But as far as understanding the
world goes, I think we can go further. For the relationship between the two hemispheres is not
symmetrical. They are not symmetrically anything, so why would they be symmetrically wise? Of the
two, one is of greater importance when it comes, not to manipulating the world, but to understanding
it, and living in it, and with it. The right hemisphere, the so-called minor hemisphere, is in fact the one
that knows, and more importantly the one that understands, more.
I want to suggest that there is a kind of madness associated with slavish following of procedures

and rules, and with imagining that life follows a sort of mechanical logic. I am not, of course, in
favour of abandoning logic, or attention to facts, or clear expression. In fact, as is often pointed out to
me, making the case I have put forward in The Master and His Emissary depended on each of these.
But it is, in any case, the right hemisphere, not the left, which is more attentive to reality, to the facts,
and, as mentioned above, the right hemisphere is an important contributor to logic and language. Some
elegant research into gesture and speech reveals that thought begins and ends in the right hemisphere,
passing through the necessary staging post of the left hemisphere, where it is put into serial sentences.
This follows a typical pattern in the way the hemispheres relate: the origins and the end lie in the right
hemisphere's world, but it is greatly enriched by what the left hemisphere can ‘unpack’ along the way.
That middle stage, of making the parts temporarily explicit, before they are once more reintegrated
into the whole, is crucial. Yet it cannot be the endpoint. It is like learning a piece of music: first you
are drawn to play it as a whole; then you break it down into bits and practice certain passages, and
analyse harmonic transitions, and so on; but in the performance all that must once again be set
ruthlessly aside, or the results will be disastrous.
So the meaning of an utterance begins in the right hemisphere, is made explicit (literally folded out,
or unfolded) in the left, and then the whole utterance needs to be ‘returned’ to the right hemisphere,
where it is reintegrated with all that is implicit – tone, irony, metaphor, humour, and so on, as well as
a feel of the context in which the utterance is to be understood. To achieve meaning in the world
requires what linguists call the business of pragmatics, which comes from the right hemisphere. If I
say ‘it is hot in here’, your right hemisphere knows that what I mean is ‘please open the window’,
while your left hemisphere thinks I am offering helpful meteorological data. The left hemisphere is
adept at procedures, but sees them as ends in themselves. In fact, in the presence of right hemisphere
brain damage, or abnormal left hemisphere activation, the left hemisphere may produce a sort of
meaningless logorrhoea. This is a parallel to the processing of numerical data that I referred to
above: the procedure is better carried out by the left hemisphere, but the meaning is better
appreciated by the right.
Again it is more the left than the right hemisphere that furnishes our quick and dirty reactions to the
world – rough and ready approximations that help us get by, but will not do when the situation
involves new information, or something that is not accounted for within its own formal system. It is
the right hemisphere that is the devil's advocate. Newtonian mechanics is a good approximation in the
everyday world, but not a guide to how matter actually operates outside that framework. It seduces us
with its plausibility. We start to believe the world is predictable, because in certain circumscribed
circumstances it seems to be so. But this is a delusion: the flap of a butterfly's wings in Barbados can
cause a storm in China. This is the real world, not the apparently predictable one of the model.
The left hemisphere doesn't realise its own limitations. Neither does logic if unassisted. It doesn't
know what it is that it doesn't know. Well, let me qualify that. If taken far enough, it will demonstrate
its own limitations. As Pascal wrote, ‘The ultimate achievement of reason is to recognize that there
are an infinity of things which surpass it. It is indeed feeble if it can't get as far as understanding that.’
Almost three hundred years later, Gödel proved that this is necessarily so, not accidental but essential
truth. But to see this takes genius. Most people are completely and unreflectively seduced by the
rhetoric of reason. And incidentally, some recent influential work in evolutionary theory suggests that
this may be the whole purpose of logic – not to understand, but to persuade, to seduce, others and
win a competitive argument.

Narrow logic, once given foundations, can carry on operating as long as you like. But it cannot
ground itself. It cannot provide either its own first assumptions in any argument, nor, in more general
terms, its own worth as a tool in reaching the truth. That depends on an intuition in its favour based on
experience. And, of course, it is a hugely valuable tool. It just cannot tell you how to apply logic to
the real world. For that it needs once more to go back to a sense of the whole picture.
Is it logical, or just a matter of faith, to believe that logic has no limits? Is it logical to rule out the
possibility, understood for millennia, that there was a difference between the sort of knowledge that is
available to logos and the sort that is available to mythos? Is it logical, or an assertion of faith, to
assign reality to only one of these kinds of knowledge? Is it logical, or just a dogma, to assume that all
will be understood, as long as we only carry on applying the model of the machine? Is there a cost to
this approach, which, though it makes us powerful manipulators, puts us out of touch with so much
that gives life value?
Let me begin to sum up, before making some concluding remarks about where we are now. It used
to be said, according to the popular cliché, that though the left hemisphere might lack charm, it was
solid, down to earth, realistic and a sure path to the truth. But this is not at all the case. The left
hemisphere is not in touch with the world. It is demonstrably self-deceiving, and confabulates –
makes up a story, when it cannot understand something, and tells it with conviction. Michael
Gazzaniga first demonstrated this in split-brain patients. Subsequent research shows that, unlike the
right hemisphere, which tends toward self-doubt, it takes a distinctly flattering view of its own
capabilities. And when, as in the case of a paralysed limb, it is confronted with evidence that all is
not well, it refuses to recognise the problem. If forced to do so, it disowns it – won't take
responsibility: the paralysed limb belongs to the person in the next bed.
It is not reasonable. It is angry when challenged, dismisses evidence it doesn't like or can't
understand, and is unreasonably sure of its own rightness. It is not good at understanding the world.
Its attention is narrow, its vision myopic, and it can't see how the parts fit together. It is good for only
one thing – manipulating the world. Its world is a representation, a virtual world, only. It neglects the
incarnate nature of human beings, reducing them to the equivalent of brains in a vat. It reduces the
living to the mechanical. It prioritises the procedure, without a grasp of its meaning or purpose. And
it requires certainty where none can be found.
Because the left hemisphere is not equipped to understand, but instead to manipulate, I have argued
that the world is not ultimately the way the left hemisphere sees it, though that model has uses in the
everyday world. But in fact the everyday world is not like the left hemisphere's models, either. The
financial collapse was a perfect example of the following of algorithms that had been ‘proved’ to
work in the abstract, and was repeatedly marked by self-referential loops of reasoning that cut it off
from the real world outside the window. We kid ourselves that doctors, teachers, policemen are there
to develop a ‘product’ which we can then ‘get’ or consume. But this is nonsense. We don't know
beforehand what it is we are to go after and ‘get’, because it varies in every single case, and is
dependent on a relationship between individuals. It is also not put into, but drawn out from, human
individuals. A doctor, a teacher or a policeman – or for that matter a shop assistant, a therapist, an
artist, an actor, a librarian, a priest, a musician, a social worker or a potter – is, unlike a machine, not
necessarily better for doing more, doing it faster and doing it according to a standard specification. In
fact each of these machine-driven demands is almost certain to make things palpably, miserably
worse – as we all have a chance to discover when we do the simplest things, including, God help us,

ring up our bank.
Doctors are less popular now than they were in the days when my grandfather practised, when
there were quite literally only six treatments that worked. But they gave time to a relationship and
understood its power to bring healing: which meant that they were often to be found at the deathbed,
useless though this might now seem.
In the world of research, we now have to be able to say in advance what we are going to find, and
no one will fund a project unless it looks like having a chance of turning up a ‘positive’ finding,
which in reality means that it must be something pretty close to what we already know. We are not
prepared to trust; we feel we must micro-control. The aim is to increase efficiency by avoiding what
are conceptualised as waste or error, but it assures only one thing: mediocrity. Sadly many of those
doing the most interesting work in any field are increasingly having to do so outside the mainstream.
The left hemisphere tells us that the quest for meaning is meaningless, because it is not equipped to
deal in meaning or understanding, but manipulating and processing. It scorns such questions because it
can conceive only of the sort of clear, explicit answer that it rightly (from its own perspective)
dismisses as unverifiable. This has consequences, of course, one being that we are fobbed off with
the idea that successful manipulation of the world is all that matters. But both intuition and experience
tell us that it isn't.
Despite the brittle optimism constantly proclaimed by advertising, and not infrequently by
government spokesmen, the defining mood of the modern era is one of disappointment. That is not just
my opinion: it's as near a fact as such things can be. People are measurably less happy today than they
were fifty years ago, when we first started measuring, despite staggering improvements in material
well-being. There is much to feel proud of, of course, advances in conquering disease being just one
example, and we live longer – but prompting the question, for what?
We know so much, we can make so much happen, and we certainly invest much in the attempt to
control our destinies. And yet, if we are honest, we feel as though it ought somehow to have added up
to – more than this. Meanwhile, around us we can scarcely fail to see the evident global degradation
and destruction of what we now call ‘the environment’, but which is nothing less than the living
world; the breaking up of complex, close-knit communities, and their ways of living in harmony with
nature, that took at least centuries, if not millennia, to form; the substitution of a way of life that we
have already determined in the West to be lacking in meaning, often aesthetically barren, driven by
commercialism and morally bankrupt, devoted to the pursuit of pleasure and happiness, but delivering
anxiety and systemic dissatisfaction; the erosion, and in some cases the trashing, of ancient artistic
and spiritual traditions; and the loss of the sense of uniqueness as everything becomes abstracted,
generalised, categorised, mechanised, represented and rendered merely virtual.
More generally, despite apparently having at least secured ourselves some leisure (for what, by the
way?), we now find ourselves slaves of the machine that was to liberate us, working longer hours and
longer years, while the work itself gets less intrinsically rewarding: more controlled, less skill-
dependent, lacking an obvious purpose other than the accumulation of more wealth.
If I am right that we are living in the West in a culture dominated by the take on the world of the left
hemisphere, how did this come about? Surely, you may say, it's because it has proved itself more
successful than any of the alternatives. Well, that all depends on what you mean by success. It is, I
repeat, a culture that is very good at using the world, as if it were just a heap of resource to further
our plans. But are our plans necessarily wise?

I think its success can be attributed to several things. First, it makes you powerful, and power is
very seductive. Second, it offers very simple explanations, that are in their own terms convincing,
because what doesn't fit the plan is simply declared to be meaningless. For example, to declare talk
of ‘consciousness’ a delusion or a linguistic error has the virtue of simplicity. It may not, however,
satisfy the more sceptical among us, those who are not in thrall to our left hemisphere's way of
thinking. If what does not fit the model is just discarded we will never learn, never sophisticate our
model of reality, and our understanding will come to a standstill where it is. Third, the left
hemisphere is also, as I suggest in the book, the Berlusconi of the brain – the political heavyweight
that controls the media. It does the speaking, constructs the arguments in its own favour. And finally,
since the Industrial Revolution, we have constructed a world around us externally that is the image of
the world the left hemisphere has made internally. Appeals to the natural world, to the history of a
culture, to art, to the body, and to spirituality, routes that used to lead out of the hall of mirrors have
been cut off, undercut and ironised out of existence, and when we look out of the window – we see
more of the world we had created in our minds extended in concrete all around us.
The left hemisphere's values are those of utility and pleasure. But meaning cannot come from this
linear project, any more than happiness can be pursued. Happiness and fulfilment have to be the by-
products of something else, of looking elsewhere. This was a point made by Viktor Frankl in his great
book, Man's Search for Meaning. If we espouse the view of the left hemisphere we will never find
meaning, because it cannot understand. It has no way to break out of the system of signs. It does not
understand the power of metaphor, through which alone meaning would come about. It is not in touch.
That is not its purpose, not what it evolved to help us do. It evolved to help us manipulate.
And here, finally, is I think an answer of a kind to Barfield's question of why, though we know
more and more about how to manipulate, we have lost all sense of the meaning of our world. The left
hemisphere's world is reflexive, refers us back internally, not outwards to the embodied world. It
does not care to turn its attention to the world outside the window, where, whatever it says on the
piece of paper, Lieutenant Kizhe is a fraud.
Our problem is not that we have failed to find an answer to the question of the meaning of life that
would satisfy the left hemisphere – in the nature of things, no such answer could exist. Our problem is
that we have allowed ourselves to respond to this failure by deriding the question as meaningless. We
shouldn't be trying to find a glib, explicit answer to it, since any such answer would be bound to be
wrong. Meaning emerges from engagement with the world, not from abstract contemplation of it. It is
no more to be contained in a statement or a proposition than when I say of my friend that she means a
lot to me, or that Schubert's C major Quintet means something that every living person should
understand. It comes from the world as process, not from the world as a thing, and relies on patient
and consistent attention to whatever might remind us of what meaning might be like. Whatever slight
movement of recognition ensues might then begin to grow in and inform a mind not entirely closed to
its existence.
Otherwise we invite the danger that what we might learn will be for ever lost, because we will no
longer be capable of recognising it at all. We may, in terms of an image you will recognise,
concentrate so much on getting our lunch, that we become the lunch. Only it is we that will have
consumed ourselves.

If you enjoyed this e-book, why not visit the author's website at www.iainmcgilchrist.com, or see
what else Yale has to offer at www.yalebooks.co.uk and http://yalebooks.co.uk/shorts?

Copyright © 2012 Iain McGilchrist
The right of Iain McGilchrist to be identified as author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs
and Patents Act 1988.
Illustrations of the brain viewed from above by Advanced Illustrations Ltd; drawings of tree, flower and everyday objects courtesy of
Professor Nikolai Nikolaenko; illustration of the author courtesy of www.cognitivemedia.co.uk and the RSA.
All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, in any form (beyond that copying permitted by Sections 107 and
108 of the U.S. Copyright Law and except by reviewers for the public press) without written permission from the publishers.
ISBN 978–0–300–19002–1
For information about this and other Yale University Press publications, please contact:
U.S. Office:      sales.press@yale.edu      yalebooks.com
Europe Office:      sales@yaleup.co.uk      www.yalebooks.co.uk

