
Table of Contents
Introduction
The Starting Point
Your name in 3-D
Draw a box using perspective
Two boxes, one vanishing point
Four boxes, one vanishing point
Getting it right (and wrong)
The Horizon (eye level)
Perspective in action: a road
Perspective in action: an interior
Dividing spaces evenly
A bridge
Two-point perspective
A ramp
For experts only!
Vanishing points …
… and camera lenses
More about the horizon and eye level
Curved objects in 3-D
A 3-D checkerboard
Perspective in action: a house
Adding shadows in 3-D
Light source behind
More shadows in 3-D
Light source in front
3-point perspective
Another way to divide space
4-point perspective?
The laser paradox
Multiple vanishing points
Remember…
Practice
Save your drawings!
 

Publication info

Introduction
3-D means “three dimensional.”
It’s easy to draw from side to side on your paper, using its width. It’s easy to
draw from top to bottom on your paper, using its height. But how do you draw
something going away from you, into the distance? How do you create depth
(the third dimension) in your drawing? The answer is linear perspective, a
technique first developed almost 500 years ago, during the Renaissance. As you
flip through my illustrations, this may seem like really complicated and technical
stuff. And it is … sort of. Those clever artists who figured this out weren’t trying
to make your life easy! They only wanted to make realistic pictures.
Fortunately, you’ll find that the basics really are pretty simple. Better, you don’t
need much beyond the basics to make some pretty cool drawings. Best of all,
perspective can make your drawings look real in a way you can’t achieve
without it. You’ll need a few supplies, some patience, and a positive attitude.
Expect to make mistakes as you learn, and keep a smile on your face: with each
mistake you learn another way not to do it!
Find a comfortable place to draw – with decent light, so you can see what
you’re doing.
A mechanical pencil works best for this type of drawing.
Have a ruler or straightedge handy. It’s very difficult to draw in perspective
without one.
If you have one, use a T-square and triangle.
You’ll probably want a separate eraser (the eraser on your pencil will
disappear quickly). My favorite type is a kneaded type, available in art
supply and craft stores.
Patience: pay attention to the concepts. Do plenty of practice drawings!

 
Please note: in this ebook, instructions come after the illustration they refer to.

The Starting Point
Draw six circles.

Make a dot somewhere in the middle of the circles. This will become the
vanishing point.

Using a ruler, make straight lines from the dot to the outside edges of the circles.
Look at your drawing. Does it look like something going far away from you, or
rushing toward you? That’s the whole point of the vanishing point.

Now make curved lines to “chop off” the far ends. Erase the vanishing point and
straight lines close to it.
So what have you just drawn?

Might they be power poles on a distant asteroid?

Or a convention of astronomers searching for power poles on a distant asteroid?

Or a printing press, rolling out the latest news about a convention of astronomers
discovering power poles on a distant asteroid?
Or is it something else? 
You decide!
On your own

Experiment with different shapes and vanishing points. Get used to drawing
straight lines at different angles from the vanishing point, because you’ll be
doing a lot of it with your perspective drawings.
Make some drawings with lines extending all the way to the vanishing points.

Then try “chopping off” more complicated shapes.
Have fun!

Your name in 3-D
If your name is Sophronia, you can just trace this one. But, golly gee, I’ll bet
your name’s not Sophronia. In that case, follow the instructions.
Draw a curved line. Lightly write your name on it.
Make the letters wider.

Add a vanishing point.
Starting at one end, using a straightedge, make lines to connect the vanishing
point with every edge and angle of the letters of your name.

Make sure you’ve got every line in place!
“Chop off” the backs of each letter by carefully copying the shape of the front.
Erase guide lines and admire your work. Pretty cool, eh?

Now you can take it to the next level by adding shading to the letters.
If your name is Sophronia, and you simply traced this, do another drawing, using
your best friend’s name instead.
As long as it’s not Sophronia.

Draw a box using perspective
Think of this box as the basic building block of linear perspective. You’ll use it a
lot.
Draw a square. Make a small dot for the vanishing point. From it, draw light
guide lines to three corners of the box.
Guide lines help you set up your drawing. Since they won’t be part of your
final drawing, do them lightly so they will erase easily.

Repeat the shape of the front to make the back (one horizontal line, one vertical).
Erase the guide lines you no longer need.
Voila! A box in perspective!
On your own: draw this box with its vanishing points in different directions,
closer and farther away.


Two boxes, one vanishing point
One box good, two boxes better! Here they share a common vanishing point.
Draw a box with a vanishing point like the one on the previous page. Add
another square next to it.
From three corners of the second square, draw straight guide lines to the same

vanishing point.
Add horizontal and vertical lines for the back edges of the second box.
Erase guide lines.
Nice! Two convincing boxes in perspective, even with nothing else in the
picture!
On your own: draw two squares with a vanishing point directly above one of
them. Add guide lines and back edges.

LOOK! One box needs only two guide lines instead of three, because only the
top back edge shows.
Draw two squares with a vanishing point below and between them, and turn
them into boxes. Erase guide lines to finish your drawing.
 
Now draw two squares with a vanishing point directly below one of them, and
turn them into boxes.

 
You can see that this is the same as the first drawing, only upside-down. The 3-D
technique works the same no matter where the vanishing point lies.
 

Four boxes, one vanishing point
Draw four squares with a vanishing point directly in the middle of the group.
Add guide lines and back edges.
Erase your guide lines. (I’ve left mine to show you how I drew them.)
 

Compare your vanishing point drawing to these four boxes which use only
parallel lines to create depth. Can you see the difference? Parallel lines simply
don’t create the same feeling of depth when you have several objects in a
drawing.
 

You can find examples like this in European paintings from the Medieval period,
before a systematic approach to perspective had been developed.
 

Getting it right (and wrong)
On your own: draw a box in perspective, using a vanishing point. Now add a
second box behind it, using the same vanishing point guide lines. Then add
another box, and another. Notice how much smaller they get. This really creates
a sense of depth in the picture.
Note how unrealistic the four boxes below look when drawn with parallel lines.
All four boxes are exactly the same size (measure them!), but your eye and brain
expect the most distant to appear smaller than the closest. Instead, it actually
appears larger!

 
What if you simply make the more distant boxes smaller, while still drawing
with parallel lines? You’ll see that it doesn’t quite look right, especially
compared to the first drawing, with its single vanishing point.
 

 

The Horizon (eye level)
Perspective drawing started with buildings, which sit on the ground. If you
follow the ground level for as far as you can see, you come to the horizon, where
sky and earth appear to meet. In this example, you are looking down on the
boxes, and the horizon appears above them.
 

Even if you can’t actually see it, the horizon is always there. To draw a building
like the one at the left, you have to know (or decide) where the horizon lies.
If you look closely, you can see a dotted line in the drawing representing the
horizon.
 
The horizon also represents your eye level in the drawing. If you walked up to

the blocks in this drawing, where would your eye be? How much taller are the
blocks than you?
 
On your own:
Find images in books or online with buildings in them. Look for perspective at
work. Locate the horizon and vanishing points.
 

Perspective in action: a road
Draw a horizontal line for the horizon near the middle of your paper. Leave
plenty of room above and below it. Place a vanishing point near the center of the
horizon.
 
From the vanishing point, draw two lines at an angle downward.
 

Draw two more very light lines from the vanishing point, close together in the
center of the road. Divide them horizontally to make the thick dotted line
running down the middle of the road.
 
In this photo, you can clearly see the lines converging on a vanishing point. I 
wanted to take a picture of a real road, but that seemed a little dangerous. So
instead of a real road, you get a railroad. The principle is the same.
 

Since we want this to be a realistic scene, add some squiggly lines just above the
horizon. You know they’re squiggly lines. I know they’re squiggly lines. But
someone else looking at your drawing will think, “Ooh, look—mountains!”
 

To the right of the road, make a vertical power pole. To check vertical, look at
the edge of your paper.
 
The power pole is a long cylinder. Because it crosses the horizon, you’re looking
up at the top of it and down at the bottom of it. Imagine looking up and down at
a much smaller cylinder—can you see why both the top and bottom of the power

pole are rounded?
 
From the power pole, draw two guide lines to the vanishing point.
Remember that guide lines will not remain in your finished drawing, so
draw them lightly so they can be erased.

Add a second power pole, extending from one guide line to the other. Place it
about halfway from the first power pole to the vanishing point. The second
power pole needs to be thinner than the first (since it’s farther away), and again
check the side of your paper to make sure it’s vertical!
 

Add another power pole, from one guide line to the other, about halfway
between the second power pole and the vanishing point. The third power pole
should be thinner still, and still vertical. By now your brain might be screaming
at you to make the poles lean outward. Again, look at the edge of your paper for
a vertical reference.
 

Keep adding power poles until you can’t add any more! Now erase your guide
lines.
 
Time out!
 
So far, this drawing may be going perfectly smoothly for you. Still, pause a
moment to compare these examples with your power poles just in case.
 

They’re leaning. If yours are, it’s best to start again. Look carefully at the side of
your paper as you draw. Or use a drawing tool such as a triangle. Or perhaps
draw on a piece of notebook paper turned sideways, so the little blue lines run
vertically.
 

They’re the same thickness. The power poles get shorter farther away—and
they also get thinner.
 

They’re evenly spaced. In creating the illusion of depth in your drawing, you
have to watch every detail: you need to draw the smaller power poles closer
together as they go into the distance.
 

Draw short horizontal cross arms to carry the wires on each pole.
 

On the left side of each cross arm, make a little spot for the insulator, which
keeps the wire from short-circuiting on the wood or metal pole. From one
insulator to another, make a swooping line. From the pole closest to you,
continue the line to the edge of the picture.
 

Add another wire. Note how it disappears behind the poles.
 

Now, on the left side of the road, draw a short vertical fence post. From the top
and bottom, draw light guide lines to the vanishing point.
 

Add more fence posts, between the top and the bottom guide line, getting
smaller and closer together as they go into the distance. Add lines for wires,
converging on the vanishing point. Draw lines straight out to the side to make
the fence turn away from the road. They should be horizontal.
 

From a distant asteroid, a mysterious craft has arrived to inspect power poles.
Draw the craft.
 

From the sides of the mysterious craft, draw two light guide lines to the
vanishing point. Add the second craft, inside the guide lines.
 
It’s easy to make it lean, which you don’t want. Start with a horizontal line (the
horizontal axis of the ellipse) and you can avoid that common mistake.
 

Add more mysterious power pole inspection craft, taking care to keep them
horizontal.
 

You can use several “tricks” to make your drawing look more real. Because of
the atmosphere, more distant objects have less contrast. In other words, the dark
road gets lighter in the distance, while the white ground gets slightly grey.
Add hazy shadows, and a few curly marks in the sky. They may end up looking
like clouds if you do them right!
 

Add realistic details to make your drawing more believable. Using your
knowledge of 3-D drawing, add a moving truck, carrying telescopes to a far-off
mountain for a convention of astronomers in search of power poles on distant
asteroids. Create some giant mutant arachnids, which must have something to do
with those mysterious craft …
… anything to make the drawing more believable.
 

Perspective in action: an interior
Perspective works inside as well as outside. Try drawing this interior view, using
a vanishing point to create depth.
 
Start with a large rectangle. Place the vanishing point off-center.
 

Draw straight lines connecting each corner to the vanishing point.
 

Draw a horizontal line to make the bottom of the back wall.

Where the bottom of the wall intersects the line from the vanishing point, draw a
vertical line for the side of the wall.
 
Make another horizontal line for the top of the wall.
 

Complete the back wall by drawing a second vertical line.
 

From the vanishing point, draw two more guide lines along the right side wall.
 

Before going further, erase all the lines inside the area of the back wall. But
don’t erase the vanishing point. You still need it!
 

Where the two guide lines intersect the back wall, make two horizontal lines
across the back wall.
 

Draw two more guide lines where the horizontal lines intersect the side wall.
 

Draw vertical lines for doors on the right side of the hallway. Make the closer
door wider than the one farther away.
 

Draw lines for the tops of the doors. Erase guide lines next to the doors.
 

Draw two horizontal guide lines from the bottom corners of the doors. These
allow you to place two doors in the same position across the hall.
 

From those guide lines, draw vertical lines for the sides of the two doors.
 

Line up your ruler on the vanishing point, then add the tops of the doors on the
left side.
 

Draw the doors on the back wall.
 

Draw as many details as you can to create the feeling of depth. Add lights
overhead, a carpet on the floor, and a bulletin board on the wall.
 

Add shading and details to complete your drawing. Of course you can add
people to your drawing as well—just make sure they appear smaller farther
away!
 

Dividing spaces evenly
How do you know what size to make objects in perspective? Your best guide is
your eye. If you want to divide an area more precisely, here’s a technique you
can use.
 
Draw the horizon (even if you can’t see it in the picture), and make a vanishing
point off to the side.
 

From this vanishing point, draw a guide line to intersect what you’re dividing—
in this case, the carpet.
 
Where the guide line intersects the edge of the carpet, draw a horizontal line
across the carpet.
 
Where the horizontal line intersects the other side of the carpet, draw another
guide line back to the vanishing point.
 

Where this guide line intersects the other edge of the carpet, draw another
horizontal line.
 
Where this horizontal line intersects the other side of the carpet, draw another
guide line to the vanishing point. And so on. Remember, you don’t have to draw
your guide lines all the way to the vanishing point. You end up with a neatly
divided area that accurately portrays an evenly divided space in your picture.
 

A bridge
Reflections can make an impressive addition to your drawing. Try them!
 
Draw the shape you see.
 
Add stair steps on both sides. (Notice that you’ve already drawn a reflection of
sorts—the two sides mirror each other.)
 

Draw the horizon and a vanishing point above the steps. Using a ruler, draw
guide lines from each angle of the bridge back toward the vanishing point.
Note that you don’t need to draw the guide lines all the way to the vanishing
point.
 
Add some shading underneath the bridge.
 

Draw the sides of a stream meandering from the horizon, and running under the
bridge.
Take your time drawing this—it’s not so easy to make it look good!
 

Add mountains in the background, some shading along the stream, a couple of
fish playing in it. And while you’re at it, how about drawing a reflection of the
bridge in the stream?
 
Hint: if you have trouble figuring this out, try imagining the land and water
reflecting, as though the entire bridge were sitting on a mirror. Draw the whole
bridge, then erase the parts on the land. To make it even easier, turn your paper
upside down.
 

Can you figure out how to draw this? Give it a try! If not, don’t worry: after all,
it’s highly unlikely that someone would put a mirror at the end of a bridge, so
why would you want to draw one there anyway? Perhaps because it’s a great
drawing exercise!
 

Two-point perspective
The boxes we drew before have a side facing us. When a corner faces us, it’s
time to add a second vanishing point.
 
Draw a horizon, and two widely spaced vanishing points. From the vanishing
points, draw lines downward until they intersect.
 
Draw a second line from each vanishing point, to create the base of a box.
 

From the three closest corners of the base, draw vertical lines for the edges of the
box.
 
Decide where the top of the box will be, by marking the closest vertical line.
From that point, extend lines toward the two vanishing points to create the top
edges of the box. You don’t have to draw the lines all the way to the vanishing
point—just far enough to complete the top of the box!
 
From the point where the top intersects the right vertical line, draw a line toward
the left vanishing point. From the point where the top intersects the left vertical
line, draw a line toward the right vanishing point.

 
Erase guide lines, and you’ve got a box in two-point perspective!
 
Try adding more boxes around the one you’ve drawn. As you can see, nothing
stops you from going above the horizon. Remember: horizon is your eye level.
You’re looking down at the first three boxes; the fourth is at eye level.
 

No, you don’t have to get quite this carried away, but once you get started it’s
fun to add more and more boxes—keep going!
 

A ramp
Drawing a sloping surface in perspective follows the same principles as drawing
a box. It’s all logical—just a little more confusing.
 
Draw a horizon with two widely spaced vanishing points. Draw one line from
the left vanishing point, and two lines from the right vanishing point.
 
Pick a point for the end of the ramp, and from there draw a vertical line.
 
From the closest corner, draw a line to the top of the ramp.
 

From the top of your ramp, draw a line to the left vanishing point.
 
At the bottom of the vertical line, draw a very light guide line to the left
vanishing point. Even though this line wouldn’t show if the ramp were solid, you
still have to draw it. Can you see why?
 
You need it to determine the back corner of the ramp. Lightly add this vertical
line.
 

Add the remaining sloping line to complete the ramp.
 
Notice what happens when you extend the sides of the ramp. They, too, converge
on their own vanishing point.
You can stop your drawing here. Or you can make it more complicated … .

For experts only!
Draw another vertical line (arrow), and use the left vanishing point to draw
another rectangle in perspective.
 
Draw another rectangle—find the top by putting your ruler on the right
vanishing point and the top of the ramp (arrows). This way, it’s the same height
as the ramp.
 
Draw diagonal lines to connect the ramp and the taller rectangle.
 

Draw diagonal lines to connect the last rectangle.
 
Draw the two last diagonal lines. Use your ruler and the left vanishing point to
make sure the ends are in perspective.
 
From the closer edge of this bridge-like structure, make two vertical lines
downward.
 

If you’ve made it this far, I think you’re in a good position to keep exploring on
your own. Follow my example, or go wild and invent your own structure. It can
go up, it can go sideways. It just has to stay between the two vanishing points.
 
Which we should talk about next.
 

Vanishing points …
You can create different feelings in your picture depending on where you place
the vanishing points.
 
Placing them close together, as we’ve done for convenience so far, creates the
sense of objects looming toward you—rather dramatic.
 
A more “normal” view might not have any vanishing points in the picture—
maybe one, but certainly not two.
 
The farther the vanishing points lie to the side, the less apparent distortion your
viewer will see in the finished drawing.
 

You might find it difficult to draw vanishing points off the side of your paper,
unless you have a drafting table, but …
 

… by cropping the picture, you get the same effect.
 

… and camera lenses
If you’ve ever used a camera with a zoom lens, you will see a connection.
 
Vanishing points in the picture, or close to the edge of the picture, create a wide-
angle view.
 
Vanishing points farther out create a “normal” view.
 

When the vanishing points lie far outside the picture, lines converging on them
look almost parallel. This creates the effect of a telephoto lens. Notice the
wonderful perspective pattern in the lawn!
 
Here’s another example of a different camera lens—actually a zoom lens at
different focal lengths.
Can you locate the vanishing points for the truck in these two photos?
 

More about the horizon and eye level
Let’s look at some examples of changing horizon and eye level.
 
Perched on the scorching hot fender of another school bus (this was a used
school bus lot), I was looking down at this school bus, so it lies below the
horizon in the picture. Can you find the horizon in this photo?
 

Back on the ground (phew!) I take another photo. Where’s the horizon? (Can
you think of a way to estimate my height from this photograph?)
 

Now the bus looms above me (look familiar?). Where is the vanishing point for
the lines on the side of the bus?
Where is the vanishing point for the lines on the front grille of the bus?
 
These photographs look perfectly normal, right? Now try drawing rough box
drawings of each. You will be amazed how weird they are! Try drawing them
freehand (without a ruler) if you want. In reality, things like school buses aren’t
perfect boxes, so drawings like these would be just the starting point of a real
drawing. Imagine these clunky boxes as bars of soap, which you would then
carve to make the final drawing, once the correct perspective is established.
 
How strange—the horizon lies exactly at the top of the bus. Look at the photo—
it really does. Draw it.
 

From this angle, the rear wheel becomes surprisingly small compared to the
front. Just follow the rules, and draw it.
Same here—can the rear wheel really be that small? Measure it on the photo.
Look at the guidelines. Follow the rules of 3-D. Just draw it.
 

Curved objects in 3-D
Not every vehicle has the convenient boxy look of a school bus. But the same
principles of perspective apply.
 
Draw a box outline similar to that of the school bus.
 
Add wheels, using the vanishing point and guidelines to keep them in
perspective with each other. Note that the ellipse for the front wheel is slightly
wider than the rear wheel, making the front wheel appear slightly turned.
 

Add a curved fender, going behind the back of the front wheel, and covering part
of the front. Continue the curve across the bottom of the car’s front, and make
the opposite fender.
 
Draw the rear fender and line along the bottom of the side.
 

Add the curving top of the car, and the outline of the windows on the side.
 
Draw the windshield. Notice how the top curves up, and the bottom curves
down.
 

Add ovals for headlights, one wider and one thinner.
 
Add details: lines for the door, rear view mirrors, hood insignia, parking lights,
and hub caps on the wheels.
 

Erase guide lines, add some shading, and presto! It’s a car in perspective!
 
Note: if you’re interested in drawing cars, check out my book Draw Cars.
 

A 3-D checkerboard
The beauty of perspective drawing is the wonderful effects of depth you can
achieve. The downside is the drudgery of drawing all those lines. As you
complete this drawing, you’ll see what I mean. But it’s worth it!
 
Draw a horizon, two vanishing points (VP1, VP2), and two sets of guide lines.
 
From the closer to the farther intersections of the two sets of lines, make a new
guide line to the horizon to establish a new vanishing point (VP3).
 

From VP3, draw a line as you see in this drawing.
 
This new guide line creates yet another intersection. From it, draw a line back to
VP1.
 

Aha! A new intersection! From this, draw a line to VP2.
 
And now—yet another intersection, from which you can draw another line to
VP1.
 

 
Keep going!
 
As with earlier perspective exercises, this one looks best if cropped. Impressive,
isn’t it?
 

Perspective in action: a house
For convenience in this picture, I’ve placed the vanishing points close together.
A more “normal” view would position the vanishing points well outside the
picture.
 
Draw the horizon with a left and right vanishing point. Make a vertical line for
the corner of the house, and from it draw two guide lines to the right vanishing
point.
 
Make a second vertical line for the back corner of the house.
 

Draw lines from the first vertical line to the left vanishing point.
 
Make another very light guide line, from the second vertical line to the left
vanishing point.
 
Draw a vertical line for the third corner of the house. Make another very light
guide line to the right vanishing point.
 

To put the peak of the roof over the center of the wall, we have to find the center
of the wall. Do this with light lines connecting the corners.
 
From the center of the X on the wall, make a vertical line. From the top of it,
draw the sloping lines of the roof.
 

From the peak of the roof, make a guide line to the left vanishing point.
 
Now we need to locate the other end of the roof. From the center of the top of
the right wall (where the vertical line to the roof peak crosses), draw a light
guide line to locate the center of the back wall.
 
From the center of the back wall, draw a vertical line. The back end of the roof is
where it crosses the top guide line.
 

Draw the sloping line for the back of the roof.
 
Let’s make an addition! Draw two lines from the left vanishing point to extend
the wall of the house.
 

Draw a vertical line for the corner of the addition.
 
From the top and bottom, draw light guide lines to the right vanishing point.
 

Line up your ruler on the left vanishing point and the bottom corner of the house,
to locate the other corner of the addition.
 
Draw a vertical line for the back edge of the addition.
 

From that line, draw one sloping line to the house …
 
… and another.
 

Add details to the house and its surroundings. Draw some barns with different
roof angles. Add a swimming pool, some fields, and roads. Draw a light grid of
guide lines in the sky, and follow it as you draw clouds. Even though irregular in
shape, clouds can add perspective to your drawing as well. Hey! What’s this I
see? Better draw some power poles, too, because I see a power pole inspection
craft approaching.
 

Adding shadows in 3-D
Shadows in perspective drawing also use vanishing points—but not always in
obvious way.
Light source behind
Draw a basic house using two-point perspective. Leave room at the top for the
light source, and room at the bottom for the shadow. Mark the light source on
your paper, and directly beneath it on the horizon, mark the shadow vanishing
point.
 

From the shadow vanishing point, draw lines through the outside corners of the
house, at ground level.
 
Draw another line from the shadow vanishing point through the closest corner of
the house, at ground level.
 

Draw another line from the shadow vanishing point through the middle of the
end wall, at ground level.
 

Now, from the light source, draw a line through the corner of the house directly
above the first shadow vanishing point line you drew. You don’t have to draw the
entire line: you’re simply looking for the point at which it intersects the line
from the shadow vanishing point (arrow).
 

From the light source, draw another line through the closest corner of the roof
until it meets the second line from the shadow vanishing point. Make a line
connecting this point with the point established in the last step.
 
From the light source, draw a line through the peak of the roof until it reaches
the shadow vanishing point line running through the center of the house. Make a
line connecting this point with the point established in the last step.

 
From the light source, draw a line through the far corner of the roof until it
intersects the farthest line from the shadow vanishing point. This one is a little
tricky—remember, follow the rules!
 
Erase guidelines and shade in shadow areas, and now you have a very precise
shadow of the house.
 

The questions remains, do you really need a very precise shadow of the house?
Not really. However, once you understand the technique, it will be easier to draw
realistic shadows in your drawings. After all, nobody (except for fellow artists)
actually looks at the shadows in a drawing or painting. But they make a huge
difference.
 

More shadows in 3-D
Light source in front
When the light source casts a shadow behind objects, you need a light vanishing
point rather than a light source—beneath the horizon!
 
Draw a house in two-point perspective. Between the house vanishing points on
the horizon, make the shadow vanishing point. Directly below it, make the light
vanishing point.
 
From the shadow vanishing point, draw a line to the left corner of the house.
 

Now add a line to the point on the ground directly below the peak of the roof.
 
Draw another line to the next corner of the house.
 
The shadow vanishing point can still “see” one more corner of the house. Draw a
line to it.
 

From the light vanishing point, draw a line to the corner of the roof directly
above the first shadow vanishing point line. Notice where the two lines intersect.
 
Also from the light vanishing point, draw a line to the peak of the roof. Follow
the line lying directly beneath the peak of the roof, toward the shadow vanishing
point. Where the two lines intersect, draw a line connecting them with the
intersection you created in the last step.
 
Draw a line to the next corner of the roof, and another line as in the last step.
 

Do it once again for the third corner of the roof.
 
You now have established a precise shadow for the house, but notice, after all
that work, how much of the shadow is hidden. (After all, it is behind the house.)
 

3-point perspective
You can add a third vanishing point for even more dramatic effects.
 
Draw two rectangles in two-point perspective.
 

Now add a third vanishing point, very far off the bottom edge of your paper.
Draw lines from all the corners to your third vanishing point. Pretty cool!
Another way to divide space
Do you remember how to divide receding spaces evenly using a vanishing
point? Here’s an even easier way to do it.
 

From your first two vanishing points, draw lines to establish the top floor of the
buildings. In the middle of one of them, connect the corners to make an X. From
the center of the X, draw a line to your third vanishing point—but only until it
crosses the line you just drew. Now you have the center of the bottom of this
floor.
 

From the top corner of the top floor, draw a light line through the center of the
bottom.Where it intersects with the side of the building, make a very light mark
and use this to create the next floor.
 

Repeat the procedure. Once you understand the concept, you can simply make
light marks as you go, rather than drawing lots of diagonal lines you don’t want
in the final drawing.
 

When you can no longer divide the floors on the closer building, you can pick up
on the farther building, making an X and continuing.
 

4-point perspective?
You can see that a third vanishing point also works when you look up. If you
look straight ahead, would you then use four vanishing points?
 

No. But, if you allow the lines to curve, as with a fisheye lens, it works. This is
actually what your eye sees. Your brain makes straight lines.
 
The laser paradox
Imagine standing outside one night, and seeing an unbending laser beam, shining
between two points high above you.

 
You turn the other direction, and there’s the same beam, now shining at a
different angle!
 
You know the beam doesn’t bend—how does it connect in the middle? Take a
deep breath, let your mind go blank—and sure enough, you’ll see the beam as
your eye does: a curve. You don’t need a laser. Try it facing the wall of a large
room, like a gym.
 

Multiple vanishing points
While four-point perspective doesn’t really work, that doesn’t mean your
drawing is limited to two or three vanishing points.
 
If the objects you’re drawing are not aligned with each other (parallel), then
naturally each will have its own set of vanishing points.
 

Similarly, if the object you’re drawing isn’t rectangular, you’ll need a new
vanishing point for each new angle you introduce.
 

As you practice 3-D drawing, don’t feel you always have to use a ruler. Try
sketching in perspective. Play with the concepts. Make mistakes. Enjoy!
 

Remember…
Practice
One of the great secrets of our world is that behind every success there’s always
plenty of practice. The people who do amazing feats of daring, skill, or ingenuity
have been practicing, often for much longer than you’d imagine. They’ve
probably failed more often than you can imagine, too, so don’t waste time being
discouraged. If your drawings don’t look exactly the way you’d like them to,
especially when you start out with a new idea, figure out what went wrong, and
do it again right!
Save your drawings!
Whenever you do a drawing—or even a sketch—put your initials (or autograph!)
and date on it. And save it—maybe not until it turns yellow and crumbles to
dust, but at least for several months. Sometimes, hiding in your portfolio, they
will mysteriously improve! I’ve seen it happen often with my own drawings,
especially the ones I knew were no good at all, but kept anyway.
 
If you don’t have your own portfolio, here’s an idea of how you might make one
for yourself (you can find a fancy one at an art supply store if you’d rather):
 

Publication info
Copyright ©1999-2015 Douglas C. DuBosque. All rights reserved, including the
right of reproduction in whole or in part, in any form. Published by Peel
Productions, Inc.
We’d love your feedback on the electronic version of Draw 3-D. With changing
devices and screen resolutions, finding the “happy medium” presents a
challenge. Please let us know how the electronic version works or doesn’t in
your experience: ebooks@123draw.com.
eISBN 978-0-939217-69-4
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data (print edition)
DuBosque, D. C.
Draw 3-D : step by step perspective drawing / by Doug DuBosque
p. cm.
Summary: Provides instructions for making perspective drawings.
ISBN 0-939217-14-7
1. Perspective--juvenile literature. 2. Drawing--Technique--Juvenile
literature. [1. Perspective. 2. Drawing--Technique.] I. Title. II. Title: Draw
3D.
NC750.D87 1998
742--dc21 98-42174

