 
1
Dual-aspect monism 
 
JIRI BENOVSKY 
 
 
 
 
Abstract: 
In this article, I am interested in dual-aspect monism as a solution to the mind-
body problem. This view is not new, but it is somewhat under-represented in the 
contemporary debate, and I would like to help it make its way. Dual-aspect 
monism is a parsimonious, elegant, and simple view. It avoids problems with 
'mental causation'. It naturally explains how and why mental states are correlated 
(and interact) with physical states while avoiding any mysteries concerning the 
nature of this (cor)relation. It fits well with our ordinary picture of the world, as 
well as with the scientific picture. It gives its rightful place to the phenomenal, 
qualitative, subjective character of experience, instead of reducing it or eliminating 
it. It does not unnecessarily multiply ontological categories. It can come in many 
versions, and is compatible with neighbouring interesting views, such as 
panpsychism.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
2
§1. In this article, I am interested in the mind-body problem, qua metaphysical problem, 
and I defend a version of dual-aspect monism as a solution to it. This view is not new, but it is 
somewhat under-represented in the contemporary debate, and I would like to help it make its 
way. Dual-aspect monism is a parsimonious, elegant, and simple view. It avoids problems 
with 'mental causation'. It naturally explains how and why mental states are correlated (and 
interact) with physical states while avoiding any mysteries concerning the nature of this 
(cor)relation. It fits well with our ordinary picture of the world, as well as with the scientific 
picture. It gives its rightful place to the phenomenal, qualitative, subjective character of 
experience, instead of reducing it or eliminating it. It does not unnecessarily multiply 
ontological categories. It can come in many versions, and is compatible with neighbouring 
interesting views, such as panpsychism. Let me, then, put this view on the table. 
To start, let us briefly consider the main types of views there already are on the table. This 
will provide us with a first motivation for dual-aspect monism. Indeed, the state of the 
traditional debate understood as an opposition between dualism and physicalism is in a rather 
uncomfortable impasse. To put it shortly: either we embrace a form of dualism, but then we 
have problems with mental causation (that is, the difficulty to explain the relationship 
between the mental and the physical), or we embrace a form of physicalism but then we seem 
to have lost something of crucial importance: the very mental character of the mental. Even 
though these matters are well known, I will have a closer (but still rather quick) look, in the 
next two sections, at this uncomfortable situation – this will provide us with the sort of 
desiderata that a theory of the mind and the body should satisfy. (It is possible to skip these 
next two sections (§2-3), but it is useful to have them in mind, as a motivation for what comes 
after. What I want to achieve in these two sections is to set the stage for dual-aspect monism – 
the various problems and objections I mention here do of course have answers, and objections 
to these answers, and so on, and it is not the purpose of these two introductory sections to deal 
with these controversies in detail.) 
 
§2. Physicalism comes in many varieties. Many of these varieties share the idea of 
reduction. In this view(s), mental properties are then said to be reduced to physical properties. 
This can be because mental properties just are physical properties, or because they are a 
function of physical properties that realize them, to cite only the two main variants of 
reductionist physicalism. (Yes, functionalism is a kind of reductionism, since it reduces 
mental properties to a functional role they play. Under functionalism, ontologically speaking, 
only brain states and brain processes exist.) The main advantage of this family of theories is 

 
3
that they integrate well with neuroscience and with physics1, in short, they fit well the 
'scientific picture' of the world. In particular, these theories typically do not yield any special 
difficulties with mental causation and preserve the idea of the causal closure of the physical 
world – all there is, is of the same ontological kind, namely, of a concrete and spatio-temporal 
kind (brain states, brain processes), and any causality is then causality involving solely 
entities of the same kind, the physical kind.  
But, to make the well-known worry short, these views miss the target. By reducing the 
mental to the physical, they lose what makes the mental to be mental – call it as you wish: the 
phenomenal character of experience, the what-it-is-like phenomenon, the subjective character 
of mental states, qualia. Think of what the Terminator replies2 when John Connor asks him 
(it?) if he feels pain when he gets hit by a bullet: the injuries he senses, the Terminator replies, 
are "data that could be called pain" – but no whines and groans, and no unbearable experience 
accompany the data. Perhaps this is similar to how a functionalist conceives of pain: it has a 
causal role in an organism, and it informs the organism about tissue damage. But pain, at least 
human or animal pain, is clearly not just information ("data") about tissue damage – anybody 
who has ever felt pain knows this first-hand. This is what makes mental states to be mental (at 
least insofar as their qualitative character is concerned), and any theory of the mind must 
leave room for it. There seems to be a difference in kind between such-and-such a brain state 
or brain process (and the causal role it plays in my organism), and the pain I feel. Both exist, 
and both need to be accounted for. Feeling pain just is not the same thing as there being such-
and-such a physical/chemical process in my brain. If one says that pain is such a process, or 
that it reduces to one, one seems to have missed the point entirely. All this is just the old idea 
that mental/phenomenal properties or states are irreducible. If you reduce them to something 
else, you lose their phenomenal character, and thus you lose them.  
There is a family of theories labelled "non-reductive physicalism". I am not sure I 
understand such a view. It is often said to take the form of supervenience physicalism, where 
one claims that mental states are (ontologically) dependent on physical (brain) states, and that 
the former are determined by the latter – but, that they are not reduced to them. 
                                                 
1 On the interesting difference between physicalism and physicSalism, see Strawson (2006, p.54): "[…] real 
physicalism can have nothing to do with physicsalism, the view - the faith - that the nature or essence of all 
concrete reality can in principle be fully captured in the terms of physics. Real physicalism cannot have anything 
to do with physicsalism unless it is supposed - obviously falsely - that the terms of physics can fully capture the 
nature or essence of experience." 
2 "The Terminator 2: Judgment Day", 1991, James Cameron. 

 
4
Supervenience, as a formal relation, is mere co-variation3. The dependence and determinacy 
claim is an additional one. But then, this view simply amounts to a stipulation of a solution: it 
merely claims that one type of properties depends and is determined by another type of 
properties without being reduced to it, but it does not say how, and it does not provide any 
explanation of this, it only states that this is so. I am not going to press the issue here. As we 
will see below, this view (contrarily to reductionist physicalism) has problems with mental 
causation, and this will strip it – I take it – of one of the main reasons to go physicalist in the 
first place. 
 
§3. Dualist theories of the mind all have in common the idea that mental states and 
properties are of a different ontological kind than physical states and properties, and that they 
are not reducible to each other. There are, under dualism, two 'ontological realms', the mental 
and the physical, and they both are – ontologically speaking – autonomous. This makes 
mental states and properties to be genuinely ontologically self-sufficient and irreducible, 
which allows then one to make room for the irreducibility of qualia, unlike under physicalism 
(see above). Good point for dualism(s). But the bad point comes precisely from this – dualist 
– 'two-realms ontology'. Both the substance dualist and the property dualist share this 
problem, albeit in different ways.  
The property dualist claims there to be two ontological kinds of properties, which are had 
by brain processes and/or states. Mental properties are properties of a different ontological 
kind than physical properties and are not reducible to them. This creates a very peculiar 
situation for the property dualist who has to say that there are two ontological kinds of 
properties – mental and physical – but that they are both instantiated by an entity that is of the 
physical ontological kind (the brain, or brain processes). Thus, physical properties are 
instantiated by an entity of the same kind they are, while mental properties are instantiated by 
an entity that is of a different ontological kind they are. The instantiation/exemplification 
relation must thus be such that it can allow for 'regular' instantiation and for 'cross-
ontological-realm' instantiation, linking entities of two different ontological kinds.  
The substance dualist has a different picture: mental properties are instantiated by a mental 
entity, and physical properties are instantiated by a physical entity. Thus, there are two 
                                                 
3 Supervenience is standardly defined as follows: "A set of properties A supervenes upon another set B just in 
case no two things can differ with respect to A-properties without also differing with respect to their B-
properties. In slogan form, 'there cannot be an A-difference without a B-difference'." (Bennett and McLaughlin 
(2005)) 

 
5
ontological kinds of properties, two ontological kinds of substances, and two types of 
relations of instantiation/exemplification. In short, the mental realm and the physical realm 
are even more separated under substance dualism than under property dualism.  
So, these two versions of dualism are different and have different peculiarities to endorse. 
But, relevantly to our present discussion, they have this in common: in one way or another, 
the mental and the physical are two distinct mutually irreducible ontological categories. This 
is where both agree, and this is where both share problems. Indeed, once you have two realms 
in your ontology, and if you need them to interact, you need to explain how this interaction 
works. And, mental properties and physical properties do interact, a lot. They are (cor)related 
in a very intimate way: there never is pain without some kind of physical processes taking 
place. This is Descartes' problem of the union. The mind and the body are separate, but 
somehow strongly linked or united, and this calls for an explanation. How can a physical, 
extended, spatio-temporal body interact with a non-extended mind, unlocated in space, and 
thus unable of contact or movement? How can a mind make my hands and fingers move, in 
order for me to type this sentence? How can the non-physical mind have an influence on my 
brain in such a way that it can make my fingers do these things? The answers to these 
questions are as varied as they are frustratingly unconvincing: Descartes's causal 
interactionism, Leibniz's pre-established harmony between the mind and the body, 
Malebranche's occasionalism, or the view that the mind is no more than an epiphenomenon. 
This is the problem of mental causation. To be more precise, it is often articulated in the three 
following ways: 
 
 The general ontological way: how can one ontological realm interact with another (in 
such an intimate way)? 
 The overdetermination way: there seem to be – unnecessarily – two causes for my 
finger's typing this sentence, a physical cause involving my brain, and a mental cause 
involving my mind.  
 The closure way: dualism forces us to abandon the causal closure of the physical 
world. 
 
Note that the non-reductionist physicalist shares a part of these worries. At the very least, it 
shares the overdetermination problem, and it does not answer well the general question about 
how the mental can influence the physical. Indeed, if mental properties depend on physical 
properties (while not being reduced to them), but not vice-versa, then – given this situation of 

 
6
one-way dependence – it is hard to see how the mental can have a (causal) influence on the 
physical, since it seems to be fully dependent, but not reduced/identical to it. If the mental 
were reduced to the physical, like under a mind-brain identity theory, one can see how one 
side can influence the other, since they are the very one and the same thing. But here, under 
the non-reductionist view, one side – the mental one – want it or not, looks like a mere 
secondary by-product, perhaps an epiphenomenon. It depends for its existence on the 
physical, but not the other way around, so it does not seem to be doing any real work. The 
problem here comes from a claim of priority without reduction: physical states are prior, and 
mental states only exist because the physical states do. As already noted above, the trouble 
here does not come from the supervenience claim, since supervenience is mere co-variation, 
but from this additional priority-without-reduction claim. Mere co-variation would not be 
enough, but this additional claim makes the interaction between the mental and the physical 
(almost) as complicated as it is under dualism(s). The mental just seems to be de trop.  
To come back to dualism, the worries above will not go away. It's not a question of finding 
the proper answer to them. These worries are there because of a structural feature of dualism 
(namely, the two-realms ontology) – being a dualist is to say that there are two ontologically 
separated realms, and to say this automatically creates a problem concerning the interaction 
between the two, with the consequence that one loses the causal closure of the physical world. 
Of course, the dualist can argue that these worries are not as harmful as they look like, but she 
will not be able to really 'solve' the problem or avoid it.  
 
§4. So, as always in metaphysics, we have an accounting problem. Having in mind the 
mind-body issue, we ask: how many types of entities are there? If we say "one", we seem to 
be stuck with physicalism, and if we say "two" we seem to be committed to dualism – with 
their respective drawbacks to deal with.  
This is where dual-aspect monism comes in. The idea is that we can reply "one" to the 
accounting question, without embracing physicalism. In this view, there is only one 
(ontological kind of) entity, but this entity is not there at the cost of another one – that is, the 
mind does not reduce to the brain (and the brain does not reduce to the mind either), there is 
no ontological or conceptual priority, both the mental and the physical are on a par. The friend 
of reductionism claims that the physical is prior over the mental. The monist rejects any 
claims of priority, and she thus rejects what Kim (1998, p.11) takes to be a central component 
of physicalism, namely 'the mind-body dependence principle': "What mental properties a 

 
7
given thing has depends on, and is determined by, what physical properties it has. That is to 
say, the psychological character of a thing is wholly determined by its physical character." 
 
In a slogan, dual-aspect monism then claims that there is only one entity, let's call it "a 
person", which has two aspects – a mental one and a physical one – and which has them in an 
equal and non-reductive way. In this article I will try to flesh this claim out. The core idea can 
be found in Spinoza's Ethics (Part II), but I shall not attempt any exegetical work here 
(besides, Spinoza's own view is heavily marked with theistic considerations, which I prefer to 
set aside – they are not necessary). One can also find a similar idea in the work of Bertrand 
Russell, who is the champion of 'neutral monism' (see below). Chalmers (2003) speaks 
approvingly4 about a (similar but different) variant of mind-body monism, without embracing 
it. Strawson (2003, 2006) defends a (similar but different) variant of it. In what follows, I'll try 
to develop a version of mind-body monism with the purpose of putting on the table a simple 
and clear view, and the main reasons to endorse it. 
 
So, here is the idea: the body and the mind are two aspects of one and the same thing, and 
they do not reduce to each other. There is one entity, "a person", which is not a brain, not a 
mind, and not a union of both. The person has two aspects, a mental aspect and a physical 
aspect, and this is also how it is given to us – it is accessible to us, perceptually and 
conceptually, in the two different ways we are familiar with. To get an intuitive starting point, 
consider the pain in my shoulder while I am typing this article, it's been bothering me since I 
started writing it a week ago. It distracts me from my work, and it is accessible to me "in a 
mental way", that is, in a qualitative way, it has a distinct phenomenal character. But – 
suppose – I have at my disposal a very sophisticated futuristic MRI scanner, capable of 
monitoring in fine detail the activities of my brain in real time, and showing the nicely 
animated 3D results on my computer screen. It keeps showing me the portions of my brain 
corresponding to my shoulder pain. So it – too – keeps distracting me from my work. I thus 
have an access to seemingly two things, the pain I feel and the brain processes I observe, but 
                                                 
4 "Overall, […] monism promises a deeply integrated and elegant view of nature. Few detailed theories in this 
class have been developed, and it is not yet clear whether such a view can be developed in a way that 
simultaneously accommodates all the data of physics and phenomenology. But at the same time, there appear to 
be no strong reasons to reject the view. As such, […] monism is likely to provide fertile grounds for further 
investigation, and it may ultimately provide the best integration of the physical and the phenomenal within the 
natural world." Chalmers (2003, §11) 

 
8
the monist's idea is that these are merely two aspects of one and the same thing – "the pain". 
Being in pain, in this view, is to be an entity with a brain (or similar) in a certain state and to 
have a qualitative experience of a certain kind, where these two are two aspects of one and the 
same thing, namely, the pain. The idea here is that I detect and I interact with one thing – my 
pain – in two different ways. These are two different aspects of one and the same 
metaphysical reality.  
To be more precise, from the ontological point of view, there are two options. Firstly, we 
could say that the person has a dual aspect, that it is neither mental nor physical but, rather, 
'phental' ('physical-mental'). We then have access to these two different aspects of reality. 
This is the realist interpretation of dual-aspect monism. But, secondly, we could also say that 
the fundamental metaphysical nature of a person is unknowable to us, and that the two aspects 
that are given to us are different appearances of this metaphysical nature. This is an anti-
realist reading. I myself have sympathies with the anti-realist reading5, but a monist is not 
forced to share my sympathies. In what follows, if I do not say otherwise, I will try to be 
officially as neutral as possible between the two readings. 
The kind of mind-body monism I am exploring here has similarities with Russell's neutral 
monism (see, inter alia, his (1919)). The idea common to both Russell's view and the one I 
am concerned with is that ultimate reality is of only one kind (this claim, standing alone, is 
true of reductionist physicalism and idealism as well). Russell's neutral monism is then based 
on the additional idea that this reality is neither mental nor physical – it is, in this sense, 
neutral. To my mind, the monistic idea is better defended when formulated as a dual-aspect 
view: instead of saying that the reality is neither mental nor physical and that it is neutral, the 
monist's idea is better captured by saying that it is dual, namely, phental. But perhaps, this is 
only a terminological disagreement. (Russell himself then went further and claimed that the 
neutral stuff is the sensations or perceptions we have – as he puts it "Sensations are what is 
common to the mental and physical worlds; they may be defined as the intersection of mind 
and matter" (Russell (1921, p.144)). In my view, sensations and experiences are mental, and 
not neutral, and I would like to distance myself from this claim.)  
 
§5. Now, let us face the main difficulty in explaining dual-aspect monism, namely, to 
explain what an aspect is. I will be content if I can provide an explanation, even if not a 
                                                 
5 For unrelated reasons, I defend a version of metaphysical anti-realism in Benovsky (manuscript, Part II, 
Chap.3, esp.§11-). 

 
9
definition. One way to put the question is to ask what the difference is between an aspect and 
a property. An aspect is not a property, that much is clear. An aspect is not exemplified by a 
person, like a property is. (Keep in mind that "person", as I use it here, is the neutral word.) A 
person exemplifies F (say, "being in pain"), and the monist's idea is that this situation6 has two 
aspects. Under the realist reading, the person is not physical, it is not mental, it is phental. It 
exemplifies F, and F is also a phental property. It has a physical aspect and a mental one, but 
in itself it is not physical and it is not mental, it is dual. Both the person and its properties are 
thus of a – phental – dual aspect kind. Under the anti-realist reading, the way to put it is to say 
that the person's nature is unknown and that F's nature is also unknown, but that the person's 
being F is given to us in two ways – it appears to us as having two aspects, a mental one and a 
physical one. Thus, under both readings, "to have an aspect" is not to have a (higher-order7) 
property, rather it is a way to describe the entity that is F, it is a non-arbitrary way to talk 
about it, to say how it is (or how it appears to be). Under the realist reading it would perhaps 
be more appropriate to say that having two aspects is just part of the nature of a person and of 
F; being phental is just the way the person and F are. This is far from being a definition of 
"aspect", but I hope that by making clear that it is not a property, we are starting to get a better 
grip on what dual-aspect monism amounts to and what an aspect is. Let us try to tighten our 
grip further in the next two sections.  
 
§6. One could perhaps find dual-aspect monism and the whole dual-aspect idea bizarre. Of 
course, it is, to some extent. But so are all the other views on the market, with no surprise: the 
nature of the mental is probably one of the biggest mysteries in the universe. A theory of the 
nature of the mind has to be bizarre. The fact that dual-aspect monism is bizarre is a good 
sign. Perhaps, the trouble with reductionist physicalism is that it is not bizarre enough – it 
eliminates the mystery almost entirely, but while doing this it goes too far, adopting an ostrich 
strategy.  
The dual-aspect idea, while being bizarre, can be found in other places of science, namely 
quantum physics. Indeed, the idea that an entity can exhibit very different "aspects", and 
perhaps even incompatible ones, can be found in one of the central concepts of quantum 
mechanics, and can echo the kind of idea the monist appeals to. Indeed, at least under a 
                                                 
6 I am trying to avoid a strong commitment to facts here, but a friend of facts could formulate it that way. 
7 Compare to Heil's (2003) conception of properties as being both dispositional and qualitative. Heil also 
mentions the possibility that such 'aspects of properties' are higher-order properties, and - rightly - rejects it 
(p.119). 

 
10
widely shared understanding of the nature of photons, electrons, and other 'particles', it seems 
that they have both a particle-like nature and a wave-like nature – this is the famous particle-
wave duality problem. Under some experimental conditions, such quantum entities behave 
like particles, while under other experimental conditions (for instance, in the case of a double-
slit experiment) they behave like waves. It is not implausible, then, to attribute to such entities 
a dual-aspect behaviour, simply accepting that – as strange as it may seem – they are both like 
particles and waves8. Interestingly enough, this interpretation of the behaviour of quantum 
entities also comes in two versions, a realist and an anti-realist one, the latter having been 
famously championed by Bohr who insisted that such a picture means that we should abandon 
the idea that any of these claims refer to physical reality, which, as a consequence, remains 
unknown. 
Perhaps a simpler – non-quantum – case one can have in mind is, as Chalmers (1996, 
p.129) quickly remarks in connection with monism, the fact that matter and energy turn out to 
be two aspects of a single kind. Intuitively speaking, matter and energy look like two very 
different types of entities, but if physics has it right, they might turn out to be merely two 
different aspects of one and the same thing.  
I already insisted above that an aspect is not a property, but it can still be useful here to 
compare dual-aspect monism to property dualism. Chalmers (1996, p.130 and p.302) asks: 
what exactly is the difference between monism and property dualism? Well, as already 
mentioned above, according to property dualism, physical properties are exemplified by 
physical processes and mental properties are also exemplified by physical processes. The 
bearer of any of these properties is the brain (brain states/processes). The bearer is a physical 
thing. So, here as well as under physicalism, the physical is in a sense prior over the mental. 
For the monist, things are different, since there is one thing, the person, that is neither 
physical nor mental, but phental, and thus the bearer is not a physical thing. Here, the 
comparison with the particle-wave quantum issue is useful again: a photon, under this 
interpretation, is not, say, an entity that is a particle but that sometimes exemplifies wave-like 
properties in addition to its particle-like properties. Rather, it is a particle-wave entity (a 
'wavicle'), exactly as a person is a mental-physical ('phental') entity.  
 
                                                 
8 Galen Strawson, who defends a variant of mind-body monism, claims that it is actually easier to conceive of a 
dual-aspect mental-physical entity than a dual-aspect particle-wave entity, because "the experiential terms and 
the non-experiential terms do not in fact actively clash, as the wave and particle terms do" (Strawson (2003, 
p.39)) 

 
11
§7. Dual-aspect monism is usefully combined with panpsychism. Panpsychism, like 
monism, is often set aside as being a 'weird outsider' view, but there has recently been a 
revival of interest in this old view (see, for instance, Chalmers (1996), Coleman (2014), Goff 
(2009), Seager (2006), Strawson (2006)). In short, panpsychism claims that there is a level of 
mentality (experience/consciousness) even in entities like thermostats (see Chalmers (1996, 
p.293-)), or even the fundamental entities (particles, strings,…) that constitute the universe. 
The level of mentality in these very simple entities would of course not be very high, and 
typically it would not involve self-consciousness.  
Strictly speaking, the kind of monism I am concerned with in this article is perhaps 
compatible with the rejection of panpsychism – it could be modified to embrace the 
emergentist view that mentality is only associated with some sufficiently complex systems, 
and that entities that are too simple just do not exhibit any mental aspects and only exhibit 
physical aspects. But such a combination is not a natural one for the monist, since she has to 
deal, then, with two kinds of entities in her ontology: the ones that have two aspects and the 
ones that have only one. This spoils the whole monistic idea, and the whole idea of phental 
entities and properties. Combining her view with emergentism would be a huge step back for 
the monist, and it would amount to abandon the spirit of the view. Embracing panpsychism 
makes dual-aspect monism a more systematic and simpler view: it does not need to explain 
when and why entities start to have a double aspect.  
Indeed, such an explanation is bound to be difficult to find, and this is where panpsychism 
gets its main raison d'être in the first place: it arises from the difficulties associated with 
emergentism. Strawson (2006) is a recent example of a rejection of emergentism in favour of 
panpsychism (he actually argues that all physicalists have to be panpsychists, given the failure 
of emergentism). The trouble with emergentism is, in short, that it makes a complete mystery 
of how something like experience or consciousness could emerge from an arrangement of 
fully non-experiential and non-conscious entities, like purely physical fundamental particles 
(or similar). To take his example, we do understand how liquidity arises from the combination 
of H2O molecules under some well-understood circumstances, even if the molecules 
themselves do not exhibit liquidity. Liquidity is a new feature of the macro-entity that is 
composed of micro-entities that do not possess liquidity themselves, but we do understand 
how and why this new feature comes into existence. Importantly, the rise of liquidity is not a 
brute metaphysical phenomenon; rather, the liquidity of water is explained by the features 
H2O molecules do have, it is wholly dependent on these non-liquid features, in a non-
mysterious way.  

 
12
Nothing like this is available in the alleged case of emergence of experience/consciousness 
from physical micro-entities. As Strawson (2006, p.66) puts it: "For Y truly to emerge from X 
is for Y to arise from or out of X or be given in or with Y given how X is. Y must arise out of 
or be given in X in some essentially non-arbitrary and indeed wholly non-arbitrary way. X has 
to have something – indeed everything – to do with it. That's what emerging is (that's how 
liquidity arises out of non-liquid phenomena). It is essentially an in-virtue-of relation. It 
cannot be brute. Otherwise it will be intelligible to suppose that existence can emerge from 
(come out of, develop out of) non-existence, or even that concrete phenomena can emerge 
from wholly abstract phenomena. Brutality rules out nothing." 
Dual-aspect monism is the theory that is the best suited to adopt a panpsychist view. 
Mentality, so to speak, is present in the very nature of all entities/properties, since these are 
taken to be phental. This, one could say, makes sense of panpsychism, not just as being the 
default view – given a (controversial) rejection of emergentism – but as actually being the 
natural view to hold. 
 Thus, dual-aspect monism is best understood in combination with panpsychism. But 
doesn't it then have an equally serious difficulty to explain how the experiential properties of 
very simple systems or fundamental particles combine to generate experiences of more 
complex systems (such as human beings)? This is the 'combination difficulty': how can 
macro-experiences be understood as combinations or as being constituted by micro-
experiences?  
Here, it is useful to have in mind a distinction Coleman (2014) makes between two 
combination problems. The first problem arises if one thinks that the micro-experiences are 
had by micro-subjects, and that combining micro-properties to get macro-properties requires 
then to combine micro-subjects to get macro-subjects. Subjects are, presumably, points of 
view, at the very least. But then, it becomes very hard to see how a combination of many 
points of view could make up one (bigger?) point of view. Different points of view will 
always be different points of view, and will not become another unique point of view by being 
somehow combined. They could, perhaps, be destroyed and replaced by another point of 
view, but this is not combining them. Thus, this first combination problem seems to be a very 
serious one for the panpsychist (and the monist). Fortunately, one does not have to understand 
the rise of macro-experiences from micro-experiences in this way: one can see the 
combination problem as being a problem about combination of phenomenal qualities, and not 
of subjects. This is a much easier problem to handle. In a painting, to take Coleman's 
example, bits of paint form a picture by being juxtaposed and/or blended, and the way a 

 
13
complex painting arises from these tiny bits of colour is perfectly intelligible. Along the lines 
of this example, one could then understand – or at least have a rough idea – how phenomenal 
micro-qualities could be combined (by being juxtaposed or blended) to give rise to more 
complex (macro) qualities. This is of course only a rough sketch of how this type of 
combination could work, but it does not seem to present insufferable difficulties, like the case 
of combination of subjects. Colours, say, can be combined by being juxtaposed or blended, 
and so could phenomenal qualities, provided that this combination does not require the 
combination of different subjects bearing those qualities. In this way, and in general, macro-
objects could have more complex macro-properties than micro-objects (in pretty much the 
same way this is the case for all properties, and not only phenomenal/experiential properties – 
tables, say, can be rectangular, while fundamental particles cannot, but the rectangularity of 
the table depends on the particles that constitute it and the way they are arranged).  
 
So, the kind of monism I am exploring in this articles has now become richer in content. It 
is a combination of three views: (i) the properly monistic dual aspect idea, (ii) panpsychism, 
and (iii) the rejection of a strong and metaphysically loaded conception of the subject of 
experience(s). Given the advantages of panpsychism (namely, the fact that it avoids problems 
with emergence), (ii) can be seen as a good point in favour of dual-aspect monism. What 
about (iii)? If we had a good reason to think that there has to be a subject of experience for 
every experience, it seems that this component of the package of views I am considering here 
would be a burden.  
But the claim that there has to be a subject of experience can be understood in a 
metaphysically less loaded and harmless way. I have defended this view in detail elsewhere9, 
so let me here only roughly outline it. The idea is that the subject of experience, let us say the 
'Self', can be understood as being a plurality: in a way that is analogous to metaphysical 
eliminativism (i.e. the view that instead of there being tables, there are atoms arranged 
tablewise), one can say that instead of there being a Self in the form of a substance or a 
bundle, there 'only' are experiences arranged Self-wise. This is not to say that the Self does 
not exist (so, this is reductionism, not an eliminativism). The idea is that there are the 
experiences (in general, mental states) we have, and the Self is the experiences. Thus, it is a 
                                                 
9 See Benovsky (2014). There are some similarities between the view I defend there and Parfit's (1971, 1984) 
reductionism, as well as Strawson's (1997, 1999) Pearl View (a view which itself comes structurally close to the 
Stage View about persistence through time and personal identity (see Sider (2000, 2001) and Varzi (2003))), and 
– as far as I am able to tell – the Buddhist view of the Self. 

 
14
plurality. It is not a bundle or a collection of the experiences – that would be a single entity, 
additional to there being the experiences – and it is not a bearer of the experiences, whatever 
such a bearer may be. It does not supervene on the experiences, it is not derived from them, it 
does not exist in any second-hand ontologically derivative sense. It is them. Linguistically 
speaking, "I" and "Self" and "me" are all plural terms (like "the crew of the USS Enterprise"). 
Thus, being arranged Self-wise is not the same thing as being bundled together in order to 
make up a Self which is a bundle. The latter requires, metaphysically speaking, the existence 
of a bundling relation (often called "compresence") and it makes the Self to be a single entity. 
Experiences arranged Self-wise are ontologically less demanding. The idea is this: there are 
experiences, they happen to be arranged in such-and-such a way, and that's me. 
With such a conception of the Self (that can, despite it being a plurality, play the role of a 
subject of experience (see Benovsky (2014, §4)), dual-aspect-monism-cum-panpsychism-
cum-pluralism-about-the-subject is well equipped to face the combination problem. 
 
§8. Until now we have seen what dual-aspect monism is. I hope we have here a rather clear 
view, and I hope that the idea of a double-aspect is at least intelligible. It is now time to see 
what dual-aspect monism is good for. It's very simple: it provides an elegant way out of the 
dilemma we started with in §2-3.  
Firstly, dual-aspect monism does not reduce mental properties to physical properties. It 
does not give priority to the physical over the mental, nor does it give priority to the mental 
over the physical. Both are simply different aspects of one and the same thing. The qualitative 
and phenomenally rich aspects of this one thing are ontologically, conceptually, and 
empirically on a par with the physical aspects of it. The mental aspects do not depend for their 
existence on the physical aspects, they both depend for their existence on the one thing. 
Ontologically speaking, the priority is given to the one thing – the person (and her properties) 
– that has different aspects, where both enjoy the same status. Thus, in particular, the mental 
aspects of a person are not reduced to her physical aspects and can be genuinely said to have 
an irreducibly qualitative character. They have a qualitative character, they have the desired 
what-it-is-like character, and in general they can have all the features mental entities typically 
exhibit. They can have these features intrinsically and genuinely, without being reduced to 
something else, so there is no risk here to lose anything, unlike under physicalist theories. 
Secondly, and importantly, while this type of monism can satisfy this desideratum 
concerning the irreducibility of qualia which is part of the motivation for dualism, it avoids 
the problems dualism has with mental causation. For the dualist, the question was: how can a 

 
15
mind have a causal influence on a material body (the brain)? And how can a brain give rise to 
qualitative experiences such as pain? How to explain the (causal) interaction between the 
mental and the physical? The problem comes here from the dualist's idea that there are two 
ontological realms, that appear to be causally disjoined, and any cross-realm causal (or other) 
relations then become problematic. For the monist, there is no threat here. Strictly speaking, 
there is no causality at all between mental properties/states/events and physical 
properties/states/events, since they are (aspects of) one and the same thing, so there can be no 
causality between 'them'. There only is one ontological realm, there only is one entity – the 
person (and her properties) – and so the mental causation issue does not even arise, there is no 
'interaction mystery' to be solved. For the same reason, there is no threat of causal 
overdetermination. As far as the causal closure of the physical world is concerned, of course, 
it has to be abandoned here, since the idea is that the world is not physical but that it is phental 
(or unknown, under the anti-realist reading). But here the rejection is harmless: what's at stake 
in the causal closure of the physical world principle is not that much the idea that the world 
has to be physical and that it needs to be causally closed, but rather that causality always 
occurs between things of the same kind, namely, the kind that the world is made of, be it 
physical or be it phental, the principle can be salvaged with everything that is essential to it10.  
Thirdly, dual-aspect monism provides a natural explanation of how and why there is a 
strong 
correlation 
between 
mental 
properties/states/processes 
and 
physical 
properties/states/processes: since they are aspects of one and the same thing, it is no surprise 
that they go together, hand in hand. The hard question about how a material brain can give 
rise to a qualitative experience is thus no mystery at all, since strictly speaking the 'material 
brain' does not cause any experiences at all, the brain (processes/states/…) and the 
experiences being two aspects of one and the same metaphysical reality.  
 
§9. It would be possible to stop this article here. We have started with a dilemma, we have 
seen what dual-aspect monism is, and we have then seen how it can help to get out of the 
dilemma. To my mind, this is enough to take it very seriously, at the very least. In this last 
section I will try to add even more plausibility to this view, by claiming that it fits well with 
our ordinary picture of the world. There is no argument here, only a hopefully useful analogy. 
This last section can be entirely skipped, if it is judged irrelevant.  
                                                 
10 Here again, Strawson's (2006) nice distinction between physicalism and physicSalism is relevant. (See 
footnote 1 above.) 

 
16
The idea I want to compare dual-aspect monism to is that, our senses being what they are, 
we have a contingently limited access to the world in various ways, all very different. Take an 
apple you are eating. At the same time, you taste it, you touch it, you smell it, and you see it. 
These different sensory modalities provide you with experiences of different properties of the 
apple. (Here too a realist and an anti-realist readings are possible.) There are other ways to get 
to know the apple as well: you can measure it, weigh it, count the molecules that compose it, 
and so on. The point here is that we have access to the world in many different ways, each 
having a certain aspect – the kind of input we get from touching the apple is different from the 
kind of input we get from tasting it or from counting the number of molecules that compose it. 
I hope that what I am saying here is a mere platitude about the way(s) the world is given to us. 
I also hope that it rings a bell quite obviously if we have dual-aspect monism in mind. How 
are we given to ourselves? Well, I've already mentioned above that we can have ourselves 
scanned in an MRI, or that we can, say, simply enjoy the pain we are experiencing right now 
– these being two different ways of accessing the same reality. We have different ways to 
have access to ourselves, and they are also contingently limited. I can have access to my pain, 
but not to yours, in a qualitative way – but I can have access to your pain in the other, non-
qualitative, MRI-like way. If I were a specialist, just by looking at your MRI I could say that 
you're in pain, and perhaps I could even say that it is a pain in your left foot. But my mental 
access to the world is more limited: not only I do not have a qualitative access to your pains, 
but I am also restricted when it comes to my own mind – I can only experience the present 
(or, the 'specious present'11), I forget my past pains, etc. All this is completely contingent, it 
just happens to be the way I am built. Some animals have better sight, better smell, better 
hearing, some have echolocation capacities, and perhaps some conscious beings in the 
universe have telepathic access to the minds of others – at least, there does not seem to be a 
conceptual impossibility in this. (I dare to think that beings with telepathic powers would find 
dual-aspect monism quite natural.) So, be it by our five senses or by our purely mental 
introspective capacities, we have a (limited) access to a selection of reality (more or less 
spatio-temporally close to us).  
Dual-aspect monism very naturally fits this picture. Reality has different aspects (or, it is 
given to us as such, under an anti-realist reading), and we have various means to access them, 
all qualitatively different, all of a different kind. I get a lot of different type of information 
                                                 
11 See inter alia James (1890), Husserl (1964), Broad (1923), Dainton (2000, 2003), Hoerl (2009), Phillips 
(2011). 

 
17
about my brain from my five senses, and thus a lot of information about me and my 
experiences (again, a skilled interpretation of a futuristic MRI-like scans will certainly be able 
to say when I have an experience of redness, when I have an experience of pain, etc.), and I 
also can get a lot of information about me and my experiences 'from the mental perspective' 
(and here things would go the other way around: if I have an experience of redness, and a 
good knowledge of the workings of my brain, I can then get to know that this-and-this portion 
of my brain is being stimulated just because I am now having an experience of redness). I 
guess that what I am trying to convey here is simply the idea that we have different types of 
access to the world and to ourselves, and that dual-aspect monism fits well with this ordinary 
picture of the world – a picture that we get from our ordinary experience. Again, there is no 
argument for dual-aspect monism here, but it may help us to see that, far from being a "weird 
outsider", it actually seems to be a natural conceptual extension of the ordinary way we see 
the world and ourselves, as being entities with different aspects.12 
 
 
 
 
 
References : 
 
Benovsky, J. manuscript. Metaontology, metaphysical equivalence, primitiveness, and theory choice.  
 
(book-length manuscript) 
Benovsky, J. 2014. "I am a lot of things: a pluralistic account of the Self", Metaphysica. 15(1), p.113- 
 
127. 
Bennett, K. and McLaughlin, B. 2005. "Supervenience", Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy. 
Broad, C. D. 1923. Scientific thought. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co. 
Chalmers, D. J. 1996. The Conscious Mind. Oxford University Press. 
Chalmers, D. J. 2003. "Consciousness and its Place in Nature", in Stich and Warfield (eds.), Blackwell  
 
Guide to the Philosophy of Mind. Blackwell. 102-142. 
Coleman, S. 2014. "The Real Combination Problem: Panpsychism, Micro-Subjects, and Emergence", 
Erkenntnis 79:19–44. 
Dainton, B. 2000. Stream of Consciousness. London: Routledge. 
Dainton, B. 2003. "Time in Experience: Reply to Gallagher", Psyche 9(10). 
                                                 
12 I would like to thank Davor Bodrozic, David Chalmers, Lynda Gaudemard, Baptiste Le Bihan, and Martine 
Nida-Ruemelin for very helpful feedback and advice while I was writing this article.  

 
18
Goff, P. 2009. "Why panpsychism doesn't help us explain consciousness", Dialectica 63(3), 289–311. 
Heil, J. 2003. From an Ontological Point of View, Oxford University Press. 
Hoerl, C. 2009. "Time and Tense in Perceptual experience", Philosophers' Imprint, Vol. 9, n° 12. 
Husserl, E. 1964. The Phenomenology of Internal Time-Consciousness. In Heidegger (ed.) and 
Churchill (trans.). Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
James, W. 1890. The Principles of Psychology. New York: H. Holt and company. 
Kim, J. 1998. Philosophy of Mind. Westview Press. 
Parfit, D. 1971. Personal Identity. The Philosophical Review 80.1:3-27.  
Parfit, D. 1984. Reasons and Persons. Oxford University Press.  
Phillips, I. 2011. "Indiscriminability and experience of change", The Philosophical Quarterly 
Russell, B. 1919. "The Philosophy of logical atomism", The Monist, 29:3, p.345-380. 
Russell, B. 1921. "The Analysis of Mind", London: Allen & Unwin, reprinted in 1978. 
Seager, W. E. 2006. "The 'Intrinsic Nature' argument for panpsychism", Journal of Consciousness 
 
Studies 13(10–11), 129–145. 
Sider, T. 2000. The Stage View and Temporary Intrinsics. Analysis 60:84-88. 
Sider, T. 2001. Four-dimensionalism. Clarendon Press. 
Strawson, G. 1997. "The Self", Journal of Consciousness Studies 4.5/6:405-28. 
Strawson, G. 1999. "The Self and the SESMET", Journal of Consciousness Studies 6.4:99-135. 
Strawson, G. 2003. "Real Materialism", in Antony and Hornstein (eds.), Chomsky and his critics; 
reprinted in Strawson, Real Materialism and Other Essays, Oxford Clarendon Press 2008. 
Strawson, G. 2006. "Realistic Monism – Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism", Journal of 
Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11):3-31. 
Varzi, A. 2003. Naming the stages. Dialectica 57:387-412. 

