The multiple-demand (MD) system of
the primate brain: mental programs for
intelligent behaviour
John Duncan
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, 15 Chaucer Road, Cambridge CB2 7EF, UK
A common or multiple-demand (MD) pattern of frontal
and parietal activity is associated with diverse cognitive
demands, and with standard tests of ﬂuid intelligence. In
intelligent behaviour, goals are achieved by assembling
a series of sub-tasks, creating structured mental pro-
grams. Single cell and functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) data indicate a key role for MD cortex in
deﬁning and controlling the parts of such programs,
with focus on the speciﬁc content of a current cognitive
operation, rapid reorganization as mental focus is chan-
ged, and robust separation of successive task steps.
Resembling the structured problem-solving of symbolic
artiﬁcial intelligence, the mental programs of MD cortex
appear central to intelligent thought and action.
Multiple-demand activity in the human brain
Over the past 20 years, functional neuroimaging has ident-
iﬁed many individual associations between speciﬁc cogni-
tive functions and speciﬁc regions of the human cerebral
cortex. In parallel, there has been a more unexpected
discovery – a common pattern of activity that is a salient
part of the brain’s response to many different kinds
of cognitive challenge. Illustrated in Figure 1a, this
multiple-demand (MD) pattern [1,2] extends over a speciﬁc
set of regions in prefrontal and parietal cortex, in particu-
lar: cortex in and around the posterior part of the inferior
frontal sulcus (IFS), in the anterior insula and adjacent
frontal operculum (AI/FO), in the pre-supplementary
motor area and adjacent dorsal anterior cingulate (pre-
SMA/ACC), and in and around the intraparietal sulcus
(IPS). A smaller region of accompanying activity is some-
times seen in rostrolateral prefrontal cortex (RPFC).
Highly similar MD patterns are identiﬁed by a range of
methods, from pooling of activity associated with different
kinds of task to analyses of temporal correlations in resting
state data, and are variously described as ‘task positive’ [3],
a ‘task-activation ensemble’ [4] or a ‘task control’ network
[5,6].
A closely similar activity pattern can also be seen by
contrasting standard tests of ﬂuid intelligence [7] – gener-
ally, tests of novel problem-solving – with suitable sensor-
imotor controls (Figure 1b; [8–10]). Correspondingly,
recent lesion data suggest that deﬁcits in ﬂuid intelligence
are speciﬁcally associated with damage to the MD network
(Woolgar et al., unpublished data). In psychometrics, tests
of ﬂuid intelligence are of interest for their broad ability to
predict success in many kinds of laboratory and real-world
activity. One candidate explanation is that tests of this
kind are a good measure of some general or g factor [11], to
some extent contributing to effective performance in many
different task contexts. Evidently, this suggestion ﬁts well
with a brain system showing activity associated with
multiple kinds of cognitive demand.
How should we understand the function of this MD
system? Undoubtedly, frontoparietal cortex is important
in cognitive control, but how should ‘control’ be conceived?
Much current work on control is concerned with isolated
operations, such as response inhibition [12] or control of
attentional bias [13,14]. Beyond these, I suggest, the pro-
blem of control is centrally concerned with the structure
and requirements of complex, multi-component behaviour.
In all realistic behaviour, from cooking a meal [15] to
solving a problem in formal logic [16], goals are achieved by
assembling a series of sub-tasks, each separately deﬁned
and solved. In this respect, human behaviour resembles
the sequential activity of conventional computer programs,
assembling a series of operations that together achieves
the ﬁnal goal. The problem is well illustrated by artiﬁcial
intelligence systems, from the earliest days of the General
Problem Solver [17] to systems such as Newell’s SOAR [18]
and Anderson’s ACT [19]. In all these systems, as in all
complex human behaviour, the problem is not simply to
control isolated steps of thought or behaviour, but equally
signiﬁcant, a task must be decomposed into useful parts,
with these component sub-tasks addressed in turn.
It has long been noted that, after major frontal lobe
damage, the structure of complex behaviour is impaired,
with important parts omitted, irrelevant parts introduced,
and the whole failing to achieve its ends [20,21]. Such
results indicate an obvious link to the problems of symbolic
artiﬁcial intelligence [22,23], and to the sequential pro-
gramming of goal-directed behaviour [20,21]. Sequential
mental programming has several requirements. Each step
requires focus, that is enclosed processing only of the parts
of the current sub-task. As sub-tasks are completed, the
current cognitive focus must be abandoned and a new focus
created. Often, selected results from one sub-task must be
passed to the next. Especially in novel tasks, useful sub-
parts must be deﬁned and separated. Mental programming
of this sort is an indispensable part of all structured mental
activity. I suggest that neural activity in MD cortex is well
suited to such programming, explaining broad recruitment
Review
Corresponding author: Duncan, J. (john.duncan@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk)
172
1364-6613/$ – see front matter ! 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2010.01.004 Available online 18 February 2010

across cognitive domains, and a central role in human
intelligence.
Neurophysiology of mental programs
Each step of a mental program deﬁnes a new cognitive
epoch, with different operations, goals, and task-relevant
information. In everyday behaviour, such epochs follow in
rapid succession, requiring frequent changes of processing
context. Both single unit and functional magnetic reson-
ance imaging (fMRI) data show features of MD activity well
matched to the construction of focused cognitive epochs,
and rapid transition from one to the next.
An example is shown in Figure 2 [24–27]. In these
experiments, monkeys were trained to monitor a series
of pictures, awaiting a speciﬁc target (Figure 2a). The side
of the stimulus stream (left or right) varied randomly from
one trial to the next. Maintained ﬁxation was required
until the target was detected; reward was then given for a
saccade to the stimulus location at target offset. In one task
variant (ﬁxed target), the same picture served as target
throughout training. In a second (cued target), monkeys
learned associations between three cue pictures and three
corresponding targets. Each trial began with a cue
instructing the target for the current trial; in this variant,
most nontargets were pictures that had served as targets
on other trials.
One key feature of mental programming is selective
coding of information relevant to the current decision. In
the above tasks, up to 50% of all cells recorded in lateral
prefrontal cortex discriminated targets from nontargets
[24–26] (see example data in Figure 2b). By contrast, many
fewer cells made the task-irrelevant discrimination be-
tween one nontarget and another [24]. Many other studies
have reported selective coding of task-relevant objects,
features and categories in prefrontal neurons [28–30].
Even when neurons are randomly sampled, as in our
experiments, large proportions show coding of some kind
of task-relevant information [31]. Similar results have also
been described in medial frontal, insular and parietal
cortex (e.g. [32–34]).
Wide MD coding of attended or task-relevant infor-
mation is also shown by human fMRI data (Figure 3). In
adaptation studies, for example, changes to an attended
object [35,36] or feature [37] lead to extensive activity
throughout the MD system. Such change-related activity
occurs even in passive conditions, with subjects simply
instructed to attend to one input stream [35,38]. Similar
conclusions are indicated by multivoxel pattern analysis
(MVPA) [39], showing extensive MD coding of task-
relevant stimuli and cognitive operations [40,41].
A second key feature of mental programming is rapid
change of processing focus and content. In the monkey
prefrontal cortex, neurons show rapid changes in the infor-
mation they code, depending on corresponding changes in
how stimuli should be interpreted and responses chosen. In
the tasks of Figure 2, for example, prefrontal cells show
similar
patterns
of
target/nontarget
discrimination
whether the target is ﬁxed (Figure 2b, left) or cued
(Figure 2b, right), although in the latter case, the same
stimulus that is to be categorized as target on one trial
serves as nontarget on others. Again, many other exper-
iments show the ability of prefrontal cells to follow rapid
changes of cognitive context [14], either across [29,42] or
even within [43] trials.
In organized behaviour, several steps or cognitive
epochs follow in sequence. How do prefrontal cells code
successive steps? The question can be examined [27] in the
context of the same cued-target detection task illustrated
in Figure 2a (right). For this analysis, data were analysed
from a randomly selected sample of 324 neurons in lateral
prefrontal cortex. For each neuron, mean ﬁring rates were
calculated for each of 18 separate task events – 6 cues (each
possible combination of cue picture x visual ﬁeld), 6 delay
periods (intervals between one stimulus and the next, for
each cue x visual ﬁeld combination) and 6 targets – then
converted to relative activity by normalizing for the
neuron’s mean ﬁring rate across events. For each task
event, the analysis thus produced a pattern or vector of
activity across the sample of 324 neurons; by correlating
these vectors, we asked how similar are frontal codes for
different task events. A cluster analysis of the resulting
correlation matrix is shown in Figure 2c. Three major
clusters are deﬁned by the 3 task phases – cue, delay
and target. Each cluster is further divided by hemiﬁeld,
and then by cue/target identity. For different task phases,
activity patterns were approximately orthogonal (corre-
lations close to 0); for different cue/target identities within
Figure 1. (a) MD pattern. Data are drawn from a previous review of brain activity
associated with diverse cognitive demands [1,2]. To produce this figure, peak
activity coordinates from the original studies have been smoothed and summed,
and the resulting summed map thresholded to show regions of most frequent
activity. To combine data from left and right hemispheres, left hemisphere peaks
were transposed to the right. Coordinates of local maxima (dark blue) are shown in
the IFS, AI/FO, pre-SMA, ACC, RPFC and IPS. Nearby coordinates (pale blue, italics)
come from an independent analysis of activity peaks associated with different
aspects of task control [64]; the parietal coordinate is the average of more anterior
and posterior coordinates from the original report. Coordinates have been
transformed as necessary into Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space. (b)
Right hemisphere activity associated with a standard test of fluid intelligence.
Adapted, with permission, from Ref. [10].
Review
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
Vol.14 No.4
173

one phase and hemiﬁeld, correlations rose to a median of
0.5. Thus each successive task stage was deﬁned by its own,
unique pattern of activity across prefrontal cells whereas
stimulus information within each stage was coded by
modest modulations of the basic stage pattern. The results
indicate that, in complex behaviour, transitions from one
step to the next are managed by corresponding transitions
among widely distributed, largely independent patterns of
prefrontal activity.
In distributed representations, orthogonal codes are
useful to maximize discriminability. This makes sense
for the successive stages of complex behaviour, where
Figure 2. (a) Fixed and cued target detection tasks. Monkeys maintained central fixation (red/green dots) while monitoring a stream of pictures presented either to left or right.
When a specified target appeared (unpredictably following 0–3 nontargets), reward was given for a saccade to the position of the stimulus stream, made at target offset. In the
fixed target task, nontargets (teddy bear, burger) and target (fish) were fixed throughout training. In the cued target task, pictures changed their status as target or nontarget from
one trial to the next; a cue at trial onset indicated the target for this trial. Cue-target associations (upper right) were learned pre-experimentally. (b) Example data showing
percentages of cells in lateral prefrontal cortex that discriminated targets from nontargets (red – stronger response to targets; green – stronger response to nontargets). Heavy
black line shows time of stimulus presentation; discrimination was tested in sliding windows beginning 200 ms before stimulus onset. Data are similar from the two tasks, with
an early peak of target-preferring cells, beginning around 100 ms from stimulus onset. Across stimuli and time periods, up to 50% of all randomly selected cells showed target/
nontarget discrimination. (c) Cued target task. Cluster analysis showing similarity of prefrontal activity pattern for 18 different task events (3 trial types [search for target stimuli 1
to 3] x 3 task epochs [cue, interstimulus delay, target; nontargets not analysed] x 2 stimulus sides [ipsi-/contralateral to recording location]). For each task event, mean
normalized activity was measured in a sample of 324 cells; similarity was measured by correlation of activity patterns across this cell sample. Correlations were close to zero for
different task epochs (cue, delay, target), showing that activity in one epoch was unpredictive of activity in others. By contrast, searching for different targets, especially on the
same side, produced strongly correlated activity patterns at each task epoch. Adapted, with permission, from Refs. [24–27].
Review
Trends in Cognitive Sciences Vol.14 No.4
174

any number of steps, each with arbitrary cognitive content,
might need to be assembled. Orthogonal patterns could be
valuable in maintaining the separate identity and proces-
sing content of each step.
Recent modelling work illustrates the potential of such
schemes [44]. To assemble the arbitrary rules of a particu-
lar behavioural epoch, for example ‘If the context is X and
the stimulus is Y, then make response Z’, cells selective for
speciﬁc content (e.g. context X, stimulus Y, response Z)
could be linked through a further, large population of cells
with random connections. Because these linking cells are
connected to random combinations of content-speciﬁc
cells, they are useful in stabilizing arbitrary combinations
of speciﬁc cognitive activities. The system has greatest
representational power when each randomly connected
cell is linked to about half of the speciﬁc cells. Under these
circumstances, randomly connected cells have properties
strongly reminiscent of those observed in prefrontal cortex,
with selective, somewhat independent activity in many
different cognitive epochs, and rapid transitions from one
epoch to the next [44]. In systems of this sort, randomly
connected cells are involved not only in controlling, but
also in learning and storing the successive steps of a
mental program. In this sense they are reminiscent of
both process and representational models of prefrontal
functions [45].
Transitions between coalitions of active neurons, each
associated with a different task epoch, are also seen in
analyses of activity patterns across multiple, simul-
taneously-recorded cells. Transitions can be reﬂected not
only in changes of mean ﬁring rate for each cell, but in
altered patterns of correlation between cells, either be-
tween epochs [46,47] or occurring at the moment of switch
from one task epoch to the next [48]. Similar data come
Figure 3. (a) MD response to attended stimulus changes. A series of stimulus frames (left) contained black (horizontal) and white (vertical) words, both centred on fixation,
surrounded by distracting Xs. Participants were required to watch either the black or the white word stream, but with no active task to perform. As the series flashed on and
off, either attended or unattended words were periodically changed. Images to right show response (per cent signal change) to attended and unattended word changes in
spherical ROIs (black circles) centred on peak MD coordinates from Figure 1. Asterisks and whole brain render show activity significantly greater for attended compared to
unattended word changes. (b) Similar data for attended vs. unattended stimulus features. A cue at trial onset instructed participants to attend to either colour or shape. A
series of stimuli preceded a final test display (black frame); participants indicated whether the test matched the immediately preceding stimulus on the attended feature.
Because the occurrence of the test was unpredictable, participants were required to attend to the relevant feature for every stimulus in the series. Each such stimulus
matched the preceding one in shape, colour or both features; the analysis (right) contrasts increased response for attended vs. unattended feature change. In both (a) and
(b), the trend was for greater response to attended stimulus changes across the MD network, although with stronger and more consistent results in IFS, AI/FO, pre-SMA and
IPS than in RPFC and ACC. L = left, R = right. Data adapted, with permission, from Refs. [35,37].
Review
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
Vol.14 No.4
175

from lateral and medial frontal cortex of the rat. Again, the
activity of single cells is strongly modulated by task epoch
[49]. As in the monkey data, a given cell can be active in one
or more task epochs, and transitions between epochs result
not only in changed patterns of mean activity across cells,
but in changed correlation between cell pairs [50].
Across MD regions, these physiological results show
neural properties suitable for the needs of sequential,
Figure 4. (a) Example stimulus for 1 of 8 tasks used in Ref. [54]. For each task, instructions could define up to 5 rules (e.g. if upper and lower pictures are identical, press left
key; if 1 picture depicts a bird, press key on side of larger square). (b) Phasic activity linked to instruction screens (20 s on, 10 s delay between screens) for each new rule.
Whole brain render shows regions with stronger activity during instruction screens than intervening delays; surrounding panels show signal strength (finite impulse
response parameter estimate) as a function of time (s) for 3 successive instruction screens (onsets at 0, 30 and 60 s) in MD ROIs (black circles). Data are for the final 3 rules of
each task, presented either following instructions for 2 previous rules (pale grey, full instructions), or without preceding rules (dark grey, reduced instructions). Phasic
activity linked to each new rule presentation was strong in IFS, IPS and pre-SMA, with significant but weaker activity in left AI/FO and right RPFC. L = left, R = right. (c)
Example matrix problem (left), with variation in 3 stimulus features (shape, size, colour), and equivalent problem (right) with only 1 varying feature. In each case, the task is
to complete the matrix (top) with 1 of 4 response alternatives (bottom).
Box 1. Integration across successive task events after frontal-temporal disconnection
In the monkey, several methods are available to disconnect prefrontal
from inferotemporal cortex. Because most connections between
these regions are intrahemispheric, one method is to remove
inferotemporal cortex on one side, and prefrontal cortex on the other.
The method avoids the very severe performance impairments that
follow large, bilateral prefrontal removals. Instead, it asks how
performance depends on direct communication between prefrontal
cortex and the high-level visual representations of the temporal lobe.
Intriguingly, the disconnection has no effect on some demanding
visual tasks [69,70]; an example is concurrent object discrimination
learning. On each trial of this task, the monkey sees a pair of objects;
touching the correct one brings reward. Importantly, trials with different
pairs (e.g. AB, CD, EF. . .) are interleaved, so that multiple pairs are
learned concurrently. Evidently, frontal-temporal communication is
unnecessary for simple association of a visual object with reward.
Instead, the disconnection produces deficits in several task variants,
which in the normal animal allow radical improvements in perfor-
mance. In one such variant, object pairs are not interleaved, but
learned one at a time. In experienced normal animals, this task is
much easier than the concurrent version, probably reflecting a win-
stay lose-shift strategy. In this strategy, information is combined
across successive trials: if the initially chosen object is rewarded then
the monkey chooses it again, otherwise switching to the alternative.
Following frontal-temporal disconnection this strategy is apparently
lost and performance returns to a level comparable to concurrent-pair
learning [69]. A second task variant similarly emphasizes integration
of information across successive task episodes. Now, each object
choice is followed by presentation of a second object, uniquely
associated with the particular object chosen. For example, choice of
object A is followed by W and then reward; choice of B by X and no
reward; in another concurrently-learned pair, C is followed by Y and
reward, D by Z and no reward and so on. As compared to a version
with an empty delay between choice and reward, the opportunity to
associate each possible choice with a unique following object (‘A
leads to W’) substantially improves performance in control animals.
Again, this improvement is absent following frontal-temporal dis-
connection [70].
Evidently, the need for frontal involvement in visual tasks is not
predicted by simple task difficulty. Instead, frontal involvement is
crucial when visual information must be combined across successive
task epochs, or passed from one stage to the next of a sequential
mental program [69–71].
Review
Trends in Cognitive Sciences Vol.14 No.4
176

multi-step behaviour, with selective focus on many kinds of
task-relevant information, and rapid transitions between
different, largely independent processing states as succes-
sive task steps unfold. Complementing these conclusions
are recent lesion studies in the monkey (Box 1), showing
that, when prefrontal and temporal cortex are discon-
nected, deﬁcits are predicted not only by task difﬁculty,
but by a requirement to integrate visual information across
successive task epochs.
MD activity in new task assembly
As a new task is learned, its components must be ident-
iﬁed, separated and assembled. The ability to learn and
use the multiple rules of novel, complex behaviour is
strongly correlated with ﬂuid intelligence [51,52]. In
extreme cases, failure is manifest in ‘goal neglect’ [51];
although the subject might correctly describe the different
task components, one component is lost in actual beha-
viour. Similar mismatch between knowledge and beha-
viour has long been described in frontal lobe patients
[20,53]. Goal neglect is closely linked to task complexity;
as the instructions for a new task are received, and the
number of task components increases, the probability of
success in adding each new component declines. The
results indicate limits on some process of differentiating
and maintaining separate, functionally effective parts of a
novel task plan.
A recent fMRI study [54] shows what happens in the
brain as new task instructions are received. In this exper-
iment, each task rule (Figure 4a) was described in a
separate instruction screen, presented for 20 s with a delay
of 10 s between each instruction and the next. Time-course
analysis asked which brain regions show phasic activity as
each new instruction is processed. In line with the visual
and linguistic demands of written instructions, extensive
activity was seen in occipital cortex, extending especially
on the left into the temporal lobe (Figure 4b). Strong phasic
activity was also seen, however, in parts of the MD net-
work, in particular the IFS, IPS and pre-SMA. Accompa-
nying this phasic activity was a broader pattern of shift in
the return to baseline that followed each instruction:
across most or all regions of the MD network, baseline
activity
increased
with
increasing
task
complexity,
approaching an asymptote following the second or third
rule. Reﬂecting this asymptotic increase, baseline activity
was higher for rules speciﬁed after several other rules
(Figure 4b, full instructions) than for the same rules speci-
ﬁed alone (Figure 4b, reduced instructions). One hypoth-
esis is that, across the MD system, sustained activity
reﬂects the total complexity of the currently maintained
task plan. Smaller activity changes for later rules might
reﬂect the weaker impact or representation of these rules.
Whether or not this is so, the results show strong MD
involvement in new task assembly.
In many ways, the problems of standard ﬂuid intelli-
gence tests resemble novel task instructions. The matrix
problem of Figure 4c (left), for example, instructs several
separate task components or cognitive operations, calling
for separate processing of object shape, colour and size.
Problems with only one such component (Figure 4c, right)
seem trivial by comparison [55], implying, as in the goal
neglect experiments, a similar limit in separating and
assembling multiple task parts. In problems of this sort,
frontal and parietal activity is sensitive to the number of
varying dimensions [56]. As noted earlier, useful division of
a task into independently soluble sub-parts is perhaps the
central challenge of all problem-solving systems [18,57],
and MD activity is strong when problem materials are
organized into novel sub-units or chunks [58]. In large part,
the role of MD regions in separation and assembly of task
parts might explain their importance in ﬂuid intelligence.
Conclusions and open questions
The importance of frontal lobe processes in complex,
sequential activity has long been recognized [20,21]. Sym-
bolic artiﬁcial intelligence has shown how complex, goal-
directed behaviour is achieved through sequential mental
programming, or dividing complex problems into com-
ponent sub-problems. With the ascendancy of parallel,
neural network models, interest in sequential mental pro-
gramming has been somewhat in abeyance. Much work has
addressed isolated acts of cognitive control, such as atten-
tional bias or response inhibition [12,13]. Less work has
considered processes required to build complex, multi-step
behaviour.
Questions of sequential mental programming, however,
could be central to understanding of MD function, and its
role in ﬂuid intelligence. The MD system is deﬁned by
common brain activity in tasks of many different kinds. In
all tasks, the goal is achieved by a series of focused stages
or sub-tasks. In lateral prefrontal cortex, neural properties
are well adapted for construction and control of such sub-
tasks, with focus on the speciﬁc content of a current
cognitive operation, rapid reorganization with changing
context, and robust separation of successive task stages.
When a new, complex task is learned, its different parts
must be separated and assembled; this process engages
strong MD activity, and is closely linked to ﬂuid intelli-
gence.
These ideas, of course, provide only a beginning, and
many open questions remain. In large part, the single cell
data I have reviewed come from recordings in the posterior
part of the lateral prefrontal cortex. Although plausibly
there is some homology with MD activity in the poster-
olateral frontal cortex of the human brain, more detailed
comparisons are needed across species. Similarly, there is
a relative lack of single cell data from possible homologues
of other MD regions. Work is needed to identify these
regions in the monkey, and to study their neural properties
in more depth.
As outlined earlier, several different methods deﬁne
very similar MD patterns (Figure 1). As illustrated in
Figures 3 and 4, data from many different kinds of exper-
iment can be effectively analysed using simple, spherical
regions of interest (ROIs) deﬁned around a ﬁxed set of peak
coordinates. At the same time, there is clear evidence that
the deﬁnition of MD regions can be improved. In Figure 3,
for example, whole brain data indicate peak parietal
activity that curves above and around the spherical IPS
ROI. On the lateral frontal surface, whole brain analyses
often show activity spreading both anterior and posterior
to the IFS ROI. Although there are obvious attractions to
Review
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
Vol.14 No.4
177

using ﬁxed, a priori ROIs, it seems probable that, for this
purpose, ROIs can be improved over those currently avail-
able.
In fMRI, the different components of the MD system are
commonly activated together. Usually, the parts of the
system appear to work together in assembly and use of a
mental program. Their very different connectivity, however,
indicates a strong likelihood of different processing roles.
The fMRI literature contains a variety of interesting sugges-
tions concerning specialization of function within the MD
network. One inﬂuential proposal concerns different roles
for anterior cingulate and lateral prefrontal cortex, the
former serving to detect cognitive conﬂict, and the latter
responding with increased cognitive control [59]. Some-
times,theanteriorcingulateindeedshowsaphasicresponse
toincreasedconﬂict,whereaslateralprefrontalcortexshows
tonically increased activity in anticipation of a demanding
decision [60]; at the same time, phasic responses during
demanding trials can certainly be seen in the lateral pre-
frontal cortex [61,62], and tonic responses in the anterior
cingulate [5,63]. Dosenbach et al. [5,64] have recently pro-
posed a rather different separation with RPFC, AI/FO and
pre-SMA/ACC linked to tonic maintenance of task set, and
IFS/IPS more associated with on-line processing of speciﬁc
task events. Again, the distinction ﬁnds some supporting
data, in particular the association of RPFC with more sus-
tained aspects of task preparationand performance([65,66];
see also weak phasic responses in Figures 3 and 4). In
different task contexts, however, most MD regions can show
either strong phasic or strong tonic activity (see e.g. [54]).
On theoretical grounds we can distinguish several
requirements in assembly and use of a mental program.
One is construction of the current task step, with focus on
onlythoseoperationsthatthissteprequires.Toachievesuch
focus, MD systems must interface with the many separate
brain systems executing speciﬁc cognitive operations, for
example identiﬁcation of a speciﬁc visual object, or retrieval
of speciﬁc facts from memory. A second requirement is a
signal for successful completion of the current step and
transition to the next; reminiscent of the ‘test’ component
in the TOTE architecture of Miller et al. [67]. Such a success
signal might be built upon brain processes more generally
concerned with reward, perhaps linking to the autonomic
functions of AI/FO and ACC. While one component of a
complex task executes, others must be kept latent for later
use; interface between active and latent task components
has been proposed as a core function of RPFC [68].
More work is needed to develop such ideas. At present,
fMRI data are clear in deﬁning the MD pattern, but much
less clear in deﬁning the separate functions of its com-
ponents. Meanwhile, I suggest, the needs of sequential
mental programming provide a critical perspective on
the control functions of the frontoparietal cortex. The
essential function of the MD system might lie in separ-
ating, organizing, storing and controlling the parts of
complex, intelligent mental activity.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by Medical Research Council (UK) intramural
program U.1055.01.001.00001.01. Russell Thompson provided expert
assistance with ﬁgures, in particular data preparation for Figure 3.
References
1 Duncan, J. and Owen, A.M. (2000) Common regions of the human
frontal lobe recruited by diverse cognitive demands. Trends Neurosci.
23, 475–483
2 Duncan, J. (2006) Brain mechanisms of attention. Q. J. Exp. Psychol.
59, 2–27
3 Fox, M.D. et al. (2005) The human brain is intrinsically organized into
dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.
S. A. 102, 9673–9678
4 Seeley, W.W. et al. (2007) Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks
for salience processing and executive control. J. Neurosci. 27, 2349–
2356
5 Dosenbach, N.U. et al. (2006) A core system for the implementation of
task sets. Neuron 50, 799–812
6 Cole, M.W. and Schneider, W. (2007) The cognitive control network:
Integrated cortical regions with dissociable functions. Neuroimage 37,
343–360
7 Cattell, R.B. (1971) Abilities: Their structure, growth and action,
Houghton-Mifﬂin
8 Prabhakaran, V. et al. (1997) Neural substrates of ﬂuid reasoning: An
fMRI study of neocortical activation during performance of the Raven’s
Progressive Matrices Test. Cognit. Psychol. 33, 43–63
9 Duncan, J. et al. (2000) A neural basis for general intelligence. Science
289, 457–460
10 Bishop,
S.J.
et
al.
(2008)
COMT
val158met
genotype
affects
recruitment of neural mechanisms supporting ﬂuid intelligence.
Cereb. Cortex 18, 2132–2140
11 Spearman, C. (1927) The abilities of man, Macmillan
12 Aron, A.R. et al. (2004) Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 8, 170–177
13 Desimone, R. and Duncan, J. (1995) Neural mechanisms of selective
visual attention. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 193–222
14 Miller, E.K. and Cohen, J.D. (2001) An integrative theory of prefrontal
cortex function. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 24, 167–202
15 Penﬁeld, W. and Evans, J. (1935) The frontal lobe in man: A clinical
study of maximum removals. Brain 58, 115–133
16 Newell, A. et al. (1958) Elements of a theory of human problem solving.
Psychol. Rev. 65, 151–166
17 Newell, A. et al. (1962) The processes of creative thinking. In
Contemporary approaches to creative thinking (Gruber, H.E. et al.,
eds), pp. 63–119, Atherton Press
18 Newell, A. (1990) Uniﬁed theories of cognition, Harvard University
Press
19 Anderson,
J.R.
(1983)
The
architecture
of
cognition,
Harvard
University Press
20 Luria, A.R. (1966) Higher cortical functions in man, Tavistock
21 Fuster, J.M. (1989) The prefrontal cortex: Anatomy, physiology, and
neuropsychology of the frontal lobe, (2nd edn), Raven
22 Shallice, T. (1982) Speciﬁc impairments of planning. Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. Lond., B, Biol. Sci. 298, 199–209
23 Spector, L. and Grafman, J. (1994) Planning, neuropsychology, and
artiﬁcial
Intelligence:
Cross-fertilization.
In
Handbook
of
Neuropsychology (Boller, F. and Grafman, J., eds), pp. 377–392,
Elsevier
24 Everling, S. et al. (2002) Filtering of neural signals by focused attention
in the monkey prefrontal cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 5, 671–676
25 Kusunoki, M. et al. (2009) Detection of ﬁxed and variable targets in the
monkey prefrontal cortex. Cereb. Cortex 19, 2535–2547
26 Kusunoki, M. et al. Target detection by opponent coding in monkey
prefrontal cortex. J. Cogn. Neurosci. (in press)
27 Sigala, N. et al. (2008) Hierarchical coding for sequential task events in
the monkey prefrontal cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 105,
11969–11974
28 Freedman, D.J. et al. (2001) Categorical representation of visual
stimuli in the primate prefrontal cortex. Science 291, 312–316
29 Sakagami, M. and Niki, H. (1994) Encoding of behavioral signiﬁcance
of visual stimuli by primate prefrontal neurons: Relation to relevant
task conditions. Exp. Brain Res. 97, 423–436
30 Rainer, G.A.W.F. and Miller, E.K. (1998) Selective representation of
relevant information by neurons in the primate prefrontal cortex.
Nature 393, 577–579
31 Asaad, W.F. et al. (2000) Task-speciﬁc neural activity in the primate
prefrontal cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 84, 451–459
Review
Trends in Cognitive Sciences Vol.14 No.4
178

32 Procyk, E. et al. (2000) Anterior cingulate activity during routine and
non-routine sequential behaviors in macaques. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 502–
508
33 Mizuhiki, T. et al. (2007) Mode changes in activity of single neurons in
anterior
insular
cortex
across
trials
during
multi-trial
reward
schedules. Neurosci. Res. 57, 587–591
34 Caselli, L. et al. (2004) Posterior parietal cortex and the control of non-
spatial attention, In Program No. 331.4. Abstract Viewer/Itinerary
Planner, Society for Neuroscience, (Washington DC)
35 Hon, N. et al. (2006) Frontoparietal activity with minimal decision and
control. J. Neurosci. 26, 9805–9809
36 Downar, J. et al. (2001) The effect of task relevance on the cortical
response to changes in visual and auditory stimuli: an event-related
fMRI study. Neuroimage 14, 1256–1267
37 Thompson, R. and Duncan, J. (2009) Attentional modulation of
stimulus
representation
in
human
fronto-parietal
cortex.
Neuroimage 48, 436–448
38 Downar, J. et al. (2000) A multimodal cortical network for the detection
of changes in the sensory environment. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 277–283
39 Haynes, J.D. and Rees, G. (2006) Decoding mental states from brain
activity in humans. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 523–534
40 Li, S. et al. (2007) Flexible coding for categorical decisions in the human
brain. J. Neurosci. 27, 12321–12330
41 Haynes, J.D. et al. (2007) Reading hidden intentions in the human
brain. Curr. Biol. 17, 323–328
42 Watanabe,
M.
(1986)
Prefrontal
unit
activity
during
delayed
conditional go/no-go discrimination in the monkey. I. Relation to the
stimulus. Brain Res. 382, 1–14
43 Rao, S.C. et al. (1997) Integration of what and where in the primate
prefrontal cortex. Science 276, 821–824
44 Rigotti, M. et al. (2007) The importance of neural diversity in complex
cognitive tasks, In Program No. 929.3. Abstract viewer/Itinerary
planner, Society for Neuroscience, (Washington DC)
45 Wood, J.N. and Grafman, J. (2003) Human prefrontal cortex:
processing and representational perspectives. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 4,
139–147
46 Vaadia, E. et al. (1995) Dynamics of neuronal interactions in monkey
cortex in relation to behavioural events. Nature 373, 515–518
47 Abeles, M. et al. (1995) Cortical activity ﬂips among quasi-stationary
states. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 92, 8616–8620
48 Sakamoto, K. et al. (2008) Discharge synchrony during the transition of
behavioral
goal
representations
encoded
by
discharge
rates
of
prefrontal neurons. Cereb. Cortex 18, 2036–2045
49 Jung, M.W. et al. (1998) Firing characteristics of deep layer neurons in
prefrontal cortex in rats performing spatial working memory tasks.
Cereb. Cortex 8, 437–450
50 Lapish, C.C. et al. (2008) Successful choice behavior is associated with
distinct and coherent network states in anterior cingulate cortex. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 105, 11963–11968
51 Duncan, J. et al. (1996) Intelligence and the frontal lobe: The
organization of goal-directed behavior. Cognit. Psychol. 30, 257–303
52 Duncan, J. et al. (2008) Goal neglect and Spearman’s g: Competing
parts of a complex task. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 137, 131–148
53 Milner, B. (1963) Effects of different brain lesions on card sorting. Arch.
Neurol. 9, 90–100
54 Dumontheil, I. et al. Assembly and use of new task rules in the
frontoparietal cortex. J. Cogn. Neurosci. (in press)
55 Carpenter, P.A. et al. (1990) What one intelligence test measures: A
theoretical account of the processing in the Raven Progressive Matrices
Test. Psychol. Rev. 97, 404–431
56 Christoff, K. et al. (2001) Rostrolateral prefrontal cortex involvement in
relational integration during reasoning. Neuroimage 14, 1136–1149
57 Sacerdoti, E.D. (1974) Planning in a hierarchy of abstraction spaces.
Artif. Intell. 5, 115–135
58 Bor, D. et al. (2003) Encoding strategies dissociate prefrontal activity
from working memory demand. Neuron 37, 361–367
59 Botvinick, M. et al. (2001) Conﬂict monitoring and cognitive control.
Psychol. Rev. 108, 624–652
60 MacDonald, A.W. et al. (2000) Dissociating the role of the dorsolateral
prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex in cognitive control. Science
288, 1835–1838
61 Dove, A. et al. (2000) Prefrontal cortex activation in task switching: An
event-related fMRI study. Cogn. Brain Res. 9, 103–109
62 Luks, T.L. et al. (2002) Evidence for anterior cingulate cortex
involvement in monitoring preparatory attentional set. Neuroimage
17, 792–802
63 Ford, K.A. et al. (2005) Neural processes associated with antisaccade
task
performance
investigated
with
event-related
FMRI.
J.
Neurophysiol. 94, 429–440
64 Dosenbach, N.U. et al. (2007) Distinct brain networks for adaptive and
stable task control in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104,
11073–11078
65 Braver, T.S. et al. (2003) Neural mechanisms of transient and
sustained cognitive control during task switching. Neuron 39, 713–726
66 Sakai, K. and Passingham, R.E. (2003) Prefrontal interactions reﬂect
future task operations. Nat. Neurosci. 6, 75–81
67 Miller, G.A. et al. (1960) Plans and the structure of behavior, Holt
Rinehart and Winston
68 Koechlin, E. et al. (1999) The role of the anterior prefrontal cortex in
human cognition. Nature 399, 148–151
69 Browning, P.G. et al. (2007) Frontal-temporal disconnection abolishes
object discrimination learning set in macaque monkeys. Cereb. Cortex
17, 859–864
70 Browning, P.G. and Gaffan, D. (2008) Prefrontal cortex function in the
representation of temporally complex events. J. Neurosci. 28, 3934–3940
71 Wilson,
C.R.
and
Gaffan,
D.
(2008)
Prefrontal-inferotemporal
interaction
is
not
always
necessary
for
reversal
learning.
J.
Neurosci. 28, 5529–5538
Review
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
Vol.14 No.4
179

