

Early Speculative Bubbles and
Increases in the Supply of Money
DOUGLAS E. FRENCH
Second Edition
MISES INSTITUTE

First edition ©1992 by Douglas E. French
Second edition © 2009 by the Ludwig von Mises Institute and published under the Creative Commons
Attribution License 3.0. http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/
Ludwig von Mises Institute
518 West Magnolia Avenue
Auburn, Alabama 36832
www.mises.org
ISBN: 978-1-933550-44-2

To Deanna,
for loving me through
the boom and the bust.

Table of Contents
Introduction
Chapter 1—The Greater Fool Theory
Chapter 2—Tulipmania
Chapter 3—Free Coinage, the Bank of Amsterdam, and Tulipmania
Chapter 4—John Law, Genius or Swindler
Chapter 5—John Law’s Monetary Theories
Chapter 6—The Mississippi Bubble
Chapter 7—The South Sea Bubble
Chapter 8—Increases in the Supply of Money, Speculative Bubbles, and the
Austrian Malinvestment Theory
Bibliography
Footnotes
Index

Introduction
As all the world economies writhe in financial pain from the cleansing of the
largest bubble in financial history, the question is being asked—how could this
happen? Of course the usual answers are trotted out—human greed, animal
spirits, criminal fraud, or capitalism itself. Modern financial history has been a
series of booms and busts that seem to blend together making one almost
indistinguishable from the next. The booms seduce even the most conservative
into taking what in retrospect appear to be outlandish risks speculating on
investment vehicles they know nothing about.
In response to the financial meltdown, central banks are slashing interest
rates to nearly zero and growing their balance sheets exponentially. With no
more room to lower rates, central bankers now speak of a “quantitative easing”
policy which in plain English means “creating money out of nowhere.” But no
one is shocked or horrified by this government counterfeiting. All this, after the
U.S. central bank—the Federal Reserve—has already, at this writing, increased
the M-2 money supply 11-fold ($686 billion to $8.2 trillion) since August of
1971 when the U.S. dollar’s last faint ties to gold were severed.
While history clearly shows that it is this very government meddling in
monetary affairs that leads to financial market booms and the inevitable busts
that follow, mainstream economists either deny that financial bubbles can occur
or claim that the “animal spirits” of market participants are to blame. Economists
running central banks even claim that it is impossible to identify asset bubbles.
Meanwhile, the Austrian School stands alone in pointing the finger at
government intervention in monetary affairs as the culprit.
Austrian economists Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich A. Hayek’s Austrian
business cycle theory provides the framework to explain speculative bubbles.

The Austrian theory points out that it is government’s increasing the supply of
money that serves to lower interest rates below the natural rate or the rate that
would be set by the collective time preferences of savers in the market.
Entrepreneurs react to these lower interest rates by investing in “higher order”
goods (e.g., factories and machinery) in the production chain, as opposed to
consumer goods.
Despite these actions by government, consumer time preferences remain the
same. There is no real increase in the demand for higher order goods and instead
of capital flowing into what the unfettered market would dictate—it flows into
malinvestment. The greater the monetary expansion, in terms of both time and
enormity, the longer the boom will be sustained.
But eventually there must be a recession or depression to liquidate not only
inefficient and unprofitable businesses, but malinvestments in speculation—
whether it is stocks, bonds, real estate, art, or tulip bulbs.
This book was my master’s thesis (with just a couple of slight changes and
additions) written under the direction of Murray Rothbard and it examines three
of the most famous boom and bust episodes in history. Government monetary
intervention, although different in each case, engendered each: Tulipmania, the
Mississippi Bubble, and the South Sea Bubble.
As the seventeenth century began, the Dutch were the driving force behind
European commerce. Amsterdam was the center of this trade and it was in this
vibrant economic atmosphere that tulipmania began in 1634 and climaxed in
February 1637. At the height of tulipmania, single tulip bulbs were bid to
extraordinary amounts with the Witte Croonen tulip bulb rising in price 26 times
in a month’s duration. But when the market crashed: “Substantial merchants
were reduced almost to beggary,” wrote Charles Mackay, “and many a
representative of a noble line saw the fortunes of his house ruined beyond
redemption.”1
In 1716, the French government was on the verge of bankruptcy and its
citizens were fed up with their government’s currency depreciation, recoinage

schemes and increased tax collections. The situation was ripe for the notorious
John Law’s monetary magic which was to “lighten the burden of the King and
the State in lowering the rate of interest” on France’s war debts and to increase
the supply of money to stimulate the French economy. Ultimately, the scheme,
which was the Mississippi Company, unraveled and an outraged French public
ultimately forced the Regent to place the once revered Law under house arrest.
While John Law was struggling to keep his Mississippi bubble inflated,
across the English Channel, a nearly bankrupt British government looked on
with envy, believing that Law was working a financial miracle. Sir John Blunt
followed Law’s example with his South Sea Company, which in exchange for
being granted monopoly rights to trade with South America, agreed to refinance
that government’s debt.
The company had no real assets, but that didn’t matter as speculators bid
the share price higher and higher, spawning the creation of dozens of other
“bubble companies.” The South Sea Company lobbied the British government to
pass a Bubble Act that would shut down these new companies that were
competing for investor capital. Ironically, it was the enforcement of that act that
burst the bubble with South Sea Company shares falling nearly 90 percent in
price.
Although these episodes occurred centuries ago, readers will find the events
eerily similar to today’s bubbles and busts: low interest rates, easy credit terms,
widespread public participation, bankrupt governments, price inflation, frantic
attempts by government to keep the booms going, and government bailouts of
companies after the crash.
Although we don’t know what the next asset bubble will be, we can only be
certain that the incessant creation of fiat money by government central banks
will serve to engender more speculative booms to lure investors into financial
ruin.

The Greater Fool Theory 1
Speculative bubbles have occurred throughout history. These episodes are
characterized by a continuous sharp rise in the price of a particular asset or group
of related assets, leading to further price increases driven by new speculators
seeking profits through even higher prices. These higher prices are driven by the
potential profits to be made through trading, rather than the earning capacity or
economic value of the asset. These speculative manias then come to abrupt and
dramatic endings, as expectations change and buyers quickly become sellers, in
mass. The consequences are often disastrous, with the ensuing crash inflicting
financial pain on the region or country involved. Euphoria turns to despair as the
mandatory readjustment that takes place in the economy creates massive worker
dislocation and great numbers of bankruptcies.
Contemporary economists’ views concerning speculative bubbles vary. The
Rational Expectations School questions whether speculative bubbles can happen
at all, given rational markets. Charles Kindleberger concisely gives the rational
expectations viewpoint:
Rational expectations theory holds that prices are formed within the limits
of available information by market participants using standard economic
models appropriate to the circumstances. As such, it is claimed, market
prices cannot diverge from fundamental values unless the information
proves to have been widely wrong. The theoretical literature uses the
assumption of the market having one mind and one purpose.1
History tells a different story, of course. Market speculators at various times
in history have bid up prices to extraordinary levels, not based upon fundamental

values, but with the expectation of selling the asset in question at an even higher
price and thus making a profit. This is sometimes referred to as the “greater fool
theory.”
John Maynard Keynes spends the whole of chapter 12 of The General
Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money discussing speculation and bubbles,
pointing to five factors which foster these episodes: (1) neophyte investors
owning an increased proportion of capital investment; (2) the day-to-day price
fluctuations having an excessive influence over the market; (3) violent changes
in the mass psychology of ignorant individuals changing asset valuations; (4)
professional investors devoting their skills to “anticipating what average opinion
expects the average opinion to be;” and (5) confidence, or lack of, in the credit
markets.2
Keynes metaphorically describes speculative markets:
Nor is it necessary that anyone should keep his simple faith in the
conventional basis of valuation having any genuine long-term validity. For
it is, so to speak, a game of Snap, of Old Maid, of Musical Chairs—a
pastime in which he is victor who says Snap neither too soon nor too late,
who passes the Old Maid to his neighbor before the game is over, who
secures a chair for himself when the music stops.3
Keynes also touches upon the consequences of speculative bubbles and
manias:
Speculators may do no harm as bubbles on a steady stream of enterprise.
But the position is serious when enterprise becomes the bubble on a
whirlpool of speculation. When the capital development of a country
becomes a by-product of the activities of a casino, the job is likely to be ill-
done.4

Ironically, it is due to a Keynesian economic policy and its monetary
apparatus, i.e., that of expanding the supply of money to increase economic
activity, that speculative price bubbles and manias are engendered. This was
exemplified by John Law, whose system (driven by a huge increase in the supply
of money) created the Mississippi Bubble in France. Law, who preceded Keynes
by two hundred years, held many of the same views as Keynes. As Charles Rist
explains:
It is said that history repeats itself. One can say the same thing about
economists. At the present time there is a writer whose ideas have been
repeated since Keynes, without ever being cited by name. He is called John
Law. I would be curious to know how many, among the Anglo-Saxon
authors who have found again, all by themselves, his principal arguments,
have taken the trouble to read him.5
However, there are economists who do not feel the episode in early
eighteenth century France was a bubble. As Peter Garber writes:
That Law’s promised expansion never materialized does not imply that a
bubble occurred in the modern sense of the word. After all, this was not the
last time that a convincing economic idea would fracture in practice. One
respectable group of modern economists or another have described
Keynesian economics, supply side economics, monetarism, fixed exchange
rate regimes, floating exchange rate regimes, and the belief in rational
expectations in asset markets as disastrously flawed policy schemes.
Indeed, elements of the first three were primary components in Law’s
scheme.6
Other contemporary economists pursue the explanation of speculative
bubbles through mathematical formulas. It is not surprising that this search for

empirical evidence has produced nothing that aids in our understanding of these
episodes. The tools of econometrics were designed to explain the movement of
lifeless particles, not the activities of humans, who act with purpose to improve
their condition in life. In an article by Robert Flood and Robert Hodrick, it is
pointed out that “academic economists conducted relatively little formal
empirical analysis of actual markets until recently, probably because economist’s
analytical and statistical tools were inadequate.”7 Messrs. Flood and Hodrick go
on to pursue the case that “the widespread adoption of the rational expectations
hypothesis provided the required underpinning for theoretical and empirical
study of the issues.”8 But, as was pointed out above, those in the Rational
Expectations School, through their belief that all market participants can foretell
the future, and thus only act rationally, virtually rule out the potential for
speculative bubbles. Unsurprisingly, after surveying the current empirical
literature concerning bubbles, they come to the conclusion that “the current
empirical tests for bubbles do not successfully establish the case that bubbles
exist in asset prices.”9
This present volume contends, based upon historical experience, that
speculative bubbles do occur and that these bubbles are precipitated by a large
increase in the supply of money. This monetary intervention creates situations
that manifest themselves in malinvestment, i.e., speculative bubbles. What then
follows is the required period of readjustment, i.e., crash and depression. This
sequence of events is similar to the Minsky/Kindleberger sequence of events that
characterize stock market booms and busts, as outlined by Antoin Murphy:
1. The market rise starts off because of some exogenous shock such as war, the
end of a war, a technological or natural resource discovery, or “a debt
conversion that precipitously lowers interest rates.” The shock creates new
opportunities for profit, and a boom is engendered.
2. The boom is nurtured by an expansion of bank credit which expands the
money supply. Alternatively, the velocity of circulation increases.

3. As increased demand pushes up the prices of goods and financial assets,
new profit opportunities are found and confidence grows in the economy.
Multiplier and accelerator effects interact and the economy enters into a
“boom or euphoric state.” At this point overtrading may take place.
4. Overtrading may involve:
a. Pure speculation, that is over-emphasis on the acquisition of assets for
capital gain rather than income return;
b. Overestimation of prospective returns by companies;
c. Excessive gearing involving the imposition of low cash requirements
on the acquisition of financial assets through buying on margin, by
installment purchases, and so on.
5. When the neophytes, attracted by the prospect of large capital gains for a
small outlay, become numerous in the market, the activity assumes a
separate abnormal momentum of its own. Insiders recognize the danger
signals and move out of securities into money.
6. A financial distress period sets in as the neophytes become aware that if
there is a rush for liquidity prices will collapse. The race to move out of
securities gathers pace.
7. Revulsion against securities develops as banks start calling in loans and
selling collateral.
8. Panic sets in as the market collapses and the question arises as to whether
the government or Central Bank should come in and act as a lender of last
resort in what has been recently described as a “lifeboat operation.”10
Help in accounting for how speculative bubbles are initiated comes to us
from the Austrian School. The Austrian trade cycle theory serves to shed a bright
light on how boom-bust business cycles are created, with speculative bubbles
many times being an offshoot from these business-cycle booms.
The Austrian view of the trade cycle begins with the view that, in a market
economy, entrepreneurs serve as forecasters, predicting what consumers will
want in the future. After determining future wants, they set about the task of

organizing and implementing the factors of production in the present, so that the
product will be available when the consumers demand it, at a price sufficient for
the entrepreneur to reap a profit.
What happens in a bust and the subsequent depression is that a
preponderance of entrepreneurs have predicted in error and go bankrupt. Why is
there this cluster of entrepreneurial errors? The answer lies not in examining the
bust, but the boom that leads up to the crisis.
The boom-bust cycle begins with a monetary intervention into the economy.
In the modern world, this occurs by way of the banking system’s excessive issue
of credit. This increase in what Mises called “fiduciary media,” or unbacked
banknotes or deposits, serves to reduce interest rates, and sends the false signal
to entrepreneurs that consumers have changed their consumption/investment mix
to one of greater investment and less consumption. Businessmen then invest this
increased amount of money in capital goods, shifting resources away from
consumer goods.
Prices and wages are then bid up in capital goods industries, but as this new
money 
trickles 
down 
to 
consumers, 
their 
“time 
preferences,” 
or
consumption/investment mixes, have not actually changed, thus there is no
increase in demand for the now abundant capital goods. The increased supply of
unwanted capital goods, or malinvestment, must then be liquidated. This
liquidation is then followed by a recession or depression, which is the economy’s
healing period, serving to reallocate the factors of production to more productive
and efficient ways of satisfying customer wants.11
What also must be considered, when searching for what creates an
environment from which speculative bubbles can emerge, is that age old
question: What is the right amount of money for any given economy? Is more
money beneficial for an economy? Does more money constitute more wealth? If
more money is beneficial, then would not all the new money be channeled into
production investment? David Hume explains what money is, and is not:

Money is not, properly speaking, one of the subjects of commerce; but only
the instrument which men have agreed upon to facilitate the exchange of
one commodity for another. It is none of the wheels of trade: It is the oil
which renders the motion of the wheels more smooth and easy.12
Money is useful only for its exchange-value, thus an increase in the supply
of money, as Murray Rothbard indicates, “does not— unlike other goods—confer
a social benefit.”13 Thus, if there is more money produced in an economy, its
price will drop, making all other goods, which money is traded for, more
expensive, in money terms.
The supply of money in the free market is determined by the market. So if
gold is the money in a particular economy, the market will decide the amount of
gold that will be produced for use as money. All of the gold that is mined will
not be demanded by the market for use as money. Some of the precious metal
would be channeled toward jewelry or industrial uses. But if by government
mandate all gold is coined, even though the market does not demand it, the effect
of this over-supply of money will lead to the same malinvestments as an increase
in fiduciary media.14
Three different speculative bubbles will be explored in this volume. The
first is Tulipmania, which occurred in 1634–37 in Amsterdam. The Tulipmania
episode was spurred by the enormous influx of silver, and to a lesser extent, gold
specie into Amsterdam. This influx was the result of free coinage laws, the
stability of the Bank of Amsterdam, increased trade, and the Dutch Navy’s
success on the high seas at confiscating treasure.
Next, is a discussion about the life and theories of perhaps the world’s first
inflationist, John Law and the bubble that he directly engineered, the Mississippi
Bubble. Law viewed paper money, and in fact stocks, bonds, or any other
financial instruments as superior to gold or silver money. Law, like so many after
him, also felt that low interest rates and more money were essential for a healthy,
thriving economy. Law was to fuel the speculation in Mississippi Company

shares with enormous amounts of banknotes before the house of paper finally
collapsed. The South Sea Bubble, which occurred almost simultaneously with
the Mississippi Bubble, was an attempt to mirror Law’s system, refinancing
government debt with the shares of the South Sea Company. This company,
whose share price was to rise ten-fold, had no real assets and could only make a
profit from a large increase in the price of its stock. The share price increase was
aided with increased bank loans and other credit.
In conclusion, these three episodes shall be viewed in the context of the
Austrian theory of malinvestment. What will also be considered are the
prospects for the continued occurrence of speculative bubbles and the inevitable
crashes that follow, given fiat banking and the presence of ubiquitous central
banks waiting to prolong any boom and prop up any inevitable bust.

Tulipmania 2
“Tulipmania” has come to be virtually a metaphor in the economics field. When
one looks up Tulipmania in The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, a
discussion of the seventeenth century Dutch speculative mania will not be found.
The author, Guillermo Calvo, instead defines tulipmania as: “situations in which
some prices behave in a way that appears not to be fully explainable by
economic ‘fundamentals’.”1 Calvo then goes on to use mathematical models to
discuss “equilibria that may resemble tulipmanias, but which are consistent with
standard demand-supply analysis under the assumption of Perfect Foresight or
Rational Expectations.”
Brown University economist Peter Garber has written extensively about
Tulipmania. Garber’s article, “Tulipmania,” sought to explore the fundamentals
of the Amsterdam tulip market in 1634–37.2 After a cursory review of the
historical accounts of Tulipmania, centering for the most part on the seven pages
Charles Mackay devoted to the subject in Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular
Delusions and the Madness of Crowds, Garber initiates a discussion of the tulip
and tulip markets of 1634 Holland. He begins by dispensing information on the
nature of the tulip.
The tulip, being a bulb flower, can reproduce either by seed or through buds
formed on female bulbs. The buds can reproduce another bulb if properly
cultivated, the most effective method of reproduction being that of asexual
reproduction through buds. The flowers of the tulip appear in April and May,
and are only in bloom for about a week. The bulbs can be removed from the
ground in June, but must be replanted again by September.
The extraordinary patterns some tulips display is caused by a mosaic virus.
These patterns cannot be duplicated by seed reproduction; it is only by

cultivating the effected buds into new bulbs that duplication can occur. The seeds
produce only common flowers that later succumb to the virus creating new
patterns. The downside to the virus is that it subdues the rate of reproduction.
Thus, those tulips with more exotic patterns, were slower to reproduce, making
them more scarce and valuable than common, uninfected bulbs.3
Garber’s discussion of the bulb market begins with the assertion that this
market was limited to professional growers until late 1634, when speculators
entered the market, driven by high demand for bulbs in France. Rare bulbs were
traded as “piece” goods by weight, with the weight standard being an aas, about
one-twentieth of a gram. Common bulbs traded in standard units of 1,000 azen
or one pound (9,728 azen in Haarlem, 10,240 azen in Amsterdam), with
contracts not referring to specific bulbs.
Given the growing season mentioned above, the tulip market was a futures
market from September to June. Garber indicates that formal futures markets
began in 1636, and were the primary vehicle for trading in bulbs until February
1637, when the market collapsed.4 In the summer of 1636, trading of futures
took place in taverns, in groups called “colleges,” with few rules restricting
bidding and fees. Buyers were required to put up a small fraction of the
contracted amount of each deal for “wine money.” Otherwise, Garber indicates,
there was no margin required by either buyer or seller. On settlement date,
buyers did not typically have the required cash to settle the trade, but the sellers
did not have the bulbs to deliver either. Thus, the trade was settled with only a
payment of the difference between the contract and settlement price being
expected. Contracts were not repeatedly marked to the market; thus, when the
market collapsed, gross positions, rather than net, had to be unwound.
With the market collapse in February 1637, no bulbs were delivered under
the deals consummated by the new futures market. Bulbs could not be delivered
until June. Garber says that it is unclear as to the settlement date and price for
these transactions. It would appear that some sort of standard price was
developed, based upon the price that the majority of trades settled at.

Rare bulbs began to trade at increasingly higher prices in 1635. However, it
was November 1636 before the speculation in the common bulbs began. N.W.
Posthumus said the following concerning the timing of events:
I think the sequence of events may be seen as follows. At the end of 1634,
the new non-professional buyers came into action. Towards the middle of
1635, prices rose rapidly, while people could buy on credit, generally
delivering at once some article of value; at the same time the sale per aas
was introduced. About the middle of 1636, the colleges appeared; and soon
thereafter the trade in non-available bulbs was started, while in November
of the same year the trade was extended to the common varieties, and bulbs
were sold by the thousand azen and per pound.5
In the next section of Garber’s “Tulipmania,” he graphs price data for
various types of bulbs, placing time on the horizontal axis (typically June 1636
through February 1637) and price (guilders or aas) on the vertical axis. All the
graphs reflect sharply ascending slopes, at various degrees; six out of eight
graphs reflect prices exploding upward to February 5, 1637 and plunging
downward that same day. The graph for the Gouda bulb indicates its price
peaked on January 29 and crashed on February 5 as with the other bulbs. The
other graph, for the Semper Augustus bulb, reflects price information on a yearly
scale and shows the peak price occurring in 1637.6
After the market crashed in the first week of February, a delegation of
florists in Amsterdam on February 24th made the proposal that tulip sales
contracts consummated before November 30, 1636 should be executed, but that
transactions occurring after that date could be rescinded by the buyer upon
payment of 10 percent of the sales price to the seller. However, the Dutch
authorities came up with their own plan on April 27: to suspend all contracts.
Thus, sellers could then sell contracted bulbs at the market prices during this
suspension. Buyers were then responsible for the difference between this market

price and the settlement price decided by the authorities. By doing this, growers
were released to market bulbs to be exhumed that June. Garber goes on to
explain that the disposition of further contracts is not clear, but the example of
the city of Haarlem’s solution is cited from Posthumus, which permitted buyers
to cancel contracts upon payment of 31/2 percent of the contract price.7
After a discussion of eighteenth-century tulip and hyacinth prices, along
with modern bulb prices, Garber looks to answer the question: “Was This
Episode a ‘Tulipmania’?”8 He responds to the issue that many works written
about the economic history of seventeenth century Holland make just the
slightest reference or no reference at all to Tulipmania by making the accurate
point that, given the short duration of the mania, it had little effect on Holland’s
allocation of resources. Remember that bulbs must be planted by September and
cannot be removed until June. Thus, at the apex of the bubble, November 1636
through January 1637, it was too late to plant more bulbs. Garber also contends
that, in spite of the crash in tulip bulb prices, little wealth was transferred given
that only small settlements were required on contracts.9 This author questions
this view that there was no financial pain felt from the crash. Other sources that
will be explored later indicate that bankruptcies doubled in Amsterdam in 1637–
38, a period immediately following the crash.
Garber comes to the conclusion that, “the bulb speculation was not obvious
madness, at least for most of the 1634–37 “mania.”10 Only the last month of the
speculation for common bulbs remains a potential bubble.” Indeed, the price of
the common bulb, the Witte Croonen, rose by approximately 26 times in January
1637, and subsequently fell to one-twentieth of its peak price the first week in
February 1637.11
Economic historian Charles P. Kindleberger has written extensively on
manias and bubbles. His book, Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of
Financial Crises, is considered among the definitive books on the subject.12 But
Tulipmania, despite being a modern day metaphor for mania, is given but scant

mention in a footnote, as follows:
Manias such as the Lubeck crises 100 years earlier, or the tulip mania of
1634 are too isolated and lack the characteristic monetary features that
come with the spread of banking after the opening of the eighteenth century.
Peter Garber has dealt at length with the tulip mania. He distinguishes a
“bubble” from ordinary economic fluctuations: the latter are determined by
“fundamentals,” while the former deviates from the set of prices that
fundamentals would call for. In the tulip mania, which he suggests was not
a bubble, the fundamental accounting for the enormous rise of some tulip
prices was the difficulty of producing them.13
In A Financial History of Western Europe, Kindleberger refers to tulip
mania as “probably the high watermark in bubbles,” yet only devotes five lines
to the subject in the entire book.14 Judging by his treatment of the subject, it
would appear that Kindleberger, one of today’s most noted mainstream
economic historians, places little historical importance on the events in
Amsterdam in 1634–37. The reason for Kindleberger’s slight is found in the
footnote referenced above, in particular: “lack the characteristic monetary
features that come with the spread of banking in the eighteenth century.”
Kindleberger devotes chapter 4 of Manias, Panics, and Crashes to monetary
expansion. He begins this chapter with the following:
Speculative manias gather speed through expansion of money and credit or
perhaps, in some cases, get started because of an initial expansion of money
and credit. One can look back at particular manias followed by crashes or
panics and see what went wrong.15
He then goes on to spend a couple of pages referencing various bubbles and
ensuing crashes, all of which were created by monetary expansion.

However, Tulipmania is not mentioned for the obvious reason that
Kindleberger does not believe that an expansion of the supply of money in
Amsterdam created Tulipmania. Later in the same chapter, the Bank of
Amsterdam is talked about. The bank, at the time of Tulipmania, did not perform
credit operations, but only issued notes against deposits of specie. Thus, it’s
highly probable that, in Kindleberger’s view, the supply of money did not
undergo the sudden increase needed to create a speculative bubble. But in fact
the supply of money in Amsterdam had increased dramatically, and that is where
our story of Tulipmania begins.

Free Coinage, the Bank of
Amsterdam, and Tulipmania 3
After the fall of the Roman Empire, many different money systems prevailed
throughout Europe. Kings were eager to strike their own gold and silver coins.
These coins were typically made full legal tender at a ratio of value fixed by the
individual states. This supreme right of coinage was exercised and misused by
every sovereign in Europe. After the fall of Byzantium, the sacred images which
were struck on most coins disappeared. These sacred images had kept the
superstitious masses, not to mention states, from altering the coins. But, without
these sacred images, these gold and silver coins underwent numerous alterations,
to the point where it was difficult to follow either a coin’s composition or value.
This “sweating,” “clipping,” or “crying” of coins continued right up to the
beginning of the seventeenth century, with all of Europe’s various rulers being
guilty. These kings quickly found that an empty state treasury could be filled by
debasing the currency.
The powerful Charles V was among the most culpable for altering the value
of money. These alterations in the Netherlands came by monetary decree. In
1524, Charles raised the value of his gold coins from nine or ten, to eleven and
three-eighths times their weight in silver coins. This created immense
displeasure throughout the kingdom, so much that, in 1542, Charles returned to a
ratio of ten to one, not by lowering the value of his gold coins back to their value
before 1524, but by degrading his silver coins. Four years later, in 1546, Charles
struck again, suddenly raising the value of his gold coins to thirteen times the
value of silver coins. These actions served to first overvalue and then undervalue
gold in relation to its market value to silver,1 with the result being that the

overvalued money drove the undervalued money out of circulation. This
phenomenon is known as Gresham’s Law. A silver ducat went from 54 grains
fine down to 35 grains fine.2 Thus, with silver coins being the primary
circulating medium of Holland, this action reduced the value of the circulating
money supply by one-third from its value in 1523, and raised the value of gold
nearly 50 percent. By this device, Charles was able to replenish his dwindling
treasury.
This transgression, in 1546, writes Del Mar, may have been “the straw that
broke the patience of his long-suffering subjects.”3 A revolution was then
sparked in the Netherlands, and, although Charles was able to check any
upheaval during his reign, with the accession of Phillip the Bigot, the smoldering
revolutionary fires burst into intense flames. After the “Confederation of
Beggars” formed in 1566, six years later the revolution was proclaimed.
One of the first measures instigated by the revolutionary government was
“Free” or “individual” coinage. Helfferich explains:
The simplest and best-known special case of unrestricted transformation of
a metal into money is that known as “the right of free coinage,” or “coinage
for private account.” The State will mint coins out of any quantity of metal
delivered to it, either making no charge to the person delivering the metal,
or merely a very small charge to cover cost. The person delivering the metal
receives in coin from the mint the quantity of the metal delivered up by him
either without any deduction or with a very small deduction for
seigniorage.4
The idea of free coinage was brought to the Netherlands from the Dutch
East Indians, who inherited the concept from the Portuguese. The practice was
originated by the degenerate Moslem governments of India, and was copied by
Mascarenhas in 1555.5
Free coinage was an immediate success. Possessors of silver and gold

bullion obtained in America,
had vainly sought to evade the coinage exactions of the European princes;
now the door of escape was open; they had only to be sent to Holland,
turned into guilders and ducats, and credited as silver metal under the name
of sols banco.6
As the seventeenth century began, the Dutch were the driving force behind
European commerce. With Amsterdam as capital of Holland, it served as the
central point of trade. Amsterdam’s currency consisted primarily of the coins of
the neighboring countries and, to a lesser extent, its own coins. Many of these
foreign coins were worn and damaged, thus reducing the value of Amsterdam’s
currency about 9 percent below that of “the standard” or the legal tender. Thus, it
was impossible to infuse any new coins into circulation. Upon the circulation of
newly minted coins, these newly minted coins were collected, melted down and
exported as bullion. Their place in circulation was quickly taken by newly
imported “clipped” or “sweated” coins. Thus, undervalued money was driven
out by overvalued or degraded money, due to the legal tender status given these
degraded coins.7
To remedy this situation, the Bank of Amsterdam was originated in 1609.
The Bank was to facilitate trade, suppress usury, and have a monopoly on all
trading of specie. But the bank’s chief function was the withdrawal of abused
and counterfeit coin from circulation.8 Coins were taken in as deposits, with
credits, known as bank money issued against these deposits, based not on the
face value of the coins, but on the metal weight or intrinsic value of the coins.
Thus, a perfectly uniform currency was created. This feature of the new money,
along with its convenience, security and the City of Amsterdam’s guarantee,9
caused the bank money to trade at an agio, or premium over coins. The premium
varied (4 to 6¼ percent), but generally represented the depreciation rate of coin
below its nominal or face value.10

One of the services that the Bank provided was to transfer, upon order from
a depositor, sums (deposits) to the account of creditors by book entry. This is
called a giro banking operation. This service was so popular that the withdrawal
of deposits from the bank became a very rare occurrence. If a depositor wanted
to regain his specie, he could easily find a buyer for his bank money, at a
premium, due to its convenience. Additionally, there was a demand for bank
money from people not having an account with the Bank.11 As Adam Smith
related in the Wealth of Nations: “By demanding payment of the bank, the owner
of a bank credit would lose this premium.”12 The City of Amsterdam’s
guarantee, in addition to the requirement that all bills drawn upon or negotiated
in Amsterdam, in the amount of six hundred guilders or more, must be paid in
bank money, “took away all uncertainty in the value of the bills,” and thus forced
all merchants to keep an account at the bank, “which necessarily occasioned a
certain demand for bank money.”
Smith goes on to explain the mechanics of how the Bank of Amsterdam
issued bank money.13 The Bank would give credit (bank money) in its books for
gold and silver bullion deposited, at roughly 5 percent below the bullion’s then
current mint value. At the same time as this bank credit was issued, the depositor
would receive a receipt that entitled the depositor, or bearer, to draw the amount
of bullion deposited from the bank, within six months of the deposit. Thus, to
retrieve a bullion deposit, a person had to present to the bank: (1) a receipt for
the bullion, (2) an amount of bank money equal to the book entry, and (3)
payment of a ¼ percent fee for silver deposits, or 1/2 percent fee for gold
deposits. Should the six month term expire with no redemption, or without
payment of a fee to extend for an additional six months, “the deposit should
belong to the bank at the price at which it had been received, or which credit had
been given in the transfer books.” Thus, the bank would make the 5 percent fee
for warehousing the deposit, if it were not redeemed within the six-month time
frame. The higher fee charged for gold was due to the fact that gold was thought

to be riskier to warehouse, because of its higher value. A receipt for bullion was
rarely allowed to expire. When it did happen, more often than not, it was a gold
deposit because of its higher deposit fee.
This system created two separate instruments that were combined to create
an obligation of the Bank of Amsterdam. As Smith explains:
The person who by making a deposit of bullion obtains both a bank credit
and a receipt, pays his bills of exchange as they become due with his bank
credit; and either sells or keeps his receipt according as he judges that the
price of bullion is likely to rise or to fall. The receipt and the bank credit
seldom keep long together, and there is no occasion that they should. The
person who has a receipt, and who wants to take out bullion, finds always
plenty of bank credits, or bank money to buy at ordinary price; and the
person who has bank money, and wants to take out bullion, finds receipts
always in equal abundance.
    The holder of a receipt cannot draw out the bullion for which it is
granted, without re-assigning to the bank a sum of bank money equal to the
price at which the bullion had been received. If he has no bank money of
his own, he must purchase it of those who have it. The owner of bank
money cannot draw out bullion without producing to the bank receipts for
the quantity which he wants. If he has none of his own, he must buy them
of those who have them. The holder of a receipt, when he purchases bank
money, purchases the power of taking out a quantity of bullion, of which
the mint price is 5 percent, above the bank price. The agio of 5 percent,
therefore, which he commonly pays for it, is paid, not for an imaginary, but
for the real value. The owner of bank money, when he purchases a receipt,
purchases the power of taking out a quantity of bullion, of which the market
price is commonly from 2 to 3 percent, above the mint price. The price
which he pays for it, therefore, is paid likewise for a real value. The price of

the receipt, and the price of the bank money, compound or make up
between them the full value or price of the bullion.14
The same system that Smith describes above, also applied to coins that
were deposited with the bank. Smith does assert that deposits of coinage were
more likely to “fall to the bank” than deposits of bullion.15 Due to the high agio
(Smith indicates typically 5 percent) of bank money over common coin, the
paying of the bank’s six-month storage fee created a loss for holders of receipts.
The amount of bank money for which the receipts had expired, in relation
to the total amount of bank money was very small. Smith writes:
The bank of Amsterdam has for these many years past been the great
warehouse of Europe for bullion, for which the receipts are very seldom
allowed to expire or, as they express it, to fall to the bank. The far greater
part of the bank money, or of the credits upon the books of the bank, is
supposed to have been created, for these many years past, by such deposits
which the dealers in bullion are continually both making and
withdrawing.16
The bank was highly profitable for the city of Amsterdam. Besides the
aforementioned warehouse rent and sale of bank money for the agio, each new
depositor paid a fee of ten guilders to open an account. Any subsequent account
opened by that depositor would be subject to a fee of three guilders. Transfers
were subject to a fee of two guilders, except when the transfer was for less than
six hundred guilders. Then the fee was six guilders (to discourage small
transfers). Depositors were required to balance their accounts twice a year. If the
depositor failed to do this, he incurred a twenty-five guilder penalty. A fee of 3
percent was charged if a depositor ordered a transfer for more than the amount of
his account.17
In the beginning, the Bank of Amsterdam did not perform a credit function;

it was strictly a deposit bank, with all bank money backed 100 percent by specie.
The administration of the Bank of Amsterdam was the charge of a small
committee of city government officials. This committee kept the affairs of the
bank secret. Because of the secretive nature of its administration, it was not
generally known that individual depositors had been allowed to overdraw their
accounts as early as 1657. In later years, the Bank also began to make large loans
to the Dutch East India Company and the Municipality of Amsterdam. By 1790
word of these loans became public and the premium on bank money (usually 4
percent, but sometimes as high as 6¼ percent) disappeared and fell to a 2 percent
discount. By the end of that year, the Bank virtually admitted insolvency by
issuing a notice that silver would be sold to holders of bank money at a 10
percent discount. The City of Amsterdam took over the Bank in 1791 and
eventually closed it for good in December of 1819.18
The effects of free coinage, combined with the stability of the Bank of
Amsterdam, created the impetus that channeled the large amounts of precious
metals being discovered in America, and to a lesser degree in Japan, towards the
direction of Amsterdam.
After Columbus came to America in 1492 and Cortés invaded Mexico in
1519, an influx of precious metals into Europe began, principally through Spain.
The output of these fertile mines in the Americas reversed a trend of lower prices
in Europe that had been caused by the combination of static metals production in
Europe and rapidly expanding industry and commerce. Production in the New
World was further increased after the discovery of Peru’s Huancavelica mercury
mine in 1572. The amalgamation process which was invented in the mid-
sixteenth century depended heavily on mercury. This process greatly increased
the efficiency of the silver production process.19
The Japanese silver-mining industry was also expanding at the same time,
but without the benefit of the mercury-amalgam process. The Dutch East India
Company had a virtual monopoly on trade with Japan and, of course, access to
their precious metals production from 1611 through the end of the century. Del

Mar points out that, “from 1624 to 1853 the Dutch were the only Europeans
permitted to trade with Japan,” managing “to obtain about one-half of the total
exports of the precious metals from Japan.”20
Flynn indicates that:
American output of bullion, in conjunction with the output of Central
European and Japanese mines, increased the world’s supply of silver
sufficiently to slowly drive its market value downward. That is, there was
price inflation in the sixteenth century. American and non-American mines
produced such an enormous quantity of silver that its market value dropped
to a level below the cost of producing it in a growing number of European
mines.21
Francis Amasa Walker validates this view: “the astonishing production of silver
at Potosi began to be felt. From 1570 to 1640 silver sank rapidly. Corn rose from
about two oz. of silver the quarter, to six or eight oz.”22 Walker goes on to quote
David Hume:
By the most exact computations that have been formed all over Europe,
after making allowance for the alterations in the numerary value, or the
denomination, it is found that the prices of all things have risen three, four,
times since the discovery of the West Indies.23
Table 1 illustrates this large influx of precious metals.
Bullion flowed from Spain to Amsterdam due to both trade and seizure of
treasure. As Violet Barbour relates:
In 1628 occurred the famous capture of the Spanish treasure fleet by Piet
Heyn, which netted 177,537 lbs. weight of silver, besides jewels and

valuable commodities, the total estimated to come to 11 1/2 to 15 million
florins. More important than such occasional windfalls was the share of
Dutch merchants in the new silver brought twice a year to Cadiz from the
mines of Mexico and Peru, a share which represented in part the profits of
trade with Spain and through Spain with the New World. Just what that
share was from year to year we do not know. Only a few fragmentary
estimates for non-consecutive years in the second half of the century have
come to light. According to these the Dutch usually carried off from 15 to
25 percent of the treasure brought by the galleons and the flota, their share
sometimes exceeding, sometimes falling below the amounts claimed by
France or Genoa.24
TABLE 1
SPANISH IMPORTS OF FINE GOLD AND SILVER FROM AMERICA (IN GRAMS)

Source: Earl J. Hamilton, American Treasure and the Price Revolution in Spain
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1934), reprinted in Shepard B.
Clough, European Economic History: The Economic Development of Western
Civilization (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1968), p. 150.
Del Mar echoes this view:
The honest Abbe Raynal explains the whole matter in a few words: whilst
the Portuguese robbed the Indians, the Dutch robbed the Portuguese. “In
less than half a century the ships of the Dutch East India Company took
more than three hundred Portuguese vessels laden with the spoils of Asia.
These brought the Company immense returns.” Much of eastern gold,
which found its way to Amsterdam was proceeds of double robbery.25
Further evidence of an exceptionally large increase in the supply of money
in the Netherlands is provided in table 2.
TABLE 2
TOTAL MINT OUTPUT OF THE SOUTH NETHERLANDS, 1598–1789 (IN GUILDERS)
Source: Jan A. van Houtte and Leon van Buyten, “The Low Countries” in An
Introduction to the Sources of European Economic History 1500–1800, Charles
Wilson and Geoffrey Parker, eds. (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1977),
p. 100.

The numbers in table 2 point to the explosive increase in the supply of
money for the time period from 1630–38, during the later part of which
Tulipmania took place (1634–37).
Figure 1 shows the deposits in the Bank of Amsterdam. An exceptional
growth in deposits is reflected for the period from approximately 1625 to 1650.
Upon close inspection it appears that from the year 1633 to 1638 deposits grew
from five million florins to eight million florins, a 60 percent increase!
FIGURE 1
DEPOSITS IN THE BANK OF AMSTERDAM, 1625–1650
Source: J.G. van Dillen, reprinted in Frank C. Spooner, The International
Economy and Monetary Movements in France, 1493–1725 (Harvard Economic
Studies, vol. 138; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1972), p. 68.

As the above evidence indicates, free coinage, the Bank of Amsterdam, and
the heightened trade and commerce in Holland served to attract coin and bullion
to Amsterdam from throughout the world. As Del Mar writes:
Under the stimulus of “free” coinage, an immense quantity of the precious
metals now found their way to Holland, and a rise of prices ensued, which
found one form of expression in the curious mania of buying tulips at prices
often exceeding that of the ground on which they were grown.26
Del Mar goes on to discuss the end of Tulipmania:
In 1648, when the Peace of Westphalia acknowledged the independence of
the Dutch republic, the latter stopped the “free” coinage of silver florins and
only permitted it for gold ducats, which in Holland had no legal value. This
legislation discouraged the imports of silver bullion, checked the rise of
prices, and put an end to the tulip mania.27
Del Mar concedes in a footnote that the mania had already been discouraged on
April 27th, 1637 by a resolution of the States-General that canceled all contracts.
The crash of tulip prices left the growers of the bulbs to absorb the majority
of the financial damage of the mania. With the government basically canceling
all contracts, growers could not find new buyers or recover money owed them by
buyers supposedly under contract. As Simon Schama describes:
In any event, the magistrates of the Dutch towns saw niceties of equity as
less pressing than the need to de-intoxicate the tulip craze. Their
intervention was hastened by the urgency of returning the genie speculation
to the bottle from which it had escaped, and corking it tightly to ensure
against any recurrence. To some extent, they could feel satisfied that the
ineluctable operations of Fortuna had already punished the foolhardy by

taking them from rags to riches and back again in short order. But they still
felt impelled to launch a didactic campaign in tracts, sermons and prints
against folly, since its special wickedness had been in leading the common
people astray.28
FIGURE 2
NUMBER OF ANNUAL BANKCUPTCIES IN AMSTERDAM, LEIDEN, HAARLEM, AND
GRONINGEN, 1635–1800
Source: Charles Wilson and Geoffrey Parker, eds., An Introduction to the
Sources of European Economic History 1500–1800 (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1977), p. 102.
In spite of the short duration of the tulip craze and assertions by other
authors to the contrary, there is evidence of financial pain that resulted from
tulipmania. Figure 2 depicts the number of annual bankruptcies in Amsterdam,
Leiden, Haarlem and Groningen from 1635–1800, presented by Messrs. van
Houtte and van Buyten, reflects a doubling in the number in Amsterdam from
1635 to 1637.29 It would be hard to imagine that only tulip growers made up this
increase in the number of bankruptcies. I suspect some of the “foolhardy

masses” were among this group.
The story of Tulipmania is not only about tulips and their price movements,
and certainly studying the “fundamentals of the tulip market” does not explain
the occurrence of this speculative bubble. The price of tulips only served as a
manifestation of the end result of a government policy that expanded the
quantity of money and thus fostered an environment for speculation and
malinvestment. This scenario has been played out over and over throughout
history. But what made this situation unique was that the government policy did
not expand the supply of money through fractional-reserve banking, which is the
modern tool. Actually, it was quite the opposite that occurred. As kings
throughout Europe debased their currencies, through clipping, sweating, or by
decree, the Dutch provided a sound currency policy which called for money to
be backed 100 percent by specie. This policy, combined with the occasional
seizure of bullion and coin from Spanish ships on the high seas, served to attract
coin and bullion from throughout the world. The end result was a large increase
in the supply of coin and bullion in 1630s Amsterdam. Free coinage laws then
served to create more money from this increased supply of coin and bullion than
what the market demanded. This acute increase in the supply of money served to
foster an atmosphere that was ripe for speculation and malinvestment, which
manifested itself in the intense trading of tulips.
The Bank of Amsterdam, and the bank money it issued, served as the
inspiration for John Law’s early theories on money. The early seventeenth-
century episode in Holland, known as Tulipmania, was not only a bubble, driven
by the same monetary features as later bubbles, but its catalyst, The Bank of
Amsterdam, served to inspire the man who was to create two later (and more
famous) bubbles, the Mississippi and South Sea Bubbles.

John Law, Genius or Swindler 4
Perhaps no person in the history of economics has inspired such strong opinions,
both for and against, as John Law. Some view Law as a genius. To others he is
considered a madman and swindler. In many ways, he was all of these things.
Very rarely is an economist presented with the opportunity that John Law
enjoyed. Typically, the closest an economist comes to implementing his or her
ideas is by serving in some advisory capacity to a ruler, president, or governing
body. But even in this capacity, the economist’s recommendation becomes just
one of many considerations that the politician or monarch takes under
advisement when setting economic policies. But Law’s situation was much
different. Law himself said, after his fall, that he had exercised more power than
any other uncrowned individual in Europe. At the height of his power, he
controlled the Royal Bank (and thus the supply of money), the public debt,
indirect taxes, colonial trade, the tobacco monopoly, and more than half of what
is now the continental United States. Additionally, Law was the finance minister,
the main economic advisor, and the favorite of an absolute prince.1
Because of his power, Law was able to manipulate all aspects of the French
economy, and gave what is now known as “Keynesian economics” its first test.
Ultimately, Law’s system ended in disaster. But unfortunately, the mistakes made
by John Law and his imitators in Britain continue to be made over and over
again, to this day.
John Law was born in Edinburgh in 1671, the son of a goldsmith-banker.
Law’s father died when John was in his teens.2 Law’s mother, a distant relative
of the Duke of Argyll, saw to it that her son received an education in both
theoretical and applied economics. Mackay indicates that young John worked for
his father for three years, learning the Scottish banking trade. Law displayed a

great aptitude for numbers, which aided in his quick grasp of the principles of
the banking business.
After the death of his father, Law’s interest in the banking business waned.
At age seventeen, Law was a strapping young man who was a favorite with the
ladies, in spite of his face being deeply scarred from the small-pox. The young
women called him Beau Law, while the men nicknamed him Jessamy John, for
his foppery.
With young Law receiving an inheritance from his father’s estate, he could
afford to take off and see the world. His first stop was London, which provided
John the opportunity to profit from certain gambling systems using his
considerable mathematics skills. Law was the envy of all the other gamblers,
who after witnessing his success, began to follow his bets. Law’s way with the
ladies continued in London, with John having his choice of the most beautiful.
Law’s life of leisure continued for nine years. But by this time, John was
addicted to gambling, and he eventually lost more than he could repay without
mortgaging his family estate. About this same time, Law’s love life also created
trouble. While in London, a love affair with Elizabeth Villiers,3 led to a duel
with a jealous suitor of Ms. Villiers, named Edward Wilson. Law proved to be
good with a gun also, killing Wilson on the spot. Normally, this would not have
been considered a grave offense. However, Wilson had many powerful friends,
which, combined with the fact that Law was a foreigner, led to arrest on a charge
of murder. After being found guilty, he was sentenced to death. But the sentence
was subsequently lowered to just a fine on the grounds that his offense was only
manslaughter. While being detained pending an appeal by Wilson’s brother, Law
bribed a guard and escaped to the continent. A reward was offered for him.
Mackay quotes the ad in the Gazette, describing Law:
Captain John Law, a Scotchman, aged twenty-six; a very tall, black, lean
man; well shaped, above six-feet high, with large pock-holes in his face; big
nosed, and speaking broad and loud.4

Mackay speculates that this description was published to aid Law in his
escape, given its exaggerated nature. Law traveled for three years on the
European continent studying the monetary and banking matters of the countries
he was in by day, and speculating at the gaming tables by night.
After returning to Edinburgh in 1700, Law began to write on the subjects of
money and trade. His first pamphlet entitled, Proposals and Reasons for
constituting a Council of Trade was not well received.
Law went back to the continent after his proposal was sacked. More
importantly, Law was unable to obtain a pardon for his murder of Mr. Wilson,
thus making life in Scotland somewhat uncomfortable. For fourteen years, Law
gambled his way across Europe, supporting himself on gaming wins. He was
known in gambling halls everywhere as a skilled player. His reputation was such
that he was persona non grata, in Venice and Genoa. The magistrates in those
two cities believed him to be a dangerous influence on youth. While in Paris,
Law made an enemy of the lieutenant-general of the police, who eventually told
Law to leave town. However, by that time, Law had become friends with the
Duke de Vendome, the Prince de Conti, and, more importantly, the Duke of
Orléans. The Duke of Orléans and Law shared the preference for social life, and
they frequently ran into each other at social functions. It was through the Duke
of Orléans that Law would eventually implement his monetary and financial
plans.5
Law submitted a proposal for a privately owned Bank of France to Madame
de Maintenon, the head mistress of Louis XIV, in 1702. Part of the introduction
of this proposal included the financial instruments that Law considered part of
the money supply: stock in the Dutch and English East India companies,
exchequer notes, Dutch government bonds, and Bank of England stock.
Branches of the bank would be located in each province, with notes payable to
bearer being redeemed at the parent bank in Paris or at any branch. Through this
bank, Law argued, the supply of money could be increased, which would lower

interest rates and stimulate economic activity. But the proposal was not accepted,
some believe, due to Law’s protestant faith, Louis being a catholic.6
With Scotland in the throes of a depression in 1704, the Bank of Scotland
suspended specie payments. This development led Law, who was back in
Edinburgh at the time, to make his land bank proposal to the Scottish Parliament.
In 1705, this proposal was published anonymously as: Money and Trade
Considered: With a Proposal for Supplying the Nation With Money. Numerous
other tracts were written during that same period, with each author claiming that
a lack of money was the cause of the crisis. Law’s work, however, went much
further than the others in terms of formulating the theory behind his proposal.
But again, his work was for naught. In spite of support from the Lord High
Commissioner, the Earl of Islay, and the Duke of Argyll, only two Scottish
Parliament members supported the plan.7
In 1706, Law again was in France submitting his “Treatise on Money and
Commerce” to French finance minister, Michel Chamillart. Hamilton calls this
presentation Law’s best, although it has never been published. Law was told to
leave France due to his radical ideas, according to Hamilton, who argues that
allegations that Law was banished because of his gambling prowess are untrue.8
Law’s next stop was Italy, where, in 1711, he presented his bank proposal,
based upon the Bank of England, to Vittorio Amadeo II, Duke of Savoy.
Although impressed with Law’s intelligence and knowledge, the Duke felt the
plan much too ambitious for his small country. He urged Law to try the king of
France again.9
France’s new finance minister, Desmaretz, turned down Law’s proposal yet
again in July 1715. Desmaretz liked the plan, but was uneasy about a bank being
so dominated by one man, especially if that man was to be John Law. But later
that same year, persistence would finally pay off. Louis XIV died, and with the
immediate heir to the throne being only seven years old, Law’s old friend, the
Duke of Orléans, assumed the reins of the French government.
Louis had made a shambles of the finances of the country. France was

deeply in debt and on the verge of bankruptcy. The regent tried such odious
tactics as a recoinage, which depreciated the currency by 20 percent, and
aggressive, heavy handed attempts at increasing tax collections. Neither of these
tactics worked. Rather, they served to incite the ire of the populace. Thus, when
Law presented, his plan he was well received. But while Law was able to garner
the Duke’s support for a royal bank, the Council of Finance rejected the proposal
on October 24, 1715. However, this was to be Law’s last defeat. Law altered the
plan, making the bank a privately owned institution, and obtained a charter for
the General Bank in early May, 1716.10 Being the first Bank of France, Law was
able to draft the charter document, and subscribed to 25 percent of its stock.
Alas, Desmaretz’s worst fears had come true, as the bank was completely
dominated by Law, possibly more than any bank had or ever would be
dominated by one man in history.11

John Law’s Monetary Theories 5
John Law’s Money and Trade Considered With A Proposal For Supplying The
Nation With Money was published in 1705, and submitted to the Parliament of
Scotland as a solution to lift that country from the depths of a depression. Law’s
solution, of course, was to create more money.
Law felt that the use of banks was the best method to increase the quantity
of money. He was especially impressed with the Bank of Amsterdam and noted
its contribution to the prowess of the Dutch in their trade and commercial
endeavors, despite having no more natural advantages than his native Scotland.
Law noted that the Bank of Amsterdam was a “secure place,” and describes its
original intent:
Banks where the Money is pledg’d equal to the Credit given, are sure; For,
tho Demands are made of the whole, the Bank does not fail in payment.1
Law goes on to say that unbacked credit was issued despite the constitution of
this bank requiring 100 percent backing.
Yet a Sum is lent by the Managers for a stock to the Lumbar, and ‘tis
thought they lend great sums on other occasions. So far as they lend they
add to the money, which brings a Profit to the Country, by imploying more
People, and extending Trade; They add to the Money to be lent, whereby it
is easier borrowed, and at less use, and tho none suffer by it, or are
apprehensive of Danger, its Credit being good; Yet if the whole Demands
were made, or Demands greater than the remaining Money, they could not
all be satisfied, till the Bank had called in what Sums were lent.2

Law then proposes that the conveniences to be gained from unreserved or
unbacked money were more than equal to the risks involved.3 Those
conveniences being: less interest, more money, and ease of payments.
In Money and Trade, Law, although advocating a system of fractional-
reserve banking, was not ignorant of its harmful effects:
Raising [debasing] the Money in France is laying a Tax on the People,
which is sooner pay’d, and thought to be less felt than a Tax laid on any
other way. ...This Tax falls heavy on the poorer sort of the People.4
In the last half of Money and Trade, Law espouses his proposal for paper
money backed by land, his view being that silver was unsuitable to be money
because more and more of it was being produced. Thus, it became less valuable
over time. Law believed that land would increase in value over time, for the
following reasons: demand for it increases, improvements are made making it
more productive, it does not lose any of its uses, and the amount stays the same.
The following capsulizes Law’s proposal:
The Paper-money propos’d will be equal in value to Silver, for it will have
a value of Land pledg’d, equal to the same Sum of Silver-money, that it is
given out for. If any Losses should happen, one 4th of the Revenue of the
Commission, will in all appearance be more than sufficient to make them
good.
This Paper-money will not fall in value as Silver-money has fallen, or
may fall: Goods or Money fall in value, if they increase in Quantity, or if
the Demand lessens. But the Commission giving out what Sums are
demanded, and taking back what Sums are offer’d to be return’d; This
Paper-money will keep its value, and there will always be as much Money
as there is occasion, or imployment for, and no more.5

Law lists the qualities necessary in money as being:
1. Ease of delivery
2. Same value everywhere
3. Kept without loss or expense
4. Divisible without loss
5. Capable of a stamp
6. Stable quantity6
Law insists that paper money has more of these qualities than silver. But
should Law have been comparing the merits of silver vs. paper or of silver vs.
land? If the paper money was to be backed by land, could one redeem their paper
for land? If so, land itself must pass the above tests. If not, fiat paper must pass
muster.
The following is Professor Murray Rothbard’s necessary qualities for
money:
1. Generally marketable (non-monetary value)
2. Divisible
3. High value per unit weight (portable)
4. Fairly stable supply
5. Durable
6. Recognizable
7. Homogeneous7
The two lists are similar, however, Rothbard’s being somewhat more
rigorous, it will be used for the comparison between silver, paper and land for
use as money.
TABLE 3

As table 3 reflects, silver passes the test with flying colors. Paper and land
do not do as well. When looking at the paper and land columns, what stands out
is that by merging these two columns, the three “no” qualities of land could be
changed to “yeses” by paper, and the four paper “noes” can be changed to
“yeses” by land. It’s doubtful that Law went through this exercise, but his
thought process must have been similar. However, the two cannot be merged.
Paper backed by land would have to be redeemable in land. That forces land into
the qualities of money test, with a predictable outcome.
Although Law spends 120 pages touting land-backed money in Money and
Trade, this author believes that Law never intended that paper money would be
redeemable in land. He was only attempting to build a case for paper money that
would eventually have little or no backing. Law began to move toward this
direction in later writings. He moved away from land and toward paper assets as
backing for money, or to serve as money.
Antoin Murphy has written that Law, between 1707 and 1711, moved away
from land bank proposals toward financial institutions patterned after the Bank
of England and the East India Company. Instead of land backing financial
claims, Law began to see the support being provided by:
government securities and loans to the private sector, in the case of the
Bank of England, to fixed and working capital (ships, trading forts,

harbours, stock in hand) and government securities in the case of the East
India Company.8
In the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, England was waging
numerous wars, which it financed with continuous borrowing. This debt took the
form of the government securities shown on the balance sheets of the Bank of
England and the East India Company. The Bank, the East India Company, and
later the South Sea Company, all were granted increased monopoly privileges in
either banking or trading for their parts in buying up government debt at lower
interest rates.
Through his interest in the Bank of England and the East India Company,
Law expanded his view of what forms money could take. As early as 1707, only
two years after Money and Trade was published, Law began to view exchequer
bills, bills of exchange and tallies as money. In addition, new money was being
created in the form of shares of stock in the Bank of England and East India
Company. Murphy relates the following quote from Law in “Mémoire pour
prouver qu’une nouvelle espèce de monnaie peut être meilleure que l’or et 1
argent”:
What approximates most to a new type of money is the East India
Company. The stock of this Company is divided into shares like that of the
bank. They are traded each day on the exchange and the current price is
published for the public’s information in the gazettes. As the transfer of
these shares is easy they are given and received in payment at the price at
which they are traded, so that the merchant or trader with payments to make
does not need to hold money as a reserve. As part of his capital is held in
the Indies Company he can use these shares for payment and if difficulties
in exchanging them at that day’s market rate all he has to do is send them to
the Exchange and convert them into specie, but as they are convertible they
will not be refused.9

Law believed that this “new” money would rise in value along with
inflation, as opposed to silver specie that would decline in value as more was
discovered or produced. Law felt that the exchequer bills and bills of exchange,
like silver, were subject to this decline in value, because ultimately these
instruments would be liquidated for specie. But Law was beginning to view
shares of stock the way he had viewed land, as being superior to silver, believing
that these shares could never decrease in value.
In “Mémoire,” Law continued to propose a banking system based upon his
land-bank proposal. However, on a theoretical level, he was beginning to place
more emphasis on liquidity. Murphy writes:
He was defining as money any financial instrument that could be used as a
medium of exchange. Tallies, exchequer bills and bills of exchange were
used for facilitating exchange and so came to be regarded as money by
Law.10
These “les credits,” however, still lacked an attribute that Law was looking
for in money: being inflation proof. Thus, in Law’s mind, the shares fit the bill,
providing the superior store of value function that he was looking for. The
capital of the East India Company was employed in productive activities, not
just money, which provided this inflation protection. Law wanted his monetary
system to be tied to productive assets. That was the case with his land-bank
proposal—currency being backed by the productivity of the land— but now he
was extending this idea to the capital of companies.
The shares of these companies were interpreted as media of exchange
because of their ready marketability and, in Law’s view, a view that tended to
dismiss the downside risk associated with shares, were superior stores of value
than money because they were linked to a productive capital base.11
In 1711, Law was in Italy advising the Duke of Savoy and preparing a

proposal for a bank to be established in that country. The proposal was heavily
influenced by the structure of the Bank of England. Law, by that time, had
dropped the land-bank plan, and was concentrating on a proposal that would
incorporate the shares of the Bank of England and the East India Company into
the supply of money. The Bank of England impressed Law for two reasons: its
ability to finance the long and costly wars England was engaged in, and the way
it had expanded the supply of money so that trade continued to expand in the
face of the outflow of specie to finance the War of Spanish Succession. Murphy
quotes Law from an unpublished manuscript in the Archivio di Stato in Turin,
which Law wrote and sent to Amadeus, Duke of Savoy:
The stock of the Indies Company is also divided up in shares, like that of
the Bank. They are negotiated and received in payment. A merchant with
payments to make does not keep large sums in cash. He invests a part of his
capital in the Indies Company or in the Bank and gives this shareholding in
payment when he has insufficient cash. If there are difficulties with respect
to acceptance he sends them to the stock exchange to convert them into
specie, but as they are negotiable they are not refused at the current market
price. Most people prefer them to specie because no return is derived from
specie until the occasion arises to use it. Shares constitute a value already in
use which is productive.12
Law viewed France’s problem in 1715 as twofold, a monetary crisis (too
little money), similar to that of Scotland in 1705, and also a financial crisis,
which stemmed from excessive war debts. Law sought to solve this problem by
establishing a sinking fund to pay off a portion of the government debt and
establish a bank to increase the supply of money. The bank was to be a joint
venture between Law and the King, who would receive 75 percent of the profits.
Law, in turn, would receive 25 percent. However, Law’s plan called for the
King’s profits to be consigned to repaying France’s debt. Thus, both problems

would be served: the bank to meet the shortage of money and the king’s profits
to pay off the national debt. Law was linking monetary policy with financial
policy.
Law continued to develop this linkage in the “Mémoire sur les Banques,”
which was presented to the French authorities in July 1715. Law recommended a
credit creating bank that issued banknotes, like the Bank of England. Law also
reminded the authorities of the benefits of including bank shares as part of the
media of exchange. Bank of England shares at that time were trading at a 30
premium over their par value. Law’s proposal also included using bank profits to
purchase the Hotel de Soissons, later to be used as the site for a stock exchange,
the bank and a center for foreign-exchange transactions.13
Although he was repeatedly rejected by the French authorities, Law
continued to write letters to the Regent espousing his grandiose plans. These
plans began to include more than just his bank. Murphy quotes Law in a letter to
the Regent as saying:
But the bank is not the only nor the biggest of my ideas—I will produce a
work which will surprise Europe by the changes that it will generate in
France’s favour, changes which will be greater than those produced by the
discovery of the Indies or by the introduction of credit.14
From all appearances, this “work” Law was referring to was the inclusion
of shares in the supply of money. Law wrote,
I will lighten the burden of the King and the State in lowering the rate of
interest on money, not by legal methods, but by an abundance of specie.15
The specie which France mints from bullion taken from the Indies falls and
loses its value in accordance with the quantities brought into Europe—the
credit which I propose to introduce will have a more assured value and will
gain 20 and 30 percent on specie.16

It is clear through Murphy’s findings that Law had formulated much of
what was to be the Mississippi System prior to his being granted the charter for
the General Bank in May 1716. Murphy, as shown in table 4, helps to outline
how Law used the framework of the Bank of England, the East India Company,
and the South Sea Company to formulate the Mississippi System.17
TABLE 4

This combined company served to realize three of Law’s aims: the
expansion of the supply of money, with shares serving as money as well as
banknotes and deposits; management of France’s debt; and the development of
the real economy. Law’s “success” with his Mississippi System led not only to
the Mississippi Bubble, but influenced the South Sea Company in England, and
thus aided in the creation of the South Sea Bubble.18

The Mississippi Bubble 6
John Law began General Bank in May of 1716, a time when France was
economically devastated. The late seventeenth century and early eighteenth
century had been especially cruel to the French people. Under the reign of Louis
XIV, France had fought wars almost continuously from 1689 to 1713, first with
the League of Augsburg and then against Great Britain, Austria, Holland, and
parts of Spain in the War of the Spanish Succession. In addition to the loss of life
and financial costs of these wars, the French suffered through famines in 1693
and 1694, the loss of manpower and skilled labor resulting from the persecution
of the Huguenots, and the extraordinarily cold winter of 1708–1709.
The War of the Spanish Succession (1701–1713) was fought mainly on
foreign soil, which weighed heavily on the government treasury as it financed
armies fighting in various theaters throughout Europe simultaneously. This
financing was provided by floating debt, known as billets de monnaie. These
certificates were first issued in 1701 to the owners of old coin and bullion who
were delivering their specie for recoinage. But because the Paris mint was so far
behind in striking and delivering new coins, this paper money was issued
instead. The ever-increasing war needs led to overissue, with the expected
depreciation in their value soon taking place. The billets de monnaie were made
legal tender in Paris to stop this depreciation. Additionally, a royal proclamation
was made on December 26, 1704, calling for 71/2 percent interest to be paid on
these notes. Legal tender status was extended to the provinces on April 12, 1707.
To finance the war, bills were issued on various royal agencies, adding to
the billets de monnaie already in circulation. By 1708, the total supply of billets
de monnie had reached 800 million livre tournois (l.t.). This large increase in the
supply of debt, on which the French government was obligated to pay interest,

created a tremendous burden. To alleviate the financial strain, the Controller
General of Finances, Nicolas Desmaretz, converted the 800 million l.t, in billets
de monnaie into 250 million l.t. of billets d’êtat1 and lowered the interest rate on
the new notes to 4 percent. However, taxes could not be paid with these new
notes, as was the case with billets de monnaie, despite both notes being payable
by the government. This provision served to replace specie with these new paper
notes.
During this period, the French working class continued to deal in hard-
money because both types of billets were issued in denominations too large for
wage payments. More importantly, the common man harbored a healthy distrust
for government-issued paper money. In spite of the billets’ legal tender status,
Hamilton indicates that, “sellers accepted them for goods only at their market
value in terms of specie, which varied from 20 to 50 percent of par.”2 These
fluctuations in value made both types of billets unacceptable as mediums of
exchange, and created a basic skepticism about paper money in general. It was
this skepticism that prevented the establishment of a bank of issue.3
After the massive military buildup to wage war from the previous two
decades, the French economy was to undergo a dramatic shift to peacetime
operations. To resist the deflationary effects of this change in the economy,
Desmaretz declared that money would be gradually devalued by approximately
40 percent from December 1, 1713 to September 1, 1715. The initial effect on
prices was mixed, with lower prices in Paris, and higher prices in the cities of
Marseille, Toulouse, and Bordeaux in 1714. But by 1715, prices throughout
France had plunged.4
Louis XIV died in September of 1715 with France’s indebtedness being 31/2
billion livres, or 159 livres per person. In spite of numerous taxes and rigorous
tax collection, the state could not pay its debts. France was technically bankrupt
and was forced to restructure its debt. This restructuring was accomplished by a
combination of reduction, repudiation, and renegotiation.

Philip, Duke of Orléans, came to power after the death of Louis XIV. He
ruled as Regent of France from 1715 to 1723 during the minority of Louis XV,
who was the great grandson of Louis XIV. Philip replaced Controller-General
Desmaretz with the Duke of Noailles, who was given the unenviable task of
reducing the state’s debts. All of the long-term debt owed by the government
was refinanced, with city governments, particularly the Hôtel de Ville in Paris,
acting as intermediaries. For a fixed return, investors would lend money to the
municipalities, who in turn would lend the money to the state. Tax revenues
would then be assigned to the municipalities to pay the interest due the
bondholders. The state was the big winner in these transactions, at the expense
of bondholders. The state’s floating rate debt was then subject to a Visa5, which
reduced the floating debt from 597 million livres to 198 million livres. This new
debt was in billets d’état, of which the government issued 250 million livres, 198
million livres toward the old debt, and 52 million livres for its own account.
How the various types of old, floating-rate debt was changed into billets
d’état depended, in theory, upon the type of debt that was converted, whether the
owner of that debt was the original purchaser, or whether the debt was paid for in
cash. However, there was speculation that the size of the bribe to the Pâris
Brothers, who operated the Visa, was the overriding factor in how much of a
particular person’s debt was replaced with the billets.
In addition to the financial destruction imposed by the Visa, Noailles
established the “Chamber of Justice” in March of 1716. Murphy describes the
Chamber of Justice as follows:
The Chamber of Justice was an extraordinary commission established to
judge and punish financiers and profiteers deemed to have made their
wealth in a dishonest manner at the expense of the Crown. It was not a new
phenomenon— there had been four Chambers of Justice in the seventeenth
century in 1601, 1607, 1625, and 1661. They fulfilled a dual role, providing
a blood-letting... and at the same time holding out hope of raising badly

needed revenue for the Crown. Under the 1716–17 Chamber of Justice
8,000 people were investigated with just over half, 4,410, taxed a total of
220 million livres. In some less fortunate cases people found guilty were
sent to the galleys, imprisoned, or locked in stocks and pilloried. Unlike
some of the earlier Chambers of Justice, no one was executed.6
As was the case with the Visa, the Chamber of Justice was not true to its
name in doling out tax levies. It was rife with corruption, and the wealthy
financiers were treated favorably at the expense of a less fortunate, less wealthy
class, who shouldered the brunt of the financial punishment. This inequities
created a rebellion against the Chamber, which directly affected the collection of
these taxes. Only 95 million livres were actually collected of the 220 million
levied, with the majority being paid in depreciated paper. Noailles is said to have
estimated the effective amount raised through the Chamber as only 51 million
livres.
Like all other odious tax schemes, the Chamber of Justice, combined with
the Visa, stifled the French economy. The wealthy were not inclined to spend or
invest, credit tightened, and bankruptcies increased. Recognizing the damage
inflicted by the Chamber, Noailles had it discontinued in March 1717.7
John Law obtained an exclusive charter (20-year term) for the General
Bank in May 1716, and soon the Bank began operations in his home. Law
picked the board of directors, the officers, and its first employees. Hamilton
speculates that “no other national bank in history—not excepting the Reichsbank
under Hjalmair Schacht or the Bank of England under Montagu Norman—has
ever been so completely dominated by a single man.”8 The Bank’s protector was
none other than Law’s old friend, the Duke of Orléans.
In the beginning, banknotes were to be payable in specie of the weight and
standard of the date. The Bank was not subject to taxation, nor were foreigners’
deposits subject to confiscation, in the case of war. Depositors would receive
banknotes on sight for their coin. The Bank could open deposit accounts, which

could be withdrawn, or through which an amount could be transferred to another
party, similar to today’s check writing. Bills and letters of exchange could be
discounted by the Bank. However, the bank was not to engage in trade, maritime
insurance, or commission business. There was no limit placed on the number of
banknotes that could be issued by the bank. It was left to John Law’s judgment
as to the amount of banknotes to be in circulation.9
On May 20, 1716, the organization of General Bank was revealed. The
Bank’s capital totaled 6 million livres, comprised of 1,200 shares at 5,000 livres
each. Murphy points out however, that:
The effective capital base of the bank was much smaller than this due to the
fact that only one quarter of the capital was to be subscribed in specie
money and threequarters in billets d’état (a type of government security).
The billets d’état were then at a discount of about 60 percent so that the
effective amount of capital to be subscribed was:
   Specie                          1.5 million
   Billets d’état (4.5 × 0.4)  1.8 million
                                        3.3 million livres tournois
Thus, at most, the effective capital base of the Bank would have amounted
to 3.3 million livres, but even then capital was to be subscribed in four
equal installments. It is believed that only one installment was actually paid
up so that the General Bank started its operations with 825,000 livres
(£52,700).10
A tremendous amount of government debt remained outstanding in spite of
the amount lopped off by the Visa of 1716. It’s estimated that, in addition to the
abundant amount of long-term debt outstanding in the form of annuities, some
250 million l.t. was outstanding in the form of billets d’état, along with 215

million l.t. more in other obligations of the state. With this tremendous amount
of debt and only an undercapitalized bank to work with, John Law needed
another vehicle to lower interest rates. This vehicle was the Company of the
West, which originated in the summer of 1717.
The idea for the Company of the West came from Le Gendre d’Arminy who
was the brother-in-law of financier Crozat. Crozat owed a large tax liability from
the Visa, and wished to submit his ownership of the Louisiana trade lease as
payment for this tax. Law made a grand proposal for the Company and was
given permission to sell shares in the company in August of 1717. The company
issued 200,000 shares at 500 l.t. each, or a total capitalization of 100 million l.t.
These shares could only be purchased with billets d’état, which at the time
where discounted between 68 and 72 percent. Thus, the effective capitalization
was more like 30 million l.t. in total, or 150 l.t. per share. The Company of the
West’s principal asset was the exclusive trading privilege with Louisiana that
was granted by the French government. The privilege was received in exchange
for the company’s conversion of the government’s debt into company stock at a
lower interest rate.11
Initially, General Bank was prudently operated by Law and his staff. The
banknotes issued by the bank were fully backed by specie. During the Bank’s
first 31 months, the supply of money in France was increased only 3 percent by
the Bank’s notes. The Bank met every obligation on demand and instilled a great
deal of confidence for itself with the French public. By this time the operations
of the Bank had expanded outside of Paris into the provinces. Law persuaded the
Regent to order receivers to accept and redeem banknotes, and further, to remit
tax receipts to Paris only in notes. Thus, circulation of the notes became
widespread at a much quicker rate than would have taken place without such
coercion.12 It was Law’s view that the power of the state should be used, if
necessary, to force the use of banknotes, and that these notes should not bear
interest, but be payable at site. He felt that the payment of interest on these notes
created distrust amongst the people.

On April 10, 1717, it was decreed that all taxes and revenues of the State be
paid in banknotes and received at par for that purpose. It is this date that is
recognized as the first intervention of the state on behalf of General Bank,
although as mentioned above, the provinces had received orders from the State
six months prior to this. The provinces were united in their opposition to the use
of the banknotes, and the Duke of Noailles was forced to follow up with
supplementary decrees no less than three additional times, issued September 12,
1717, February 26, 1718, and June 1, 1718, before the opposition finally
succumbed.13 On December 4, 1718, General Bank formally became the Royal
Bank, although the outstanding stock of the bank had already been purchased by
the government prior to this date.14
The share price of the Company of the West in May of 1719 was still
languishing, selling at a discount to their nominal issue price of 500 livres per
share. For Law to fully set in motion his system, buying momentum was needed
to spur an increase in the share price. His first move was to merge the Company
of East Indies and the China Company together with the Company of the West.
The new company was known as the Company of the Indies (a.k.a. Mississippi
Company). To accomplish this alliance required funds, to pay off the heavy debt
of both the China and East Indies companies, to outfit existing ships, and to
build new ships. The Company could then exploit the colonial trade that was
now under its complete control. The Mississippi Company then took over the
Company of Africa on June 4th, which required further funding. To generate the
needed capital, Law proposed issuing 50,000 shares at 500 livres per share, with
a premium of 50 livres per share due immediately. Parliament refused to approve
the issue, but the Regent stepped in and unilaterally granted approval by a decree
of council on June 17th. By this time, the price of the shares had risen to 650
livres, undoubtedly buoyed by the issue of 159.9 million livres in banknotes by
the Royal Bank in five installments, the first in January 1719 for 18 million, 20
million more in February, two infusions in April totaling 71.9 million, and 50
million more in June.

Activity in Mississippi Company shares began to pick up, with Law fueling
the fire by allowing the new issue of 50 million shares to be purchased in 20
monthly installments of 25 livres each. Law did not want interest in the old
shares to wane while promoting the new shares, thus, in modern parlance, he
created a rights issue, whereby only owners of old shares, called mères, could
purchase new shares, called filles. For every four old shares owned, an investor
could buy one new share Murphy explains:
These rights could be sold once they had paid the premium and the initial
installment (50 livres plus 25 livres). Indeed, a decree of 27 July suggests
that it was only necessary to pay the 50 livres premium and that the first
payment of subscriptions was deferred till 1 September. In this way he
maintained interest in the mères, thereby ensuring that holders such as the
Regent and his followers made significant capital gains, but also provided a
cheap way for others to come into the market by buying filles through
monthly installments, when existing holders of old shares decided to realize
some of their capital gains by selling their partly paid filles. But, above all,
Law through the issue of partly paid shares provided leverage for investors
to make capital gains that were a multiple of their initial investment. For
example, if shares rose to 1,000 then the holder of a partly paid fille,
assuming he had just paid the 50 livres premium, could make a profit of 450
livres (1,000–50+(25×20) by selling his fille, a profit nine times his initial
investment.15
This new marketing ploy, allied with the expanded money supply, helped to
increase investor interest in the shares of the Company of the Indies and the
share price went over 1,000 in the middle of July.
On July 20, 1719, the Company of the Indies was awarded the profits of the
Mint for a nine year period. The price to acquire these profits was 50 million
livres, payable over a fifteen-month period. Within a week of this latest

acquisition, the Royal Bank was allowed to increase the issue of banknotes by
240 million livres, and on July 25th, 220,660,000 livres worth of notes were
issued. To enhance the value of the company’s shares, Law then declared a
dividend of 12 percent (60 livres) payable in two half yearly payments in 1720.
The very next day after declaring the dividend, Law floated a new rights issue
hoping to raise the 50 million livres needed to pay for the Mint purchase. As put
succinctly by Murphy:
Law had moved extremely quickly. He had increased the money supply and
so oiled the speculative wheels of the stock market, he promised an
extremely high dividend to increase the attractiveness of shares, and he was
channelling more shares on to the market.16
This time Law priced the shares at 1,000 livres each, with the company of
course gaining a 500 livre premium on each share. To buy these new shares,
called petites filles, the purchaser had to own 4 mères and 1 fille. The petites
filles were to be paid in twenty monthly installments of 50 livres each. To create
a sense of urgency, Law only gave investors 20 days to subscribe to these rights.
This stoking of the speculative fire was not needed, for the share price had
moved over 1,000 livres. Murphy draws upon four sources to construct the
following table of Mississippi Company share prices for a three week period in
late July and early August, 1719.
25 July         1,300     (Piossens)
29 July         1,500     (Piossens)
11 August    2,250     (Dutot)
9 August      2,330     (Giraudeau)
4 August      2,940     (Giraudeau)17
The rise in the share price continued, reaching 5,000 livres in September.

With the public interest in buying the shares at a fever pitch, Law turned to
refinancing more of the government debt. Once again Law floated Mississippi
Company shares, in an attempt to lend the King 1.2 billion livres at a 3 percent
interest rate. This new financing was to refinance France’s remaining billets
d’état in addition to replacing all of the state’s rentes, or long-term obligations.
Law made four share issues in the fall of 1719 that totaled 324,000 shares:
200,000 were issued in late September, with 124,000 more issued a week later
on October 2nd and 4th. The share price was 5,000 livres, with payment for the
shares to be made in ten monthly installments of 500 livres. These new shares
came to be known as cinq-cents.
These new issues were to raise 1.5 billion livres, an amount 14 times greater
than the total of Law’s first three stock issues combined. Law had struck while
the fire was hot. But only a fraction of this amount was raised, because investors
who purchased cinq-cents only put up 500 livres to acquire their rights, the rest
to be paid in nine installments. In fact, if investors were having trouble making
the monthly payments, Law would adjust the payment schedule to call for
quarterly payments. Law was a master at developing ways to market the shares
of the Company to the general public. In addition to the small down payment
feature, Law developed an option market for the shares, called primes, in 1720.
The Royal Bank made low interest loans for share purchases, and the shares
were made bearer securities, thus providing anonymity of ownership. This later
feature was important, given the people’s memories of the 1716 Visa tax.
But the principal fuel that drove the market was the continuous increase in
newly created banknotes, supplied by the Royal Bank. By the end of 1719, the
total amount of banknotes had increased to one billion livres, and Law, through
his tool, the Royal Bank, was far from finished. In May of 1720, banknotes were
to total 2.1 billion livres.18
Near the end of 1719, share prices had risen to 10,000 livres, and more than
a few investors wanted to sell their shares and realize their profits in specie. At
this point, the Regent stepped in with various decrees to repress the attempted

realizations. On December 9th, the company was granted the monopoly for the
refining and separation of precious metals. On December 21st, banknotes were
fixed at a 5 percent premium over silver coin. Silver could then only be used for
payments under 10 livres, with gold to be used only for payments less than 300
livres. In addition, all foreign letters of exchange could only be paid in notes.
“Law foresaw that, unless he could prevent the circulation of coin, it would all
be quietly remitted across the border.”19
On December 30, 1719, the company set the dividend for 1720 at 40
percent on the par value of 500 livres. Given a market price of 10,000 livres, the
dividend amounted to a 2 percent yield, or a 4 percent yield on the recently
issued cinq-cents. The company’s income could not have paid that dividend from
current income. Thus, it is not viewed as legitimate, but yet another of Law’s
tools to hype the stock price. Still, this dividend was only half the income the
holders of rentes had received from the French government, prior to being forced
to relinquish rentes for shares in the company. In fact, many rentes holders
resisted the redemption. However, Law, upon being named Controller-General of
France in January 1720, issued an ultimatum that rentes not redeemed by July
1st would be arbitrarily converted into 2 percent rentes.
As the share price began to wane, Law became determined to sustain the
system by force if necessary. In late 1719, old gold and silver coins were
confiscated. On January 20, 1720, a decree was passed authorizing the search of
all homes for concealed coins. Eight days later it was decreed that banknotes
were currency throughout the kingdom. The company was then allowed to
search all buildings, with any specie seized benefiting the informer. Davis quotes
from Mémoires Secrets sur les Règnes de Louis XIV. et de Louis XV:
They excited, encouraged, paid informers. Valets betrayed their masters.
Citizen spied upon citizen. This made my Lord Stair say that there could be
no doubt of Law’s Catholicity, since he established the Inquisition, after
having already proved transubstantiation by changing paper to money.20

Those who still dared to hold on to coin lived in constant fear, and Law did
not stop there. On February 4th, it was announced that the wearing of any type
of precious stone was to be prohibited after the first of March, the penalty being
confiscation and a hefty, 10,000 livre fine. Two days later, the Royal Bank was
allowed to issue 200 million livres in banknotes, and on the 9th all legal
proceedings involving banknotes, which might arise, were to be brought before
the Council. On the 11th, all “futures” transactions between individuals were
banned, with the company being reserved exclusive right to sell “futures.” On
February 18th, it was decreed that goldsmiths were forbidden to manufacture or
sell vessels of gold or silver, except for some articles of which the weight would
be specified by the Regent. The next day, on February 19th, it was declared that
no person was to have more than 500 livres in coin in his possession, and
nobody, except goldsmiths and jewelers, was to have any articles of gold or
silver. It was also announced that all payments of 100 livres and greater were to
be made in banknotes, and all creditors of the State were ordered to be paid
immediately.
Royal Bank was absorbed by Company of the Indies on February 22nd.
John Law had the printing presses working full time to keep up with his
ambitious banknote issue. Still the printers and clerks could not keep up.
Engraved notes were abandoned, and more clerks were designated to sign the
notes. In the case of 10 livre notes, so many had been created that many were
issued without signature. These lax procedures created mistrust on the part of the
public. To regain the appearance of conservatism, it was decreed that no more
notes would be issued, except by decree at a meeting of the shareholders of the
company.21
At the same meeting, in which it was decreed that the Royal Bank would be
merged with the Mississippi Company, a number of other important measures
were instituted. The King ceded to the company his 100,000 shares in the
company, and in return he was credited with a 300,000 livre deposit at Royal

Bank and the Company also committed to pay him 5 million livres a month for
ten years. The total compensation was 900 million livres, or 9,000 livres per
share. This was close to the then market price of 9,545 livres on February 22nd.
The share price had peaked on January 8th at 10,100 livres. Thus Law was able
to cash out the King very close to the market top.
At this same meeting, Law announced the closing of the Company’s office
for the purchase and sale of shares. Prior to its closure, this office had supported
the share price of the Company at a high level. Murphy explains the purpose of
the office:
Ostensibly this was to bring some order to the market and prevent
transactors being duped by some of the “sharks” who frequented the rue
Quincampoix where the shares were traded. In reality it was to provide
official support for the share price to prevent it falling below a certain
minimum floor price. This policy had monetized the Mississippi shares and
greatly expanded the liquidity of the economy.22
These measures combined to produce a precipitous decline in the price of
the company’s shares. Within a week, the price fell from 9,545 livres to 7,825
livres, a 26 percent decline. Law had anticipated that there would be a movement
out of shares and banknotes into specie, and had prepared for this event with his
decrees of early February. On February 25, Law announced an augmentation of
specie, raising the louis-d’or from 25 to 30 livres and other coins pari passu.
Murphy speculates that:
This augmentation was meant to signal to the market that a diminution of
specie was imminent, The message to specie holders was clear—move out
of specie and into banknotes as specie would be worth less in terms of the
money of account once the diminution was announced.23

Two days later Law repeated the decree that prohibited a person from
holding more than 500 livres in coin.24 Thus the Bank could then refuse to
convert more than 500 livres for any one person, and have the law to point to.
Law had thus given people two choices as to what form their wealth could be in,
banknotes or shares.
On March 5th, Law announced several policies. The first was to reopen the
office that bought and sold the company’s shares. This office was now known as
bureau de conversions, and was buying Mississippi Company shares at a
guaranteed price of 9,000 livres. This measure served to again monetize the
company’s shares. Davis explains:
With a fixed price attached to them, they became at once a part of the
circulating medium, if not of the kingdom, at least of Paris. They were not
receivable in payment of taxes, they were not made a legal tender, but they
were convertible at will at a fixed price into banknotes which fulfilled those
purposes. Dutot calls attention to that phase of this decree. He says they—
the shares—“became proper to fulfil the uses of money.”25
Next another augmentation of the coin was announced. Louisd’or went
from 36 livres to 48 livres, and the ecu was raised from 6 to 8 livres. This
augmentation foreshadowed an impending diminution of specie against
banknotes at the Bank. It was also ordered that all bank loans would be called at
maturity. As Davis indicates: “This order was peremptory, and the inference is
unavoidable that the bank had no other business than loans on margins.”26
Within a week, on March 11th, a series of diminutions was decreed. These
diminutions were intended to demonetize specie. Gold was to be demonetized by
May 1st, with the silver marc to be demonetized in monthly diminutions from 80
livres to 30 livres, by December 1720. It is clear that Law’s intent was to have
only two circulating mediums in France, banknotes and Mississippi Company
shares, both of which were under his control.27

The decrees of March 5, 1720 have been viewed differently by various
writers. Davis summarizes these views:
According to Daire, it was the keystone of the system, and fully realized
Law’s economic thought. It transformed the bank into a reservoir of the
circulating medium, which the paper of the Company of the Indies would
keep at any height, since it served both as feeder and outlet. Should money
become too abundant, it would find its way to the bank for conversion into
shares. Should the reverse be the case, shares would be converted into
notes. Dutot says the decree was a mortal blow to the system. Law was
confronted with the necessity of sustaining either notes or shares, but was
unable to protect both. Shares at the time represented more than fourfold
the value of the notes, and he chose the shares. In taking this step, Dutot
thinks a mistake was made. Law was responsible for the notes; but Dutot
does not think him responsible for the speculation, intimates that the regent
must be held responsible for the decree, and says that it was counselled by
enemies of the system. Forbonnais says the decree absolutely decided the
fall of the system. He thinks the purpose was to sustain the promised
dividend by absorbing into the treasury shares on which the dividend would
then not have to be paid, and that Law was attached to the principle of the
multiplication of wealth, and believed that the shares would assume the
property of money in circulation. Louis Blanc denounces the decree as a
crime, which has unjustly been imputed to Law, and believes it was issued
in the interest of the Court. The decree announcing that no more shares
would be bought and sold saved the system by ruining several great lords.
The decree of March 5 saved several great lords by ruining the system.28
However, the decree of March 5th was not the last “shoe to drop.” That
distinction could possibly be assigned to the decree of May 21st, which Murphy
describes as “the Beginning of the End.” In table 5 Murphy outlines the phased

price reductions of shares and banknotes set forth in the decree of May 21st:
TABLE 5
Source: Antoin Murphy, Richard Cantillon: Entrepreneur and Economist
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986), p. 148.
By this decree, Law was acknowledging that his decree of March 5th,
guaranteeing the 9,000 livre price of the shares and at the same time stipulating
that silver’s value would be diminished in phases, could not be sustained.
Murphy explains in a footnote that:
Law argued that as silver was to be reduced from 80 to 30 it was illogical to
hold that shares and banknotes should not be reduced also. ...In
retrospective comments on the System he argued that he wanted to make
such reductions in March but had been prevented from doing so by vested
interest groupings.29
This comment adds credence to Louis Blanc’s view that the system was
sacrificed for the benefit of political insiders. As quoted by Murphy, Law
admitted to the public:

It was necessary to fix a just proportion betwixt the bank bills and the
specie, therefore we were forced to deviate from the former proportion,
without which, the actions and bank bills must unavoidably have lost their
credit.30
As much as Law had hoped to drive specie out of circulation, by the use of
both market incentives and heavy handed coercion, the French public could not
be completely persuaded of Law’s view that paper money was better than gold
and silver. The decrees of March, 1720 had but slight success in attracting specie
to the Royal Bank. By May 21st, with the public holding 2.1 billion livres in
banknotes and another 600 million livres at the bank or about to printed, the
Royal Bank’s specie holdings amounted to only 21 million livres in silver and 28
million in gold.
For the investing public, Law’s decree of the 21st cast a cloud of doubt over
what was supposed to be an infallible system. Now all of a sudden, shares were
subject to diminution similar to specie. The public outcry forced Law’s friend,
the Regent, to demote Law and place him under house arrest. The once revered
Law, along with his system, was now despised, and on May 27th, the Regent
attempted to stem the negative tide by revoking the May 21st decree. Two days
later, he announced further an augmentation of specie along with rescinding the
prohibition on the holding of gold and silver.
In spite of the system now being in shambles, Law was reappointed to a
lesser position within the government, Intendant Général du Commerce, and was
reaffirmed as director of the Royal Bank. Law attempted to keep the system
afloat through the end of 1720, but the public did not fall for any more of Law’s
financial razzle-dazzle. In table 6 Murphy shows the downward trend in
Mississippi Company share prices from June through November of 1720.
Although share prices declined, they did so gradually, which is a departure
from other bubbles, where asset prices typically break sharply. Murphy explains:

TABLE 6
Source: Antoin Murphy, Richard Cantillon: Entrepreneur and Economist
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986), p. 151.
However, there is an explanation for the gradual collapse in the price of
Mississippi shares, a phenomenon not mirrored by the collapse of the South
Sea scheme where the fall in the price of shares was sharper and more
sudden. In France large quantities of specie had been withdrawn from
circulation, through Law’s measures and hoarding on the part of the more
perspicacious public. Most wealth holders in France faced the classic
Keynesian two-asset choice, that is money (banknotes) or bonds (shares of
the Mississippi Company). The price of shares did not collapse because
French investors were locked in to holding either shares or banknotes. At
times the price of shares rose because investors felt marginally more
confident about them than about holding banknotes.31
The way to truly gauge the affects of the excessive money creation by Law
is to look at the French exchange rate, which sank from 20 pence sterling in May
to 6 pence in September, and was so low it was not quoted for the last three
months of 1720. It was the livres plunge against the pound sterling that is the
manifestation of the bursting of the Mississippi Bubble. In table 7 Murphy
juxtaposes this exchange rate relationship with Mississippi share prices in both
livres and sterling for selected months in 1720.

TABLE 7
Source: Antoin Murphy, Richard Cantillon: Entrepreneur and Economist
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986), p. 152.
While the drama of this boom and subsequent bust was being played out,
what was the effect upon the lives of the French working class? As is the case
with all government created monetary schemes that expand the supply of money,
money is not spread equally over the populace; certain groups gain access to the
money, i.e., government, borrowers, and speculators, while other groups, such
as, the working class, elderly, and savers are excluded.
Hamilton has developed index numbers to represent commodity prices,
money wages, and real wages in Paris during the period of John Law’s system.32
The commodity price index is a composite of food, raw materials, wholesale
building materials, and household staples. However, articles with “sticky” prices,
such as bread and salt, were omitted. The money wage index is comprised of
only daily wages of skilled and common labor, and excludes salaries. It is
Hamilton’s intention that, “the present index numbers presumably do not
underestimate the rise of prices and wages during the Mississippi Bubble.”
To gain a sense of the effects imposed upon the French populace from the
tremendous increase in the supply of money, we shall juxtapose these indexes at
selected months in the Mississippi Bubble story.

TABLE 8
The selection of the above dates was not random, each date is significant:
May 1716 
 General Bank is chartered
Dec. 1718 
 General Bank becomes Royal Bank
July 1719 
 Royal Bank expands banknote issue by 221m
Jan. 1720 
 Company share price peaks at 10,100
Mar. 1720 
 Law’s diminution of silver
May 1720 
 Law’s diminution of banknotes and shares
Sep. 1720 
 Paris price index peaks
Dec. 1720 
 Law’s system falls apart
The above indexes illustrates the disparity between prices and wages. As
prices continued to spiral upward, wages, although increasing a certain sporadic
intervals, never kept pace with prices. Included in the above price index are
building materials, which experienced the largest percentage increase of any of
the goods included in Hamilton’s index for the year 1720. As is the case with
many modern increases in the supply of money, construction activity in Paris
was growing at a frantic pace, doubling the cost of building materials. The
following year, after the bubble’s collapse, threequarters of this gain was lost.33
The boom and bust was not confined to Paris. Hamilton has compiled wage
and price indices for three cities in southern France during the Mississippi
Bubble period: Marseille, Toulouse, and Bordeaux.34 Hamilton summarizes his

findings:
From June to October 1720 prices advanced 36 percent, at Bordeaux, 47.2
percent, at Toulouse, and 12.3 percent, at Marseille...
At their highest points, in October, prices at Bordeaux were twice as
high, and at Toulouse 2.4 times as high, as the respective averages in 1716–
1717. Owing to the catastrophic pestilence that ravaged Provence in the late
spring and summer of 1720, the peak at Marseille, reached in September,
was 2.7 times as high as in the base period. In their apogee, in September,
commodity prices at Paris stood only 2.04 times as high as in 1716–17.35
Concerning wages, unfortunately, an acceptable wage series could not be
found for Bordeaux, but Hamilton was able to secure financial records for
Marseille delineating wages for seven different classes of labor, and wages for
four different grades of labor in Toulouse. Wage rates in both cities fluctuated
moderately between the years 1711 through 1718. As Law’s system began to
take shape in earnest, in 1719, wages moved up sharply in the second quarter,
but still lagged behind prices. As the system collapsed in the fourth quarter of
1720, real wages at Toulouse stood at 82.2, and 87.8 at Marseille, reflecting the
same phenomenon as that in Paris. Wage increases were always a step behind
commodity price increases. In the systems aftermath, wage-earners continued to
be decimated in Toulouse, as the real wage index sank to 76.3 in the third quarter
of 1721. This did not occur at Marseille, due to the plague’s decimation of the
population, thus making labor scarce. Real wages began to rise in 1721 and
continued through 1725.36
By all measures, John Law’s money machine was to spell disaster for the
French working class, whether they lived in Paris or in the provinces. As
Hamilton states, “Law’s System was a catastrophe to the labouring class.”37
As we recount the story of John Law’s Mississippi System and its eventual
collapse, it is clear that Law was a man very much ahead of his time. He created

a bank which in many ways could be considered the prototype of modern central
banks. Through the vehicle of the Royal Bank, Law created paper money out of
thin air and tried in vain to escape the confining clutches of gold and silver
specie, a struggle that has been taken up by subsequent inflation mechanics from
Benjamin Strong and Montagu Norman to Alan Greenspan. The following quote
from Law sums up his view:
An abundance of money which would lower the interest rate to 2% would,
in reducing the financing costs of the debts and public offices etc. relieve
the King. It would lighten the burden of the indebted noble landowners.
This latter group would be enriched because agricultural goods would be
sold at higher prices. It would enrich traders who would then be able to
borrow at a lower interest rate and give employment to the people.38
Law’s theories were virtually a blueprint for Keynesian economics, as
Murphy says, “Keynes can be termed as post-Lawian!”39
Salerno quotes Rist’s critical summary of Law’s ideas:
Law’s writings... already contain all the ideas which constitute the
equipment of currency cranks—fluctuations in the value of the precious
metals as an obstacle to their use as a standard... the ease with which they
can be replaced by paper money, money defined simply as an instrument of
circulation (its function of serving as a store of value being ignored), and
the conclusion drawn from this definition that any object can be used for
such an instrument, the hoarding of money as an offence on the part of the
citizens, the right of the government to take legal action against such an
offence, and to take charge of the money reserves of individuals as they do
of the main roads, the costliness of the precious metals compared with the
cheapness of paper money.40

Given modern central bankers and their respective governments’
willingness, if not eagerness, to reach for the easy-money tonic to revive an
ailing economy, it is no surprise that an overindebted Britain turned to John
Law’s medicine in 1720. The manifestation of Britain’s financial chicanery is
known as the South Sea Bubble, which had its origins with the founding of the
Bank of England in 1694, an institution that Law sought to emulate with his
Royal Bank.

The South Sea Bubble 7
Late seventeenth-century England was a time of increased trade, industrial
expansion, and, of course, war. All of these elements created the need, at least in
the minds of the British, for a public bank. England’s close relations with
Holland during this period gave the British a first-hand view of the vast Dutch
economy and the important linchpin for that economy, the Bank of Amsterdam.
In fact, after the founding of the Bank of Amsterdam in 1609, other public banks
began to be formed: local banks at Rotterdam, Delft, and Middelburg, the Bank
of Hamburg in 1619, and the Bank of Sweden in 1656. English merchants began
to be exposed to public banks throughout Europe, and thus various proposals
began to surface for a public bank in England.
But it was the British government that had the greatest need for a public
bank. William of Orange, when he came to the throne in 1689, hoped to gain
popularity by abolishing the hearth tax.1 But, needing money to fight the war
against France, in addition to the civil war in Ireland and Scotland, William
imposed a series of other taxes: the poll tax, stamp tax, window tax, land tax,
and taxes on peddlers, hackney coaches, births, bachelors, marriages, and
burials. As is inevitable, government revenue was not increased in the same
proportion as the increase in the tax levies. Even had all the taxes been collected,
the war expenses were far in excess of the highest revenue potential of the
taxes.2
Parliament made provisions allowing tallies to be issued on future sources
of government tax revenue. At first these orders were issued against the proceeds
of specific taxes. But the government then began to issue against revenue in
general. These tallies were made assignable and eventually the majority of this
government debt was held by England’s goldsmith-bankers.

In December of 1671, Charles II was in need of funding to finance his
Navy. He called upon the bankers for help, but they refused. After a debate in
Council, the King decided to prohibit certain payments out of the Exchequer. His
proclamation of January 5, 1672 has come to be known as the “Stop of the
Exchequer.” The Stop allowed the King to pay whom he wanted, with others
being out of luck. Keith Horsefield quotes two items in the proclamation that
allowed for the King’s payment discretion: “all other public services and support
of the government” as well as “all other payments appointed by Warrant under
the Privy Seal or Royal Sign-Manual.”3 The second item enabled the King to
direct payments even on stopped funds. Not surprisingly, payments continued to
flow to areas of the government. The most serious losses were absorbed by the
goldsmith-bankers. With the government not making payments on their tallies,
bankers were in turn forced to stop payment. Although Charles told the bankers
to make payment to their customers, the banks did not have the money to do so.
The Stop was originally to only last for one year, but was continued until
January 1674. But by that time the damage had been done, as Horsefield
indicates: “By then the funds on which the orders had been drawn were all
expended, so in practice the Stop became permanent.”4 The immediate effect of
the Stop was that credit quickly evaporated. The goldsmith’s notes became
worthless, and subsequently many goldsmith-banks folded. The long-reaching
effect of the Stop was the postponement of joint-stock banking for ten to fifteen
years.5
After the Stop, the King had difficulty borrowing money. Thus, the British
government needed a bank, and of the many schemes proposed, the one
advanced by William Paterson had the most promise. Paterson is described by
John Giuseppi as, “one of those men whose ideas range some years ahead of
their time and who have a streak of the true visionary about them, but never
quite reaches genius.”6 Paterson and the spokesman for his financial backers,
Michael Godfrey, took their plan for a “Bank of England” to Charles Montague,
a Lord of the Treasury who subsequently, in 1694, became Chancellor of the

Exchequer. Paterson’s financial backers were all men of great substance,
influential politically and all Protestants.
In spite of such backing, the plan was vigorously debated upon reaching
parliament for approval. The Tories feared that the Bank’s operation would
greatly strengthen the Whig government, while the goldsmiths and money
lenders feared being demolished. Also, some merchants worried that the Bank
would pose a threat to their trade business, and there were even some Whig
supporters who feared that the Bank of England would make the monarchy
financially independent of the Parliament. Prior to the proposal reaching
Parliament, there were concerns within the government about the scheme, most
prominently, the note issue. Paterson and his promoters recognized the
tremendous profit potential from note issue, by expanding on what goldsmiths
were enjoying on a local basis. The government took a dim view of the bank
encroaching on its domain—the manufacture and control of England’s currency.
Paterson’s first proposal was denied by Parliament because, as Clapham
says: “It looks as though they thought the proposal was for the issue of legal
tender bank notes; and apparently that is what it was.”7 Paterson quickly
formulated a second proposal, which made no mention of bills, except in clause
28 of the Act, which was added to the original draft in a separate schedule. Sir
John Clapham makes the comment that “the clause looks like an afterthought.”8
This proposal was brought before the Cabinet by Montague, who submitted that
£1,200,000 be raised, which in turn would be lent to the government at 8
percent, under the condition that the subscribers be incorporated and that £4,000
a year go toward their management expenses.
Paterson’s scheme was debated at length by the Cabinet. Finally, it was
agreed that a bill containing the proposal should be put before Parliament, where
it was passed after being adroitly attached to an ordinary finance bill. The act
was not known as the Bank of England Act, but as:
An Act for granting to their Majesties several Rates and Duties upon

Tunnage of Ships and Vessels, and upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors: for
securing certain Recompenses and Advantages, in the said Act mentioned,
to such persons as shall voluntarily advance the Sum of £1,500,000 towards
carrying on the War against France.9
Thus, the Bank in its early years was called the “Tunnage Bank.” On April
25, 1694, the Act received the Royal Assent, and subscriptions for £1,200,000 of
the £l,500,00010 began to be taken. Opponents of the Bank attempted to
postpone the commission, but Queen Mary squelched the antagonists
immediately. King William, plain and simple, needed the money to fight France.
The subscription books were opened at “Mercer’s Chappell” on June 21st, with
£300,000 being subscribed the first day. The entire £1,200,000 was completed
by July 2nd. The first subscribers were the King and Queen for £10,000,11
followed by 1,267 individual holders. Subscribers were required to pay 25
percent of their subscribed amount in cash.12
As remarkable as the speed of filling the subscription is how quickly the
subscription’s full sum made its way into the Exchequer. The Bank had promised
to complete the operation by January 1, 1695, but full funding was in fact
completed by mid-December. Clapham indicates that “this had been done while
its capital, nominally of the same amount, was still only 60 percent paid up; and
even some of this £720,000 existed in the form of subscribers bonds which,
rather sanguinely, were ‘reckoned as cash’.”13
The Bank aggressively sought deposits from its very beginning, devising
three “methods in keeping running cash.” These methods are described by
Clapham:
...by “Notes payable to Bearer, to be endorsed”, by “Books or Sheets of
Paper, wherein their Account to be entered”, or by “Notes to persons to be
accomptable”. The third method is a kind of deposit receipt, as is shown by
an August decision that only “accomptable notes” be given for foreign or

inland bills of exchange until “the mony be actually received”. The second
method anticipated the modern passbook: it blended with the third under a
rule by which people who drew notes (cheques) should have receipts for
their deposits “and ye particulars of the Bills drawn are to be entered on ye
side”. It is the first method which produced those bearer notes “without
which the Bank could hardly have carried on business”; and the third from
which the cheque developed, for the holder of an “accomptable note” could
create “drawn notes” against it, for himself or others.14
The Bank of England’s note issue monopoly was only limited by the formal
order that prohibited it from issuing notes in amounts exceeding its capital.
However, as early as 1696, critics of the Bank complained of the free use of
notes. Clapham quotes from a broadsheet issued in connection with the
recoinage of 1695–96 entitled The Mint and Exchequer United:
the Bank was limited by Act of Parliment not to give out Bills under the
Common Seal for above £1,200,000; and if they did every Proprietor was to
be obliged... to make it good, so that they give out Bank Bills with interest
for but £1,200,000. But they give the Cashier’s notes [observe the term he
uses] for all sums (ad infinitum) which neither charge the Fund nor the
Proprietors, which seems to be a Credit beyond the intention of the Act...
and never practiced before by any Corporation, and almost a Fraud on the
Subject.15
In spite of frequent attacks, the Bank prospered. Its promoters were all
influential Whigs, which ensured the support of both the government and the
commercial world, both of which would run to the Bank’s aid whenever it was
threatened. This success was reflected in the price of the Bank’s stock which hit
the unprecedented price of £108 in January, 1696. But two dangers loomed on
the horizon: the recoinage and the Land Bank project.

England’s coinage was depreciating daily as a result of continual clipping
and other debasement, e.g., iron and copper coins being silvered over. The
situation was so severe that trade was at a standstill, attracting the attention of
Parliament, which passed the ReCoinage Act of 1696. This act forbade the
exchange, sale, or receipt of any coins, clipped or unclipped, gold or silver, for
more than their nominal value. Additionally, the law called for a £500 fine for
anyone caught in possession of coin clippings, plus the offender would be
branded on the right cheek with a capital R. And, if this was not enough, only
professional goldsmiths were allowed to buy or sell bullion. Any house
suspected of containing bullion could be inspected at any time. If bullion was
found on the premises, the owner was required to prove that the bullion was not
the product of clippings or melted coin. County sheriffs were required to pay £40
to anyone who procured the conviction of a clipper. The law went even further to
provide incentives to snitch on a person’s bullion holding neighbor. Any
“clipper” who was able to secure the guilt of two other “clippers” would receive
a pardon, and the ambitious apprentice who informed on his master was made a
freeman of the City. This “war on clipping” which ultimately led to the harshest
of penalties, execution, inspired the clergy to protest. Tw o difficulties that the
Exchequer was forced to grapple with concerning the ReCoinage Act were the
expense of the recoinage and more importantly, the decision as to whether the
coins should keep their old standard or be issued at a lower one.
The expense of the operation totaled £2,703,164 and was covered with
difficulty. This ultimate cost was far in excess of that estimated in the beginning.
The Bank also was naïve about the consequences of the recoinage, as Andréadès
writes:
Possibly too, if the Bank had realized the difficulties it would have to face
—the depreciation of its stock and notes, the suspension of payments and of
dividends—its directors, in spite of their courage and intelligence, would
have refused to enter upon such a formidable adventure, more especially

since they were already threatened by the Land Bank.16
The question of whether the new coins should keep their old standard or be
issued at a lower one was to be debated vigorously. William Lowndes, the
Secretary of the Treasury, developed the idea that lowering the standard of
fineness of the coins while continuing to call the coins by their former names,
would defray the expense of the recoinage. Lowndes’s report was met with a
crushing rebuttal from John Locke, who is quoted by Andréadès:
But this, however ordered, alters not one jot the value of the ounce of silver,
in respect to other things, any more than it does its weight, this raising
being but giving of names at pleasure to aliquot parts of any piece. No
human power can raise the value of our money their double in respect of
other commodities, and make that same piece or quantity of silver, under a
double denomination, purchase double the quantity of pepper, wine, or lead,
an instant after such proclamation, to what it would do an instant before.17
In spite of Lowndes’s suggestion being the prevailing view, Montague’s
support, combined with Locke’s keen analysis, led to passage of the resolution to
preserve the old standard.18
The Land Bank proposal was put forth by Dr. Hugh Chamberlain and John
Briscoe. Their idea was to raise a public loan twice that of the Bank of England.
This loan would be backed by the security of landed property and have an
interest rate of 31/2 percent. Chamberlain and Briscoe fell into the same trap as
John Law, viewing paper money backed by land as equivalent, if not superior, to
gold or silver. Their plan called for the printing of money equal to the total value
of all property. As Andréadès points out, these promoters knew that government
coercion was needed to carry out their scheme:

The promoters did not deny that the public preferred the precious metals,
and that in consequence if the Land Bank were forced to pay in gold, it
would soon have to suspend its payments. But they proposed to overcome
this difficulty by making the notes inconvertible and legal tender.19
The British government in the spring of 1696 was again, as is the case with
all governments, in need of money, and the Land Bank received Royal Assent on
April 27th by way of a Ways and Means Bill. The bill was to raise £2,564,000,
with the interest on the loan to be covered by a salt tax. But alas, the Land Bank
act died as quickly as it was engendered. Only £7,100 was subscribed, with
£5,000 of that being the King’s investment. With the government on the brink of
bankruptcy, the Exchequer stepped in with an issue of Exchequer bills to fill the
breach. Also, the King was able to secure a loan from the Dutch in the amount of
£500,000. This scrambling for funds was due to the fact that the government had
borrowed all that the Bank of England could lend, based on it not being able to
lend an amount more than its capital. The Bank’s bills had fallen to a 10 percent
discount. Additionally, its stock had dropped from £107 to £83 with the passage
of the Land Bank proposal and the subsequent floating of the Exchequer bills.
The Bank had many competitors, with all of them issuing their own paper. As
Carswell writes:
Neither recoinage nor expanding trade could have been financed without
paper money, which was issued during the war in increasing quantity from
the Exchequer, the Bank of England, and the innumerable goldsmiths and
running cashes of Lombard Street.20
It was the damage that the Bank received from the Land Bank scheme, the
recoinage, and its pesky competitors, that led its promoters to seek aid from the
government in the form of monopoly status. The case was made that, for the
Bank to be useful to the State, its notes must not be faced with competition

which “causes distrust and contracts credit instead of enlarging it.”21
The main provisions of the act in 1697, which gave the Bank of England
monopoly status, were:
a. The Bank would add £1,001,171 to its capital,
b. Subscriptions could be paid 80 percent in Exchequer bills, 20 percent in
Bank notes,
c. Subscribers were to be incorporated in the company,
d. The Bank was granted monopoly status for the duration of its charter until
August 1, 1711, since no other banking corporation was to be established
by an Act of Parliament,
e. 8 percent interest was guaranteed by the salt tax on tallies accepted in
payment by the Bank,
f. Before opening the subscription for the additional capital, the original
capital was to be paid up to 100 percent for each proprietor,
g. The Bank was authorized to issue notes to the amount of its original capital
(£1,200,000), plus the sums to be subscribed, on the condition that they
were payable on demand,
h. All property of the Bank was exempt from taxation,
i. It was to be a felony to forge or tamper with Bank notes.22
By consequence of this act, £200,000 in banknotes and £800,000 in tallies
were drawn out of circulation, thus the discount on the remaining Bank notes
disappeared, and these banknotes began to circulate without bearing interest.23
England’s war with France also ended in September, 1697, relieving the
government treasury of the burdensome expense of the war, perhaps just in time.
Early in 1697, over £5 million of shortterm government borrowings were due
and had to be extended, and to add to the distress, the Malt Lottery loan
subscription in April was a complete flop.24 The government’s credit was
repaired with the help of the Bank of England, three years of peace, and the
successful floating of New East India Company stock in 1698, which in turn

loaned £2 million to the Exchequer. This new entity, like the Bank of England,
was allowed to use the government’s debts that it owned as a “fund of credit.”25
The tranquility of peace was not to last long, as the War of the Spanish
Succession began when Louis XIV of France marched into the Spanish
Netherlands in February 1701. William, who hated Louis XIV, was eager to join
the European coalition. However, the public was not in the mood for more of
William’s war and commercial unrest. In spite of three years of peace, taxes and
interest rates had remained high, hangovers from the previous war debts. But
with a hostile enemy just across the English Channel, the English joined the fray
in earnest, especially after the death of King William in 1702.
The long and bloody confrontation was to again tax England’s treasury. The
Bank of England supplied shortterm funding, with long-term funding supplied
mainly by the sale of 96 to 99 year annuities. Sidney Godolphin was named as
Lord Treasurer in 1702 by Queen Anne, and was, in the view of Dickson to
manage “the national finances with great care and skill.”26 Godolphin seemed to
be able to raise funds to fight the French with relative ease, being aided by the
British army’s battlefield conquests, which bolstered investor confidence. The
war’s expense was running at between £8 million to £9 million per year. This
unprecedented expense was far greater than what could be extracted from the
populace by way of new taxation. Thus, tax revenues through the end of the
century were mortgaged with long-term debt. From 1704 through 1710, the
British government’s long-term borrowings totaled £10.4 million. In addition to
these loans from the public, Godolphin borrowed £1.7 million in Exchequer bills
from the Bank of England, and obtained loans from the East India Company.
By this time, the public had become anxious about the length of the war and
its cost, both in blood and financially. The harsh winter of 1708–09, which led to
a bad harvest the following summer, pushed up prices. This inflation and the
failure of peace talks at The Hague in August was followed by a bloody battle at
Malplaquet in September and created an adverse political climate that led to a
new Tory Ministry the following year. The new Ministry sacked Godolphin on

August 8, 1720, with Robert Harley being named Chancellor of the Exchequer
two days later. In May of the following year Harley was named Lord Treasurer.27
In the meantime, Sir John Blunt and his partners had transformed the Sword
Blade Company into a finance company in order, as Carswell says, to “annex for
themselves as large a part as they could of the politico-financial empire that had
been carved out by the Bank of England.”28 The Sword Blade Company’s
business was to acquire estates with the proceeds from stock issues that were
paid for in government obligations. The obligations chosen were Army
Debentures, issued by the Paymaster of the Forces. The market price of these
debentures was £85, for which the holders were then offered Sword Blade stock
valued at £100. The government was thus traded their own debt instrument, at a
discount, for their land.
In the spring of 1704, the Bank of England took offense of the activities of
the Sword Blade Company, serving notice to the Treasury that the monopoly
clause of the Act of 1697 was being violated by Mr. Blunt and his company.
Blunt contended that the Act of 1697 only prohibited rival corporations set up by
an Act of Parliament, which the Sword Blade Company was not. By May of
1707, the Bank managed to get the Treasury’s promise that it would take action
against Sword Blade Company and to fortify the Bank’s privileges.
The Sword Blade Company provided good, healthy competition for the
Bank of England, but the Treasury needed money, and the Bank was willing to
lend £11/2 million at 41/2 percent.29 With the Treasury getting what it wanted, it
in turn extended the Bank’s charter to 1732, along with allowing the bank to
double its existing capital of £2,201,171. The additional capital was raised
before noon the same day subscriptions became available. Andréadès provides a
breakdown of the Bank’s capital position at this point:
Capital of the Bank.....................................................£2,201,171
This Capital doubled..................................................£4,402.343

And increased by the £400,000 now advanced............£4,802,343
To which must be added for the Exchequer bills.........£1,775,027
Total                                                                         £6,577,37030
The activities of the Bank, along with those of the Sword Blade Company
and the East India Company, ensured that there was plenty of money available.
As Carswell writes: “The war had encouraged, not checked, the advance of
wealth and the multiplication of paper. It was no uncommon thing, now, for a
man to have made a ‘plum,’ as current slang described £100,000.”31
As was the case in the Bank’s original charter, the Bank’s note issue was
only restricted by the amount of its capital. Andréadès quotes H.D. Macleod’s
stinging criticism of this scheme:
Now, to a certain extent, this plan might be attended with no evil
consequences, but it is perfectly clear that its principle is utterly vicious.
There is nothing so wild or absurd in John Law’s Theory of Money as this.
His scheme of basing a paper currency upon land is sober sense compared
to it. If for every debt the Government incurs an equal amount of money is
to be created, why, here we have the philosopher’s stone at once. What is
the long sought Eldorado compared to this? Even there the gold required to
be picked up and fashioned into coin.32
The new Chancellor of the Exchequer, Robert Harley, had inherited from
his successor, Godolphin, a mountain of debt, and the immediate problem of
having to satisfy the creditors of the Navy, all of whom were anxious to be paid.
Harley received proposals from John Blunt and George Caswell of the Sword
Blade Company, and from Sir Ambrose Crowley, a large contractor with the
Navy Board. The Blunt-Caswell plan essentially called for the incorporation of
the Navy and other creditors, along with cancelling the state’s debt to them in
exchange for stock.

Harley was not flush with options. He did not have the cash to pay the
floating debt, and had no alternative to the Blunt-Caswell proposal. On June 12,
1711, the plan was given Royal Assent. The government’s short term creditors,
holding close to £9 million, were to be incorporated under the Great Seal as “the
Governor and Company of Merchants of Great Britian Trading to the South Seas
and other parts of America and for encouraging the Fishery.”
This new entity, in exchange for extinguishing £9 million in government
debt, was given a monopoly on trade with South America, on the east coast from
the River Orinoco to Tierra del Fuego, and for the entire west coast. This region
had for some time held an allure of riches to the British. Thus, it was the perfect
vehicle to placate the government’s creditors, given its potential for high profits.
In fact the British, since the reign of Queen Elizabeth, had attempted to break the
Spanish stronghold on the Americas, either by force or license. This attempt, like
the others, was to fail. The opening of this market would come much later, in the
nineteenth century, with the political independence of the Spanish colonies.
The establishment of the South Sea Company coincided with the British
expedition in August, 1711 against Quebec, and the planning of an Anglo-Dutch
attack on the Spanish West Indies. Dickson theorizes that: “It can therefore be
regarded as part of a three-pronged drive for empire in the new world, though
there is little doubt that in fact this grand design was three-quarters bluff,
intended to assist Harley’s peace negotiations.”33
At war’s end in 1713, the South Sea Company’s trading rights were
defined. The company had permission to send, annually, one 500 ton ship to
trade at the fairs of Cartagena or Veracruz and to send 150 ton supply ships to
supply food to the factories. In addition, it was given a thirty year contract to
supply African slaves to New Spain. This contract called for the delivery of
4,800 slaves per year of a specified condition, with the company paying taxes on
4,000 of these. The King of Spain was to receive 10 percent of the company’s
slave trade profit in addition to the 28 percent of all other trading profits. This
limited amount of trading privilege, along with the payment to the King of Spain

of his share, left but a meager return for the company.
It was to take over two years to even come close to selling out the South
Sea subscription. The books were finally closed on Christmas of 1713, with a
total of £9,177,968 having been raised, an amount smaller than the £9,471,324
envisaged by the South Sea act. The company was to receive annually £550,678
in interest and £8,000 for management from the government. In the beginning
the government paid promptly. But this situation changed, and by the summer of
1715 interest was six months in arrears. With no interest income coming in and
little progress made in starting trade with Spanish America, the company was
quickly in financial trouble. In 1712, 1713, and 1714 the proprietors were given
the option of receiving dividends in cash or in bonds. In 1715, no choice was
given, dividends were paid in bonds; and, in 1716, dividends were paid in the
form of stock. Fortunately for the subscribers the stock was now at par.
From 1712 through 1715, the government used South Sea stock to pay
creditors and to secure loans. “For the use of the public,” £2,371,402 of the
company’s capital had been set aside; plus £500,000 in stock was created for the
government’s use by the South Sea Act. This use of funds was not popular, and
eventually, in 1717, the company was able to shed its encumbrances, with
Parliament proclaiming that government deficiencies were to be paid, in the
future, out of the General Fund. Also, by this date progress had been made on
the trade front and the company appeared to have weathered its difficult
beginnings.
By the use of the South Sea Company vehicle, the government was able to
rid itself of its floating debt. However, this repayment did nothing to fund the
burden of the war expense that had reached its height at that time (1711). To
fund this shortfall, Harley created Exchequer bills on a massive scale to handle
the shortterm needs, and used the Bank of England as receiver for £9.2 million in
lottery loans floated in 1711 and 1712 to cover the revenue deficit. Harley went
on to float smaller lottery loans in 1713 and 1714, with the Bank acting as
receiver. One loan was to discharge the debts of the Civil List, and the other was

to go to the public service.34
The War of the Spanish Succession was finally over in 1713. England and
the other participants had each created a huge mountain of debt with which they
were forced to contend. On September 29, 1714, Britian’s national debt stood at
£40,357,011. Additionally, there were over £41/2 million in Exchequer Bills
outstanding, not to mention debts of back-pay to the army and foreign subsidies
of unknown amounts. The government undertook a massive restructuring of its
debts in hopes of lessening the interest burden.
This restructuring was accomplished through three conversion Acts. The
first called for the conversion of the 1711–12 lottery loans outstanding and half
of the 1705 Bankers’ Annuities debt to be exchanged into 5 percent stock to be
managed by the Bank of England. The second act reduced the interest rate on
various debts owed to the South Sea Company and the Bank of England. The
third act established a sinking fund for reduction of the national debt and called
for reducing the interest rate on Exchequer bills to l1/2 percent.
These measures, which were implemented between 1715–1719, were for
the most part successful, reducing the government’s annual interest charge by 13
percent and providing welcome relief to the state. Although the yield on
government obligations had been lessened, most holders of the government
stock felt their principal was more secure. This feeling was reflected in the
market price of government stock. At the end of 1717, the stock was trading four
points above its par value.
However, there was one finance problem left to be solved, that of the high
and virtually perpetual interest to be paid to annuitants. These annuity holders
would have to be persuaded to exchange their annuities for redeemable stock.
The Treasury turned to the South Sea Company in 1719 with a plan for this
conversion. The interest payable on these annuities was £135,000 yearly, thus
the Treasury calculated that this interest should be capitalized at a market price
of eleven and a half years purchase, or £1,552,500. To be added to this was

£168,750 in back interest owed the company and the £778,750 the company was
to lend to the Exchequer. Thus, the total increase in the state’s debt was to be
£2.5 million as a part of this conversion.
In the spring of 1719, it turned out that only two-thirds of the subscription
was taken. As a result the South Sea Company’s capital increased by £1,746,844
to a total of £11,746,844. The subscription, which was payable in fifths, was
fully funded in December 1719, with the company receiving £592,800. The
Exchequer was to be paid £544,142. This was raised by selling £520,000 in new
stock at £114 in July. The company’s claims against the state now stood at
£193,582. Thus, when all was said and done, the company had made a tidy profit
of £242,240 from the operation, and had £24,000 in stock still in hand. This
success led to a much bigger operation of the same kind the following year.
Across the Channel, in 1719, John Law’s system was at its height and was
viewed with more than a twinge of jealousy and concern from the Brits. Law’s
debt conversion had already inspired John Blunt and his fellow Sword Blade
partners. But what concerned the British government was the ever increasing
flight of capital leaving London to seek the much-talked-about returns to be
enjoyed in Paris. With further debt conversions being contemplated by the
government, it did not want this loss of capital to hinder its plans. These fears
were raised when rumors began to circulate that John Law was opening a large
“bear” account to depress British Government stocks. At the same time, another
rumor had him buying the East India and South Sea Companies so as to become
the financial czar of Europe. But the government’s worries were pointed in the
wrong direction. John Law’s system was about to fall apart, and besides, Law
had a very ambitious imitator in Sir John Blunt, who was about to embark on his
own grand scheme.
Two categories of debt were particularly troublesome to the government.
One was the ninety-six and ninety-nine-year annuities which had been sold when
interest rates were high, and could not be redeemed by a lump-sum payoff or a
sinking fund (they could be redeemed only if annuitants were persuaded

voluntarily). The other category was miscellaneous debts, which were being
redeemed by Walpole’s sinking fund at approximately £750,000 per year. Total
government debt service, not including management charges and amounts
converted into stocks already, was over £1.5 million per year, and as Carswell
relates:
this was the amount negotiators at the Treasury were concerned to disguise
as a single huge redeemable annuity to the South Sea Company. For this
purpose it was necessary to represent the whole as a capital sum. ...To keep
one’s head in the maze of South Sea finance, it is important to lay firm hold
on the fact that the capital figures were mere paper calculations.35
The capitalization of the redeemable debt was straightforward and totaled
approximately £16 million. As for the irredeemable annuities, the capitalization
was much more difficult to formulate. The overriding objective was to reduce
the cost of this debt as much as possible. This was accomplished by capitalizing
these annuities at their original term of years, but without regard to the date they
were issued. Ninety-nine and ninety-six year annuities were capped at 5 percent
for twenty years, with the thirty-two year and the Lottery annuities being capped
at 6 percent interest for fourteen years. The total capitalization for the annuities
was £15 million, making the grand total £31 million.
Against this staggering sum of £31 million, an equal amount of South Sea
stock was to materialize when debt holders would voluntarily exchange one for
the other. The amount of stock that the company would issue for any given debt
was to be decided by the market. Thus, as was the case with the 1719
conversion, the higher the price of the stock, the more profitable the conversion
would be for the Company.
The Company’s deal with the government in regards to the conversion was
very precise: for every pound of yearly expense spared the government, the
Company received a pound a year from the government. The exception to this

was on irredeemables where the Company would receive only 14 shillings for
each pound the government was saved. This was worth £40,000 a year to the
Exchequer. The ultimate savings to the government was to come after seven
years, when the government would only pay 4 percent on all of the converted
debt, a savings of roughly £400,000. In addition this obligation could be
redeemed. Thus, the government was allowed to pay off the debt in total
whenever it might be able. It was calculated that if the interest savings were
applied according to sinking fund principles, Britian’s debt would be retired in
twentyfive years. And if the prospect of being debt free was not enough
incentive, the Company offered a carrot that was to be paid at the end of the one
year conversion term: a gift to the Exchequer of £3 million, payable in four
quarterly installments, to be used to pay off redeemable debts incurred before
1716, with any amounts that remained being available for use in whatever way
the Exchequer desired.
This £3 million sweetener also served as an insurance policy for Blunt. If
all of the redeemables were not converted, this £3 million would be available to
pay these debts off. Thus, with the Bank of England owning most of these notes,
the threat of repayment was enough for the Bank, which would not be able to
reinvest the cash at attractive returns, to convert the debts it held for South Sea
stock. Blunt knew that he would never earn, in the normal course of business,
the £3 million in cash needed to make this promised gift, for every penny of
income would have to go toward payment of the 5 percent dividend on the
capital. What Blunt was counting on was a rise in the share price of South Sea
stock to generate the needed funds.
Blunt calculated correctly that, if a boom in stock prices was engendered,
holders of government annuities would quickly exchange this debt for the
opportunity to make huge capital gains relatively quickly. The fuel needed for
this boom was endogenous to the plan, as Carswell points out:
The plan amounted to the injection into the economy which was already

booming, of another £5 million or so of new money—ten times the
injection of the previous year— with a simultaneous lowering of interest
rates.36
The final days of 1719 brought news that spurred the fortunes of the South
Sea Company. Peace between Spain and England had been declared on the terms
of the latter, opening up trade passages to South America. The time had come for
Blunt’s grand plan to be presented to the Parliament. Chancellor of the
Exchequer, John Aislabie, laid the plan before the House of Commons on the
basis that the plan was forthcoming from the Company. Secretary Craggs
followed with the suggestion that the House receive the plan. But to Aislabie’s
dismay, an influential Anglo-Irish Whig, Thomas Brodrick, suggested that the
House consider other offers before it accepted this one, and the measure was not
voted on. This allowed the Bank of England time to make a rival proposal.
The Bank was suddenly put in a position of having to fight for the top
financial perch upon which it had sat for so many years. For ten years the South
Sea Company had slowly increased the amount of annual payments it received
from the government, to over £500,000, and now the Bank was faced with the
possibility that the South Sea Company would be the recipient of £2 million in
annual annuity payments at its expense. It was feared that the loss of this
conversion would relegate the Bank to being just an ordinary commercial bank,
with its old enemy, the Sword Blade Company, the credit-creating agency behind
the South Sea Company, depriving them of their lofty position within the
London money market.
The bidding for the conversion was spirited. The critical deal point, which
the Bank and the Company continued to make more and more attractive, was the
amount to be given as a gift to the Exchequer. The South Sea Company’s
original £3 million was increased to £31/2 million, only to be increased to £51/2
million with the Bank’s bid. But the Company finally won out by raising the

stakes of the gift to £4 million certain to the Exchequer, with the possibility of as
much as another £31/2 million. The additional amount was dependent upon the
amount of debt that was actually converted. Also, the Company promised to
make the annuity open for redemption in four years rather than the seven years
originally proposed, and, at the same time, reduce the interest rate to 4 percent.
Finally, the Company offered to circulate £1 million in Exchequer bills with no
management fee or interest. This was an offer that the Bank of England could
not match, and the South Sea proposal passed in the House with ease. With the
news of the Company’s triumph, the traders in Exchange Alley bid the price of
its stock up 31 points, from 129 to 160, and what a journalist of the time called
“the English Mississippi” was underway.37
As the debt conversion was being negotiated and subsequently bid for,
English pounds continued to flow across the channel into the awaiting tempest
that John Law’s system had now become. After hitting a high in January 1720,
Mississippi Company shares had fallen. Law was now desperately trying to hold
up the shares at the expense of his inflation ravaged currency, and the financial
freedom of the French people. Law’s proposals put forth in the spring, in hopes
of salvaging the currency, were met with suspicion from the savviest of
London’s investors, who began to pull their money out of Paris and return it to
the London market.
John Blunt and the rest of the South Sea stock promoters, like John Law in
the case of the Mississippi shares, sparked the fire of speculation in the
Company’s shares by allowing the governing class the opportunity to be in on
the ground floor of the stock issue. This virtually assured them a profit. Nearly
all of London’s bourgeoisie had purchased their shares prior to the publishing of
the Bill calling for the debt conversion on March 17th. Subsequently, between
March 19th and 21st, the share price soared from £218 to £320 on reports from
Paris that John Law was taking criticism from the Regent and having
nightmares. A second reading of the Bill on the 21st inspired a debate on the

23rd over whether the terms of the conversion should be fixed in advance and be
written into the statute. The debate lasted six hours, with contrary news causing
the price of the shares to trade in a broad range of 110 points, between £270 and
£380. The company prevailed, which propelled the stock to £400 for a brief
period before it retreated back to £330.
On March 25th, the Bank of England was further humiliated. It was
announced that the entire debt held by the Bank (£3.75 million) that was not to
be redeemed by the South Sea Company would be repaid by the end of the year.
The payoff of this debt meant that the Bank would no longer be a national
institution. Any support the Bank had enjoyed from those individuals in
government that was now firmly behind the South Sea Company, with more than
a few having been given shares in the company to enjoy in the speculation and
reap the financial reward. The Bill finally received Royal Assent on April 7th.
The Company had provided £574,500 worth of stock in bribes to government
officials to get the bill passed, and now London was poised for the boom.
Carswell added up the liabilities that the Company would incur over the next
year (£11.4 million), which the profits of the conversion would have to cover.38
A share price of £140 was needed to break even. On April 7th the stock stood at
£335.
The South Sea Company’s subscription and debt conversion was begun in
April, with the Company’s primary motive being very clear: to market its new
stock while the share price was rising, while deferring the second conversion of
government debt until August, when its share price was at its height (£1,000).
This would maximize its exchange advantage over government debt holders.
The Company’s first stock subscription was on April 14th, with 2,250,000 issued
at a per share price of £300. The terms of payment were 20 percent down, with
the balance to be paid for over sixteen months with calls every two months.
The second issue came two weeks later, on April 29th, with l1/2 million
shares issued at a price of £400. The terms quickly became more liberal, 10

percent down, with the balance over twenty months payable in nine calls at three
to four month intervals. With the market frantically trading up the stock, the
Company made its third and largest issue on June 17th, issuing 5 million at
£1,000 per share. Terms again called for 10 percent down, but payments were
stretched over fifty-four months, with nine payments made semiannually. The
fourth, and final issue was made on the 24th of August, with 1,250,000 issued at,
again, a £1,000 share price. The terms of this issue called for 20 percent down,
with the balance to be paid over the next thirty-six months. Had all payment
calls been made, the Company would have received £75,250,000 over the
subsequent four and one-half years! The market had two vehicles with which to
trade the South Sea Company: the actual shares and the subscription receipts.
Demand for the shares was enormous, as exhibited both by the increase in
price and how quickly the shares were snapped up during the four offerings. The
first was said to have been filled in an hour, the second and third issues in a few
hours, and the final issue in three hours. There was even talk of an additional
issue, however it was scuttled in early September when the market was
beginning to crumble.
The decision by John Blunt and the rest of the South Sea directors to begin
with stock issues or “Money Subscriptions” as they were known, rather than the
conversion of the government debt was driven by the following motives,
outlined by Dickson:
first, to the knowledge that they could legally increase their capital without
any limit, provided they applied part of the proceeds to paying off the
government’s creditors; second, to their wish to take the exchanges in
stages, rather than spoiling the market by taking them all at once. A third
motive was, of course, their wish to cash as quickly as possible the cheque
which the Government had handed them without waiting to see if there
were the funds to meet it.39

When the Company began to convert the annuities to South Sea stock, the
holders of these annuities were eager to get hold of the new South Sea shares
and sell them in the now booming market, but the Company was not keen on a
flood of shares pouring into the market, putting a damper on the share price.
Annuitants or their attorneys showed up at South Sea House, with their title
documents in tow, to sign their names and the annual amounts they received into
the books. These documents were headed by an introductory statement that most
of them, unfortunately, neglected to read. This preamble gave three South Sea
clerks the power to subscribe the capital stock in whatever way the company saw
fit to the annuitants. Rather than delivering shares, a book entry was made, with
the actual stock not being delivered until December 30, 1720. This method was
repeated in July and again for the third and, as it turned out, final debt
conversion in August. The government creditors had thus exchanged their debts
for no more than the expectation of possessing South Sea stock.
The primary holders of the government debts were, not the unsophisticated
masses, but no less than the powerful Bank of England, Million Bank, and a host
of wealthy, powerful individuals. Dickson gives the result of their collective
gullibility:
80% of the long and short annuities (the Irredeemables) and 85% of
Government ordinary stock (the Redeemables) were converted into South
Sea stock. The company’s nominal capital increased by over £26m., on
which the Government was to pay interest partly at 5% and partly at 4%
until midsummer 1727, then entirely at 4%. Despite bitter pressure on the
part of the disappointed public creditors in the winter of 1720–1, the
exchanges were not rescinded,...
When it put the accounts together, the company found that, thanks to
the rise in the market price of its stock, it had been able to persuade holders
of £26m. of the £31m. subscribable debts to exchange them for South Sea
stock so over-valued that they only obtained £8.5m. of it.40

By the late spring, early summer of 1720, foreign buying began to push the
price of South Sea stock ever higher, as investors fled Paris in ever increasing
numbers. Also, specie from Holland began to arrive in London to be used for the
purchase of shares. At the same time, the Company gave Exchange Alley a
liquidity injection by giving the directors the power to lend money on the
security of South Sea stock. This action produced £11 million in loans. At the
same time, the Bank of England was throwing gasoline on the fire in the form of
loans on its own stock. The government also got into the act by lending the
South Sea Company £1 million in Exchequer bills that were subsequently used
to purchase the Company’s shares. Even the Royal African Company, which lent
£102,000, joined the party.
The South Sea share price was now rocketing upward. At the start of June,
the price was £600, and by the end of that month it stood near £1,000. This
tremendous speculation led to a flood of other proposals for new companies in
Exchange Alley. Many of the proposed operations were swindles, with
promoters marketing a particular stock with the tool of low down payments and
deferred-payment plans, only to confiscate the down payments and leave the
city. Some, however, were respectable ventures. The number of “bubble
company” proposals hit its height in June, with 88 being promoted in that month.
Only eleven more were sponsored the entire rest of the year.
Speculation was not limited just to South Sea shares or these “bubble
companies.” Other securities rose as well, along with the price of land, as the
following quote of Lord Bristol, who was negotiating with William Astell over
the price of a land parcel from Dickson, illustrates: “land has almost doubly
increased in value since ye time I first fix’d for your final answer.”41
Ironically, at the height of speculation in June, the pin that would eventually
pop the bubble was being fashioned by the British government. On June 11th,
the King’s assent was given to the Bubble Act, which made it an offense to
“presume to act” as a corporate body or to divert an existing charter to

unauthorized ends. In August, four companies were found to be in violation of
the Act: the English Copper Company, the Royal Lustering Company, the York
Buildings Company, and the Welsh Copper Company. Although the Act had
been enacted to keep capital from being channeled away from the South Sea
Company, the writs against the four companies signaled the beginning of the
steep fall in the price of South Sea shares. In spite of desperate attempts to
increase the demand for shares by declaring a 30 percent Christmas dividend (à
la John Law), a torrent of sell orders descended upon Exchange Alley. By mid-
September the share price had dropped to £520, and by October the price was
£200, on the its way to £120 in December. The bubble had exploded.42
After the “house of cards” had finally been leveled, the financial prospects
of the South Sea Company were put in a clearer light. The Company’s only
asset, besides trading privileges that were for the most part unexploitable, was a
stream of income from the Exchequer in the amount of £2 million per year. The
bad news was that expenses for the coming year were £14.5 million. The South
Sea Company was hopelessly insolvent.43
In spite of the Company technically being bankrupt, it was able to stay in
business for many years through a massive reorganization engineered by Sir
Robert Walpole. Walpole’s ability to sift through the wreckage and decide who
the winners and who the losers would be from this financial train wreck made
him a revered and beloved man of such high reputation that he went on to rule
England as Prime Minister for twenty years. This reverence for Walpole is
evidenced by Clough’s comment:
He [Walpole] was able, moreover, to save for government bondholders
about 60 percent of their investment, and he was successful in salvaging
enough of the South Sea Company to keep the organization in business,
eventually, however, with government securities as its only assets.44
Clough fails to realize that government securities were the only asset the

company ever had. Furthermore, we can only wonder if the government
bondholders at the time thought that taking a 40 percent “haircut” on their
investment was a good deal.
Far from being an isolated mania engendered only by the urges of a
populace with the gambling spirit, the South Sea Bubble was the inevitable
result of a government living beyond its means. Britain had the help of some
enterprising entrepreneurs who, with the example of John Law, produced the
various schemes and institutions through which to create the money needed to
pay for its wars and largess. As is always the case when paper money is created
illegitimately, some groups benefited at the expense of others, with speculation
taking the place of honest work and production as the way to achieve wealth.
This environment of frenzied speculation led to political corruption, great
disparities of wealth, fraud, and violence. As aptly put by Andréadès:
But all these must not lead us to infer that the South Sea crisis was
beneficial to England. It had produced enormous agitation and an unjust
redistribution of wealth and had very nearly ruined the Hanoverian
monarchy. ...Those who shared in it knew perfectly well that it was only a
fraud, but hoped notwithstanding to make some profit out of it. ...These
speculators—and this is one of the most painful features of the crisis—
represented all classes of society, and things were so arranged that the
poorest man might ruin himself as easily as the millionaire.45
The big winner in this story of financial debauchery was, of course, the
British government, which was able to transform an insurmountable mountain of
debt, through their agent, the South Sea Company, and at the expense of the
public creditors, into a much more manageable expense. In effect, a portion of
the government’s debt service was repudiated, with the financial pain being
thrust upon those people who were least able to shoulder it, an unsuspecting
public.

The South Sea bubble episode was relatively short compared with that of
the Mississippi Bubble. The difference between the two bubbles was that Law
used the Royal Bank to print more money, and thus sustained the system for a
longer period of time. Conversely, the Bank of England stood apart from the
South Sea government debt conversion. As the bubble burst, the Bank of
England, concerned about its own survival, discontinued discounting, called in
loans made against its own stock and loans made to the East India Company, and
sold customers interest-bearing notes in an attempt to raise cash.46
If the Bank of England had been successful in outbidding the South Sea
Company for the conversion of the government debt, a replay of the Mississippi
bubble is a distinct possibility, the likely result being a British populace suffering
even greater financial pain.

Increases in the Supply of Money,
Speculative Bubbles, and the
Austrian Malinvestment Theory 8
As we seek explanations for the causes of speculative bubbles, the forthcoming
responses from the different strains of modern mainstream economic thought are
far from satisfying. The Rational Expectations School, after much muddling of
figures and formulas, comes to the conclusion that bubbles are not possible since
all market participants act rationally and can foretell the future. As this volume
has shown, speculative bubbles do occur, and market participants—people—
cannot foretell the future, and do not necessarily act rationally. Econometrics has
again struck out in its attempts to explain, let alone predict, the behavior of
humans. But, of course, rather than admit that their tools are inadequate, the
rational expectations group concludes that, empirically, it cannot be shown that
speculative bubbles exist. Thus, they do not. This otiose view flies in the face of
historical fact.
John Maynard Keynes, whose school of thought when followed as policy is
the modern catalyst for speculative bubbles, wrote at length concerning
speculation. Keynes recognized full well the damage that speculation and
malinvestment could inflict on people. What Keynes did not recognize was the
root cause of these episodes. Instead, he focused on the results which he thought
were the causes. The following paragraph from Keynes sums up his view of
speculation:
there is the instability due to the characteristic of human nature that a large

proportion of our positive activities depend on spontaneous optimism rather
than on a mathematical expectation, whether moral or hedonistic or
economic. Most, probably, of our decisions to do something positive, ...can
only be taken as a result of animal spirits.1
Keynes held the view, as reflected in the above quote, that these “animal
spirits” lead to damaging speculation, and he, of course, prescribed government
restrictions on investment to solve the problem.
So, on one end of the spectrum, we have the rational expectation camp,
which says that all people—market participants—are rational, and, being in
possession of all available data, can foretell the future. One hundred eighty
degrees opposite the rational expectations group is Keynes, who saw all people
as being possessed by “animal spirits,” i.e., being irrational, which will thus
cause frequent instability and speculation in an economy, with the obvious cure
being intervention by the State, which is assumed to be rational.
By reflecting back on what has been written in here, it is obvious that
speculative bubbles can and do occur. And if Keynes’s “animal spirits” were the
cause of speculative bubbles, these bubbles would have happened continually, ad
infinitum, throughout history. Given the fact that this “animal spirit” is an
inherent human trait that is not turned off and on, these speculative episodes
would be constantly engendered through no other impetus but human nature.
This is clearly not the case.
The three speculative bubble episodes just explored, besides having the
obvious similarity that they all occurred, share the common trait that a
government sanctioned bank, along with government policy, created large
increases in the supply of money in each economy, prior to and during these
episodes. Each episode was in its own way different, especially the Tulipmania.
However, the results were the same: boom, speculation, crash, and then financial
pain.
Another common element to all three experiences was a man named John

Law. Law was born in 1671, after the Tulipmania bubble, but he studied the
workings of the Bank of Amsterdam, which played a part in the Tulipmania,
greatly admiring its operation and its positive effect on the Dutch economy. The
Bank of Amsterdam was the linchpin of the strongest economy in the world
because of the soundness of its operation and therefore the Dutch currency. The
Bank accepted coin and bullion and issued bank money against these deposits.
All bank money was backed 100 percent (in the Bank’s beginning) by specie and
thus great confidence in this money was engendered.
Because of the soundness of this money and the Dutch free coinage policy,
immense amounts of coin and bullion flowed to Amsterdam from other parts of
Europe, America, and Japan. This torrent of coin and bullion is reflected in the
deposits of the Bank of Amsterdam, which increased an estimated 60 percent in
the five year period (1633–1638) which encompasses the Tulipmania episode.
Total mint output of the South Netherlands for the 1636–38 period was two and
a half times greater than the amount minted from 1630–32. This huge influx of
money, albeit sound money, led, as Del Mar writes, to “the curious mania of
buying tulips at prices often exceeding that of the ground on which they were
grown.”2 The culmination of Tulipmania came in January 1637 when, for
example, the price of the Witte Croonen tulip bulb rose approximately 26 times
in the space of that month, only to crash to a price of one-twentieth of its peak
price the first week in February of that same year.
After studying the operations of the Bank of Amsterdam during the course
of his travels throughout Europe, Law began to formulate monetary theories and
banking proposals, which in turn he advanced to States throughout Europe. Law
believed that silver and gold were ill-suited to serve as money, that their values
were subject to fluctuation depending upon supply. Initially, Law’s plan called
for paper money that was backed by land, thinking that this paper money would
better satisfy the qualities necessary in money.
Law was initially unsuccessful in selling his proposal to any European
governments, even that of his native Scotland. His views also began to change,

as he studied other banks including the Bank of England, which was formed in
1694. Law was impressed with the Bank of England’s ability to pay for
England’s war against France with paper money. He began to view stocks as
money and that they were superior to silver, thinking that they were inflation
proof.
Law was finally able to find a taker for his scheme in 1716, when he began
the General Bank in Paris. France at that time was devastated economically, after
fighting the War of the Spanish Succession and piling up huge debts. Law was
intent on refinancing this government debt so as to lower interest rates and
stimulate the languid French economy. To accomplish this, Law began the
Company of the West, whose only asset to speak of was the trading privilege
with Louisiana. After selling shares to capitalize the company, Law refinanced
the government’s depreciated debt.
Law then set out to put his system in motion. He was finally able to
convince the Regent to make the General Bank part of the State, with it
becoming the Royal Bank in late 1718. Law then merged three companies
together to form what has been commonly known as the Mississippi Company.
With the Royal Bank issuing 159.9 million livres in fresh banknotes, the price of
the Mississippi Company shares began to take off in early 1719. In the second
half of that same year, with Royal Bank issuing another 220.6 million livres
worth of banknotes, combined with Law’s low down payment, and the extended
terms method of marketing the stock, the price continued to climb, allowing Law
to issue more shares. He then used the capital to refinance more of the
government’s debt.
The share price peaked at 10,100 livres in January 1720, aided by increases
in the supply of money that was to total 2.1 billion livres by May of 1720. In the
spring of 1720, the system was beginning to unravel, leading Law to issue a
series of decrees attempting first to devalue silver, then to devalue shares and
banknotes. With investors attempting to sell shares and convert the proceeds to
specie, Law frantically tried to keep the system afloat, and in fact was able to do

so, given the lack of specie due to hoarding and Law’s policies. But by the end
of the year, the bubble had been deflated. In September, shares were 43 percent
of the high. Indeed, in pound sterling terms, Mississippi shares were only 14
percent of their highs, which more truly reflects the consequences of the massive
increase in the supply of money engineered by Law.
While speculation was running rampant, commodity prices were exploding
over the course of four years, not only in Paris, but in other cities in France.
Some cities experienced worse inflation, and for some it was not as severe. The
big loser was, of course, the laboring class, whose wages never caught up with
prices.
Law’s “success” with the Mississippi System was viewed with envy and
fear from across the Channel in England. Britain, like France, had heavily
encumbered itself, with the help of the Bank of England and Lottery loans, to
fight the War of the Spanish Succession. The Bank of England was an innovator
in the creation of paper money and checking accounts. Its entire capital base was
made up of government debt, with its charter allowing it to issue notes up to the
amount of its capital.
The Bank of England was constantly hounded by competitors who wanted a
share of the Bank’s lucrative business. One of these competitors was the Sword
Blade Company, which was headed by Sir John Blunt. This Sword Blade
Company was to serve as the credit creating arm of Blunt’s South Sea Company.
In 1711, this company was given the monopoly rights to trade with South
America. Unfortunately, the Spanish were to greatly hinder the exploitation of
this monopoly. In exchange for this monopoly, the company refinanced £9
million in government debt.
But this was just the beginning. In 1719, with total government debt well
over £40 million, the South Sea Company proposed a massive refinancing of the
government’s debt, à la John Law. The Company was forced to bid against the
Bank of England for this operation, and finally won out by offering
extraordinary terms and extensive bribery. Once the bid had been won, the price

of South Sea stock took off, which was necessary for Blunt’s plan to work. The
Company would make its money on the conversion, by exploiting the exchange
difference between the government debt and inflated share prices.
The South Sea shares moved quickly to £1,000, with the aid of Company
loans totaling £11 million, the government loaning £1 million, the Bank of
England loaning money on its own stock and the Royal African company
lending in £102,000. With plenty of money in Exchange Alley, there were plenty
of promoters hawking what came to be known as “bubble companies.” Eighty-
eight of these companies were promoted just in the month of June, 1720.
The British government, at the urging of the South Sea Company, passed
the Bubble Act which effectively shut down these upstart bubble companies.
Ironically, the enforcement of this Act against four companies served to burst the
bubble, and speculators rushed to sell. By December of 1720, South Sea stock
was trading at £120.
The Company was bankrupt, and had no real quality assets to begin with,
but speculators were not cognizant of this as the market began to feed on itself.
This episode was, in relation to the Mississippi Bubble, short-lived. The
difference being that the Bank of England, in an effort to raise needed liquidity,
began calling in loans, not to mention not making new ones, and also offering
interestbearing notes to depositors, the equivalent of selling certificates of
deposit in modern banking. John Law, with his Royal Bank, had taken the
opposite strategy, by creating money to support the shares, which only prolonged
the Mississippi Bubble crisis.
The explanation for the cause of speculative bubbles comes to us by
examining the Austrian School’s theory of the trade cycle. This theory,
formulated by second generation Austrian economists, Ludwig von Mises and
Friedrich A. Hayek, in fact has its roots, according to Mises, with the English
“Currency School.”3 Unfortunately, the Currency School did not realize that
unbacked bank accounts were equivalent to unbacked banknotes in terms of
expanding excessive credit. Thus, as the Bank of England was forced to suspend

payment on numerous occasions, it appeared that the Currency School’s
explanation of the trade cycle was erroneous, and the view that the trade cycle
had nothing to do with money or credit, but instead Keynes’s “animal spirits”
came to the fore.
The key point of the Austrian trade cycle theory is that an increase in the
supply of money engenders an economic “boom” followed subsequently by the
correction of that malinvestment, or “bust,” which is characterized by less
money or credit. The business cycle is initially generated by some sort of
monetary intervention in the market, typically in the modern world by bank
credit expansion to business. However, this monetary intervention could be in
the form of the following, listed by Gottfried Haberler:
a. (a)  An increase of gold and legal tender money.
b. (b)  An increase of banknotes.
c. (c)  An increase of bank deposits and bank credits.
d. (d)  An increase in the circulation of checks, bills, and other means of
payment which are regularly or occasionally substituted for ordinary
money.
e. (e)  An increase of the velocity of circulation of one or all these means of
payments.4
People, as they earn money, spend some on consumption, keep some in
cash balances, while the rest is saved or invested in capital or production. For
most people, this means setting aside a portion of their income by buying stocks,
bonds, or bank certificates of deposits or savings accounts. People determine the
amount they wish to put in savings by their time preferences, i.e., the measure of
their preference for present, as opposed to future, consumption. The less they
prefer consumption in the present, the lower their time preference. The collective
time preferences for all savers determines the pure interest rate. Thus, the lower
the time preference, the lower the pure rate of interest. This lower time-

preference rate leads to greater proportions of investment to consumption, and
therefore an extension of the production structure, serving to increase total
capital. Conversely, higher time preferences do the opposite, with high interest
rates, truncation of the production structure, and an abatement of capital. The
final array of various market interest rates are composed of the pure interest rate
plus purchasing power components and the range of entrepreneurial risk factors.
But the key component of this equation is the pure interest rate.
When a monetary intervention, as discussed above, occurs, the effect is the
same as if the collective time preferences of the public had fallen. The amount of
money available for investment increases, and with this greater supply, interest
rates fall. In turn, entrepreneurs respond to what they believe is an increase in
savings, or a decrease in time preferences. These entrepreneurs then invest this
capital in “higher orders” in the structure of production, which are further from
the final consumer. Investment then shifts from consumer goods to capital goods
industries. Prices and wages are bid up in these capital goods industries. But the
money does not immediately go into production, as Mises writes:
The moderated interest rate is intended to stimulate production and not to
cause a stock market boom. However, stock prices increase first of all. At
the outset, commodity prices are not caught up in the boom. There are stock
exchange booms and stock exchange profits. Yet, the “producer” is
dissatisfied. He envies the “speculator” his “easy profit.” Those in power
are not willing to accept this situation. They believe that production is being
deprived of money which is flowing into the stock market. Besides, it is
precisely in the stock market boom that the serious threat of a crisis lies
hidden.5
This shift to capital goods industries would be fine if people’s time
preferences had actually lessened. But this is not the case. As the newly created
money quickly permeates from business borrowers to wages, rents, and interest,

the recipients of these higher incomes will spend the money in the same
proportions of consumption-investment as they did before. Thus, demand
quickly turns from capital goods back to consumer goods. Unfortunately, capital
goods producers now have an increased amount of goods for sale and no
corresponding increase in demand from their entrepreneurial customers. This
wasteful malinvestment is then liquidated, typically termed a crash, bust or
crisis, which is the market’s way of purging itself, the first step back to health.
The ensuing recession or depression is the market’s adjustment period from the
malinvestments back to the normal efficient service of customer demands.
This process or cycle can occur in a relatively short period of time.
However, the booms are sometimes prolonged by more doses of monetary
intervention. The greater the monetary expansion, both in magnitude and length
of time, the longer the boom will be sustained (as was the case with the
Mississippi Bubble).
The recovery phase, or recession, will weed out inefficient and unprofitable
businesses that were possibly engendered by, or propped up by the money-
induced boom. The recovery is also characterized by an increase in the “natural”
or pure rate of interest. In other words, time preferences increase, which leads to
a fall in the prices of higher-order goods in relation to those of consumer goods.
As Rothbard writes:
Not only prices of particular machines must fall, but also the prices of
whole aggregates of capital, e.g., stock market and real estate values. In
fact, these values must fall more than the earnings from the assets, through
reflecting the general rise in the rate of interest return.6
In the final analysis, monetary intervention cannot increase the supply of
real goods, it merely diverts capital from avenues the market would dictate
toward wasteful malinvestment. The boom created has no solid base, and thus,
“it is illusory prosperity.”7

The three episodes discussed are examples of malinvestment at, in
retrospect, its most ludicrous. All were created by different examples of
monetary intervention. The Tulipmania was engendered and fueled by a massive
influx of specie into Amsterdam; see Haberler’s “a” above. The Mississippi
Bubble was driven by a blizzard of John Law’s paper; see “b” and “d” above.
The South Sea Bubble was formed by the modern banking tools of deposits and
credits, along with increasing, as Murphy relates: “the velocity of circulation of
money by lending money to potential purchasers of its stock;” see “c” and “e”
above.8
All three objects of speculation were equally dubious in terms of their
investment value. With all due respect to Mr. Garber, in no way can a cogent
argument be made to support how the value of a tulip bulb could be greater than
the land it is grown in. John Law’s Mississippi Company had the appearance of a
powerful company, but the majority of its assets were the debts of a bankrupt
country. As Wagner aptly puts it, “Counterfeiting becomes a profitable activity,
one that the state customarily tries to reserve for its own use.”9 This
counterfeiting was Law’s only asset, but as we learned from Mises, it cannot
create real prosperity. The South Sea Company, similar to the Mississippi
Company, was capitalized with government debt and was technically bankrupt.
The busts, in all three cases, served to liquidate the malinvestments, the
break being sharper in the Tulipmania and South Sea cases. In both these cases, a
sound money alternative was available for capital to flee to. In the Mississippi
Bubble case, the only alternative to Law’s worthless stock was his worthless
currency. The ensuing recessions were painful, although short, and in the case of
France, engendered a healthy distrust of paper money which served that country
well. In the case of England’s handling of the South Sea episode, a mistake was
made in not allowing the full brunt of the crisis to be played out. This is a
mistake that has been and continues to be repeated constantly throughout history.
In times of financial panic a “lifeboat operation” is employed. As Mises
explains:

If the crisis were ruthlessly permitted to run its course, bringing about the
destruction of enterprises which were unable to meet their obligations, then
all entrepreneurs— not only banks but also other businessmen—would
exhibit more caution in granting and using credit in the future. Instead,
public opinion approves of giving assistance in the crisis. Then, no sooner
is the worst over, than the banks are spurred on to a new expansion of
circulation credit.10
Robert Walpole was possibly the originator of the “lifeboat operation” in
1721, and his legacy continues to live on in a modern world where we have
unbacked fiat currency and central banking expanding and contracting—mostly
expanding—the supply of money at every political whim. Thus, we live from
one speculative bubble, or economic boom, to the next resounding crash, only to
reinflate the supply of money, serving to maintain a shaky scaffolding under
inefficient enterprise and bloated governments, forestalling the inevitable,
complete bust.
Modern history is riddled with the occurrence of speculative bubbles and
their inevitable crashes: Britain’s railroad mania, the 1929 and 1987 stock
market booms and subsequent crashes in the United States, Japan’s stock market
and property booms in the late 1980s. The common factor to all has been a
monetary intervention or tremendous increase in the supply of money, ultimately
leading to these malinvestments. These bubbles also share the common trait that
the object or manifestation of the monetary intervention was a familiar
investment instrument, i.e., stocks and/or real estate— nothing as obscure as
tulips, until recently that is, when the boom in China’s stamp market was
recently revealed.11 The genesis for this bubble? Money, of course: it is
estimated that savings deposits in China have grown to one trillion yuan. This
vast increase in the supply of money has forced interest rates on bank savings
accounts down to less than 2 percent! Thus, speculators and others have turned

to stamps, pushing the price of some stamps up 500 percent in a two-year period.
With no contraction of China’s monetary policy, the only thing that has
stopped China’s only free market is government coercion. The Chinese
authorities began a crackdown to attempt to close down the market on November
9, 1991. Now Beijing’s Yuetan Park is quiet, after being a site of trading activity
as frenzied as that of the taverns of seventeenth-century Amsterdam, of Paris’s
Rue Quincampoix, or of London’s Exchange Alley. But too much money must
go somewhere, and China’s stamp speculators are now trying to guess what the
object of China’s next bubble will be: stocks12 or antiques.
As long as we live in a world in which the supply of money is being
manipulated by governments, rather than set by the free and unfettered market,
monetary interventions will continue to be the norm. Although much time has
passed since the occurrence of the three episodes discussed in this paper, the
laws of economics do not change with time. The consequences of monetary
interventions have always been and will continue to be booms and subsequent
busts. Speculative bubbles are the ultimate manifestation of these monetary
induced booms. It is impossible to know what the object of the next speculative
bubble will be, or exactly when it will occur. What has been shown here is that
these bubbles, or malinvestments, are engendered by increases in the supply of
money, with the ensuing busts inevitably to follow, leading once again to
bankruptcies and financial pain, as these wasteful investments are converted to
more productive assets. What can be predicted with absolute accuracy is that fiat
money, fractional-reserve banking, central banks, Keynesian monetary policies,
and self-serving politicians will combine to ensure that there will be many more
booms and speculative bubbles for future economists and historians to chronicle.

Bibliography
Andréadès, Andreas M. [1909] 1966. History of the Bank of England 1640–
1903. New York: Augustus M. Kelley.
Bank of International Settlements. 1963. Eight European Central Banks. New
York: Frederick A. Praeger.
Barbour, Violet. 1963. Capitalism in Amsterdam in the 17th Century. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Bisschop, W.R. [1896] 1968. The Rise of the London Money Market 1640–1826.
New York: Augustus M. Kelley.
Bloom, Herbert I. 1969. The Economic Activities of the Jews of Amsterdam in
the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries. New York and London: Kennikat
Press.
Brewer, John. 1989. The Sinews of Power: War, Money, and the English State,
1688–1783. New York: Knopf.
Burke, Peter. 1974. Venice and Amsterdam: A Study of Seventeenth-Century
Elites. London: Temple-Smith.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1987. “Tulipmania.” In The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of
Economics. 4 Vols. Eds. John Eatwell, Murray Milgate, and Peter Newman.
New York: The Stockton Press.
Carswell, John. 1960. The South Sea Bubble. London: The Cresset Press.
Clapham, Sir John. 1966. The Bank of England: A History. Volume I: 1694–
1797. London: Cambridge University Press.
Clough, Shepard B. 1968. European Economic History: The Economic
Development of Western Civilization. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Clough, Shepard Bancroft, and Charles Woolsey Cole. 1952. Economic History
of Europe. Boston: D.C. Heath.

Conant, Charles Arthur. [1927] 1969. History of Modern Banks of Issue. New
York: Augustus M. Kelley.
Davis, Andrew McFarland. 1887. “An Historical Study of Law’s System” I & II.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 1 (April, July).
Davis, Ralph. 1973. The Rise of the Atlantic Economies. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press.
Del Mar, Alexander. [1895] 1969. History of Monetary Systems: A Record of
Actual Experiments in Money Made By Various States of the Ancient and
Modern World, as Drawn From Their Statutes, Customs, Treaties, Mining
Regulations, Jurisprudence, History, Archeology, Coins Nummulary Systems,
and Other Sources of Information. New York: Augustus M. Kelley.
——. [1902] 1969. A History of the Precious Metals, from the Earliest Times to
the Present. New York: Augustus M. Kelley.
De Vries, Jan. 1976. Economy of Europe in an Age of Crisis, 1600–1750.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dickson, P.G.M. 1967. The Financial Revolution in England: A Study in the
Development of Public Credit 1688–1756. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Fisher, Kenneth L. 1987. The Wall Street Waltz. Chicago: Contemporary Books.
Flood, Robert P., and Robert J. Hodrick. 1990. “On Testing for Speculative
Bubbles.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 4, no. 2 (Spring).
Flynn, Dennis O. 1983. “Sixteenth-Century Inflation from a Production Point of
View.” In Inflation Through The Ages: Economic, Social, Psychological and
Historical Aspects. Eds. Nathan Schmukler and Edward Marcus. New York:
Brooklyn College Press.
Galbraith, John Kenneth. 1975. Money: Whence It Came, Where It Went. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Garber, Peter M. 1989. “Tulipmania.” Journal of Political Economy 97, no. 3.
——. 1990. “Famous First Bubbles.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 4, no. 2
(Spring).
Giuseppi, John. 1966. The Bank of England: A History from its Foundation in

1694. Chicago: Henry Regnery.
Groseclose, Elgin. 1961. Money and Man: A Survey of Monetary Experience.
New York: Fredrick Unger.
Haberler, Gottfried. 1983. “Money and the Business Cycle.” The Austrian
Theory of the Trade Cycle and Other Essays. Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von
Mises Institute.
Hamilton, Earl J. 1929. “Imports of American Gold and Silver into Spain, 1503–
1660.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 43.
——. 1936. “Prices And Wages At Paris Under John Law’s System.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 51 (November).
——. 1937. “Prices And Wages In Southern France Under John Law’s System.”
Economic History Supplement to the Economic Journal 3, no. 12 (February).
——. 1968. “Law, John.” International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences. Ed.
David L. Sills. New York: Macmillan and The Free Press.
——. 1969. “The Political Economy of France at the Time of John Law.”
History of Political Economy 1.
Haring, Clarence H. 1915. “American Gold And Silver Production in the First
Half Of The Sixteenth Century.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 29 (May).
Hayek, F.A. 2008. A Free-Market Monetary System and The Pretense of
Knowledge. Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute.
Hayes, Carlton J.H. 1953. Modern Europe to 1870. New York: MacMillan.
Helfferich, Karl. [1927] 1969. Money. Trans. by Louis Infield. New York:
Augustus M. Kelley.
Hildreth, Richard. [1837] 1968. The History of Banks: To Which is Added, A
Demonstration of the Advantages and Necessity of Free Competition in the
Business of Banking. New York: Augustus M. Kelley.
Horsefield, Keith J. 1982. “The ‘Stop of the Exchequer’ Revisited.” The
Economic History Review 15, no. 4 (November).
Hume, David. 1970. Writings on Economics. Ed. Eugene Rotwein. 2nd ed.
Madison: The University of Wisconsin Press.

Keynes, John Maynard. 1964. The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and
Money. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.
Kindleberger, Charles P. [1978] 1989. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History
of Financial Crises. New York: Basic Books.
——. 1984. A Financial History of Western Europe. London: George Allen &
Unwin.
——. 1987. “Bubbles.” In The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics. 4
Vols. Eds. John Eatwell, Murray Milgate and Peter Newman. New York: The
Stockton Press.
——. 1991. “The Economic Crisis of 1619 to 1623.” The Journal of Economic
History 51, no. 1 (March).
Law, John. [1705] 1966. Money And Trade Considered with a Proposal for
Supplying the Nation With Money. New York: Augustus Kelley.
Mackay, Charles. [1841] 1932. Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions
and the Madness of Crowds. London: Richard Bentley, New Burlington
Street.
McCulloch, John C., ed. [1856] 1966. “Advice of His Majesty’s Council of
Trade, Concerning The Exportation of Gold and Silver in Foreign Coins &
Bullion. Concluded 11th December, 1660.” In A Select Collection of Scarce
and Valuable Tracts on Money. New York: Augustus M. Kelley.
McGregor, James. 1991. “China Cancels Its Red-Hot Stamp Market, But Traders
Hope Crackdown Will Pass.” Wall Street Journal. December 19, 1991.
Melville, Lewis. [1921] 1968. The South Sea Bubble. New York: Burt Franklin.
Mises, Ludwig von. [1952] 1981. The Theory of Money and Credit. Trans. H.E.
Batson. Indianapolis: Liberty Classics.
——. 1966. Human Action: A Treatise on Economics. 3rd ed. Chicago: Henry
Regnery.
——. 1978. On the Manipulation of Money and Credit. Trans. Bettina Bien
Greaves. New York: Free Market Books.
——. 1983. “The Austrian Theory of the Trade Cycle.” The Austrian Theory of

the Trade Cycle and Other Essays. Trans. David O’Mahony and J. Huston
McCulloch. Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute.
Mitchell, Wesley C. 1953. “The Role of Money in Economic History.” In
Enterprise and Secular Change: Readings in Economic History. Eds.
Frederic C. Lane and Jelle C. Riemersma. Homewood, Ill.: Irwin.
Murphy, Antoin. 1986. Richard Cantillon: Entrepreneur and Economist. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
——. 1991. “The evolution of John Law’s theories and policies 1707–1715.”
European Economic Review 34 (August).
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1983. “Speculative Hyperinflations in
Maximizing Models: Can We Rule Them Out?” Journal of Political
Economy 91, no. 4 (August).
Rich, E.E., and C.H. Wilson., eds. 1975. The Cambridge Economic History of
Europe. Vol. 4: The Economy of Expanding Europe in the Sixteenth and
Seventeenth Centuries. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Richards, J.F., ed. 1983. Precious Metals in the Later Medieval and Early
Modern Worlds. Durham, N.C.: Carolina Academic Press.
Rist, Charles. [1944] 1966. History of Monetary and Credit Theory: From John
Law to the Present Day. New York: Augustus M. Kelley.
——. 1961. The Triumph of Gold. New York: Philosophical Library.
Rothbard, Murray N. 1983a. America’s Great Depression. 4th ed. New York:
Richardson and Snyder.
——. 1983b. “Economic Depressions: Their Cause and Cure.” The Austrian
Theory of the Trade Cycle and Other Essays. Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von
Mises Institute.
——. 1990. What Has Government Done to Our Money? 4th. ed. Auburn, Ala.:
Ludwig von Mises Institute.
Salerno, Joseph T. 1991. “Two Traditions In Modern Monetary Theory: John
Law And A.R.J. Turgot.” Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines 2
(June/September 1991).

Schama, Simon. 1987. The Embarrassment of Riches. New York: Alfred A.
Knopf.
Schwartz, Anna J. 1973. “Secular Price Change in Historical Perspective.”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 5, no. 1, part II (February).
Schubert, Eric S. 1988. “Innovations, Debts, and Bubbles: International
Integration of Financial Markets in Western Europe, 1688–1720. The Journal
of Economic History 48, no. 2 (June).
Smith, Adam. [1776] 1965. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth
of Nations. New York: Random House.
Smith, Vera C. [1936] 1990. The Rationale of Central Banking and the Free
Banking Alternative. Preface by Leland B. Yeager. Indianapolis: Liberty
Press.
Spooner, Frank C. 1972. The International Economy and Monetary Movements
in France, 1493–1725. Harvard Economic Studies. Vol. 138. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Van Cauwenberghe, E.H.G. 1983. “Inflation in the Southern Low Countries,
from the Fourteenth to the Seventeenth Century: A Record of Some
Significant Periods of High Prices.” In Inflation Through the Ages:
Economic, Social, Psychological and Historical Aspects. Eds. Nathan
Schmukler and Edward Marcus. New York: Brooklyn College Press.
Van Horne, James C. 1985. “Of Financial Innovations and Excesses.” The
Journal of Finance 40, no. 3 (July).
Van Houtte, Jan A., and Leon Van Buyten. 1977. “The Low Countries.” In An
Introduction to the Sources of European Economic History 1500–1800. Eds.
Charles Wilson and Geoffrey Parker. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Wagner, Richard E. 1980. “Boom and Bust: The Political Economy of Economic
Disorder.” Journal of Libertarian Studies 4, no. 1 (Winter).
Walker, Francis Amasa. [1886] 1968. Money. New York: Augustus M. Kelley.

Notes
Introduction
1Charles Mackay, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds
(London: Richard Bentley, New Burlington Street), p. 95.
Chapter 1—The Greater Fool Theory
1Charles P. Kindleberger, “Bubbles,” in The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of
Economics, John Eatwell, Murray Milgate, and Peter Newman, eds., 4 vols.
(New York: The Stockton Press, 1987), p. 281.
2John Maynard Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and
Money (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1964), pp. 153–58.
3Ibid., pp. 155–56.
4Ibid., p. 159.
5Quoted in Joseph T. Salerno,”Two Traditions in Modern Monetary Theory:
John Law And A.R.J. Turgot,” Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines
2 (June/September 1991): 368–70.
6Peter Garber, “Famous First Bubbles,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 4
(Spring 1990): 46–47.
7Robert Flood and Robert Hodrick, “On Testing for Speculative Bubbles,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 4 (Spring 1990): 85.

8Ibid., p. 86.
9Ibid., p. 99.
10Antoin Murphy, Richard Cantillon: Entrepreneur and Economist (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1986), pp. 66–67; emphasis in original.
11Murray Rothbard, America’s Great Depression, 4th ed. (New York: Richardson
& Snyder,1983), pp. 15–25.
12David Hume, Writings on Economics, Eugene Rotwein, ed., 2nd ed. (Madison:
The University of Wisconsin Press, 1970), p. 33.
13Murray N. Rothbard, What Has Government Done to Our Money?, 4rd ed.
(Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1990), p. 33; emphasis in original.
14F.A. Hayek, A Free-Market Monetary System and The Pretense of Knowledge
(Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 2008), pp. 12–15.
Chapter 2—Tulipmania
1Guillermo Calvo, “Tulipmania,” in The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of
Economics, John Eatwell, Murray Milgate, and Peter Newman, eds., 4 vols.
(New York: The Stockton Press, 1987), p. 707
2Peter Garber, “Tulipmania,” Journal of Political Economy 97, no. 3 (1989):
535–60.
3Ibid., pp. 541–42.
4Ibid.
5Quoted in ibid.

6Ibid., pp. 543–45.
7Ibid., pp. 546–49.
8Ibid., pp. 547–50.
9Ibid., pp. 555–56.
10Ibid., p. 558.
11Ibid., p. 556.
12Charles P. Kindleberger, Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial
Crises (New York: Basic Books, [1978] 1989).
13Ibid., p. 7.
14Charles Kindelberger, A Financial History of Western Europe (London:
George Allen and Unwin, 1984), pp. 215, 272.
15Kindleberger, Manias, Panics, and Crashes, p. 57.
Chapter 3—Free Coinage, the Bank of Amsterdam, and
Tulipmania
1The ratio of silver to gold from 1524 to 1546, based on the average for Europe,
fluctuated between approximately 101/2 and 11 (E.E. Rich and C.H. Wilson, eds.,
The Cambridge Economic History of Europe, vol. 4: The Economy of Expanding
Europe in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries [Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1975], p. 459).
2Alexander Del Mar, History of Monetary Systems: A Record of Actual
Experiments in Money Made By Various States of the Ancient and Modern

World, as Drawn From Their Statutes, Customs, Treaties, Mining Regulations,
Jurisprudence, History, Archeology, Coins Nummulary Systems, and Other
Sources of Information (New York: Augustus Kelley Publishers, [1895] 1969), p.
345.
3Ibid., p. 348.
4Karl Helfferich, Money, Louis Infield, trans. (New York: Augustus M. Kelley,
[1927] 1969), p. 370.
5Del Mar, History of Monetary Systems, pp. 344–51.
6Ibid., p. 351.
7Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations
(New York: Random House, [1776] 1965), p. 447.
8Herbert I. Bloom, The Economic Activities of the Jews of Amsterdam in the
Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries (New York/London: Kennikat Press,
[1937] 1969), pp. 172–73.
9The city of Amsterdam was bound for the coin or bullion’s security while at the
Bank, against fire, robbery, or any other accident.
10Richard Hildreth, The History of Banks: To Which is Added, A Demonstration
of the Advantages and Necessity of Free Competition in the Business of Banking
(New York: Augustus M. Kelley, [1837] 1968), p. 9.
11Shepard B. Clough, European Economic History: The Economic Development
of Western Civilization (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1968), p. 199.
12Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, pp.
447–48.

13Ibid., pp. 448–49.
14Ibid., p. 450.
15Ibid., p. 451.
16Ibid., p. 451.
17Ibid., p. 454.
18Charles Arthur Conant, History of Modern Banks of Issue (New York:
Augustus M. Kelley Publishers, [1927] 1969), p. 289.
19Hamilton, Earl J. “Imports of American Gold and Silver into Spain, 1503–
1660,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 43 (1929): 436–43.
20Alexander Del Mar, A History of the Precious Metals, from the Earliest Times
to the Present (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, [1902] 1969), pp. 307–08.
21Dennis O. Flynn, “Sixteenth-Century Inflation from a Production Point of
View,” in Inflation Through The Ages: Economic, Social, Psychological and
Historical Aspects, Nathan Schmukler and Edward Marcus, eds. (New York:
Brooklyn College Press, 1983), p. 162, 164.
22Francis Amasa Walker, Money (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, [1881] 1968),
p. 135.
23Ibid.
24Violet Barbour, Capitalism in Amsterdam in the 17th Century (Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 1963), pp. 49–50.
25Del Mar, A History of the Precious Metals, pp. 326–27.

26Del Mar, History of Monetary Systems, p. 351.
27Ibid., p. 352.
28Simon Schama, The Embarrassment of Riches (New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
1987), pp. 361–62.
29Jan A. Van Houtte and Leon Van Buyten, “The Low Countries” in An
Introduction to the Sources of European Economic History 1500–1800 (Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1977), p. 102.
Chapter 4—John Law, Genius or Swindler
1Earl J. Hamilton, “Law, John” in International Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences, David L. Sills, ed. (New York: Macmillan and The Free Press,1968), p.
80.
2Hamilton indicates that Law’s father died when John was age 13, Mackay
indicates that Law was 17. See Charles Mackay, Memoirs of Extraordinary
Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds (London: Richard Bentley, New
Burlington Street, [1841] 1963), p. 3.
3Later she became the Countess of Orkney.
4Mackay, Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions, pp. 3–4.
5Ibid., pp. 2–4.
6Both Mackay and Hamilton make reference to this religious bigotry. Mackay,
Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions, p. 5, relates, “The reason given
for the refusal is quite consistent with the character of that bigoted and tyrannical
monarch.” He also indicates that it has appeared in the correspondence of the
Duchess of Orléans, Madame de Baviere, and the mother of the Regent.

7Hamilton, “Law, John,” p. 79.
8Ibid., p. 79.
9Mackay, Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions, pp. 5–6.
10Hamilton indicates the 2nd of May, Mackay the 5th.
11Hamilton, “Law, John,” p. 79.
Chapter 5—John Law’s Monetary Theories
1John Law, Money and Trade Considered With A Proposal For Supplying The
Nation With Money (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, [1705] 1966), p. 37.
2Ibid.
3Ibid., p. 41.
4Ibid., p. 51.
5Ibid., p. 89.
6Ibid., p. 93.
7Murray Rothbard, “History of Economic Thought,” lecture at the University of
Nevada at Las Vegas (Fall 1990).
8“The Evolution of John Law’s Theories and Policies 1707–1715,” European
Economic Review 34 (August 1991): 1113.
9Ibid., p. 1114.
10Ibid., p. 1115.

11Ibid., p. 1116.
12Unpublished manuscript in the Archivio di Stato in Turin, Italy. Mazzo J3 2a
Categoria, p. 62. Quoted in ibid., p. 1117.
13Ibid., pp. 1118–19.
14Ibid., p. 1120.
15Law was not referring to metallic specie, but to the new type of “credit.”
16Ibid., p. 1121.
17Ibid., p. 1123.
18Ibid., pp. 1122–23.
Chapter 6—The Mississippi Bubble
1Hamilton describes these financial instruments as equivalent to treasury bills.
2Earl J. Hamilton, “The Political Economy of France at the Time of John Law,”
History of Political Economy 1 (1969): 125.
3Ibid., pp. 123–26.
4Earl J. Hamilton, “Prices And Wages At Paris Under John Law’s System,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 51 (November 1936): 51; “Prices And Wages in
Southern France Under John Law’s System,” Economic History Supplement to
the Economic Journal 3, no. 12 (February 1937): 444.
5Agency in charge of cancellation or repudiation of debt.
6Antoin Murphy, Richard Cantillon: Entrepreneur and Economist (Oxford:

Clarendon Press, 1986), pp. 56–57.
7Ibid., pp. 54–57.
8Hamilton, “The Political Economy of France at the Time of John Law,” p. 145.
9Andrew McFarland Davis, “An Historical Study of Law’s System I & II,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 1 (April, July 1887): 298–99.
10Murphy, Richard Cantillon, pp. 70-71.
11Ibid., pp. 71–73.
12Hamilton, “The Political Economy of France at the Time of John Law,” p.145.
13Davis, “An Historical Study of Law’s System,” pp. 303–05.
14Hamilton, “The Political Economy of France at the Time of John Law,” p. 145.
15Murphy, Richard Cantillon, pp. 77–78.
16Ibid., p. 78.
17Piossens, Mémoires de la régence de S.A.R. le Duc d’Orléans Durant la
minorité de Louis XV roide France (1729), p. ii.; Dutot, Réflextions politiques
sur les finances et le commerce (1738); Giraudeau, Bibliothèque de l’Arsenal
(Paris), MS 4061. This manuscript is also to be found in the Bibliothèque
Mazarine (MS 2820) and the BN (MS 14092); cited in ibid.
18Ibid., pp. 130–31.
19Davis, “An Historical Study,” p. 434.
20Ibid., p. 439.

21Ibid., pp. 436–41.
22Murphy, Richard Cantillon, p. 132.
23Ibid., pp. 137.
24Davis, “An Historical Study,” p. 440.
25Ibid., p. 444.
26Ibid., p. 443.
27Murphy, Richard Cantillon, p. 138.
28Davis, “An Historical Study,” pp. 445–46.
29Murphy, Richard Cantillon, p. 156.
30John Law, The Present State of the French Finances (London, 1720), p. 105;
Quoted in ibid., p. 149.
31Ibid., p. 152.
32Hamilton,“Prices And Wages At Paris Under John Law’s System,” pp. 50–54.
33Ibid., pp. 65–66.
34Hamilton, “Prices And Wages In Southern France Under John Law’s System,”
pp. 441–61.
35Ibid., pp. 455–56.
36Ibid., p. 459.
37“Ibid., p. 461.

38John Law, Euvres complètes, P. Harsin, ed. (Paris, 1934); reprint Vaduz, 1980),
II, p. 307; ‘Mémoire sur les banques’ (translation); quoted in Murphy, Richard
Cantillon, p. 129.
39Murphy, Richard Cantillon, p. 129.
40Charles Rist, History of Monetary and Credit Theory: From John Law to the
Present Day (New York: Augustus M. Kelley Publishers, [1940] 1966), p. 65;
quoted in Salerno, “Two Traditions in Modern Monetary Theory: John Law And
A.R.J. Turgot,” Journal et des Etudes Economistes 2, no. 2/3 (191): 15.
Chapter 7—The South Sea Bubble
1The hearth tax was a tax on all dwellings except cottages, and was levied based
upon the number of hearths or stoves that were in a given dwelling. The tax was
very unpopular and as can easily be imagined, hard to collect.
2Andreas M. Andréadès, History of the Bank of England 1640–1903 (New York:
Augustus M. Kelley, [1909] 1966), pp. 55–56.
3Keith J. Horsefield, “The ‘Stop of the Exchequer’ Revisited,” The Economic
History Review 15, no. 4 (November 1982): 513.
4Ibid., p. 514.
5Ibid., pp. 511–28.
6John Giuseppi, The Bank of England: A History from its Foundation in 1694
(Chicago: Henry Regency, 1966), p. 9.
7Sir John Clapham, The Bank of England: A History, vol. I: 1694–1797
(London: Cambridge at the University Press,1966), p. 16.

8Ibid., p. 17.
9Ibid.
10The £300,000 difference was to be raised by annuities.
11£10,000 was the maximum subscription allowable. Ten other contributors
besides the King and Queen contributed the maximum amount.
12Giuseppi, The Bank of England, pp. 11–12.
13Clapham, The Bank of England, p. 20.
14Ibid., p. 21.
15Ibid., p. 22.
16Andréadès, History of the Bank of England 1640–1903, p. 99.
17This quote is taken from Locke’s pamphlet entitled, Further considerations
concerning raising the value of money. Andréadès indicates that this pamphlet
has been reprinted at the end of McCulloch’s Principles of Political Economy;
quoted in Andréadès, History of the Bank of England 1640–1903, p. 101.
18Andréadès, History of the Bank of England 1640–1903, pp. 90–102.
19Ibid., pp. 104.
20John Carswell, The South Sea Bubble (London: The Cresset Press, 1960), p.18.
21Andréadès, History of the Bank of England 1640–1903, pp. 107–10.
22Ibid., pp. 111–12.
23Ibid.

24The Malt lottery was to issue 140,000 £10 tickets, raising £1,400,000. Only
1,763 tickets were sold, the rest of the tickets were used by the Exchequer as
cash. P.G.M. Dickson, The Financial Revolution in England: A Study in the
Development of Public Credit 1688–1756 (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1967),
p. 49.
25Ibid., p. 57.
26Ibid., p. 59.
27Ibid., pp. 59–64.
28Carswell, The South Sea Bubble, p. 34.
29Ibid., pp. 34–37.
30Andréadès, History of the Bank of England 1640–1903, p. 122.
31Carswell, The South Sea Bubble, p. 43.
32Ibid., p. 124.
33Dickson, The Financial Revolution in England, p. 66.
34Ibid., pp. 59–75.
35Carswell, The South Sea Bubble, pp. 103–04.
36Ibid., p. 108.
37Ibid., pp. 98–113.
38Ibid., p. 127.

39Dickson, The Financial Revolution in England, p. 129.
40Ibid., pp. 134, 136.
41Letter Books of John Hervey, first Earl of Bristol (Wells, 1894), II, p. 126;
Bristol to Astell August 4, 1720; quoted in Dickson, The Financial Revolution in
England, p. 147.
42Dickson, The Financial Revolution in England, pp. 122–53.
43Carswell, The South Sea Bubble, pp. 238–39.
44Shepard B. Clough, European Economic History: The Economic Development
of Western Civilization (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1968), p. 217.
45Andréadès, History of the Bank of England 1640–1903, pp. 143–44.
46Giuseppi, The Bank of England, p. 44.
Chapter 8—Increases in the Supply of Money, Speculative
Bubbles, and the Austrian Malinvestment Theory
1John Maynard Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and
Money (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1964), p. 161.
2Alexander Del Mar, History of Monetary Systems: A Record of Actual
Experiments in Money Made by Various States of the Ancient and Modern
World, as Drawn From Their Statutes, Customs, Treaties, Mining Regulations,
Jurisprudence, History, Archeology, Coins Nummulary Systems, and Other
Sources of Information (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, [1895] 1969), p. 351.
3Ludwig von Mises,“The Austrian Theory of the Trade Cycle,” in The Austrian
Theory of the Trade Cycle and Other Essays, David O’Mahony and J. Huston

McCulloch, trans. (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1983), p. 1.
4 Gottfried Haberler, “Money and the Business Cycle,” in ibid., p. 9.
5Ludwig von Mises, On the Manipulation of Money and Credit, Bettina Bien
Greaves, trans. (Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Free Market Books, 1978), p. 161.
6Murray Rothbard, America’s Great Depression, 4th ed. (New York: Richardson
& Snyder, 1983), p. 21.
7Mises, On the Manipulation of Money and Credit, p. 183.
8Antoin Murphy, Richard Cantillon: Entrepreneur and Economist (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1986), p. 73.
9Richard E. Wagner, “Boom and Bust: The Political Economy of Economic
Disorder,” The Journal of Libertarian Studies 4, no. 1 (Winter 1980): 13.
10Mises, On the Manipulation of Money and Credit, p. 142.
11See James McGregor, “China Cancels Its Red-Hot Stamp Market, But Traders
Hope Crackdown Will Pass,” Wall Street Journal (December 19, 1991), p. C1.
12China has two stock exchanges, one in Shanghai, the other in Shenzhen; ibid.

Index
A  |  B  |  C  |  D  |  E
F  |  G  |  H  |  I  |  K
L  |  M  |  N  |  O  |  P
R  |  S  |  T  |  U  |  V
W  |  Y
A
Aislabie, John, 94
amalgamation process, 26
Americas
free coinage and, 21, 26–28, 107–08
Mississippi Bubble and, 35, 56–57, 108
South Sea Bubble and, ix, 88–89, 94, 109–10
America’s Great Depression (Rothbard), 7n11, 113
Amsterdam, Bank of. See Bank of Amsterdam
“An Historical Study of Law’s System” (Davis), 57n13, 62–63nn19–21, 4–
65nn24–26
Andréadès, Andreas M., 81–83, 87, 102
History of the Bank of England 1640–1903, 76–77nn2–5, 83–84nn21–23
Anne (Queen of England), 85
Astell, William, 100
Austrian School of economics, viii, 6, 110
Austrian theory of malinvestment, 9, 105–17
“The Austrian Theory of the Trade Cycle” (Mises), 110n3

Austrian theory of trade cycle, 6–8, 110–17
B
Bank of Amsterdam
deposits into, 30f.
effect on English economics, 75
free coinage and, 22–33
influence on John Law, 41–42, 107–08
Bank of England
formation of, 77–79
influence on John Law, 44–45, 47–49, 55, 74
South Sea Bubble and, 79–03, 109–10
The Bank of England: A History (Clapham), 78n7–9
The Bank of England: A History from its Foundation in 1694 (Giuseppi), 77n6,
79–80nn13–15, 102n46
Bank of France. See Royal Bank (France)
bankruptcies in Holland, 32f.
Barbour, Violet, 27–29
Capitalism in Amsterdam, 29n24
Blanc, Louis, 66–67
Bloom, Herbert I., The Economic Activities of the Jews of Amsterdam in the
Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries, 22n8
Blunt, John, ix, 86–88, 92–98, 109–10. See also South Sea Company
“Boom and Bust: The Political Economy of Economic Disorder” (Wagner),
114n9
Briscoe, John, 82
Brodrick, Thomas, 94
Bubble Act, ix, 100, 110
“Bubbles,” The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics (Kindleberger), 2n1

bullion. See precious metals
business cycle theory, 6–8, 110–17
C
Calvo, Guillermo, 11
The Cambridge Economic History of Europe, 20n1
Capitalism in Amsterdam (Barbour), 29n24
Carswell, John, 86–87, 92–94, 96–97
The South Sea Bubble, 83n20, 101n43
Caswell, George, 88
central banks, vii
Chamber of Justice, 54–55
Chamberlain, Hugh, 82
Charles II (King of England), 76–77
Charles V (King of France), 19–20
“China Cancels Its Red-Hot Stamp Market, But Traders Hope Crackdown Will
Pass” (McGregor), 116n11
China’s monetary policies, 116
Clapham, John, 78–80
clipping of coins, 19, 80–81
Clough, Shepard B., 101, European Economic History: The Economic
Development of Western Civilization, 22n11
coinage and recoinage, 8, 19–33, 39, 51, 80–83, 107–08
coins, gold and silver. See precious metals
Company of East Indies, 58
Company of the Indies. See Mississippi Company
Company of the West, 56–58, 108
Crowldy, Ambrose, 88
Currency School, 110–11

D
d’Arminy, Le Gendre, 56–58
Davis, Andrew McFarland, 64–66
“An Historical Study of Law’s System,” 57n13, 62–63nn19–21
debasement of money, 19–20, 80–81
Del Mar, Alexander, 20, 26–27, 31, 107
History of Monetary Systems, 21nn5–6
A History of the Precious Metals, 29n25, 31nn26–27
Desmaretz, Nicolas, 39–40, 52–53
Dickson, G.G.M., 85–86, 98
The Financial Revolution in England: A Study in the Development of Public
Credit, 89–90nn33–34, 100nn41–42
Dillen, J.G. van, 30
Duke of Noailles, 53–55, 57
Duke of Orléans, 38, 39, 53
Dutch East India Company, 26–27
E
East India Company (English), 38, 44–45, 49, 85–87, 102
econometrics, 4, 105
The Economic Activities of the Jews of Amsterdam in the Seventeenth and
Eighteenth Centuries (Bloom), 22n8
The Embarrassment of Riches (Schama), 32n28
English Copper Company, 100
European Economic History: The Economic Development of Western
Civilization (Clough), 22n11, 101n44
Euvres complétes (Law), 73n38
“The Evolution of John Law’s Theories and Policies 1707–1715” (Murphy), 45–

46nn8–11
Exchange Alley, 99, 100, 110, 116
F
“Famous First Bubbles” (Garber), 4n6
Federal Reserve, vii
A Financial History of Western Europe (Kindleberger), 16–17
The Financial Revolution in England: A Study in the Development of Public
Credit (Dickson), 85–86n24–27, 89–90nn33–34, 98n39, 100nn41–42
Flood, Robert, 4
Flynn, Dennis O., 27
free coinage, 8, 19–33. See also coinage and recoinage
A Free-Market Monetary System and The Pretense of Knowledge (Hayek), 8n14
Further considerations concerning raising the value of money (Locke), 82n17
G
Garber, Peter, 3–4, 11–15, 114
“Famous First Bubbles,” 4n6
General Bank (of France), 51, 55–56, 108. See also Royal Bank (France)
The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (Keynes), 2–3, 106n1
Giuseppi, John, 77, The Bank of England: A History from its Foundation in
1694, 77n6, 79–80nn13–15, 102n46
Godfrey, Michael, 77
Godolphin, Sidney, 85–86, 88
gold. See precious metals
goldsmiths, 36, 63, 76–77, 80–83
Greenspan, Alan, 73
Gresham’s Law, 20

H
Haberler, Gottfried, 111, 114
Hamilton, Earl J., 38n6
American Treasure and the Price Revolution in Spain, 28
“Imports of American gold and Silver into Spain, 1503–1660,” 26n19
“Law, John,” International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, 35n1,
39nn7–8
“The Political Economy of France at the Time of John Law,” 52nn2–3,
57n12
“The Political Economy of France at the Time of John Law” (Hamilton),
58n14
“Prices and Wages At Paris Under John Law’s System,” 53n4, 70–71nn32–
33, 72–73nn34–37
Harley, Robert, 86, 88–89
Hayek, Friedrich A., viii, 110
A Free-Market Monetary System and The Pretense of Knowledge, 8n14
Helfferich, Karl, 20
Hildreth, Richard, The History of Banks: To Which is Added, A Demonstration of
the Advantages and Necessity of Free Competition in the Business of
Banking, 22n10
History of Modern Banks of Issue (Conant), 26n18
History of Monetary and Credit Theory: From John Law to the Present Day
(Rist), 74n40
History of Monetary Systems: A Record of Actual Experiments in Money Made
By Various States of the Ancient and Modern World (Del Mar), 20n2–3,
21nn5–6, 107n2
History of the Bank of England 1640–1903 (Andréadès), 76–77nn2–5, 81n16,
82–83nn17–19, 83–84nn21–23, 87n30
A History of the Precious Metals (Del Mar), 29n25, 31nn26–27

Hodrick, Robert, 4
Horsefield, Keith, 76–77
Huancavelica mercury mine, 26
Hume, David, 7, 27
I
“Imports of American gold and Silver into Spain, 1503–1660” (Hamilton),
26n19
inflation
free coinage and, 27
Mississippi Bubble and, 8, 46, 73–74, 96, 108–09
severe weather and, 86
Inflation Through The Ages: Economic, Social, Psychological and Historical
Aspects, 27n21
An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (Smith), 22–25
The International Economy and Monetary Movements in France (van Dillen), 30
International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, 35n1
K
Keynes, John Maynard, 105–06
The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, 2–3
Keynesian economics, 36, 69, 73, 105–06, 111, 117
Kindleberger, Charles, 1–2
“Bubbles,” The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, 2n1
A Financial History of Western Europe, 16–17
Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, 15–16
L

land (as money), 42–44, 46, 80–83, 87
Land Bank project, 80–83
Law, John
Bank of Amsterdam as inspiration, 33
banking proposal, 38–40
biographical information, 35–38
effect on English economics, 87–88, 92, 96, 107–10
Euvres complétes, 73n38
Mississippi Bubble and, 3–4, 8, 51–74, 114–15
monetary theories, 41–50
overview, ix
“Law, John,” (Hamilton), 35n1
Law, John, publications by
Money and Trade Considered: With a Proposal for Supplying the Nation
With Money, 38, 41–43
The Present State of the French Finances, 68–69nn30–31
Proposals and Reasons for constituting a Council of Trade, 37
Theory of Money, 87–88
“Treatise on Money and Commerce,” 39
Le Gendre d’Arminy, 56–58
Locke, John, 82
London Exchange Alley, 99, 100, 110, 116
Louis XIV (King of France), 38–39, 51, 53, 85
Louisiana, 56–57, 108
“The Low Countries,” An Introduction to the Sources of European Economic
History 1500-1800 (van Houtte and van Buyten), 33n29
Lowndes, William, 81–82
M

Mackay, Charles, ix, 11
Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds,
ixn1, 11, 36n2, 37n4, 38n6, 39nn7–8
Macleod, H.D., 87–88
malinvestment, theory of, 9, 105–17
Malt Lottery, 84
Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises (Kindleberger), 15–
16
Mary (Queen of England), 79
McCulloch, John C., Principles of Political Economy, 82n17
McGregor, James, “China Cancels Its Red-Hot Stamp Market, But Traders Hope
Crackdown Will Pass,” 116n11
Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds
(Mackay), ixn1, 11, 36n2, 37n4, 38n6, 39nn7–8
Mexico, 26
Million Bank, 99
Mises, Ludwig von, viii, 6, 110, 112, 115
On the Manipulation of Money and Credit, 114n7
Mississippi Company, ix, 48–50, 58–74, 108–110. See also Law, John
Money (Walker), 27nn22–23
money, defined, 7
“Money and the Business Cycle, 111
Money and Trade Considered: With a Proposal for Supplying the Nation With
Money (Law), 39, 41–44
Montague, Charles, 77, 78
Murphy, Antoin, 5–6, 44–48, 54, 58–59, 66–68
Richard Cantillon: Entrepreneur and Economist, 56–57nn10–11, 59–
60nn15–16, 64nn22–23, 65n27, 73n39, 114n8
N

The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 11
Noailles, Duke of, 53–55, 57
Norman, Montagu, 73
O
“On Testing for Speculative Bubbles” (Flood and Hodrick), 4nn7–9
On the Manipulation of Money and Credit (Mises), 112n5, 114n7, 115
Orléans, Duke of, 38, 39, 53
P
Paterson, William, 77–78
Philip, Duke of Orléans, 38, 39, 53
“The Political Economy of France at the Time of John Law” (Hamilton), 52nn2–
3, 57n12, 58n14
Posthumus, N.W., 13–14
precious metals. See also coinage and recoinage
compared to paper money, 48, 73–74, 82–83, 108
free coinage, 19–33
influx into Europe, 26–31
monopoly by government bank, 61–65, 68, 80–83
ties to U.S. dollar, vii
prices, 70–74
“Prices and Wages At Paris Under John Law’s System” (Hamilton), 53n4, 70–
71nn32–33, 72–73nn34–37
Principles of Political Economy (McCulloch), 82n17
Proposals and Reasons for constituting a Council of Trade (Law), 37
R

Rational Expectations School, 1–2, 4, 11, 105–06
Recoinage Act of 1696, 80–81
recoinage and coinage, 8, 19–33, 39, 51, 80–83, 107–08
Richard Cantillon: Entrepreneur and Economist (Murphy), 6n10, 54–55nn6–7,
56–57nn10–11, 64nn22–23, 65n27, 73n39, 114n8
Rist, Charles, 3
History of Monetary and Credit Theory: From John Law to the Present Day,
74n40
Rothbard, Murray, viii, 7, 43
America’s Great Depression, 7n11, 113
What Has Government Done to Our Money?, 7n13
Royal African Company, 99, 110
Royal Bank (France), 35–40, 49, 59–74, 108. See also General Bank (of France)
Royal Lustering Company, 100
S
Salerno, Joseph T., 73–74
“Two Traditions in Modern Monetary Theory: John Law and A.R.J. Turgot,”
3n5
Schama, Simon, 31–32
The Embarrassment of Riches, 32n28
silver. See precious metals
“Sixteenth-Century Inflation from a Production Point of View” (Flynn), 27
slave trade, 89
Smith, Adam, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations,
22–25
South America. See Americas
South Sea Act, 90–91
The South Sea Bubble (Carswell), 83n20, 86–87nn28–29, 87n31, 92n35, 94–

95nn36–37, 101n43
South Sea Company
conversion Acts and, 90–96
establishment of, 88–90
framework of, 49
increase and fall of share prices, 96–103
increase in money supply and, 89–103
influence on John Law, 45
overview, viii, 8
trade cycle theory and, 109–11
Stop of the Exchequer, 76–77
“The ‘Stop of the Exchequer’ Revisited” (Horsefield), 76n3
Strong, Benjamin, 73
Sword Blade Company, 86–88, 92, 109
T
theory of malinvestment, 9, 105–17
Theory of Money (Law), 87–88
time preference, 7, 111–13
trade cycle theory, 6–8, 110–17
“Treatise on Money and Commerce” (Law), 39
Tulipmania
background, 11–17
increase in money supply and, 19–33, 114–16
malinvestment theory and, 106–08
overview, viii–ix, 8
“Tulipmania” Journal of Political Economy 97 (Garber), 11–15nn2–11
“Tulipmania” The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics (Calvo), 11n1
Tunnage Bank, 78–79. See also Bank of England

“Two Traditions in Modern Monetary Theory: John Law and A.R.J. Turgot”
(Salerno), 3n5
U
United States, 35. See also Americas
V
van Buyten, Leon, 32–33
van Dillen, J.G., 30
van Houtte, Jan A., 32–33
W
wages, 70–74
Wagner, Richard E., 114
Walker, Francis Amasa, 27n21
Walpole, Robert, 92, 101, 115
War of Spanish Succession, 51–52, 85, 90, 108
Wealth of Nations (Smith), 22–25
Welsh Copper Company, 100
What Has Government Done to Our Money? (Rothbard), 7n13
William of Orange (King of England), 75–76, 79, 85
Writings on Economics (Hume), 7n12
Y
York Buildings Company, 100

