IV
THE EARLIEST GREEK GEOMETRY. THALES
The 'Summary' of Proclus.
WE shall often, in the course of this history, have occasion
to quote from the so-called f Summary' of Proclus, which has
already been cited in the preceding chapter. 
Occupying a
few pages (65-70) of Proclus's Commentary on Euclid, Book I,
it reviews, in the briefest possible outline, the course of Greek
geometry from the earliest times to Euclid, with special refer-
ence to the evolution of the Elements. At one time it was
often called the ' Eudemian summary', on the assumption
that it was an extract from the great History of Geometry in
four Books by Eudemus, the pupil of Aristotle. But a perusal
of the summary itself is sufficient to show that it cannot
have been written by Eudemus; the most that can be said is
that, down to a certain sentence, it was probably based, more
or less directly, upon data appearing in Eudemus's History.
At the sentence in question there is a break in the narrative,
as follows:
* Those who have compiled histories bring the development
of this science up to this point. Not much younger than
these is Euclid, who put together the Elements, collecting
many of the theorems of Eudoxus, perfecting many others by
Theaetetus, and bringing to irrefragable demonstration the
propositions which had only been somewhat loosely proved by
his predecessors/
Since Euclid was later than Eudemus, it is impossible that
Eudemus can have written this; while the description ' those
who have compiled histories', and who by implication were
a little older than Euclid, suits Eudemus excellently. Yet the
style of the summary after the break does not show any
such change from that of the earlier portion as to suggest
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE < SUMMARY' OF PROCLUS 
119
different authorship. The author of the earlier portion fre-
quently refers to the question of the origin of the Elements of
Geometry in a way in which no one would be likely to write
who was not later than Euclid; and it seems to be the same
hand which, in the second portion, connects the Elements of
Euclid with the work of Eudoxus and Theaetetus. Indeed
the author, whoever he was, seems to have compiled the sum-
mary with one main object in view, namely, to trace the origin
and growth of the Elements of Geometry; consequently he
omits to refer to certain famous discoveries in geometry such
as the solutions of the problem of the duplication of the cube,
doubtless because they did not belong to the Elements. In
two cases he alludes to such discoveries, as it were in paren-
thesis, in order to recall to the mind of the reader a current
association of the name of a particular geometer with a par-
ticular discovery. Thus he mentions Hippocrates of Chios as
a famous geometer for the particular reason that he was the
first to write Elements, and he adds to his name, for the pur-
pose of identification, ' the discoverer of the quadrature of the
lune \ 
Similarly, when he says of Pythagoras * (he it was)
who' (o? Sfj . . .) ' discovered the theory of irrationals [or
" proportions "] and the construction of the cosmic figures',
he seems to be alluding, entirely on his own account, to a
popular tradition to that effect. If the summary is the work
of one author, who was it ? 
Tannery answers that it was
Geminus; but this seems highly improbable, for the extracts
from Geminus's work which we possess suggest that the
subjects therein discussed were of a different kind ; they seem
rather to have been general questions relating to the philoso-
phy and content of mathematics, and even Tannery admits
that historical details could only have come incidentally into
the work.
Could the author have been Proclus himself ? This again
seems, on the whole, improbable. In favour of the authorship
of Proclus are the facts (1) that the question of the origin of
the Elements is tept prominent and (2) that there is no men-
tion of Democritus, whom Eudemus would not have ignored,
while a follower of Plato such as Proclus might have done
him this injustice, following the example of Plato himself, who
was an opponent of Democritus, never once mentions him, and
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

120 THE EARLIEST GREEK GEOMETRY. THALES
is said to have wished to burn all his writings. On the other
hand (1) the style of the summary is not such as to point
to Proclus as the author; (2) if he wrote it, it is hardly
conceivable that he would have passed over in silence the dis-
covery of the analytical method, ' the finest', as he says else-
where, of the traditional methods in geometry, ' which Plato is
said to have communicated to Laodamas'. Nor (3) is it
easy to suppose that Proclus would have spoken in the
detached way that the author does of Euclid whose Elements
was the subject of his whole commentary : ' Not much younger
than these is Euclid, who compiled the Elements . . . V ' This
man lived in the time of the first Ptolemy . . .'. On the whole,
therefore, it would seem probable that the body of the sum-
mary was taken by Proclus from a compendium made by some
writer later than Eudemus, though the earlier portion was
based, directly or indirectly, upon notices in Eudemus's History.
But the prelude with which the summary is introduced may
well have been written, or at all events expanded, by Proclus
himself, for it is in his manner to bring in 'the inspired
Aristotle' (6 Sai/iSi/ios jipicrToriXr}?)—as he calls him here and
elsewhere—and the transition to the story of the Egyptian
origin of geometry may also be his:
1 Since, then, we have to consider the beginnings of the arts
and sciences with reference to the particular cycle [of the
series postulated by Aristotle] through which the universe is
at present passing, we say that, according to most accounts,
geometry was first discovered in Egypt, having had its origin
in the measurement of areas. For this was a necessity for the
Egyptians owing to the rising of the Nile which effaced the
proper boundaries of everybody's lands/
The next sentences also may well be due to Proclus:
' And it is in no way surprising that the discovery of this as
well as the other sciences had its beginning in practical needs,
seeing that everything that is in the course of becoming pro-
gresses from the imperfect to the perfect. 
Thus the transition
from sensation to reasoning and from reasoning to under-
standing is only natural.'
These sentences look like reflections by Proclus, and the
transition to the summary proper follows, in the words :
'Accordingly, just as exact arithmetic began among the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ORIGIN OF GEOMETRY 
121
Phoenicians owing to its use in commerce and contracts, so
geometry was discovered in Egypt for the reason aforesaid/
Tradition as to the origin of geometry.
Many Greek writers besides Proclus give a similar account
of the origin of geometry. 
Herodotus says that Sesostris
(Ramses II, circa 1300 B.C.) distributed the land among all the
Egyptians in equal rectangular plots, on which he levied an
annual tax; when therefore the river swept away a portion
of a plot and the owner applied for a corresponding reduction
in the. tax, surveyors had to be sent down to certify what the
reduction in the area had been. ' This, in my opinion (SoKeec
fioi)\ he continues, 'was the origin of geometry, which then
passed into Greece/1 The same story, a little amplified, is.
repeated by other writers, Heron of Alexandria,2 Diodorus
Siculus,3 and Strabo.4 True, all these statements (even if that
in Proclus was taken directly from Eudemus's History of
Geometry) may all be founded on the passage of Herodotus,
and Herodotus may have stated as his own inference what he
was told in Egypt; for Diodorus gives it as an Egyptian
tradition that geometry and astronomy were the discoveries
of Egypt, and says that the Egyptian priests claimed Solon,
Pythagoras, Plato, Democritus, Oenopides of Chios, and
Eudoxus as their pupils. But the Egyptian claim to the
discoveries was never disputed by the Greeks. In Plato's
Phaedrus Socrates is made to say that he had heard that the
Egyptian god Theuth was the first to invent arithmetic, the
science of calculation, geometry, and astronomy.5 
Similarly
Aristotle says that the mathematical arts first took shape in
Egypt, though he gives as the reason, not the practical need
which arose for a scientific method of measuring land, but the
fact that in Egypt there was a leisured class, the priests, who
could spare time for such things 6 Democritus boasted that no
one of his time had excelled him ' in making lines into figures
and proving their properties, not even the so-called Harpe-
donaptae in Egypt \7 
This word, compounded of two Greek
words, apneSovq and anTtiv, means (rope-stretchers' or ' rope-
1 Herodotus ii. 109. 
2 Heron, Geom. c. 2, p. 176, Heib.
3 Diod. Sic. i. 69, 81. 
4 Strabo xvii. c. 3.
5 Plato, Phaedrus 274 c. 
6 Arist. Metaph. A. 1, 981 b 23.
7 Clem. Strom, i. 15. 69 (Vorsokratiker, ii3, p. 123. 5-7).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

122 THE EARLIEST GREEK GEOMETRY. 
THALES
fasteners'; and, while it is clear from the passage that the
persons referred to were clever geometers, the word reveals a
characteristic modus operandi. 
The Egyptians were ex-
tremely careful about the orientation of their temples, and
the use of ropes and pegs for marking out the limits,
e.g. corners, of the sacred precincts is portrayed in all
pictures of the laying of foundation stones of temples.1 The
operation of' rope-stretching' is mentioned in an inscription on
leather in the Berlin Museum as having been in use as early
as Amenemhat I (say 2300 B.C.).2 Now it was the practice
of ancient Indian and probably also of Chinese geometers
to make, for instance, a right angle by stretching a rope
divided into three lengths in the ratio of the sides of a right-
angled triangle in rational numbers, e.g. 3, 4, 5, in such a way
that the three portions formed a triangle, when of course a right
angle would be formed at the point where the two smaller
sides meet. There seems to be no doubt that the Egyptians
knew that the triangle (3, 4, 5), the sides of which are so
related that the square on the greatest side is equal to the
sum of the squares on the other two, is right-angled; if this
is so, they were acquainted with at least one case of the
famous proposition of Pythagoras.
Egyptian geometry, i. e. mensuration.
We might suppose, from Aristotle's remark about the
Egyptian priests being the first to cultivate mathematics
because they had leisure, that their geometry would have
advanced beyond the purely practical stage to something
more like a theory or science of geometry. But the docu-
ments which have survived do not give any ground for this
supposition; the art of geometry in the hands of the priests
never seems to have advanced beyond mere routine. The
most important available source of information about Egyptian
mathematics is the Papyrus Rhind, written probably about
1700 B.C. but copied from an original of the time of King
Amenemhat III (Twelfth Dynasty), say 2200 B.C. The geo-
metry in this ' guide for calculation, a means of ascertaining
everything, of elucidating all obscurities, all mysteries, all
1 Brugsch, Steinimchrift und Bibelwort, 2nd ed., p. 36.
2 Diimichen, Denderatempel, p. 33.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EGYPTIAN GEOMETRY 
123
difficulties', as it calls itself, is rough mensuration. 
The
following are the cases dealt with which concern us here.
(1) There is the rectangle, the area of which is of course
obtained by multiplying together the numbers representing
the sides. (2) The measure of a triangle is given as the pro-
duct of half the base into the side. And here there is a differ-
ence of opinion as to the kind of triangle measured. Eisenlohr
and Cantor, taking the diagram to represent an isosceles tri-
angle rather inaccurately drawn, have to assume error on
the part of the writer in making the area \ab instead of
^aV(bP —%a2) where a is the base and b the 'side', an error
which of course becomes less serious as a becomes smaller
relatively to b (in the case taken a = 4, b = 10, and the area
as given according to the rule, i.e. 20, is not greatly different
from the true value 19-5959). But other authorities take the
triangle to be right-angled and b to be the side perpendicular
to the base, their argument being that the triangle as drawn
is not a worse representation of a right-angled triangle than
other triangles purporting to be right-angled which are found
in other manuscripts, and indeed is a better representation of
a right-angled triangle than it is of an isosceles triangle, while
the number representing the side is shown in the figure along-
side one only of the sides, namely that adjacent to the angle
which the more nearly represents a right angle. The advan-
tage of this interpretation is that the rule is then correct
instead of being more inaccurate than one would expect from
a people who had expert land surveyors to measure land for
the purpose of assessing it to tax. The same doubt arises
with reference to (3) the formula for the area of a trapezium,
namely |(a + c)x6, where a, c are the base and the opposite
parallel side respectively, while b is the ' side', i.e. one of the
non-parallel sides. In this case the figure seems to have been
intended to be isosceles, whereas the formula is only accurate
if b, one of the non-parallel sides, is at right angles to the base,
in which case of course the side opposite to b is not at right
angles to the base. As the parallel sides (6, 4) in the case
t^aken are short relatively to the ' side' (20), the angles at the
base are not far short of being right angles, and it is possible
that one of them, adjacent to the particular side which is
marked 20, was intended to be right. The hypothesis that
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

124 THE EARLIEST GREEK GEOMETRY. 
THALES
the triangles and trapezia are isosceles, and that the formulae
are therefore crude and inaccurate, was thought to be con-
firmed by the evidence of inscriptions on the Temple of Horus
at Edfu. 
This temple was planned out in 237 B.C., the in-
scriptions which refer to the assignment of plots of ground to
the priests belong to the reign of Ptolemy XI, Alexander I
(107-88 B.C.). From so much of these inscriptions as were
published by Lepsius1 we gather that %(a + c) .%(b + d) was a
formula for the area of a quadrilateral the sides of which in
order are a, b, c, d. Some of the quadrilateral figures are
evidently trapezia with the non-parallel sides equal; others are
not, although they are commonly not far from being rectangles
or isosceles trapezia. Examples are ' 16 to 15 and 4 to 3§ make
5 8 i ' (i.e.£(16 + 15)x.|(4 + 3f) = 58|); < 9| to 10| and 2 4 | | to
22| i make 236£?; ' 22 to 23 and 4 to 4 make 90', and so on.
Triangles are not made the subject of a separate formula, but
are regarded as cases of quadrilaterals in which the length of
one side is zero. Thus the triangle 5,17, 17 is described as a
figure with sides ' 0 to 5 and 17 to 17 \ the area being accord-
ingly |(0 + 5). -|(17 + 17) or 42^; 0 is expressed by hieroglyphs
meaning the word Nen. It is remarkable enough that the use
of a formula so inaccurate should have lasted till 200 years or
so after Euclid had lived and taught in Egypt; there is also
a case of its use in the Liber Geeponicus formerly attributed to
Heron,2 the quadrilateral having two opposite sides parallel
and the pairs of opposite sides being (32, 30) and.(18,16). But
it is right to add that, in the rest of the Edfu inscriptions
published later by Brugsch, there are cases where the inaccu-
rate formula is not used, and it is suggested that what is being
attempted in these cases is an approximation to the squara
root of a non-square number.3
We come now (4) to the mensuration of circles as found
in the Papyrus Rhind. 
If .d is the diameter, the area is
given as {(1 — i)d}2 or f^d2. 
As this is the corresponding
figure to JTTCJ2, it follows that the value of ir is taken as
iL5
T
6- = (iJ5-)2, or 3-16, very nearly. 
A somewhat different
value for TT has been inferred from measurements of certain
1 'Ueber eine hieroglyphische Inschrift am Tempel von Edfu' (Abh»
der Berliner Akad., 1855, pp. 69-114).
2 Heron, ed. Hultsch, p. 212. 15-20 (Heron, Geom. c. 6. 2, Heib.).
3 M. Simon, Gesch. d. Math, im Altertum, p. 48.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EGYPTIAN GEOMETRY 
125
heaps of grain or of spaces which they fill. Unfortunately
the shape of these spaces or heaps cannot be determined with
certainty. The word in the Papyrus Rhind is shad; it is
evident that it ordinarily means a rectangular parallelepiped,
but it can also be applied to a figure with a circular base,
e.g. a cylinder, or a figure resembling a thimble, i.e. with
a rounded top. There is a measurement of a mass of corn
apparently of the latter sort in one of the Kahun papyri.1
The figure shows a circle with 1365§ as the content of the
heap written within it, and with 12 and 8 written above and
to the left of the circle respectively. The calculation is done
in this way. 
12 is taken and § of it added; this gives 16;
16 is squared, which gives 256, and finally 256 is multiplied
by | of 8, which gives 1365f. 
If for the original figures
12 and 8 we write h and k respectively, the formula used for
the content is (fh)2.%k. 
Griffith took 12 to be the height
of the figure and 8 to be the diameter of the base. But
according to another interpretation,2 12 is simply* •§ of 8, and
the figure to be measured is a hemisphere with diameter
8 ells. If this is so, the formula makes the content of a
hemisphere of diam'eter k to be (f . §&)2.§& or §&3. Com-
paring this with the true volume of the hemisphere, §. \-nlft
or -^irk3 = 134-041 cubic ells, we see that the result 1365§
obtained by the formula must be expressed in x^ths of a cubic
ell: consequently for T^7r the formula substitutes ^%, so that
the formula gives 3-2 in place of IT, a value different from the
3-16 of Ahmes. Borchardt suggests that the formula for the
measurement of a hemisphere was got by repeated practical
measurements of heaps of corn built up as nearly as possible
in that form, in which case the inaccuracy in the figure for TT
is not surprising. With this problem from the Kahun papyri
must be compared No. 43 from the Papyrus Rhind. A curious
feature in the measurements of stores or heaps of corn in
the Papyrus Rhind is the fact, not as yet satisfactorily ex-
plained, that the area of the base (square or circular) is first
found and is then regularly multiplied, not into the ' height'
itself, but into § times the height. But in No. 43 the calcula-
tion is different and more parallel to the case in the Kahun
papyrus. The problem is to find the content of a space round
1 Griffith, Kahun Papyri, Pt. I, Plate 8. 
2 Simon, 1. c.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

126 THE EARLIEST GREEK GEOMETRY. THALES
in form ' 9 in height and 6 in breadth \ 
The word qa, here
translated c height1, is apparently used in other documents
for 'length' or 'greatest dimension7, and must in this case
mean the diameter of the base, while the 'breadth' is the
height in our sense. If we denote the diameter of the circular
base by k, and the height by h, the formula used in this
problem for finding the volume is (f. §&)2. §h. 
Here it is
not § h, but | hy which is taken as the last factor of the
product. Eisenlohr suggests that the analogy of the formula
for a hemisphere, 7rr2.§r, may have operated to make the
calculator take § of the height, although the height is not
in the particular case the same as the radius of the base, but
different. 
But there remains the difficulty that (f)2 or -1
¥
e-
times the area of the circle of diameter h is taken instead
of the area itself. As to this Eisenlohr can only suggest that
the circle of diameter Jc which was accessible for measurement
was not the real or mean circular section, and that allowance
had to be made for this, or that the base was not a circle of
diameter k but an ellipse with ^-Jc and h as major and minor
axes. But such explanations can hardly be applied to the
factor (|)2 in the Kahun case if the latter is really the case
of a hemispherical space as suggested. Whatever the true
explanation may be, it is clear that these rules of measure-
ment must have been empirical and that there was little or
no geometry about them.
Much more important geometrically are certain calculations
with reference to the proportions of pyramids (Nos. 56-9 of
the Papyrus Rhind) and a monu-
ment (No. 60) 
In the case
of the pyramid two lines in the
figure are distinguished, (1)
ukha-thebt, which is evidently
some line in the base, and
(2) 
pir-em-us 
or per-em-us
('height'), a word from which
the name irvpaiiis may have
been derived.1 
The object of
1 Another view is that the words nvpafiis and nvpafiovs, meaning1 a kind
of cake made from roasted wheat and honey, are derived from nvpoi,
' wheat', and are thus of purely Greek origin.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MEASUREMENT OF PYRAMIDS 
127
the problems is to find a certain relation called se-qet,
literally 'that which makes the nature', i.e. that which
determines the proportions of the pyramid. The relation
se-qet = -—: 
. In the case of the monument we have
piremus
two other names for lines in the figure, (1) senti,' foundation',
or base, (2) qay en hern, 'vertical length', or height; the
same term se-qet is used for the relation — 
j 
or
* • 
qay en hern
the same inverted. 
Eisenlohr and Cantor took the lines
(1) and (2) in tbe case of the pyramid to be different from
the lines (1) and (2) called by different names in the monument.
Suppose A BCD to be the square base of a pyramid, E its
centre, H the vertex, and F the middle point of the side AD
of the base. According to Eisenlohr and Cantor the ukha-
thebt is the diagonal, say AC, of the base, and the pir-em-us
is the edge, as AH, 
On this assumption the se-qet
AE
= -j-=. = cos HAE.
In the case of tKe monument they took the senti to be the
side of the base, as AB, the qay en heru to be the height of
the pyramid EH, and the se-qet to be the ratio of EH to
\AB 
or of EH to EF, i.e. the tangent of the angle HFE
which is the slope of the faces of the pyramid. According
to Eisenlohr and Cantor, therefore, the one term se-qet was
used in two different senses, namely, in Nos. 56—9 for cos HAE
and in No. 60 for tan HFE. 
Borchardt has, however, proved
that the se-qet in all the cases has one meaning, and represents
the cotangent of the slope of the faces of the pyramid,
i. e. cot HFE or the ratio of FE to EH. There is no difficulty
in the use of the different words uhha-ihebt and senti to
express the same thing, namely, the side of the base, and
of the different words per-emi-us and qay en hem in the same
sense of ' height'; such synonyms are common in Egypt, and,
moreover, the word oner used of the pyramids is different
from the word an for the monument. Again, it is clear that,
while the slope, the angle HFE, is what the builder would
want to know, the cosine of the angle HAE, formed by the
edge with the plane of the base, would be of no direct use
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

128 THE EARLIEST GREEK GEOMETRY. THALES
to him. But, lastly, the se-qet in No. 56 is | § and, if se-qet
is taken in the sense of cot HFE, this gives for the angle
HFE the value of 54° 14' 16" which is precisely, to the
seconds, the slope of the lower half of the southern stone
pyramid of Dakshur; in Nos. 57-^9 the se-qet, f, is the co-
tangent of an angle of 53° 7'48", which again is exactly the
slope of the second pyramid of Gizeh as measured by Flinders
Petrie; and the se-qet in No. 60, which is J, is the cotangent
of an angle of 75°57/50", corresponding exactly to the slope
of the Mastaba-tombs of the Ancient Empire and of the
sides of the Medum pyramid.1
These measurements of se-qet indicate at all events a rule-
of-thumb use of geometrical proportion, and connect themselves
naturally enough with the story of Thales's method of measuring
-the heights of pyramids.
The beginnings of Greek geometry.
At the beginning of the summary of Proclus we are told
that THALES (624-547 B.C.)
'first went to Egypt and thence introduced this study
(geometry) into Greece. 
He discovered many propositions
himself, and instructed his successors in the principles under-
lying many others, his method of attack being in some cases
more general (i.e. more theoretical or scientific), in others
more empirical (cdo-OrjTiKGOTepov, more in the nature of simple
inspection or observation)/ 2
With Thales, therefore, geometry first becomes a deductive
science depending on general propositions; this agrees with
what Plutarch says of him as one of the Seven Wise Men:
'he was apparently the only one of these whose wisdom
stepped, in speculation, beyond the limits of practical utility:
the rest acquired the reputation of wisdom in politics.3 3
(Not that Thales was inferior to the others in political
wisdom. Two stories illustrate the contrary. He tried to
save Ionia by urging the separate states to form a federation
1 Flinders Petrie, Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh, p. 162.
2 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 65. 7-11.
3 Plutarch, Solon, c. 3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MEASUREMENT OF PYRAMIDS 
129
with a capital at Teos, that being the most central place in
Ionia. And when Croesus sent envoys to Miletus to propose
an alliance, Thales dissuaded his fellow-citizens from accepting
the proposal, with the result that, when Cyrus conquered, the
city was saved.)
(a) Measurement of height of jpyramid.
The accounts of Thales's method of measuring the heights
of pyramids vary. The earliest and simplest version is that
of Hieronymus, a pupil of Aristotle, quoted by Diogenes
Laertius:
' Hieronymus says that he even succeeded in measuring the
pyramids by observation of the length of their shadow at
the moment when our shadows are equal to our own height/1
Pliny says that
f Thales discovered how to obtain the height of pyramids
and all other similar objects, namely, by measuring the
shadow of the object at the time when a body and its shadow
are equal in length/ 2
Plutarch embellishes the story by making Niloxenus say
to Thales:
' Among other feats of yours, he (Amasis) was particularly
pleased with your measurement of the pyramid, when, without
trouble or the assistance of any instrument, you merely set
up a stick at the extremity of the shadow cast by the
pyramid and, having thus made two triangles by the impact
of the sun's rays, you showed that the pyramid has to the
stick the same ratio which the shadow has to the shadow/3
The first of these versions is evidently the original one and,
as the procedure assumed in it is more elementary than the
more general method indicated by Plutarch, the first version
seems to be the more probable. Thales could not have failed
to observe that, at the time when the shadow of a particular
object is equal to its height, the same relation holds for all
other objects casting a shadow; this he would probably
infer by induction, after making actual measurements in a
1 Diog. L. i. 27. 
2 N. H. xxxvi. 12 (17).
8 Plut. Conv. sept. sap. 2, p. 147 A.
1523 
K
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

130 THE EARLIEST GREEK GEOMETRY. THALES
considerable number of cases at a time when he found the
length of the shadow of one object to be equal to its height.
But, even if Thales used the more general method indicated
by Plutarch, that method does not, any more than the Egyptian
se-qet calculations, imply any general theory of similar tri-
angles or proportions; the solution is itself a se-qet calculation,
just like that in No. 57 of Ahmes's handbook. In the latter
problem the base and the se-qet are given, and we have to
find the height. So in Thales's problem we get a certain
se-qet by dividing the measured length of the shadow of the
stick by the length of the stick itself; we then only require
to know the distance between the point of the shadow corre-
sponding to the apex of the pyramid and the centre of the
base of the pyramid in order to determine the height; the
only difficulty would be to measure or estimate the distance
from the apex of the shadow to the centre of the base.
(/?) Geometrical theorems attributed to Thales.
The following are the general theorems in elementary
geometry attributed to Thales.
(1) He is said to have been the first to demonstrate that
a circle is bisected by its diameter.1
(2) Tradition credited him with the first statement of the
theorem (Eucl. I. 5) that the angles at the base of any
isosceles triangle are equal, although he used the more archaic
term ' similar' instead of ' equal3.2
(3) The proposition (Eucl. I. 15) that, if two straight lines
cut one another, the vertical and opposite angles are equal
was discovered, though not scientifically proved, by Thales.
Eudemus is quoted as the authority for this.3
(4) Eudemus in his History of Geometry referred to Thales
the theorem of Eucl. I. 26 that, if two triangles have two
angles and one side respectively equal, the triangles are equal
in all respects.
' For he (Eudemus) says that the method by which Thales
showed how to find the distances of ships from the shore
necessarily involves the use of this theorem/ 4
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 157. 10. 
2 Ib., pp. 250. 20-251. 2.
3 Ib., p. 299. 1-5. 
* Ib., p. 352. 14-18.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GEOMETRICAL THEOREMS 
131
(5) ' Pamphile says that Thales, who learnt geometry from
the Egyptians, was the first to describe on a circle a triangle
(which shall be) right-angled {Karaypd^ai KVKXOV TO Tpiyoavov
opOoy&viov), and that he sacrificed an ox (on the strength of
the discovery). Others, however, including Apollodorus the
calculator, say that it was Pythagoras/1
The natural interpretation of Pamphile's words is to suppose
that she attributed to Thales the discovery that the angle
in a semicircle is a right angle.
Taking these propositions in order, we may observe that,
when Thales is said to have 'demonstrated' (aTroSeigou) that
a circle is bisected by its diameter, whereas he only * stated'
the theorem about the isosceles triangle and ' discovered \
without scientifically proving, the equality of vertically
opposite angles, the word ' demonstrated' must not be taken
too literally. Even Euclid did not ' demonstrate' that a circle
is bisected by its diameter, but merely stated the fact in
I. Def. 17. 
Thales therefore probably
observed rather than proved the property;
and it may, as Cantor gays, have been
suggested by the appearance of certain
figures of circles divided into a number
of equal sectors by 2, 4, or 6 diameters
such as are found on Egyptian monu-
ments or represented on vessels brought
by Asiatic tributary kings in the time of the eighteenth
dynasty.2
It has been suggested that the use of the word ' similar ' to
describe the equal angles of an isosceles triangle indicates that
Thales did not yet conceive of an angle as a magnitude, but
as a figure having a certain shape, a view which would agree
closely with the idea of the Egyptian se-qet, 'that which
makes the nature', in the sense of determining a similar or
the same inclination in the faces of pyramids.
With regard to (4), the theorem of Eucl. I. 26, it will be
observed that Eudemus only inferred that this theorem was
known to Thales from the fact that it is necessary to Thales's
determination of the distance of a ship from the shore.
Unfortunately the method used can only be conjectured,
1 Diog. L. i. 24, 25. 
2 Cantor, Gesch. d. Math, i3, pp. 109, 140.
K 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

132 THE EARLIEST GREEK GEOMETRY. THALES
The most usual supposition is that Thales, observing the ship
from the top of a tower on the sea-shore, used the practical
equivalent of the proportionality of the sides of two similar
right-angled triangles, one small and one large. Suppose B
to be the base of the tower, C the ship. It was only necessary
for a man standing at the top of the
Ak r 
tower to have an instrument with
two legs forming a right angle, to
place it with one leg DA vertical and
in a straight line with B, and the
other leg DE in the direction of the
ship, to take any point A on DA,
B 
c 
and then to mark on DE the point E
where the line of sight from A to 0 cuts the leg DE. Then
AD (=1, say) and DE (= m, say) can be actually measured,
a& also the height BD (= A, say) from D, to the foot of the
tower, and, by similar triangles,
The objection to this solution is that it does not depend
directly on Eucl. I. 26, as Eudemus implies. Tannery 1 there-
fore favours the hypothesis of a solution on the lines followed
by the Roman agrimensor Marcus Junjus Nipsus in his
fluminis varatio.—To find the distance from
A to an inaccessible point B. Measure from A,
along a straight line at right angles to AB,
a distance AC, and bisect it at D. From G, on
the side of AG remote from B, draw GE at
right angles to AC, and let E be the point on
it which is in a straight line with B and D.
Then clearly, by Eucl. I. 26, GE is equal to
AB; and GE can be measured, so that AB
is known.
This hypothesis is open to a different objec-
tion, namely that, as a rule, it would be
difficult, in the supposed case, to get a sufficient amount of
free and level space for the construction and measurements.
I have elsewhere2 suggested a still simpler method free
1 Tannery, La gSometrie grecque, pp. 90-1.
2 The Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements, vol. i, p. 305.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DISTANCE OF A SHIP AT SEA 
133
from this objection, and depending equally directly on Eucl.
I. 26. If the observer was placed on the top of a tower, he
had only to use a rough instrument made of a straight stick
and a cross-piece fastened to it so as to be capable of turning
about the fastening (say a nail) so that it could form any
angle with the stick and would remain where it was put.
Then the natural thing would be to fix the stick upright (by
means of a plumb-line) and direct the cross-piece towards the
ship. Next, leaving the cross-piece at the angle so found,
he would turn the stick round, while keeping it vertical, until
the cross-piece pointed to some visible object on the shore,
which would be mentally noted; after this it would only
be necessary to measure the distance of the object from the
foot of the tower, which distance would, by Eucl. I. 26, be
equal to the distance of the ship. It appears that this precise
method is found in so many practical geometries of the first
century of printing that it must be assumed to have long
been a common expedient. 
There is a story that one of
Napoleon's engineers won the Imperial favour by quickly
measuring, in precisely this way, the width of a stream that
blocked the progress of the army.1
There is even more difficulty about the dictum of Pamphile
implying that Thales first discovered the fact that the angle
in a semicircle is a right angle. Pamphile lived in the reign
of Nero (A. D. 54-68), and is therefore a late authority. The
date of Apollodorus the l calculator' or arithmetician is not
known, but he is given as only one of several authorities who
attributed the proposition to Pythagoras. Again, the story
of the sacrifice of an ox by Thales on the occasion of his
discovery is suspiciously like that told in the distich of
Apollodorus 'when Pythagoras discovered that famous pro-
position, on the strength of which he offered a splendid
sacrifice of oxen'. But, in quoting the distich of Apollodorus,
Plutarch expresses doubt whether the discovery so celebrated
was that of the theorem of the square of the hypotenuse or
the solution of the problem of c application of areas'2; there
is nothing about the discovery of the fact of the angle in
a semicircle being a right angle. It may therefore be that
1 David Eugene Smith, The Teaching of Geometry, pp. 172-3.
2 Plutarch, Non posse suavitervivi secundum Epicwiiih, c. 11, p. 1094 B.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

134 THE EARLIEST GREEK GEOMETRY. THALES
Diogenes Laertius was mistaken in bringing Apollodorus into
the story now in question at all; the mere mention of the
sacrifice in Pamphile's account would naturally recall Apollo-
dorus's lines about Pythagoras, and Diogenes may have
forgotten that they referred to a different proposition.
But, even if the story of Pamphile is accepted, there are
difficulties of substance. 
As Allman pointed out, if Thales
knew that the angle in a semicircle
is a right angle, he was in a position
at once to infer that the sum of the
angles of any rigid-angled triangle is
equal to two right angles. For suppose
that BO is the diameter of the semi-
circle, 0 the centre, and A a point on
the semicircle; we are then supposed
to know that the angle BAG is a right angle. Joining OA,
we form two isosceles triangles OAB, OAC; and Thales
knows that the base angles in each of these triangles are
equal. Consequently the sum of the angles OAB, OAG is
equal to the sum of the angles OB A, OCA. The former sum
is known to be a right angle; therefore the second sum is
also a right angle, and the three angles of the triangle ABG
are together equal to twice the said sum, i. e. to two right
angles.
Next it would easily be seen that any triangle can be
divided into two right-angled triangles by drawing a perpen-
dicular AD from a vertex A to the
A
opposite side BG. 
Then the three
angles of each of the right-angled
triangles ABB, ADC are together equal
to two right angles. By adding together
the three angles of both triangles we
find that the sum of the three angles of the triangle ABG
together with the angles ABB, ABG is equal to four right
angles; and, the sum of the latter two angles being two
right angles, it follows that the sum of the remaining angles,
the angles at A, B, 0, is equal to two right angles. And ABG
is any triangle.
Now Euclid in III. 31 proves that the angle in a semicircle
is a right angle by means of the general theorem of I. 32
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ANGLE IN A SEMICIRCLE 
135
that the sum of the angles of any triangle is equal to two
right angles; but if Thales was aware of the truth of the
latter general proposition and proved the proposition about
the semicircle in this way, by means of it, how did Eudemus
come to credit the Pythagoreans, not only with the general
proof, but with the discovery, of the theorem that the angles
of any triangle are together equal to two right angles ?1
Cantor, who supposes that Thales proved his proposition
after the manner of Euclid III. 31, i.e. by means of the general
theorem of I. 32, suggests that Thales arrived at the truth of
the latter, not by a general proof like that attributed by
Eudemus to the Pythagoreans, but by an argument following
the steps indicated by Geminus. Geminus says that
'the ancients investigated the theorem of the two right
angles in each individual species of triangle, first in the equi-
lateral, then in the isosceles, and afterwards in the scalene
triangle, but later geometers demonstrated the general theorem
that in any triangle the three interior angles are equal to two
right angles?.2
The c later geometers' being the Pythagoreans, it is assumed
that the 'ancients' may be Thales and his contemporaries.
As regards the equilateral triangle, the fact might be suggested
by the observation that six such triangles arranged round one
point as common vertex would fill up the space round that
point; whence it follows that each angle is one-sixth of four
right angles, and three such angles make up two right angles.
Again, suppose that in either an equilateral or an isosceles
triangle the vertical angle is bisected by a straight line meet-
ing the base, and that the rectangle of which the bisector and
one half of the base are adjacent sides is completed; the
rectangle is double of the half of the original triangle, and the
angles of the half-triangle are together equal to half the sum
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 379. 2-5.
2 See Eutocius, Coinm. on Comes of Apollonius (vol. ii, p. 170, Heib.)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

136 THE EARLIEST GREEK GEOMETRY. THALES
of the angles of the rectangle, i.e. are equal to two right
angles; and it immediately follows that the sum of the angles
of the original equilateral or isosceles triangle is equal to two
right angles. The same thing is easily proved of any triangle
by dividing it into two right-angled
triangles and completing the rectangles
which are their doubles respectively, as
in the figure. But the fact that a proof
on these lines is just as easy in the case
of the general triangle as it is for the
equilateral and isosceles triangles throws doubt on the whole
procedure; and we are led to question whether there is any
foundation for Geminus's account at all. Aristotle has a re-
mark that
'even if one should prove, with reference to each (sort of)
triangle, the equilateral, scalene, and isosceles, separately, that
each has its angles equal to two right angles, either by one
proof or by different proofs, he does not yet know that the
triangle, i.e. the triangle in general, has its angles equal to
two right angles, except in a sophistical sense, even though
there exists no triangle other than triangles of the kinds
mentioned. For he knows it not qua triangle, nor of every
triangle, except in a numerical sense; he does -not know it
notionally of every triangle, even though there be actually no
triangle which he does not know \1
It may well be that Geminus was misled into taking for
a historical fact what Aristotle gives only as a hypothetical
illustration, and that the exact stages by which the proposi-
tion was first proved were not those indicated by Geminus.
Could Thales have arrived at his proposition about the
semicircle without assuming, or even knowing, that the sum
of the angles of any triangle is equal to two right angles ? It
seems possible, and in the following way.
Many propositions were doubtless first
discovered by drawing all sortsof figures
and lines in them, and observing apparent
relations of equality, &c, between parts.
It would, for example, be very natural
to draw a rectangle, a figure with four right angles (which, it
1 Arist. Anal Post. 1. 5, 74 a 25 sq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ANGLE IN A SEMICIRCLE 
137
would be found, could be drawn in practice), and to put in the
two diagonals. 
The equality of the opposite sides would
doubtless, in the first beginnings of geometry, be assumed as
obvious, or verified by measurement. 
If then it was assumed
that a rectangle is a figure with all its angles right angles and
each side equal to its opposite, it would be easy to deduce
certain consequences. Take first the two triangles ADC, BCD.
Since by hypothesis AD = BC and CD is common, the two
triangles have the sides AD, DC respectively equal to the sides
BC, CD, and the included angles, being right angles, are equal;
therefore the triangles ADC, BCD are equal in all respects
(cf Eucl. I. 4), and accordingly the angles AGD (i.e. OCD) and
BDC (i.e. ODC) are equal, whence (by the converse of Eucl. I. 5,
known to Thales) OD == OC. Similarly by means of the
equality of AB, CD we prove the equality of OB, 00. 
Conse-
quently OB, OC, OD (and OA) are all equal. It follows that
a circle with centre 0 and radius OA passes through B, C, D
also; since AO, OC are in a straight line, AC is a diameter of
the circle, and the angle ABC, by hypothesis a right angle, is
an ' angle in a semicircle \ 
It would then appear that, given
any right angle as ABC standing on i C as base, it was only
necessary to bisect AC at 0, and 0 would then be the centre of
a semicircle on A C as diameter and passing through B. The
construction indicated would be the construction of a circle
about the right-angled triangle ABC, which seems to corre-
spond well enough to Pamphile's phrase about ' describing on
(i. e. in) a circle a triangle (which shall be) right angled \
(y) Thales as astronomer.
Thales was also the first Greek astronomer. 
Every one
knows the story of his falling into a well when star-gazing,
and being rallied by 'a clever and pretty maidservant from
Thrace' for being so eager to know what goes on in the
heavens that he could not see what was straight in front
of him, nay, at his very feet. 
But he was not merely a star-
gazer. There is good evidence that he predicted a solar eclipse
which took place on May 28, 585 B.C. We can conjecture
the basis of this prediction. The Babylonians, as ,the result
of observations continued through centuries, had discovered
the period of 223 lunations after which eclipses recur, and
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

138 THE EARLIEST GREEK GEOMETRY. THALES
this period was doubtless known to Thales, either directly or
through the Egyptians as intermediaries. 
Thales, however,
cannot have known the cause of eclipses; he could not have
given the true explanation of lunar eclipses (as the Doxo-
graphi say he did) because he held that the earth is a circular
disc floating on the water like a log; and, if he had correctly
accounted for solar eclipses, it is impossible that all the
succeeding Ionian philosophers should, one after another, have
put forward the fanciful explanations which we find recorded.
Thales's other achievements in astronomy can be very
shortly stated. Eudemus attributed to him the discovery of
'the fact that the period of the sun with reference to the
solstices is not always the same'1; the vague phrase seems
to mean that he discovered the inequality of the length of
the four astronomical seasons, that is, the four parts of the
'tropical' year as divided by the solstices and equinoxes.
Eudemus presumably referred to the written works by Thales
On the Solstice and On the Equinoxes mentioned by Diogenes
Laertius.2 He knew of the division of the year into 365 days,
which he probably learnt from Egypt.
Thales observed of the Hyades that there were two of
them, one north and the other south. He used the Little
Bear as a means of finding the pole, and advised the Greeks
to sail by the Little Bear, as the Phoenicians did, in preference
to their own practice of sailing by the Great Bear. This
instruction was probably noted in the handbook under the
title of Nautical Astronomy, attributed by some to Thales
and by others to Phocus of Samos.
It became the habit of the Doxographi to assign to Thales,
in common with other astronomers in each case, a number
of discoveries not made till later. The following is the list,
with the names of the astronomers to whom the respective
discoveries may With most certainty be attributed: (1) the
fact that the moon takes its light from the sun (Anaxagoras
and possibly Parmenides); (2) the sphericity of the earth
(Pythagoras); (3) the division of the heavenly sphere into
five zones (Pythagoras and Parmenides); (4) the obliquity
of the ecliptic (Oenopides of Chios); (5) the estimate of the
1 See Theon of Smyrna, p. 198. 17. 
2 Diog. L. i. 23.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THALES AS ASTRONOMER 
139
sun's diameter as 1/72Oth part of the sun's circle (Aristarchus
of Samos).
From Thales to Pythagoras.
We are completely in the dark as to the progress of geometry
between the times of Thales and Pythagoras. 
ANAXIMANDER
(born about 611/10 B. C.) put forward some daring and original
hypotheses in astronomy. 
According to him the earth is
a short cylinder with two bases (on one of which we live) and
of depth equal to one-third of the diameter of either base.
It is suspended freely in the middle of the universe without
support, being kept there in equilibrium by virtue of its
equidistance from the extremities and from the other heavenly
bodies all round. The sun, moon, and stars are enclosed in
opaque rings of compressed air concentric with the earth and
filled with fire, what we see is the fire shining through vents
(like gas-jets, as it were). The sun's ring is 27 or 28 times, the
moon's ring 19 times, as large as the earth, i.e. the sun's
and moon's distances are estimated in terms (as we may
suppose) of the radius of the circular face of the earth, the
fixed stars and the planets are nearer to the earth than
the sun and moon. This is the first speculation on record
about sizes and distances. Anaximander is also said to have
introduced the gnomon (or sun-dial with a vertical needle)
into Greece and to have shown on it the solstices, the times,
the seasons, and the equinox1 (according to Herodotus2 the
Greeks learnt the use of the gnomon from the Babylonians).
He is also credited, like Thales before him, with having
constructed a sphere to represent the heavens.3 But Anaxi-
mander has yet another claim to undying fame. He was the
first who ventured to draw a map of the inhabited earth
The Egyptians had drawn maps before, but only of particular
districts; Anaximander boldly planned out the whole world
with ' the circumference of the earth and sea \4 
This work
involved of course an attempt to estimate the dimensions of
the earth, though we have no information as to his results.
It is clear, therefore, that Anaximander was something of
1 Euseb. Praep. Evang. x. 14 11 (Vors. i3, p. 14. 28).
2 Hdt. ii. 109. 
3 Diog. L ii. 2
4 Diog. L. I. c.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

140 THE EARLIEST GREEK GEOMETRY. THALES
a mathematician; but whether he contributed anything to
geometry as such is uncertain. True, Suidas says that he
' introduced the gnomon and generally set forth a sketch
or outline of geometry' (0X009 yecofierpias viroTvircocnv eSeigev);
but it may be that' geometry' is here used in its literal sense
of earth-measurement, and that the reference is only to the
famous map.
f Next to Thales, Ameristus, a brother of the poet Stesichorus,
is mentioned as having engaged in the study of geometry;
and from what Hippias of Elis says it appears that he acquired
a reputation for geometry.'1
Stesichorus the poet lived about 630-550 B.C. The brother
therefore would probably be nearly contemporary with Thales.
We know nothing of him except from the passage of Proclus,
and even his name is uncertain. In Friedlein's edition of
Proclus it is given as Mamercus, after a later hand in cod.
Monac. 427, Suidas has it as Mamertinus (s.v. Stesichorus);
Heiberg in his edition of Heron's Definitions writes Mamertius,
noting Mapfterios as the reading of Cod. Paris. Gr. 2385.
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 65. 11-15.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

