


The Capitalist Manifesto

Also by Johan Norberg
Open
Progress



First published in hardback and trade paperback in Great Britain in 2023 by Atlantic Books, an
imprint of Atlantic Books Ltd.
Copyright © Johan Norberg, 2023
The moral right of Johan Norberg to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted by him
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act of 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise, without the prior permission of both the copyright owner and the above publisher of this
book.
Every effort has been made to trace or contact all copyright holders. The publishers will be pleased to
make good any omissions or rectify any mistakes brought to their attention at the earliest opportunity.
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Hardback ISBN: 978 1 83895 789 6
Trade paperback ISBN: 978 1 83895 790 2
E-book ISBN: 978 1 83895 791 9
Printed in Great Britain
Atlantic Books
An imprint of Atlantic Books Ltd
Ormond House
26–27 Boswell Street
London
WC1N 3JZ
www.atlantic-books.co.uk

To classical liberals of all parties

CONTENTS
Preface: What happened to Reagan and Thatcher?
1. Life under savage capitalism
2. At each other’s service
3. The silence of the factory whistle
4. In defence of the 1 per cent
5. Monopoly or Minecraft?
6. Picking losers
7. China, paper tiger
8. But what about the planet?
9. The meaning of life
Epilogue: The Emperor’s singing contest
Notes
Index

T
Preface
WHAT HAPPENED TO
REAGAN AND THATCHER?
‘No one is particularly keen on globalization now, except possibly Johan Norberg.’
PO TIDHOLM, SWEDISH PUBLIC RADIO, 29 MAY 2020
wenty years ago I wrote a book in defence of global capitalism. I
never thought I would do that. Capitalism, I had thought, was all
about greedy monopolists and mighty landlords. But then I began to
study the world and realized that it was in the least market-based societies
that such elites were protected from the free choice of citizens and therefore
had the greatest power. Paradoxically, it was capitalism – in the form of free
markets and voluntary agreements based on private ownership – that
threatened the powerful. The argument for capitalism is not that capitalists
always behave well – if that were the case, we could safely give them
monopoly power – but that they often do not behave well unless they have
to. And it is freedom of choice and competition that force their hands.
In fact, Marx and Engels were right when they observed in that other
manifesto, the communist one of 1848, that free markets had in a short time
created greater prosperity and more technological innovation than all
previous 
generations 
combined 
and, 
with 
infinitely 
improved
communications and accessible goods, free markets had torn down feudal
structures and national narrow-mindedness. Marx and Engels realized much
better than socialists today that the free market is a formidable progressive
force. (Unfortunately, they were not sufficiently dialectically minded to

understand that communism was a reactionary counterforce that would
bring societies back to a kind of electrified feudalism.)
A century and a half later, global capitalism made it possible for ever
more people to free themselves from lords and monopolies. The growth of
markets gave them the opportunity to choose, to bargain and to say no for
the first time. Free trade gave them cheaper goods, new technologies and
access to consumers in other countries. It lifted millions and millions from
hunger and poverty.
However, at the turn of the millennium capitalism was under fierce
attack. An international anti-capitalist movement wanted the government to
take more control of the economy with a barrage of tariffs, regulations and
taxes. Huge demonstrations took place against the World Trade
Organization’s negotiations for more open markets. Free trade, foreign
investment and multinational corporations were accused of making the poor
poorer. Attac, a French left-wing protectionist movement, spread rapidly
throughout Europe. I saw them as a reactionary counterforce that would
deprive poor societies of the freedoms they had just begun to take.
I compiled my arguments against them in the book In Defence of Global
Capitalism, published in 2001. It was a classical liberal manifesto about
why global justice takes more capitalism, not less. Timing is everything and
the book became an international bestseller, translated into more than
twenty-five languages, including Arabic, Persian, Turkish, Chinese and
Mongolian.
And eventually, the globalization debate began to change. Supporters of
open economies started fighting back. The critics were often driven by
sincere anger about global poverty and injustice. We free traders could start
from this common ground and show – with realistic explanations and clear
statistics – that we needed freer markets to fight poverty and hunger. The
more we discussed, the more it felt as if the opponents realized that it was
not as simple as they had assumed, and parts of the audience began to
change their mind. They had associated globalization with the status quo,
the EU, the World Bank and the IMF, and were taken aback when
challenged by opponents who were equally dissatisfied with today’s

injustices and offered radical solutions. Soon, the most common position in
the debate was that poor countries need more trade, investment and
entrepreneurship to develop economically and socially. As UN General
Secretary Kofi Annan stated, the problem was too little globalization, not
too much.
Soon, Attac lost its popular appeal and faded away. The British anti-
capitalist George Monbiot apologized for his protectionism with an article
in the Guardian: ‘I was wrong about trade’. There he explained that a world
without the WTO would probably be more unfair. And soon, a major
campaign against the EU’s agricultural protectionism was launched by the
British charity Oxfam, which usually leans left and has been a critic of free
markets.
‘I’ve had an epiphany in recent years about commerce. It has upended
everything for me,’ declared Bono, the Irish rock musician and activist
against global inequality. ‘In dealing with poverty here and around the
world, welfare and foreign aid are a Band-Aid. Free enterprise is a cure.
Entrepreneurship is the most sure way of development.’ It was a conversion
that surprised not just his fans but himself too: ‘Rock star preaches
capitalism. Sometimes I hear myself and I just can’t believe it.’1
It goes without saying that this was not just my doing. There were many
others who fought day and night and there were many other factors that
came into play, especially the simple fact that globalization delivered.
Poverty declined in countries that integrated themselves into the global
economy, faster than ever before. Oxfam even publicly denied that their
new stance was a result of having been converted by me. And Bono has
surely listened to me less than I have listened to U2.
The end of globalization was called off, but there was to be no happy-
ever-after ending. The twenty years since I wrote my book have been a
rough ride for the planet. We experienced the greatest financial crisis of
modern times in 2008–9, a major pandemic that shut down the world and
killed millions, chaos in the Middle East, terrorist attacks, the migration
crisis, geopolitical tensions and the return of large-scale wars of aggression,

as Putin invaded Ukraine. During the same period, global warming’s
calamitous effects on the planet began to make themselves felt for real.
This has all contributed to a new sense of vulnerability and a renewed
suspicion of an open world economy. It inspired a longing for strong men
and big governments to protect us from a dangerous world. WTO
negotiations stalled completely, its dispute settlement mechanism was
undermined by the US and, after the financial crisis, trade’s share of GDP
stopped increasing for the first time since World War II. Global economic
freedom stagnated and the wave of democratization was ended by an
authoritarian backlash.
In China, a thirty-year reform process was reversed, and the state began
to regain lost ground. In the Western world, once again it was said that
globalization has gone too far and that businesses must be controlled.
Where international summits previously talked about opening up,
deregulating and liberalizing (even though it was not always translated into
action), language was suddenly blurred and fuzzy code words such as
inclusivity, sustainability, strategic autonomy and ‘partnership’ between this
and that pushed out concrete reform agendas.
Shortly afterwards, a peculiar intellectual swap took place. After the
leftist offensive against globalization stumbled, the opposition suddenly
migrated to the right. Fighting protectionism is like fighting a skin disease,
as the US economist Paul Samuelson once said: no sooner do you cure it in
one place than it appears somewhere else. A new generation of conservative
politicians now sound very much like Attac did in 2001: the world is
dangerous, there is no longer anyone in charge and free trade is destroying
local traditions and good jobs. A ‘globalist’, US president Donald Trump
explained, is a person ‘frankly not caring about our country so much’.
The rapid progress in poor countries may have shown the West that
those countries could benefit from globalization, but since the myth persists
that the economy is a zero-sum game that assumes that someone’s gain is
always another one’s loss, many have concluded that we in the rich world
must be the losers. The worldview is the same, the roles are just reversed –
twenty years ago free trade was considered bad because we exploited them,

now it is considered bad because they exploit us. Twenty years ago,
capitalism was wrong because supposedly it made the world’s poor poorer.
Now it is wrong because it makes the poor richer.
When I originally presented my pro-market, pro-trade and pro-
immigration arguments I was often attacked for being on the ‘crazy right’.
When I express the same arguments today, I am sometimes accused of
being ‘woke left’. I’m not the one who’s changed. But since right-wing
nationalists do not have much more of an economic agenda than the urge to
stop the world so that they can get off (and to throw out immigrants), their
rage against globalization has created a new front for what used to be a
classic left-wing programme of government intervention. To provide us
with a false sense of security, governments have made trade, migration and
construction more difficult, all but ensuring slower growth, hurting the very
people politicians claim to be protecting.
Today’s dominant narrative about global capitalism – shared by right-
wing and left-wing populists but now also, in a milder form, by large
sections of the political and economic establishment – does not deny that
prosperity has been created during these twenty years, but it says it did end
up in far too few hands and that those hands belong to the wrong people.
The big global winner is China, they argue, which took our factories and
our jobs – and it is a dangerous winner, stealing our technology and
undermining our national security. This in turn has made it popular to talk
about the global economy as a geopolitical winner-takes-all game, where
we have to introduce trade barriers and renationalize value chains.
According to this narrative, growth in the West benefited mainly the
rich, while the wages of the general public have stagnated for decades.
Inequality has skyrocketed and employees have become a new precariat
that has to drag itself along, insecure and stressed out. The factories have
closed and the working class has been wiped out, sometimes even
physically, by ‘deaths of despair’ (a term we’ll look at in chapter 3). In the
market, monopolies have returned, predominantly in the form of a small
circle of untouchable tech giants that have entered more and more areas and
crushed the sympathetic mom-and-pop stores.

Apparently, it’s that bad. And that is before we factor in global
warming’s effects on the planet. To counteract all this, we are told that big
government must now return, to regain control, redistribute resources and,
with enlightened industrial policy, steer resources to particular national
industries and green technology.
This is what the debate looked like even before the pandemic. When the
new coronavirus ravaged the planet, suspicion of the outside world and free
trade exploded. Governments began to close their borders and demand that
supply chains be repatriated. ‘I don’t want to talk about a victory lap,’
Trump’s rather enthusiastic business secretary said about the ravages of the
virus, but ‘I think it will help to accelerate the return of jobs to North
America.’ Financial Times’ global business columnist Rana Foroohar
declared that ‘Globalisation as we’ve known it for the last forty years, has
failed.’
Governments, meanwhile, decided that the way to protect the economy
was bailouts for everyone – first for the financial sector, then for everybody
else. People got used to the idea that gains are to be privatized but a
growing share of losses are to be covered by taxpayers or central banks.
When they run out of money, they just print more and when this creates
inflation, people need another round of bailouts to compensate for higher
prices. And so on. The pandemic, explained the Swedish Prime Minister
Magdalena Andersson, was the definitive ‘end of the neoliberal era
inaugurated by Thatcher and Reagan’.
We don’t just hear that from Social Democrats these days. Now right-
wing populists, journalists and economists also claim that ‘the
Reagan/Thatcher era is over’. These two leaders are often used as symbols
of the era of economic liberalization in the early 1980s, and I agree that it
feels an awful lot like that era has come to an end.
Donald Trump’s advisor Stephen Moore declared that the Republicans
are no longer Reagan’s party but Trump’s, and that’s exactly how the party
comes across in their recent agitation against free trade, immigration and
tech companies, not to mention lies about election fraud. (Reagan once
called the peaceful transfer of power the ‘magic’ of the free world.)

Thatcher’s Tories have abandoned the European single market she was once
instrumental in developing, and have simultaneously abandoned many other
economic orthodoxies, toying with more active industrial policies and ‘Buy
British’ slogans – a new attitude that Boris Johnson in an unguarded
moment happened to summarize as ‘fuck business’.
His short-lived successor, Liz Truss, who famously declared that large-
scale imports of cheese were ‘a disgrace’, tried to invoke the Iron Lady,
albeit through her boldness rather than her policies. Instead, Truss railed
against the ‘consensus of the Treasury, of economists, with the Financial
Times’ that budgets should be balanced and went on to doom her
premiership with a massive, unfunded package of energy subsidies and tax
cuts, which markets refused to finance.
Reagan and Thatcher are not usually declared dead as part of an
objective assumption about which way the winds are blowing. These
declarations are formulated as if their era was some kind of ideological
deviation, when wild theorists and radicals dragged politics in a dogmatic
neoliberal direction, and as if now we can finally return to common,
interventionist sense. That is not what the reform era was about. Although
liberal economists inspired many of the changes associated with Reagan
and Thatcher, their era was never an ideological experiment but a pragmatic
attempt to deal with the fact that an earlier model of inflation and
regulation, along with a constantly expanding government, was in free fall.
One sign of this is that the ‘Reagan/Thatcher era’ started before Reagan
and Thatcher. It was actually initiated by their political opponents. It was
Reagan’s Democratic representative, Jimmy Carter, who in his first State of
the Union speech in 1978 declared: ‘bit by bit we are chopping down the
thicket of unnecessary federal regulations by which the government too
often interferes in our personal lives and personal business.’2 It was the
Carter administration that deregulated aviation, railways, trucking and
energy (and craft beer! Before him you would not have been allowed to
drink a Samuel Adams). It was Carter who appointed Federal Reserve
chairman Paul Volcker, who declared war on inflation in October 1979.

In Britain, Thatcher’s predecessor, Labour’s James Callaghan, explained
to party members in 1976 that they used to believe recessions could be
ended through higher spending and more inflation: ‘I tell you now, in all
candour, that that option no longer exists,’ and in so far as it ever did exist,
it was only by ‘injecting a bigger dose of inflation into the economy,
followed by a higher level of unemployment as the next step.’3 Thatcher’s
fight against the unions to close 115 loss-making and environmentally
damaging coal mines made her admired and hated, but did you know that
the two previous Labour prime ministers, Callaghan and Harold Wilson,
closed no less than 257 coal mines in total?4
It was not libertarian ideologues that carried out the great liberalizations
of the 1970s, 80s and 90s. Socialist parties began to de-socialize India,
Australia and New Zealand. Protectionist parties opened the economies of
Brazil and Mexico. In China, Vietnam and Chile, economic liberalization
was carried out by dictators, whose hearts did not in any way beat for
liberal values. In most cases, these were parties and leaders who would
have loved to be able to continue to control their people and the economy.
But the idea of big government had an annoying problem that they could
not escape – a problem that the Swedish Social Democratic Minister of
Finance Kjell-Olof Feldt once summed up when speaking of the dreams of
democratic socialism in his country: ‘To put it simply, it just turned out to
be impossible.’
And that’s the point. It may sound irresistibly appealing. It is always
popular when someone promises us the world, bailouts and free stuff. But it
just does not work. Still doesn’t. There are no free lunches, and wealth has
to be created before it can be distributed. Sooner or later you always run out
of other people’s money, as Thatcher put it, and if you print more then
sooner or later you’ll ruin its value. And, as Liz Truss learned, sooner or
later you’ll run out of Thatcher quotes to defend everything-to-everyone
budgets that just don’t add up. Debts pile up and inflation rises, and you are
going to have to start thinking instead about how wealth is created.
That will not stop new generations of politicians from repeating these
mistakes. As memories of previous failures fade, the temptation to try again

is often overwhelming. And with the simmering hostility towards foreigners
and businesses, it might come in the form of outright irrational attempts at
protectionism, top-down industrial policy, clumsy regulations and
confiscatory taxes. It would squeeze growth out of the economy and hurt
the most vulnerable. It would sabotage a global economy that has turned out
to be the best hope for human progress.
Yes, we have had twenty terrible years, full of shocks, pandemics and
war. And yet, in terms of human well-being, they have been the best twenty
years in human history. Extreme poverty has been reduced by 70 per cent.
This means that we got more than 138,000 new arguments for global
capitalism every day since I wrote my first defence of it. That’s how many
people have risen out of poverty every day during these two decades:
138,000 men, women and children. Every day. Despite all these shocks and
obstacles and despite the increase during the pandemic. That’s progress
worth fighting for, and encouraging in more places.
That is why these lessons have to be relearned, and the arguments
against a reversal have to be restated. At least every twenty years we need a
capitalist manifesto that makes the case for economic freedom, applied to
the problems and conflicts of the present era. That’s why I wrote this book.
For all these reasons – and one more: some time in the last decade,
economic issues stopped being a priority. Obviously, the debate continued,
but it became a sideshow. Something else has captured hearts and minds
and tweets. When the Cold War conflict between capitalism and
communism was over, many felt that economic policy could disregard ideas
and be reduced to a question of which party has the right set of skills and
administrative dexterity. Instead of the struggle for freedom or class war, we
got culture wars. Where we once discussed where we were going, everyone
suddenly started asking themselves who we are – and who does not fit in.
Both the statist left and the nationalist right started engaging in some sort of
purge of everything that does not fit into their pure, safe world. Borders
would be closed, statues toppled, dissenters cancelled, ‘woke’ businesses
threatened into silence.

The culture war is a zero-sum game about what kind of homogeneous
identity should be imposed on everybody else. Capitalism, on the contrary,
is a positive-sum game that creates growing, dynamic societies and so gives
greater opportunities for all groups to live according to their identity and
realize their visions and projects. Instead of ‘victory or death’ or ‘silence is
violence’, the liberal capitalist puts ‘live and let live – as long as you do not
pick my pocket or break my leg’.
This book is an attempt to distract you from the culture war and get you
back to the issues that are decisive for our future.
Why ‘capitalism’? Words have an unfortunate tendency to confuse. Free
market capitalism is not really about capital, it is about handing control of
the economy from the top to billions of independent consumers,
entrepreneurs and workers, and allowing them to make their own decisions
about what they think will improve their lives. So careless talk about
‘taking control of capitalism’ actually means that governments take control
of citizens.
But it doesn’t sound like it, does it? One of my intellectual heroes,
Deirdre McCloskey, complains that the word capitalism gives the
misleading impression that it is about the rule of capital, rather than
liberating people to make their own economic decisions, which is really
what the free market is about: ‘“Capitalism” is a scientific mistake
compressed into a single word, a dramatically misleading coinage by our
enemies, and still used by the sadly misled among our friends.’5 So why do
I use it? Because, no matter what we think of it, and no matter which word
we would prefer for a system of private property and free markets, this is
the word that has become inextricably linked to it, and if its supporters
don’t fill that word with meaning, its opponents will.
It will become clear in the following pages that the market economy is
not primarily about competition and rivalry but about cooperation and
exchange. It’s about being able to do something with others that you would
not be able to do on your own. Similarly, neither did this book emerge from
my brain as Athena out of Zeus’s head, fully grown, in shining armour. It is
the result of people I have met and books I have read, of researchers who

have broadened my knowledge and opponents who have helped to correct
my mistakes. This book is the product of the efforts of an incredible number
of people, just like every product and service on the market, even if any
mistakes are of course mine.
In that spirit of cooperation and solidarity, I would like to thank Mattias
Bengtsson, Andreas Birro, Christian Sandström, Fredrik Segerfeldt, Patrik
Strömer, Mattias Svensson and Daniel Waldenström for ideas, inspiration
and data. I am deeply grateful to Caspian Rehbinder for useful comments
and suggestions, in both form and substance. Thanks also to Benjamin
Dousa and Andreas Johansson Heinö for their role in bringing this book
about, to my literary agent, Andrew Gordon, for being such a reliable
champion for my work, to my editor at Atlantic, James Nightingale, for
careful editing and valuable comments, and my copyeditor, Charlotte
Atyeo, for her attention to detail.
I am especially grateful to you, Frida, for your love, patience and
courage. I love capitalism, but I love you even more.
May the market force be with you – always.
Johan Norberg

T
1
LIFE UNDER SAVAGE CAPITALISM
‘[After 1990] capitalism was suddenly free to lapse into its most savage form.’
NAOMI KLEIN1
wenty years ago, I began In Defence of Global Capitalism with a
chapter about how the world was improving faster than ever. I
attacked the popular perception that the world was getting worse,
more dangerous and unfair, and that the poor were getting poorer. In 1999,
the World Bank claimed that ‘world poverty has increased and growth
prospects have dimmed for developing countries’. The famous American
activist Ralph Nader declared: ‘The essence of globalization is a
subordination of human rights, environmental rights, democracy rights to
the imperatives of global trade and investment.’ Or as Sweden’s archbishop
summarized the state of the world: ‘our journey leads straight to hell’.2 In
contrast, I talked about the strangely unheralded progress that I saw in poor
countries that had begun to liberalize their economies, which now had
better incomes, agricultural production, nutrition, health, vaccination and
education.
It was not easy to get such information back then. For some strange
reason, tax-funded international organizations still preferred to keep secret
the data they had collected. It was four years before Gapminder was
founded and Hans Rosling began to fill the gaps in our knowledge about
world progress in a fun and easily accessible way, and ten years before Max
Roser started Our World in Data, which compiles an incredible amount of

user-friendly statistics.3 But what I did find was enough to impress me and
completely change the worldview I grew up with.
I was especially fascinated by the fact that global extreme poverty,
contrary to the World Bank’s claims but according to its own data, seemed
to have decreased from 38 to 29 per cent in the 1990s.4 I explained that
poverty continued to decline rapidly and presented an extremely optimistic
forecast that this could be halved by 2015. It was far exceeded. In 2015,
extreme poverty was around 10 per cent.
Between 2000 and 2022, extreme poverty decreased in a way we have
never seen before – from 29.1 per cent of the world’s population to 8.4 per
cent. (As recently as 1981, the figure stood at more than 40 per cent.) For
the first time in history, fewer than one in ten people were poor. Despite the
fact that the world population increased by more than 1.5 billion people
during this period, the number of poor decreased by more than 1.1 billion.
That is the greatest thing that has ever happened to mankind. The relentless
hardship that most of humanity has suffered throughout its existence has
been pushed back faster than ever in more places than ever. It is such a
remarkable development that I must admit that I find it difficult to take
writers and pundits seriously who do not take it as a central point of
departure when analysing our time.
A common objection is that this poverty reduction is not real because it
‘is just China’. It is a little strange to dismiss a country that holds one in
five of the world’s inhabitants when talking about global development.
Furthermore, it’s wrong. Even if China is removed from the 1990–2019
dataset, global poverty has been reduced by almost two-thirds, from 28.5 to
around 10 per cent.
During the era of globalization, the development of the world’s poorest
countries has been so strong that extreme poverty in East Asia, South Asia,
Latin America and the Middle East today is actually lower than it was in
Western Europe in 1960, a time we remember today as the post-war boom.
Only in sub-Saharan Africa is poverty higher than it was in Western Europe
in 1960.5

The economist and Nobel laureate Angus Deaton has written: ‘Some
argue that globalization is a neoliberal conspiracy designed to enrich a very
few at the expense of the many. If so, that conspiracy was a disastrous
failure – or helped more than a billion people as an unintended
consequence. If only unintended consequences were worked so favorably.’6
Other indicators that I looked at have continued to show very rapid
improvements, partly because technology has become cheaper and because
local purchasing power has increased.7 Between 1990 and 2020, the
proportion of children who die before the age of five decreased from 9.3 per
cent to 3.7 per cent. Despite a significantly larger population today, this
means that almost 7.5 million fewer children die annually compared with
the early 1990s.8 During the same period, maternal mortality decreased by
more than 55 per cent.
Global life expectancy increased from 64 years to almost 73 years
between 1990 and 2019. The proportion of the world population receiving
basic education has skyrocketed and the illiteracy rates have almost halved:
from 25.7 per cent to 13.5 per cent. In the age group 15–24, illiteracy is
now just over 8 per cent. Between 2000 and 2020, child labour in the age
group 5–17 decreased globally from 16 to just under 10 per cent.9

Global Progress: 1990–202010
The three decades after 1990 – when capitalism, according to Naomi
Klein, enveloped the planet in its ‘most savage form’ – have seen greater
improvements in human living conditions than the three millennia before
that combined. It has also been three difficult decades, full of wars, crises
and injustices. I am not saying that the era has been unequivocally good,
only that it has been better than any other era humanity has experienced.
The pandemic reversed some gains – when the world was closed and
trade, migration and education were blocked. It seems like life expectancy
was pushed back to seventy-one in 2021, and the number of people in
extreme poverty probably increased by almost 70 million during the first
year of the pandemic. Based on various estimates of income, poverty and
health, the world was thrown back in time by two to three years as a result
of the pandemic. It is difficult to imagine a stronger and more tragic proof
that progress depends on open societies and economies than the disaster of

a global lockdown. As soon as 2021, as the world began to open up,
extreme poverty started declining again – in that year, by 30 million people.
The distribution of capitalism
It could be argued that a person who is near-sighted in one eye and far-
sighted in the other has, on average, perfect vision. All figures above are
averages and include countries that have lagged behind or even collapsed
due to war or dictatorships. This means that progress has been even higher
elsewhere. These successful countries are found on all continents and in all
cultural spheres. The only common denominator is that, for one reason or
another, they have given their citizens a little more freedom to innovate,
create, work, buy and sell.11
We can see this by looking at when and where economies took off
historically. During the first 1,800 years of the Common Era, global average
income barely budged. But 200 years ago, something suddenly happened in
Britain, which was then the world’s freest economy. The Industrial
Revolution began to create rapid growth and Britain’s extreme poverty rate
was halved between 1820 and 1850, which was something completely
unprecedented. Then Britain was followed by Western Europe and the
United States, which began to take over the position as the freest economy.
The Scandinavian economies started to be liberalized in the middle of the
nineteenth century and then had a hundred years of faster economic
development than any other country, with the exception of Japan, which
opened its economy after the Meiji Restoration of 1868 and reduced
poverty from 80 to just over 20 per cent in half a century.12
But most of the south and east, which were subjected to authoritarian
leaders and colonial masters with command economies, stagnated. The
famous sociologist Max Weber felt compelled to write books on why
Confucianism and Hinduism make it difficult to modernize societies and
economies. We got used to dividing the world into industrialized countries
and developing countries – rich and poor.

Global GDP per capita between the years 1–202013
However, four East Asian tigers would soon disrupt our worldview. The
British colony of Hong Kong and the city-state of Singapore did the
opposite of all other countries, and opened their economies wide, without
trade barriers. The experts claimed that free trade would knock out the
small manufacturing sectors they had, but, on the contrary, they
industrialized at a record pace and shocked the outside world by becoming
even richer than the old colonial master, Britain.
Taiwan and South Korea learned from this and began to liberalize their
economies with amazing results.14 Their rapid growth took them from being
some of the poorest countries in the world to some of the richest in a few
generations. It was a global wake-up call because it was so easy to compare
what the Chinese in Taiwan achieved compared to the Chinese in Mao’s
China, and what the Koreans in the capitalist south created compared to the
Koreans in the communist north. In the mid-1950s, Taiwan was only

marginally richer than China. In 1980, it was four times richer. In 1955,
North Korea was richer than South Korea. (The north was, after all, where
mineral resources and power generation were located when the country was
partitioned.) Today, South Korea is twenty times richer than North Korea.
It was no longer possible to say that only the Western world could
become rich through capitalism, so a new narrative took hold: although a
few developing countries might be able to enter global markets from the
periphery, it is only because they are very small, almost insignificant.
Strangely enough, today you sometimes hear the opposite: that developing
countries might make it, but only if they are very large.
This is due to the transformation of two giants, China and India, which
for decades were held back by, in one case, a communist despot, and in the
other a democratic but strictly protectionist command economy. Therefore,
people said that Chinese and Indians will be successful all over the world –
except in China and India. But then, in 1976, China’s dictator Mao Zedong,
as the US economist Steven Radelet put it, ‘single-handedly and
dramatically changed the direction of global poverty with one single act: he
died’.
His successor, Deng Xiaoping, began to accept the private enterprise
that peasants and villagers secretly engaged in and extended it to the entire
economy. All the restrained creativity and ambition was finally let loose
and China grew at record speed. Ironically, intellectuals around the world –
modern-day Max Webers – soon explained that this is itself not that strange,
as Confucianism made it easy to modernize the economy.
India held back a little longer, but an Indian economist, Parth Shah, tells
me that the country started looking at what was happening around them, in
Taiwan, South Korea and now also China: ‘We saw that they actually
changed their model and they did succeed in what they had done, and it was
time for India to learn the lesson.’15
That was decisive in 1991, when a debt-financed boom crashed and the
foreign exchange reserve had shrunk to such a level that India was three
weeks from running out of money. The crisis prompted the Minister of
Finance Manmohan Singh to quote the nineteenth-century romantic Victor

Hugo in parliament: ‘No power on earth can resist an idea whose time has
come.’ The idea was to dismantle trade barriers and stifling regulations that
held India back and kept half the population in extreme poverty.
In the past, economists spoke condescendingly of the ‘Hindu growth
rate’ as if there was some kind of complacency built into the country’s
tradition that stopped the economy from growing faster than the population.
After the reforms of 1991 and those that followed, this culture changed as if
by magic and growth took off. Today, average income is three times greater
than before reform and extreme poverty is only one-fifth of previous levels.
Around the same time, communism in Central and Eastern Europe
finally fell, but its economic rivalry with capitalism had, of course, long
since been decided. It’s easy to think that these countries were never close
to the market economies, but in 1950 countries such as the Soviet Union,
Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary had a GDP per capita about a quarter
higher than poor Western countries such as Spain, Portugal and Greece. In
1989, the eastern states were nowhere close. The eastern part of Germany
was richer than West Germany before World War II. When the Berlin Wall
fell on 9 November 1989, East Germany’s GDP per capita was not even
half that of West Germany’s.16
Of these countries, those that liberalized the most have on average
developed the fastest and established the strongest democracies. An
analysis of twenty-six post-communist countries showed that a 10 per cent
increase in economic freedom was associated with a 2.7 per cent faster
annual growth.17 Political and economic institutions have improved the
most in the Central and Eastern European countries that are now members
of the EU, not least the Baltic countries, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
Today, they are some of the freest countries in the world and have more
than tripled average incomes since independence. But one can also observe
a recent reformer like Georgia. It was seen as an economic basket case, but
after the Rose Revolution in 2003 it increased per capita incomes almost
threefold and cut extreme poverty rates by almost two-thirds.
All over the world this connection is discernible. Economic and social
progress does not happen because a country is small or because it is big,

and it has much less to do with religion and tradition than we think.
(Religions and traditions are complex things and societies constantly
reinterpret them in order to fit into the prevailing culture and economy.) It
has to do with freedom. Where people are given a little bit of freedom, they
begin to develop their countries and make great progress. The unequal
distribution in the world is due to the uneven distribution of capitalism:
people who have it become rich; those who do not have it stay poor.
Why not Latin America?
Latin America has long suffered from a phenomenon that can be called
growth without development – when the economy and export revenues
grow without the population as a whole getting better off. This was the
result of a colonial legacy that was not uprooted but in many ways
deepened by domestic elites after the independence of Spain and Portugal.
The economies were semi-feudal with a small, protected landowner class
with colossal lands and a huge class of poor and uneducated farm workers.
Landowners were able to expand their production by taking more land
from the indigenous population and exploiting the abundance of labour.
Therefore, there were never any incentives to invest the proceeds in better
technology and more highly productive agriculture. At the same time,
discrimination, business regulations and a lack of education stopped
entrepreneurship in other sectors. Latin American intellectuals of the 1950s
and 1960s who were rightly appalled by this hacienda economy based on
raw materials and agricultural products developed the ‘dependency theory’,
which declared that the way out was to invest in ‘import substitution’,
where the state kept imported goods out with high tariffs and instead
supported domestic industrialization with subsidies and regulations. The
cruel irony is that this policy reinforced every problem these intellectuals
had warned about.
Inefficient, protected industrial companies could now enrich themselves
at the expense of poor consumers and small businesses, so inequality

increased even further. In the early 1960s, average tariffs could reach a few
hundred per cent and were supplemented by quotas and other trade barriers.
An Argentine truck, which in fact was mostly an imported truck
disassembled at the border and then reassembled, cost almost one and a half
times more than the world market price. A Chilean car could cost three
times as much. Instead of focusing on specialization and economies of
scale, companies began to do just about any product in small series at a very
high cost per item.18
As companies became politicized, those who wanted to thrive had to get
involved in politics, with even more corruption as a result. Since domestic
businesses were not pressured by competition to modernize technology and
knowledge, governments had to attract multinational corporations that
could do so, lured there by promises of new protections and privileges. And
absurdly, these economies became even more dependent on the export of
raw materials and agricultural goods since it was the only way to finance
the import of machinery and inputs for closed economies with small
domestic markets.
Industries could still expand, but it was a growth of inefficient and
expensive production, increasingly funded with loans from global financial
markets. That road closed when international interest rates rose sharply and
Mexico declared bankruptcy in August 1982. The whole region suffered a
devastating economic collapse that has been summarized as ‘the lost
decade’. Almost in a state of panic, country after country had to abandon its
economic models, clean up inefficient structures and open up to the outside
world. As a final, spectacular irony, it was one of the pioneers of
dependency theory, the sociologist Fernando Henrique Cardoso, who began
liberalizing Brazil in the role of president between 1995 and 2002. ‘To fight
hunger effectively, aid is necessary – especially in famine-ridden countries.
But the fact remains that international trade, as defined by a fair, rules-
based system in the WTO, is much more important, not only to fight
hunger, but also to foster development worldwide’, the old protectionist
eventually explained.19

Since 1990, Latin America’s economies have begun to grow again,
albeit with a legacy of commodity dependence and political instability that
creates vulnerabilities and volatility. The region’s inequality has finally
begun to diminish. In countries such as Brazil, Chile and Peru, income
inequality has decreased by around 10 per cent. Extreme poverty has
decreased by three-quarters.20
Latin America’s freest economies are Chile and Peru, which have also
been the most successful ones in recent decades. In the mid-1970s, Chile
was poorer than the Latin American average, but after market reforms –
first under the brutal dictator Pinochet, but then under democratic left- and
right-wing governments – the country grew so fast that it is now almost
twice as rich as the average.
Peru’s policies are chronically chaotic and the country has had eleven
presidents since the turn of the millennium, but since economic
liberalization in the 1990s, the economy has grown 150 per cent under
nationalists and populists, technocrats and left-wing radicals. Extreme
poverty has decreased by 85 per cent. Such progress creates new forms of
discontents, as those who have been left behind want to join in, and those
who get ahead raise their expectations. Riding this wave, left-wing radicals
were recently elected presidents in both Chile and Peru. But the most
fascinating aspect of the leftist populist Pedro Castillo winning Peru’s
presidential election in 2021 was his campaign message: ‘No poor people in
a rich country.’ No one would ever have thought of describing Peru as a
‘rich country’ in 1990, when it was as poor as Congo-Brazzaville.
Why not Africa?
Speaking of Congo-Brazzaville, in most discussions of global development,
sub-Saharan Africa is mentioned as some kind of a synonym for
hopelessness. That was not always the case. In the 1960s, most African
countries were richer and had higher growth than Asian countries, and were
blessed with more natural resources. Economists such as Gunnar Myrdal

believed more in Africa than Asia, where they worried that governments
were not strong enough to push industrialization and Confucian attitudes
were thought to block innovation and development. In 1967, the World
Bank’s chief economist listed seven African economies that he thought
could grow by more than 7 per cent annually. Thirty years later, two other
World Bank economists concluded that these seven countries had since
registered negative growth.21
Sub-Saharan Africa is not the poorest part of the world because the
region lacks the economic conditions needed for growth but because it has
lacked freedom. Its economy is based on a centuries-old development. Long
before colonialism, many Africans suffered from despotism and conflict,
and before the transatlantic slave trade, they suffered from the indigenous
slave trade and the trans-Saharan one. But as Ghanaian economist George
Ayittey has shown, there is also a strong African tradition of private
property and markets with free pricing. Most parts of the continent were
integrated into vast trade networks where merchants, goods and currencies
moved about freely.22
European colonizers undermined these markets in two ways: partly by
dividing the continent and isolating the populations from each other, partly
by creating centralized structures in each colony, where farmers and
workers were plundered to enrich robber barons thousands of miles away.
The next tragedy was that when African countries gained their
independence after World War II, domestic elites did not dismantle colonial
structures but took them over. Whether the new leaders called themselves
liberation heroes, Marxists, nationalists or anti-communists, they became
occupiers who continued to plunder their people. They seized natural
resources to enrich themselves and forced the rural population to produce
food at prices far below the market rate.
What Western economists thought of as strongmen who would enforce
stability and development were, in fact, looters who vacuumed their lands
for assets. In almost every country, strict government control, planned
economies and import substitution were applied in weak domestic markets,
isolated from neighbours through arbitrary borders. Often, even domestic

tariffs were introduced to stifle spontaneous trade. Africa’s dictators had
many conflicting aims, but the president of the Club du Sahel, Anne de
Lattre, once summed up their common denominator: ‘Well, there is one
thing we all agree on: that private traders should be shot.’23
Western countries made the situation worse by sending development aid
to undemocratic, closed economies just because they were former colonies,
which enriched the despots and prolonged the oppression. By handing over
huge amounts of capital to the leaders of desperately poor countries, the
West intensified a tragedy created by the nationalization of natural
resources: the path to wealth for disadvantaged groups was to take up arms
and invade the capital.
It became an orgy of corruption, aid dependence and underdevelopment.
Major food exporters soon became dependent on imports for survival.
State-owned companies that were supposed to bring glory and prosperity
instead destroyed wealth as they turned every valuable resource into
expensive, worthless products. The only thing that saved factories from
destroying even more value was that mismanaged electricity companies
caused constant power outages. Like Latin America, African states
extended this death march by borrowing, and just like in Latin America, the
debt crisis of the 1980s became devastating. Machines ground to a halt, the
trucks stopped and deliveries of food and medicine failed to appear. In the
mid-1980s, many of the countries with the richest lands and the greatest
natural resources were poorer than they had been at independence – except,
of course, the leaders whose ideology has sometimes been called Swiss
bank socialism. A generation of children became shorter due to
malnutrition, but the leaders’ cars and yachts only got longer.
In an attempt to get out of the quicksand, many African countries
implemented reforms in the 1990s that made me write in In Defence of
Global Capitalism that it was not impossible for the 2000s to become
‘Africa’s century’. The reforms have not continued in a way that makes this
probable, but median growth per capita on the continent still increased from
0.2 per cent in 1980–99 to 1.6 per cent in 2000–19. Throughout this period,
the African countries that opened their economies to the outside world grew

three times as fast as those that did not. As a whole, Africa’s GDP per
capita grew by 35 per cent between 2000 and 2019, faster than the world as
a whole. Extreme poverty decreased from almost 60 per cent to just over 40
per cent. Industrial production nearly doubled and the share of the
population working in manufacturing has increased.24
It is often said that Africa is doomed to underdevelopment due to
history, geography, ethnicity, culture, climate, disease, drought or any other
factor. But how do we know that it is not rather a matter of corrupt leaders
destroying the possibilities of Africans with control, corruption and
confiscation? Imagine that an African country had taken a different path
after independence, had developed democracy, independent courts and
freedom of the press, and had applied free enterprise, low taxes and free
trade? Could it not have worked even there, even though the country may
have lacked a coastline, mostly consists of desert and was hit harder than
others by HIV/AIDS?
In fact, there is one such country: Botswana in southern Africa. How
did it work? Very well, thank you. In fact, better than in any other country
in the world. During the forty years after 1960, the Asian tigers and China
grew annually between 5.2 and 5.8 per cent per capita. Botswana, on the
other hand, grew by an incredible 6.4 per cent on average – more than ten
times faster than the world average.25 Since 1985, extreme poverty has
declined from 42 to 15 per cent, compared with 40 per cent in Africa as a
whole.
Some would object that this is only because Botswana has diamonds.
But valuable natural resources are more the rule than the exception in
Africa, and are often something that creates conflict and stagnation. What
distinguishes Botswana in the region is not the resources but the fact that it
did not nationalize them. Instead it privatized them, and after independence
from Britain in 1966 it created a stable regulatory framework that attracted
foreign investment.26
There is another African country that has had a high degree of economic
liberalism for a long time: Mauritius. In 1961, the Nobel laureate James
Meade predicted that in such a small country, with ethnic divisions, without

natural resources and dependent on a single commodity (sugar), the
‘outlook for peaceful development is weak’. But precisely because
Mauritius was so small, it realized early on that it could not do without
world trade, and import substitution was abolished as early as the 1970s.
The country introduced export-processing zones where a deregulated textile
industry could grow, and the economy has continued to diversify with a
modern service sector. After uninterrupted high growth, Mauritius was
classified by the World Bank as a high-income country in 2019. Even
though it slipped back because of Covid-19, it will probably soon rise
again. Today, Mauritius and Botswana have GDP per capita similar to a EU
country like Bulgaria.
In recent years, countries such as Uganda and Rwanda have tried to
imitate such policies after brutal episodes of conflict and massacre.
Although they have had authoritarian leaders, they have liberalized their
economies more than their neighbours and also grown faster. While Africa’s
GDP per capita grew by 35 per cent after 2000, Uganda did so by 75 per
cent and Rwanda by 157 per cent. As Africa’s population continues to grow
rapidly, it is crucial for the future of the continent and for hundreds of
millions of young people that such liberalization deepens and spreads, and
that hopeful ideas about African free trade unions do not remain on the
drawing board.
Meeting your grandkids
The broadest and most systematic measure of free markets is the Economic
Freedom of the World, conducted by the Canadian Fraser Institute in
conjunction with partners around the world. Each year 165 countries are
assessed on the basis of five broad categories that consists of forty-two
different components – the size and tax burden of the state, legal system and
property rights, the monetary system, free trade, and regulations. Its data
reveal that nothing improves people’s lives as much as the freedom to look
for better jobs, find new markets and invest in the future.27

When you compare the economically freest quarter of countries with the
least-free quarter, you see that GDP per capita is more than seven times
higher in the free countries, while extreme poverty is as much as sixteen
times greater in the least-free countries. In addition, this difference is
reflected in better access to nutrition, healthcare and security. For example,
the average life expectancy in the most economically free countries is
almost fifteen years longer. As Robert Lawson, one of the scholars behind
the index, told me, the difference between living to the age of sixty-five or
to eighty is the chance to see potential grandchildren grow up. Capitalism is
sometimes characterized by expensive watches and fast cars, but what gets
overlooked is the fact that it enables us to get to know our grandkids.
Economic freedom and income per capita28

A review of 1,303 academic articles that explored the index showed that
the correlation between economic freedom and societal outcomes was
overwhelmingly positive: countries with freer markets have faster growth,
better wages, greater poverty reduction, more investment, less corruption,
higher subjective well-being and are more democratic, with greater respect
for human rights.29 At the same time, the data show that you do not have to
get high grades in each individual category to perform well overall. For
example, Scandinavian countries have comparatively high taxes but
compensate for this by having higher economic freedom in other categories.
Why are free countries better off? What is cause and what is effect?
Like other indexes that provide snapshots of the world, it cannot determine
the issue on its own. What if rich, happy, well-functioning democracies
decide to liberalize economies more than others? Then it is not capitalism
that causes good outcomes but good outcomes that cause capitalism. This is
a complex issue that must be combined with historical research and studies
of individual countries before and after policy changes. The Western world
and East Asia (or, for that matter, China and India) were not rich when they
liberalized their economies, but they liberalized because they were not. As
they became richer, they continued to increase freedom in certain areas but
also expanded public spending simply because growth made it possible for
them to do so. (Despite all the casual talk about a dismantling of the welfare
state since the Reagan/Thatcher era, social spending as a share of GDP
grew by about half in the United States and the United Kingdom in 1980–
2010.)30
Sometimes a snapshot can actually give the appearance that economic
freedom creates social problems, since many countries abolish controls and
open markets because the previous model had created a catastrophic
situation. Many critics of In Defence of Global Capitalism made a point of
this. When I wrote that liberalization lifted countries, they argued that many
countries that had just liberated their markets were at the absolute bottom.
Sometimes they had a point. During the 1980s and 90s, it was often
countries in disintegration that began to open their economies in
desperation, and it was often a painful process. Countries that have spent

money they did not have on things they didn’t need will obviously have to
implement tough austerity measures that suppress the economy for several
years. When they ran out of money, many leaders sacrificed resources for
education and healthcare rather than on industrial subsidies and the military,
and then blamed everything on ‘neoliberalism’.
Furthermore, many mistakes were made during the reform processes,
because of bad luck, ignorance or plain corruption. If you privatize
companies without first having competitive markets, you only create new,
private monopolies. And markets without rule of law and protected property
rights often hand control to states, oligarchs and criminals. It took a long
time for some countries to get this right. Some, like Russia, have still not
done so. In the 1990s the Russian government sold powerful natural
resource monopolies to cronies for a song. When Putin got into power, he
just took the monopolies from the oligarchs and handed them over to his
own friends instead.
For all these reasons, this made it difficult to perceive much of a growth
spurt in emerging markets in the 1980s and 90s, even after reforms. One of
the critics was the economist William Easterly, who was particularly
influential because he worked at the World Bank, which had finally begun
to recommend liberalization. In a 2001 study, Easterly pointed to the
minimal growth in poor countries as a ‘major disappointment’ for those
with great expectations of reform. Some who made a big deal out of
Easterly’s conclusion have missed that he repeated his effort in 2019 and
this time he observed a different result. He now says that he underestimated
how few reforms had actually been undertaken in many countries at the
time of the previous survey, and now finds that growth has been rapid in
countries where they have begun to be introduced. Easterly states: ‘the
previous disappointment now needs an update’.31
This suggests that we cannot just look at lots of countries as a group, but
must examine more closely what policies they actually pursued. For that
reason, one study distinguished between countries that implemented
substantial economic liberalization and those that did not, from 1970 to
2015. In a database of 141 countries, they found forty-nine countries that

had reformed their economy. Over a five-year period, annual growth in
those countries was on average about 2.5 percentage points higher than in
similar countries that did not liberalize. This means that those countries
were 13 per cent richer after five years. Another study with a narrower
definition of reformed countries showed that for the first two years they
grew more slowly than other countries – which is often the result of
changing policies in times of crisis – but then they began to beat them, and
after a decade were more than 6 per cent richer.32
Reforms made in low- and middle-income countries, combined with
greater free trade, cheaper transport and better communication technology,
led to a historic shift some time in the 1990s: poor countries began to grow
faster than rich ones. Economists have always believed that they would do
so, as they can use technologies and solutions that have already been
developed at great cost in the leading countries. But this convergence did
not take place before the 1990s, since global markets were not very open
until then and protected companies had not been pressured to upgrade
methods and technologies by the competition.
In addition, the poor faced an ancient problem. Their fastest way to
development would be to gain access to the technology that meant no
longer having to dig with a shovel, spin by hand or use scythes to cut
grains, crops and grass. But who has an interest in disseminating such
technology and, above all, who wants to invest resources in developing it in
a form that suits their particular level of technical infrastructure and local
conditions? Leading economies have no interest in creating technology that
would make it much more efficient to manufacture, say, industrial goods
manually instead of with robots. So if poorer countries wanted to take the
first steps towards industrialization, they would have to settle for much
older technology.
Then there was a revolution, thanks to the emergence of international
supply chains. Foreign investors and global companies now consider
suppliers in a poor country an integral part of their own business and it is in
their own commercial interest to invest massively in their productivity. This
is one reason why many countries that have been integrated into global

supply chains – not least through much-maligned low-wage factories and
‘sweatshops’ – have been able to skip several stages of development and
grow at a record pace. Once you have built factories, roads and ports to
manufacture and transport clothes and toys, you can then also use them to
produce and export high-tech components.33
Surprisingly, this spread of technology has gone hand in hand with
stronger local protection for intellectual property. In many ways it is a
prerequisite: companies would not be interested in investing so much
technology in other parts of the world if everything could be instantly
copied by the factory on the other side of the road.
This technological advance – combined with the fact that low- and
middle-income countries had stronger macroeconomic stability and
experienced fewer crises – helped them to grow. In 1960–99, high-income
countries grew 1.4 percentage points faster than low- and middle-income
countries per capita annually, thus contributing to global inequality. In
2000–19, low- and middle-income countries grew 2 per cent faster than rich
countries and thus got a little closer to them with each passing year. It is an
unweighted average for all countries, so it is not a matter of a few big shots
raising the average. Vanuatu and China weigh equally heavily.34
There is no guarantee that this convergence will continue. It depends on
local politics and the openness of the world economy. If rich countries go
further to repatriate supply chains, this will deprive the world’s poor of
many opportunities.
It is also probable that not every country that grew faster did so because
they had managed to create a growth model that will keep on delivering
every year. Instead, in some countries the growth spurt came from getting
rid of witless leaders and insanely ineffective policies. We have yet to see if
those countries can move from avoiding an outright destruction of wealth to
policies that create much more of it in the long run. But as this seems to be
the first time since the Industrial Revolution – researchers speculate that it
may be the first time since the sixteenth century – that global inequality has
declined, it may be worth stopping and reflecting on its importance.

Strong men make weak nations
Just as there are success stories on all continents, there are also
governments that engage in self-harm on all continents. In In Defence of
Global Capitalism I warned against Zimbabwe, where dictator Robert
Mugabe declared that he would show the world that the ‘neoliberal model’
and its wild market forces could be dismantled.35 He nationalized
agriculture, financed the state through the printing press and handled the
subsequent hyperinflation with price controls. The result was a historic
collapse. Between 2000 and 2008, GDP per capita collapsed by about half.
At the same time, on the other side of the Atlantic, in Venezuela, the
authoritarian populist Hugo Chávez and his disciple Nicolás Maduro
initiated a similar policy of massive spending, corruption and
nationalization. The difference was that Chávez had control over the
world’s largest oil reserves at a time when oil prices were soaring, so he
received almost $1,000 billion that could keep that policy afloat for a little
longer. That was enough for Chávez to be the left’s favourite demagogue
for a while. Bernie Sanders said that the American dream was more alive in
Venezuela than in the US. Labour’s Jeremy Corbyn praised Chávez for
showing that ‘the poor matter and wealth can be shared’. Oxfam called
Venezuela ‘Latin America’s inequality success story’. In an open letter to
‘Dear President Chávez’, luminaries of the Left such as Jesse Jackson,
Naomi Klein, Howard Zinn and others state that they ‘see Venezuela not
only as a model democracy but also as a model of how a country’s oil
wealth can be used to benefit all of its people.’36
On paper, that $1,000 billion was enough to make every extremely poor
individual in Venezuela a millionaire. But still, it is not much money if you
do not invest it productively and if you destroy the ability to create new
wealth with nationalization and price controls. When the price of oil began
to fall only slightly, it became obvious that the business sector was in a
shambles and the oil industry had been demolished by corrupt
mismanagement and underinvestment. The result was one of the worst
economic disasters to have occurred anywhere in the world in peacetime.

Between 2010 and 2020, Venezuela’s average income plummeted by an
incomprehensible 75 per cent. South America’s richest country suddenly
turned into South America’s poorest country with breadlines and a mass
exodus from an increasingly tyrannical state. Around seven million
Venezuelans have fled the crumbling country, an unbelievable 25 per cent
of the country’s population.
Since then, Venezuela has been less frequently mentioned as the hope of
the international working class. This is because the country followed the
three steps of socialism, which were identified by the British economics
writer Kristian Niemietz when he studied how an admiring outside world
viewed countries such as the Soviet Union, China, Cuba and Venezuela:37
Step 1: The honeymoon. The strongman distributes the country’s
resources and Western supporters declare triumphantly that he has shown
that socialism is superior to capitalism and should be introduced
everywhere, instantly.
Step 2: The excuses. The honeymoon does not last for ever. Soon, the
outside world receives information about how the economy doesn’t work,
resources run out and problems pile up. Now the admirers become
defensive and explain that the difficulties are due to bad luck, the wrong
administrators ending up in the wrong places, falling commodity prices, bad
weather that destroyed the crops, or sabotage from the elites or the outside
world. If not for that, you would all have seen how well socialism works.
(In Venezuela, for example: ‘They were unlucky with the oil price’ –
despite the fact that the price in 2010 was still around six times higher than
when Chávez took office. ‘It is because of US sanctions’ – even though
sanctions against the oil industry were not introduced until 2019, when the
collapse was already a fact.)
Step 3: ‘It was not real socialism.’ In the end, it’s impossible to deny
that the economy is not working, hunger is rising and people are fleeing for
their lives. No one wants to be associated with the experiment any more.
Now instead it is said that the country never introduced real socialism but
some form of corrupt state capitalism that only appropriated the socialist
brand, and it is intellectually dishonest to use that failure as evidence that

socialism is not working, especially as real socialism right now is being
developed elsewhere, in the hopeful country X, which you should look at
instead. (At which point the foreign admirers move on to the next
experiment and the process begins again from step 1.)
To witness the damage a single person can inflict on a country, one can
head to South Africa. Following the liberation from apartheid, Nelson
Mandela, as president from 1994, created a climate of reconciliation while
democratizing the country and liberalizing the economy. Under Mandela
and his successor, Thabo Mbeki, inflation was tamed, government debt was
halved and the growth rate reached 5 per cent. The outside world thought
South Africa could be the next economic miracle. But the leader of the
ANC’s left wing, Jacob Zuma, agitated against this ‘neoliberal’ model and
gained power in 2009–18 on a programme promising that state control of
the economy would create fair distribution.
He really did change things – for the worse. Zuma jacked up public
spending, but for consumption and corruption, not investment. State-owned
companies were drained by Zuma and his lackeys, who are suspected of
having looted about the equivalent of 20 per cent of GDP. Constant power
outages and collapsing infrastructure contributed to growth collapsing and
soon becoming negative. After being halved under the predecessors, public
debt doubled under Zuma. Extreme poverty had also halved under the
previous administration; under Zuma it not only stopped declining but even
began to increase.38
That’s the way it usually goes. Strongmen who complain that growth
takes too long to provide results are like the farmer who has no patience
with the harvest and quickly makes himself popular by letting everyone
gorge on the seed. Fewer seeds means you will have less to eat next season.
Sooner or later, you’ll run out of other people’s harvests, as Thatcher would
have said.
Some long for a dictator like Chile’s Pinochet or China’s Deng
Xiaoping who they assume will establish order and create economic
development in a poor country. However, they are rare exceptions, not the
rule. It is far more likely that an authoritarian will destroy the economy than

save it. Contrary to popular myth, low-income democracies have had higher
growth than low-income dictatorships since 1960.39 It is just that the more
capricious policies of dictators create a wider variety of outcomes, so at
each given moment there is always a couple of despots who can report
superior growth and can be applauded at Davos. But on average,
dictatorships perform worse and are more prone to sudden, sharp dips –
often the same countries that grew faster the previous decade. Investors,
captivated by the strongman’s ability to get things done, soon realize that
this ability extends to seizing their business or blocking the ports if he
suddenly fancies doing that instead.
Ye t this fact is often obscured for a long time, since dictatorships lie
about their economic performance. By comparing a country's reported
growth rate with its night-time light, which is strongly correlated with
growth but cannot be manipulated as easily, US economist Luis Martínez
has shown that autocracies exaggerate their annual growth numbers by
around 35 per cent.40 Revealingly, this mismatch between growth and light
did not appear until after the dictatorships were too rich to receive foreign
aid, and it appeared in areas that are highly reliant on information provided
by the state, like investment and government spending.
One study showed that anti-capitalist populists in Latin American
countries such as Venezuela, Nicaragua and Bolivia on average make their
countries 20 per cent poorer than comparable countries.41 A more
comprehensive database of fifty populist leaders on both the right and the
left (sometimes democratically elected), between 1900 and 2018, reveals
that in the long run it is almost impossible to find someone who creates the
thriving economy they all promise. With populists in power, the economy
fares worse both in relation to the country’s previous trend and the global
average. Fifteen years after they take control, their economies are, on
average, more than a tenth smaller than comparable economies. The
database shows that the economy does just as badly under right-wing and
left-wing populists; the difference is that right-wing populists also tend to
increase income inequality.42

When people finally see that the harvest is withering away, the populists
have already changed the rules of the game so that they can cling to power
despite popular dissatisfaction. On average, press freedom decreased by 7
per cent during their reign, civil rights by 8 per cent and political freedom
by 13 per cent.43
What populists fail to see is that there are no perfect solutions, just
trade-offs. When I hear populists on the right and left say that there are no
such difficult trade-offs and that they can solve our problems here and now,
quickly and easily (Trump: ‘I will give you everything’) if they just get the
treacherous elites out of the way, I think of the story of the man who comes
to the job interview:
‘It says in your CV that you are quick at mathematics. What is
seventeen times nineteen?’
‘Sixty-three.’
‘Sixty-three? That’s not even close!’
‘No, but it was quick.’

A
2
AT EACH OTHER’S SERVICE
‘In the pre-capitalist world, everyone had a place. It might not have been a very nice
place, even maybe a horrible place, but at least they had some place in the spectrum of
the society.’
NOAM CHOMSKY1
t an event in Newcastle during the Brexit campaign, a professor
discussed the possible effects on Britain’s gross domestic product of
different outcomes. One heckler instantly shouted back: ‘That’s your
bloody GDP, not ours.’
Why did I just spend the first chapter of this book on statistics and GDP
growth rates? Why am I so obsessed with growth? Whose GDP is it
anyway? Would a country with a few percentage points more growth be
better than another? No, of course that’s not a given. But think about it this
way: in the late nineteenth century, Sweden’s journey of prosperity began,
thanks to free enterprise and international trade. What if Sweden had since
then had an annual per capita growth rate a single percentage point lower
than it actually had? That doesn’t sound that dramatic, does it? But in this
case, Sweden would today have been as poor as Albania.
Think of the difference between Sweden and Albania, where per capita
incomes are just a quarter as high, and the difference that prosperity makes
in people’s daily lives, consumption choices, the opportunity for leisure and
holidays, the resources that can be invested in care, education, culture and
working conditions or to solve environmental problems and reduce child
mortality (about four times higher in Albania than in Sweden). Well, then it
suddenly becomes obvious that growth is not something to be sniffed at.

In a recent TV debate on growth, Sweden’s most prominent leftist
intellectual, Göran Greider, recently explained that in 1970 the country had
reached a standard that ‘filled our basic needs’, and that the growth since
then is mainly ‘completely unnecessary gadget production’. Really? If
Sweden had not become richer since 1970, how would it have financed the
big government of which Greider always speaks so warmly?
If you look at the public spending of today, you realize that Greider has
a point about the most basic needs: with the prosperity of the 1970s,
Sweden would actually be able to afford what it spends today on public
administration, the nightwatchman state, healthcare, education and social
protection (although he probably thinks it is too little) – but only on the
condition that it simultaneously ended all investments in roads, railways,
public transportation, development aid, basic research, culture, leisure
activities, waste and sewage management, water supply and environmental
protection. Nor would its citizens be able to spend a single penny on
frivolous private interests, such as eating, buying clothes, having a home or
transporting themselves. Obviously they would not be able to afford
newspapers, books and TV programmes where one can complain about the
banalities of growth. If there were unforeseen expenses, such as a need to
develop green technology or a vaccine against a new virus, then that money
would have to come from healthcare, education or policing.2
Even judging by prosperity levels as far back as 1950, the country
would still be able to afford today’s investments in education, healthcare
and social support for children, the sick and disabled, but then it would also
have to abolish all pensions, unemployment benefits and social assistance,
public administration, the judiciary, police, defence – and of course, again,
have to do without food, clothes, transport and housing. It’s not just mobile
phones that would be lost.
The value of all the goods and services a country produces is called
gross domestic product (GDP). To find out how much is created per person,
we divide it by the number of inhabitants in a country (per capita). Growth
is what it’s called when we raise this level – when we create more or better
goods and services tomorrow. It is an embarrassingly deficient measure of a

society’s prosperity. It does not include unpaid work in the home and it does
not include natural resources. Therefore, it is important to combine it with
other measures of what we value. GDP is the worst way to quantify wealth
– except all the other ways that have been tried from time to time.
Growth is not a value in itself either. When European colonizers or
Marxist dictators forced farmers into modern production methods, it was
also growth. But growth that does not take place on people’s own terms –
because they have chosen new methods and innovations themselves – is not
the kind of growth I want. Of course, if some prefer to devote more time to
leisure than productivity, then they should do that. If people are willing to
work for lower wages in less productive businesses in quieter areas, one
should not sabotage those opportunities. The growth I care about is the one
in which people generate more value tomorrow by deciding to create
something that is in demand. If we choose to do that, we will also
accomplish many other great things.
I have lost count of the number of various UN agencies’ international
studies on poverty, health and education that repeat the message that growth
is not enough to guarantee good development. But then, as I flip through the
statistical compilations – those gathered at the end, where few readers reach
– I notice an almost unambiguous connection between growth and progress.
It is not completely unambiguous as there is always a country that deviates:
a rich country that has an unusually short life expectancy or a poor state in
India that has unexpectedly good health indicators. However, the overall
connection is usually striking and, if we are to use data to learn how to
improve the world, the general rule is more interesting than the exceptions:
the richer a country is, the longer and healthier people live, with improved
outcomes on almost all indicators of well-being. Unfortunately, growth has
also been an effective way of exploiting nature but, as we will see in
chapter 8, richer countries are also better at reducing and repairing
environmental damage once they decide that is a priority.
This means that, almost no matter which values we want to maximize,
we should prefer a society with a faster-growing economy, and no matter
which threats and disasters we risk in the future, it is better that we face

them with greater prosperity, more knowledge and greater technological
capacity than with less. We must move forward, and one reason is that our
previous solutions have unforeseen consequences that we must also solve.
We save lives with antibiotics, but some bacteria become resistant and then
we have to work with that problem. More people live longer and then we
have to develop hip replacements and bypass surgery. We reduce hunger
with fertilizers, and poverty with industry, but that causes large carbon
emissions and so we need to develop technical solutions to that problem.
There is never a point where all problems are solved and we can live
happily ever after.
If a country can achieve a growth rate of 2 per cent per capita, its
average income will double in about thirty-five years. If we could increase
it to 3 per cent, it would double in just twenty-three years. In a hundred
years, that 1 per cent means the difference between becoming seven times
as rich or nineteen. It is such a huge improvement of all our opportunities
and assets that everything else pales in comparison.
It is growth that ends global poverty. If a country that belongs to the
poorest fifth of countries manages to maintain an annual per capita growth
of 2 per cent for twenty years, extreme poverty is halved on average. If the
country succeeds in increasing growth to 4 per cent over twenty years,
poverty will decrease on average by more than 80 per cent.3
Again and again, economic institutions and well-meaning intellectuals
ask the question of how to make growth ‘pro-poor’ – how growth can
become ‘inclusive’ and benefit the poorest? But a survey of 118 countries
over forty years shows that we already have the answer: the best way to
create inclusive growth is to increase growth for everyone and to keep it up.
The study shows that more than three-quarters of the differences in the
income the poorest 40 per cent have in different countries can be explained
by the growth in average income. The size of the cake is more important
than its distribution.
‘The bad news,’ the researchers write, is that ‘we do not find robust
evidence that certain policies are particularly “pro-poor” or conducive to

promoting “shared prosperity” other than through their direct effects on
overall economic growth.’4
This is why redistributive policies are so terribly overrated. If Sweden
had distributed its total GDP equally in 1900, everyone would have been as
poor as the average person in Kenya. Sweden’s GDP, evenly distributed in
1950, would have been enough to correspond to today’s average Tunisians.
What lifted the country from that level is not that the seeds were distributed
in a new pattern, but that they were constantly planted and the harvests
grew. The political debate surrounding inequality is mostly about who
should receive limited financial assistance from somebody else, whereas the
question should really be, which institutions will help us create more for
everyone? The problem is that evolution has made us prioritize a small
instant reward over a big possible reward some time in the future, so we
become obsessed with who gets what today. But today we live in the future
that seemed so distant a few decades ago. So if we care about more people
than ourselves right now, right here, we should strive for economic growth.
A Swede today who lives at the income level that was the median in
1995 would now be considered poor (with the relative poverty measure
defined as 60 per cent of the median income). Those who fall below the
poverty line in the United States own more amenities such as dishwashers,
washing machines, dryers, air conditioners and televisions (and of course
computers and mobile phones) than the average American did in 1970, as
productivity has made all these things much cheaper.5
Let’s say that you are a median person with a median income and that
your income grows in line with the economy. If you only care about your
personal finances, do you think you should vote for the party that promises
to give you a brand-new government benefit of $100 a month or the party
that says they do not intend to give you anything but will implement
reforms that raise the country’s growth per capita from 1 to 2 per cent? If
you were to vote for the benefit party, you would make a loss after as little
as three years. After ten years, you would lose more than $4,000 a year.
In addition, the growth created by the second party would have been a
gain that benefited the majority of the population, while the benefit would

be taken from that population. This means that government redistribution is
not only paltry but also perilous, because higher taxation of labour,
entrepreneurship and investment will reduce labour, entrepreneurship and
investment and thus growth. After all, it is because we want less smoking
and pollution that we tax cigarettes and pollution. As the English social
liberal John Stuart Mill put it: ‘To tax the larger incomes at a higher
percentage than the smaller is to lay a tax on industry and economy; to
impose a penalty on people for having worked harder and saved more than
their neighbours.’6
However, a government also has to tax people for the services it
provides. Borrowing to pay for public expenses is just a way of delaying
taxation, which also adds uncertainty for everyone involved, including for
lenders. If lenders begin to doubt that a government will be able to repay
them – as they did after Liz Truss’s UK budget in November 2022 – they
run for the doors, interest rates surge and shock waves go through the
economy.
Economists Andreas Bergh and Magnus Henrekson conclude that the
research points to a negative correlation between the size of government
and growth. An increase in the size of the public sector by 10 percentage
points is associated with a reduction in the annual growth rate by between
0.5 and 1 per cent.7 That growth means the most for those who have the
least. The share of a country’s income that goes to the poorest tenth does
not differ much depending on how free the economy of a country is: in the
least-free quarter of countries, the poor get 2.7 per cent; in the freest quarter
they get 2.9 per cent. The big difference comes from the fact that the free
countries are so much wealthier, so even if the poor’s share of the cake is
not that much larger, they have a share of a much larger cake. In the freest
quarter of the countries, the income of the poorest is more than eight times
greater than in the least-free quarter.8

Economic freedom and the income share
of the poorest 10%9

Economic freedom and the income earned
by the poorest 10%10
Let’s break for coffee
Why do people create so much more in free economies? To sharpen the
senses before I answer that question, I just made a cup of coffee.
But that is not quite true. I can’t make a cup of coffee; neither can you.
In fact, no one can make a cup of coffee. Those invigorating drops are the
result of lots of people’s knowledge, skill and hard work that no single
person can undertake. I am not just thinking of those who cultivate, pick
and roast the beans, but also of everyone else who makes it possible. There
are so many people involved that the thought is dizzying.

One man who has looked at this is the American journalist A. J. Jacobs.
He sometimes says grace in a secular way by thanking those who made the
family’s meal possible by growing the crops or transporting the food. One
day he was interrupted by his son: ‘You know these people can’t hear you,
right?’ So Jacobs decided to actually go and thank them personally. He
chose to thank those who made his coffee, which felt like a relatively
limited task. It was not. The journey took him around the world, because
production of the coffee in his cup began nine months previously and then
travelled 4,000 kilometres on motorcycles, trucks and ships, in buckets,
metal containers as big as apartments and warehouses as big as football
pitches. His cup was made possible by farmers and truck drivers and
warehouse workers, but also by those who manufactured the pallets, ships
and buildings, and those who produced and processed the raw materials.
And don’t forget the engineer who designed the process for the production
of steel, the designer who developed the special plastic bag that keeps the
beans fresh and the cleaner of the stockroom. From the small (like the
entrepreneur who created the device to measure the density of beans) to the
big (like those responsible for the water that fills 99 per cent of the cup and
the treatment plants and the chemicals that make it safe) to the absurd (like
the team behind the special pheromones that are spread in the warehouse so
that the moths stop being interested in the opposite sex and refrain from
procreating and eating all the beans).
Jacobs tried to thank them all but was quickly overwhelmed. He
realized that he really should also thank those who make the plastic for the
helmets that the miners wear to dig iron ore that is made into steel, which is
turned into saws that the forest workers use to cut down trees to be made
into pallets on which coffee beans are transported. He also had to think
about the software, the hardware, the internet, the energy sources and the
fuel that keeps everything going – and the financial system that makes sure
that everyone involved gets paid before he had even promised to pay for the
coffee. Jacobs had to make do with a thousand thanks, all of which are
listed in his book Thanks a Thousand, but behind each of them we can

easily find at least ten people who have in a very direct way made that
person’s job possible.11
The point is, your simple cup of coffee is magical. Tens of thousands of
people have collaborated to pour coffee into your cup, not because they are
forced to do so, not even because they have been organized for the purpose.
They do not know who you are or who the others in the supply chain are,
and most of them do not even know that they are involved in making
coffee, but all of them have chosen to make an effort for your mental peace.
They started making your cup of coffee nine months ago (iron, wood and
chemicals much earlier, of course) in a world-spanning network. And yet
there is a cup of coffee at the cafe or at work or at home at the exact
moment you want one, which you might not have even known you wanted
ten minutes ago. This is true for your cup and for the two billion other cups
served every day worldwide.
Your coffee cup is magical. So is the food on your table. And the table.
And the house it is in, and the vehicle you drove to make it there. Your shirt
too, your mobile phone, books and wallpaper. That and almost everything
else you use daily has been created by complex networks of tens of
thousands of people who have voluntarily moved to the place where their
labour is paid better than in other jobs.
Free enterprise is not primarily about efficiency or optimal use of
resources. It is about opening the dams for human creativity – to let
everyone participate and test their ideas and see if they work. But this is
precisely why it guarantees a decent use of resources. We test more
solutions and we get immediate feedback from consumers that is honest
because their response is not about which project they think has the best
intentions, think sounds convincing or has passed some sort of bureaucratic
test, but about what they are actually willing to buy with their own money.
People from all over the world work together for your sake, individuals
with every conceivable colour on their skin and beliefs in their hearts,
people who are attracted to the opposite sex or their own, both or none.
These are individuals living in urban and rural areas, vegetarians and
carnivores, rightists and leftists, synth-kids or heavy metal fans. Most of

them have never met and do not know of each other’s existence. Many
would not like each other if they actually met. Some of them may be mortal
enemies on Twitter. Still, they cooperate, and the prejudiced person who
suddenly refused to finance, work for, hire, buy or sell to a person who
belongs to the ‘wrong’ group, even though it would have been the
financially smart choice to do so, would lose out. Of course, there are
always idiots, but in a free market they have to pay dearly to be idiotic.
There’s a reason why it’s so pathetic when some on the left claim that
capitalism is racist and racism is capitalist. On the contrary, the market
economy is the first economic system that makes it profitable to be colour-
blind and look for the best supply and the best demand, regardless of who is
responsible for it. Of course, it will not make everyone colour-blind, but it
does so more than otherwise would have been the case (especially in
combination with the liberal values on which capitalism is based). Attitude
surveys show that Western market economies are the world’s least racist
societies. In an empirical study of seventy countries, economists Niclas
Berggren and Therese Nilsson document that economic freedom is
positively correlated with tolerance of other ethnic groups and gay people
and with the belief that it is important to teach children to be tolerant.12
Everyone knows about the segregation on buses, trams and trains in the
American South, until Rosa Parks and the civil rights movement aroused
public anger about it in the 1950s, and I thought it had always been so until
I read the African-American economist Thomas Sowell. He has showed that
railroads, streetcars and buses in the South did not engage in systematic
race discrimination until the end of the nineteenth century. The reason was
that they were mostly privately owned and treated customers equally – not
because the owners were less racist than other white Southerners but
because they were for-profit and recognized that black Southerners were
also paying customers. Segregation would alienate consumers, demand
larger wagons and force the staff to conduct an unpleasant policing task.
The Southern states introduced racist Jim Crow laws because they were
outraged that greedy capitalists only thought of money and refused to
discriminate against black people. In Montgomery, Alabama, where Rosa

Parks boarded the bus, segregation was first enacted in 1900. Companies
lobbied against the racist laws, challenged them in court and often delayed
them by refusing to enforce them. Alabama and other Southern states
responded by arresting and fining employees who did not uphold
discrimination and by threatening the directors with imprisonment.13
I have myself witnessed how market forces are breaking down the caste
system in India. When companies began to face competition in the early
1990s, it suddenly became costly to favour the upper castes and
discriminate against good workers just because they were Dalits – the
quarter of the population denied education, given the dirtiest jobs, called
‘untouchables’ and isolated from the rest. A Dalit I met, Madhusudan Rao,
moved from his village to Hyderabad in search of a better life. There he
happened to hear a building contractor scolding an employee for not being
able to get enough workers who could dig trenches for the laying of cables.
Madhusudan stepped forward and offered to provide him with twenty-five
workers as soon as that evening. The contractor had a pressing economic
need for a trench, but not a pressing economic need to get one dug by
people from a particular caste. So he gladly accepted. Madhusudan rented a
truck, gathered willing men outside the city and made more money that day
than he had seen all his life. He then created his own construction company
with 350 workers: ‘When I’m hiring employees, I am not seeing any caste.
I’m seeing if they’re talented.’
In the two decades after 1993, poverty in India fell by about 25 per cent
faster among Dalits than for Indians in general. At the same time, other
forms of discrimination began to break down. A survey in India’s largest
state showed that the custom of separating seats at weddings, so that higher
castes are not ‘polluted’, decreased by more than 80 per cent during that
period and the proportion of non-Dalits who would accept food and water
in Dalit households increased from 3 to 60 per cent. Chandra Bhan Prasad,
a mentor and advisor to Dalit companies, once joined Maoist rebels to fight
the caste system; now he says that ‘capitalism is changing caste much
faster’.14

The economy’s GPS
Ten thousand people do not serve you coffee because they are part of a Big
Coffee Plan where a coffee tsar decides who will make what, when, how
and at what price. In fact, it can only happen because there is no such coffee
plan. The process works because each of these ten thousand people uses
their individual knowledge of what they can do and how they can do it
better. A centrally placed coffee tsar would never be able to centralize all
this complex knowledge. Even if he had been able to do so, the interests,
skills, supplies and circumstances would have changed before he had time
to send out detailed orders about who should do what.
The free market is first and foremost a cooperation machine, and it
works better than all forms of centralized systems because it utilizes the
knowledge, talent and imagination of far more people. Free trade allows the
farmer to grow a new mobile phone in his wheat field, the textile worker
can sew a new motorbike and the author can (if lucky) write a holiday trip
to Tuscany. The free trade alchemy constantly turns our particular work into
the goods and services we need but cannot produce as well ourselves.
The ten thousand people increase growth because they have an
individual motive to think about how they can work a little smarter, and to
come up with ideas for which technologies and which methods could make
their process faster, cheaper or better – or if they could create greater value
by doing something completely different. They think so much about your
coffee that you don’t have to.
No one in central authority can know whether it is better to direct a little
more steel to containers or to refrigerators, or whether the salary for
chemists who develop pheromones is reasonably high, or whether it is
better to manufacture more powerful tractors at a higher price, or smaller,
cheaper models. No bureaucrat can know if it’s worth experimenting with a
lid on the cardboard mug that lets through a little more aroma, or how much
the lifting of bags of beans should be automated. We can only test different
solutions, observe the results, learn from them and adapt.

The free market is based on Socratic wisdom – that the most important
thing is to be aware of what we do not know. We do not know which ideas
offer the most productive innovations or are the best solutions to our
problems. We know that we have not yet come up with the best ways to
teach students, cure illnesses, organize family life, insure against risk,
produce food, or make a cappuccino. We only know that the chance of
finding ever better methods is greater if everyone is allowed to join in the
search. An underestimated consequence of this (which the Austrian thinker
Friedrich Hayek devoted several books to explaining15) is that whenever we
make today’s best solution mandatory, we stop further development –
whether it’s one form of education or a particular mobile phone charger. It
would hamper the experiments and the competition that can teach us more
and take us further.
This is the main reason why it is so important to have private
alternatives and freedom of choice in the welfare sector, which Sweden has
experimented with more than others. It is not primarily a matter of believing
that a private school or caregiver will make the services cheaper and the
users more satisfied (although, according to research, they tend to do that).16
The most important role of the alternatives is to try to compensate for the
fact that the public sector by its nature has to go for a one-size-fits-all
approach and therefore blocks innovation in some of the areas that are most
important to us. This freedom of choice is a way to see if the welfare state
can be open to alternative ideas and be more experimental, which is
necessary precisely because it is in the surprise results that we find
development.
One day in the middle of the nineteenth century, a young Frenchman
from the countryside visited Paris. It fascinated him that millions of people
there slept peacefully even though they would die within a few days if
transports from all over the country did not continue to flow to the big city.
The thought was dizzying. How could it be that this huge marketplace was
filled every morning with almost exactly the number of goods that the
inhabitants needed, neither more nor less? And how could it be that the
Parisians could suddenly feel an urge for something new they had never

thought of before and go to a store and just expect it to be there?17 What,
then, is the secret and ingenious power that governs this complicated
system that everybody seems to have such trust in even if they barely give a
thought to its existence (except for that one time when what they are
looking for is not on the shelf)? That power is nothing but prices and the
profit motive.
All information is local and it is not even always available to ourselves.
I do not know how much coffee I want next week, or how important it is for
me to drink the coffee from a cardboard cup that allows the drink’s aroma to
float out while I drink. The steel industry does not know if their products
are currently best needed for frames for glasses, refrigerators or cars. But
what we want can be revealed by our actions, and they are visible because
we constantly send signals of supply and demand that are visible in the
prices. If we are heading for autumn darkness and we suddenly drink more
coffee, the income of those selling it increases, and if there is a shortage of
coffee beans or specially designed plastic bags, the prices rise. Prices act as
information disseminators because they reduce the information to the
absolute simplest and most important signals: what works and what does
not work? What do we want more of and what do we want less of? It does
not matter who wants more roasted beans or why they want them; the
important thing is that the signal is being sent to start roasting. If the
demand for lumber increases because we need more pallets for coffee bags
or because everyone suddenly decided to build a porch does not matter to
the forestry companies; the important thing is that they suddenly benefit
from hiring more forest workers. Prices constantly convey changing
information about what we want, but they also encourage us to react to that
information and adapt to what others want. Free pricing and profit
opportunities act as the economy’s GPS, describing the landscape and
showing you how to navigate to the place you want to be.
This is one reason why regulations are always problematic – even those
that are necessary, for example, to maintain safety or environmental
protection. Every ban or requirement placed on the ten thousand people

from the outside makes it a little harder, more expensive and slower for
them to adapt, adjust and do something else a little better.
That pricing is unregulated, and determined by nothing else but the
voluntary actions of all market participants, is crucial if the economy’s GPS
is to show us right. Politicians do not have much ability to control the
economy, but they know how to create surpluses and deficits. If they want a
surplus, they can just pay the producer more for a certain item than people
want to pay for it. Then we will have overproduction, as when the EU’s
fixed, high agricultural prices in the 1980s created milk lakes and meat
mountains that were dumped in poor countries. Or they can force everyone
to pay more for something than they would otherwise, such as with high
minimum wages that mean that job opportunities disappear for those with
poorer qualifications and less experience.18 If politicians want a deficit
instead, they can just force producers to sell at a price that is clearly lower
than what consumers are willing to pay. Regardless of whether it is rent
control or the Venezuelan price controls on food, the result is the same:
supply decreases, waiting times increase and an informal market emerges.
The only way to make sure one can get the coveted product is to have
contacts with power and influence.
Another way to undermine the price system is inflation. Inflation is
often described as something outside of our control, but every rapid and
general increase in prices is a monetary phenomenon: when central banks
create more money (for example, to deal with funding problems during a
financial crisis or a pandemic) we get more liquidity but no more wealth, so
more money chases the same number of goods. Prices increase and our
purchasing power is undermined. It is a way of taxing people without them
understanding what happened. But it’s worse than taxation because it also
distorts the price system. It makes it impossible to distinguish a real price
signal from inflation noise.
The economist John Maynard Keynes, who has often been used by
politicians to play down the risks of inflation, understood that it was in fact
one of the great dangers to an economy. High inflation, he wrote, makes

economic relationships ‘so utterly disordered as to be almost meaningless;
and the process of wealth-getting degenerates into a gamble and a lottery.’19
The voluntary economy
According to Karl Marx, we have capitalism when the economy is based on
privately owned means of production, with workers who voluntarily sell
their labour, and when coordination is market-based. He put it in a slightly
depressing way, setting up a false dichotomy between classes (he had a hard
time imagining a thriving capitalism where capitalists are also wage
earners, workers own companies through pension funds and there are a
multitude of partnerships, cooperatives and companies owned by workers),
but in essence it is a decent working definition.20
Property rights are the foundation, so that we make a distinction
between yours and mine, defining who has the right to decide how property
is to be used, divided, transferred or sold. It is basically an institution for
social peace that ensures property can be transferred and distributed in any
way as long as it is done through voluntary agreements not force. And when
something is yours, it creates an incentive to manage it well, as Aristotle
stated 2,300 years ago.
Property rights have often been described as a form of protection for the
rich and powerful but, in fact, if we do not have legal protection for private
property, it is only the rich and powerful who will rule. They will dictate
how resources are to be used. In both India and Africa, I have met people
who have been denied formal ownership of land that they have used for
generations and they always say the same things: that they feel powerless;
that someone else controls their lives; that it does not pay off to invest long-
term, to renovate their home, dig wells or buy tractors. For example, the
Ministry of Forestry’s officials regularly demand money under the table in
order not to raze people’s plantations with a bulldozer. And if a brother-in-
law of a government minister suddenly comes up with something he wants

to use the land for, one day he will just step in and take it, meaning all their
hard work has been in vain.
It is not always the case that the ten thousand people who make your
cup of coffee participate in the process voluntarily. It is not uncommon for
the land of the coffee plantations to have been stolen and for those who
lived there to be displaced or forced into the local industry. In some cases,
there is direct slave labour in coffee production. These are primarily legal
issues, and the government’s most basic role is to uphold people’s right to
their freedom and their property. But it is also a reason why the commercial
economy has to expand, so that landowners lose their complete control and
people have an alternative to staying and obeying.
Many countries that have moved from rags to riches have begun with
land reforms, which break down feudal structures, take land from the land-
owning aristocracy and give individual property rights to the people. This
may sound like a form of government redistribution, but it is not a recurring
arrangement, it is a one-time correction for a history of looting, often
centuries-old with racist overtones, where a small elite has seized huge
areas without working for it or receiving it through voluntary transactions
(see Nozick’s rectification principle).21 In many cases, land reforms are
about legally recognizing what people already possess but are denied by the
elite. An innovative research project came to a rough estimate around the
turn of the millennium: people in low- and middle-income countries hold
informal land and buildings worth about $10,000 billion – almost as much
as the total value of all companies on the rich countries’ stock exchanges at
the time. Because governments do not recognize these holdings as property
rights, the owners can’t use them to take loans, do not dare to expand and
can’t transfer the property. It remains dead capital, controlled by the
powerful rather than the real owners.22
Property rights are not just about sound incentives but also human
dignity. I have, on a very modest scale, been involved in sponsoring a
project that helps black South Africans formally register their property, in a
country whose official policy has long been to deny it to them. One of the
first women to receive a document confirming her ownership was ninety-

nine-year-old Maria Mathupe, who cried with happiness when she got it.
‘Why?’ someone wondered. ‘After all, you are ninety-nine years old, and it
is not certain that you will be able to use the property for that long, or get so
much pleasure from investing in the future.’ Mary replied, ‘I cry, for now I
can die with dignity.’
All the ten thousand people you can thank for your cup of coffee
certainly do not go to work with joy. Some do it just to survive; others do it
because the alternatives are terrible. Many probably hate their jobs.
Wherever we work, we also have Monday mornings when we curse the toil
and think we have ‘bullshit jobs’. Work is not always fun – that’s why we
pay each other to do it! In free capitalism we go to work not because
someone has forced us there but because we need the money and have
decided that this is a better way of getting it than the alternatives. And that’s
a pretty new phenomenon in history.
Life is a struggle to create or make available the resources that enable us
to survive and thrive. The utopians who have dreamed about avoiding this
struggle always land in some variant where they force others to perform it
for them, just like in Aristophanes’ play Ecclesiazusae from 391 bc:
Proxagoras: I shall begin by making land, money, everything that is
private property, common to all. Then we shall live on this common
wealth.
Blepyrus: But who will till the soil?
Proxagoras: The slaves.23
Throughout history, the powerful have always come up with new ways
to force someone else to struggle so that they themselves can escape. Most
societies have applied slavery, where people have been reduced to the
property of others. Feudal systems have imprisoned the peasants on the
land, where they were whipped to work for their lords. In modern times,
communism and fascism have sought to drag humanity back to its dark

past. The Soviet communist Trotsky described ‘a country where the sole
employer is the state’ as being one in which ‘The old principle: who does
not work shall not eat, has been replaced by a new one: who does not obey
shall not eat.’24 The radical break with this dark history came with
Enlightenment ideas that started to emerge in the seventeenth century along
with classical liberalism and the notion that man owns himself: he is not
just a means to others’ ends but has the right to pursue his own happiness in
the way he thinks best.
The free market was the sort of economy that followed when people
were given the right to shape their relationships and collaborations, and to
exit them if they became exploitative. It was the only system that meant
that, if you were to earn anything, you had to serve others and give them the
goods, services and rewards they wanted. It therefore creates the impetus to
come up with even better ways to do it tomorrow, enabling the immense
supply of hard work and ingenuity that makes all the difference between
poverty and prosperity.
The uniqueness of the free market is revealed every time you arrive at
the counter and pay for your coffee. You say thank you, and the cashier
answers with a thank-you. We hear such strange double thank-yous in all
marketplaces, from the square where we buy vegetables and the restaurant
when we pay the bill, to the meeting room where a contract is written with a
supplier. It is not a thank-you followed by a ‘you are welcome’ or a ‘yes,
sir’. It is a thank-you that is answered with a thank-you, for each party has
done the other a favour. This mutual gratitude is the sign that you have
created value for someone else. And the potential profit you make is proof
that you have produced goods or services that people are willing to pay
more than is required for just the raw materials, technology and working
time required to create it. Profit is the reward for those who create a whole
that others find more valuable than its constituent parts. All other economic
systems have also created winners, but the winners were those who took
what others created. In a free market you can also get rich, but only by
enriching others.

Slavery, feudalism, socialism and fascism were based on some issuing
commands and others obeying. The market economy is instead based on
doing your best for others, and getting their best in return. The pyramids,
the cotton fields of the American South and the Soviet steelworks were
built with beatings and floggings. The coffee cup in front of you was
created by a thousand handshakes and double thank-yous (and surely some
examples of abuse and oppression as well – there is still work to be done).
The ten thousand people organize their work in different ways, often
depending on local circumstances. Some work on their own, others as
family households, still others in private or public companies. Maybe they
are financed through savings, bank loans or venture capitalists – or they
work in consumer cooperatives, kibbutzim or worker-owned companies.
Anything that is voluntary. One reason why capitalism is morally superior
to socialism is that you are free to live as a socialist in a free market
economy, as long as you do not force anyone else to do so.
The free society is based on the fact that, in as many areas as possible,
we replace the logic of the chop and the blow with the logic of the
voluntary handshake. That we do not compel and command but ask, offer
and negotiate. We do not dictate who should do what but let everyone test
their ideas and keep the fruits of their labour if there are any. And we say no
when something does not add anything to us. As I write this, Starbucks is
closing most of its stores in Sweden. It did not help that it is the world’s
largest cafe chain with huge financial muscle; we Swedes had better coffee
here already.
When the crisis comes
You might think yes, yes, all that sounds nice, as long as everything goes
smoothly, but then there are pandemics, natural disasters or wars and then
we need the government. In desperate times, politicians need exceptional
powers to get us to behave properly and produce what is needed. A
common interpretation is that the pandemic showed that we can’t rely on

global supply chains where tens of thousands of people across the globe
manufacture our face masks, protective equipment and medical technology.
Like China, many countries now think they should have had large domestic
production, or at least have large stockpiles full of protective equipment like
Finland did. We must ‘limit our dependence on other countries,’ said EU
Health Commissioner Stella Kyriakides. ‘We need to invest in making more
of our products right here in the United States,’ said President Biden.25
But knowledge about the economy, about ever-changing possibilities,
availability and demand is local and only exists in decentralized form: in
the minds of millions of actors on the market. Thi s means that the freedom
to act on this information is even more important in times of crisis. We all
have a small piece of a great social jigsaw puzzle whose motive
continuously changes, especially in times of rapid transformation. Then it is
even more difficult for authorities to get an overview of what is needed and
who can do it, which then makes it more important than ever that people are
allowed to act locally, based on their information about who needs what,
when and how, and that all those tens of thousands of producers are free to
improvise based on the latest price signals that our new behaviour
transmits. Research on the Spanish flu in 1918 shows that the more
economically free a country was, the less it was damaged by the economic
shock of the pandemic.26
A review of all 389 economic crises in the world since 1993 shows that
economically free countries (defined as ten units above the average on a
hundred-point scale) are 30 per cent less likely to be hit by a crisis in a
given year and that the crisis will not be as deep as in other countries. In
countries with low economic freedom (ten units below the average), the
average GDP decrease is 12 per cent when crises strike, while the decrease
in economically free countries is 8 per cent.27 To a large extent, this can be
explained by the fact that less regulated economies give people the
opportunity to quickly adapt to new knowledge and move capital and labour
to the areas where they are needed instead of keeping them in the wrong
place.

It is easy after each crisis to point out exactly what could have been
done to deal with it, but the problem is that we do not know what will be
the next crisis. In the summer of 2018, Swedes were angry that more had
not been invested in firefighting because then the problem was not a
pandemic but forest fires. In 2019, Swedes believed more land should have
been set aside for animal feed when there was a sudden shortage. In 2020, it
was a pandemic and Swedes thought they should have had factories that
manufactured protective equipment. Yet the next crisis may not be a
pandemic but a flood, a cyber-attack or something completely different.
After Putin’s attack on Ukraine, most Swedes concluded that it was
weapons and ammunition that we lacked.
Even those countries who were well prepared to handle a full-blown
pandemic had to react when the need for medical supplies increased
twentyfold. Despite all the local factories, China needed to import about
two billion face masks and 400 million other forms of protective equipment
to meet the outbreak in Wuhan. Finland’s famous emergency stockpile
contained about 4.5 million face masks, which sounds impressive until you
get a pandemic where you need 3.5 million a day: if the Finns opened the
warehouses on Monday morning, they would have emptied them before
lunch on Tuesday.28
Therefore, the best defence is not to build a static public health Maginot
Line to protect us from the next threat we assume will arrive, but a mobile
defence that can quickly react to unforeseen events. That is exactly what
free enterprise and international trade help us to do. Concentrating
production in order to manufacture all the things we need ourselves sounds
safe but – regardless of whether it is war, natural disasters or epidemics –
catastrophes usually affect a certain geographical area at a particular time. If
we have concentrated production to a certain region, it is also threatened
when we are hit and need it most. Protectionism makes us vulnerable. If
you think resilience is created by concentrating production, I have some
infant baby formula to sell you. No, actually, I don’t, since there is a severe
shortage in the US as I write this, precisely because regulations and tariff
barriers had concentrated the production to a few US factories, and then it

didn’t take more than problems in one factory to create a devastating
national shortage. Resilience is not created by concentrating production but
by diversifying it.
Even when a crisis is global, like the pandemic, it strikes different
regions at different times. China was hit first and was able to import
protective equipment from other countries. When those countries were hit,
Asia’s factories had started to reopen and could instead export to them. In a
study by the European Centre for International Political Economy, I looked
at how EU trade was affected during the crisis, and it showed that free trade
came to the rescue. In March 2020, EU countries’ imports of protective
clothing from other EU countries fell by 25 per cent – for a period, all
European states wanted to seize everything they came across themselves.
What saved hospitals from even worse shortages of protective clothing was
that imports from countries outside the EU increased by as much as 44 per
cent in one month. During the same month, EU imports of hand sanitizer
from the outside world increased by 278 per cent and of gas masks by 430
per cent.29
This exposes the danger of the popular idea of ‘friend-shoring’ – trading
more with close geopolitical partners while avoiding rivals. In March 2020,
France didn’t just impose an export ban on protective equipment, it even
confiscated such goods sent through the country by third parties. While
France was trying to stop vulnerable neighbours like Italy and Spain from
getting hold of the equipment their healthcare systems needed, Italy and
Spain could buy it from Asian exporters like China. This is not because
China is a better friend and a closer geopolitical ally than France, but for the
simple reason that China is far away and so is less likely to suffer from the
same shortage at the same time. Putting all your eggs in the same friendly,
geographical basket is dangerous.
As globalization came to our rescue, it gave us respite to rearrange our
own production. Entrepreneurs across Europe asked themselves how they
could contribute based on their local situation, skills and equipment. Vodka
distilleries and perfume manufacturers began producing hand sanitizer and
disinfectants. Hygiene companies switched to the production of disposable

gloves and surgical masks. In less than two months, the number of
European companies that made face masks increased from twelve to 500. In
the United States, 95 per cent of textile companies switched to making
protective clothing for the first time.30
If you doubt the ability of people to adapt in times of crisis, take a look
at the shelves of your local shop. Do you remember when you stockpiled
cans, coffee and toilet paper when the world was closing during the first
weeks of the pandemic? The food industry in particular was shaken by a
perfect storm. New trade barriers were created, a large part of the workforce
stayed at home while others were forbidden to cross national borders, and
deliveries to the restaurant industry collapsed at the same time as demand
for other food supplies soared when shoppers became preppers. The
incredible thing about your shop shelves was that almost nothing happened.
Through round-the-clock work to change suppliers, reallocate labour, adjust
production methods and redirect transportation, the food industry managed
to rebuild global supply chains in just a few weeks. It is an absolutely
amazing achievement and we consumers noticed almost none of it. It was
not done by any food tsar who dictated what everyone should do. It worked
because it was not a centralized process. Each adjustment of the processes
was based on local knowledge of what could be done in a particular place
with the available raw materials and the workforce present – and what they
could stop doing without creating catastrophic shortages elsewhere.
It is impossible to centralize all this constantly changing knowledge. It
is only found on the ground and on the factory floor and can only be seen in
prices that change with our millions of individual acts. Freedom to
improvise based on this local information is never as important as when the
world is changing rapidly in an unpredictable way.
Now that we are getting out of the pandemic, we have experienced
extended waiting times for deliveries and large numbers of container ships
lining up outside ports, waiting for access. It is not strange that supply
chains are strained in times of random acts of lockdowns, curfews, new
quarantine rules and trade restrictions, when ships are suddenly banned
from entering a port and the Chinese dictatorship locks down entire cities

without warning. The remarkable thing is that heroic entrepreneurs are
constantly meeting these obstacles by rebuilding and rerouting supply
chains and continuing to deliver. Right now, more goods cross the world's
oceans than before the pandemic, despite much tougher restrictions. Free
markets faced the most difficult stress test possible, and they passed with
flying colours.
One cannot help but think of the great American poet and
transcendentalist Henry David Thoreau, who wrote in 1849 that trade and
commerce seem to be made of rubber, because they always ‘manage to
bounce over the obstacles which legislators are continually putting in their
way’.31

W
3
THE SILENCE OF THE FACTORY WHISTLE
‘This is not a rising tide that lifts all boats. This is a wave of globalization that wipes
out our middle class and our jobs.’
DONALD TRUMP, SPEECH IN NEW YORK, 22 JUNE 2016
hen I defended free markets twenty years ago, it was often against
a leftist afraid that it would make rich countries richer and poor
countries poorer. History has already settled that debate. Never
before have poor countries grown so fast and never before have so many
people been lifted out of poverty.
When I argue for free markets nowadays, I am often rebuked by right-
wing nationalists in the West who fear that it will make poor countries
richer but rich countries poorer. There is a widespread feeling that the
economies of Western Europe and North America have been
deindustrialized due to cheap imports from China, especially during the first
years of the twenty-first century. That we produce nothing any more, and
the old decent, well-paid manufacturing jobs – such as the 1950s car
industry in Detroit – have disappeared and, at best, we can aspire to low-
paid jobs at an Amazon warehouse. That wages are stagnating, rural areas
are dying and the traditional working class is being wiped out, in some
cases physically. That suicide, overdoses and alcohol-related injuries have
increased rapidly in vulnerable groups.
In a sense, they are right. Fewer and fewer people work in the
manufacturing industry. The factory whistles that sounded through
industrial towns to signal when muscular men would put down their tools

have long since fallen silent. But if this is a sign of societal decay, one must
ask why that process has been the same in all other industrialized countries,
even those that are export powerhouses with chronic trade surpluses. Japan
and Germany began to ‘deindustrialize’ in this sense in the 1970s;
Singapore did so in the 1980s and South Korea in the 1990s. There is a
simple way to disprove the notion that these jobs would have remained if
China had not taken them with low wages and massive industrial subsidies:
China is also being deindustrialized.1
The proportion of Chinese workers with factory jobs peaked in 2013
and since then the country has lost some five million jobs in manufacturing
a year. Chinese companies are currently reducing their share of the world
market for clothing, shoes and furniture. So if even the country that has
taken all our manufacturing jobs loses manufacturing jobs, where have all
those jobs gone? That would be sub-Saharan Africa, the only continent
where the share of manufacturing jobs is currently increasing.
We must abandon the old notion that deindustrialization is a sign of
weakness. In fact, it is a sign of strength, provided it occurs at the right
stage. It is a phase all countries go through as they get richer. And in a real
sense, of course, this is not about deindustrialization; on the contrary, the
conveyor belts roll faster than ever. Since 1980, industrial production in the
United States has more than doubled, it’s just that we do not need as many
workers to sustain that production.2
If you zoom in on the American manufacturing world during the first
ten years of the millennium, you see that it lost 5.6 million jobs. But that
was not because they produced less. In fact, Americans produced more
during this time – so much more that, if they had produced as much per
worker in 2010 as in 2000, they would have had to hire three million more
people. The loss of jobs was therefore not due to the fact that the factories
were outcompeted, but to the fact that they became much more productive.3
About 87 per cent of the lost industrial jobs were due to improved
production, while only 13 per cent were due to trade. This means that even
if strategic industrial policy were to bring the factories home, it would not
bring the factory jobs home because they were not taken by the Chinese and

Mexicans but by R2-D2 and C-3PO. The Chinese and Mexicans are also
acquiring more and more robots. Since 2010, Chinese companies have
increased the number of industrial robots from 50,000 to 800,000.4 That’s
why they can be more productive and competitive.
This does not mean that we will run out of jobs – just like the spinning
machine, mechanical looms, the steam engine, the car, the computer, the
ATM and other innovations didn’t kill all jobs. Instead, automation creates
complementary industries and frees up purchasing power to hire more
people. Current research shows that an increase in automation in a factory
by 1 per cent actually increases the workforce there by 0.25 per cent after
two years and 0.4 per cent after ten years.5 But it’s not the same job. The
manual jobs that compete directly with the machine are replaced by other
jobs that complement the machine.
In addition, rising prosperity means that an ever smaller part of our
consumption is devoted to material objects, and increasingly to services,
such as care, nursing, entertainment, design, research, development and
education. We can only afford this because the automation of manufacturing
means that we can devote a shrinking share of our purchasing power to its
products.
This feels wrong because our social psychology and our economic
debate is often characterized by a picture-book nostalgia. It seems that we
have lost ‘real jobs’ where ‘real men’ produced things you could drop on
your foot – the kind of jobs that are in children’s picture books. In exchange
we get a lot of unsatisfactory bullshit jobs (as David Graeber called them in
a popular book of the same name) with temporary contracts where it’s
unclear what is actually produced. Which children’s books are really about
art directors, personal trainers, PR consultants, content managers, food
couriers or biotechnological analysts?
The picture books should be supplemented with the views of people
who have actually worked in those fabled factories. If the 1950s and 60s
were the golden age of the Western labour market, why is it that those who
worked there, with few exceptions, emphasize the dirt, weariness and
boredom, worn-out bodies and exhausted minds? The reason why workers

in these factories fought so hard to give their children a good upbringing
and education was so that their children could get other jobs. As a steel-
worker in Pennsylvania warned his children: ‘Come in this place, you don’t
know if you’re coming out. And if you do, you might be missing an arm, or
eye, or leg. Do something for yourself.’6 Even in the acclaimed depiction of
life in the Rust Belt Hillbilly Elegy, author and now Senator J. D. Vance
writes that there was one thing he and all his schoolmates agreed on when
they were growing up: ‘no one wanted to have a blue-collar career’.7
Of course, there are exceptions. It must have been a dream to be a
worker in Detroit’s automotive sector in the 1950s, given how that example
always reappears in today’s labour market nostalgia. Or was it? Historian
Daniel Clark has conducted a major interview project with such workers
and expected stories of a lost Eden. What he heard was something
completely different. ‘Hardly anyone, male or female, white or African
American, recalled the 1950s as a time of secure employment, rising wages,
and improved benefits.’8 Instead, he heard about rapid restructuring,
economic volatility, precarious employment and recurring unemployment.
For a time, one-tenth of all US unemployment was concentrated in the city
of Detroit. High hourly wages did not say much about the annual income if
you were only called in temporarily and were quickly out the door again.
Most car workers Clark spoke to needed to take second jobs – such as
movers, cleaners, garbage collectors, waiters, cotton pickers – to pay the
bills: ‘Autoworkers fell behind on installment plans, resulting in
repossessions of their purchases, and they found it impossible to keep up
with mortgages and rents. Most autoworkers, and especially those with
families, were priced out of the market for the new cars that they built –
even though they were ostensibly among the highest paid industrial workers
in the country.’9
The Golden Age myth of Detroit is based on the fact that those who
managed to hold on to a long-term, full-time job in these industries had
significantly better wages than Americans in general at the time because the
general level was so low, and this was especially true of the group
employed in Detroit in 1953. So, in other words, the whole narrative of the

lost golden age of factories is based on a single American city in a single
year during the very peculiar time after World War II, when Europe’s
industry lay in ruins. And how much did these lucky ones get paid? Well,
the strong autoworkers’ union managed to push the hourly wage up to about
$1.3 – equivalent to around $14.5. It happens to be a little bit below the
typical entry-level salary Amazon pays its warehouse workers.
Does work pay?
Anyone can look at the segment of the labour market that is having the
toughest time at the moment and conclude that we are living in the age of
the precariat. Some write whole books about it. But if we want to know
how things are going for the population as a whole, individual stories are
not enough. We need to see how things are going for employees in general:
have wages stagnated, jobs become more precarious and wage earners been
thrown into insecurity?
The story of wage stagnation is just like the nostalgia for factories:
imported from America, where wage growth, especially for low-skilled
occupations, was slow for many decades. But the story is easily
misunderstood as if it were about the fact that wages have not increased.
This is not even what the advocates of this position claim; instead they
mean that people who have a certain type of work at a certain age today do
not have a much better salary than a person in a similar situation and in a
similar position in 1980. Whoever has an American minimum wage today
is no better than the person who had the minimum wage in 1980. Yet it’s
not the same person on that wage, then and now. The Austrian economist
Joseph Schumpeter pointed out that we often look at distribution issues as if
we were looking at a hotel where the rooms are nicer the higher up you get.
When we just take a snapshot of national income distribution today and
compare it to what it looked like a few decades ago, we will not see much
change except that the large suites at the top have become even more
luxurious with espresso machines and silk sheets. But Schumpeter’s point is

that people rarely live on the same floor all their lives. On the contrary, it is
common for them to move to higher floors. Those who lived in the luxury
suites eventually check out and the hotel is filled with new immigrants and
students who get their first room on the ground floor and begin their own
journey upwards.
Most of those who lived on the minimum wage in 1980 have during
their working life received wage increases, changed jobs, been promoted
and received even higher wages, and so on. Those who start working for the
minimum wage today will also experience this. As soon as after one year,
about 70 per cent who live on the minimum wage in the United States have
moved on to a position with a higher wage. In addition, the proportion of
American workers living at or below the minimum wage decreased from 15
per cent in 1980 to 1.5 per cent by 2020.10
Of Americans born in the poorest fifth (quintile), almost 37 per cent
eventually end up in one of the three highest quintiles and almost half of
those born in the second-lowest quintile move there.11 One of the largest
recent studies shows that almost one-tenth of all American children born in
1986 in a family in the poorest quintile have a salary that takes them to the
richest quintile by the age of twenty-six. It is a measure of social mobility
that has been stable since the 1971 generation when the data series began
and ‘if anything intergenerational mobility may have increased slightly in
recent cohorts’.12 This surprises many who have just assumed that increased
inequality would reduce mobility, including several of the researchers
themselves. They conclude their report by stating that more research is
needed on why mobility has not decreased as everyone expected.
Since the differences between the quintiles have increased, this says
something very interesting about social mobility in the United States. The
steps have become steeper, but the chance of climbing these steps has not
decreased. In other words, it has actually become easier for the average
person to improve their life in dollars and cents. (This is an important
distinction when comparing America with, for example, Sweden and
Denmark. It is more difficult for poor Americans to change income
category than for Swedes and Danes due to more compressed wages in

Scandinavian countries. A few hundred dollars in wage increase is enough
to climb to a higher quintile in the Nordic countries, while it requires
thousands of dollars in the United States.)
The fact that wages are not much higher for a low-skilled entry-level
job today than forty years ago can, in this perspective, be seen as an
opportunity for new groups of young people and immigrants to be allowed
to enter Schumpeter’s hotels, after which most of them can move to higher
floors. If they could only enter at a higher wage level, many would not be
allowed to check in at all.
The truth of the history of wage stagnation in the United States is that
Americans have experienced slower wage increases since the mid-1970s
than in previous decades. This is partly because they increased so fast
before that – faster than productivity. The United States had a unique
position after World War II while Europe was being rebuilt. It was
unsustainable for US industry to dominate the globe once Europe’s own
economies got back on their feet. More jobs were lost in the Rust Belt in the
northeastern United States between 1950 and 1980 – that is, before
globalization reached the United States – than in the decades that
followed.13 Lower wage increases thereafter were a correction of the cost
level, which was required so that the country’s business sector would not
collapse entirely. When the difficult structural transformation was
completed, US wages began to rise again. Since 1990, the average wage
adjusted for inflation has increased by about 34 per cent.14 This means that
the debate about wage stagnation is primarily a bad legacy of the 1970s and
80s. Three decades later, this narrative began to take over the political
debate completely, which says something about the stagnation of external
analysis in that sector.
Of course, an average says nothing about how things have gone for low-
income earners, so we should also divide the data into different groups.
Then we see that wages for those who are in the lowest-paid tenth actually
increased slightly more, by 36 per cent. If you also look at income after
taxes and transfers, the advantage of low-income earners increases even
more. Income for the poorest fifth of households increased by 66 per cent,

compared with the median household’s 44 per cent from 1990 to 2016.15
There are many ways to describe a 66 per cent increase in a quarter of a
century, but stagnation is not one of them.
If the stagnation debate is to be taken seriously, one must also keep in
mind that the figures we use disregard the fact that an increasing proportion
of salaries are paid in various fringe benefits for tax purposes, such as
health insurance, pensions or paid holidays that are not visible in the
statistics or salary account. If such benefits are taken into account, the
average US hourly wage has increased by about 60 per cent since 1980.16
For the vast majority, today’s service jobs pay much better than
industrial jobs did. Even in the group that has been at the forefront of the
debate about the unequivocal losers of globalization – American men raised
in working-class homes – 72 per cent have higher wages than their fathers
had when they were the same age. On average, they earn almost a third
more.17 It can still be described as a deterioration compared to their parents’
generation, where probably close to 100 per cent had higher wages than
their fathers had, but that was because their fathers had in most cases grown
up in severe poverty in agriculture and during the Great Depression. It’s
easier to do better than that.
However, there is something to the story that the middle class has
eroded, since certain types of routine jobs that provided average incomes
have disappeared since World War II. This applies to many forms of
manufacturing work but also to clerks responsible for registers and
warehouses or bank and postal tellers who handled invoices or received,
counted and handed over banknotes. These were jobs that required
precision and accuracy but not improvisation and social intelligence – just
the kind of work industrial robots, computers and ATMs are good at. Yet
this does not mean the total number of jobs declines. The money we
previously spent on this type of work remains and is now used to buy other
types of work in what is sometimes called ‘the new middle-class jobs’, such
as in transport, healthcare, education, entertainment and culture. We have
fewer manufacturing workers and bank cashiers but more technical support,
package deliverers, truck drivers, installers of broadband, solar cells and air

conditioning, family counsellors, legal assistants, masseurs, event
organizers, art directors, sound engineers, chefs and lecturers. Still, from
this list you can also tell how the labour market has become tougher: most
of these jobs require increased problem-solving, improvisation and
communication skills. Even the introverted IT support worker must be able
to talk to me without revealing how incompetent he thinks I am.
Educational requirements have increased for almost all tasks as a
consequence. This means that it is increasingly difficult to get a good
middle-class job for those with little education – for example, Americans
without a high school education. (Even though that proportion has
decreased from 40 per cent in the early 1950s to about 10 per cent.)
What once distinguished middle-class jobs was that they gave an
average salary. Economist Michael Strain decided to see what has happened
to those who used to have it. He defined the American middle class as
households that have an inflation-adjusted average salary between
approximately $35,000 and $100,000 a month, which is slightly arbitrary
but corresponds with many people’s assumption about middle-class jobs.
The numbers did show that the middle class has eroded, which everyone is
worried about (between 1967 and 2018, the proportion with that average
salary decreased from 54 to 42 per cent), but they don’t ask the relevant
question: where did the middle class go? Not down, because the proportion
earning less than $35,000 a month has also decreased, from 36 to 28 per
cent. The missing middle class has moved upwards. The proportion who
earn more than $100,000 a month has more than tripled since 1967, from 10
to 30 per cent. It is not the bottom that has slipped, but the ceiling that has
been raised.18

Share of households per income group19
I know, it’s easy to get the feeling that ‘when my grandfather was my
age, he could support his wife and three children and have a house built
without borrowing a penny, while I have to take out a payday loan to afford
a PlayStation’, but it ignores the fact that your grandfather only had to pay a
tenth of his income to the government, and that in his time it was actually
legal to build a new house somewhere (and as late as 1950, the chance was
more than even that his home would lack a bathroom).20 In addition, the
generally low wages made labour-intensive projects such as building a
house cheap. Instead, ask Grandpa what he did if he wanted meat for dinner
or needed a new jacket or a book, phone or radio, or transportation
somewhere or for that matter a new hip joint, and you will be treated to a

story that is less reminiscent of the good old days and more of Monty
Python’s Four Yorkshiremen sketch (‘Of course, we had it tough.’)
Is it bullshit?
If it feels like work life is becoming more stressful, like there is more churn
and we have to switch jobs all the time and work harder and more intensely,
then we have to think about where that feeling comes from because right
now we are actually experiencing a very calm period after 150 years of
large-scale industrialization and urbanization. An American study of the
years between 1850 and 2015 shows that the period with the largest churn
in the labour market – the most jobs destroyed and created – was the
earliest, while the one with the least churn was the most recent. The 1950s
and 60s are remembered as boom years, but back then structural
transformation was about five times greater than today.21 Then it was also
less often about changing jobs to another company in the same city and
more often about uprooting your whole family and moving to a different
part of the country. During the 1950s and early 1960s, about 20 per cent of
the US population moved each year. Since then, the proportion has
decreased continuously. In 2017–18, it fell to less than 10 per cent for the
first time since 1947, when the US Bureau of Statistics started registering
domestic mobility, and has since continued to decline.22
The problem today is rather too little churn than too much, because a
large part of our growth comes from old jobs and companies disappearing
and being replaced by new and more productive ones. When this is not
done to a sufficient extent, we do not get the rapid improvement in job
quality and wages that we expect. That is an important reason to make it
easier to build where the jobs are.
We do not work more than ever, but less than ever. Since the
breakthrough of industrialism, working hours have halved in the Western
world and have continued to decline in recent decades, albeit at a slower
pace. Between 1960 and 2017, annual working hours in Sweden, the United

Kingdom, the United States, Germany, France, Spain and Italy decreased by
an average of about one-fifth.23 In addition, we start working later in life
and live longer after retirement than ever before.
We work less24
Workplaces have also become much safer. In the 1950s and 1960s, there
were around twenty to twenty-five workplace fatalities per 100,000
workers, and that figure has declined continuously – it is now around 3.4
per 100,000 workers according to the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration. Worker injuries and illnesses have declined from 10.9
incidents per 100 workers in 1972 to 2.8 per 100 in 2019. Incidentally, the
biggest safety gain comes when going from manufacturing work to the
service sector.
But even if objective factors do not indicate deterioration or instability,
then tougher competition, higher pace of work and more flexible contracts
can still create feelings of anxiety and insecurity. If the proportion who

claim to be satisfied with their salary, security, career opportunities and boss
are all in drastic decline, it would be a sign that we do after all get worse
jobs. But it is the other way around on all these points. Gallup has asked
Americans how satisfied they are with their job since 1993. During this
quarter of a century, when tougher competition and globalization are said to
have undermined all good jobs, the proportion who are completely satisfied
with their work increased from 35 to 56 per cent. (Together with those who
are reasonably satisfied, it is now almost nine out of ten workers.) The
proportion who are satisfied with the amount of work required of them has
increased by a third and the proportion dissatisfied has halved.25
Some critics of modern working life, such as David Graeber and Roland
Paulsen, say that all the time we spend talking on the phone, emailing,
playing and wasting time at work shows that we may not have very
important and meaningful jobs.26 Of course, this can be the case, although it
may be more about our need for micro-breaks and distractions even when
doing something urgent. In the same way that you regularly have to stretch
and move your body in a different way when you have a demanding
physical job, you may need to stretch intellectually with a round of Desktop
Tower Defense or YouTube when working with your head. (If only you
knew how many Nick Cave videos I have watched while working on this
book.) But the interesting thing is this: if you have time to play and email
during working hours, or can surf porn 75 per cent of the time without it
being noticed on your performance like a particular Aviation Authority
employee (one of Paulsen’s favourite examples), at least it is an indication
that the demands and pace of working life generally can’t have been pushed
up to inhuman levels.
In his book on ‘bullshit jobs’, Graeber makes much of the fact that 37
per cent of Britons say no when asked whether their work ‘makes a
meaningful contribution to humanity’. By equating this with the claim that
these 37 per cent are ‘convinced their jobs are meaningless’, he concludes
that the thesis that there are more and more bullshit jobs has ‘been
overwhelmingly confirmed by statistical research’.27 Yet the question he
asked presents a pretty high threshold for not getting your job declared

idiotic. I can come up with a lot of meaningful tasks I perform that do not
concern much of humanity in the slightest. (By the way, can one really rule
out a certain modesty among Britons when asked if they see themselves as
benefactors of humanity?) If instead we ask the question whether you have
the feeling that you are doing ‘useful work’, only 4.8 per cent in the EU
answered ‘never’ or ‘rarely’ in 2015, and that proportion also decreased
from 7.8 per cent in 2005.28
If we do not trust what people say about how stressed they are at work,
we can swipe the inside of their cheeks to look for stress hormones. Three
researchers asked 122 people in a medium-sized American city to do this
six times a day. It turned out that most of them were really stressed – in
their spare time. The majority of workers experienced more stress at home,
surrounded by family and household chores, than they did in the workplace.
(Could this mean that shorter working hours have actually made us more
stressed?) It could, of course, reflect an unequal labour market, where
highly educated workers with high wages and excellent benefits are living
an increasingly comfortable life, while low-income earners are working
harder. This is why this study was so surprising, as it indicated the opposite:
the socio-economically weak, who had lower wages and poorer working
conditions, stated that they felt greater satisfaction and less stress in the
workplace than the socio-economically strong did.29
We must not draw too far-reaching conclusions from a single study, and
more research is required (as scholars usually say when they want more
bullshit jobs), but it is in any case difficult to confirm the darkest theories
about the modern labour market based purely on this. On the other hand, it
fits the theory that work can function as a safe place for people with a
difficult home environment, such as those with broken families or those
who suffer violence or abuse in the home.
Research shows that there are economic cycles in the feeling of
insecurity on the labour market – it increases in a recession and decreases in
a boom – so those who want to argue about how bad everything has become
use a simple trick: they use surveys done in the middle of recessions and
compare them with how people responded during a previous boom. If you

instead measure over a longer period of time, over several business cycles,
the pattern is one of stability and a small improvement. In the United States,
United Kingdom and Germany, the experience of labour market insecurity
has not increased in the last forty years, despite the major financial crisis
towards the end of the period. When researchers try to explain subjectively
perceived insecurity, they can’t find that it correlates with technological
change or labour market legislation. The only long-term and unambiguous
correlation is that insecurity rises with the level of unemployment.30
There is a new and fast-growing part of the labour market that has much
less security than the traditional one: the gig economy, where – rather than a
permanent job – you have temporary, insecure assignments to drive taxis or
deliver food. I must admit that when I see a food courier cycling fast in rain
and headwind to deliver pizza for a few bucks, I also doubt if this is really a
step forward for humanity. Even though this is a new sector and research is
in its infancy, an interesting survey result is that, on average, gig workers
seem to be roughly as satisfied with wages and working hours as permanent
employees, even though the spread is large.31 It has to do with the fact that
the absolute majority of gig workers state that they actively sought such
jobs, not just because they have no alternatives. For most people, it is a
temporary job on the way to or in addition to something else. It is often a
matter of complementing another job or earning an income while studying,
starting a business or looking for a job that really matches one’s skills. And
in that case, the opportunity to choose when and how much you work is a
feature and not a bug, even if the salary might look dismally low when
compared to a full-time salary.32
Of course, there is a substantial minority who take these jobs because
they don’t have anything else, and then the pressure to accept even lousy
job opportunities can be great and satisfaction with the job will be low. But
if all other opportunities are worse, it means that this job is the least bad.
Another word for ‘least bad’ is ‘best’. Studies of Uber and Lyft drivers in
the United States consistently show that between 60 and 70 per cent prefer
to have the job as a gig over a permanent job. And this is also the wrong
question, since the real choice is between being a gig worker and having a

smaller chance of permanent employment, because if companies have to
pay fixed salaries and benefits, they will not be able to accept anyone,
especially not someone who does not pull in a sufficient number of
assignments or is not efficient. When Canada banned Foodora from treating
food couriers as independent contractors in 2020, the company left the
market.
Many dislike the fact that gig workers are only considered to work
when they perform a certain task and many platforms have been pressured
by trade unions or the law to treat the workers as employees. But if you are
to have permanent employment with a fixed salary in an industry with low
margins, it presupposes that you give up on the idea of working when it fits
your schedule, and instead drivers are directed to the times of day and areas
that provide the greatest income. In New York, this has led to gig drivers no
longer being able to check in at the moment they want a job and instead
having to work shifts. They are no longer allowed to take breaks or holidays
when they want, which was one of the points of having a gig job.
When it comes to food deliveries, permanent employment means that
workers must be very productive. They must, for example, cycle fast uphill
in the rain, and the company must monitor them so that they know they are
doing so. If you get the same salary no matter how fast you pedal, the slow
cyclists will be thrown out. It thus turns out that some of the worst aspects
of the gig economy are paradoxically the result of not having respected the
flexible nature of the profession and wanting to regulate them as ordinary
jobs. ‘And just like that, a simple bywork for anyone who can ride a bike,
has turned into a qualified job for the strong, fast and physically fit,’ as
economist Andreas Bergh puts it.33
The wave power of globalization
Nothing I have written here is meant to imply that stories of abandoned
industrial landscapes and decaying rust belts are fantasies. Communities
grow up around thriving companies that offer attractive jobs. When those

business models no longer hold, communities begin to erode. Stores and
subcontractors that were created by that purchasing power are shut down
and the young start to move out. This is particularly conspicuous in a young
country like the United States, where the factories were not built in organic
urban environments with long traditions but in places where new
communities grew around them. When you travel in some parts of the
American Rust Belt today, sometimes you get the gloomy feeling of being
in ghost towns without life and hope. The feeling is similar in some old
European industrial towns. How can anyone who sees this defend the wave
of globalization that is drowning the middle class and all the good jobs?
But wait a minute, with what evidence is globalization named the villain
of this drama? Let us look at the most widely used example: China’s entry
into the global economy after WTO membership in 2001. Between 2001
and 2021, the share of manufacturing jobs in the United States fell by 0.2
percentage points annually, which is obviously painful for those concerned.
However, it happens to be a smaller decrease than in previous decades.
Between 1960 and 2001, the share of manufacturing jobs decreased by
almost 0.4 percentage points annually. So this is not a sudden new
development, just the continuation of a long trend – at a slower pace.34
Critics say that competition from Chinese imports knocked out about
130,000 American jobs annually in 2000–15. That sounds like a big number
until you compare it to the approximately 60 million jobs that disappeared
in the US economy each year during the same period. About 20 million of
those job losses are involuntary, resulting from companies closing down,
moving or needing a different composition of staff. This means that for
every job that disappeared due to Chinese imports, 150 workers lost their
jobs due to a completely different cause.35 But for some reason we think
more about that individual job than about the other 150, perhaps because
that one job fits into the picture of predatory global capitalism?
But that bigger number – 150 – reveals that we will always lose jobs.
Technology changes, some tasks are automated while others require
different skills. People move and the purchasing power moves with it.
Consumers constantly change their demand. Suddenly, we would rather

order our trip online ourselves than by stepping into a travel agency, and
our film consumption no longer requires the production of video tapes. One
day we realize that we do not need so many paper mills to read the news in
the morning. Jobs will always disappear. All we have to decide is whether
we should lose jobs from a position of weakness, where we have tried to
conserve all the old, disappearing sectors and so have less productivity and
wealth, or from a position of strength, where we have the resources and the
expanding industries that help us to restructure and hire people in new,
competitive companies. If we choose the latter, it is difficult to imagine a
better ally than international trade. It allows us to constantly upgrade our
methods and specialize in what we do best, so that we constantly create
better jobs than the ones we lost.
Sixty million jobs are lost in the United States every year and more than
that number of new jobs are created every year. And who are the ones
creating these new jobs? The answer is a bit unexpected: the companies that
are most exposed to Chinese imports. They lose some jobs, but in response
to competition, they specialize in areas where they can create greater value.
A recent study showed that companies exposed to Chinese imports
expanded employment 2 per cent more per year than other companies.36
Critics say it is not the same job, which is true. They are better jobs:
manufacturing jobs with higher wages, because they are in the stages of
production where they can add more value, and in complementary service
jobs, such as engineering, design, research and development, and
marketing. So if it is true that ‘China took our jobs’ then it is also true that
they gave us better jobs in exchange.
You can climb the value chain in different ways. Research on half a
million European companies around the turn of the millennium showed that
those exposed to Chinese competition responded by investing more in
research and development and they accounted for more patent applications.
One result was that European employment shifted to more innovative
companies. The researchers concluded that Chinese competition was behind
14 per cent of the technological upgrades in the European economy
between 2000 and 2007.37

In addition, domestic companies can expand production by using
cheaper, imported intermediate goods. Studies showing that imports destroy
local jobs usually just look at direct competition: if the Smith family buys a
refrigerator from a Chinese company, they don’t buy it from an American
company. But that’s just one aspect of trade and it’s not the biggest. Most
things that cross our borders are inputs, materials and components that
companies need to be able to manufacture goods. Sometimes we buy a
refrigerator from China, but it is more common for an American
refrigerator manufacturer to buy doors, cables or lamps from China, to
make a better and cheaper refrigerator. A recent study showed that if you
look at the entire value chain from 2000 to 2007, the net effect of trade with
China is more American jobs. The average US region increased
employment 1.3 per cent more annually than a hypothetical region that had
no trade with China. As a result, 75 per cent of American workers got
higher real wages.38
But why sacrifice any jobs at all? Just look at an iPhone. Donald Trump
could not understand why Apple assembles its mobile phones on the other
side of the globe. ‘China is the biggest beneficiary of Apple – not us,’ he
complained in January 2019, urging Apple to ‘build their damn computers
and things in this country instead of in other countries’. But is China really
the biggest winner? Some researchers disassembled an iPhone 7 that sold
for $649. They observed that the manufacturing cost of just over $237
(which looks like $237 of Chinese imports in the data tables) mostly
consists of components that have previously been imported to China, such
as American, Japanese, Korean and Taiwanese microprocessors, memory
chips and displays. But some are, of course, Chinese labour and parts. How
much? Just under $8.5 – not much more than an hourly US minimum wage.
The ‘biggest winner’ thus receives only 1.3 per cent of what you pay for an
iPhone.39
The remaining 98.7 per cent goes to other manufacturers of
components, as well as to Apple and American workers, researchers,
designers, programmers, salespeople, marketers, warehouse workers and
tax authorities. And that is the answer to the question of whether it would

be better to bring those factories home. These are routine assembly jobs that
few Americans would be willing to take – and if they were tempted to do so
with US wages, iPhones would be so expensive that the company would
have difficulty competing (for example, against Chinese mobile phone
manufacturers). If the assembly is instead outsourced where it can be done
efficiently and cheaply, then Americans are able to retain the skilled jobs –
developing the designs, components, software and advertising campaigns –
and bring the big bucks home.
Systems of despair
Everyone is not better off, though, and there is one group of losers who
have shaken my optimism. These are parts of the old working class in
America, especially the middle-aged in the rust belts around the
Appalachians. Since 1999, bad health and mortality have increased rapidly
in this group as a result of suicide, alcohol-related injuries and, above all,
overdoses. Their mortality has increased so much that it is back where it
was in the 1980s. The scholars Anne Case Deaton and Angus Deaton have
summed it up with the uncomfortable but apt concept ‘deaths of despair’.40
This is also the group that has performed the worst in the labour market
during this time. Wages have not kept pace with the rest of the market and
many of them have left the workforce altogether, which in turn has
destabilized families and local communities. It is tempting to blame
globalization. However, a chart of men between the ages of twenty-five and
fifty-four who have left the labour force shows an almost constant increase
since 1965, where it is difficult to discern any effect of deregulation, the
North American free trade agreement (NAFTA) or China’s membership of
the WTO, and where neither boom nor bust affect the long-term trend. In
fact, the proportion of men who dropped out of the labour force increased
more during the good old days 1965–75 than during the entire period 2000–
19.

US men not in labour force 1965–201941
Anne Case and Angus Deaton agree that globalization cannot be the
explanation for deaths from despair: ‘As its name tells us, globalization is
global, as is automation’.42 The entire Western world has made the same
globalization journey, including many countries that are more open to trade
than the United States. How come deaths of despair did not occur there?
Western Europeans do not seem to have been affected and in the United
States we have not seen this increased mortality among Latinos or among
black people (at least not in the first stage), or for that matter among white
people with a college degree. So there is something else going on in this
group that makes their difficult labour market situation particularly serious.
It is not poverty in itself, according to the Deatons. The problems do not
correlate with poverty among whites and cannot explain why the risk of
mortality in all age groups is lower (and continues to fall) for Latinos than
for non-Hispanic whites, even though they are significantly poorer. Nor is it
about inequality. The most unequal states, such as New York and
California, have lower mortality rates. It has to do with a dysfunctional and

increasingly expensive healthcare system. Most people receive health
insurance from their employer (for tax reasons), which means that
companies have an incentive to get rid of the least productive workers and
that the workers lose the insurance if they lose their jobs. Another American
peculiarity is a large increase in the proportion of the population who have
been convicted of a crime and often suffer from discrimination in the labour
market. In healthcare, education and jobs that require a professional licence,
discrimination is sometimes imposed by government authorities. A third
peculiarity is the large proportion of war veterans in the population, who
often suffer from poor physical and mental health.
All these factors have affected ethnic minorities to at least the same
extent. According to the Deatons, one reason why it is still white people
with little education who have had the worst development in the last twenty
years is that the United States has become less racist and that black people
and Latinos have made rapid social progress. This is obviously a very
positive development but can be perceived as threatening for those who
have become accustomed to having a superior status just because they were
born into a certain group. When you’re accustomed to privilege, equality
can feel like oppression, as the saying goes.
Added to the problem is the fact that the US government has often dealt
with the loss of jobs by removing those affected from the workforce, much
more so than countries with a more active labour market policy. Those who
lose their jobs can receive benefits, food stamps, disability benefits, early
retirement and healthcare, which cushion the fall, but most of that support is
dependent on not retraining, taking another kind of job or moving to regions
with stronger economies. They stay in areas that can no longer offer them
any jobs. Of every dollar that the United States gives to the unemployed,
about 99 cents go to getting the person to stay on the couch and only 1 cent
to helping him find a new job.
The American welfare state creates extreme lock-in effects. Of course,
we want those who suffer from unemployment or illness to get some sort of
financial assistance, but if it means that the support disappears the moment
you get a job, you have created a welfare trap. If you take a job, save money

or get married, you will be punished financially. The welfare system is
absurdly rigged to encourage everything that politicians on both the left and
the right say is a destructive lifestyle. It’s not just an American
phenomenon: almost 40 per cent of the unemployed in OECD countries
suffer an 80 per cent marginal tax if they take a job.43
A few years ago, I approached Americans living on welfare to study
their situation. The common denominator was that they felt trapped and
could not understand the system. Chris, a single mother with four children,
said she receives five different forms of compensation and that they are
incomprehensible: ‘All five of those have different rules and regulations
and guidelines for what you can earn or not earn or for what’s counted and
not counted. It’s very complicated to figure out what the sweet spot is of
what I can earn.’ She can lose money by taking a job with a low income,
and if the salary goes up to $30,000 a month, so many benefits fall away
that it was as if she only earned $15,000.
Keith and Monique said they were punished financially for marrying
and moving in together after having children. Overnight, their total benefits
decreased by 55 per cent and it was not certain that Monique would be
allowed to keep her subsidized apartment. ‘A lot of people don’t tell public
assistance about their children’s father,’ said Monique. ‘Sometimes I wish I
would have done the same thing.’
Angel, who has a criminal record and has lived on benefits all his life,
noted that any attempt to save something rings up in the authorities’
registers and results in less assistance. ‘If you don’t want to get cut off, you
take the money and spend it.’ Have you ever wondered how the poor in
inner cities can have such large sets of expensive sneakers? I asked the
question and got the answer that it is a form of savings. An entire wardrobe
of sneakers does not make the authority remove your health insurance or
subsidized apartment. If you get an unexpected expense, you sell a pair of
shoes or go to a ‘sneaker bank’ where you can get a loan with the shoes as
collateral.
I found out that economically devastated areas can often be close to
places where companies are searching for labour. West Virginia was hard

hit but borders the more attractive states of Virginia and Maryland. Crisis-
hit Maine is next door to fast-growing New Hampshire. In previous
generations, the unemployed moved to jobs when an industry closed down,
but that has become increasingly difficult. A combination of building
restrictions and a NIMBY epidemic44 means that it is only possible to build
without objections in areas where no one wants to live. This leads to an
increase in property prices, which means that moving to a new town for
work risks costing you money.
Another obstacle to mobility is that professional licences have become a
way to protect those who already have a job and keep outsiders away. The
proportion of employees covered by laws on licences and credentials has
increased from less than 5 per cent in the 1950s to just over 25 per cent
today. Over 1,100 different professions are regulated in at least one state,
from nurses and opticians to make-up artists and florists. And the
requirements are different from state to state. If you lose your job, it is
difficult, expensive and time-consuming to obtain a special education and
licence to do the exact same thing on the other side of the state border.45
Many reforms are needed to deal with the problem of stay-at-home
labour, both in the United States and in other parts of the world. However,
restricting free trade and competition is not a solution – not only because it
would make us all poorer, but also because it would create more losers.
I am sometimes asked to explain to a person who has lost his job
because of free trade why he has lost out in the name of restructuring. I
frame it like this: perhaps we could save a traditional manufacturing job in,
say, steel production with a tariff. But what would have happened if we did?
We would have saved a job, at least in the short term. We’d have shown
vigour and might be re-elected. That is what you see, as the French
nineteenth-century economist Frédéric Bastiat would have said. What you
don’t see, however, but usually happens afterwards, is something like this:
steel becomes more expensive and struggling companies that use it to
produce their products get fewer sales, so Person A loses a job in that
company. Consumers who face higher prices for everything made of steel
now have less money to spend on other goods and services and then Person

B loses a job when demand is absent in these sectors. In addition, your
tariffs would cause Person C in the exporting country to lose his job and
then there would be less money there to buy from our export companies,
and then Person D would lose a job there. In addition, we would see less
growth and tax revenues generally. So for every person the free trader has to
face and explain why he is losing his job, the protectionist has to look at
around four people in the eye and explain why they are losing their job. Just
because we do not have enough imagination to picture the damage that our
actions can cause further down the line does not mean that it does not exist.
The government can’t remove the pain, it can just move it on. The
problem is that it shifts the burden from the least productive companies to
the most productive ones – those that would have prepared the ground for
more innovative and competitive jobs. We lose the jobs with tariffs too, but
do so from a position of weakness where we cannot create new jobs and do
not have the resources to help those affected. If it had not been a tariff that
protected the job, but a tax-financed contribution, the effect would have
been similar: the state can only create a job by taking resources that would
otherwise have been used to create other jobs.
This is not a hypothetical example but what happens every time
politicians promise to take action to protect domestic jobs. Maybe I was
counting a little low in my example above. A detailed analysis of different
US trade barriers showed that each saved job cost consumers on average six
times more than the average wage in the manufacturing industry. So for
each job saved by protectionism, we lost purchasing power that could have
been used to employ six other workers.46
Britain is right now experiencing the detrimental consequences of a
retreat from open trade. The pursuit of the hardest possible Brexit has left
the country not just outside the EU but also outside the European single
market that Margaret Thatcher once worked so hard to launch. At first,
many overlooked the dramatic consequences of this because free trade only
ended in January 2021. Since then, businesses that were used to freely
exporting to any EU country, have found themselves surrounded by new
trade barriers – what Thatcher once called ‘the insidious ones of differing

national standards, various restrictions on the provision of services,
exclusion of foreign firms from public contracts.’47 As many small
businesses give up in the face of all this red tape, the number of buyer–
seller relationships with Europe has fallen by almost a third. So far, it seems
like Brexit mostly means that bureaucrats take back control from
entrepreneurs and consumers. ‘To deny the downsides of Brexit on trade
with the EU is to deny reality,’ writes Iain Martin, the pro-Brexit columnist,
for The Times.48
The economy as a whole suffers from this. The pound has fallen steeply,
contributing to costlier imports and higher prices. Even though a lower
exchange rate also makes exports cheaper, exports have not recovered after
the pandemic in the way they have for other big European countries.
Business investment also lags behind, despite very generous tax breaks to
drive it up. This will combine to reduce productivity and hold back wages.
Some hoped that Brexit would create a ‘Global Britain’, an open,
deregulated economy trading freely with the whole world. But instead, the
appetite for globalization has declined and the new free trade deals have
mostly just replaced deals Britain already had through the EU. And while a
trade deal with Australia is welcome, it can’t compensate for being part of a
single market of almost half a billion people across the Channel, accounting
for more than half Britain’s trade.
The official forecaster, the Office for Budget Responsibility, estimates
that Brexit will make Britain’s trade intensity 15 per cent smaller in the long
term than it otherwise would have been, and will make the country 4 per
cent poorer. This is roughly £100 billion a year in lost output, depriving the
government of around £40 billion of tax revenue a year. In comparison, Liz
Truss’s proposed cut in the top income tax rate, which spooked markets in
September 2022, would have reduced tax revenue by about £2 billion.
In most discussions about trade, we forget the most important loser of
all from protectionism: the consumer. And the people it affects the most are
low- and middle-income households who spend a larger share of their
income on internationally traded goods, such as clothing, food and

consumer electronics, while spending a smaller share on domestic services
like restaurant visits, real estate and legal services.
According to research published in the Quarterly Journal of Economics,
the richest tenth of British households would lose roughly 10 per cent of
their purchasing power if we stopped all international trade. Maybe they
could afford it. However, the poorest tenth would lose as much as 54 per
cent of an already much smaller purchasing power.49 Each tariff barrier is a
regressive tax that takes from poor consumers and gives to rich producers.
This is a wave of protectionism that wipes out our middle class and our
jobs.

O
4
IN DEFENCE OF THE 1 PER CENT
‘I’m a multi-millionaire, I’m filthy rich. You know why I’m a multi-millionaire? ‘Cause
multi-millions like what I do.’
SOCIALIST FILMMAKER MICHAEL MOORE
ne thing is certain with capitalism: that wealth is not distributed
equally. In recent decades, a small group of super-rich – the 1 per
cent – took the lion’s share and left the rest of us behind.
Why should the capitalists get so much? They are not the ones doing the
work. When IKEA founder Ingvar Kamprad died in 2018, the chairman of
the youth movement of the Swedish Left Party, Henrik Malmrot, who
worked at an IKEA warehouse one summer, was quick to point out: ‘We are
150,000 workers who should share the inheritance.’ IKEA’s value is not
created by Kamprad but by the workers, he argued, and now it is time for
them to ‘take back what he stole from them’.1
It is a fairly extreme notion that you deserve wealth just because you
happened to be in the warehouse at IKEA instead of at a somewhat less
successful furniture company, but the basic attitude is widespread: only
manual work is real, and nothing is created by the person who invents the
business idea, risks money, organizes the work and finds new markets. That
is why socialists are always so amazed when their favourite countries run
out of goods and experience hunger when the government takes over
companies. How come? The country has just as many muscles and brains as
before, it is only the exploiters that have disappeared. And that is the
answer: Venezuela has no Kamprads. That’s why there is nothing to share

there. As the Marxist economist Michał Kalecki concluded in 1962 after
seeing the desperate poverty in then-socialist countries such as India, the
problem is that there are ‘too many exploited and too few exploiters’.2
One of Sweden’s greatest authors, August Strindberg, once shared the
ideas of the young socialists, but he also lived in the heyday of
industrialism and could see with his own eyes that entrepreneurs were of
crucial importance to prosperity. In The Son of a Servant, Strindberg tells
the story of the worker who comes to a poor village and who has an idea.3
He borrows money, buys raw materials and tools and asks peasant girls if
they can help him weave straw and peasant boys if they can sew straw hats,
and suddenly a new business is operational. He pays the workers as agreed,
never misses a payment on his loans and pays for the raw materials and still
manages to make a small profit. That profit incentivizes him to develop
more efficient production, create better designs, find larger markets and
constantly stay one step ahead of the competition. Business is getting better
and better and suddenly the village is flourishing. The workers are also
better off, the hungry are fed, and the worker – who is now a capitalist – is
rich. But one day a spoiled young socialist summer worker comes to the
village (no, Strindberg does not write that, he calls him a ‘Berliner rascal’)
and incites the workers: ‘this capitalist has become rich off your work’, he
is ‘a thief’. He ignores the fact that their work had always been there, and it
was only this new business model that made their work so productive and
valuable to consumers.
In Strindberg’s story, the young socialist succeeds in convincing the
workers to take the hat manufacturer’s money and his machines. Now, no
one is paying them unless they sell something, and no one is constantly on
the lookout for the best raw materials, repairing the machines, streamlining
production or looking for new markets. The villagers continue to work, but
find that the profits and the salaries soon disappear. And no worker ever
came up with the crazy idea of risking their savings to start a factory in the
small village again – a village that soon fell back into poverty and hunger.
Strindberg’s point was that the capitalist’s work is highly productive,
and also that he is the last in line of all those who were enriched by it. If an

owner is to make money, everyone else in the supply chain must first get
theirs: customers have to get a product or service that they value more than
the money they give up. Employees must receive their contractual salary
every month, even if it takes several years before the company succeeds in
selling its product, even if it never succeeds in making a profit. One reason
why most people want to work for an employer instead of on their own is
that few are willing to wait to get paid or to completely forgo wages if the
products do not sell.
In addition, all subcontractors of materials and machinery must be paid
for their deliveries to the company, and the bank has to get their interest
payments regularly. If anything remains of the revenue when employees,
suppliers and lenders have been paid for their efforts, it is called ‘profit’ and
we are very angry when it’s a large sum. In fact, we should be happier the
bigger it is, because it shows that everyone else in the chain has been paid
first and that the company has still succeeded in its ambition to transform
time and resources into something we value. That’s why it’s so frustrating
every time someone says that successful entrepreneurs have to ‘give
something back to society’ in order to compensate for their profits. The fact
that they have made profits is a sign that they have given something to
society.
In a free market, you make a profit if you have given others something
they want, whatever it may be. Sure, I am a millionaire, the slightly
embarrassed left-wing Democrat Bernie Sanders told The New York Times:
‘I wrote a best-selling book. If you write a best-selling book, you can be a
millionaire, too.’4 Profits are not something you take from others, but a
small share you get to keep of the value you create for others. How small a
share? Nobel laureate and economist William Nordhaus has studied the
profits that innovators and entrepreneurs make in addition to the normal
return on investment when they introduce new goods, technologies and
methods into the economy. Nordhaus’s conclusion from fifty years of US
statistics is that these greedy capitalists seize about 2.2 per cent of the social
value of their innovations, despite patent protection and the benefits of
being first to market.5

Just 2.2 per cent! Why so little? Think of it this way: one day someone
will come up with a process that makes microprocessors for half the price.
Who benefits from this? The consumers, of course, but first and foremost
the innovator, because she only needs to lower the price of microprocessors
so much that she is a little below her competitors and yet everyone wants to
buy from her. But soon the process begins to spread, she licenses it to other
producers, others imitate it and still others learn in this way that it is
possible and develop their own methods (and someone soon develops an
even better method). After a while, most producers use the new innovation
and no one earns much more than they did before. But the invention
remains and so does the saving of time and effort, and hence lower prices. It
has now become the profit of the consumer and of humanity. (Despite all
our sometimes justified concerns that patent protection blocks imitation, it
takes less and less time for innovations to spread to other companies and to
consumers.)6
Capitalism 
is 
an 
improbably 
good 
deal 
for 
non-capitalists.
Entrepreneurs take on debt, risk their homes, ignore friends and family and
toil day and night, and if they succeed against all the odds, they get 2.2 per
cent of the profits. Meanwhile the rest of us who lie on the couch and watch
films get almost 98 per cent, in lower prices for goods and services, and
therefore increased purchasing power. This is a beneficial form of
inequality, and the greater the profits made by entrepreneurs, the more our
98 per cent share will be worth. On the other hand, 2.2 per cent of multi-
billion profits are enough to become a new Ingvar Kamprad, Bill Gates or
Elon Musk, and the hope of joining them can inspire many.
Sven Norfeldt, one of Sweden’s most successful entrepreneurs, once
described the market to me as a minefield. Over there, on the other side,
there is new knowledge, capacities, products and services that could enrich
the whole of society. But our path there is blocked by a minefield of
uncertainty, technological dead-ends, unpredictable consumers, shifting
business cycles, interest rate changes, capricious policies and plain bad
luck. We have no idea where the mines are located. The only way to find a
way to the other side is to get as many people as possible to venture out.

This increases the chance that someone will find a safe path that we can all
follow.
Nothing can inspire people to make this risky journey of discovery like
the hope of getting a substantial share of the profits if they succeed. Most
will hit a mine, but a few actually get there. It is not always a fair process,
and it’s not always the ‘right’ person who reaches the other side unharmed –
not always the person who worked hardest or is the most sympathetic.
Maybe it’s simply someone who happened to be lucky. But for the rest of
us, what’s important is that a path is found at all, one that we can follow to
the other side and then start tackling the next minefield. This is the only
way humanity can move forward.
Grandpa’s grandma’s grandpa’s grandma’s time machine
Innovations can still create massive income and wealth differences. If
ordinary people’s average salary increases by a couple of per cent per year
while a small group gets a couple of per cent of trillions of trillions, it might
soon feel like we live in completely different worlds. That small group of
people make so much money per second that they would lose money by
stopping to bend down and pick up a lost hundred-dollar bill.
Such differences are hard to stomach. But maybe we should make an
effort. Imagine for a moment, like US economist Donald Boudreaux asks us
to in one of his books, that your grandpa’s grandma’s grandpa’s grandma
was transported by a time machine from 1800 to 2023 and happened to end
up in the home of one of the super-rich – let’s say Bill Gates.7 What do you
think she would find most amazing and enviable in his everyday life?
Think for a moment before reading on.
What did you come up with? I personally think she would first note that
he does not worry about getting food on the table for himself and his family,
or that there is fresh food from around the world rather than just potatoes
and porridge. And she would be amazed that he could get safe water just by
turning a tap – water that he has not pumped up himself. Even hot water for

showering or bathing. On top of that, he can send away the family’s faeces
to a very safe distance – just by pressing a flush button!
Bill Gates seems to have his teeth left even though he is sixty-seven
years old, can take a pill to get rid of headaches and can even get a new hip
joint or liver if he needs it. When a previously unknown coronavirus hits
the world, he can get a vaccine against it within a year. All three of his
children are alive, even though they were born many decades ago and seem
to expect to live to be in their eighties.
Bill Gates has plenty of comfortable clothes, and after he’s worn them
he can make them clean again by stuffing them into a big box. He can make
every room bright, even in the middle of the night, by pressing the right
place on the wall. He can hold up a small box against something he finds
interesting or beautiful and thus generate an almost perfect image of it.
Unbelievably, he can use the same little box to look at moving images from
the other side of the planet, even in real time. Even though he does not have
a symphony orchestra at home, he can listen to masterpieces by Beethoven
and Mozart any time he likes or even obscure artists such as VNV Nation
and Clan of Xymox – over and over again. The same device seems to be
able to answer any question he can come up with, from how to get the weed
out of your lawn to who is the richest person in the world.8
When your great-great-great-grandmother hears that Bill Gates can also
go wherever he wants in a metal construction that travels faster than a horse
gallops and that he can fly to other continents in just a few hours with a
tubular variant with wings, then she would probably be convinced that she
is dreaming. It feels like Gates does not live like a king but as a magician.
This is the amazing life that the world’s super-rich lead. But so do you.
That’s what’s most remarkable about this thought experiment. The most
impressive things that separate your ancestors’ lives from today’s super-rich
are mostly things that you also have access to. Of course, there are
differences. Gates has his own metal tube that he can fly in while you have
to share yours with others, and his house with hot water, water closets and
symphonies is much bigger than yours. But the super-rich of your
ancestors’ time also had huge mansions and armies of servants. The

amazing new things that have emerged since then you actually share with
the super-rich. I would even dare to suggest that the supply of the most
important goods, services and amenities is now more evenly distributed
than at any other point in the history of mankind.
Why is that the case? Because Bill Gates, Jeff Bezos, Sam Walton,
Ingvar Kamprad, and many, many others have been allowed to become
super-rich by developing all these goods, services and amenities and
creating business models and processes that have reduced them in price so
much that they became available to the general public. They have got lots
of zeros after the dollar sign in their bank account, but the rest of us got a
better, simpler, more comfortable life that would have made grandpa’s
grandma’s grandpa’s grandma faint from rapture.
The 1 per cent
But how many of the super-rich are like Gates and Kamprad? Aren’t they
more often people who sit on large inheritances and passive incomes? The
French economist Thomas Piketty has shown that income from interest and
gains on capital grow faster than growth (r > g) and that inherited properties
just grow and grow until a small elite has almost everything. In the
acclaimed Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Piketty therefore advocates
what he himself calls ‘confiscatory taxes’ to squeeze the rich. He has no
illusion that these taxes would generate large revenues. The important thing
is that they end the big incomes. In that case, one must be very sure that the
generation of these incomes do not add anything important to society, such
as innovation and growth. Piketty is not.
His book has been praised because he is writing more about the
entrepreneurs in the novels of Austen and Balzac than about their modern
equivalents, and I personally found it quite a fun read, but he understands
novels better than entrepreneurship. He admits that ‘I know virtually
nothing’ about how the richest actually became rich. He just assumes that
there are no pure hero stories but that everyone is somewhere on ‘a

continuum’ between value creation and pure theft. Piketty writes that ‘the
courts cannot resolve every case of ill-gotten gains or unjustified wealth’,
so taxes become ‘a less blunt and more systematic instrument for dealing
with the question’.9
This is completely absurd, both in his disregard of businesses’ social
contributions and his belief that you should demand higher taxes if you are
robbed instead of calling the police. His position is almost a caricature of a
French intellectual sitting comfortably in his ivory tower, taking pride in
ignoring what’s going on down there, in garages, shops and factories, and
how that might be related to the fact he lives in history’s richest civilization.
Piketty happens to confirm my prejudice. Since he turned twenty-five, he
writes, ‘I have not left Paris, except for a few short trips.’10
At the same time, Piketty states an explicit reason to ignore the
importance of free enterprise. He believes that even entrepreneurs who
profit from their own ideas and work eventually become a ‘rentier’ –
someone who can live on interest and returns alone, for r > g – and then the
family’s position is reproduced through inheritance. When he looks at
Forbes’ list of billionaires, he seems to see that over a certain limit,
inherited properties ‘grow at extremely high rates’, much faster than the
average fortune. Therefore, they will leave the rest of us behind.11
That is strange because when other researchers look at Forbes’ list of
400 billionaires in 1982, they find that only sixty-nine of them or their heirs
remain in 2014, and their conclusion is that ‘dynastic wealth accumulation
is simply a myth.’12 Another researcher looked at the individuals who
remained on the Forbes list between 1987 and 2014 and the 327 who left it,
and calculated that their average annual wealth increase was a paltry 2.4 per
cent. That is only a third of what they would have received if they had
invested the money in a passive US index fund during the same period.13
Far from accumulating more and more, the richest are losing out in terms of
overall wealth growth due to philanthropy and taxes, consumption, poor
investment decisions and, for some of them, hefty fines (because a few
really are crooks).

What is striking when looking at the Forbes list is the absence of names
such as Rockefeller, Carnegie, Morgan, Mellon, Hearst, Stanford and
Vanderbilt – the super-rich families called ‘robber barons’ in the late
nineteenth century. When you follow rich families, it turns out that around
70 per cent of their wealth disappears in the second generation. After the
third generation, as much as 90 per cent of the wealth is gone.14
Piketty has made an elementary mistake: he has only focused on the
most successful on the Forbes list right now – the likes of Bill Gates – and
how they have fared, while forgetting those whose fortunes have
diminished and completely ignoring those who have fallen off the list. It’s a
bit like stating that humans are immortal because you’ve limited your
observation to those who are still out and about in the city.
Interestingly, the year 1982 – a time when the Western world was
exceptionally equal – is more reminiscent of Piketty’s nightmare of dynastic
empires than today’s capitalism. Of the hundred richest people on Forbes’
list, sixty had then inherited their money. As many as ten of them were heirs
to DuPont’s nearly 200-year-old fortune. This is what it looks like when
taxes are high, most people are employed and few start new companies:
equality looks impressive and few new assets are created. In that case, old
money stays strong. By 2020, the number of heirs on Forbes’ list had more
than halved, with only twenty-seven of the hundred richest people having
primarily inherited their fortune.15 The proportion of US billionaires’
inherited assets has decreased continuously, from about 50 per cent in 1976
to 35 per cent in 2001, to just over 30 per cent in 2014.16 The proportion of
the ten richest per cent who are also in the top ten in earned income – and
thus seem to accumulate their wealth at work rather than at the club – has
doubled since 1980.
In fact, Piketty is also wrong in his overall thesis. The share of incomes
made up of capital gains has indeed grown since the 1970s, yet this is not
due to wealthy capital owners but is mainly explained by housing prices.
They have increased by an absurd amount but are also more evenly
distributed than other forms of capital since home ownership is more
equally distributed than ownership of stocks. Excluding housing, the share

of capital income has decreased somewhat since the 1950s.17 According to
calculations by the scholar Branko Milanović, who is deeply concerned
about inequality and wants to tax the rich harder, the distribution of capital
income has been relatively stable in the United States and United Kingdom
since 1975. (Given how obsessed everyone is with Reagan and Thatcher, it
may be worth pointing out that the distribution does not look so different
there than in countries like Germany and Norway.)18
As more people make money instead of inheriting it, the fortunes of the
super-rich do not grow ‘at extremely high rates’ but more slowly than the
average, and capital income does not grow faster than growth if one
excludes the housing market. We also have to remind ourselves of
grandpa’s grandma’s grandpa’s grandma’s time machine. Inequality in
dollars and cents is not the same as inequality in access to the good things
in life. A sign of this is that the increased economic inequality in the
Western world has not been followed by increased inequality in the
subjective feeling of well-being. On the contrary: inequality in happiness
has actually decreased significantly in fast-growing Western countries, even
where income inequality has increased at the same time.19
Another reason why happiness inequality does not increase might
simply be that we have exaggerated even inequality in dollars and cents,
since most studies look at market income and exclude the taxes and most of
the transfers that are partly implemented to reduce inequality. The US
Census Bureau claims that the top quintile receives 16.7 times as much
income as the bottom quintile. However, if you include all the taxes that
mostly reduce incomes at the top and the transfers that add more at the
bottom, the difference is reduced from 16.7 to just four times as much.20
Globally, of course, inequality is more conspicuous, but thanks to the
fact that low- and middle-income countries have grown faster than rich
countries during the era of trade liberalization and international supply
chains, global income inequality has decreased for the first time since the
Industrial Revolution. This is a monumental change, and it has been
dizzyingly quick. Betwee n 2000 and 2018 the global Gini coefficient (a
measure of income inequality, rated from 1 to 100) decreased from seventy

to sixty points, thus erasing a hundred-year build-up of global inequality in
less than two decades.21
Nor have we seen a rapid increase in global inequality in assets. I’m not
overly pleased with Credit Suisse’s popular annual compilations of global
assets. A lot of it is pure guesswork and, because they do not use adjusted
figures for the purchasing power of the local currency, they underestimate
the prosperity of poor countries. Dramatic annual shifts are often simply a
reflection of changes in the exchange rate. But it is interesting that these
data also show that the share of the world’s financial assets among the
wealthiest decreased slightly between 2000 and 2020. The richest tenth
decreased its share from 89 to 82 per cent and the share of the top 1 per cent
decreased from 48 to 45 per cent despite the incredible increase in asset
prices during this period.23
Global inequality 1950–201822

Nevertheless, the differences are huge. Every year, the aid organization
Oxfam works hard to come up with a new calculation of how dramatically
skewed global distribution is, based on Credit Suisse’s reports. Recently,
Oxfam announced that the world’s 2,153 billionaires own more than the
world’s 4.6 billion poorest people combined.24 It sounds like complete
madness, and they are making it seem as if the world’s problems could be
solved if only the rich shared some of their wealth.
One should know that the reason why the contrast seems so sharp is that
the poorest have hardly any financial net assets like stocks and bonds. There
is not much left of the poorest’s assets when you deduct all the debts they
have from this amount. Oxfam also includes indebted Westerners who have
just received their college degree in their calculation – according to their
method, about a fifth of the world’s poorest 10 per cent are in Europe and
North America. So when Oxfam adds up the total assets of the poorest 4.6
billion, they first deduct student debt and housing loans in rich countries
from the assets. I used to tell Oxfam that with their way of counting, my
daughter, whose piggy bank contained a total fortune of about $20, was
richer than two billion people combined.
But ignore that for a moment. Maybe the poor of the world could be
helped if the rich shared their fortunes? What if we simply distributed the
billionaires’ assets to these 4.6 billion? If we somehow managed to avoid
the problem that all the world’s stock exchanges and most companies would
collapse when we tried to sell these unrealized gains, it would give
everyone almost $1,900. That’s not peanuts. It would increase the annual
income of the poorest 4.6 billion by almost 60 per cent, but unfortunately
only for a year, then the money would run out – at the cost of eliminating
financial incentives for entrepreneurship, investment and innovation
worldwide.
Therefore, let’s say that instead we give the 4.6 billion people the return
on capital so that they receive an annual income boost. We expropriate all
billionaires’ money and invest it in an index fund, and then we assume,
optimistically, an annual return with reinvested dividends that is adjusted
for inflation following what we have had in the last twenty successful years

in the United States. If all goes well, then each of the world’s 4.6 billion
poorest will receive an extra 32 cents a day (before tax). In that case, we
will increase the average income level of the world’s poor by roughly 4 per
cent. That is not to be sniffed at, but it does not directly solve all the
problems of the world.
It is also, fascinatingly, less of an increase than they receive on the
market every year under normal circumstances. The poorest half of the
world population saw their average incomes increase by roughly 6 per cent
annually from 2008–18. The poorest tenth increased it by almost 8 per cent
every year.25 That is compounded growth: you increase last year’s income
by 8 per cent and next year you increase that new, higher sum total by 6 per
cent, and so on. It is not just an extra 32 cents every year. It is through such
steady growth that poverty is reduced in the long term – not by
redistributing the prosperity we already have but by creating more of it, by
investing in new technology and better methods. That does not tend to
happen in countries that expropriate the wealth of the rich and successful,
but it does in the countries where poor people can become billionaires if
they have a successful idea. As Venezuela’s Hugo Chávez showed, even
$1,000 billion does not go very far if it is not constantly reinvested
productively.
As Churchill stated in a parliamentary debate in October 1945: ‘The
inherent vice of capitalism is the unequal sharing of blessings. The inherent
virtue of socialism is the equal sharing of miseries.’
Does inequality kill?
Take the London Underground train eastwards from Green Park on the
Jubilee Line, and the average life expectancy for someone born in London
drops by one year for every two stops. If you travel northbound from Hyde
Park Corner to Holloway Road, a fifteen-minute ride on the Piccadilly Line,
life expectancy decreases by eleven years.26

Books like The Spirit Level and The Killing Fields of Inequality argue
that it is not just poverty that is the problem. Inequality in itself creates
status stress and health issues. Therefore it is not enough to fight poverty;
we must also fight great wealth.
Angus Deaton, the Nobel laureate who has done so much to focus the
world on deaths of despair in the United States, is very critical of such
research: ‘[I]t is not true that income inequality itself is a major determinant
of population health… it is low incomes that are important, not inequality,
and there is no evidence that making the rich richer, however undesirable
that may be on other grounds, is hazardous to the health of the poor or their
children, provided that their own incomes are maintained.’27 In his book
Deaths of Despair, written with Anne Case Deaton, he also points out that
inequality is a ‘false trail’ in the debate: ‘those in despair are in despair
because of what is happening to their own lives and to the communities in
which they live, not because the top 1 per cent got richer’.28
Almost all examples that are popular in the debate can be explained by
the fact that unequal countries have on average more poverty, and it is
poverty – not income difference – that undermines health. Unequal US
states have, on average, a larger African-American population, which has
worse health than other groups at all income levels due to a long history of
racism and inferior healthcare.
Along London Underground lines, income differences are big, but even
there the causality is contested. Income is often less important than the
lifestyle it is associated with, as the Swedish author Fredrik Segerfeldt has
noted.29 Those who lack education smoke more, eat more unhealthily and
exercise less, but not because they have less money. Cigarettes are
expensive, and you can take a walk for free. A major reason for differences
in life expectancy is that smoking is four times more common in the most
deprived areas of England than those living in the least deprived areas.
These differences are more related to the fact that it has become a status
symbol in the middle and upper class to exercise, think about diet and live a
healthy life. It is now embarrassing to not take care of oneself, and social
stigma means such habits spread fast. It is more difficult to change the

culture of others through government dictate, no matter how much social
engineers would like to do so. But there is actually one thing that seems to
work: in 2016, American researchers in The Journal of the American
Medical Association discovered that low-income earners have better health
if they live in cities with many high-income earners.30
It’s a fascinating finding. Seeing people with higher incomes, better
housing and a fancy lifestyle every day was assumed to make one status-
stressed, humiliated and ill. But it turns out that it makes one feel better and
live longer than being surrounded by people at the same income level.
Why? One of the researchers behind the report speculates that it is because
habits are contagious: ‘So poor people living near rich people may pick up a
lot of their habits. Some of these habits – say, pretentious vocabulary –
aren’t likely to affect one’s health. Others – working out – will definitely
have a positive impact. Indeed, poor people living near rich people exercise
more, smoke less, and are less likely to suffer from obesity.’31
When does someone write the book Inequality Saves Lives?
Not all super-rich!
This does not mean that inequality is desirable as such. Inequality is good if
it arises because a person creates something that makes her and other
people’s lives better. Unfortunately, not all inequality is due to such good
processes – sometimes it is due to the opposite. This is often the case in
authoritarian and corrupt states around the world. Russia has become one of
the world’s most unequal countries through the elite’s institutionalized theft
from the people. But the problem of ugly inequality also exists in
democratic market economies.
When I fought against the anti-globalization movement twenty years
ago, black-clad left-wing activists and henna-dyed hippies had an
unexpected ally among their financiers: the conservative textile magnate
Roger Milliken. His generosity towards free trade opponents across the
political spectrum had a simple explanation: his business model was

dependent on high tariff barriers that prevented poor countries from selling
clothes to the American market.
Capitalism is based on companies competing for the favour of
consumers with better goods and services, but unfortunately many
companies choose instead to compete for the favour of politicians to get
subsidies, tariffs, regulatory benefits and bailouts so that they do not have to
worry about consumers. It is not free market capitalism, it is crony
capitalism – or, as it is sometimes called, socialism for the rich – and it is
one of the biggest problems in our economy. Partly because it gives one
group of people the legal right to put its hand in our wallets, and partly
because it helps non-competitive business models to survive and drag down
the entire economy.
Before the pandemic, when making a documentary for American public
television, I travelled around America to study this phenomenon – from
tariff protection for steel companies to restrictions on building so as not to
disturb the view (or value) of the lucky ones who already live in the most
attractive areas. I saw how large food companies receive huge subsidies for
the cultivation of maize, wheat, soybeans, sugar and cotton – paid by
consumers and by the farmers who grow fruit and vegetables that are not
subsidized. I met experts who estimate that about 70 per cent of the
subsidies go to the 10 per cent largest agricultural holdings. This is not just
a US phenomenon, of course. OECD countries spend approximately $300
billion on farm subsidies annually – almost ten billion a day.
Among the most successful American welfare queens are the brothers
Alfonso and José Fanjul in Florida, who receive around $65 million in
subsidies for their sugar empire annually. They use part of that money to
buy political support for a continued stream of subsidies in their direction.
The best that can be said about them is that at least they don’t contribute to
political polarization. During the irreconcilable presidential election
campaign in 2016, the Fanjul brothers protected themselves by holding one
fundraiser for Trump and one for Clinton.
I witnessed a shameless attempt by large food companies to regulate a
small family farm to death. The state of Indiana allows small-scale farmers

to slaughter their chickens on the farm, provided they use a safe and proven
technology, so that they don’t have to rely on large, centralized
slaughterhouses. But when Hawkins Family Farm began to achieve greater
success and managed to sell its chicken to upscale restaurants, big
agriculture persuaded many state politicians to remove the exemption and
ban Hawkins chickens. It was not only the chicken industry but also the
pork and steak industry that lobbied hard for the proposal, which they saw
as a chance to stop smaller competitors overnight. This time the proposal
was stopped by angry popular opinion but, as Zach Hawkins said, the most
common result of such processes is for ‘the small farmers to lose the battle’.
The more heavily businesses are regulated, the greater is the business
community’s legitimate interest in lobbying to protect itself against clumsy
or excessive regulations. They must invest more and more in lobbying and
political contacts as a form of self-defence. Silicon Valley’s tech companies
once took pride in not lobbying politically, but they soon found out that if
you are not at the table, you are on the menu, and felt compelled to join the
game. Now their lists of vacancies are full of titles such as ‘public policy
manager’ and ‘director of government affairs’. Then, of course, comes the
temptation and the opportunity to lobby to tailor the regulations to one’s
own business and to stop competitors. Be on your guard when a business
interest says there is chaos in the market and that it would probably be best
for everyone with a little more order and fewer actors. ‘When buying and
selling are controlled by legislation, the first things to be bought and sold
are legislators,’ as P. J. O’Rourke has observed.32
Companies also turn tax rules to their advantage. As a Swede, I had the
dubious pleasure of observing how the Swedish furniture giant IKEA
opened a large store in Memphis, Tennessee, on condition that they
received a tax deduction of over $9.5 million. Many large companies that
are considering establishing themselves in a new region use this tactic
against political assemblies: ‘What do we get if we come?’ When I met two
local furniture companies who did not receive any corresponding
deductions, they asked why they should be forced to pay higher taxes so
that their rival could compete more fiercely.

Then of course we have the financial markets, full of banks and
financial companies that count on taxpayers saving them when they fail,
and traders who think that the central bank must avoid any risk of a bear
market with promises of low interest rates and increased liquidity. This has
perverted the stock market. It is supposed to value companies, and when,
say, trade wars, pandemics and recessions hurt those companies, stocks
should fall in value, yet instead they have often increased because central
banks respond to every crisis by lowering interest rates and pumping more
money into the economy. This creates speculative bubbles and makes it all
the more painful when they finally burst. At any given stage, it is
understandable why central banks act as they do. When a housing bubble is
punctured or companies face a debt crisis, the consequences can be dire.
The only problem is that the attempts to save people from the consequences
of their folly is to fill the world with fools.
To help the economy recover from the dotcom bubble, interest rates
were cut drastically in 2001. No one made money from savings any more,
so they searched for exotic bonds in the only sector that rating agencies and
governments thought bomb-proof: the housing market. This gave rise to the
global financial crisis of 2008, which I wrote about in my book Financial
Fiasco. To get out of that crisis, greater stimuli and even negative interest
rates were introduced.33 Indebtedness therefore increased even more, not
least for house buyers and companies with low credit ratings – the only
ones who paid any interest to speak of. When the pandemic struck, of
course, interest rates on these risky loans rose sharply, and to prevent a
wave of defaults, central banks bought even more, which is in effect a
subsidy of hedge funds and others who have speculated in the loans least
likely to be repaid. Now this unrestrained monetary expansion has pushed
stock and housing prices to imaginary levels and the fall might be even
deeper once we return to a somewhat normal situation.
Again, the behaviour is understandable. Nobody wants a crisis to be
deeper than it needs to be, and once you have subsidized huge risks it
becomes even more expensive when they fail. The problem is that in this
way the state has annulled the market forces. If you just get rich enough and

are sufficiently important for the financial markets, gravity will shift and
you can only fall upwards. The financial upper class that owns assets, such
as shares and condominiums in the big cities, have been enriched, while
most people have to pay for this in inflation and more public debt.
Unfortunately, a substantial part of the growing inequality in recent decades
is not due to the kind of innovations and investments I wrote about earlier
in this chapter but to the fact that governments coddle speculators.
This policy encourages irresponsible behaviour. Capitalism is a profit
and loss system – profits when you do what’s right, losses when you do
what’s wrong. The losses are absolutely crucial signals. Failing companies
should be cleared out and capital transferred from them to more competitive
business models, not given artificial respiration. If companies and
speculators know they will be saved if their investments fail, their only
driving force is to increase their leverage, seek increasingly exotic assets,
ever higher risks and multiply their efforts, aware that they can always send
losses to the government. In this way, we systematize mispricing of risk and
stockpile more and more bad investments in the economy.
One consequence is that the economy is becoming increasingly
zombified – full of business models that are the living dead. A study by the
Bank for International Settlements (BIS) – an international financial
institution owned by central banks – defines a zombie company as a
company that has such meagre profits that it cannot meet interest payments
and has a low valuation that suggests poor prospects. The share of listed
companies that are zombies has increased rapidly in rich countries – from
less than one in twenty in the late 1980s to one in six companies before the
pandemic. There is reason to believe that this is an underestimate, as many
problem companies are unlisted and the pandemic has also increased their
number.34
One reason why zombie companies have become much more common,
especially since the global financial crisis, is the prolonged era of extremely
low interest rates. This made it less interesting for banks (which also face
low borrowing costs) to force them into bankruptcy, which would also force
the banks to record a loss and risk entering into a long-running dispute over

assets. Zombie companies find it much easier to sell bonds in a market that
the central banks has inflated. So they stumble on and tie up capital and
labour that would otherwise have gone to more energetic newcomers in the
industry.
The BIS review shows that an increase in the proportion of zombie
companies by one percentage point reduces productivity growth in the
economy by 0.1 percentage points. In that case, it would mean that the
zombification since the mid-1990s has reduced productivity growth by one
percentage point – a large part of the growth problem in Western
economies.
Socialism for capitalists is no better than other forms of socialism, and
few reforms could be more important than once again making capitalism a
system of profit and loss. The market-liberal logic is merciless: either a
business is competitive and so does not need support, or it is not
competitive and so doesn’t deserve support.

A
5
MONOPOLY OR MINECRAFT?
‘If you care about democracy, you need to break up the monopolies. If you care about
the economy, same thing.’
TUCKER CARLSON
lright, you might object, perhaps there are examples of entrepreneurs
who become super-rich by working hard to give consumers the
goods and services they have been longing for. But what if large
companies, by virtue of their size, can stay in control of large segments of
their market and pressure suppliers and employees into submission? And
what about tech companies, who can use their dominance to obtain more
and more information about us, and use it to control the way we spend our
time and to silence voices they don’t like? We don’t seek them out, they are
just there, everywhere, and the more we use their products the more
psychologically hooked and emotionally drained we become.
When I wrote In Defence of Global Capitalism, I described a situation
where the dominance of the big companies decreased. That was true then
but it’s not true any more. In the entire OECD area, market concentration
has increased. Some large companies are taking over ever larger parts of the
national markets, and they can set prices that are ever higher above the
marginal cost – the cost to produce one additional unit of a product or a
service. In a high-profile report, Barack Obama’s Council of Economic
Advisers showed that between 1997 and 2012 revenues had been
concentrated in fewer and fewer large companies in ten of thirteen US
sectors.1 It conjures up the image of powerful monopolies that are

devouring more local markets. Many ha ve linked this development to
disappointing productivity gains in Western economies – the problem of
getting more output from the input, such as labour or capital.
Before we examine whether it is time to worry about the dominance of
big companies, let’s start with the question of why we should worry about
monopolies. The traditional fear is that companies that dominate a market
can limit product development and supply, raise prices and lower wages,
because consumers and employees have nowhere else to go. If we were to
see such results, all our alarm bells should ring.
As I showed in the previous chapter, there are such examples. There are
plenty of companies that make sure politicians keep their competitors at a
safe distance so they can continue to destroy capital and productivity. But
that is not the dominant trend. On the contrary, it is large companies that
invest the most in new business methods, research, development and
innovations.2 In addition, they reduce prices more often than they raise
them. Companies such as IKEA and Walmart do not primarily base their
strong positions on tax deductions but on efficient production and logistics
systems that allow them to sell their products cheaper than anyone else.
Many in the tech industry even give them away for free. And far from using
their position to pay lower wages, on average, companies pay more the
bigger they are. US companies with more than 1,000 employees pay about
twice as much as companies with fewer than a hundred employees.3
This means there must be something wrong with the new monopoly
narrative. What that is becomes evident when you look at the extent to
which the market share is concentrated in a small number of firms at
different geographical levels. Then you see that market concentration
increases nationally but actually decreases locally and regionally. It sounds
contradictory but is two different ways of looking at the same change. If
there is only one cafe in your village and suddenly a Starbucks opens, this
means that the concentration decreases locally, but it increases nationally
because Starbucks is already the largest cafe chain. So what looks like
increased monopolism nationally may locally mean greater choice and

increased competition. And that is good news because we consumers live in
a local environment, not in an aggregated national table.
Economists Esteban Rossi-Hansberg and Chang-Tai Hsieh estimate that
about 93 per cent of increased concentration in the United States is due to
large companies having established themselves in more places. This is
mainly a new set of retailers that have succeeded in the difficult task of
increasing productivity in the service sector. Innovative business models
and large investments in data processing have made it possible for them to
quickly and smoothly adapt their methods and offerings to changing
demand geographically and over time. This is a more likely explanation for
the increasing concentration than the usual notion that it is due to a
relaxation of US competition law. The pattern is the same in other OECD
countries, including in the EU, where competition law has been tightened.4
This explains many of the paradoxes that have given academics so
much headache. The United States’ productivity growth peaked in 1996–
2005, one percentage point above the historical average, and that happens to
be the period when market concentration increased most rapidly.5 The fact
that productivity growth has fallen since then has to do more with the
zombie companies than the superstar firms. The latter have grown so large
because they are more efficient, which explains why increased dominance
on paper can be combined with being more productive. Their investment in
information technology is very costly but can then provide cheap unit cost,
which means they can set prices that are higher above their marginal cost
than other companies can, while still giving customers lower prices. Rossi-
Hansberg and Hsieh refer to it as an ‘industrial revolution in services’.6
These are not some lazy monopolists who are slowing down the
economy (although there are some like that). These are creative
entrepreneurs who increase the pace so much that others do not keep up. It
is not ‘monopoly capitalism’, where one gains by simply taking up more
and more limited space and taking more of people’s pay cheques.7 It is
rather Minecraft capitalism, an open environment, where other players are
not primarily opponents but partners, where you extract and collect
resources, acquire ever better tools and, on your own or with others, stack

blocks to build increasingly ingenious constructions, and in that way make
the whole game more beautiful, interesting and exciting for others.
We used to be concerned about monopolies because they would serve
consumers poorly. But if companies become large because they are better,
that’s another matter. Of course, they are a threat to other companies, but
that’s the way it should be. Economic development presupposes that more
productive and innovative companies beat the others. I know what you’re
thinking: how fun is it with Starbucks, Tescos and H&Ms everywhere?
Shouldn’t there be room for eccentric, local alternatives? I can understand
that frustration. Few things make my blood boil as much as when my
charming favourite cafe is replaced by a streamlined chain serving some
vanilla-bullshit-latte-cappa thing. But if the charming places are as
charming as we say they are, we will express this with our purchasing
power and then they will have no problem flourishing, even next to the
chains. If, on the other hand, we choose not to go there, it means that our
complaint was just theoretical, and so we have no right to whine about how
society changes because that change is us.
In the long run, other companies will learn from these large companies
and start to compete. Before we know it, many of the big ones will be swept
away. And if they ever take advantage of the dominance they have created
using low prices and good service and instead raise prices and worsen the
service, that will be the blood in the water that signals for the competition to
attack. Today, the dominant companies may look unbeatable, but companies
always do that just before they fall. Capitalism is merciless against
capitalists who do not deliver. When I wrote In Defence of Global
Capitalism twenty years ago, I rhetorically asked how many people
remembered that the world’s largest mobile phone manufacturer, Nokia,
‘just a few years ago, was a small Finnish firm manufacturing motor tyres
and boots?’ Today, the question is rather how many people remember that
Nokia was the world’s largest mobile phone manufacturer in 2001.
Only fifty-one of the companies on the Fortune 500 list of the largest
US companies in 2020 have been on the list since it was started in 1955.

This means that almost 90 per cent of the largest companies have gone
bankrupt, been acquired, just dropped out or closed shop.8
For obvious reasons, established companies always fight hard to protect
and develop the business model that has made them successful. However,
this makes it difficult for them to develop new innovations that would
cannibalize sales of their own products. Business history abounds with
examples of companies that dominated the market and actually had all the
technical expertise to take the next step. IBM should have developed fast
personal computers, Kodak the digital camera, Sony the digital music
player, Lego Minecraft, and Blockbuster video streaming. But they were a
little too fond of their old markets and therefore missed the next big thing.
The Austrian economist Ludwig von Mises said that the reason why
critics of the market believe it is synonymous to corporate power is that we
can all see that entrepreneurs and capitalists are at the helm and control the
economic ship:
‘The direction of all economic affairs is in the market society a task
of the entrepreneurs. Theirs is the control of production. They are at
the helm and steer the ship. A superficial observer would believe
that they are supreme. But they are not. They are bound to obey
unconditionally the captain’s orders. The captain is the consumer.
Neither the entrepreneurs nor the farmers nor the capitalists
determine what has to be produced. The consumers do that. If a
businessman does not strictly obey the orders of the public as they
are conveyed to him by the structure of market prices, he suffers
losses, he goes bankrupt, and is thus removed from his eminent
position at the helm. Other men who did better in satisfying the
demand of the consumers replace him.’9
The most important anti-trust policy is to trade freely and keep markets
open so that others who could steer the ship better are able to compete.
When the Obama Council of Economic Advisers concluded that US
markets saw increasing levels of concentration, it made a beginner’s error

by looking only at goods produced in the United States. This meant, for
example, that it looked like Motorola had 100 per cent market share in
mobile phones because it was the only company that manufactured them
within the country’s borders. They analysed a market where there were no
iPhones, Samsungs or Huaweis.10 Two central bank economists looked at
market dominance in US industries in 1992–2012 but also added goods that
consumers bought from abroad. Then it turned out that the entire increase in
concentration disappeared. The market share of the twenty largest
companies decreased.11
How much did you lie today?
Was that a bit too much? Sounds like I’m idealizing corporations? As if the
big bullies are just good entrepreneurs with the public interest in mind? In
that case, I have not made myself clear. I know that some will be tempted to
lie and deceive, and I know perfectly well that there are thieves and bandits
hiding among the companies. That is why we must have free markets. Had
we always been able to rely solely on their goodwill, we could have offered
them monopoly power and tariff protection. It is precisely because we
cannot count on their goodwill that we need to control them with free
competition and consumer choice, as well as an independent legal system
and free media. Capitalism is our way to keep capitalists under our control.
That does not stop us from regularly discovering scandals in the
business world, such as Volkswagen’s manipulated emissions tests,
Theranos’ fraudulent blood tests or the collapse of Sam Bankman-Fried’s
crypto exchange FTX. At the same time, such scams are getting so much
attention, and causing such a strong market reaction, because they are
exceptions. There is a built-in protection against crooks in the market:
businesses are voluntary collaborations based on trust; no one wants to
collaborate with someone who does not inspire trust. That is not always
enough, because confidence tricksters use our limited information against
us. Low-cost airlines continue to sell airline tickets with attractive flight

times, which they then systematically change to an unearthly hour on
Monday morning (didn’t you read the small print?). Unscrupulous loan
sharks obscure their default interest rate and use the bailiff as if it were a
branch of business. And the customer service of some companies is so
chronically understaffed that you can never ask for your money back. Not
every businessman is a hero.
However, economist Tyler Cowen poses an interesting question to
assess the reliability of entrepreneurship. Sure, he notes, companies lie but
the question is: do they lie as much as normal people do? That is not a
given, because we are not always in line with the truth. On average, we lie
about twice in a ten-minute conversation, usually to our loved ones. Or look
at our dating profiles online: according to one survey, 53 per cent admit that
they have lied in their profile (and should any hardened liar refuse to admit
a lie, this is of course an underestimate). Our profile pictures are so often
from a bygone era (ten years and ten pounds ago) that many platforms have
begun to demand time-stamped photos. And don’t even get me started on
the CVs we show to potential employers. One recruiter estimates that 40 per
cent contain pure lies, 76 per cent improve their history and 59 per cent
omit key information.12
With the help of data analysis, you can also find out how much we lie to
our friends and relatives. On social media, we present ourselves as a happy
family on holiday, who exercise, eat exciting food and read Thomas Mann’s
The Magic Mountain. But when we search online in the comfort of
anonymity, we deal with relationship problems and body discomfort and try
to find short summaries of what The Magic Mountain is really about.
Seth Stephens-Davidowitz recently studied these discrepancies and the
result was the book Everybody Lies. Just take the difference in how women
talk about their husbands. On social media, the description of the husband is
usually ‘fantastic’, ‘cute’ and ‘my best friend’. In anonymous searches,
where they want frank advice, the husband is instead ‘an idiot’, ‘annoying’
– or possibly ‘gay’.13 Admittedly, one should keep in mind that the
anonymous search tends towards the forbidden because we are looking for
things that we find difficult to talk about with others. So the truth about

your husband’s character may sit somewhere between Instagram and
Google.
The fact is we bend the truth when we need to polish our self-image,
present ourselves as a little better and more interesting than we are, or just
want to avoid a quarrel and the bad mood that the unvarnished truth tends to
cause. Therefore, it is not surprising that we do the same in business (or in
academia, journalism, politics or in non-profit organizations). The
difference is that companies work hard to develop institutions and control
mechanisms to reduce this risk because they know that trust sells. There is a
greater chance that you will be deceived by the door-to-door salesman than
at Tesco or Starbucks.
One of my favourite surveys listed the most stolen books from
American and British libraries. If there was any truth in the view that moral
philosophers often depict businessmen being particularly unscrupulous, one
would imagine that textbooks on economics and management literature, to
be studied by future capitalists, would be at the top of the list. But the books
most often stolen are the ones on moral philosophy! Obscure, modern
works on ethics, which are mainly read by teachers and research students,
are stolen 50 per cent more often than books that are not about ethics.
(Although I am embarrassed to say that books by classical liberals like
Locke and Mill seem to be particularly prone to being stolen.)14
Undignified consumption
Several critics of In Defence of Global Capitalism said I ignored the fact
that one form of fraud underlines the entire modern consumer society. It
concerns so-called ‘planned obsolescence’, companies that deliberately
build in errors and shortcomings that shorten the lifespan of products and
therefore force us to buy new ones. According to some critics, it is a central
mechanism behind the modern growth model.15 Isn’t it strange that older
iPhones suddenly started to slow down after a software update? How come
your washing machine breaks down after seven years, when it can continue

to wash for decades in the laundromat? And why on earth do my light bulbs
go out when there’s a light bulb, the Centennial Light, at a fire station in
Livermore, California, that’s been shining for 120 years?
The answer according to the documentary The Light Bulb Conspiracy is
that companies all over the world formed a cartel in 1925 to shorten the
lifespan and raise the price of light bulbs. Otherwise we would all have had
centenary lamps today. It is true that there was such a cartel, but it was
quickly put out of action, partly because the Swedish consumer cooperative
Lumafabriken took up the competition with cheaper light bulbs. The cartel
was forced to reduce the price to the same level as Luma the same year.
Interestingly, Luma did not then try to manufacture any bulbs that lasted for
an eternity – it was too expensive to do so and did not provide good enough
light.
The Livermore lamp shines for the simple reason that it has a carbon
wire that is much thicker than modern metal wires, but it is a terribly
inefficient way to make light out of electricity. At the beginning of the
nineteenth century, tungsten filaments were used instead because they can
withstand a much higher temperature and thus emit a stronger light. The
side effect is that the wire also wears faster, but if you want to save money
and save the environment, it is actually much better to change the bulb from
time to time (and, unlike the Livermore firefighters, to turn it off when you
are not using it, even though that also shortens its service life). Or even
better – enjoy the technological development that now gives us low-energy
light bulbs that produce more light from less electricity, and have a burning
time of almost 100,000 hours, compared to 1,000 hours for a traditional
light bulb.
In most instances, we can get significantly better products that last
longer if we are willing to pay for it, but it’s all about priorities. You can
buy a washing machine that is built to handle much more than the one you
have. There is a large selection of durable machines for laundry use that are
on sale between $5,000 and $20,000. But if you go heavily into debt just to
be able to afford one, what do you do when a significantly better and more
energy-efficient alternative is developed in a couple of years? Choosing

something that is less durable is in fact often a reasonable balance between
personal finances, convenience, time spent and expectations of future
development. There is no obvious right balance, so the best thing is to have
different solutions compete with each other and consumers who are free to
choose, then all of us can learn from these experiments.
When it comes to cars, long life gives a higher resale value, so
durability becomes a key competitive advantage. That’s why a car today
can achieve a mileage twice as high as it did when I was a kid. Only 7 per
cent of American cars manufactured in 1960 turned fifteen years old –
today, the average age of the American car fleet is over twelve years.16 In
other cases, the development is so fast that customers will soon want a new
variant, as in the case of mobile phones. Then it becomes difficult to get a
consumer to pay for an expensive model built to last a couple of decades. In
other cases, we are too frugal for our own good. If we just focus on the
price, we will get plain products built with basic components. The drive to
keep costs down means the manufacturer will not include a compartment
that allows for the replacement of batteries or other parts, for example. How
much do you think they can pay for components of a coffee maker that is
sold for $9.90 or a printer for $39.90?
I don’t rule out that there are real examples of planned obsolescence,
where the manufacturer actively reduces the longevity of a product, but it is
more unusual than the debate suggests and the company that is exposed
doing it will quickly be punished in the market. France has a law against
planned obsolescence, and it has mostly shown how difficult it is to
document a single case. Yes, it was heard all over the world that Apple was
forced to pay a fine after older iPhones started working more slowly
following a software update. But what few observed is that Apple was
never considered guilty of planned obsolescence, only of not informing
users of the change. The background was that many users’ iPhones crashed
after an update of the operating system at the end of 2016. The reason was
that older batteries could not cope with the power of all new applications
when they were not sufficiently charged. To solve that problem, Apple
introduced a feature in the next update that prevented phones from crashing

when exposed to high workloads, by performing certain tasks over a longer
period of time when they reached a peak. This is the exact opposite of
planned ageing: since most people prefer a slower mobile phone to one that
crashes, it prolongs its lifetime. That is also what the French court found.
Apple now informs users about this function and as a user you can turn it
off if you would rather have an iPhone that crashes at regular intervals.
On the other hand, capitalists don’t have to make old products break
down. Instead, they can regularly come up with new products that have a
slightly better function and a slightly slimmer design, so we will still be
tempted to upgrade quickly. This is a staple argument of anti-
commercialism: that capitalism creates new needs by playing on our
acquisitiveness and status anxiety. But no matter how silly the product is,
such as a hoodie sewn into a blazer, a boiler suit in denim and specially
designed toilet brushes, new consumer goods rarely reflect a newly created
need. Humans have always sought different opportunities to enhance their
beauty, status, convenience, safety, communication, transportation and
entertainment. It’s just the ways to satisfy it that constantly change – from
cave paintings to Instagram, from smoke signals to smartphones, from
tattoos to, well, back to tattoos.
Anthropologists and archaeologists have not found a single human
culture that has not in any way adorned itself. One hundred thousand years
before the beauty industry told us we needed to groom and decorate
ourselves, our ancestors were willing to offer everything they had and even
risk their lives in battle to get coveted pigments to colour their skin. The
Neanderthals had no luxury brands that manipulated them, but they still
fought over the best eagle claws to make necklaces and bracelets from.
Anyone who believes that consumer culture is a result of the pressure of
commercial interests has a hard time explaining why people who threw off
the yoke of communism immediately coveted jeans and record players. In
the Taliban’s Afghanistan around the turn of the millennium, women went
to underground beauty salons and painted themselves under the burqas,
despite being threatened with flogging. The moment the Taliban fell in
2001, Afghans lined up to buy make-up, televisions and VCRs.

Undignified, thought Western intellectuals, and ‘how depressing was it to
see Afghan citizens celebrating the end of tyranny by buying consumer
electronics?’ lamented one Western journalist.17 But that’s human nature for
you, says archaeologist Brian Hayden, who has lived with indigenous
peoples in the Middle East, the Far East, North America and Australia. It is
not commercialism – it is us: ‘I can say categorically that the people of all
the cultures I have come in contact with exhibit a strong desire to have the
benefits of industrial goods that are available. I am convinced that the
“nonmaterialistic culture” is a myth.’18
In this consumption we can also discern a certain restlessness that is not
due to planned obsolescence but because it is deeply human to get used to
an item and then be attracted by something new. There is no big brand
running expensive campaigns to make us tired of old personal names and
buy a new, fresh one that they have patented. Still, there are extremely
strong fashion trends in the names we give our children. Just look at what
they are called in nursery today. When we are naming our kids we are
looking for a unique name but not too unique (so we will often borrow one
from our grandparents’ generation, so that it’s both nostalgic and
innovative).
That there are trends in everything has evolutionary rather than
commercial reasons. We want to feel safe but also to experience the new;
we want to be exciting but not weird, to stand out but not exclude ourselves
from the community. That’s why we always update our hairstyles and
clothes a bit but not too much. We want to be different but not too different.
Where the balance lies changes all the time and depends on what others do.
When everyone constantly micro-modifies their taste in that way, fashion
arises. We are not capricious because companies make money out of it, but
companies make money out of it because we are capricious.19
Yes, I know. It is incredibly superficial and silly. The consumption of
others is often silly, right? I find it quite embarrassing when others are
impressed by expensive watches and fast cars, and I have never understood
why you have to renovate the kitchen so often or why you need so many
cushions on the sofa. On the other hand, I have covered all my walls with

books and enjoy every moment of being surrounded by world literature, and
the most frequent comment from visitors is whether so many books are
necessary – isn’t everything online anyway?20 I confess, it is probably not
necessary to own the first editions of my favourite books. Was it even
necessary for you, dear reader, to buy this book?
That’s one way of looking at it. It is so easy to denigrate the behaviour
and vanity of others and to think they are engaged in demeaning
consumption. How lucky, then, that we get to live in a free economy where
you can skip it.
What does the web do to us?
No business sector has fallen from grace faster than the tech sector. Just a
few years ago tech companies were perceived as exciting and creative, but
are now perceived as insidious monopolies who sell out our integrity and
hypnotize us to ignore real life. These companies can take advantage of
spectacular network effects. You have to be on Facebook because so many
people are already there, and when you join, the platform becomes even
more indispensable for others. Then Facebook gets more and more data,
which means they can tailor their services and their ads to even more
people. Data is the new oil, so success breeds success for social media,
search engines, map services, e-commerce, payment apps, streaming, app-
based taxi services and other digital services.
At the same time, the debate about social media has taken a very dark
turn. What was once considered the salvation of democracy is now more
often seen as its gravedigger. Half of its critics are angry that too much
content is censored; the other half are complaining that too little is deleted,
allowing hate and lies to spread wildly. The Left thinks these are platforms
for right-wing lunatics and disinformation, the Right thinks they are
politically correct leftists who invented cancel culture. Many are angry at
Apple for charging too much or at Facebook and Google for not charging
(‘then you are the product’). At best, social media is just a stupid waste of

time. At worst it is a machine that creates polarization, filter bubbles,
loneliness and social pressure, and exists only to glue our eyeballs to ads.
Whatever you think about these companies, when you look at how
many of us flock to their platforms and what we state that we like about
them, there is no doubt that they have created enormous value. An
interview-based survey showed that if some of the most common services
disappeared, people would be willing to pay imaginary sums for them. They
would be willing to pay an incredible average of $18,000 for search
engines, $8,000 for email and $3,600 for digital maps – per year. If you
included just these three services in US GDP per capita by the price people
would be willing to pay, the average American would suddenly appear to be
50 per cent richer.21 These tech giants have created products of absolutely
enormous value that they give to us for almost nothing.
Yes, to repeat, ‘if you do not pay for it, you are the product’. We’ve all
heard it (and I’ve said it myself) again and again. But if the cost of
something I would have paid tens of thousands of dollars for is only that I
have to look at ads that are a little more relevant than the ones I saw before,
it’s a pretty good deal. Most people seem to think so – and if they don’t they
are free to abstain. The issue of integrity is a serious one, but the critics
must learn to understand what we know as individuals: that this is about
trade-offs and there are no perfect solutions. I don’t want to give up too
much information about myself, but on other hand I get angry the moment
an online shop does not remember what I purchased the last time so that I
have to look it up again. (I personally believe the way forward is for users
to take control of their data and for a market to emerge for information
banks that systematically control the data management of websites we visit,
not clumsy rules like the EU’s GDPR, which has only made us click a lot of
boxes without ever reading the text as we surf the web.)
It doesn’t sound like it in the arena of debate, but the hopes of a
democratization 
of 
communication 
through 
the 
internet 
actually
materialized. Suddenly, in fact, most people can access almost all the
information in the world, and can make themselves heard and find friends,
like-minded people and partners all over the world. It is nothing less than a

revolution. The reason there is now such widespread disappointment is that
the socially progressive internet pioneers often assumed it would mean that
people like them would populate the public conversation. They did not
consider that if everyone can speak freely, it also means that those who do
not share their values will also make their voices heard. That includes
nationalists and anti-vaxxers, and because those people were often
marginalized in the media, they had the greatest reason to invest properly in
the digital realm. Just compare how journalists were moved to tears when
the Obama campaign won voters with social media and tailored ads in
2008, while similar methods were seen as insidious manipulation on the
verge of hypnosis when used by the Trump campaign in 2016. (Which, by
the way, does not sit well with the fact that Trump was most popular among
older people in rural areas who used the internet the least. Among users of
social media, Trump actually performed worse than the previous
Republican presidential candidate, Mitt Romney.)22
The debate about communication technology has all too often been
about whether it would turn us all into cuddly latte liberals or xenophobic
reactionaries. What if it instead just shows who we were all the time, for
better or worse? Of course, that does not mean that it’s good. The fact that
we are suddenly exposing ourselves in public, with our semi-digested
assumptions and prejudices, is not necessarily a civilizational advance and
one can only hope that we will soon learn the difference between kitchen
tables and digital mass media. However, if you are frustrated that the
internet is full of idiots, you need to remind yourself that there have always
been idiots, it’s just that they rarely entered your field of vision before. Also
keep in mind that you might only think that way because you follow
political wrestling on Twitter, for example, where different fighters have to
show off for their tribes and therefore are not rewarded for nuances and
complexity or even normal civilized behaviour. For the vast majority of
people in the world, you’re crazy to even care. Instead, they use the internet
to find equals and immerse themselves in their interest in the local
environment, ornithology, steampunk, football, the perfect fried rice,
restored outboard motors, Leonard Cohen bootlegs, or the latest insights

into Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Or to quickly learn how to make a red-
wine sauce, fix a zip, read an annual report, get rid of a stain or dress up for
a funeral. In addition, it has exposed us to a whole universe of ideas,
cultures, research, stories and music. It might be worth some craziness.
There is a lot of talk about us getting caught up in filter bubbles online,
but we are actually much more exposed to opposing views than before
because those who share our interests in a certain dimension do not
necessarily do so in other areas. An index of how isolated we are from
opposing views shows that people who read morning newspapers are
somewhat more isolated than those who read news online, while
workplaces, neighbourhoods and families are even more homogenized
opinion bubbles. The worst echo chamber is your kitchen table.23
Political polarization in America is often blamed on social media, but it
took off before there was social media and is led by an older generation
who devote more time to talk radio and cable TV than to Twitter and
Facebook. In an analysis of nine Western countries, researchers at Stanford
and Brown recently discovered that polarization actually decreased in five
of them – and all were countries with greater internet use than in the United
States.24
I know, there is a lot of rubbish online as well. The bigger something is,
the more rubbish there is that fits there. I also suspect that the sudden
abundance of different and conflicting stories about everything can create a
dangerous backlash in a small group that begins to long for simple answers,
for someone who just tells us how it is, once and for all. How many
conspiracy theories and hateful messages should platforms clean up? We
can all see lies and harassment remaining on platforms, while completely
harmless, ironic or even urgent messages (and people) are thrown out. This
indicates that the companies are incompetent or possibly evil, some say. It
indicates that it is a difficult task, I think. Even when something is way
outside the limits of polite and sane society, it is still an open question
whether it is better if those people are pushed into an even more hateful
underground online environment. These are difficult trade-offs without
obvious answers, where we have to try different solutions. Nothing suggests

this task would be easier if it were taken over by a government authority or
by hundreds of different platforms after a break-up of the large tech
platforms.
Of course, we must pay special attention to how our children are
affected by the availability of everything at all times. A leaked report from
Facebook revealed that a substantial minority of teenage girls – 4 per cent –
believe that Instagram makes them feel worse.25 But less noticed was that
the same report showed that slightly more – 9 per cent – stated that it made
them feel better. There is social pressure and bullying in social media, just
as there is in school. One can recognize and combat such problems without
concluding that it is bad that social media – or schools – exist. After all, 81
per cent of teenagers say that social media helps them form a stronger
community with their friends, and 68 per cent say it gives them the feeling
that there are people who are there for them when things are bad. Large
majorities say it makes them feel included and confident rather than
excluded and insecure.26
The whole thing is complicated and it will require a lot of learning and
experimentation to use the web better and reduce its negative effects. But
for me, the debate about the social net effect of the tech industry was
decided when I spoke to an eighty-three-year-old disabled widow who
could not care less about the theoretical debate about screen time: ‘I love
my computer,’ she said. ‘You can google anything you want to know, and I
never have to be alone.’
Big bad tech
Regardless of what one thinks of the tech companies’ contribution, there is
the risk that they cement their leadership position, buy up small rivals and
create an ‘innovation shadow’ where it does not pay for others to even try
to compete. There may be a potential competitor who could be better, but
we never give them a chance because it is too costly to learn a new service,
transfer our data and get a sufficient number of users to do the same.

‘Will the dominant social network of our time ever lose its monopoly?’
asks the Guardian’s tech columnist. Hardly: ‘it is well on the way to
becoming what economists call a “natural monopoly”. Users have invested
so much social capital in putting up data about themselves it is not worth
their changing sites, especially since every new user that it attracts adds to
its value as a network of interacting people.’
But no matter how difficult it sounds in theory, it works in practice to
break monopolies if someone else offers something better. We know this,
because the text above is not about Facebook today, but was written in 2007
and was about the completely dominant network MySpace.27
Given how impossible it is considered for new competitors to enter the
market, it is a miracle that this happens so often. Just look at how novel
today’s big tech companies – Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple, Microsoft
(GAFAM) – actually are. When I wrote the Swedish version of In Defence
of Global Capitalism in 2001, Google was a three-year-old newcomer who
had three years left to go to IPO and was doing battle with search engine
giants such as Yahoo!, AltaVista and MSN Search. ‘How Yahoo! won the
search wars’ was a Fortune magazine story in March 1998. The report
stated that many people believed Yahoo! even had the potential to become
the next America Online (if you remember them).28 There is actually a
similarity: both Yahoo! and AOL were later bought by the telecom
company Verizon, which, after large losses, recently sold them for $5
billion.
Back then, Amazon was a loss-making new online bookstore. Just one
year earlier, the venerable investment bank Lehman Brothers had warned
that Amazon was incompetent, bleeding money and would probably go
bankrupt within a year (eight years later, Lehman Brothers was bankrupt).
In 2001, Mark Zuckerberg had not left Harvard to start Facebook –
because he had not even started at Harvard. The social networks that ruled
were Sixdegrees, AIM, Friendster and most importantly MySpace, which
was so hot that Google saw it as a breakthrough to get a three-year
advertising agreement with the network in 2006, which was signed at a

glamorous party on Pebble Beach with such guests as Bono and Tony Blair.
Finally, Google got to hang out with the big boys.
Apple, on the other hand, was a veteran of the personal computer age,
but after a long crisis it had become a symbol of the fact that an early
dominant position does not mean much in a fast-moving market. However,
Steve Jobs had recently returned to the company, and the launch of the iPod
at the end of 2001 gave Apple new hope. In 2003, the company was finally
able to enjoy a modest annual profit. Adjusted for inflation, that annual
profit is roughly what Apple currently earns in fourteen hours. But that was
only after the company revolutionized the mobile phone, which was then
dominated by Nokia. ‘One billion customers. Can anyone catch the cell
phone king?’ asked Forbes in October 2007. ‘No mobile company will ever
know more about how people use phones than Nokia’, so ‘Nokia has a
historic opportunity to become synonymous with the Web’.29
Of course, Microsoft had also been around for a long time, but they
faltered and missed the transition to the mobile internet, making a
comeback only after almost completely changing their business model from
personal computer operating systems to cloud-based services that also work
on Apple and Android products.
In his book Tech Panic, US journalist Robby Soave writes: ‘If a visitor
from the future had told me in 2006 – the year I graduated from high school
– that within a few years I would no longer need Myspace, AOL Instant
Messenger, or an MSN Hotmail email address, I would have assumed it was
because I was going to die in a freak accident.’30
There is no reason to believe that the new giants are safer in their
position than their predecessors. As long as they launch new products and
services that are better, cheaper or more interesting than the alternatives,
they will continue to get users – but, unlike the users, they get nothing for
free. We sometimes think of them as money-printing machines that succeed
in whatever they do, but that is because we look at the top sellers they have
today. Yet do you remember Amazon’s Fire Phone, Google Glasses or
Microsoft’s Zune music player? Lots of product launches from the GAFAM
companies fell flat because they offered something that was uninteresting,

already existed, was too complicated, too ugly, too expensive or just
cringeworthy. Microsoft never succeeded with the music service Groove
Music, the speaker Invoke, the fitness bracelet Microsoft Band or the iPad
clone Surface RT. To ‘bing’ has still not become as popular as to ‘google’.
Microsoft’s mobile phone Kin failed badly and was replaced by the
unsuccessful Windows Phone. To get back on track, Microsoft bought
Nokia’s mobile division in 2013. It did not give Microsoft’s mobiles new
life but killed Nokia’s.
Facebook would probably like to forget that in 2013 it made its own
attempt in the mobile market with ‘Facebook Home’ on a special mobile
that had to be reduced in price from $99 to 99 cents after one month. It
would presumably also rather forget the search engine Graph Search, the
photo-sharing app Facebook Poke or its successor Slingshot, as well as
Facebook Credits, Facebook Deals and Facebook Offers, and the same goes
for the Facebook currency Libra.
Amazon also has a long list of projects that had to be thrown overboard
when the market disapproved, such as its own Fire Phone, the photo service
Spark, the game Crucible, Amazon Wallet, subsidiaries that sold fashion
and baby products, and its attempts at an auction site, food deliveries, ticket
sales, travel agency and pop-up stores.
Google’s ability to enter new areas does not include social networks,
where it in turn created and shut down Orkut, Google Buzz and Google+.
The same fate befell its Twitter imitation Jaiku, the location service
Dodgeball, the encyclopaedia Knol, the game Google Lively and more
recently Google Stadia, the work tool Google Wave, the media player
Nexus Q and the digital discount booklet Google Offers. And the much-
hyped Google Glasses are currently in the ‘Where are they now?’ file.
Apple was the company that almost perished before Steve Jobs made a
comeback, but even under his rule the company made some blunders, for
example with the social network Ping, the stereo speaker iPod Hi-Fi, the
smart speaker Home Pod and the connection Firewire, which admittedly
could do more than USB but cost too much. Most embarrassing was
probably the launch of Apple’s map app, which in its first incarnation was

so buggy and incomplete that CEO Tim Cook had to apologize and
recommend angry users to use its competitors’ products.
There is nothing strange about these and many, many other failures
from established companies. Failing is a way to start over in a smarter way,
with new lessons having been learned. The most successful companies are
constantly launching lots of experiments to understand what works and
what doesn’t. And that’s the point: the large size of these companies is not
what makes them succeed with new products and services – as soon as they
launch something a little worse, they are universally mocked no matter how
many millions they spend on marketing – on the contrary, they are big
because they have managed to create so many appreciated products and
services that were better than the alternatives. In comparison to MySpace,
Facebook was faster, less ad-heavy and constantly adapted to what users
wanted to do on the site. When Google was launched, three of the biggest
search engines could not even find themselves online.
The question is how long these companies can continue to be innovative
and keep up with the competition. I think they can stumble faster than most
people assume, for the simple reason that I’ve seen AOL, Digital
Equipment Corporation, AltaVista, Palm, BlackBerry, Nokia, Netscape,
Yahoo!, MySpace, Compaq and Kodak all hold a leading position for a
certain period but not survive the next change of the technological
paradigm. Before we know it, some other big, proud names will be added to
that list.
Unfortunately, there is a way we consolidate the giants’ position even
when their time is up, and it is paradoxically the regulations we believe are
a way of controlling them. Complicated regulations create a fixed cost for
established companies that they handle with divisions of specialists. But for
startups with few employees and little capital, these regulations act as direct
barriers to entry. Research on the US economy shows that market
concentration grew the most in sectors where regulations increased the
fastest.31
It is in this context that we should see Facebook’s new-found interest in
abolishing section 230 of the Federal Communications Decency Act, which

means that American platforms are allowed to moderate content without
making themselves open to legal action for what others publish on their site.
Without this, platforms would be stopped from taking any action against
even hateful speech and harassment if they didn’t have the resources to
engage in very strict moderation to make sure that nothing ever slips
through. Mark Zuckerberg’s openness to abolishing it was greeted by some
as a sign that he had become enlightened and realized that Facebook needs
to be monitored more closely. In fact, it’s just the latest round in the old
game of increasing your competitors’ costs. Reading, examining and
moderating everything posted by the public almost in real time would be
very expensive even for those who have Facebook’s entire infrastructure
and 60,000 employees, but what is more important to Zuckerberg is that it
would be completely impossible for smaller rivals. If MySpace had
succeeded in enforcing such a regulation, they might still be dominant now,
and Bono and Tony Blair would still be attending their beach parties.
If there is one thing I am afraid of, it is a development where the
government and big business become too close, where the government
gives companies increasingly protected positions in exchange for adapting
operations and behaviour to what is appreciated by the politicians in power
at that moment. Between different spheres of society, there must be a
certain healthy antagonism so that they balance each other in an open,
decentralized system. When big government and big business team up, the
small players will lose out.
Data is the new sand
One reason why lots of people think the big platforms are unbeatable is the
misconception that data itself is what is valuable. However, data is not ‘the
new oil’ but the new sand. Sand is not very valuable in itself. But if you
refine it properly (to silicon), you can create the most powerful productive
power we have (the data chip). So it is with data. Since the breakthrough of
the web and digitization, we have been living with a surplus of information,

just about everywhere. In itself, it has as little value, but if you refine,
analyse and assort it you can find new information and matches that allow
you to help others to find what they are looking for in a lucrative way. And
that takes tremendous effort, massive investment and constant innovation.32
This means that no one has an impregnable lead just because they sit on
a pile of data, as Joakim Wernberg explains in a fascinating study of digital
paradoxes.33 It can even be the other way around. Of course, there are
economies of scale that allow companies to create better services at a lower
price if they have a large market – and in that case it is good for consumers
if companies are allowed to grow to that size; that’s how we reap these
benefits – but there are also diseconomies of scale that set a limit to
companies’ expansion. Since a large part of their value is created by
intellectual and individual matchmaking, a platform can become too
crowded and noisy. When everyone is there, it can be harder to find the
person you are looking for. You get unintended consequences such as the
young not wanting to share a platform with their parents, and dating apps
that become too general and insipid. Then the demand arises for something
more narrow and exclusive that better expresses one’s individuality or one
particular slice of it, and makes it possible to find like-minded people or
more particular results.
Therefore, one should not expect the competition to come from another
giant that offers a similarly broad platform (it’s also not obvious what users
would gain from having two Facebooks) but from many smaller and more
niche platforms. There is another interesting implication. The innovation
shadow is real. Large companies can invest more in small, incremental
improvements and they can quickly imitate smaller rivals. This means it
pays less for venture capitalists and entrepreneurs to invest in areas where
the elephants are already dancing. But Joakim Wernberg thinks this is
counter-intuitively a good thing. It means that large resources are not
wasted on things that are similar to what we already have, but are
channelled into areas for radical and subversive innovation that cannot
easily be incorporated into existing business models. Something that will

enrich us all more than having a second Facebook or a slightly bolder set of
emojis.
One way for market leaders to continue to stay on top for a while longer
is to buy small, innovative companies – from YouTube and Instagram to
Oculus and DeepMind. It is sometimes almost considered cheating, as if the
old vampires are extending their own lives with the blood of young, vibrant
startups. But this is an important division of labour. It is difficult for
established companies that focus on defending old business models to be
radically innovative, while new companies rarely have the knowledge of the
market, the capital to invest, the ability to manage regulatory systems or the
infrastructure to develop, market and sell. By joining forces – like Pfizer
and BioNTech when it comes to vaccines – they can ensure that true
innovation quickly turns into a functioning product. That’s the important
thing: not who does it or why, but that it becomes a reality and benefits
consumers. The opportunity to be acquired also strengthens the drive to
invent, develop and start companies. Then you do not have to navigate the
entire minefield yourself. It is enough to have a potentially promising idea
that is appreciated by someone on the other side of the minefield.
There is more lag in this debate than in my teenagers’ network
connection when we’re on vacation, and it freezes more often. Just as many
people began to see big platforms as impregnable monopolies, they were
exposed to substantial competition for the first time. In the last five years,
the leading company’s market share has actually decreased in online ads,
cloud services, app stores, business software and ride hailing. In terms of
video streaming and food delivery, the leading company has lost more than
a quarter of the market.34
This is partly because of relative newcomers. During the pandemic, we
were all on Zoom rather than established companies’ video services.
Snapchat and TikTok suddenly made the old social media look rheumatic.
Despite it being said that no new arrivals can upset reinforced incumbents,
TikTok reached one billion users in just four years – half the time it took
Facebook to do the same. Salesforce is becoming increasingly aggressive in
cloud services, and in five years Canada’s Shopify has gone from one-

seventieth of US e-commerce to one-tenth. PayPal is becoming increasingly
important in online payments. In addition, long-established companies are
finally getting online. Disney has entered the streaming market and
Walmart and Target and all their local counterparts have invested heavily in
online shopping. Amazon is constantly competing against eBay and local
competitors.
Anyone who thinks the GAFAM companies lean back and count money
has misunderstood the fiercely competitive pressure they are exposed to. In
addition, the big firms must constantly spy on each other. Microsoft and
Alphabet have started competing with Amazon for cloud services, which
puts pressure on prices. Amazon, Apple and Microsoft have taken up the
fight with Google and Facebook over online advertising. Facebook has
started Facebook Shops to strike back at Amazon. Apple TV and Amazon
Prime are simultaneously chasing Netflix. According to The Economist’s
calculations, the share of GAFAM’s revenues that overlap with their
competitors has increased from 22 to 38 per cent since 2015.35 In a more
existential way, Apple has started to make life miserable for its ad-
dependent competitors by offering iPhone users the opportunity to avoid
being tracked online by a particular company.
Furthermore, Big Tech’s impressive growth took place during a period
of low interest rates and booming markets. These companies will face more
difficult times ahead. Just as I wrapped this chapter up, I received the latest
results from these supposedly invincible companies: in November 2022,
amid slowing sales and collapsing share prices, Amazon announced that it
would have to let around 10,000 workers go and there were reports that
Google was preparing to do the same. Microsoft was already in its third
wave of layoffs since the summer of that year and Apple announced a
hiring freeze. Meta, Facebook’s parent company, slashed a tenth of its
workforce.
If you’re afraid that a company’s control over search services will give
them control of what you see, think and buy, it’s worth recalling that they
have another eight billion competitors. The most common way to find out
something, get a second opinion or recommendation on what to think, do or

buy is actually not to ask Google or Facebook but to send a message to a
friend or contact and ask. Big Tech’s greatest achievement is to have made
that form of advice easier than ever before.

I
6
PICKING LOSERS
‘The market will always reach the most efficient economic outcome, but sometimes the
most efficient outcome is at odds with the common good and the national interest.’
REPUBLICAN SENATOR MARCO RUBIO1
f it’s so crucial to have successful companies, innovation and growth, are
they not a little too important to leave to the market? Shouldn’t we help
them along a bit?
When an interviewer introduces the Italian-American star economist
Mariana Mazzucato by mentioning many of her assignments in advisory
bodies to politicians and authorities, she replies: ‘There’s actually even like
thirty more.’ No wonder she’s sought after: the thesis she pursues is that her
clients are the heroes of development. In my worldview, businesses create
the innovations and the growth that funds the public sector, but Mazzucato
says it is the other way around – that the state funds and develops research
and innovations, which private companies use to create profitable products.
Mazzucato’s diagram that shows how governments gave us almost
everything important that makes up an iPhone has become famous. Her
view is that if the government can send astronauts to the moon, it should be
able to solve most other problems if charismatic politicians and visionary
bureaucrats just point the way and fund the right technologies and solutions.
Then knowledge will be commercialized and new innovations developed,
she says. That is why we need ‘moonshots’, ‘mission-oriented innovation’,
for all our societal challenges: ‘First and foremost, a mission has to be bold
and inspirational while having wide societal relevance. It must be clear in

its intention to develop ambitious solutions that will directly improve
people’s lives and it should appeal to the imagination.’2
Active industrial policy has grown in popularity during the great
financial crisis. Once again, governments are supposed to pick winners and
fund particular businesses and projects to get ahead. As nations started to
worry about their supply chains during the pandemic and the invasion of
Ukraine, this perspective won even more adherents. Technocratic politicians
who believe they can commandeer resources for the common good have
been joined by national conservatives who believe that an ambitious
industrial policy is a condition for survival, not just to create good
manufacturing jobs but also to help the West dominate tomorrow’s business
sectors and to give their technological systems a chance in the geopolitical
rivalry with China. In the Communist Party, we are said to have a rival who
thinks strategically and plans for how the technologies of the future can be
exclusively ‘Made in China’.
Mazzucato has been criticized by other scholars because in this area she
does not lean towards systematic research but instead tells various stories to
show the government’s involvement and success, and such anecdotes say
nothing about overall effects. In addition, she fiddles with many of those
stories. In an academic review, Christian Sandström objects that it is
misleading to talk about everything important in a smartphone without
mentioning the transistor, the integrated circuit, the digital image sensor and
many other things developed by commercial interests. In addition, he points
out that the microprocessor, LCD screen and cellular technology were
developed by private companies and not by the government, as Mazzucato
claims.3 Her evidence is anecdotal and the anecdotes are sometimes
fabricated.
But there is a more fundamental problem with Mazzucato’s ideas – a
naive view of innovation. It is not strange that she is so happy to return to
the moon landing. This is one achievement that really follows her preferred
mission-oriented template: the president sets a goal, NASA plans, procures
and implements, and along the way technological development is
stimulated. It was an extremely clear goal limited to achieving a certain

capability, where the political will was so great that one could ignore the
fact that the budget was constantly exceeded. But innovation rarely happens
like that.
Internet, porn and politics
Another of Mazzucato’s favourite examples is, of course, the internet, a
powerful example of a hierarchical, foresighted authority being able to
point out future solutions and get it done. It was developed by the military
research authority DARPA (formerly known as ARPA), which Mazzucato is
particularly fond of as it ‘has always been aggressively mission oriented’.
This was necessary to develop the internet, says Mazzucato. Only ‘the State
dared to think – against all odds – about the “impossible”’: to create a
communication system that would survive a nuclear war. The government
was not only ‘dreaming up the possibility of the internet’, but only it had
‘the vision, the resources and the patience to see it through’ – ARPANET,
which later became the internet, required ‘a massive push by the state’.4
It’s a great story, but it is not what happened. Ideas for networks
between computers began to be conjured up in many places in the 1960s
because universities and private companies had started developing various
forms of information technology. In 1963, J.C.R. Licklider at the company
Bolt, Beranek and Newman was able to propose an ‘intergalactic computer
network’ that described many of the solutions that would become the
internet’s infrastructure. At the same time, Paul Baran at the private think-
tank RAND Corporation came up with a proposal for a distributed
communication network.
When Licklider started working at ARPA, he was involved in creating a
network between its mainframe computers – the project that in 1969 would
become ARPANET, the forerunner of the internet. But that project had
nothing to do with the military’s needs. The motivation was that his boss
Robert Taylor was annoyed at having to walk between different terminals
and use different log-in procedures to use several computers at the same

time. It was time-consuming and made collaboration with other researchers
difficult. The process of getting started had no resemblance whatsoever to
any visionary five-year plan or strategic NASA committee. Taylor simply
went to ARPA’s manager and asked if it was OK to start work on linking
their computers. Far from drawing up a plan for a massive, state push to do
‘the impossible’ against all odds, Taylor said (not entirely truthfully) ‘we
already know how to do it.’ His boss replied, ‘Great idea, get it going,’ and
gave him a bag of money. The meeting was over in twenty minutes.5
As Taylor himself has stated: ‘The ARPAnet was not created with war
in mind [and] ARPAnet was not an internet’.6 Although it is disputed (as so
much else in this creation story because so many people played an active
role in different and overlapping ways at different stages), Taylor believes
that a real internet – a network of networks – was created on Xerox only in
1975, where their ethernet was connected to the ARPANET.
The government was involved in many ways, through ARPA, with
procurement and research money, but the result was a happy, unintended
side effect of public funding and something completely different from the
notion of mission-oriented innovation where charismatic leaders get people
involved in large-scale projects. It was not the case that the government
‘dared to think the impossible’. No president has ever given a speech saying
‘we have decided to communicate in a digital global network’, and no
Ministry of Defence published a visionary memorandum on how to create a
worldwide computer network with a massive government push. And no
one, not even Taylor, had any idea how the world would change because he
didn’t want to walk between different terminals.
Recently, Mazzucato adjusted her story about why the internet was
invented. Her latest book no longer states that the network was created to
survive a nuclear war, but so that ‘satellites could communicate’.7 The
interesting thing is not that she is wrong again but that she is always wrong
in the same way – she always believes it must involve a big, important plan
and a massive government push.
In an interview in 1989, the internet pioneer Robert Taylor took direct
aim at such ideas long before Mazzucato formulated them herself. While

Mazzucato claimed that ARPA was always ‘aggressively mission oriented’,
Taylor instead complains that American politicians began to focus more and
more on ‘mission-directed funding’ after he left and that it had ‘enormously
weakened the quality of the work’. Taylor believed that innovation is
mainly created when you solve practical problems step by step and in this
way constantly expand your knowledge and find new opportunities and
suddenly happen to create a completely new world. If you follow a more
mission-oriented policy, in which politicians demand a certain result in a
certain way, ‘then you’re going to miss opportunity after opportunity to
make a real advance, because a large part of what we’ve done over the
years is stumble on things. We didn’t do it by planning.’8
It was not that the military or politicians picked a winner, as Mazzucato
claims; they did not have the faintest idea what Licklider, Taylor and the
others were doing. In fact, the US Department of Defense had had a similar
idea served to them on a silver platter a few years earlier. Paul Baran of
RAND Corporation tried to sell his idea to the US Air Force in 1965,
arguing that such a network could withstand a military attack. So it was not
the government that dreamed up the idea – it was the state that neglected it.
Baran’s contacts appreciated the concept, but as a result of a power struggle
with the Ministry of Defense, the project went to the Defense
Communication Agency, which had no technical expertise in the field and
left it at that. ‘I felt that they could be almost guaranteed to botch the job
since they had no understanding for digital technology, nor for leading-edge
high-technology development. Further, they lacked enthusiasm,’ Baran
said.9 He withdrew his application and instead spent the next few years
spreading the idea publicly and becoming an important source of
inspiration.
When, despite all of this, Mazzucato wants to give a visionary
government credit for the internet, she reduces her thesis to the fact that the
government was responsible for anything that it somehow happened to
touch in some part of the process, even if it didn’t understand what was
going on or hadn’t sought this result. That is completely different to the
moon landing’s mission-oriented innovation. Apart from a series of

erroneous and contradictory claims about the birth of the internet, she
shows no causal connection but engages in praise by association. In fact, it
seems enough that someone who starts an innovative tech company has
received a public university education for her to say that the government is
the instigator and the private sector is just parasitic.
But innovation does not happen by someone getting an idea and
pressing a button on a machine, like in a children’s TV series, so that an
invention emerges on the other side. Matt Ridley’s ambitious contribution
to the history of technology, How Innovation Works, shows convincingly
that the great breakthroughs never come from government plans or solitary
geniuses but from bustling intellectual ecosystems with constant cross-
fertilization between different disciplines and activities. They rely on a
complex web of collaborations, surprises, inspiration and improvisation.
Big leaps can come from unexpected combinations and coincidences. This
means that large numbers of people and institutions have touched every
single innovation.10
If we are to engage in Mazzucatian praise by association, there will be a
lot of praise to go around (many individuals, not just Licklider and Baran
had hopeful visions about some kind of global digital network). And given
that governments in the Western world account for almost half of their
country’s GDP, it would be very strange if those governments did not touch
most things at some stage, especially in their role as a procurer and as
financier of education. It’s not the same as getting an idea and pressing a
button, or that it would just be a process of pressing the button a little more
often to get further innovations on the other side.
You could actually write a Mazzucato book like that about active
industrial policy, but replace the government with the porn industry. Think
about it: it is well established that pornography has played a crucial role in
several technological developments. The printing press, photo, film, video
streaming, online payment system, chat features, peer-to-peer sharing and
virtual reality have in many cases been developed and disseminated to
satisfy carnal desires. Historian Jonathan Coopersmith states: ‘If it were not
for the subject matter, pornography would be publicly praised as an industry

that has successfully and quickly developed, adopted, and diffused new
technologies.’11
Is there anything the government can do that the porn industry could not
do? And, although the porn industry does not have half the nation’s GDP at
its disposal but at most a few tenths of a per cent of it, it has repeatedly
touched almost all the innovations of information technology. If I were one
of the new cheerleaders for active industrial policy, I would conclude from
this that we should pour tax money over the porn industry to stimulate
technological innovation. Yet this would be mistaken in the same way
Mazzucato’s whole perspective is mistaken: these innovations did not come
from the porn industry’s annual committee meetings, but from chaotic and
ever-changing interactions and competition with other innovators and
industries and the changing demand of customers.
Boulevard of broken dreams
The reason economists came to view industrial policy with such scepticism
from the 1980s onwards was not that they were neoliberal but that they
were disappointed. The policy had been tested on a large scale and the
result turned out to have no similarities with their hopes.
The US federal programme for innovation in the 1960s and 70s ‘is
hardly a success story’, stated economics professors Linda Cohen and
Roger Noll and three other economists who initially had a positive attitude
towards industrial policy. Their cost-benefit analysis of six ambitious
federal projects revealed that only one of the projects was even ‘worth the
effort’ (NASA’s communications satellites). Four of them were ‘almost
unqualified failures’.12 Their book was titled The Technology Pork Barrel as
the projects often kept going because they gave politicians something to
show in their home districts, not because they were successful.
In an evaluation of support for Swedish businesses, researchers found
no statistically significant effects on the recipient companies’ productivity,
turnover, number of employees or the proportion of employees who were

highly educated or were researchers. They found a single positive effect: the
small companies that had received grants had higher sales than others – but
only during the first year. Industrial policy is less moonshot than sugar rush.
The researchers conclude: ‘The lack of positive effects is worrying in view
of the costs associated with selective business support, such as the direct
administrative costs, the emergence of interest-seeking behaviour in
companies and the distortion of competition.’13
When economist Josh Lerner sat down to write a book on what the
government can do to actively stimulate entrepreneurship and innovation,
the experience was so depressing that he gave it the title Boulevard of
Broken Dreams. He noted, like Mazzucato, that there are successful
examples of active industrial policy, especially in poor countries that use it
to catch up with an already known and proven technology. But Lerner also
took the trouble to look at the other side: ‘but for each effective government
intervention, there have been dozens, even hundreds, of failures, where
substantial public expenditures bore no fruit.’14
An obvious reason why the moon landing has been given such a place
of honour in the debate is that it worked – unlike so many other attempts at
public innovation since the 1960s, such as Nixon’s war on cancer, breed
reactors, production of synthetic fuel from coal, French–British Concorde,
Minitel, a large number of shipyards and steel plants, and now Germany’s
Energiewende, corn-based ethanol, municipal hydrogen strategies and
attempts to make fuel from cellulose.
Perhaps you remember Quaero, the European search engine that would
end Google’s domination. ‘We must take the offensive and muster a
massive effort’, otherwise we will lose ‘the power of tomorrow’, announced
French President Jacques Chirac when he launched the project together
with German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder in April 2005.15 A massive
effort from the taxpayers, however, could not help that all the politicians,
companies and research institutes in the vast Quaero consortium could not
even agree on what it was that the search engine was supposed to search for.
The following year, the project collapsed.

Because political projects are better at selling themselves than they are
at selling goods and services, the outside world often initially reacts with
anxious reverence, believing they must respond with the same industrial
policy in order not to lose out. Nixon wanted the United States to have a
supersonic passenger aircraft just because Europeans developed Concorde.
Republican politician Newt Gingrich believed the Minitel interactive
computer terminals could make France ‘the leading information-processing
society in the world by the end of the century’ and wanted the US
government to do something similar. Search engine consultant Brad Fallon
told The Economist in March 2006 that ‘Quaero appears to have the edge’
ahead of Google – before Quaero even came close to knowing which
product to develop.16 And today Western politicians think they have to pick
winners to keep up with China’s centralized innovation strategy.
The new industrial policy is often formulated in contrast to the old one.
Now the idea is no longer to keep old, outdated industrial structures alive,
but to encourage the new, innovative companies. But that’s the way the idea
was sold back then as well. It is only in retrospect that the failed projects
appear to support already doomed industries. At first most of them were
moonshots that used the latest technology to do what they thought would
become commercially viable.
Now that we know how these projects failed, you can’t expect to read
about them in new books on active industrial policy, since the authors try to
give the impression that this time it’s different, this time it will work. With
one exception: Mariana Mazzucato actually mentions Energiewende,
Germany’s decommissioning of nuclear power and investment in renewable
energy that began in 2010. In the beginning, Mazzucato even mentioned it
as ‘a model of how to implement an integrated strategy’, a modern
equivalent to the moon landing. But nowadays she admits it has big
problems and mainly praises the good intentions of the project (she would
know, as she was one of the project’s advisors).17 And that’s true of course:
if the success of new industrial policies is to be measured in intentions, I
can already predict that they will be resounding successes. For those who
care more about results, the new policy is rather a magnificent failure. In

2019, Germany’s Auditors General stated that the change had cost €160
billion in the last five years alone and that the expenditure is ‘in extreme
disproportion to the results’.18 Attempts to transform everything from the
top created instability and uncertainty in the entire electricity system, and
the decommissioning of nuclear power meant that perversely Germany had
to use more coal power. The result of the massive government push was
that Germany reduced CO2 emissions less than other European countries
and it cost them more – in taxes and in the highest electricity prices in the
EU.
When I asked the energy expert Dieter Helm about the German energy
transition’s 
three 
goals 
of 
reducing 
emissions, 
and 
increasing
competitiveness and safety, he replied briefly: ‘to fail on one is something
the politicians should answer for. But to fail on all three, that’s a pretty big
achievement.’19
More Vasa than NASA
Failures are admittedly part of all innovation processes, including private
ones. If you do not fail regularly, you do not take enough risks. The
difference is that public support removes many of the essential mechanisms
that steer resources from failures to successes. Private projects depend on
ruthlessly sincere feedback from owners, financiers and customers who do
not want to be a part of something they lose from. A constant stream of
figures on costs, sales, profit and valuation relentlessly shows what works
and what doesn’t.
Public projects also receive feedback, but not from financiers who risk
their own money or customers who choose. Politicians and authorities do
not act in markets, which would have created a habit of dealing with
opportunities and risks, and they do not invest their own resources, which
means they are not compelled to find what can create greater value in the
long run. Politicians have an ideological interest in certain projects. They
also want to get on well with important constituencies and donors, prove

that they are doing something and create many photo and job opportunities
during their term in office. They want to end up in the history books as
contributors to important changes and – against all economic and technical
logic – by putting as much of the production as possible in their home
constituency.
Authorities are often given the role of ticking boxes so that they find
recipients of funding who meet a combination of what is currently
politically in demand. And just like in every situation where you do not
control output, you begin to emphasize your financial input as a measure of
success. ‘We celebrated with cake every time we managed to get money out
of the door,’ as a former official at the Swedish Energy Agency described
their way of picking winners. Not getting rid of the annual budget can mean
smaller appropriations next year and thus reduced opportunities to grow and
employ. Therefore, according to the same person, the logic was: ‘if you
receive a credible application, you accept it. If there isn’t one, you take the
most credible one available.’20 This makes evaluating the projects a bit
more fuzzy, with yes-men being rewarded, problems often swept under the
rug and critics marginalized. That is why the story of the government’s
attempt to control development more often ends up like the Swedish royal
ship Vasa – which was built according to the king’s rushed timetable and
specifications, and sank on its maiden voyage in 1628 after having sailed
roughly one kilometre – than the space agency NASA.
All in all, governments rarely find those amazing opportunities that
everyone else has neglected, but instead follow the latest trends, where the
presentations contain all the buzzwords, the food is the best and you get to
hang out with the cool entrepreneurs rather than the introverted engineers.
Like the glossy business magazines, governments jump from the IT
industry to biotechnology to gaming to green technology and now ‘real
manufacturing jobs for real men’. When Lerner wrote his book in 2009,
forty-nine US states had programmes to create clusters that attracted
biotechnology companies from other states and I would not be surprised if
the fiftieth state has acquired one since then. (If one of them succeeds, they
will no doubt be included in Mazzucato’s next book as an example of

amazing, impossible projects that would not have happened if politicians
had not dreamed about it.)
In cases where politicians discover a real shortcoming in production that
they want to remedy, such as on semiconductors (which is not because of a
supply chain breakdown but due to increased demand for semiconductors;
production and export is at an all-time high), it is a shortcoming that
everyone else has already noticed and is working as fast as possible to solve
for purely commercial reasons. When the EU and the White House propose
billions of dollars to subsidize the production of semiconductors, it is
corporate welfare that will only generate an even larger oversupply once all
the expansion plans have become reality. The German semiconductor
manufacturer Infineon unintentionally displayed the absurdity of handing
the taxpayers’ money to large, profitable businesses in a November 2022
tweet about having ‘record results in revenue’, and also planning to build a
new factory in Dresden, with the vaguely threatening caveat: ‘subject to
adequate public funding’.21
Every industrial policy subsidy is paid by taxpayers, who thereby lose
purchasing power that could have benefited other companies. It also attracts
labour to politically favoured projects, rather than to those that might have
given the best returns. In addition, subsidies change companies’ behaviour.
In a free market, companies receive a powerful signal when it is time to
stop expanding. If their last unit costs more to produce than they can sell it
for, they engage in pure capital destruction. Then it’s time to change
business, scale back or close down. But with an active industrial policy,
suddenly grants and co-financing come into play, which means that you get
more money if you continue to expand. This makes it rational to destroy
capital.
Governments are bad at picking winners, but losers are good at picking
governments. Several researchers have identified the species ‘welfare
entrepreneurs’, who systematically turn to various authorities to keep their
business afloat for a while longer.22 Instead of developing the best products
to attract consumers, they develop the best presentations to attract
politicians and officials. Instead of filling order books, they learn to fill in

forms with the buzzwords that will trigger the officials’ Pavlovian reflexes.
In this way, they can pay qualified staff well, but with low productivity and
lack of innovation they tie up resources that are in demand elsewhere in the
economy.
Welfare entrepreneurship is an impressive example of how enterprising
people can be in order to make money – something that is facilitated by the
fact that there are many bodies at municipal, regional, national and EU level
that distribute grants, often completely uncoordinated from each other. Most
ingenious was the Swedish entrepreneur who managed to collect as many as
thirty-eight different grants between 1997 and 2013.23 Imagine how much
such inventive people could have contributed to the national economy if
they had had incentives to seek markets instead of grants and were paid for
innovations instead of capital destruction.
All this turns industrial policy into a boulevard of broken dreams. What
is so sad is that there are a number of initiatives that could create a much
better business climate: legal security, efficient bureaucracies, good
infrastructure, the freedom to build, good education systems and liberal
labour immigration. Instead of investing energy and political capital in
creating these conditions, politicians run off to pick specific business
models to support. As Josh Lerner points out, it’s kind of like serving the
main course without first setting the table – it allows you to focus on the
most fun activity, but you ruin the whole dinner.
The final frontier
In the recent volume Questioning the Entrepreneurial State, thirty scholars
of innovation show that the history of top-down approaches to industrial
policy has a dismal record: ‘Innovation policy should be a matter of
removing barriers to growth and renewal instead of handing out targeted
support that tends to end up reinforcing vested interests.’24
Governments can contribute to innovation indirectly by financing the
development and dissemination of knowledge, for example through

universities. As long as it does not try to guide the activities too much, this
does not presuppose any centralized knowledge or ability to predict the
future. It is simply based on giving smart people money and asking them to
go and be smart in some eccentric, unpredictable way and then giving the
market’s decentralized ecosystems the opportunity to use these insights to
develop innovations that create value for society.
But theoretical knowledge is not the same as application, and invention
is not the same as innovation. In order for knowledge to be transformed into
processes and products that enrich society, something else is needed, and it
is when governments want to stimulate a certain technology or business
model that the problems arise. In this phase we instead need decentralized
experiments in an ever-changing ecosystem of investors, innovators and
industrialists, as well as consumers. Governments don’t expand the amount
of knowledge if they interfere at this stage. On the contrary, by pointing out
one path and pulling capital and labour in that direction – rather than
accepting a multitude of paths to find the way over the minefield – they
reduce it.25
Another form of innovation policy that is not directly targeted by my
criticism here is prizes: if you like it, put an incentive on it. If someone
develops a new, important vaccine or wireless transmission of electric
power over long distances, they get a bundle of millions. The prize does not
have a say in who should do it or how, but gives a general incentive to
everyone who thinks they have a chance to use their knowledge and to try
to do it their way. It’s just a matter of setting the right goals, which is not as
simple as it sounds (and if it is, it is probably incredibly profitable to
develop the innovation anyway).26
What I’ve written here is the reason why the nationalist attitude to
research is a folly. It is based on the idea that we as a country (or at least
countries that are like us) must ‘own’ certain knowledge complexes and
technologies. But the reason we so often let the government subsidize basic
research and basic knowledge is that it is less interesting for commercial
forces to do so, as it is difficult to exclude a competitor from using any
breakthroughs. Once someone has figured out how to fix nitrogen, conduct

light through optical fibres or cut and paste DNA, it is difficult to prevent
others from using the same knowledge. And that is true even if it was Xi
Jinping’s chosen ones who made these discoveries. The insight would soon
be spread all over the world. What’s more important for a country is how it
decides to exploit this insight.
For a long time, it was only in the Western world that we financed this
type of research on a large scale, which everyone could then use without
having been involved or paying for it. There are problems related to the rise
of some other countries now, such as when the research is used by
authoritarian states to create military capacity or to oppress their citizens,
and in that case we should do what we can to limit their access. But to the
extent that other countries also start to engage in basic research, we should
be happy that they help us fill the global knowledge reservoir. The key is
that we have plenty of venture capital, energetic entrepreneurs and curious
consumers who are constantly testing new methods to use that knowledge
to develop new technologies and products that improve our lives,
economies and capabilities.
This is best done in decentralized systems because technology and
business development are risky, unpredictable processes where it is the sum
of all experiments that creates results, not a single moonshot. If we suspect
that an initially very costly technology or business idea would be a success
that pays off many times over in the future, we have access to a time
machine that allows us to use that future revenue instantly. It is called
financial markets. Bank savers, equity investors and venture capitalists will
refrain from consumption today in exchange for a substantial part of the
income tomorrow.
Politicians who fund a certain technology steer resources away from the
innovation and industry that would otherwise have happened. And why
would they know better than millions of financiers, companies, researchers
and consumers what will work? Not even the people who operate daily on
the market and have hangars of data know what will succeed next time
(recall the list of mistakes made by Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Google and

Microsoft), so what is the chance that someone who stands outside the
market looking in should be able to do it?
Perhaps I’m wrong. Politicians and bureaucrats may in fact occasionally
know better than we mere mortals, but in that case we should ask them to
put their own money where their tax money is. If they are so convinced that
a European search engine or ethanol from cellulose is the future, we should
at least request that they put their own savings in the project before they
force us to chip in.
The world is big, with many different interests and many laudable ideas
searching for funding. The most important reason why the moon landing
should not be a model for development is that the whole of society
shouldn’t be subjected to a single goal from the top down. No political
vision should be allowed to cost whatever it takes, because that removes
resources from other people, who have their own dreams for the future, and
from their attempts to solve the problems that are most urgent to them.
The fact remains that the moon landing would not have taken place in
1969 if it had not been for the US government project. As a space
enthusiast, I would regret that. But what was it all about, really? We did not
get any moon bases and no asteroid mining, no solar power in space, no
space tourism and no journey towards Mars and into outer space. Precisely
because it was all about political symbolism, the moon landing was little
more than a glorified photo opportunity, and there was a complete lack of
interest in building a sustainable infrastructure for space travel. And
because the political interest in it was so overwhelming, the costs for the
Apollo programme were allowed to soar, which made the project possible
then but also completely unsustainable in the slightly longer run. The moon
landing is a bizarre symbol of the new hope for industrial policy because we
never got any industry. We placed a flag on the moon and then travelled
back. We boldly went back home like no one has done before.
Ironically, space is only beginning to be conquered now that it is being
privatized, with companies such as SpaceX, Blue Origin and Virgin
Galactic. They are not going for moonshots but for experimenting,
improvising, adjusting and, through incremental improvements, constantly

finding new methods and sources of revenue; step by step they are reducing
the cost of turning humanity into a multiplanetary species. Each launch of
NASA’s Space Launch System, SLS, designed to take us back to the moon,
is projected to cost $2 billion. When NASA’s boss suggested in 2019 that it
would be quicker and cheaper using SpaceX’s technology instead (projected
at $10 million per launch), he got a good lashing by US politicians and had
to back down. The fiercest critic was Richard Shelby, chairman of the
Senate Appropriations Committee. He is from Alabama, which just happens
to be home to the Marshall Space Flight Center, the lead centre for SLS
development. ‘I have more than a passing interest in what NASA does. And
I have a little parochial interest, too,’ Shelby has told NASA. ‘You keep
doing what you’re doing. We’ll keep funding you.’27
So industrial policy does not work in space either. Does it even work in
China?

M
7
CHINA, PAPER TIGER
‘I have fantasized, what if we could just be China for a day? Where we could actually
authorize the right solutions on everything from the economy to environment.’
THOMAS FRIEDMAN ON MEET THE PRESS, 23 MAY 2010
y In Defence of Global Capitalism was published in Chinese
translation. I saw this as a modest personal indication that the
country was gradually opening up. But I knew there were
boundaries: wherever I went on my Chinese book tour, I was followed by
plainclothes policemen who tracked my every step and recorded who I met.
Nothing has disappointed me more since I wrote that book than China. The
tension was always there, but I hoped that the epoch-making economic
progress the country had made over three decades would be followed by a
political opening. It would be increasingly difficult for the regime to
combine a richer and more educated population with an authoritarian state.
In the book, I mentioned the Communist Party’s labour camps, political
prisoners and the oppression of the Uighur population in Xinjiang, but I saw
these as a remnant of an earlier Maoist system, believing that they would
gradually ease under the pressure of an emerging middle class and
international opinion. I was completely wrong. Over the past decade, China
has experienced an authoritarian U-turn, politically and economically. Since
becoming General Secretary in 2012, Xi Jinping has concentrated power on
himself and recreated an almost Maoist political model. Hong Kong’s
freedoms have been shattered and colossal camps in Xinjiang for forced
labour and brainwashing have been erected. China is testing its neighbours’

borders in the South China Sea daily and is constantly threatening Taiwan
with a military invasion.
Where previously there was room for differing views as long as the
party’s right to govern was not questioned, censorship has now become
more aggressive and all-encompassing. Dissidents are even kidnapped on
foreign soil. The Chinese will no longer ‘seek truth from facts’, as Deng
Xiaoping urged them to. Now it is written in the constitution that they
should study ‘Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese
Characteristics for a New Era’.
Concerns about what this new Chinese model will mean for the world
and the possibility of peaceful coexistence have created a new dark
narrative about China, especially in America where opposition to China is
often said to be the last bipartisan issue. The narrative goes something like
this: China’s economic miracle was made possible by the Communist
Party’s strategic industrial policy and the naivety of the West. Step by step,
China guided its companies until they could dominate world markets. By
letting China into the WTO in 2001, we in the Western world were
defenceless when they stole our technology and dumped subsidized goods
here. Our industries were shattered and the Chinese could use the revenues
to build the industries of the future along with its military. It was naive to
believe there were ever conditions for real liberalization or democratization.
We can only minimize our losses by trying to block its exports and
imitating its industrial policies to win the tug-of-war over the technology
and business models of the future. In short: in order to defeat China, we
have to become China.
I share the disappointment implicit in this line of reasoning. I am deeply
concerned about the future of China and the effect its authoritarian model
has on the outside world. But the general disappointment has led to a
narrative that is inaccurate on almost every point and, if we embrace it, it
could lead to major mistakes both in China and in the West.
When China became capitalist

To start from the beginning, it is a Communist Party myth that its strategic
planning made China rich. On the contrary, as Ning Wang and Nobel
laureate Ronald Coase showed in their book How China Became Capitalist,
it was a series of popular revolts that created grassroots capitalism and set
the entire reform process in motion.1 Hungry farmers began to dismantle
collective farming and privatize land in the late 1970s. They wrote secret
documents that stated the land would be divided between families, and they
promised to raise the children of the villagers who were sent to labour
camps if the party ever found out about their conspiracy. But it was difficult
to keep it a secret when their production increased so rapidly. Private
farming spread ‘like a chicken pest’, as one farmer put it. ‘When one village
has it, the whole country will be infected.’2
The rapidly increasing agricultural productivity enabled the rural
population to use part of their time for non-agricultural purposes. They
created small companies that operated outside the planned economy and
therefore sent their own buyers to obtain material and their own sellers to
seek consumers. As a result, they outmanoeuvred the old rigid state-owned
companies and made consumers accustomed to simple but more varied
products at market prices. This success meant unemployed young people in
the cities started demanding the right to start similar companies in the early
1980s. Around 20 million young people had been sent to the countryside
under Mao’s rule because there were no jobs for them in the state-owned
companies. After his death, they returned to the cities and demanded
employment. They began to protest, sometimes in a subversive manner. In
several cities, they blocked railways. It forced the government to allow
small-scale businesses in cities from 1983, which revolutionized the
restaurant industry, retail and soon even manufacturing.
The party learned some tricks and began to allow special free trade
zones where companies were freed from the plan and allowed to experiment
with technology and investment from abroad, even from Hong Kong and
Taiwan. It was intended as a limited experiment at a reasonable distance
from the big cities so that the planned economy would not be affected too
much by a failure – or a success. ‘We [had] to put up a fence around the

provincial border of Guangdong,’ a deputy prime minister said, ‘so that
other provinces would be sheltered from the bad influence of capitalism.’3
But like with chickenpox and private farming, it was difficult to isolate any
part of the country from the remarkable innovation and productivity these
zones made possible. The Guangdong backwaters soon became the
country’s largest economy. The old fishing village of Shenzhen with a
population of 30,000 grew to become a global economic centre with more
than ten million inhabitants.
This entrepreneurial explosion in villages, cities and special zones
began to put pressure on state-owned companies, which lost consumer
markets and bled money. Therefore, after much hesitation, the party
initiated a harsh restructuring that meant state-owned companies were
disciplined, privatized or closed down. Between 1996 and 2002, the
workforce in state-owned companies decreased by more than 40 per cent.4
In combination with the abolition of price controls and a major tax reform,
this created an integrated national market, where market forces that had
previously been allowed to exist only on the margins in effect replaced the
planned economy. The periphery took over the centre.
However, the decline of state-owned companies created a new problem
in that workers’ housing was owned by the work units of these companies.
How would they ensure people were not left homeless because their
employers went bankrupt? The answer was to privatize housing. From 1998
onwards, the cities’ properties became the property of the workers. They
saw in turn that they now owned an asset they could invest in, mortgage,
sell or exchange, so the result was a housing market, a real-estate boom and
a construction sector in full swing.
The reform process created a new imbalance. Rural workers lost their
jobs when agricultural productivity increased, while dynamic markets in the
cities needed labour. Migrants wanted to migrate to cities, where the factory
jobs were dirty and dangerous but also offered an income five times higher
than the one they had left. It prompted the Communist Party to embark on
the greatest reform of all – to dismantle the internal borders. During Mao’s
time, no one was allowed to leave their home village, and anyone who

somehow managed to get to a city was not even allowed to buy food. Now
the system began to erode. In 2003, a law was revoked that had allowed the
police to forcibly relocate people back to their home village, leading to the
biggest wave of migration in history, and this gave further impetus to
entrepreneurship and the real-estate market that had previously opened.
Within a few years, a quarter of a billion people had sought refuge in the
cities and become the economic engine of the twentieth century in their
roles of workers, consumers and new entrepreneurs. Between 1980 and
2010, Beijing grew from 9 to 21 million inhabitants and Shanghai from 11
to 20 million.5
The last major reform was China’s accession to the WTO, which was
finally approved in 2001. The notable consequence was a rapid increase in
Chinese exports, but the main intention of Chinese reformers was to make
their own companies stronger by exposing them to competition, both
internationally and at home. The most important outcome was a continued
opening of the Chinese economy. Average Chinese tariffs fell from 40 per
cent in 1992 to less than 10 per cent in 2004.6
As I described in chapter 3, the notion that China devastated Western
industrial landscapes is all wrong. This trade enriched both us and the
Chinese. Many Chinese exports are in fact exports of products Western
companies have had made in China. Unfortunately, many such
collaborations have been allowed only on condition that technology and
intellectual property are transferred to Chinese partners. Even if that
condition has not been stated in the agreements, it does not matter much.
Often, soon after a Swedish or British company has opened a factory in
China, a Chinese factory pops up nearby that produces a slightly cheaper
variant of the same product.
The theft of knowledge and technology has been massive and
shameless, but it is by no means unique. Swedish and British companies did
the same thing at a corresponding level of economic development. The
United States even had an official policy of smuggling inventions and
bribing European artisans to reveal their secrets.7 What changed was not
that Americans were forced to change policies by outsiders, but that they

became more inventive themselves and therefore began to realize the value
of protecting patents and copyrights. The same thing is happening right now
in China. For ten years, the US–China Business Council has asked US
companies how China’s intellectual property protection has changed over
the past year. The proportion who experience an improvement since the
previous year is on average 47 per cent during these ten years. The
proportion who experience a deterioration is just 3 per cent. Forced
technology transfers is a major concern but only ends up in twenty-fourth
place among the twenty-seven biggest concerns that US companies
experience in China.8
One of the best ways to deal with such abuses is to use World Trade
Organization rules, because several issues about intellectual property and
government subsidies are covered by WTO agreements. Critics of the WTO
claim that the organization is toothless, that the dispute resolution
mechanism has been unfair to the United States (‘you lose almost all of the
lawsuits in the WTO,’ Trump complained) and that China still does not
follow rulings when they lose. However, of the complaints dealt with by the
United States against China, the US has won twenty out of twenty possible,
while China has won only about a third of the complaints it has brought
against the United States. In addition, in all but one case (which the US
chose to abandon), China has taken action as a result of the ruling, meaning
that – despite all the flaws and shortcomings in the process – it follows the
process better than the United States, which has sometimes completely
disregarded WTO rulings.9 The way to get China to engage in fair play is
not to withdraw from multilateral trade cooperation but to expand and
deepen it – and perhaps even to follow the rules ourselves.
Why am I taking up your time with this review of the waves of reform
in China? Because how China’s economic success is interpreted is crucial to
which model the country chooses and how the West should perceive it. The
Chinese Communist Party gives itself the credit for the economic
development since the late 1970s, which is a view shared by China’s angrier
critics in the West. This creates a false image of how strategic and wise the
party is and what can be achieved with centralization and industrial policy.

So the party wants more of it, while the critics in the West believe they must
borrow China’s instruction book if the West is to make its own economies
strong. This is based on a fundamental misreading of China’s modern
history. The waves of liberalization were not initiated by the Communist
Party and were not even foreseen by it. Observers often date the start of the
reform process to the Eleventh Central Committee’s third plenary session in
December 1978, in which Deng Xiaoping took power. But as one of Deng’s
closest advisors, Bao Tong, later acknowledged: ‘In fact, reform wasn’t
discussed. Reform wasn’t listed on the agenda, nor was it mentioned in the
work reports.’10
As we have seen, many reforms were initiated informally, by brave
villagers, such as land privatization and the opening of small businesses.
Deng Xiaoping’s greatest achievement with his Reform and Opening Up
programme was to acknowledge the development and not to punish the
pioneers, since it turned out that they produced results superior to the
planned economy. Other reforms were reluctantly implemented because the
popular demand was too great, such as free enterprise in the cities. Still
others came about because previous changes had created unintended
consequences and pressured the party to solve urgent problems, such as the
reforms of state-owned companies or the opening-up of internal migration.
This was ‘crossing the river by touching the stones’ as Deng put it, and it
was the Chinese people who had put the stones in the right place. The
economist Weiying Zhang says the reform process was about ‘becoming
good at using spontaneous forces and turning spontaneous forces into
conscious policy.’ The process was not planned, controlled or even
foreseen. It was, Weiying writes in an explicit reference to Adam Smith, as
if it was controlled by an ‘invisible hand’.11
Everything that took China out of poverty happened outside the five-
year plans. By the mid-1990s, the last four five-year plans had been
abandoned before they reached halfway, and the plans thereafter were more
about vague objectives than governance and commands. ‘How much of that
success can be attributed to industrial policy and planning?’ asks Barry
Naughton, an expert on China’s modern economic policy, in a recent book.

‘The answer is simple: none.’12 The reason he can speak so categorically is
that, by the middle of the twentieth century, the planned economy had
collapsed and China still had no industrial policy.
In 1978, more than 99 per cent of China’s urban population worked for
the state. In 2011, only 18 per cent did so. Almost all of the 250 million
urban jobs created since 1978 were private. The private share of the export
sector increased from a third in 1995 to almost 90 per cent in 2012.13
Poverty plummeted on a larger scale than anywhere else at any time before.
Between 1981 and 2015, extreme poverty in China fell from 88 per cent to
around 1 per cent according to the World Bank. Masses and markets had
defeated Maoism.

Extreme poverty in China 1981–201514
Mao strikes back
But then, towards the end of the first decade of the new millennium,
everything started to go wrong and Maoism started to make a comeback.
Although there was always such a risk, it was by no means decided by fate.
In fact, for a while longer, most party documents talked about continued
reforms, both economically and politically.
During the period 1995–2008, it was even possible to believe that China
was on the verge of democratization. When I wrote In Defence of Global
Capitalism, experiments with elections at village level were going on, and

the influential Zeng Qinghong led attempts in the 1990s and 2000s to make
politics more transparent and gradually liberalize civil society, the media
and the public debate. This was not because the Communist Party
appreciated political freedom but because it was worried that what does not
bend might break. It is common knowledge that the Chinese authorities
carefully studied the collapse of Soviet communism, and most people know
that they thought Gorbachev’s political reforms were too rapid. Few
remember that another central conclusion was that the Soviet reforms had
begun too late, when the system had solidified and the Communist Party
was already deeply unpopular.15
But in 2008, Zeng retired from the Politburo in what must be described
as historically unfortunate timing. Just then, the global financial crisis hit
and was interpreted by many around the world as the end of the ‘neoliberal’
era. The United States was stuck in Iraq and Afghanistan after military
invasions. Conservative groups in China’s Communist Part saw it as a sign
of the decadence of the West, while at the same time their fear of political
change escalated when revolutions took place in former Soviet republics
such as Georgia (2003), Ukraine (2005), Kyrgyzstan (2005) and Moldova
(2009). The Arab Spring would soon make it seem even more worrying. In
China’s Leaders, China scholar David Shambaugh describes how four
groups who felt threatened by the reform effort – the party’s propaganda
apparatus, state-owned companies, the security forces and the military –
used this opportunity to convince the weak General Secretary Hu Jintao that
continued liberalization risked undermining the party’s position. Without
Zeng at the top, there was no one to oppose them, and the initiative passed
to the conservative faction, which would later consolidate its power under
Hu’s successor Xi Jinping.16
Not only did this new centre of power reverse the incipient political
openness but they also began to dismantle the liberal economic model.
They had never had any preference for spontaneous order and grassroots
capitalism but instinctively believed in command and control. These were
the groups that got high on their own propaganda, which stated it was the
party that in its infinite wisdom had led people to prosperity. Now they tried

to get reality to imitate fiction. Instead of clearing up large-scale
malinvestment after the financial crisis, they created a massive stimulus
package where indebtedness and government spending would lead the way
instead of productivity and innovation.
Even this faction believed China’s economy needed to be modernized
but, where previous generations of leaders were willing to accept that
liberalization had snowball effects, this group has repeatedly rolled back
reforms when they’ve faced the consequences.17 Attempts to discipline
banks that speculated with easy money from the central bank in 2013 were
abandoned when it caused short-term interest rates to soar. In 2014, Chinese
companies were allowed to start investing abroad but were stopped when it
led to a massive outflow of capital. In 2015, the bank interest rate was
liberalized, but concerns that small banks that offered higher interest rates
would attract money away from the state-owned companies meant an
informal rule was created that no one could be too far from the interest rate
benchmark. In 2016, an aggressive tightening of speculative loans began
but, when new construction and infrastructure decreased, it was also
abandoned, and this has turned into a painful stop-and-start process. Tech
companies were given freedom from regulations and protection from
foreign competition, but when they became too big, policy turned around
and the state started chasing them to the brink of ruin.
This pattern has been repeated time and time again during Xi Jinping’s
time. This confusing dance back and forth is not about any elegant fine-
tuning of the economy, as some foreigners believe. Nor is it about any
conviction that the economy does not need more liberalizations. The party
has cautiously initiated reforms that it has seen as necessary but, as soon as
it has created unforeseen consequences, the leadership has panicked and
turned 180 degrees back to the secure, low-productivity command structure
it is used to.
When one does not dare to liberate market forces, state-commanded
innovation emerges as the only remaining source of growth. The active
industrial policy that now suddenly dominates China’s economy – where
the government makes plans that define crucial technical and economic

areas and steers companies towards them – began to appear in documents in
the middle of the 2000s and was realized on a large scale only around 2010.
State-owned companies have once again been given a prominent role.
Instead of doubling down on international trade, the government has begun
to strive for self-reliance in many industries, partly as a reaction to Trump’s
trade war, which Biden has essentially continued. The aim of reducing
economic connections with the West reinforces the party’s sense that they
can now safely ignore what the rest of the world thinks of their human
rights violations and aggressive foreign policy.
Both the party and its critics now see today’s command policy as
defining China’s economy, and believe that it explains their success. That is
reading history backwards, as Barry Naughton explains:
‘China’s emergence as an economic and technological super-power
is due primarily to the policy package that it followed from 1978
through the first decade of the 21st century, that is, until about
2006–7. China’s policy package today – that is, the policies that
started tentatively after 2005 but were fully in place by 2008–2010 –
are radically different. Because of this, it is a mistake to attribute
China’s success to the policies China is currently following. These
policies are simply too recent to have had a determinative impact on
today’s outcomes.’18
Would a poorer China have been less destructive?
I am the first to say that China has gone completely in the wrong direction
in the last decade. I also think the free world has been very bad at sticking
together against China’s new aggressive foreign policy and its economic
punishment of countries that criticize its human rights abuses. Democracies
in the Pacific region must deepen their security cooperation to prevent
China from subjecting one country after another through economic warfare
or threatening military might. I am also convinced we have been naive in

our view of Chinese investment abroad. It is not a problem when it comes
to chairs or sunglasses, but investments in important digital or physical
infrastructure can make us vulnerable. We must be aware that after 2010, no
Chinese companies are completely private. They are all expected to submit
to the party’s plans.
But the popular notion that it was wrong to support China in opening up
to the outside world because it enriched an enemy is something completely
different. Well, if the expectation was that trade would make China a free,
democratic country, it has clearly failed. But the goal of the Western world
was not to try to reach heaven but to avoid hell. Nixon did not go to China
in 1972 to turn them into cuddly liberals but to split a communist bloc with
which the West was in existential conflict, and to shake up the Soviet Union
until it was willing to come to the negotiating table.
There was also a worried realization that a poor but technologically
sophisticated China would find other ways to raise money if it were not
allowed to sell clothes and toys. In the 1980s, China not only provided the
instruction manual for an atomic bomb to Pakistan but sold the entire kit,
including uranium and ballistic missiles. There were great fears that China
would become a large-scale exporter of weapons of mass destruction to
every villainous regime around the world. After decades of negotiations and
relationship-building, China is now an active opponent of nuclear
proliferation. The diplomats of the 1980s would have seen it as a great
success that has made the world much safer.19
The idea that it was always naive to expect China to continue towards
openness is based on the notion of a monolithic China that has acted
according to a unified long-term plan, whereas there has always been a
struggle within China over both means and goals, between reformists and
market liberals on the one hand and conservatives and neo-Maoists on the
other. Interestingly, it was the former who supported economic
modernization, while the latter group opposed it. Could both groups really
be so wrong?
For the Western world, the question boils down to whether China today
would have been less authoritarian and destructive if it had been poorer and

more isolated internationally. Of course, that is not impossible but I have
still not heard any convincing arguments for it. Just look at other
dictatorships like Iran and North Korea, which were isolated and kept in
poverty by despots and sanctions. None of them are WTO members. As is
well known, none of them mitigated their foreign policy aggression or
implemented democratic reforms. Instead, both countries have moved in an
increasingly despotic and threatening direction and continue to develop
their nuclear weapons programmes despite sanctions from a far more united
world than we could ever have mustered against China. And Iran and North
Korea have not even had nuclear technology since the 1960s, as China has.
Nor do they have a fifth of the world’s population and a self-image of being
a historically dominant power only temporarily humiliated and held down
by the Western world.
Counterfactual history is always difficult, but my guess is that if we had
closed our markets for Chinese goods and our universities to their students
in the 1990s, not only would many more Chinese still be living in deep
poverty but the Chinese people would also have been much more likely to
have generally perceived Westerners as irreconcilable opponents, instead of
the present situation where many consider an open, peaceful world as the
goal and Western democracies as models – something that might be pivotal
for the country’s future. The risk is that in the alternative timeline, where
we continued to shut China out, we would not only have talked about a
possible future war between China and the United States but perhaps
already have been in one.
Even though, as I said, I share the view that we need to look at Chinese
investment abroad in a whole new way, I am afraid that a policy of trade
barriers and isolation for fear of an aggressive China could become a self-
fulfilling prophecy that strengthens the most reactionary and nationalist
forces in China. The reason the Communist Party has not gone all in with
supporting Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is not that it treasures peace and
human rights but that it fears secondary economic sanctions from the West.
If our economies were to decouple completely from China, that limitation

would disappear and the dictatorship would be free to act according to its
character. That would be a more dangerous world.
Going backwards
One reason the Chinese Communist Party performed unexpectedly well for
such a long time was that it learned a crucial lesson from Mao’s autocracy,
which resulted in the greatest famine in history and the horrifying cultural
revolution. One-man rule limits the amount of knowledge that reaches the
top, and leads to yes-men, paranoia and purges. Major mistakes can be
made when witless loyalty is rewarded. Therefore, a more collective
leadership with ideological flexibility was developed within the top
echelons of the party. Internal debate meant that different factions could
make their views and objections heard, and consensual decisions meant that
no individual lost face when they needed to change their mind and set a
new direction.
Xi Jinping has overthrown this order. Xi and the other conservatives
were worried that dissatisfaction with the party was growing. The party
cells in business, state-owned companies and organizations had fallen into
disrepair and, even though the party membership grew, it no longer meant
anything – you could have any opinion on various issues or none. Since the
leaders rejected the idea of creating loyalty through democratic
experiments, their only solution was to return to a more Maoist control,
with centralized power and a personality cult. Like Mao, Xi rules through
purges, in the form of perpetual anti-corruption campaigns, creating fear
and submissiveness. Officials and students practise Xi Jinping’s thinking
via apps on mobile phones, and eighteen research institutes have been set
up to study his speeches and texts.
Yet this is precisely what makes the new system extremely vulnerable.
When decisions are presented as the will of an infallible leader, it is no
longer possible to pragmatically cross the river by touching the stones and
adjust direction when you’ve gone wrong. It builds tensions within the

party and makes it more difficult to respond incrementally to problems and
dissatisfaction. It increases the risk of catastrophic decisions – like the
brutal zero-Covid policy that hurt people and the economy, and then at the
end of 2022 the rushed, almost panicked abandonment of it without
preparing for it, by importing foreign, efficient vaccines for example.
Centralised authority also makes it more difficult to admit a mistake since
it’s more difficult to escape individual responsibility for it.20
It is often said that China shows political stability, but it’s too early to
tell since this is a system that has yet to be tested by an economic
depression or a military defeat. In its current form, the model is not much
more than a decade old. The party, of course, presents itself as popular, but
its need to constantly sharpen censorship and persecute every dissenting
thought suggests a lack of self-confidence and a fear of brewing discontent
in the population. Political models that give people the right to choose and
build their own lives will always have an attraction to people. But a
technocratic dictatorship like China has to prove its worth by delivering
growth and higher wages. That means it can never feel safe and it must
constantly prove itself, which will not be easy with the new economic
policy.
The more economic power the Communist Party takes, the more
knowledge and outside initiative is lost. The difference between the popular
image of China and what research actually shows about it could hardly be
greater. Our politicians and media paint horrifying images of China’s
brilliant strategic planning, but in the vast literature on China’s economy
there is hardly a single study that even attempts to argue that a specific
industrial policy has created real commercial success.
The Westerners who now assume we need an active industrial policy in
order to compete with China thus choose not to imitate the Chinese policy
that created the country’s successes but the post-2010 policy that involves
enormous risk-taking. To the extent that the new policy has achieved any
results, they are negative. Capital has been transferred to less productive
state-owned companies. Despite the fact that they only account for around a
quarter of the country’s GDP, they get about 80 per cent of the banks’

lending. Growth per capita, which in the 1990s and 2000s was around an
incredible 10 per cent annually, declined to 5 per cent before the pandemic
(and some observers believe this was an exaggeration). Under the current
economic model, China finds it hard to squeeze any growth out of the
economy. You can afford to make many big mistakes if you have double-
digit growth. A slower economy cannot buy itself out of structural problems
in the same way.
The problem is that China’s impressive growth was based on reforms
that were made far back in time. One after another, changes were
undertaken that gave a new boost to the economy. But since the
liberalization of migration and the WTO membership, no major new
reforms have been implemented. After the financial crisis, the economy was
sustained through massive government investment, but since it was not
supplemented by increased productivity and innovation, ever more money
is needed to get any growth out of it. After rising 1.1 per cent annually from
1982 to 2010, growth in total factor productivity (what you can squeeze out
of the resources you use) declined by 0.6 per cent during the period 2011–
2019.21
In addition, the working-age population is declining and any time now
the population as a whole will start declining as well. China can no longer
build its economy on rural farmers moving into factories, or its housing
boom on more of the population moving into brand-new apartments in
cities. Real estate is no longer the engine of the economy but a drain on it.
At the time of writing, the real-estate market seems to be in free fall. By
2033, almost a third of the population will be over sixty years old. As the
Chinese get older, they will also need the savings that the government has
previously used to keep state-owned companies under arms.
All this would have been easier to deal with if China had been a rich
country. But that it is the world’s second-largest economy is because the
population is large not because it is rich. Measured in GDP per capita,
China is about as poor as Turkmenistan and the Dominican Republic, at
about a quarter of Britain’s prosperity level. Other fast-growing Asian
economies began to grow more slowly only when they were already

relatively rich: Japan in the 1970s, and South Korea and Taiwan in the
1990s. When they reached China’s current level, Taiwan grew by 7.5 per
cent annually for another decade and South Korea by 6.3 per cent.22 The
only way for the current Chinese model to reach such levels is to falsify
numbers.
One should not underestimate what was required for China to grow so
fast in recent decades, but the first step in the growth saga – to catch up – is,
after all, the easiest. It is about getting low-productivity farmers to move to
modern factories and about making these factories more productive by
utilizing technologies and processes that have already been tried and tested
in richer countries. The next stage is much more difficult. When there are
not many farmers left who want to move to the city and the old technology
is already imitated, you have to come up with your own innovations, new
methods, products and business models to create growth on your own
merits. The problem for the Communist Party is that these innovations can
only come from the unexpected, from creative and seemingly chaotic
processes, and if there is something authoritarian rulers do not like, it is
surprises. As long as the Chinese state only has a market for goods but not
for ideas, it will always be handicapped.
In several areas, however, China has been surprisingly good at
innovation. One reason is that the dictatorship has paradoxically given
companies great freedom if they are focused on an area that is perceived as
politically prioritized. It is not uncommon to hear Western entrepreneurs at
the frontiers of technology say they have significantly greater freedom from
regulation in China than in the West (which should give us pause for
thought). But on the other hand, Chinese companies have significantly less
freedom as soon as something does not fit into the plan, and as China
moves in an authoritarian direction, the plans become increasingly
comprehensive and more arbitrary. In addition, successful private
entrepreneurs are always a threat to groups who want total control and
cannot accept a variety of power sources.
The ongoing attack on China’s tech sector is an example. Unlike the
tightly controlled financial and energy sectors, tech companies were

unregulated for a long time. They are not just imitators but often genuinely
innovative companies that have surpassed their Western models in e-
commerce and digital payments. But they became a little too successful and
a bit too bold in public, and the Communist Party has responded by
attacking the entire sector. The most dramatic example is the payment giant
Ant Group, which was on its way to the largest IPO in history in the autumn
of 2020. After its popular founder, Jack Ma, gave a speech criticizing the
country’s banks, the launch was blocked, the company castrated and
China’s highest-profile business leaders were forced out of the public life.
In part, this might have been about the regulatory system trying to catch
up with the new superstars, but the drastic change in attitude and
arbitrariness of the decisions reveal the weakness of the authoritarian
model. By striking so fiercely, the Communist Party has deterred other
entrepreneurs and chased capital away. What could have been China’s next
big success story, with the potential to conquer world markets, now looks
more like a crisis industry. Since then, the attacks have been extended to the
gaming industry and education companies. No one knows where such
persecution ends once it has begun. In an article that was quickly scrubbed
off the net, economist Weiying Zhang warned that Xi Jinping’s policy of
‘common prosperity’ risks leading to ‘common poverty’.
Experiments and innovation always look messy and you never know
what you will get, and this will never be welcomed by rulers with an
excessive sense of order. Many despots have succeeded in creating rapid
growth by moving farmers to factories, but so far no one has managed to
take the next step and become a complex, innovation-driven growth
economy. Most foreign observers still hope the Communist Party will learn
from its mistakes and once again reverse course, but that is exactly what is
so difficult with the new personality cult. It would probably presuppose a
coup against Xi.
I know I’m sticking my neck out when I predict that China’s
authoritarian model will not survive. I got it wrong last time. But I think the
reason I got it wrong was that the Communist Party identified exactly the
dilemma I pointed to: continued economic liberalization will lead to

openness and diversity that will eventually undermine the dictatorship.
Precisely for that reason, the party chose to step on the brakes and start
rolling back the liberalization. They don’t do it out of self-confidence, but
because they fear they are losing their grip.
That is not to say that I believe that China will necessarily become a
liberal democracy. It could also crumble in factional struggles and
separatism, it could become a failed state, and the Communist Party might
also decide to be content to become the kind of semi-rich regional middling
power that an authoritarian system can bear. What I don’t believe is
possible is that a totalitarian superpower will be able to replace the leading
role of the United States and Europe.
To sum up: many in the West believe China is winning and that the
West’s only chance to cope with this economic and technological rivalry is
to become more like China. But they confuse China’s unparalleled
successes during the opening years 1978–2010 with the centralist policies
after 2010, which in fact hold the country back and put its future in peril. As
long as China does not allow capital to flow to the most promising ideas,
refuses to let entrepreneurs pursue innovations and surprises, and only
allows markets in goods and not in ideas, China will never be an innovative,
rich economy. And the more Xi Jinping concentrates power on himself and
his clique, the more vulnerable he makes the country when it encounters
unpredictable but inevitable problems and manifestations.
The despotism that makes the country dangerous is also what sets a
limit to how powerful it can become. It is not the free world that has to
become like China to beat China. It is the other way around. If China wants
to ‘beat’ the free world, then China has to become free.

W
8
BUT WHAT ABOUT THE PLANET?
‘We are in the beginning of a mass extinction, and all you can talk about is money and
fairy tales of eternal economic growth. How dare you!’
GRETA THUNBERG, AT THE UN’S CLIMATE
ACTION SUMMIT 2019
hen I read In Defence of Global Capitalism again, I am struck by a
startling oversight. I flip back and forth but find it nowhere.
Where is climate change? I write about the environment,
resources and emissions, but I do not address with one word what almost
everyone today considers to be the most serious threat to our planet. It feels
like an oversight that will be difficult to explain to my children.
I underestimated the risks of greenhouse gases, in part because so many
of the environmental movement’s warnings had previously turned out to be
exaggerated or outright false. According to the environmentalists, we would
suffer from overpopulation, food would run out, water would run out, oil
would run out, we would have silent springs without birdsong, forests
would be replaced by a ‘chemical desert’ and genetically modified crops
were ‘Frankenfoods’. The first environmental issue that concerned me as a
child was the belief that we would all soon die due to nuclear power. The
environmental movement had cried wolf so many times that I did not see
when a real wolf actually snuck up on us. It says something about how one
can deceive oneself with simplified historical analogies.
But it also says something about how the climate threat has worsened
and our knowledge of it has improved. When I wrote In Defence of Global

Capitalism, the latest available report at the time from the UN’s climate
panel IPCC spoke of a warming of between 0.3 and 0.6 degrees over the
last hundred years, ‘a change that is unlikely to be entirely natural in origin’
(my emphasis). The IPCC wrote that there was not enough knowledge to
say whether warming led to more extreme weather such as storms and
cyclones.1
Everything has certainly not improved in the last two decades. Our
greenhouse gas emissions have increased rapidly and now there is no doubt
that they have made a strong contribution to global warming. According to
the IPCC’s latest assessment, humans have increased the global temperature
by around 1 degree and are increasing it by a further 0.2 degrees every
decade. We have also begun to see the consequences of this warming in the
form of new temperature records, extreme weather events, more droughts,
more floods. The climate is extremely complex, each effect has a variety of
causes and it is almost impossible to isolate how much humans have
contributed to a particular weather outcome. Climate change strikes locally
and randomly, sometimes in a favourable way. But what we do know is that
a large amount of change is now occurring around the world at a rate that
exceeds previous forecasts. In addition, there is the risk of tipping points:
rapid, irreversible changes that risk completely changing conditions for life
on Earth. Although the risks of their occurrence may be small, the
consequences would be so enormous that it is worth investing quite a bit to
insure ourselves against such an outcome.
Reducing global warming and its consequences will require major
changes. But which ones? A common line of argument is that the problem
is the whole idea of an ever-growing economy with ever more planes and
trucks ferrying people and goods across the continents around the clock.
Leftists like Naomi Klein claim this is the inevitable result of global
capitalism and ever-increasing production. But even a climate activist like
Greta Thunberg complains that world leaders only talk about money and
‘some technical solutions’.2 This alludes to the widespread perception that
we cannot rely on the growth and technology that have created the

problems to solve them. Many greens want ‘degrowth’ and say we should
consume less, travel less and settle for less to give the planet a chance.
It is my sincere conviction that this would be the worst thing we could
do for the world – and for the climate. My exhibit A is the fact that we just
tested this approach. The 2020 pandemic was an unforeseen and
undesirable experiment in degrowth. Almost overnight, the machines
stopped and the borders were blocked. The planes stayed on the ground,
cargo ships anchored outside the ports and half the world’s population was
barred from leaving their homes. The result was disaster. People lost their
jobs and their livelihoods. According to the World Bank, nearly 70 million
people were thrown back into extreme poverty as a result of the pandemic.
Hunger increased rapidly and the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) estimates that between five and seven million children
may be hampered in their physical development due to pandemic-related
malnutrition.3
And how much did this global lockdown reduce 2020’s global carbon
emissions? By about 6 per cent. It is the largest reduction ever but nowhere
close to what would be needed. If we were to meet the Paris Climate
Agreement by 2030 just by doing and travelling less, we would need to
suffer a pandemic like this every year for the next decade, without allowing
us to have any recovery between the pandemics. Which, of course, would
lead to an unprecedented social collapse.
Even under this global state of emergency 94 per cent of CO2 emissions
remained. It shows that the solution was never to stop flying and settle for
less. The large emissions are built into our societal infrastructure and our
energy systems. We can get rid of them too, through a transition to non-
fossil fuels and energy sources, but it will cost tens of thousands of billions
of dollars. And if there is one thing people who are fighting for their jobs
and for food on their tables do not appreciate, it is spending tens of
thousands of billions more. This is why people always see the environment
as less of a priority during recessions.
If we were to achieve carbon neutrality through negative growth, it
would require us to phase out approximately 85 per cent of the global

energy supply by the year 2050. It would have the potential to become the
greatest catastrophe to hit humanity. About half of food production would
be threatened, as it is dependent on fertilizer produced from coal and gas.
We would have to give up agricultural machinery and cold storage. The
result would be large-scale starvation. Even more people would die when
healthcare clinics lose lighting, medical technology and the ability to cool
vaccines and medicines.
A few years ago, I visited a small, poor village in the Atlas mountains in
Morocco. I got to spend time with a friendly family who lived close to each
other and close to nature. From the outside, it looked like a simple but good
life, far from the stress and pressure of the modern world. But when I asked
the father about their lives, he gave a long list of everything they were
missing and desperately longed for: a water pump so the family could
shower off the desert sand and water the crops, a refrigerator to store food
and lighting so kids could read in the evening. He wanted to be able to
charge a telephone to keep in touch with the outside world, especially his
eldest son, who had moved away to university in the big city. All these
needs could be summed up in a single wish: that the power lines would
finally reach all the way to their little village. Worst of all, without
electricity and gas, the family cooked and warmed itself in the same way as
three billion other people do: by burning solid fuel indoors – a dirty
everyday activity that results in respiratory diseases and lung conditions
that kill around two million annually (still the world’s most fatal
environmental problem).
An Indian study shows that for every million children born, 8,000 die
from lack of electricity. A report from Bangladesh documents that infant
mortality is more than a third higher in villages without electricity. These
numbers would be much worse if the energy-poor could not use technology
and goods produced in places with electricity but, in a world of energy
starvation, the entire world’s production, trade and transport systems would
collapse.4
And that’s not all. Paradoxically, degrowth would also make global
warming even more dangerous for humans, as we need prosperity and

technology to adapt to it. Rich countries have no fewer natural disasters
than poor ones, but they are much better at minimizing their damage to life
and health. According to the International Disaster Database, the global risk
of dying in a climate-related disaster – such as droughts, floods, storms,
forest fires and extreme heat – has decreased by more than 90 per cent since
the 1950s.5 That’s not because the number of natural disasters has
decreased, but because prosperity, technology, construction and healthcare
have improved. If we had had zero growth since the 1950s, we would have
had less CO2 in the atmosphere, but almost half a million more people
would have died from climate-related disasters every year.
Lower growth is one of the costliest ways to reduce CO2 emissions,
both in terms of money and human life. According to one estimate, each
tonne of CO2 that was reduced because of negative growth in 2020 cost
approximately $1,750 (in the form of reduced GDP), which is many times
more than the cost of most technologies to reduce CO2 emissions available
even today.6 Poverty is one of the most expensive ways to save the planet,
even apart from its effect on the poor themselves.
We cannot save the climate by becoming poorer, we can only do so by
becoming richer, in a smarter way. And if we want to find out how it can be
done, we should learn from previous environmental progress.
Environmental progress
Many environmental problems have been dealt with surprisingly well. We
did not run out of natural resources. In the last hundred years, the amount of
material used for a certain amount of economic growth has decreased by
around two-thirds in the Western world. That did not suffice when at the
same time the population grew rapidly and each country produced much
more goods and services. The use of resources still increased in absolute
numbers – until now. Rich countries now use less aluminium, nickel,
copper, steel, stone, cement, sand, wood, paper, manure, water and fossil
fuels every year. The use of sixty-six of the seventy-two resources

important enough to be documented in the US Geological Survey has
declined in recent decades.7
The problem is rather that the residual products end up in the wrong
places, although we have also started to clean this up. Freons were phased
out and the ozone layer began to heal. The leading pollutants have fallen
dramatically in the United States and Europe. One remarkable success story
is sulphur dioxide, which tormented our lungs and acidified our soil and
water. Between 1990 and 2013, emissions of sulphur dioxide in the EU
decreased by 92 per cent. The dreaded forest death did not occur.8
These improvements have also cautiously begun to spread globally, not
least because cross-border trade and investment make new technologies
available to more people. The World Health Organization has a measure of
Disability-adjusted life years (DALY), which it uses to assess the total
disease burden that something causes in a population, both in terms of
premature death and disability. Globally, from 1990 to 2017, the number of
DALYs lost to air pollution has decreased by 49 per cent and to water
pollution by 65 per cent.9

Environmental damage to life and health10
One important exception is CO2 emissions, which have continued to
increase as more parts of the world have been electrified. However, this
electrification has been crucial in reducing the number of people who cook
with biofuels. Between 1990 and 2019, the number of deaths from indoor
air pollution decreased by more than two million. The death rate has
dropped by two-thirds, one of the biggest health triumphs of recent
decades.11
Yet biodiversity is under increasing threat as humans encroach on the
wilderness, mainly to turn it into agricultural land. It is often said that we

are in the midst of the sixth mass extinction, this time a man-made one. But
almost all the figures we hear about how many species die (such as ‘150 a
day’) are based on ‘pessimistic projections’ about the relationship between
space and species and have been shown to be incorrect, according to Claude
Martin, former head of the World Wide Fund for Nature. The International
Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has documented fewer than a
thousand species that have become extinct in the last five hundred years,
mostly invertebrates, which is about one-twentieth of a per cent of all
described species.12 On the other hand, even these numbers represent a
tragedy, and with great certainty it is an underestimation. The IUCN
estimates that 37,000 species are currently endangered.
Many countries try to deal with this problem by creating larger nature
reserves. Today, 13.5 per cent of the Earth’s surface is protected from
exploitation, more than double the figure in 1990. Development has been
even faster for coastal areas and nationally administered zones in the oceans
and seas. The proportion protected today is fifteen times greater than in
1990,13 even though that does not help much when the rest of the sea is
overfished by huge, tax-subsidized trawlers.
One of the biggest threats to biodiversity is the continued loss of virgin
forests. Every year, an area of forest corresponding to the size of Hungary
disappears. However, the rate of deforestation has fallen by 40 per cent
since the 1990s, according to the FAO. Deforestation has ceased in rich
countries. In the United States and Europe forested areas are increasing. In
China and India, too, forests are now growing, suggesting that rising
populations and economies do not have to cause overexploitation.14 Were it
not for deforestation in seven countries – Brazil, Paraguay, Angola, Congo,
Tanzania, Indonesia and Myanmar – the world’s forests would have grown
in the 2010s. That is not much of a comfort, given the unique natural values
lost with those forests. But it shows that the notion that we are experiencing
a relentless global deforestation does not hold.
If we are to save biodiversity, the human footprint on the planet must be
reduced, which can only happen through urbanization and more productive
agriculture. Half of the world’s ice- and desert-free land is used for

agriculture, so everything we can do to make the soil give higher yields is
important. We have already seen tremendous progress in this regard thanks
to the productivity improvements of the Green Revolution. If Indian
farmers had grown wheat as they did in the early 1960s, they would have
needed another 65 million hectares to achieve the 2010 harvests, and
Chinese farmers would have needed 120 million more hectares just for
corn. In total, higher agricultural productivity has probably saved around
three billion hectares of forest and grassland since 1961. Without it, an area
equivalent to the size of two South Americas would have had to be put
under the plough.15
In recent decades this has led to ‘peak farmland’ and, for the first time
in history, we have allowed pastures to grow again.16 If urbanization and
agricultural productivity continue to increase – with the help of genetically
modified crops, for example – we have a historic chance for rewilding,
where wildlife recovers lost land with flora and fauna in diverse
combinations.
The economists Jonas Grafström and Christian Sandström have
compiled an impressive set of statistics for Sweden showing that in almost
all environmental areas there has been striking improvements since 1990.
Despite the fact that the population has increased by 1.6 million and the
economy has almost doubled, emissions and resource use have decreased.
Sweden now uses less water and pesticides and almost half as much petrol.
The amount of nitrogen and phosphorus with which the country
eutrophicates its sea areas has decreased by 40 per cent. Emissions of
metals such as chromium, cadmium and mercury from treatment plants
have plummeted by more than 80 per cent. The amount of waste has
increased by almost a quarter, but the emissions from its treatment have
decreased by almost 40 per cent – CO2 emissions from the waste by 67 per
cent. Of the twenty-six harmful emissions into Swedish air, twenty-four
have decreased since 1990, nineteen of them by more than half. Particulates
have been halved, nitrogen oxides have decreased by 54 per cent, volatile
organic compounds 63 per cent, carbon monoxide 69 per cent and lead 97
per cent.17

This is no longer just about a relative decoupling, where we use fewer
resources per person or unit of GDP, but an absolute decoupling, where we
get more from less even as the population and economy grow. As economist
Paul Romer has stated, growth does not have to come from using more
ingredients but from coming up with better recipes and creating many of the
best ones with fewer ingredients. If growth was only created when more
things were put into the pot, there would obviously be limits to growth, but
only our imagination and our freedom set the limits for what recipes we can
come up with.
What went right?
What happened? Wasn’t capitalism supposed to destroy the planet? Leftist
thinkers like Naomi Klein and Göran Greider still claim we need a planned
economy to save the environment. But a look at the planned economies that
actually existed in the communist states in Eastern Europe provides an
insight into what works and what doesn’t.
The communists tortured the environment. There were many reasons for
this, but one of them relates to resource use. In the 1980s, Soviet
economists calculated that their factories needed to use 50 per cent more
materials and more than twice as much energy to produce the same amount
of goods as American ones. The Soviets used almost twice as much steel
and cement but produced only half as much with it. Their machines and
tools weighed 15–25 per cent more than foreign models.18 Of course, this
was because machinery and methods were outdated, but why should they
not be? If the planners thought that a certain form of production was a
priority, it received the material and energy it needed. In the socialist
system, the factories faced no pressure to constantly streamline production
in order to cope with competition from others who were better at managing
materials and energy.
It is very different in a capitalist economy with competition, profit
motives and free pricing. The company that comes up with methods to

reduce the thickness of a soda can by just a tenth of a millimetre can earn
millions in material costs (something that has reduced its weight from 85 to
13 grams in a century). This means that production is constantly being
revolutionized. The one who succeeds in developing more environmentally
friendly technology can be the next green tech billionaire.
It always looks like the resources we use will soon run out if we ignore
human ingenuity and assume that they will be used in the same way and in
the same proportions. The nineteenth-century economist William Stanley
Jevons – known for his prediction that coal would soon run out – collected
tons of writing paper and wrapping paper because he believed there would
soon be no trees left.19 But as long as resources are privately owned and
priced, myriad innovators and entrepreneurs will constantly come up with
new ways to manage them better, find substitutes and recycle – new recipes,
in other words.
None other than Karl Marx admired how effectively the capitalist
economy turned waste into wealth. He noticed how the meat industry
realized that leftovers could be used to make buttons, handles, glue, soap
and tallow instead of throwing the leftovers away. As long as they were
exposed to competition from others and there were no commons where they
could freely throw their rubbish, they had to find ways to recycle their
waste in a profitable way.20 Now, however, there are plenty of commons in
the form of forests, water and sewage, and the links between the person
who emits and the damage it does become increasingly complex during
industrialism.
But the damage was no less simply because it happened somewhere
else. We built higher chimneys to send our sulphur dioxide away, but they
always ended up in another lake and emptied it of life. The lead that
lubricated our engines also ended up in children’s nervous systems. This
form of environmental degradation runs counter to the fundamental
capitalist principle that everyone should bear the costs of their own
behaviour. Polluters privatize profits (for example, from production or
transport) but socialize costs (for example, through emissions that harm
others, the waters they fish in or the climate we all depend on). If

companies are free to use other people’s resources or dump their waste, they
will do so, but if they have to bear their own costs – either by negotiating a
price with those affected or by the government putting a price on the
environment – they will invest in new ways of using fewer resources,
developing green technology, cleaning up or exploiting waste, just as Marx
observed.
The free market solution is that no one should profit from passing costs
on to others, and the only reason to accept emissions is that they are the by-
product of a process that creates such great value that they can be justified
even to those hurt by them. There could be – and historically sometimes
have been – legal processes where polluters bear strict responsibility for the
consequences of their actions, with those affected being compensated
financially. But in a complex world with increasingly diffuse relations, it is
not always applicable. Can a few billion people bring a class-action lawsuit
against a few million CO2 emitters? How do you compensate for an
increased risk of a forest fire? How do you track specific damage to a
particular car, flight or cow?
Therefore, it is an important political task to imitate what an
environmental market based on property rights, liability and negotiations
would have done to ‘internalize the externalities’ as economists say – or to
put a price on the environment, in the layman’s language. Some emissions
are destructive and yet have alternatives so that they can be banned outright,
such as freons in refrigerators or lead in petrol, while other emissions are so
central to human well-being, like the greenhouse gases that our lifestyle
relies on so far, that it is better to put a price on them so that there is an
incentive to reduce emissions and find alternatives. This creates difficult
demarcation problems to which I cannot give any precise answers, but the
principle is important and, as always, it is better to be approximately right
than exactly wrong.21
One reason for Sweden’s environmental success is that they started
setting prices for emissions in the early 1990s in the form of, for example,
the nitrogen oxide tax and the sulphur tax. It harnessed the creativity of the
market by giving all producers the incentive to look for better technology

and fewer emissions. This meant progress did not depend on the assumption
that politicians could predict which technology would work, but only on the
assumption that innovators and entrepreneurs wanted to make money.
We could afford the west coast
Free markets make us richer and that is crucial. In a famous statement from
1972, the Prime Minister of India, Indira Gandhi, declared: ‘Are not
poverty and need the greatest polluters? … How can we speak to those who
live in villages and in slums about keeping the oceans, the rivers and the air
clean when their own lives are contaminated at the source? The
environment cannot be improved in conditions of poverty.’22
That is not entirely true. It is possible to improve the environment at all
economic levels, even in deeply poor countries, but it is more difficult to
get broad support for expensive measures before people have food on the
table. We should be grateful to the green movement for our insights into the
importance of environmental problems, but the fact that it emerged in the
1970s is in itself an illustration of the importance of prosperity. Before that,
we in the Western world were still struggling to provide our children with a
proper education and our old with care and pensions. Then we were still
prepared to sacrifice nature for a few dollars more.
‘If you want this town to grow, it has to stink’, as one American mayor
put it in the 1960s. Or as the Swedish Social Democratic State Secretary to
the Minister of Finance explained in 1970 when big industry wanted to set
up on the beautiful west coast: ‘If we look at this from the point of view of
economic efficiency and growth, it is obvious that we should sacrifice the
west coast. I can’t find any other solution that gives better returns… There
are hundreds of miles of coasts around the Mediterranean and other seas.’23
The best thing about having money is that you can think of other things
than money. Prosperity changes our preferences. As individuals we begin to
think about how our behaviour affects the local environment, as consumers
we think about how our goods are produced and as voters we elect

politicians who protect the west coast instead of sacrificing it. In addition,
richer economies can also devote more resources to research, development
and consumption of greener technologies. It is richer countries who have
developed new processes and technologies that enable us to produce and
transport goods in a better way and to take care of and manage waste and
dirty water. This is where we have had a rapid development of the catalytic
converter, cyclonic separation, scrubbers and sorbents that purify emissions
and take care of hazardous chemicals. This is where we have the resources
to develop unleaded petrol, oil with less sulphur, electric cars, more fuel-
efficient aircraft, domestic appliances that consume half as much energy as
in the 1990s and lights that consumes a fifth. It is also these countries who
are leading the development towards replacing physical products with ones
and zeros. Radios, cameras, calculators, alarm clocks, telephone directories,
calendars, maps and compasses now fit in a single mobile phone.
Prosperity gives us resources to take care of and treat our waste. In
recent years, our plastic consumption has been much discussed and we have
seen wildlife documentaries where animals get stuck in or eat our plastic
waste with heartbreaking consequences. But we cannot do without plastic.
Although a tonne of plastic has a slightly greater environmental impact than
a tonne of replacement material, like wood or glass, the problem is that no
other material is as light, strong and flexible, meaning we’d need more
tonnes of the replacement, which is not necessarily better for the planet.
Plastic reduces food waste by protecting food from moisture, dirt and
insects, and plastic packaging allows us to pack goods so efficiently that we
can manage with one truck instead of two or three.
So the more interesting question is about where the plastic goes after we
have used it. In rich countries, plastic very rarely ends up in nature or in the
oceans. It is collected, recycled or incinerated and becomes electricity and
heat. Even if every European and American citizen ceased all use of plastic
bags, straws, sterile disposable bags in healthcare, the plastic in the cars
(which makes them lighter and more fuel-efficient) and all other plastic
beyond that, it would not even reduce plastic emissions in the oceans by a
single per cent.24

In poor countries, plastic is often thrown onto leaking landfills, and
where these are close to rivers, the plastic often eventually ends up in the
ocean. The Philippines alone accounts for seven times more plastic in the
oceans than the whole of Europe and North America together. Although
Asian and African countries use very little plastic per person, they account
for almost 90 per cent of all plastic that ends up in the oceans.
All this points to a clear conclusion: to ‘talk about money’ is not the
problem but the solution. The Environmental Performance Index (EPI) is an
ambitious project from Yale University, in partnership with others, to
regularly rank the ecological sustainability of 180 countries according to
thirty-two different environmental measures, from biodiversity to climate
emissions. In fact, the regions of the world line up in relation to their level
of prosperity, and it looks the same within each region. Wealthy Western
democracies occupy the first thirty-seven places in the list, and at the
bottom you find mainly African countries and the poorest Asian countries.
The EPI concludes that ‘environmental performance correlates strongly
with a country’s wealth’, although there are also countries at each level of
prosperity that perform both better and worse.25
In the literature there is a discussion about a possible ‘Kuznets curve’
for the environment. Many forms of environmental degradation follow the
pattern of a ‘U’ turned upside-down, a shape that the economist Simon
Kuznets had previously used to describe the relationship between growth
and inequality. As countries begin to urbanize and industrialize, the damage
to nature and health increases rapidly, but after a certain point increased
income is associated with environmental improvements. The hypothesis is
controversial and many researchers object that there is no automatic
connection and that it does not apply to all forms of environmental damage.
However, a review of more than a hundred empirical studies between 1992
and 2009 shows that there is such a connection for many of our most
serious environmental problems.27

Wealth and environmental protection26
There are even indications that this might apply to biodiversity. The
Living Planet Index, which is published by the World Wide Fund for
Nature, shows an improvement since 1990 in high-income countries, even
though that study only covers vertebrate animals. An OECD review of
biodiversity shows it is declining in most regions but has increased in
Western Europe over the past half-century. An in-depth study of the
Netherlands shows that biodiversity declined rapidly until 1970, but since
then it has increased rapidly, ‘a pattern that is broadly consistent with the
notion of an inverted U-shaped environmental Kuznets curve’.28
The challenges facing the world are great and how much damage we
will do before it gets better is still an open question. What we have learned,
though, is that degrowth is not the solution to environmental problems. The

question is not how we can keep the Chinese and Indians in poverty, but
how we can get them over to the right side of the Kuznets curve.
One way is to keep the global economy open. Long-distance trade is
often blamed for creating more emissions and we are encouraged to buy
local products. After reviewing the research, Hannah Ritchie from Our
World in Data writes: ‘While it might make sense intuitively – after all,
transport does lead to emissions – it is one of the most misguided pieces of
advice.’29 The reason it sounds intuitive is that we overestimate the
environmental impact of transport compared to other factors. According to
a review of the average European diet, transportation does not account for
more than 6 per cent of the average grocery bag’s climate impact, and much
of it is the last mile – from store to home. The rest comes from land use,
production and storage. Surveys of such diverse goods as shoes, beer and
iPads show similar results – nine-tenths of the emissions come from other
things than trade.30 This means that the green choice may counter-intuitively
be to buy something from the other side of the globe if it can be produced in
a little more environmentally friendly way than it can locally, such as
onions from New Zealand or roses from Kenya instead of from the
Netherlands, where the same rose gives rise to emissions more than five
times larger.31
Instead, the great effect of trade is to stimulate technological
development globally. It drives down the price of greener methods and
products so local companies can use them to a greater extent. This makes it
easier for poor countries, who face the greatest environmental challenges, to
learn from our mistakes and from our progress. They can use technology
that it took us many generations and many billions to develop. (From that
perspective, tariffs on green technology are even more idiotic than tariffs in
general.)
To get rid of lead in gasoline, we needed to invest in advanced refineries
that made it possible to get higher octane levels even without lead additives,
and research sodium additives to replace the lubricating effect of lead on the
engines. It was not until 1995 that lead in petrol was banned in Sweden.
China and India could do the same only five years later, when they had a

per capita income at around one-tenth of the Swedish level. Since Iraq and
Yemen banned lead in petrol, the UN Environment Programme states that
the last country to use lead in petrol is Algeria. As I write this, however, the
news comes that Algeria has also abandoned it. From having completely
dominated the market when I was growing up, today there is no longer a
single petrol station in the whole world that sells leaded petrol.
Such a spread of greener technology makes it possible to be cautiously
hopeful about even some of the most affected countries. As China’s
economy has grown, it has become one of the world’s largest polluters in
almost every category, but the risk of a Chinese person dying from any kind
of air pollution has decreased by almost two-thirds during the period 1990–
2019.32
If you are still not convinced that we can combine free markets and a
healthy planet, you might be interested in learning that in the latest edition
of the Environmental Performance Index researchers use two different
indices of economic freedom and test them against environmental
indicators. The results, surprising to some, emphasize that one does not
have to choose between the economy and the environment: ‘we find that
economic 
liberalism 
is 
positively 
associated 
with 
environmental
performance. While our results do not give countries carte blanche to
pursue laissez-faire economic strategies without regard for the environment,
they do cast doubt on the implicit tension between economic development
and environmental protection.’33
But, hey, wasn’t this chapter supposed to be about the
climate?
So what does all this mean for our ability to cope with climate change?
Unfortunately, it illustrates once again why it has been so difficult to get
anything done. No one owns the atmosphere, and polluters do not have to
pay for imposing environmental costs on others. The effects of pollution are
unpredictable and spread over time, and they are often not limited to one

country with a political assembly that can set rules, so it is difficult to get an
overview of causes and effects. But that does not mean that nothing has
been done. In the world as a whole, the amount of energy required to
produce a unit of GDP decreased by 36 per cent between 1990 and 2018.
Low- and middle-income countries have made an even faster journey as
they have been able to move quickly from old, dirty technology to the very
latest. China’s energy intensity decreased by as much as 70 per cent during
this time.34 In addition, an ever smaller part of the energy that is produced
requires fossil fuels as renewable sources become more affordable. Between
2009 and 2019, for example, the price of electricity from non-subsidized
solar power plants fell by an incredible 89 per cent.35
With a longer-term perspective, we see extraordinary gains. Britain and
other countries that industrialized in the nineteenth century needed to emit
around 1 kilogram of CO2 for every dollar of GDP (in today’s value) they
produced at their peak. When China and other emerging economies did the
same a century later, they only emitted 500 grams for every dollar at the
dirtiest point. The present generation of fast-growing economies in Africa
and south Asia have already peaked at 300 grams per dollar produced and
are moving towards a greener energy transition.36
But the fact that we emit less per person and per unit of wealth
produced is unfortunately not enough, for the simple reason that tomorrow
there will be even more of us on this planet and we will produce more units
of wealth. Energy use therefore increased by 59 per cent during the same
period and CO2 emissions by approximately 38 per cent. But it means the
underlying trend is the right one and that we shouldn’t back-pedal but step
on the gas. Those who long for degrowth should take a look at countries
that have experienced economic crises in the last decade, such as Greece
and Portugal. Yes, in the short run they reduced emissions because
production declined, but the long-term effect is that they put fewer
resources into investments. Since 2010, unlike the planet as a whole, they
have increased the amount of greenhouse gases they need to produce a unit
of growth.37

In the last decade, about fifty countries have reduced their CO2
emissions even in absolute terms, and these are mainly the richest countries,
such as North America and those in Western Europe. This is not due to
them having outsourced emissions to dirty factories in poor countries. The
carbon emissions imported by OECD countries through trade have been
reduced by more than a third since 2006.38 It seems like there is a Kuznets
curve even for CO2 emissions, but it peaks and starts declining at a much
higher level than the other emissions.
How do we get more countries onto the right side of the Kuznets curve,
and accelerate the pace for the fifty countries that are already there? Well, I
don’t know. And you don’t know either. Nor do our political
representatives. Maybe electric cars or extremely fuel-efficient combustion
engines, better biofuels or completely different modes of transport? Should
we get energy through the sun, wind or a new generation of cheap and safe
nuclear power? And if it’s the sun, is it by building massive, industrial solar
parks or by wrapping solar panels around everything or placing them in
space where the sun always shines? Should we become vegetarians, start
eating laboratory-grown meat or develop other diets and new additives so
livestock do not need as much grazing land or emit as much methane? Or
should we continue with certain fossil fuels and separate the CO2 and store
it, perhaps by sucking CO2 from the atmosphere? And if we do that, should
we do it by cultivating more trees, with all that means in terms of colossal
monocultures and its demands of huge amounts of water, or through
industrial processes that companies such as Climeworks, Carbon
Engineering and Global Thermostat are experimenting with right now,
where the hope is that the cost of capturing a tonne of CO2 could be brought
below a hundred dollars? (You may remember that the same process cost
around $1,750 per tonne when it happened through negative growth during
the pandemic.)
No one knows which technologies will work best in the end, which
innovations will drive that technology down in price or which scientific
breakthroughs will suddenly result in a completely unexpected solution.
That is why we need to mobilize as many people as possible to perform

different experiments based on their local knowledge and individual beliefs
and skills. The goal is to accelerate the trend towards energy efficiency and
non-fossil energy so that difficult international agreements are not required
for us to use green technology and instead we do so because it is also in our
economic interest. My friend Mattias Svensson surprised me with the fact
that illegal poppy fields in Afghanistan are irrigated with pumps powered
by solar energy. Not because the poppy farmers care so much about
government orders or even the environment, but simply because it is the
cheapest way to do it. When we all face the same incentive as Afghan
opium producers, the problem is solved (in terms of energy consumption, at
least).
The best way to encourage such development everywhere is to make
people pay for the consequences of their actions. A tax on all forms of fossil
fuels at the wholesale level means that the cost of them is spread to
industries and consumers at the next level. It makes everyone feel their
contribution to global warming, not only in their conscience but also in their
wallets. It gives everyone an incentive to direct their consumption towards
goods and services that create less greenhouse gases, and motivates
everyone to come up with their best ideas on how to reduce CO2 in the
cheapest way possible and develop new technologies that minimize
emissions.
With a carbon tax, politicians could stop trying to predict which
technology will work best to reduce greenhouse gases. They could stop
handing out subsidies and benefits to potentially green companies with
which they have private contacts, personally believe in, like for ideological
reasons, make for a good photo opportunity, create jobs in their
constituency or are needed for campaign contributions. Companies would
not make money in relation to how well they manage to charm decision
makers but in relation to how much they reduce emissions. Then you could
remove detailed regulations telling you what kind of light bulbs you should
use, how large windows may be or what year we should all stop driving a
petrol car.

It would avoid a sham Potemkin-like environmental policy that sets
specific goals for a specific technology and subsidizes an expansion that
does not always have any relation to what it delivers. A current example is
China’s planned economic expansion of wind power, which led to many
turbines but little electricity, as quality is low and inefficiency high. Despite
the fact that China has twice as much wind power as the United States on
paper, they generate about the same amount of electricity. Up to 30 per cent
of the capacity is not even connected to the electricity grid, but what does
that matter when the goal is to fulfil the plan and impress the outside world?
39
About forty countries and many cities, states and provinces have set
some kind of price on CO2 – usually the richest countries and, within these,
the richest regions. But it still means that only around one-fifth of global
emissions are priced. And here we come to the central political problem:
how do you get people to agree to pay for something that was previously
free, if the reward comes in the distant future and perhaps mostly in other
places?
Sometimes it feels like a hopeless task and, therefore, in the EU work is
underway to start punishing countries without a CO2 price by imposing a
border tariffs on their exports. Yet I fear that this is not a way to save the
climate but to destroy world trade. As it is completely impossible to find
out the individual emissions of all foreign exporters, they would be subject
to customs duties based on the amount of greenhouse gases such exports
usually generate. A company that has made costly investments in greener
production would therefore be punished as much as those who haven’t. It is
difficult to imagine a worse incentive for environmental progress. And what
to do with regions within a country that have introduced emission markets
or taxes? Should EU customs officials start separating goods from Virginia
and West Virginia? North Carolina and South Carolina?
Carbon border tariffs are a blackmail tactic for countries that do not
have the right environmental policy, but they risk inviting a perpetual trade
war, where other people’s policies are used as an excuse to prevent their
exports. Perhaps other countries should respond with tariffs on EU exports

for its overfishing of the world’s oceans? Personally, I would prefer us to do
the exact opposite. We could entice other countries to introduce carbon
pricing by saying that, if they do, they will also have free access to our
markets without tariffs or quotas. The important countries we need to take
climate action have exports that are still facing high tariffs in rich countries.
China and India, for example, would like to see tariffs abolished on textiles,
while Australia and Brazil would love free trade in food. A grand bargain
could see them price emissions in exchange for us abolishing all our tariffs
on such goods.40
We don’t have to include all countries, but the more countries that are
involved, the less the risk that fossil-dependent production will move
elsewhere. Initially, the most important thing is to get the big emitters on
board. If the EU could only agree with the five other countries that emit the
most, it would cover almost 70 per cent of global CO2 emissions. In that
case, we could encourage poorer countries to join the programme on
condition that they are allowed to introduce the levy gradually as their GDP
per capita rises.
One way to encourage voters is to give the money back to them. A
carbon tax should function as a price and an incentive, not as a source of
revenue for the state. The money should therefore go back to the population
in the form of a reduction in other taxes. One way to avoid threatening our
own business competitiveness in a world where few countries have taxes on
emissions is to use a substantial part of the revenue to reduce capital and
corporate taxes. But before we get there, we can do something even easier:
even if we do not demand payment for the damage, we do not need to
subsidize it. The world’s states spent a total of $440 billion on fossil fuel
subsidies in 2021, mainly involving large developing countries such as
China, India and Iran.41 That’s almost ten billion every day. If politicians are
afraid of how consumers will react to higher electricity and fuel prices, they
can still abolish all subsidies and instead give the $440 billion directly to
consumers, so they can decide for themselves whether it is fossil fuels they
want to use them for or maybe something else.

Wait, I’m not done. There is a final paradox that doesn’t get enough
attention: if we are too green in the short term, we will never be green in the
long term. Climate change and electrification will require copious amounts
of copper, aluminium, lithium and other metals and minerals, but we in the
Western world now believe that mines and smelters are too rough and dirty.
Increasingly complex permit processes make many investments impossible
and delay them all. It is natural that we don’t treasure such dirty extraction
business any more – we have slipped far down on the other side of the
environmental Kuznets curve. The only problem is that we risk becoming
completely dependent on importing such materials from authoritarian states
with lower environmental requirements, where the pollution and natural
impact from such processes are significantly worse. In addition, it raises
prices, which delays the entire transition.
This is understandable if our environmental commitment is nothing but
an aesthetic attitude, but if we really believe that global warming is a
crucial problem for the world, we cannot have an environmental policy that
is mostly focused on delaying, limiting and shutting down. Then we cannot
block every new mine, delay all permits for power lines, wind and solar
power parks, ban genetically modified crops that can make agriculture
greener, or phase out the nuclear power that gives us fossil-free energy. And
for all intents and purposes, we must not become a NUMBY – ‘not under
my back yard’ – and protest against any project to capture CO2 and store it
underground. If we are not willing to get our hands dirty, we will never be
able to clean up all the dirt.

O
9
THE MEANING OF LIFE
‘Forty years of neoliberal capitalism has at best marginalised values such as solidarity,
community, togetherness and kindness. At worst, it has cast these values summarily
aside.’
NOREENA HERTZ1
K, say that the economic case for free markets is true then.
Capitalism makes us freer and richer, creates better jobs and greater
opportunities and helps us solve environmental problems. But does
it make us happier? Is it really the purpose of life to work, perform and
stress, to sharpen our elbows to beat the competition, to collect even more
stuff that we do not need and cannot take with us when we die? Free
markets and individualist societies make us obsessed with being
independent, but this also liberates us from what makes us human –
communities, relationships, fellow human beings, faith and family. Self-
realization becomes nothing but a beautiful word for the emptiness of
modernity, the loneliness of the mall.
This is the last line of defence against free markets, from the statist left,
the national conservatives and collectivist intellectuals. Once upon a time
the critics said liberal capitalism could never produce wealth, then they had
to admit that it does albeit only to a small elite, then they admitted that
everyone might get richer but poor countries will suffer, but eventually then
they said OK, everyone might be better off, but why would that be such a
good thing? Capitalism may make us materially rich but spiritually poor.
The American conservative Patrick Deneen believes that liberalism
makes us ‘increasingly separate, autonomous, nonrelational selves, replete

with rights and defined by our liberty, but insecure, powerless, afraid, and
alone’. By liberating us from ‘particular places, relationships, memberships,
and even identities’, liberalism and markets ‘render us ever more naked as
individuals’.2 Under the fantastic and exhaustive headline ‘Neoliberalism –
the ideology at the root of all our problems’, the British leftist George
Monbiot explains that these problems include (but are by no means limited
to) ‘epidemics of self-harm, eating disorders, depression, loneliness,
performance anxiety and social phobia.’3
Freedom ‘doesn’t make us free, it makes us lonely,’ adds Christian
conservative Joel Halldorf. ‘Increasing mental illness, isolation and
populism are signs that liberalism cannot sustain itself.’4 Society must be
something greater than the sum of all individual market relations. We need
something more to heal our spiritual emptiness.
Just look at how free markets distort our very soul. In The Lonely
Century, the leftist economist Noreena Hertz writes that ‘Neoliberalism has
made us see ourselves as competitors not collaborators, consumers not
citizens, hoarders not sharers, takers not givers, hustlers not helpers’.5
Similarly, the socialist author Nina Björk claims that the urge to improve
our situation invades every corner of our lives and makes us ask in every
situation and in every meeting: ‘What do I gain from this?’ It makes us
compete and fight: ‘Living in competition breeds fear… We turn each other
into a threat.’ In the end, therefore, it leads to relationship fear: ‘If we are
dealing with each other primarily as competitors, maybe we do not want so
much to do with each other?’6 Since John Locke taught us the value of
freedom of choice in the late seventeenth century, personal relationships
have become based on ‘the calculation of personal self-interest’, claims
Patrick Deneen: ‘Liberalism encourages loose connections’.7
Why on earth would anyone want individual liberty and free markets if
this is the result? According to these descriptions, it sounds like an infernal
machine that destroys all the humanity within us. Anyone who actively
advocates it must be completely mad.
If one claims that political opponents create human isolation and mental
illness, one takes on a rather heavy burden of proof. Incredibly, such

sweeping statements are only very rarely followed by attempts to document
any causal link or even a correlation. Surprisingly often, a quick misreading
of classical liberals is enough to prove the connection between liberalism
and greed and loneliness. As if the resistance to forced relationships was
based on a resistance to relationships.
But John Locke, the father of classical liberalism, wrote in 1689 that
‘God having made man such a creature, that … it was not good for him to
be alone’, and went on to explain why one cannot imagine the individual
without the family and her other communities.8 Adam Smith, the stepfather
of economic liberalism, declared in 1759 that nature ‘formed man for
society’, and set out in a sophisticated way how our behaviour and our
morals emerged from our social interactions as a result of our empathy, in a
period when his conservative opponents just assumed that they had been
given to us by God.9
The point is that Patrick Deneen spouts nonsense when claiming that
traditional liberals ‘rejected the classical and Christian understanding of
human beings as fundamentally relational creatures – “social and political
animals”’.10 Both liberals and anti-liberals saw man as a social animal. That
was never the bone of contention. They both believed that the individual
needed the family, culture and communities, and that we are all in fact
created in such contexts. The disagreement was about something else.
Opponents of liberalism did not just see humanity’s social nature as a
fact but as a moral obligation. For them, it was not just descriptive but
normative. So if we belonged to a particular community, family or faith, we
had an obligation to stay there and submit to the literal or figurative father
of the family, no matter how he behaved: support your country, right or
wrong, and stick to this lord or church, even if they abuse you or your
conscience. But this does not follow from man’s social nature, and the
historical achievement of liberalism and capitalism was that it gave people
the freedom to leave exploitative collectives, demand that they be changed
if they were to stay, or create entirely new ones that better suited their needs
and interests – like the labour movement that leftist communitarians now

fight for, or the religious groups to which Christian conservatives belong
that are the creations of radicals who split off from the traditional Church.
Liberalism does not deny man’s need for belonging, it just denies that
Deneen and Hertz know which collectives we should belong to. Liberalism
is not about finding all life’s meaning in a shopping list, it just says that we
need more meaning than can be found in a ballot paper. And that those who
seek the meaning of life in collective projects that they try to enforce on
everybody have less of a sense of the beautiful richness and diversity of
human nature than the alleged cold and robotic market liberals. Do we need
something more than our lonely, individual lives? Of course we do, but
what? Can we even find a single collective project that would make Patrick
Deneen, Noreena Hertz, Joel Halldorf and Nina Björk cuddle together in
communitarian hygge?
Even then we are still only talking about a small homogeneous group of
Western intellectuals who demand a collective political project. What does
the collective utopia look like that would fill the empty hearts of such
diverse people as Stephen Fry, MrBeast, Elon Musk, Billie Eilish, Roger
Federer, Mario Vargas Llosa, Danielle Steel, Richard Dawkins, PewDiePie,
Robert Downey Jr, Nick Cave, LeBron James, Larry David, Donald Trump,
Kylie Jenner, The Rock, Boris Johnson, Quentin Tarantino, Posh Spice,
Robert Smith, Chris Rock, Blixa Bargeld, Neal Stephenson, Kim
Kardashian, Lionel Messi, Johan Norberg and some 7.9 billion more?11
Liberalism is not based on ignoring the meaning of life but on believing
that more people have a chance to find that meaning if they have the
freedom to search for it. The counter-argument is that we just can’t. That
there is something in the very freedom of choice that makes us too selfish,
afraid of relationships and isolated, that it’s precisely this individual search
for meaning in life that creates the epidemic of loneliness that is sweeping
the Western world.
But is there even such an epidemic?
One hundred years of solitude?

Few conditions are more destructive to people’s physical and mental well-
being than the feeling of being abandoned. Loneliness is an individual
misfortune and a major societal problem. But most articles I read about an
epidemic of loneliness are in fact about the growing number of single
households. That’s not the same thing. Living alone has its downsides, but
there is actually no strong association between it and feelings of loneliness
or lack of social support. Sweden often tops lists of most single households,
but at the same time it is also one of the countries where people say they
feel the least loneliness – clearly below the European average and,
interestingly, much below the feelings of loneliness in southern Europe,
despite their reputation for big families and warmth. Of course, this could
be because Swedes are so introverted that they think a visit to the local shop
is sufficient to experience community. But Swedes are also in touch with
their friends more often than other Europeans.12
The problem with assessing our level of loneliness is that we tend to
interpret the difficulties we all experience with relationships and relatives as
a sign that such connections have fallen into disrepair, and that there must
have been a better time or place when we all lived in more harmonious
relationships. It may be worth recalling that the most common violent crime
in the traditional society of the nineteenth century was violence against
parents (at a time when children often had a legal obligation to care for
them), suggesting that an enforced relationship is often a cause of conflict
rather than concord.13
I often hear the claim that poor and more collectivist countries have a
different and deeper form of community than people who live in urbanized,
individualized materialist ones (from students in rich countries, that is – I
have still never heard it said in poor countries). But when the Gallup World
Poll asks people around the world: ‘If you were in trouble, do you have
relatives or friends you can count on to help you whenever you need them?’
a very different pattern emerges. In African countries, an average of 25 per
cent answer ‘no’, in South America and Asia about 20 per cent, around 10
per cent in Japan and Taiwan, while it is down to single digits in Europe,
the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand.14

In November 2022, I read an article in the Financial Times with the
headline ‘Are we ready for the approaching loneliness epidemic?’ that
claimed ‘the share of people who report having friends and relatives they
can count on has been steadily dropping’. Yet when I checked the source, it
stated – quite to the contrary – that the average level of people who have
someone to count on ‘is almost unchanged’ (at more than 90 per cent) and
that satisfaction with relationships has actually increased slightly.15
After reviewing research in the field, Our World in Data concludes:
‘There is an epidemic of headlines that claim we are experiencing a
“loneliness epidemic”, but there is no empirical support for the fact that
loneliness is increasing.’16 One reason many believe there is an epidemic is
that those who say they are most lonely are the young, but this is based on
the belief that they grow up and continue to feel just as lonely as then.
However, as teens grow up, stop feeling they are misunderstood by society,
establish friendships and romantic relationships, form families and have
colleagues, their loneliness tends to decrease (until a partner dies late in life,
when the feeling of loneliness increases again). Therefore, a more relevant
question is whether those who are young today are more lonely than those
who were young before (and whether older people today are more lonely
than the older were back then), and the answer seems to be no.
Noreena Hertz wrote a whole book claiming that loneliness is
increasing and that we now live in ‘the lonely century’. But even though
she reports depressing data on the number of people who feel alone, she
does not make the case that this share has risen over time. Studies following
American college students since 1977 show the proportion who state that
they lack friends and feel left out has decreased somewhat. When
researchers compare today’s middle-aged and older people with previous
generations at the same stage of life in the United States, England, Sweden,
Finland and Germany, they don’t find evidence of increased loneliness. As
far as I know, we have no studies looking at whether we as a society have
experienced Gabriel García Márquez’s one hundred years of solitude, but
we have at least seventy-five years of British loneliness studies and they do
not show an increase in the proportion who say they feel lonely.17 We must

also take into consideration that it is probably less stigmatized to talk about
feelings of loneliness today than in previous generations.
Swedes have answered questions about social relations since the golden
age of collectivism, and their responses show that the feeling of loneliness
has diminished since then among younger and older people, men and
women. In the early 1980s, more than one in four Swedes stated that they
lacked a close friend. Now only just over one in ten do so.18
In other words, all these separate, autonomous, nonrelational selves
seem to be distinctly social. This should not come as a surprise – after all,
we are social beings. So collectivist pressures and political programmes are
not needed to make us seek and develop contact with other people. Freedom
is not about opting out of relationships but about choosing relationships that
suit you and match your values.
If you want to feel lonely, you should refrain from fantasizing freely
about how opponents destroy all communities and instead, like the political
scientist Caspian Rehbinder, compare data on subjective feelings of
loneliness in places with different institutions. This actually shows the
opposite of what critics see as the Achilles heel of liberalism. Rehbinder
notes that loneliness is reported less where freedom is greater. For every
point a country gains on the Fraser Institute’s ten-point scale for personal
and economic freedom – in effect, a measure of the classical liberalism of a
country – loneliness is on average six percentage points lower. Rehbinder
also looks at the equality of distribution and degree of religiosity in a
society, since they are usually suggested as remedies to the emptiness of
liberalism, from the left or the right. There is no connection whatsoever. If
we trust the broad simple correlations, it seems we need personal freedom
and free markets to remedy the existential isolation that equality and
spirituality can’t solve; it’s not the other way around.19
Several indicators of loneliness and isolation worsened sharply during
the pandemic, and it will take a long time until we learn whether this is a
temporary dip or a new trend. However, this is the predictable result of
government-enforced social distancing, when people were commanded to
stay at home and kids were not even allowed to meet their classmates. If

anything, it is a counter-argument to the hypothesis that too much liberty
and mobility make us lonely.
On average, there is also no evidence for the large increase in mental
illness that most of us assume exists (again with the caveat that the
pandemic probably worsened these problems, at least temporarily). Once
again turning to the Our World in Data project, Hannah Ritchie writes:
‘Many (myself included) have the perception that mental health issues have
been increasing significantly in recent years. The data… that we have does,
in general, not support this conclusion.’ On the contrary, it suggests that
levels of mental illness have been stable since 1990.20
In a review of the literature in the field, researchers found forty-two
studies between 1990 and 2017 that used the same methodology to study
mental illness in the same geographical area over time. Most studies
showed no increase in bad health (although such studies receive less media
attention than the few that show an increase) and the overall result pointed
to a ‘minimal’ increase that they believe is due to demographic changes
(health changes over the years). The researchers conclude: ‘we can be
rather confident that the overall global prevalence of mental illness has not
dramatically increased in recent decades if it has at all.’21
In a population of eight billion, there will always be groups of people in
certain countries whose physical and mental suffering increase. There are
ominous signs of a certain increase in depression and anxiety in teenage
girls in many countries, for example, and in the United States there are the
widespread deaths of despair that I wrote about in chapter 3. But globally,
the suicide rate has fallen by about a third over the last thirty years, despite
the fact that the real cause of death is increasingly being reported as
secularized and individualized societies. In Sweden, the suicide rate has
halved since 1980, although most of the decline took place before the turn
of the millennium.22
So why are we so convinced that mental health is deteriorating? One
reason is that we have borrowed terminology that was created for clinical
health problems to talk about common forms of grief and worry. As many
traditional, tangible sources of suffering disappear, the expectation that we

should feel good all the time increases, and when we don’t we suddenly
start talking in psychiatric terms, even though stress and sadness are part of
a good life. After observing that the proportion who experience reduced
mental well-being is fairly constant while diagnoses and sick leave increase,
Christian Rück, professor of psychiatry, concludes that we have confused
two different forms of suffering. Some mental pain is simply the abrasions
of the soul, says Rück, which is just a part of life, but we have begun to
confuse it with the fractures of the soul, which we need help and treatment
to deal with.23
One hopeful reason to believe in an increase in mental illness is that
many taboos have been broken in this area. Previous generations spoke
freely about physical ailments but the mental ones were hidden away and
talked about only in a hushed voice. Today, it is much more common to
report mental symptoms and to talk about them and seek help, and society
and the healthcare system is more likely to take it seriously. That is a sign
of an increasingly healthy society not a sick one.
The generous egoist
Even if there is no evidence that the free market makes us lonely or
mentally ill, it can still make us coarsened and ruthless. What if it distorts
our personality and poisons our relationships, as Noreena Hertz and Nina
Björk claim? What if the economy displaces all other human motives and
makes us see each meeting as an opportunity to take advantage of others?
A common mistake is to assume that capitalism introduced a desire for
profit that did not exist before and that would disappear if we had another
economic system. Disappointed with the greed of man, intellectuals turn on
capitalism. But as the sociologist Max Weber wrote in 1905: ‘The impulse
to acquisition, pursuit of gain, of money, of the greatest possible amount of
money, has in itself nothing to do with capitalism. That impulse exists and
has existed among waiters, physicians, coachmen, artists, prostitutes,
dishonest officials, soldiers, nobles, crusaders, gamblers, and beggars. One

may say that it has been common to all sorts and conditions of men at all
times and in all countries of the earth.’24
Nor does the desire for profit end when market forces are banned. No
one studying Soviet party leaders, the Iranian Revolutionary Guards,
Chavist ‘boligarchs’ or the Egyptian army would argue that these groups
are less interested in accumulating property or living a life of luxury than
the average person in market economies. The difference is that, in order to
satisfy that craving, they do not have to produce goods and services that
someone else wants. They can just confiscate companies and plunder the
population. North Korea is the world’s least market-based economy but
probably has the leaders who spend the most on Rolex watches, Mercedes
limousines and Hennessy Paradis cognac.
The question of whether market incentives coarsen our profit-hunger
and squeeze out all other motives than the material ones is an empirical
question that is not best decided by quoting Marx and Barthes. Anyone who
has seen people who are as tough in economic negotiations as they are
generous to friends and strangers (and vice versa) sees that Hertz and Björk
have fallen for a one-dimensional caricature of human psychology. Human
beings are big enough to accommodate different motivations and complex
enough to behave differently in different relationships. Bill Gates’ desire to
crush competitors did not diminish his interest in saving millions from
malaria.
What evidence does Nina Björk have that market incentives sabotage
our humanity? What on earth makes her believe that under free market
capitalism ‘qualities such as solidarity, empathy, responsiveness, sensitivity,
the will to satisfy others without regard to one’s own gain become almost a
sign of weakness’?25 She mentions the well-known fact that an external
reward for something we used to do out of inner motives, such as money for
donating blood, can weaken those inner motives. But that is not even
relevant for the issue she is discussing – it does not mean that financial
rewards for work, entrepreneurship and saving would make us less
interested in donating blood without getting any reward for it. Had Björk
studied blood donations empirically, she would have had difficulty

explaining why they are most common in individualist market economies.
(By the way, when payment for blood plasma was introduced in countries
such as Canada and the United States, it did not even result in a reduction in
unpaid blood donations; there was actually a small increase.)26
A group of American psychologists recently measured the prevalence of
seven different forms of generosity and helpfulness in 152 countries: the
willingness to donate blood, organs and bone marrow, give to charity,
volunteer, help strangers and treat animals well. It turned out that one of the
strongest correlations was that the citizens of individualist countries were
more likely to help. Even when they allowed for the fact that individualist
countries also had more prosperity, better health and education, the
correlation remained. Again, the assumptions of anti-capitalist pundits are
turned on their head; the more you care about your own self-fulfilment, the
more you are willing to put in some extra effort for others in a difficult
situation.27
Researchers speculate that this may have to do with the fact that those
who feel good about themselves and are not forced into self-sacrificing
relationships may have more energy and will to help others – a kind of ‘put
on your own oxygen mask first before assisting others’ effect. Another
explanation they raise is that individualistic attitudes undermine tribal
cultures and make us more prepared to help strangers as well.
Experiments in many societies at different levels of development give a
completely different picture of our behaviour than that given by Hertz and
Björk. They show that there are indeed societies, as envisioned in Hertz’s
and Björk’s nightmares, where people see every meeting as an opportunity
for exploitation and to take everything they come across – but they were the
societies that were least used to market transactions on a daily basis.
This is the experiment that the researchers carried out: one player gets a
certain amount of money and is asked to give some of it to an anonymous
player. The other player then approves or declines the offer. If the recipient
says yes, the bid goes through, but if she says no, neither person gets
anything. What would you offer the anonymous player? Both Marxists and
the economics textbooks make us believe that you would offer the recipient

as little as possible in this ultimatum game, and this person would still
always say yes, because almost nothing is always better than nothing at all.
Since the game only takes place once, there is also no reason to build a
reputation for being a generous player. For the same reason, there is no
incentive for the recipient to turn down a stingy offer to pressure you to
become more generous in the future. But many years of research around the
world, from Missouri to Mongolia, show that we just don’t behave that way.
In rich market economies, in fact, the most common offer is to split the
amount fifty-fifty; the recipient is so offended by bad offers that they
usually say no if offered less than 30 per cent.
Such experiments have been carried out in communities that are at
different stages of development, from industrialized cities to peasant
communities, to groups of hunters and gatherers. It turns out that the way
you play has nothing to do with gender, age, education or ethnicity – it has
to do with how familiar people are with taking part in markets. The more
people engage in trade in their daily lives, the more they are inclined to
make generous offers and to punish stingy ones, even if it comes at their
own expense. The market attitude is to be generous, while people in
societies without markets ‘display relatively little concern with fairness or
punishing unfairness’, the researchers state. On average, players in the most
market-integrated societies offered twice as much as the ones in the least
market-based societies.28
At first, these results seemed so unlikely that the researchers went back
to see if they could repeat their results. They added other economic games
and also studied the differences within groups. The results were replicated:
the more people are used to buying and selling, the less ruthlessly they
behaved. When researchers indirectly reminded research participants about
markets, these participants became more trusting and invested more money
in interacting with strangers. When the game was played in fifty-three
groups of Oromo in Ethiopia, even the distance to a marketplace proved
important. The closer you live to the market, the more prepared you are to
work with strangers. Those who have no more than half an hour of travel to

the marketplace almost always collaborate in the experiments; those who
are five hours away from the marketplace almost never cooperate.29
The habit of thinking in terms of mutual gain apparently develops a
feeling for others and their needs. Of course, researchers do not deny that
non-market societies also have strong standards of justice, but those
standards are mainly limited to traditional rules for how relatives and
friends should be treated. Those who are not used to interacting with
outsiders often consider them a threat or a chance for short-term gains.
Those who regularly trade, on the other hand, have norms that include a
certain openness and generosity that makes it easy for them to find common
denominators with strangers. Because people want to socialize and trade
with those who seem friendly and generous, such norms are encouraged.
‘The more friendly, the more advantageous. Such is the humanity of trade,’
as Marx’s collaborator Friedrich Engels acknowledged in 1844.30
When we merely express our values in polls, we get a similar result. An
analysis of World Values Survey data over many years shows that richer
and more economically free countries express less materialism and greed.
The researchers believe that one reason is the declining marginal utility of
money: ‘the market makes us richer and being richer allows us to focus on
alternative, non-material things.’31
In the light of the widespread worry about the decline of trust and
solidarity in recent decades, it is also worth looking at changes over time.
Researchers have found 511 studies on cooperation between strangers in the
United States between 1956 and 2017. Encouragingly, they did not find a
decline in cooperation in social dilemmas – instead they found there was an
increase in cooperation of almost 20 per cent over these sixty-one years.32
Interestingly, they found that not just wealth but also urbanization and the
percentage of people living alone were positively linked to cooperative
behaviour. One possib le explanation is that people in cities and those who
live alone depend more on strangers to achieve what they want in their daily
life, and so are also more eager to cooperate as this is something they are
already used to doing.

Hertz and Björk may be on to something when they say market attitudes
seep into our character, but the poison it spreads is openness to cooperation
and generosity towards strangers. It is so pervasive and powerful that we
express a keen sense of justice even in a game rigged to expose our
unscrupulous materialism. It turns us into competitors and collaborators,
consumers and citizens, takers and givers.
The person who cannot see another human being without asking the
question ‘What do I gain from this?’ and considers every meeting a moment
to eat or to be eaten does exist – we have all had an unpleasant opportunity
to meet them, in business, in politics, in journalism and in our private life –
but the greatest risk of running into such people is at a few hours’ walk
from the marketplace.
Happy capitalism
So now perhaps we can go back to the original question of whether
capitalism really makes us happier. Can money buy happiness? The answer
is yes.
In the early days of well-being research, data pointed to the opposite
conclusion. Economist Richard Easterlin noted in 1974 that we were getting
richer but we did not seem to become any happier. We simply got used to
the rising prosperity and instead we compared ourselves to the neighbours
who became even richer than we did. This ‘Easterlin paradox’, which has
its roots in Rousseau’s critique of materialism and modernity, became
famous and it is still the only thing many non-experts remember about the
connection between money and happiness. But in the barely half-century
that has passed since then, many more surveys in far more places have been
undertaken, with more sophisticated methods, so we have been able to
follow developments over time. And our knowledge has changed.
When I wrote a book about happiness in 2009, I interviewed the Dutch
sociologist Ruut Veenhoven, the man behind the famous ‘World Database
of Happiness’. He told me he had become interested in well-being research

because he thought it showed that prosperity did not contribute to happiness
and he was quickly met with interest from politicians critical of economic
growth. But as he collected statistics from more countries, a different
pattern began to emerge. Growth actually proved to be good for well-being:
‘The Easterlin paradox does not exist. It is not supported by the data of
most countries and the theoretical basis is incorrect.’ In any case, the new
insight had a clear political result. ‘Then the green politicians stopped
calling,’ states Veenhoven.33
Nobel Prize-winning psychologist Daniel Kahneman is another scholar
who has made the case for the Easterlin paradox. But after receiving
statistics from several countries, he has changed his mind:
‘We had thought income effects are small because we were looking
within countries. The GDP differences between countries are
enormous, and highly predictive of differences in life satisfaction. In
a sample of over 130,000 people from 126 countries, the correlation
between the life satisfaction of individuals and the GDP of the
country in which they live was over .40 – an exceptionally high
value in social science. Humans everywhere, from Norway to Sierra
Leone, apparently evaluate their life by a common standard of
material prosperity, which changes as GDP increases. The implied
conclusion, that citizens of different countries do not adapt to their
level of prosperity, flies against everything we thought we knew ten
years ago. We have been wrong and now we know it.’34
In my book on well-being, I observed that you can buy happiness – but
only at a very bad exchange rate. Compared to having health, peace of mind
and good relationships, money is not much to write home about. Based on
the statistics we had then, I stated that if your mental worry and anxiety for
some reason increase by a tenth, you need to increase your monthly salary
by around $20,000 to get back to the same level of happiness that you had
before. But one reason why individual income is less important for one’s
well-being is revealed by grandpa’s grandma’s grandpa’s grandma’s time

machine in chapter 4. Most goods, services and technologies that make a
real difference to one’s well-being spread quickly in market-based societies,
so a few hundred bucks here or there does not make much of a difference to
one’s happiness. The important thing is to live in a rich, free, capitalist
society. If you have been lucky enough to be born there, much of your
potential for happiness is already fulfilled.
We are not talking about objective indicators here but about what people
say regarding their own emotional state. The sources of error are many:
both those who are too depressed and those who have too much excitement
in life may not respond to surveys; occasional events play a
disproportionately large role in our mood (such as the weather on the day
you respond, if you missed the bus or if you happened to find a coin in the
elevator just now); not everyone is honest even in anonymous surveys (the
French believe melancholy is a sign of intelligence and some think
Scandinavians have such low expectations of life that they are constantly
pleasantly surprised). So one has to treat this data with great care, but it is
fascinating that what well-being research suggests now is completely
opposite to the notion that free markets and individualism suck the joy out
of life.
The data indicates that individuals’ average happiness grows with their
income and the population’s average happiness grows with the country’s
GDP per capita, and that both of these levels increase on average over time,
as people and countries become richer. In Western Europe, North America,
Australia and New Zealand, people report the highest level of well-being. In
Africa, South Asia and the Middle East the levels are lowest. The
correlation is clear, though not perfect. Latin American countries are
happier than their level of prosperity would predict and former communist
countries are unhappier.35

Richer countries are happier36
Ruut Veenhoven sums up the state of research as ‘[t]he more
individualized society, the happier its citizens are’ and the research project
World Values Survey documents that the most important factors behind
increased 
well-being 
are 
‘global 
economic 
growth, 
widespread
democratization, growing tolerance of diversity, and a rising sense of
freedom’. After devoting an entire book to talking about a happiness crisis,
even the British economist Richard Layard admits that ‘we in the West are
probably happier than any previous society’.37
That people claim to be so satisfied with their lives is in itself a surprise
to most people. The British believe that only 47 per cent of Brits perceive
themselves as very or fairly happy, while as many as 92 per cent state that
they are fairly or very happy themselves. The result is similar in all thirty-
two countries where the question has been asked. People apparently look
more depressed on the outside than they feel on the inside. And the
underestimate is not small. Canadians and Norwegians are most optimistic

about their compatriots, and assumed that 60 per cent of them were happy.
That is actually lower than the self-perceived happiness in the least happy
country, Hungary (69 per cent).38
This makes it incredibly risky to speculate about human well-being
without relying on data – particularly when it comes to intellectuals, who
(according to many studies) suffer more from anxiety and neuroticism than
others.39 This is often what drives them onwards, to create, write and debate
in public. Yet it also makes them even more inclined to underestimate the
happiness of others, especially as they really can’t comprehend how
someone can be happy with the trivialities of everyday life, unintellectual
professions and taco Tuesday. It also makes them inclined to look for causes
of these problems in societal structures and in vulgar capitalism. David
Hume said of his close friend Rousseau that he just happens to be unhappy
but tries to blame it on society instead of his own melancholy disposition.41

We underestimate the happiness of others40
When seen from the inside, capitalism is not as depressing as most
intellectuals assume. Veenhoven, who was active in the Dutch Social
Democrats when he began to study happiness, first believed that
government redistribution and generous social spending contributed to the
well-being of a population. It is easy to assume this when you tend to find
countries like Denmark, Finland and Sweden near the top of the happiness
lists. But as Veenhoven got more statistics, it became clear that other small,
rich democracies such as Iceland, Switzerland and New Zealand, with much
smaller welfare states, were also at the top of the rankings. Ireland, the
Netherlands and Australia have about half the social spending as a share of
GDP as Belgium, Italy and France do, but they are significantly happier.

Government redistribution has not even succeeded in creating a more equal
distribution of well-being. ‘Happiness is not greater in welfare states,’
Veenhoven now states, ‘I was simply wrong.’42
Another conclusion that surprised Veenhoven was that income
inequality does not reduce a country’s well-being: ‘Income inequality is a
by-product of capitalist societies and they have such a positive effect on
well-being that outbalance the negative effect of being relatively poor.’ This
is not a popular conclusion in all camps: ‘My colleagues are not amused.
Inequality is big business here in the sociology department. Entire careers
have been built on it.’43
There is a strong correlation between economic freedom and subjective
well-being, and – contrary to most expectations – it is strongest for low-
income earners. The researchers suspect this is due to the fact that free
markets introduce autonomy and freedom of choice for those who have a
more difficult socio-economic situation: ‘For high-income earners, this
effect is much less important, as their income already gives them the access
to more choices.’45 No matter how much critics say we should feel like we
are naked and afraid in capitalist societies, people insist on saying that it
gives them a sense of control over their lives, at least compared to other
systems.

Economic freedom and happiness44
None of this means the problems that critics equate with life in an
individualist, capitalist society do not exist. It just means the same problem
seems to be even greater in non-capitalist societies. It can be difficult to
compete, but competition for resources and positions does not disappear
because they are distributed politically instead of according to supply and
demand. On the contrary, in capitalism we search for opportunities for
mutual gain, while in economies based on distribution from the top we
begin to see other groups as threats because what they take is something we
do not get. It is telling that more than thirty years after the fall of
communism, its destructive effects on communities and social trust have
not completely faded. Although the gap with other countries is narrowing, it
is still in post-communist societies that we find less trust, more loneliness
and less well-being.

The hunt for status is no less brutal because there are fewer arenas in
which to compete. If there are many different ways in which people can
develop their identity and seek confirmation, there is a chance for more
people to find their way than in more collectivist societies where there is
just one true way. It may even apply to our consumption. The philosopher
Steven Quartz and the political scientist Anette Asp believe that diversity
and freedom of choice can be an explanation for the fact that increased
inequality has not made us more unhappy – even though they point out that
it should: ‘As a result, social status, which was once hierarchical and zero-
sum, has become more fragmented, pluralistic and subjective. The
relationship between relative income and relative status, which used to be
straightforward, has gotten much more complex.’46
In poorer societies, consumption is often about showing how high one
has climbed on the prosperity ladder. That is why, paradoxically, poor
societies have such a large share of consumption of pure luxury products
that are sought after precisely because they are expensive. That exists in
richer and more individualistic societies too, of course, but there
consumption increasingly becomes a way of expressing one’s personality.
People no longer automatically covet the most expensive item but rather
what suits their taste and expresses their identity. Someone dreams of a
Porsche, but someone else prefers to show his green identity with a Tesla, a
third person prefers a cheap and comfortable car because their status is
based on not caring about status when choosing a car, while a fourth person
talks happily and often about how it is vulgar to have a car when you can
get anywhere on a bicycle and public transport. They can all converge in
feelings of well-being, even if they diverge in income and taste.
The most important word in economic freedom is not ‘economic’ but
‘freedom’. We are all different with different needs, and our chance of
finding relationships, communities, work and consumption that we enjoy
increases if we get the freedom to choose. Not everyone wants to constantly
work and strive for material rewards, and one of the advantages of an open
society is that you do not have to choose that. Even before the pandemic,
surveys in the Western world showed that between 20 and 50 per cent of

workers in recent years had chosen a less demanding job with less pay,
reduced their working hours, declined a promotion or moved to a calmer
neighbourhood to focus on their family, make everyday life easier or just to
unwind with a less stressful life.47
If you do not like the rat race, you can leave it – provided you live in a
growing economy with high productivity so that you can do it without
catastrophic consequences for the private economy. That is exactly what
capitalism makes possible, and that is why the average working time of the
average worker has decreased by about half in the last 150 years. In 1870,
Britons worked more hours between January and August in an average year
than they now do between January and December.48 In addition, we start
working later in life and live for far longer after retirement than previously.
That’s why you sit here and read and think about the viability of different
political and economic systems and their implications for human well-being
– a pastime that used to be reserved for a tiny elite with many servants and
plenty of free time, or someone who happened to have a generous friend
whose family lived off a cotton fortune, as Karl Marx had.

T
Epilogue
THE EMPEROR’S
SINGING CONTEST
‘It has been the first to show what man’s activity can bring about.’
MARX & ENGELS ON CAPITALISM1
o let Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels summarize my case: large-scale,
massive progress is something new. Ruling classes were always
primarily interested in control and stability, but this inhibited
production and innovation instead of promoting it. They had to be burst
asunder – and they were, by capitalism.
As early as 1848, the fathers of communism wrote that the then very
young market economy had ‘created more massive and more colossal
productive forces than have all preceding generations together’. In just a
few decades, we got industrialism, the chemical industry, electrification,
and global transportation and communications: ‘what earlier century had
even a presentiment that such productive forces slumbered in the lap of
social labour?’2
What makes the free market unique is that it enabled and presupposed a
constant revolution of productive conditions. If everyone is free to try
something better, old companies must do the same or fail. When these
freedoms spread to more and more people, a wave of creativity and
innovation that had been held back by the dams of oppression rushed
forward and changed the world for ever.

What Marx and Engels failed to predict was that capitalism would also
spread this prosperity within and between nations, as more productive
companies offered workers better jobs and reduced the price of goods and
services. It was not easy for them to fit changing facts into their models.
They quietly replaced the predictions of proletarianization and the iron law
of wages with the notion that it is ‘very complicated’. In a lecture in 1865,
Marx said the wages of British farm workers had increased by 40 per cent
in just ten years. In 1892, Engels was forced to supplement his half-century-
old description of the plight of the English working class with the words,
‘They are undoubtedly better off than before 1848.’3
Still, almost all the progress free markets made possible was in the
future. Just imagine if Marx and Engels had been alive to see how much
more capitalism has produced since then. In the last 200 years, extreme
poverty has been reduced from almost nine out of ten people to less than
one in ten today. In 1800, only 12 per cent of the Earth’s inhabitants could
read and write. Today, there are about as few who can’t. Global life
expectancy has increased from around thirty to more than seventy years,
and infant mortality has decreased by about 90 per cent.
Surprisingly, the twenty years since I wrote In Defence of Global
Capitalism have been the very best. Despite all the wars, injustices and
plagues, we have experienced a remarkable era, when indicators of human
well-being have, on average, improved faster than ever. The world’s
newsrooms could have led with the breaking news ‘138,000 people were
lifted out of poverty yesterday’ every day during these two decades, despite
recessions, wars and pandemics. And it happened the fastest in the countries
that did the most to integrate into global capitalism.
In this book I have also shown that this did not come at the cost of good
jobs, wage stagnation and unprecedented inequality. I have argued that (on
the whole) we did not see a new class of super-rich and monopolies that live
and thrive on our expense, but that their innovation and productivity
contribute to a distribution of important technologies, goods and services
that is more equal than it has ever been before. And I have documented the
research that shows that we do not have to sacrifice the environment or our

well-being to achieve these results. On the contrary, it is mainly in rich
market economies that we have the will and resources to reduce our
environmental impact and – even if one should be careful with data on self-
reported happiness – it is striking that it is in rich, individualistic and
capitalist countries that people consider themselves most satisfied with life.
But everything is not optimist babble (to quote a judgment about me
from back in the day). We have serious problems with crony capitalism,
which manifests itself in regulations adapted to large companies,
occupational 
licences, 
building 
regulations 
that 
protect 
insiders,
immigration restrictions that hurt our economy, and a battery of subsidies,
tax deductions and tariff protection for companies that are either
competitive (so they do not need such help) or not competitive (meaning
they are a drag on the economy). Our treatment of financial markets is now
reminiscent of our view of mental health: one must be on top all the time
and must never, ever be sad, and in that case, central banks must help by
prescribing ever-increasing doses of antidepressants. Here we have a source
of ugly inequality that also pumps up asset prices in such an absurd way
that the fall will be more painful than it would otherwise be.
We also have a welfare system that punishes work and leaves many
people on the outside. The death toll from despair in the United States is a
cruel wake-up call. We may be able to afford the financial cost of letting an
increasing number of people leave the labour market, but we definitely
can’t afford the human cost. In addition, many forms of environmental
degradation are increasing. Climate change has the prerequisites to disturb
all our plans in unpleasant ways.
In all these areas, constructive free marketeers – and everyone else too –
have an awe-inspiring to-do list. But even if we were to solve all these
problems, capitalism is not always beautiful, because we humans aren’t and
even our utopias are built on trade-offs. The creative destruction that
constantly creates wealth and new jobs harms those who lose the old ones.
When consumers control production, they will demand a lot of things that
are surely illegal, immoral, fattening, addictive, vulgar or impossible. And
business owners will not hesitate to satisfy them and become filthy rich and

buy a stupid car. Annoyingly, a disproportionately large proportion of those
who do this are probably some old classmates of yours who did not
understand arithmetic and did not care about ancient literature.
Capitalism does not reward us for merit, despite the fact that it has often
been claimed to do so by its defenders. If you are successful it does not
necessarily mean that you deserved it; if you fail, it doesn’t mean you had it
coming. The market is not a meritocracy that enriches the one who is best,
smartest or has worked hardest. Someone may have toiled away as best they
could but still not succeeded – keep in mind that the market is a minefield
and we don’t know where the mines are buried – while someone else may
have just thoughtlessly turned out a product that happened to become a
bestseller. The market does not reward us for our values, talent or effort, but
for one thing only: to create as much value for others at as little cost as
possible. ‘You can be an asshole and still make people’s lives much better
off,’ pointed out the great classical liberal Steven Horwitz, a man who did
much of the latter without ever being the former.
In my eyes, it is precisely this insistence on voluntary relations that
makes the free market morally superior to all other systems. It is also what
lies behind its incredible ability to produce wealth, as it gives everyone a
powerful motive to constantly try to find new ways to create value for
others. But it also results in a lot of consequences that are hard to stomach.
Someone loses their job no matter how hard she works, just because
someone else came up with something better. Someone else is in the black
just because she happened to be in the right place when demand passed by.
Your favourite project or the store you love has to close, while that
completely brain-dead retail chain spreads like wildfire. However, if we are
to constantly produce smarter processes and new jobs that expand
everyone’s opportunities, we must also get rid of old outdated ones. We
need more filthy rich – and more bankruptcies.
If we are to be able to use the knowledge and creativity of all people, to
create the new and unexpected, then we won’t know in advance what will
succeed and who should be rewarded. We can never predict the outcome.
The open society guarantees nothing, in the way centralized systems can at

least pretend to. It is not always a joy to live with such openness and
unpredictability.
Such problems and shortcomings are enough to make many of us feel
reluctant and dream of other systems. Another world just has to be possible.
It creates that constant temptation to find some kind of shortcut that would
give a better result than voluntary interaction and without its downsides.
Some want to start experimenting with protectionism, redistribute the
resources that could have been invested in the future, or happen to fall in
love with the latest populist leader who promises to fix everything.
Sometimes when I present the evidence for the world’s unique progress
during the era of global capitalism, I get the response: yes, it’s good – no
one is opposed to it – but why should we be happy with it? Why not make it
even better? I agree. I’m not saying that’s enough. We should be proud but
not content. We have begun to see what actually works. And that is a rare
thing in human history. We must not take it for granted, we must make sure
that it survives and spreads, precisely because we cannot be satisfied with
the progress we have seen so far.
What we mustn’t do is throw it all away because it is not as perfect as
our fantasies. Without the sometimes problematic creative destruction that
is constantly transforming our economy and technology, we will stagnate
and lose the opportunity to solve the problems we will be surprised by in
the future. Without an open world economy and global supply chains, we
would be deprived of future development and close the way out of poverty
for hundreds of millions of people. The Western world’s new ambition to
imitate China’s industrial policy and repatriated supply chains is a costly
and 
dangerous 
experiment. 
Without 
the 
awkward 
and 
difficult
unpredictability of human interaction and creativity, we know exactly what
we would be getting, for that is what we have been through for most of the
other eras of history.
An old legend is relevant to our situation: to amuse the masses, a
Roman emperor agreed to decide which one of two singers was the best.
The first one started singing and it was not bad. It was actually quite
impressive. The audience got excited – in fact, they had rarely heard

something as beautiful. But then the singer hit a note a little wrong. The
emperor instantly got up, interrupted the performance and declared that the
competition was over. He called the other singer to the stage and gave the
prize to him. The first singer had made a little mistake, so the second singer
must be the winner. The problem, of course, is that this is not at all obvious.
It is not enough to find faults and shortcomings and then fantasize that the
alternative could avoid those faults and still be better overall. The first
singer made a mistake, but the second singer might make more mistakes.
Perhaps he can’t carry a tune at all. In the worst case, he might be stark
raving mad.
Maybe you think the next singer is perfect, flawless, or that you know
how you can get the first singer to avoid all mistakes without creating other
problems. It sounds interesting. Please test it. But always listen to both
before choosing the victor: do not make the mistake of the Roman emperor.
In a complex, unpredictable world, we are not looking for perfection. We’re
just looking for the best – and the promise of continuous improvement.
And if you are someone who is convinced of the importance of open
societies and free markets: do not take them for granted. As I showed in my
book Open, many historical golden ages of openness and progress have
been laid in ruins by authoritarian revolts.4 Capitalism has meant the
greatest social and economic progress humanity has ever experienced, and
millions respond by rejecting it in favour of the next singer they have never
heard. For the first time, free markets provided broad populations with the
resources and leisure to engage in theoretical ideas and political debate, and
to a not insignificant extent we have devoted them to rejecting the market
economy as unfair and soul-destroying.
Ingenious, hard-working people will continue to strive day in day out to
supply us with innovations and growth no matter how much we whine.
They will continue to fill your cup with coffee even if they do not know
who you are. But the defence of their freedom to do so does not happen by
itself. If you appreciate their contribution, you owe it to yourself to protect
them. Global capitalism needs friends, advocates and educators.

Liberty and progress can be your project too. We pro-capitalists of the
world have nothing to lose but our chains, tariff barriers, building
regulations and confiscatory taxes. We have a world to win.

  1.
  2.
  3.
  4.
  5.
  1.
  2.
  3.
  4.
  5.
  6.
  7.
NOTES
Preface: What happened to Reagan and Thatcher?
Michka Assayas, Bono, Penguin, 2006, and Bono speaking at Georgetown University’s 2013
Global Social Enterprise Event.
Jimmy Carter, State of the Union Address, 19 January 1978.
Gavin Poynter, The Political Economy of State Intervention: Conserving Capital Over the
West’s Long Depression, Routledge, 2020, p.3.
Robert Bradley, ‘Colliery closures since 1947’,
www.healeyhero.co.uk/rescue/individual/Bob_Bradley/PM-Closures.html.
Deirdre McCloskey, Why Liberalism Works, Yale University Press, 2019, p.235.
1. Life under savage capitalism
Naomi Klein, The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism, Allen Lane, 2007, p.252.
These pessimistic World Bank words introduced the prefaces of many of the institution’s
papers and reports in 1999 and 2000, e.g. its ‘1999 review of development effectiveness’,
World Bank 1999. Nader quoted in Gary Wells, Robert Shuey & Ray Kiely, Globalization,
Novinka Books, 2001, p.23. Archbishop K. G. Hammar interviewed in Arena, no.6, 2000.
I really recommend these goldmines that have revolutionized access to knowledge.
In the first edition, I stated 29 and 23 per cent, respectively, but since then the World Bank has
raised its definition of poverty from a consumption level of $1.2 to $2.15 per day, adjusted for
inflation and local prices. In this book, I consistently use this new, higher poverty level. The
data on global poverty come from the World Bank’s PovcalNet,
http://iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/, its Poverty & Inequality Platform,
https://pip.worldbank.org/, and World Bank, ‘Correcting course: Poverty and shared prosperity
2022’, World Bank Group, 2022.
Michail Moatsos, ‘Global extreme poverty: Present and past since 1820’, How Was Life Part
II: New Perspectives on Well-Being and Global Inequality Since 1820, OECD, 2021.
Angus Deaton, ‘Thinking about inequality’, Cato’s Letter, vol.15, no.2, 2017.
The following numbers are from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators,
https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators. For more on such
statistics and what they are based on, see Johan Norberg, Progress: Ten Reasons to Look
Forward to the Future, Oneworld, 2016.

  8.
  9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
https://data.unicef.org/topic/child-survival/under-five-mortality/.
International Labor Office and United Nations Children’s Fund, ‘Child labor: Global estimates
2020, trends and the road forward’, ILO & UNICEF 2021.
This is an index graph, where the proportion affected in 1990 is set at 100 per cent to track
changes. My calculations are based on numbers from the UN Food and Agricultural
Organization, the World Bank, UNESCO and the UN respectively.
The data on GDP per capita in this chapter are adjusted for purchasing power and inflation. For
the period after 1990, I use the World Bank’s World Development Indicators,
https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators. Before 1990, I use the
Maddison Project, a continuation of the ambitious historical data series produced by the
economic historian Angus Maddison. www.rug.nl/ggdc/historicaldevelopment/maddison/.
Estimates of historical poverty in countries that are now rich can be found in Martin Ravaillon,
The Economics of Poverty: History, Measurement and Policy, Oxford University Press, 2016,
chap.1.
Yes, it’s adjusted for inflation, converted to 2011 US dollar values. If you protest that this must
be based on heroic estimates and guesswork bordering insanity, you have a point, but even if it
contains huge errors every single year, it would not affect the overall appearance of the chart.
The sources are Angus Maddison, The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective, OECD,
2001, Angus Maddison, The World Economy: Historical Statistics, OECD, 2003, and
Maddison Project Database 2020.
Yes, they also had episodes of import substitution and industrial policy – all poor countries did
– but for a shorter period and less extensively than others. For a study of the central importance
of openness for these countries, see Arvind Panagariya, Free Trade and Prosperity: How
Openness Helps Developing Countries Grow Richer and Combat Poverty, Oxford University
Press, 2019.
Interview with Parth Shah for the documentary India Awakes, 2015.
Andrea Boltho, Wendy Carlin & Pasquale Scaramozzino, ‘Will East Germany become a new
Mezzogiorno?’, Journal of Comparative Economics, vol.24, 1997.
Theo S. Eicher & Till Schreiber, ‘Structural policies and growth: Time series evidence from a
natural experiment’, Journal of Development Economics, vol.91, 2010, pp.169–79.
Christer Gunnarsson & Mauricio Rojas, Tillväxt, stagnation, kaos, 2nd edn, SNS, 2004, chap.6.
Sara Regine Hassett & Christine Weyd, ‘An interview with Fernando Henrique Cardoso’,
Journal of International Affairs, vol.58, no.2, 2005.
Max Roser & Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, 'Income Inequality', Our World in Data, October 2016.
The seven were Gabon, Guinea, Liberia, Zambia, Nigeria, Congo (Léopoldville, now Congo-
Kinshasa) and Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe). Andrew Kamarck, The Economics of African
Development, Prager, 1967, p.247. William Easterly & Ross Levine, ‘Africa’s growth tragedy:
Policies and ethnic divisions’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.112, no.4, November
1997.
George Ayittey, Indigenous African institutions, Brill, 2nd edn, 2006.
Ayittey 2006, p.486.
Belinda Archibong, Brahima Coulibaly & Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, ‘Washington Consensus
reforms and economic performance in sub-Saharan Africa: Lessons from the past four
decades’, AGI Working Paper 27, February 2021.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
World Bank, Economic Growth in the 1990s: Learning from a Decade of Reform, 2005, p.271.
Scott A Beaulier, ‘Explaining Botswana’s success: The critical role of post-colonial policy’,
Cato Journal, vol.23, no.2, 2003.
James Gwartney, Robert Lawson, Joshua Hall & Ryan Murphy, Economic Freedom of the
World: 2022 Annual Report, Fraser Institute, 2022.
Ibid.
Robert Lawson, ‘Economic freedom in the literature: What is it good (bad) for?’, in James
Gwartney, Robert Lawson, Joshua Hall & Ryan Murphy, Economic Freedom of the World:
2022 Annual Report, Fraser Institute, 2022. See also Joshua Hall & Robert Lawson. ‘Economic
Freedom of the World: An accounting of the literature’, Contemporary Economic Policy,
vol.32, no.1, 2014.
Esteban Ortiz-Ospina and Max Roser, 'Government Spending', Our World in Data, 2016.
William Easterly, ‘The lost decades: developing countries’ stagnation in spite of policy reform
1980–1998’, World Bank, February 2001. William Easterly, ‘In search of reforms for growth:
New stylized facts on policy and growth outcomes’, working paper 26318, National Bureau of
Economic Research, September 2019.
Kevin Grier & Robin Grier, ‘The Washington Consensus works: Causal effects of reform,
1970–2015’, Journal of Comparative Economics vol.49, No 1, March 2021. Pasquale Marco
Marrazzo & Alessio Terzi, ‘Structural reform waves and economic growth’, European Central
Bank, No.2111, November 2017.
Branko Milanović, Capitalism, Alone: The Future of the System that Rules the World, Belknap
Press, 2019, chap.4.2. Richard Baldwin, The Great Convergence: Information Technology and
the New Globalization, Belknap Press, 2016.
Dev Patel, Justin Sandefur & Arvind Subramanian, ‘The new era of unconditional
convergence’, working paper, Center for Global Development, 2021.
Robert Mugabe, ‘Statement by Zimbabwe’, 2 September 2002.
@jeremycorbyn, Twitter, 5 March 2013. ‘Venezuela: Latin America’s inequality success story’,
Oxfamblogs.org, 6 August 2010. ‘Jesse Jackson, Naomi Klein, Zinn, Kucinich, others express
support for Venezuela’s Chavez’, Venezuelaanalysis, 13 August 2004.
Kristian Niemietz, Socialism: The Failed Idea that Never Dies, Institute for Economic Affairs,
2019, p.56ff.
See, e.g., Johan Fourie, Our Long Walk to Economic Freedom, Tafelberg, 2021.
Tom G. Palmer & Matt Warner, Development with Dignity: Self-determination, Localization,
and the End of Poverty, Routledge, 2022, chap. 5.
Luis R. Martínez, ‘How much should we trust the dictator’s GDP growth estimates?’, Journal
of Political Economy, vol.130, no.10, 2022.
Samuel Absher, Kevin Grier, Robin Grier, ‘The economic consequences of sustainable left-
populist regimes in Latin America’, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, vol.177,
September 2020, pp.787–817.
Manuel Funke, Moritz Schularick & Christoph Trebesch, ‘Populist leaders and the economy’,
discussion paper 15405, Center for Economic Policy Research, October 2020.
Jordan Kyle & Yascha Mounk, ‘The populist harm to democracy: An empirical assessment’,
Tony Blair Institute for Global Change, 26 December 2018.

  1.
  2.
  3.
  4.
  5.
  6.
  7.
  8.
  9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
2. At each other’s service
‘Globalization and Resistance’, an interview with Noam Chomsky by Husayn al-Kurdi, Kick It
Over, no.35, Summer 1995.
I have adjusted for inflation and the growing number of workers. The comparison is inspired
by the economist Fredrik N. G. Andersson who used a variant of it in a debate at Café Athen in
Lund on 11 April 2019. Göran Greider said this on Opinion Live, SVT, 6 October 2019.
Lant Pritchett, ‘There is only one poverty strategy: (broad based) growth (Part I)’,
lantpritchett.org, 6 February 2019.
David Dollar, Tatjana Kleineberg & Aart Kraay,’ Growth still is good for the poor’, Working
Paper no.596 , Luxembourg Income Study, Cross-National Data Center in Luxembourg,
September 2013.
Bruce D. Meyer & James X. Sullivan, ‘Identifying the disadvantaged: Official poverty,
consumption poverty, and the new supplemental poverty measure’, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, vol.26, no.3, 2012.
Yes, I know I quoted it in In Defence of Global Capitalism as well, but it ought to be repeated
at least every twenty years. John Stuart Mill, Principles of Political Economy, book V, Liberty
Fund, 2006, p.810f.
Andreas Bergh & Magnus Henrekson, ‘Government size and growth: A survey and
interpretation of the evidence’, Working Paper no. 858, Institute for Business Research.
James Gwartney, Robert Lawson, Joshua Hall & Ryan Murphy, Economic Freedom of the
World: 2022 Annual Report, Fraser Institute, 2022, p.17.
Ibid.
Ibid.
A. J. Jacobs, Thanks a Thousand: A Gratitude Journey from Bean to Cup, Simon & Schuster,
2018. If you notice a certain resemblance to Leonard Read’s beautiful fable ‘I, Pencil’, you are
absolutely right. It is the best depiction of the market’s magic collaboration that exists but,
thanks to the splendid innovation of the marketplace, no one uses pencils any more.
Niclas Berggren & Therese Nilsson, ‘Economic freedom as a driver of trust and tolerance’, in
Gwartney et al 2020. See also Antonio Farfan-Vallespin, Matthew Bonick, ‘On the origins and
consequences of racism’, contribution to the annual meeting of the Association for Social
Policy, Deutsche Zentralbibliothek für Wirtschaftswissenschaften, Leibniz-
Informationszentrum Wirtschaft, Kiel & Hamburg, 2016.
Thomas Sowell, Preferential Policies: An International Perspective, William Morrow, 1990,
pp.21ff. If you now object that capitalism would not have been possible without cotton, and
cotton would not have been possible without slavery, and that capitalism was based on
colonialism, then the book you are looking for is Fredrik Segerfeldt, Den svarte mannens
börda, Timbro, 2018.
Swaminathan Anklesaria Aiyar, ‘Capitalism’s assault on the Indian caste system,’ Policy
Analysis No.776, Cato Institute, 21 July 2015.
You can begin with The Constitution of Liberty. If it is deterrently large, start with the essay
‘The use of knowledge in society’.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
Mårten Blix & Henrik Jordahl, Privatizing Welfare Services: Lessons from the Swedish
Experiment, Oxford University Press, 2021.
Frédéric Bastiat, Economic Sophisms, The Foundation for Economic Education, 1964, pp.97f.
Jeffrey Clemens, ‘Making sense of the minimum wage: A roadmap for navigating recent
research’, Cato Policy Analysis, 14 May 2019.
John Maynard Keynes, The Economic Consequences of the Peace, Harcourt, Brace and Howe,
1920, pp.235–48.
In addition, it implies that ‘state capitalism’ is not capitalism. If the state owns companies and
controls the economy, we have limited both private ownership and market coordination. State
capitalism does not exist, it is just an attempt by Marxists to avoid taking responsibility for
state socialism.
‘Although to introduce socialism as the punishment for our sins would be to go too far, past
injustices might be so great as to make necessary in the short run a more extensive state in
order to rectify them.’ Anarchy, State and Utopia, Basic Books 1974, p.231. See also Fredrik
Segerfeldt, The New Equality: Global Development from Robin Hood to Botswana, Timbro,
2014, pp.105ff.
Hernando de Soto, The mystery of capital: Why capitalism triumphs in the west and fails
everywhere else, Bantam Press, 2000.
Aristophanes, Ecclesiazusae, lines 590, 650.
Trotsky did not mind using that principle against his opposition but protested when Stalin used
it against Trotskyites. Leon Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed: What is the Soviet Union and
Where is It Going?, Pathfinder Press, 1972, p.283.
‘Covid-19 exposes EU reliance on drug imports’, Financial Times, 20 April 2020.
Vincent Geloso & Jamie Bologna Pavlik, ‘Economic freedom and the consequences of the
1918 pandemic’, Contemporary Economic Policy, vol.39, no.2, 2021.
Christian Bjørnskov, ‘Economically free countries have fewer and less severe economic
crises’, Timbro briefing paper, no.29, 2020.
Keith Bradsher, ‘China delays mask and fan exports after quality complaints’, The New York
Times, 11 April 2020. Maria Manner & Paavo Teittinen, ‘HS: n haltuun saamat
Huoltovarmuuskeskuksen luvut paljastavat, miten vähän Suomen valtiolla oli kasvosuojaimia
koronakriisin iskiessä päälle’, Helsingin Sanomat, 10 April 2020.
Johan Norberg, ‘Covid-19 and the danger of self-sufficiency: How Europe’s pandemic
resilience is open economy’, ECIPE Policy Brief, no.2, 2021.
‘EU should “not aim for self-sufficiency” after coronavirus, trade chief says’, Financial Times,
23 April 2020. Andrew Edgecliffe-Johnson, ‘Manufacturers warn US must do more to
maintain fragile PPE production’, Financial Times, 13 April 2021.
Henry David Thoreau, On Civil Disobedience and Other Essays, Dover Publications, 2021,
p.2.
3. The silence of the factory whistle

  1.
  2.
  3.
  4.
  5.
  6.
  7.
  8.
  9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
Robert Z. Lawrence, ‘China, like the US, faces challenges in achieving inclusive growth
through manufacturing’, Policy Brief, Peterson Institute for International Economics, August
2019.
Economic Data, ‘Industrial Production: Manufacturing’, Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis,
2022.
Michael Hicks & Srikant Devaraj, ‘The myth and reality of manufacturing in America’, Center
for Business and Economic Research, Ball State University, 2015.
‘China’s future economic potential hinges on its productivity’, The Economist, 14 August
2021.
Philippe Aghion, Céline Antonin & Simon Bunel, The Power of Creative Destruction:
Economic Upheaval and the Wealth of Nations, Belknap Press, 2021, p.51f.
S. L. Price, Playing Through the Whistle, First Grove Atlantic, 2016, chap.11.
J. D. Vance, Hillbilly Elegy: A Memoir of a Family and Culture in Crisis, William Collins,
2016, p.55.
Daniel Clark, ‘Detroit autoworkers’ elusive post-war boom’, The Metropol Blog.
Daniel Clark, ‘The 1950s were not a golden age for Detroit’s autoworkers’, What it Means to
be American, 9 May 2019.
US Bureau of Labor Statistics, ‘Characteristics of minimum wage workers, 2020’, report 1091,
February 2021.
Michael Strain, The American Dream is not Dead (But Populism Could Kill It), Templeton
Press, 2020.
Ray Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, Emmanuel Saez & Nicholas Turner, ‘Is the
United States still a land of opportunity? Recent trends in intergenerational mobility’, The
American Economic Review, vol.104, no.5, 2014.
Simeon Alder, David Lagakos & Lee Ohanian, ‘Competitive pressure and the decline of the
Rust Belt: A macroeconomic analysis’, Working Paper no.20538, National Bureau of
Economic Research, October 2014.
Strain 2020, p.33.
Strain 2020, chap.6.
Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis, ‘Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Hourly Compensation for
All Employed Persons’, https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/COMPRNFB.
Strain 2020, p.98f.
Strain 2020, p.72f.
Strain 2020, p.73.
‘More than half of British homes don’t have a bathroom’, Guardian, 21 March 1950. And in
grandpa’s time, construction was not made more expensive by requirements for fire safety,
moisture control, child safety, glass safety, accessibility, green space, free space, parking,
sound insulation, daylight, solar heating, energy consumption or protection against squeezing,
fall, collision or burn, or work environment requirements. See Mårten Belin, ‘Här får vi inte
bo’, Sydsvenska Dagbladet, 25 September 2021.
Robert Atkinson & John Wu, ‘False alarmism: Technological disruption and the US labor
market, 1850–2015’, Information Technology & Innovation Foundation, May 2017.
United States Census Bureau, ‘Table A-1. Annual geographic mobility rates, by type of
movement: 1948–2020’, www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/geographic-

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
mobility/historic.html.
Charlie Giattino, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina & Max Roser, ‘Working hours’, Our World in Data,
December 2020.
Ibid.
Gallup, ‘Work and Workplace’, https://news.gallup.com/poll/1720/work-work-place.aspx.
David Graeber, Bullshit Jobs: A Theory, Simon & Schuster, 2018. Roland Paulsen, The
Working Society: How Work Survived Technology, Gleerups, 2010. See also Andreas Bergh,
‘Tre böcker av Roland Paulsen – en kritisk läsning’, Ekonomisk Debatt, no.3, 2017.
Graeber 2018, pp.xix, xxiv.
Magdalena Soffia, Alex Wood, Brendan Burchell, ‘Alienation is not “bullshit”: An empirical
critique of Graeber’s theory of BS jobs’, Work, Employment and Society, June 2021.
Sarah Damaske, Matthew Zawadzki, Joshua M. Smyth, ‘Stress at work: Differential
experiences of high versus low SES workers’, Social Science & Medicine 156, March 2016.
Alan Manning & Graham Mazeine, ‘Subjective job insecurity and the rise of the precariat:
Evidence from the UK, Germany and the United States’, CEP Discussion Paper no.1712,
August 2020.
See, e.g., Thor Berger, Carl Benedikt Frey, Guy Levin, Santosh Rao Danda, ‘Uber happy?
Work and well-being in the “gig economy”’, Economic Policy, vol.34, no.99, 2019.
Linda Weidenstedt, Andrea Geissinger & Monia Lougui, ‘Why gig as a food courier?’, Report
no.15, Ratio 2020.
Andreas Bergh, ‘Låt giggarna gigga’, Arbetsmarknadsnytt, 2 December 2020.
Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis, ‘All employees, manufacturing’,
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/ MANEMP and ‘All Employees, total nonfarm’,
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/ PAYEMS. See also Lawrence Edwards & Robert Lawrence,
Rising tide: Is growth in emerging economies good for the United States?, Peterson Institute
for International Economics, 2013, p.15.
Adam Posen, ‘The price of nostalgia’, Foreign Affairs, May/June 2021. The data on lost jobs
come from the ‘Job openings and labor turnover survey’ from the US Bureau of Labor
Statistics. In 2019, the year before the pandemic, 67.9 million jobs disappeared and 70 million
new ones were created.
Ildikó Magyari, ‘Firm reorganization, Chinese imports, and US manufacturing employment’,
Job Market Paper, 2017.
Nicholas Bloom, Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen, ‘Trade induced technical change? The
impact of Chinese imports on innovation, IT and productivity’, Review of Economic Studies,
vol.83, no.1, 2016.
Zhi Wang, Shang-Jin Wei, Xinding Yu, Kunfu Zhu, ‘Re-examining the effects of trading with
China on local labor markets: A supply chain perspective’, NBER working paper no.24886,
2018.
Jason Dedrick, Greg Linden, Kenneth L. Kraemer, ‘We estimate China only makes $8.46 from
an iPhone’, The Conversation, 6 July 2018.
Anne Case Deaton & Angus Deaton, Deaths of Despair: And the Future of Capitalism,
Princeton University Press, 2020.
Nicholas Eberstadt, ‘Education and men without work’, National Affairs, no.48, 2021.
Deaton & Deaton 2020, p.222.

43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
  1.
  2.
  3.
  4.
  5.
  6.
  7.
  8.
  9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
‘The welfare state needs updating’, The Economist, 12 July 2018.
‘Not In My Back Yard’, i.e. people protesting against new local construction.
Dick Carpenter, Lisa Knepper, Angela Erickson & John K. Ross, ‘License to work: A national
study of burdens from occupational licensing’, Institute for Justice, 2012.
Gary Clyde Hufbauer & Kimberly Ann Elliott, Measuring the Costs of Protection in the United
States, Peterson Institute for International Economics, 1994.
Margaret Thatcher, ‘Speech opening single market campaign’, 18 April 1988,
www.margaretthatcher.org/document/107219.
Iain Martin, ‘Painful as it is, we need to talk about Brexit’, The Times, 8 June 2022.
Pablo D. Fajgelbaum & Amit K. Khandelwal, ‘Measuring the unequal gains from trade’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.131, no.3, 2016.
4. In defence of the 1 per cent
Ung Vänster, Facebook, 28 January 2018.
Jagdish Bhagwati, Essays in Development Economics: Wealth and poverty, MIT Press, 1985,
p.18.
August Strindberg, Tjänstekvinnans son II, Bonnier, 1919, chap.9.
Sheryl Gay Stolberg, ‘Bernie Sanders, now a millionaire, pledges to release tax returns by
Monday’, The New York Times, 9 April 2019.
William D. Nordhaus, ‘Schumpeterian profits in the American economy: Theory and
measurement’, NBER Working Paper no.10433, 2004.
Compare with Frédéric Bastiat’s reasoning on the invention of the printing press, Bastiat 1964,
pp.37f.
Donald Boudreaux, Globalization, Greenwood Press, 2008, p.32f.
Not Gates any more. Jeff Bezos beat him a few years back, then it was Elon Musk and now it
is Bernard Arnault. It changes very fast depending on the temporary stock prices of the
companies the super-rich founded, so I’ll continue to use Gates as an example for a while.
Thomas Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Belknap Press, 2014, p.444ff.
Ibid., p.31.
Ibid., pp.435–9.
Robert Arnott, William Bernstein & Lillian Wu, ‘The myth of dynastic wealth: The rich get
poorer’, Cato Journal, vol.35, no.3, 2015.
William McBride, ‘Thomas Piketty’s false depiction of wealth in America’, Tax Foundation
Special Report no.223, July 2014. Chris Edwards & Ryan Bourne, ‘Exploring Wealth
Inequality’, Policy Analysis, no.881, Cato Institute, 5 November 2019.
Amy Castoro, ‘Wealth transition and entitlement: Shedding light on the dark side of a charmed
life’, The Journal of Wealth Management, vol.18, no.2, 2015.
Paul Graham, ‘How people get rich now’, paulgraham.com, April 2021.
Milanović 2019, p.63.
Matthew Rognlie, ‘Deciphering the fall and rise in the net capital share: accumulation or
scarcity?’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, spring 2015.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
  1.
  2.
Milanović 2019, pp.26–9.
Betsey Stevenson & Justin Wolfers. ‘Happiness inequality in the United States’, The Journal of
Legal Studies, vol.37, no.52, 2008. Andrew Clark, Sarah Flèche & Claudia Senik, ‘Economic
growth evens out happiness: Evidence from six surveys’, Review of Income and Wealth, 2015.
Phil Gramm, Robert Ekelund & John Early, The Myth of American Inequality: How
Government Biases Policy Debate, Rowman & Littlefield, 2022.
Branko Milanović, ‘The three eras of global inequality, 1820–2020 with the focus on the past
thirty years’, Stone Center on Socio-Economic Inequality, working paper 59, November 2022.
See also Olle Hammar & Daniel Waldenström, ‘Global earnings inequality 1970–2018’, The
Economic Journal, vol.130, November 2020.
Milanović 2022.
Credit Suisse, Global wealth report 2021, Credit Suisse Research Institute, 2021, p.25.
Oxfam, ‘Time to care’, Oxfam Briefing Paper, January 2020.
Milanović 2022.
Lives on the Line, A Map of Life Expectancy at Birth,
https://tubecreature.com/#/livesontheline/current/same/*/940GZZLUKNB/FFTFTF/13/-0.1065
/51.5181/
Angus Deaton, ‘Health, inequality, and economic development’, Prepared for Working Group
1 of the WHO Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, May 2001.
Deaton & Deaton 2020, p.139f.
Fredrik Segerfeldt, ‘Sverige är ett klassamhälle. Och?’, Smedjan, 13 March 2018.
Raj Chetty, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi, Nicholas Turner,
Augustin Bergeron, David Cutler, ‘The association between income and life expectancy in the
United States, 2001–2014’, The Journal of the American Medical Association, vol.315, no.16,
2016.
Seth Stephens-Davidowitz, Everybody Lies: Big Data, New Data, and What the Internet Can
Tell Us About Who We Really Are, Dey Street Books, p.178.
P. J. O’Rourke, Parliament of Whores, Atlantic Monthly Press, 1991, p.210.
Johan Norberg, Financial Fiasco: How America’s Infatuation with Home Ownership and Easy
Money Created the Financial Crisis, Cato Institute, 2012. Johan Norberg, Eurokrasch: En
tragedi i tre akter, Hydra Förlag, 2012.
Ryan Banerjee & Boris Hofmann, ‘Corporate zombies: Anatomy and life cycle’, BIS Working
Paper, no.882, The Bank for International Settlements, September 2020.
5. Capitalism: Monopoly or Minecraft?
Council of Economic Advisers, ‘Benefits of competition and indicators of market power,’
Issue Brief, April 2016.
Nicolas Crouzet and Janice Eberly, ‘Understanding weak capital investment: The role of
market concentration and intangibles’. David Autor et al, ‘The fall of the labor share and the
rise of superstar firms’, NBER Working Paper no.23396, May 2017.

  3.
  4.
  5.
  6.
  7.
  8.
  9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
US Bureau of Labor Statistics, ‘Quarterly census of employment and wages: Employment and
wages, annual averages 2019’, Table 4, www.bls.gov/cew/publications/employment-and-
wages-annual-averages/2019/home.htm.
Autor et al 2017.
Philippe Aghion, Céline Antonin & Simon Bunel, The Power of Creative Destruction:
Economic Upheaval and the Wealth of Nations, Belknap Press, 2021, p.66f.
Esteban Rossi-Hansberg and Chang-Tai Hsieh, ‘The industrial revolution in services’, NBER
Working Paper no.25968, June 2019. See also Ryan Bourne, ‘Does rising industry
concentration signify monopoly power?’, Economic Policy Brief, no.2, 13 February 2020, Cato
Institute.
When a student once asked Milton Friedman to sign a Monopoly game, Friedman did so but
added the words ‘Down with’ before the game name.
Mark J. Perry, ‘Only 51 US companies have been on the Fortune 500 since 1955, thanks to the
creative destruction that fuels economic prosperity’, Carpe Diem blog, AEI, 26 May 2020.
Ludwig von Mises, Human Action, Laissez Faire Books, 1966, pp.269f.
Hal R. Varian, ‘Recent trends in concentration, competition, and entry’, Antitrust Law Journal,
vol.82, no.3, 2019.
Mary Amiti & Sebastian Heise, ‘US market concentration and import competition’, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, 5 April 2021.
Tyler Cowen, Big Business: A Love Letter to an American Anti-Hero, St Martin’s Press, 2019,
chap.2.
Seth Stephens-Davidowitz, Everybody Lies: Big Data, New Data, and What the Internet Can
Tell Us About Who We Really Are, HarperCollins, 2017. So remember to never compare your
inner self with other people’s social media.
I suspect that my friend Mattias Svensson knows why this is the case. Don’t ask him. Eric
Schwitzgebel, ‘Do ethicists steal more books?’, Philosophical Psychology, vol.22, no.6,
December 2009.
E.g. Nina Björk, ‘Klimatet kräver kontroll över ekonomin’, Dagens Nyheter, 30 August 2021
and Cosima Dannoritzer, The Light Bulb Conspiracy, 2010.
Dexter Ford, ‘As cars are kept longer, 200,000 is the new 100,000’, The New York Times, 16
March 2012. Bruce Hamilton & Molly Macauley, ‘Heredity or environment: Why is the
automobile longevity increasing?’, The Journal of Industrial Economics, vol.47, no.3, 1999.
Anna Quindlen, ‘Honestly – you should not have’, Newsweek, 3 December 2001.
Robert Wright, Nonzero: History, Evolution & Human Cooperation, Abacus, 2001, p.43.
For more information about this and its expressions, see Virginia Postrel, The Substance of
Style: How the Rise of Aesthetic Value is Remaking Commerce, Culture and Consciousness,
HarperCollins, 2003.
No, actually, the most common question is probably: ‘Have you read all these?’ Now I’ll
answer once and for all, so you never have to ask again: no.
Erik Brynjolfsson, Felix Eggers & Avinash Gannamaneni, ‘Using massive online choice
experiments to measure changes in well-being’, NBER Working Paper no.24514, 2018.
Soave 2021, p.30.
Matthew Gentzkov & Jesse M. Shapiro, ‘Ideological segregation online and offline’, Chicago
Booth & National Bureau of Economic Research, 28 March 2011.

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
  1.
  2.
  3.
  4.
  5.
  6.
  7.
  8.
  9.
10.
11.
Levi Boxell, Matthew Gentzkow, Jesse M. Shapiro, ‘Is the internet causing political
polarization? Evidence from demographics’, NBER Working paper no.23258, March 2017.
Georgia Wells, Jeff Horwitz & Deepa Seethharaman, ‘Facebook knows Instagram is toxic for
teen girls, company documents show’, Wall Street Journal, 14 September 2021.
Monica Anderson & Jingjing Jiang, ‘Teens social media habits and experiences’, Pew
Research Center, November 2018.
I just replaced ‘MySpace’ with ‘it’, otherwise the quote is verbatim from Victor Keegan, ‘Will
MySpace ever lose its monopoly?’, Guardian, 8 February 2007.
Randall E. Stross, ‘How Yahoo! won the search wars’, Fortune, 2 March 1998.
Bruce Upbin, ‘The next billion’, Forbes, 26 October 2007.
Robby Soave, Tech Panic: Why We Shouldn’t Fear Facebook and the Future, Threshold
Editions, 2021, p.13.
Germán Gutiérrez & Thomas Philippon, ‘Declining competition and investment in the US’,
NBER Working paper no.23583, July 2017.
See Tim O’Reilly, ‘Data is the new sand’, The Information, 24 February 2021.
Joakim Wernberg, ‘Innovation, competition and digital platform paradoxes’, Swedish
Entrepreneurship Forum, Policy papers on technology, economics and structural change, no.1,
2021.
‘The new rules of competition in the technology industry’, The Economist, 27 February 2021.
Ibid.
6. Picking losers
Marco Rubio, ‘Senator Marco Rubio speaks at National Defense University on the need for a
“pro-American industrial policy” to counter China’, The American Mind, 10 December 2019.
Mariana Mazzucato, Mission Economy: A Moonshot Guide to Changing Capitalism, Allen
Lane, 2021, p.121.
Christian Sandström, ‘Skapades iPhone av den amerikanska staten’, Ekonomisk Debatt, vol.41,
no.3, 2015. See also Deirdre McCloskey & Alberto Mingardi, The Myth of the Entrepreneurial
State, American Institute for Economic Research, 2020.
Mariana Mazzucato, The Entrepreneurial State, Anthem Press 2013.
Tim Harford, The Next Fifty Things That Made the Modern Economy, Hachette, 2020, chap.24.
In an email correspondence documented on NetHistory:
www.nethistory.info/Archives/origins.html.
Mazzucato 2021, p.123.
Oral history interview with R. W. Taylor, William Aspray, Charles Babbage Institute, 28
February 1989. https://conservancy.umn.edu/handle/11299/107666, p.42f.
Oral history interview with Paul Baran, Judy O’Neill, Charles Babbage Institute, 5 March
1990, https://conservancy.umn.edu/handle/11299/107101, p.34.
Matt Ridley, How Innovation Works: And Why It Flourishes in Freedom, HarperCollins, 2020.
Jonathan Coopersmith, ‘Pornography, technology, and progress’, Icon, vol.4, 1998.

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
  1.
Linda Cohen & Roger Noll, The Technology Pork Barrel, Brookings Institution Press, 1991,
p.365, chap.12.
Sven-Olof Daunfeldt, Patrik Gustavsson Tingvall & Daniel Halvarsson, ‘Statliga
innovationsstöd till små och medelstora företag – har de någon effekt?’, Ekonomisk Debatt,
vol.44, no.1, 2016.
Josh Lerner, Boulevard of Broken Dreams: Why Public Efforts to Boost Entrepreneurship and
Venture Capital Have Failed – And What To Do About It, Princeton University Press, 2009,
p.5.
‘Attack of the Eurogoogle’, The Economist, 11 March 2006. I know what you’re thinking –
and you are absolutely right. The Germans wanted a text-based search engine while the French
wanted to develop some kind of multimedia search that would appeal to all senses. Everyone
got mad at each other.
Tim Murphy, ‘Your daily newt: A $40 billion entitlement for laptops’, Mother Jones, 20
December 2011. ‘Attack of the Eurogoogle’, The Economist, 11 March 2006.
Mariana Mazzucato, ‘Mission-oriented innovation policy’, Royal Society for the
Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce, September 2017. Mazzucato 2021,
p.145.
Frank Dohmen, Alexander Jung, Stefan Schultz & Gerald Traufetter, ‘German failure on the
road to a renewable future’, Der Spiegel International, 13 May 2019.
Johan Norberg, Power to the People, Sumner Books, 2015.
Jan Jörnmark & Christian Sandström, Den industripolitiska återvändsgränden: En historia om
det statliga riskkapitalet, Skattebetalarnas förening, 2020, p.64f.
@Infineon, Twitter, 14 November 2022.
Jörnmark & Sandström 2020, p.46f, Anders Gustafsson, Andreas Stephan, Alice Hallman &
Nils Karlsson ‘The “sugar rush” from innovation subsidies: A robust political economy
perspective’, Empirica, vol.43, 2016.
Anders Gustafsson, Patrik Gustavsson Tingvall & Daniel Halvarsson, ‘Subsidy entrepreneurs’,
Ratio working paper, no.303, 2017.
Karl Wennberg & Christian Sandström, Questioning the Entrepreneurial State: Status-Quo,
Pitfalls, and the Need for Credible Innovation Policy, Springer, 2022, p.11.
For a systematic examination of the relationship between funding, research and innovation, see
Terence Kealey, The Economic Laws of Scientific Research, Palgrave Macmillan, 1996.
Even if they could probably make a lot of money on such innovations without prize
competitions. It should also be noted that many of the most productive prize competitions have
been established privately, such as the X Prize Foundation.
‘The world’s most pointless rocket has been launched at last’, The Economist, 16 November
2022.
7. China, paper tiger
Ronald Coase & Ning Wang, How China Became Capitalist, Palgrave MacMillan, 2013.

  2.
  3.
  4.
  5.
  6.
  7.
  8.
  9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
  1.
  2.
Kate Xiao Zhou, How the Farmers Changed China: Power of the People, Westview Press,
1996, p.56.
Coase & Wang 2013, p.63.
Barry Naughton, The Rise of China’s Industrial Policy 1978 to 2020, Enero 2021, p.41.
Bradley M. Gardner, China’s Great Migration: How the Poor Built a Prosperous Nation, The
Independent Institute, 2017.
‘World Development Indicators’, World Bank, 2022.
Doron Ben-Atar, Trade Secrets: Intellectual Piracy and the Origins of American Industrial
Power, Yale University Press, 2004.
US–China Business Council, ‘Member survey’, 2019 and 2020.
Scott Lincicome, ‘Testing the “China shock”’, Policy Analysis no.895, Cato Institute, 8 July
2020. Jeffrey J. Scott & Eujin Jung, ‘In US–China trade disputes, the WTO usually sides with
the United States’, Peterson Institute for International Economics, 12 March 2019. James
Bacchus, Simon Lester & Huan Zhu, ‘Disciplining China’s trade practices at the WTO: How
WTO complaints can help make China more market–oriented’, Cato Institute, 15 November
2018.
Paul R. Gregory & Kate Zhou, ‘How China won and Russia lost’, Policy Review, Hoover
Institution, 1 December 2009.
Weiying Zhang, The Logic of the Market: An Insider’s View of Chinese Economic Reform,
Cato Institute, 2015, p.xx.
Naughton 2021, p.47.
Nicholas Lardy, Markets over Mao: The Rise of Private Business in China, Peterson Institute
for International Economics, 2014.
World Bank, PovcalNet, 2022.
David Shambaugh, China’s Leaders: From Mao to Now, Polity, 2021, chaps 4 and 5.
Shambaugh 2021, p.246.
For a summary, see Daniel H. Rosen, ‘China’s economic reckoning’, Foreign Affairs,
July/August 2021.
Naughton 2021, p.14.
Listen to, e.g., Jeffrey Bader in the US–China Dialogue Podcast, 19 August 2019,
https://uschinadialogue.georgetown.edu/podcasts/jeffrey-bader-part-one.
See, e.g., Minxin Pei, ‘China’s coming upheaval’, Foreign Affairs, 5 April 2020, and John
Mueller, ‘China: Rise or Demise?’, Policy Analysis no.917, Cato Institute, 18 May 2021.
Stephen Roach, ‘Xi’s costly obsession with security’, Foreign Affairs, 28 November 2022.
Greg Ip, ‘China’s state-driven growth model is running out of gas’, The Wall Street Journal, 17
July 2019.
8. But what about the planet?
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ‘IPCC second assessment climate change’, 1995.
At the UN Climate Action Summit in New York, 23 September 2019.

  3.
  4.
  5.
  6.
  7.
  8.
  9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
Daniel Gerszon Mahler, Nishant Yonzan, Christoph Lakner, R. Andres Castedana Aguiilar &
Haoyu Wu, ‘Updated estimates of the impact of COVID-19 on global poverty’, World Bank
Blog, 24 June 2021. FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP & WHO, The state of food security and
nutrition in the world 2021, FAO 2021.
Norberg 2015.
Hannah Ritchie, Pablo Rosado & Max Roser, 'Natural disasters', Our World in Data, 2022.
Zeke Hausfather, ‘Covid-19 could result in much larger CO2 drop in 2020’, Breakthrough
Institute, 30 April 2020.
Andrew McAfee, More From Less, 2019, p.67. See also Marian L. Tupy & Gale L. Pooley,
‘Superabundance: The story of population growth, innovation and human flourishing on an
infinitely bountiful planet’, Cato Institute, 2022.
‘Air pollutant emissions data viewer (Gothenburg Protocol, LRTAP Convention) 1990–2019’,
European Environmental Agency, 11 August 2021.
Z. A. Wendling, J. W. Emerson, A. de Sherbinin, D. C. Esty, The Environmental Performance
Index 2020, Yale Center for Environmental Law & Policy, 2020, p.69.
Ibid.
‘Household air pollution from solid fuels – level 4 risk’, Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation. www.healthdata.org/results/gbd_summaries/2019household-air-pollution-from-
solid-fuels-level-4-risk.
Claude Martin, On the Edge: The State and Fate of the World’s Tropical Rainforests, Greystone
Books, 2015, p.141.
United Nations Environment Program, Protected Planet Report 2020, updated May 2021,
chap.3.
FAO, Global forests resources assessment 2020: Main report, Rome 2020.
Jesse Ausubel, ‘Peak farmland’, Lecture for the Symposium in Honor of Paul Demeny, 16
December 2012.
Joseph Poore, ‘Call for conservation: Abandoned pasture’, Science, vol.351, 8 January 2016.
Jonas Grafström & Christian Sandström, Mer för mindre? Tillväxt och hållbarhet i Sverige,
Ratio, 2020.
Nikolai Shmelev & Vladimir Popov, The Turning Point: Revitalizing the Soviet Economy,
Tauris, 1990, p.128f.
Apparently, Jevon’s son complained to Keynes that the children still had failed to use up their
father’s paper reserves. Milanović 2019, p.256.
Karl Marx, Capital, Chicago: Charles H. Kerr and Co., 1909, vol.III, pt I, chap.5. See also
Pierre Desrochers, ‘Did the invisible hand need a regulatory glove to develop a green thumb?
Some historical perspective on market incentives, win-win innovations and the Porter
hypothesis’, Environmental and Resource Economics, vol.41, February 2008.
For a discussion of how free market liberalism can and should be combined with
environmental regulations, see Mattias Svensson, Miljöpolitik för moderater, Fores, 2015.
‘Indira Gandhi’s Address’, The Times of India, 15 June 1972.
Andrew McAfee, More from Less, 2019, p.67. The State Secretary was Kjell-Olof Feldt, who
said this at a seminar at Chalmers.
Hannah Ritchie, ‘Where does the plastic in our oceans come from?’, Our World in Data, 1 May
2021.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
  1.
Wendling et al 2020, p.39.
Ibid.
Bishwa S. Koirala, Hui Li, Robert P. Berrens, ‘Further investigation of Environmental Kuznets
Curve studies using meta-analysis’, International Journal of Ecological Economics and
Statistics, no.S11, vol.22, 2011.
Thomas van Goethem & Jan Luiten van Zanden, ‘Biodiversity trends in a historical
perspective’ How Was Life? Volume II: New Perspectives on Well-Being and Global Inequality
Since 1820, OECD, 2021.
Hannah Ritchie, ‘You want to reduce the carbon footprint of your food? Focus on what you
eat, not whether your food is local’, Our World in Data, 24 January 2020.
Vilma Sandström, Hugo Valin, Tamás Krisztin, Petr Havlík, Mario Herrero, Thomas Kastner,
‘The role of trade in the greenhouse gas footprints of EU diets’, Global Food Security, vol.19,
2018. Desrochers & Shimizu 2012, p.154.
‘Airfreight transport of fresh fruits and vegetables: A review of the environmental impact and
policy options’, International Trade Center, 2007. Martina Alig & Rolf Frischknecht, ‘Life
cycle assessment cut roses’, Treeze, July 2018.
Hannah Ritchie & Max Roser, ‘Air pollution’, Our World in Data, January 2021.
Wendling et al 2020, p.47. See also Amaryllis Mavragani, Ioannis Nikolaou & Konstantinos
Tsagarakis ‘Open economy, institutional quality, and environmental performance: A
macroeconomic approach’, Sustainability, vol.8, 2016.
IEA, Energy Efficiency Indicators Statistics report, December 2020.
Max Roser, ‘Why did renewables become so cheap so fast?’, Our World in Data, 1 December
2020.
John Burn-Murdoch, ‘Economics may take us to net zero all on its own’, Financial Times, 23
September 2022.
Wendling et al 2020, p.129.
‘Economic growth no longer means higher carbon emissions’, The Economist, 8 November
2022.
Jonas Grafström, ‘Public policy failures related to China’s wind power development’, Ratio
working paper, no.320, 2019.
Now you may be wondering if I want the EU to abolish its tariffs and quotas regardless of the
policy in other countries. Yes, good point. But that is my ideal solution. Another of my ideal
solutions is for all countries to introduce carbon taxes. This is not about my ideals but about
what is politically possible in an imperfect world. For a more elaborate version of this
argument, see Svensson 2015, p.101ff and Fredrik Segerfeldt and Mattias Svensson, Frihandel
för nybörjare, Timbro, 2019, chap.7.
IEA, ‘Fossil Fuel Subsidies Database’, www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-product/fossil-
fuel-subsidies-database.
9. The meaning of life
Noreena Hertz, The Lonely Century: A Call to Reconnect, Sceptre, 2021, p.228.

  2.
  3.
  4.
  5.
  6.
  7.
  8.
  9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
Patrick Deneen, Why Liberalism Failed, Yale University Press, 2019, p.16f.
George Monbiot, ‘Neoliberalism – the ideology at the root of all our problems’, Guardian, 15
April 2016.
Joel Halldorf, ‘DN:s liberalism dog i Immanuelskyrkan’, Dagen, 23 September 2019.
Hertz 2021, p.14.
Nina Björk, Lyckliga i alla sina dagar, Wahlström & Widstrand, 2012, pp.176f and 173.
Deneen 2019, pp.32ff.
John Locke, Two Treatises of Government, Part II, Cambridge University Press, 1988, §77.
Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, Liberty Fund, 1976, p.116.
Deneen 2019, p.185.
See Nozick 1974, p.310, for a developed version of this argument.
Henrik Höjer, ‘Svensken är inte så ensam som vi tror’, Svenska Dagbladet, 20 October 2019.
Birgitta Odén, ‘Våld mot föräldrar i det gamla svenska samhället’, i Ida Hydle, Overgrep mot
eldre. Nordiska minister-rådet, 1994.
Gallup World Poll 2021, data quoted by Max Roser on Twitter, 25 May 2021.
https://twitter.com/MaxCRoser/status/1397213506802442243.
Federica Cocco, ‘Are we ready for the approaching loneliness epidemic?’, Financial Times, 24
November 2022. How’s Life? 2020: Measuring Well-being, OECD, 2020.
Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, ‘Is there a loneliness epidemic?’, Our World in Data, 11 December
2019.
Ortiz-Ospina 2019. Christina Victor, Sasha Scambler, Sunil Shah, Derek Cook, Tess Harris,
Elizabeth Rink & Stephen De Wilde, ‘Has loneliness amongst older people increased? An
investigation into variations between cohorts’, Aging & Society, vol.22, no.5, September 2002
Henrik Höjer, ‘Ensamheten minskar i Sverige’, Forskning & framsteg, 13 April 2018.
Caspian Rehbinder, ‘Ensamheten är mindre där friheten är större’, Smedjan, 18 February 2020.
Hannah Ritchie, ‘Global mental health: Five key insights which emerge from the data’, Our
World in Data, 16 May 2018.
Dirk Richter, Abbie Wall, Ashley Bruen & Richard Whittington, ‘Is the global prevalence rate
of adult mental illness increasing? Systematic review and meta-analysis’, Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, vol.140, August 2019.
Mohsen Naghavi, ‘Global, regional, and national burden of suicide mortality 1990 to 2016:
Systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016’, BMJ, 2019.
Christian Rück, Olyckliga i paradiset: Varför mår vi så dåligt när allt är så bra?, Natur &
Kultur, 2020.
Max Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, Routledge, 2005, p.xxxi.
Björk 2012, p.99.
William English & Peter Jaworski, ‘The introduction of paid plasma in Canada and the US has
not decreased unpaid blood donations’, SSRN, July 2020.
Shawn Rhoads, Devon Gunter, Rebecca M. Ryan, & Abigail Marsh, ‘Global variation in
subjective well-being predicts seven forms of altruism’, Psychological Science, vol.32, no.8,
2021.
Joseph Henrich et al. ‘“Economic man” in cross-cultural perspective: Behavioral experiments
in 15 small-scale societies’, Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol.28, no.6, 2005. Joseph Henrich

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
et al, ‘Markets, religion, community size, and the evolution of fairness and punishment’,
Science, vol.5972, no.327, 2010.
Joseph Henrich, The Weirdest People in the World, Allen Lane, 2020, chap.9.
Friedrich Engels, Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy, Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher, 1844.
Megan V. Teague, Virgil Henry Storr & Rosemarie Fike, ‘Economic freedom and materialism:
an empirical analysis’, Constitutional Political Economy, vol.31, 2020.
Mingliang Yuan, Giuliana Spadaro, Shuxian Jin, Junhui Wu, Yu Kou, Paul A. M. Van Lange,
and Daniel Balliet, ‘Did cooperation among strangers decline in the United States? A cross-
temporal meta-analysis of social dilemmas (1956–2017)’, Psychological Bulletin, vol.148,
no.3–4, 2022.
Interview with Ruut Venhoven, 23 April 2007.
Daniel Kahneman, ‘The sad tale of the aspiration treadmill’, Edge, 2008.
Johan Norberg, Den eviga matchen om lyckan, Natur och Kultur, 2009. Esteban Ortiz-Ospina
& Max Roser, Happiness and life satisfaction, Our World in Data, May 2017. An important
paper pioneering this reassessment was Betsey Stevenson & Justin Wolfers, ‘Economic growth
and subjective well-being: Reassessing the Easterlin Paradox’, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, no.1, 2008. See also Ruut Veenhoven & Floris Vergunst, ‘The Easterlin illusion:
Economic growth does go with greater happiness’, EHERO working paper, no.1, 2013. Ed
Diener, Louis Tay & Shigehiro Oishi, ‘Rising income and the subjective well-being of
nations’, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol.104, no.2, 2013.
Ortiz-Ospina & Roser 2017.
Ruut Veenhoven, ‘Quality of life in individualistic society: A comparison of 43 nations in the
early 1990s’, in M. J. deJong & A. C. Zijderveld (eds), The Gift of Society, Enzo Press, 1997.
Roland Inglehart et al, ‘Development, freedom and rising happiness: A global perspective
(1981–2007)’, Perspectives on Psychological Science, vol.3, no.4, 2008. Richard Layard,
Happiness: Lessons From a New Science, Allen Lane, 2005, p.235.
Bobby Duffy, The Perils of Perception: Why We’re Wrong About Nearly Everything, Atlantic
Books, 2018, chap.1. How is this consistent with what we saw in chapter 5? That we present a
happy facade on social media and google our anxieties in secret? Good question. Maybe we
disbelieve people’s unbelievable social media updates too much?
Ortiz-Ospina & Roser 2017.
Daniel Nettle, Happiness: The Science Behind Your Smile, Oxford University Press, 2005,
p.101.
David Edmonds & John Eidinow, Rousseau’s Dog: Two Great Thinkers at War in the Age of
Enlightenment, Harper Perennial 2007, p.131. Shortly afterwards, Hume and Rousseau became
enemies for life.
Interview with Ruut Veenhoven, 23 April 2007.
Ibid. Eric Weiner, The Geography of Bliss: One Grump’s Search for the Happiest Places in the
World, Twelve, 2008, p.16.
James Gwartney, Robert Lawson, Joshua Hall & Ryan Murphy, Economic Freedom of the
World: 2022 annual report, Fraser Institute, 2022.
Hans Pitlik & Martin Rode, ‘Free to choose? Economic freedom, relative income, and life
control perceptions’, International Journal of Wellbeing, vol.6, no.1, 2016. Kai Gehring, ‘Who

46.
47.
48.
  1.
  2.
  3.
  4.
benefits from economic freedom? Unravelling the effect of economic freedom on subjective
well-being’, World Development, vol.50, 2013. Boris Nikolaev & Daniel L. Bennett,
‘Economic freedom and emotional well-being’, Journal of Regional Analysis and Policy,
vol.47, no.1, September 2017.
Steven Quartz and Anette Asp, ‘Unequal, Yet Happy,’ The New York Times, 11 April 2015.
I saw the first study about this in Robert William Fogel, The Escape From Hunger and
Premature Death, 1700-2100: Europe, America, and the Third World, Cambridge University
Press, 2004, where 48 per cent had calmed down in the past five years.
Charlie Giattino, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina & Max Roser, ‘Working hours’, Our World in Data,
December 2020. See also Andreas Bergh, ‘Tre böcker av Roland Paulsen – en kritisk läsning’,
Ekonomisk Debatt, no.3, 2017.
Epilogue: The Emperor’s singing contest
Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto, Progress Publishers, 1948, chap.1.
Ibid.
Karl Marx, ‘Salary, price and profit’, 1865. Friedrich Engels, ‘Preface to the English edition’,
in The Working Class Situation in England, Progress Publishers, 1977.
Johan Norberg, Open: The Story of Human Progress, Atlantic Books, 2020.

INDEX
NB Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations
 
Afghanistan, 160–61, 256
Africa, 30–35, 70, 267, 282
colonisation, 31
independence, 31–4
Sub-Saharan Africa, 30–31
AIM (AOL Instant Messenger), 170
Albania, 50
Algeria, 251
Alphabet, 179
AltaVista, 169, 174
Amazon, 169–72, 178–9
Amazon Prime, 179
Andersson, Magdalena, 8
Angola, 239
Annan, Kofi, 3
Ant Group, 227
AOL (America Online), 169–71, 174
Apple, 107–8, 159, 163, 169–73, 179
Apple TV, 179
Arab Spring, 215
Aristophanes, 73
Aristotle, 70
ARPA, 183–6
ARPANET, 184–5
Asia, 267, 282
Asp, Anette, 287
Attac, 2–3, 6
Australia, 11, 258, 267, 282, 285
Ayittey, George, 31
Bangladesh, 235

Bank for International Settlements (BIS), 144
Bankman-Fried, Sam, 153
Bao Tong, 212
Baran, Paul, 184, 186–7
Bastiat, Frédéric, 114
Beijing, China, 209
Belgium, 285
Berggren, Niclas, 62
Bergh, Andreas, 56, 103
Bezos, Jeff, 127
Biden, Joe, 76, 217
big companies, 141, 146–50, 176–7, 292
BioNTech, 177
biotechnology, 195
Björk, Nina, 263, 265, 272, 274–5, 278
BlackBerry, 174
Blair, Tony, 170
Blockbuster, 151
Blue Origin, 202
Bolivia, 47
Bolt, Beranek and Newman, 184
Bono, 4, 170
Botswana, 34–5
Boudreaux, Donald, 125
Boulevard of Broken Dreams (Lerner), 190
Brazil, 11, 29, 239, 258
Brexit, 116–18
Bullshit Jobs: A Theory (Graeber), 86, 98–9
business regulation, 139–41
Callaghan, James, 10
Canada, 102, 267, 283
Capital in the Twenty-First Century (Piketty), 128
capital income, 130–31
Carbon Engineering, 255
Cardoso, Fernando Henrique, 29
Carlson, Tucker, 146
cars, 158
Carter, Jimmy, 10
Case Deaton, Anne, 108–11, 136
Castillo, Pedro, 30
Chávez, Hugo, 43, 135
child labour, 20
child mortality, 19–20, 20

Chile, 11, 29–30
China, 5, 7, 11, 19, 24–5, 76, 78–80, 83–4, 104–7, 204–29, 239, 258
agricultural productivity, 206–7, 209
Communist Party, 182, 204–9, 211–12, 215–18, 221–3, 226–8
deindustrialization, 84
economic development, 205–29
environmental issues, 251–3, 257
exports, 209–10
industrial policy, 205, 212–13, 217, 223–4, 296
innovation strategy, 182, 192
innovation, 226–8
poverty, 213, 214
Reform and Opening Up programme, 212
state-owned companies, 208
WTO and, 205, 209, 211
China’s Leaders (Shambaugh), 215
Chirac, Jacques, 191
Chomsky, Noam, 49
Christianity, 264–5
Churchill, Winston, 135
Clark, Daniel, 87
climate change, 5–7, 230–60, 293
carbon border tariffs, 258
carbon tax, 256–7, 259
energy supplies, 233–5, 253–6, 259
greenhouse gas emissions, 231, 233–5, 238, 240–41, 244, 253–9
see also environmental issues
Climeworks, 255
Clinton, Hillary, 140
Coase, Ronald, 206
Cohen, Linda, 189
communism, 2, 25–6, 241–3, 290–91
Communist Manifesto, The, 1848, 2
community, 267
Compaq, 174
Concorde, 191
Confucianism, 22, 25
Congo-Brazzaville, 30
Congo, 239
consumer culture, 160–62, 287–8
Cook, Tim, 173
cooperation, 278–9
Coopersmith, Jonathan, 188–9
Corbyn, Jeremy, 43

coronavirus see Covid-19 pandemic
Council of Economic Advisers, 147, 152
Covid-19 pandemic, 8, 21, 76–81, 223, 232–3, 270
Cowen, Tyler, 154
Credit Suisse, 132–3
crony capitalism, 139–40, 291
culture wars, 12–13
Czechoslovakia, 26
Dalits, 63–4
dating profiles, 154
‘deaths of despair’, 7, 108–10, 136, 271, 293
Deaths of Despair (Deaton and Case Deaton), 136
Deaton, Angus, 19, 108–119, 136
DeepMind, 177
degrowth, 232–5, 254–5
‘deindustrialization’, 83–5
democracies, 26, 37, 46
Deneen, Patrick, 262–5
Deng Xiaoping, 24, 46, 205, 212–13
Denmark, 91, 285
‘dependency theory’, 27–8
Detroit, Michigan, 87–8
dictatorships, 11, 24, 29, 32, 42–8
Digital Equipment Corporation, 174
disability-adjusted life years (DALY), 237
dishonesty, 153–6
Disney, 178
Dominican Republic, 225
Easterlin, Richard, 279
‘Easterlin paradox’, 279–80
Easterly, William, 39
Ecclesiazusae (Aristophanes), 73
Economic Freedom of the World index, 35–7
economic freedom, 35–42, 36, 57, 58–62, 58, 77–8
Economist, The, 179, 192
education, 20, 94
Energiewende, 191, 192–3
Engels, Friedrich, 2, 277, 290–91
Enlightenment, 73
entrepreneurship, 123–4, 128–9, 152–4
‘welfare entrepreneurs’, 197
environmental issues, 236–41, 245–52, 293

agriculture, 239–40
air pollution, 237–8
biodiversity, 238–9, 249–50
deforestation, 239
health and, 236–8, 237
plastics, 247–8
prosperity and, 245–52, 249
transportation, 250–51, 254–5
Environmental Performance Index (EPI), 248, 252
Estonia, 26
Ethiopia, 277
Europe, 22, 239, 267, 282
European Centre for International Political Economy, 79
European Union (EU), 4, 68, 79, 116, 164, 258–9
Everybody Lies (Stephens-Davidowitz), 155
Facebook, 163, 167–75, 179–80
Fallon, Brad, 192
famine, 29
Fanjul, Alfonso and José, 140
fascism, 75
Federal Communications Decency Act (USA), 174
Feldt, Kjell-Olof, 11
feudalism, 73, 75
Financial Fiasco (Norberg), 142
financial markets, 141–3
Financial Times, 8, 267
Finland, 76, 78, 268, 285
Foodora, 102
Forbes’ list, 129–30
forced technology transfers, 211
Foroohar, Rana, 8
Fortune 500 list, 151
Fortune magazine, 169
France, 79–80, 97, 159, 192, 281, 285
Fraser Institute, 35
free markets, 2–4, 6, 23, 58–62, 65–82, 83, 290–97
happiness and, 279–89, 282, 284, 286
human values and, 261–89
Friedman, Thomas, 204
‘friendshoring’, 79
Friendster, 170
GAFAM (Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple, Microsoft), 169–70

Gallup World Poll, 267
Gandhi, Indira, 245
Gapminder, 18
Gates, Bill, 124–7, 274
GDP (Gross Domestic Product), 5, 23, 26, 33, 35, 49–56
General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR), 164
generosity, 274–7
Georgia, 26, 215
Germany, 26, 84, 97, 101, 192–3, 196, 268
gig economy, 101–3
Gingrich, Newt, 191–2
Gini coefficient, 132
global financial crisis, 2008, 4–5, 142–3
global supply chains, 41–2, 58–61, 76, 81
Global Thermostat, 255
global warming see climate change
globalization, 3–8, 17, 19, 80, 103–10, 117
Google, 163, 169–73, 179–80
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 215
Graeber, David, 86, 98–9
Grafström, Jonas, 240
Greece, 26, 254
Green Revolution, 239–40
green technology, 243, 251–5
Greider, Göran, 50, 241
growth, 49–57
degrowth, 232–5, 254–5
government and, 55–6
health and, 52–3
poverty and, 53–4
Guangdong, China, 207–8
Guardian, 3, 169
Halldorf, Joel, 262, 265
happiness, 279–89, 282, 284, 286
Hawkins Family Farm, 140
Hawkins, Zach, 140
Hayden, Brian, 161
Hayek, Friedrich, 66
Helm, Dieter, 193
Henrekson, Magnus, 56
Hertz, Noreena, 261, 262, 265, 268, 272, 274–5, 278
Hillbilly Elegy (Vance), 87
Hinduism, 22, 25

Hong Kong, 23, 205, 207
Horwitz, Steven, 294
housing market, 131, 142–3, 208–9
How China Became Capitalist (Wang and Coase), 206
How Innovation Works (Ridley), 188
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, 148–9
Hu Jintao, 215–16
Hugo, Victor, 25
Hume, David, 284
Hungary, 26, 283
IBM, 151
Iceland, 285
IKEA, 119, 141, 147
illiteracy, 20, 20
‘import substitution’, 27–8
In Defence of Global Capitalism (Norberg), 3, 17, 33, 38, 42, 146, 151, 156, 169, 204, 214, 230–31
income, 22, 55, 88–96, 95, 134–5, 285, 291
low-income earners, 136–8
minimum wage, 90
wage stagnation, 89, 92–3
see also inequality
India, 11, 24–5, 63–4, 70, 234, 239, 251, 258
caste system, 63–4
Indonesia, 239
industrial policy, 182, 188–203
Industrial Revolution, 22
inequality, 7, 27, 42, 54–5, 110, 131–8, 133, 285–7
happiness inequality, 131–2
income, 285–7
life expectancy and, 136–8
infant mortality, 19–20, 235, 291
Infineon, 196
inflation, 8, 10–11, 69
innovation, 65–6, 122–3, 125, 151, 181–203
government policy and, 181–203
innovation shadow, 169, 176
prizes and, 199
research, 199–200
subsidies and grants, 196–7
Instagram, 168, 177
integrity, 164
intellectual property, 41, 210–11
International Disaster Database, 235

International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), 238
internet, 162–8, 183–7
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 231
iPhone, 107–8, 156, 159
Iran, 220
Iraq, 251
Ireland, 285
Italy, 97, 285
Jackson, Jesse, 43
Jacobs, A. J., 59–60
Japan, 22, 84, 225, 267
Jevons, William Stanley, 242
Jobs, Steve, 170, 173
Johnson, Boris, 9
Journal of the American Medical Association, The, 137
Kahneman, Daniel, 280
Kalecki, Michał, 120
Kamprad, Ingvar, 119, 124, 127
Keynes, John Maynard, 69
Klein, Naomi, 17, 21, 43, 232, 241
Kodak, 151, 174
Kuznets, Simon, 248
‘Kuznets curve’, 248, 250, 254
Kyrgyzstan, 215
Kyriakides, Stella, 76
labour market see work
Labour Party, 10
Latin America, 27–30, 42–3, 47, 282
de Lattre, Anne, 32
Latvia, 26
Lawson, Robert, 37, 283
Lego, 151
Lehman Brothers, 170
Lerner, Josh, 190, 195, 197–8
liberalism, 262–6, 269–70
Licklider, J.C.R., 184, 186
life expectancy, 20–21, 36–7, 136–7, 291
Light Bulb Conspiracy, The (documentary), 157
light bulbs, 157–8
literacy, 291

Lithuania, 26
Living Planet Index, 249
lobbying, 139–41
Locke, John, 263–4
loneliness, 266–70
Lonely Century, The (Hertz), 262
Lumafabriken, 157
Lyft, 102
Ma, Jack, 227
Maduro, Nicolás, 43
Malmrot, Henrik, 119
Mandela, Nelson, 45
manufacturing industries, 83–7
automation, 85–6, 110
Mao Zedong, 24, 207, 209, 221–2
Maoism, 213–14
Márquez, Gabriel Garcìa, 269
Marshall Space Flight Center, 202
Martin, Claude, 238
Martin, Iain, 116
Martínez, Luis, 47
Marx, Karl, 2, 70, 243, 289, 290–91
maternal mortality, 20
Mathupe, Maria, 72
Mauritius, 34–5
Mazzucato, Mariana, 181–9, 192, 195
Mbeki, Thabo, 45
McCloskey, Deirdre, 13–14
Meade, James, 34
mental health, 262, 264, 266, 270–72
Meta, 179
Mexico, 11, 29
Microsoft, 169, 171–2, 179
Middle East, 282
Milanović, Branko, 131
Mill, John Stuart, 56
Milliken, Roger, 139
Minecraft, 150–51
Minitel, 191
von Mises, Ludwig, 152
Moldova, 215
Monbiot, George, 3, 262
monopolies, 146–80

‘natural monopoly’, 169
Montgomery, Alabama, 63
moon landing, 181–3, 191, 201–2
Moore, Michael, 119
Moore, Stephen, 8
Morocco, 234
Motorola, 152–3
MSN, 169, 171
Mugabe, Robert, 42–3
Musk, Elon, 124
Myanmar, 239
Myrdal, Gunnar, 30
MySpace, 169–71, 173–5
Nader, Ralph, 17
NASA, 183, 185, 190, 202–3
Naughton, Barry, 213, 218
neoliberalism, 38, 42, 45, 262–3
Netflix, 179
Netherlands 250, 285
Netscape, 174
New York Times, The, 122
New Zealand, 11, 267, 282, 285
Nicaragua, 47
Niemietz, Kristian, 44
Nilsson, Therese, 62
Ning Wang, 206
Nixon, Richard, 191, 219
Nokia, 151, 170–72, 174
Noll, Roger, 189
Nordhaus, William, 122–3
Norfeldt, Sven, 124
North American free trade agreement (NAFTA), 109
North Korea, 24, 220, 273
Norway, 283
nuclear weapons, 219–20
O’Rourke, P. J., 141
Obama, Barack, 147, 152, 165
Oculus, 177
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), 147, 249–50
Open (Norberg), 297
Our World in Data, 18, 250, 268, 270
Oxfam, 4, 43, 133–4

ozone layer, 236
Pakistan, 219
Palm, 174
Paraguay, 239
Paris, France, 66–7
Paris Climate Agreement, 233
Parks, Rosa, 62–3
Paulsen, Roland, 98
PayPal, 178
Peru, 29–30
Pfizer, 177
Philippines, 248
Piketty, Thomas, 127–31
Pinochet, Augusto, 29, 46
‘planned obsolescence’, 156–60
Poland, 26
populism, 47–8
pornography, 188–9
Portugal, 26–7, 254
poverty, 12, 17–25, 20, 29–33, 53–4, 110, 291–2
in China, 213, 214
climate change and, 235–6, 245
inequality and, 133–7
Prasad, Chandra Bhan, 64
prices, 67–9
price regulation, 68
profit, 74, 122–4
profit-hunger, 273–5
property rights, 70–72
protectionism, 3, 5, 11–12, 78–9, 115, 117–18
Putin, Vladimir, 5, 39
Quaero, 191–2
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117
Quartz, Steven, 287
Questioning the Entrepreneurial State, 198
racial segregation, 62–3
racism, 62–3, 111
Radelet, Steven, 24
RAND Corporation, 184, 186
Rao, Madhusudan, 63

Reagan, Ronald, 8–10
Rehbinder, Caspian, 269–70
religion, 26–7
Republican Party (US), 8–9
Ridley, Matt, 188
Ritchie, Hannah, 250, 270
Romer, Paul, 241
Romney, Mitt, 165
Roser, Max, 18
Rosling, Hans, 18
Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, 148–9
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 279, 284
Rubio, Marco, 181
Rü ck, Christian, 272
Russia, 39, 138
see also Soviet Union
Rwanda, 35
Samuelson, Paul, 5
Sanders, Bernie, 43, 122
Sandström, Christian, 183, 240
Scandinavia, 22, 36, 281
Schröer, Gerhard, 191
Schumpeter, Joseph, 89
Segerfeldt, Fredrik, 137
Shah, Parth, 25
Shambaugh, David, 215
Shanghai, China, 209
Shelby, Richard, 202–3
Shopify, 178
Silicon Valley, 141
Singapore, 23, 84
Singh, Manmohan, 25
Sixdegrees, 170
slavery, 31, 73, 75
Smith, Adam, 213, 264
smoking, 137
Snapchat, 178
Soave, Robby, 171
social class, 137
middle class erosion, 93–5, 95
working class, 7
social media, 155, 163, 165–9
social mobility, 90–91

social networks, 169–71
socialism, 11, 44, 75, 120–21, 145
three steps of socialism, 44–5
Swiss bank socialism, 33
Socrates, 65
Son of a Servant, The (Strindberg), 120–21
Sony, 151
South Africa, 45–6, 72, 267
South Korea, 23–5, 84, 225
Soviet Union, 26, 215, 219, 241–2
see also Russia
Sowell, Thomas, 62
space programme, 181–3, 191, 201–2
moon landing, 181–3, 191, 201–2
Space Launch System (SLS), 202
SpaceX, 202
Spain, 26, 27, 97
Spanish flu pandemic, 1918, 77
Starbucks, 75–6, 148
Stephens-Davidowitz, Seth, 155
Strain, Michael, 94
Strindberg, August, 120
subsidies, 139–40
suicide, 271
sulphur dioxide, 236
supply and demand, 67–9
supply chains see global supply chains
Svensson, Mattias, 256
Sweden, 49–51, 54–5, 66, 75–8, 91, 240, 244–5, 251, 266, 268–9, 271, 285
Swedish Energy Agency, 194
Swiss bank socialism, 33
Switzerland, 285
Taiwan, 23–5, 205, 207, 225, 267
Taliban, 160–61
Tanzania, 239
Target, 178
taxation, 56, 259
tax deductions, 141, 148
Taylor, Robert, 184–6
tech companies, 162–79
competition, 178–80
data, 175–6
GAFAM (Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple, Microsoft), 169–80

regulations, 164, 174–5
Tech Panic (Soave), 171
Technology Pork Barrel, The (Cohen and Noll), 190
technology, 40–41
Thanks a Thousand (Jacobs), 60
Thatcher, Margaret, 8–11, 116
Theranos, 153
Thoreau, Henry David, 82
Thunberg, Greta, 230, 232
TikTok, 178
Times, The, 116
traditions, 26–7
Trotsky, Leon, 73
Trump, Donald, 6, 8, 48, 83, 107, 140, 165, 217
Truss, Liz, 9, 11, 56, 117
trust, 153–6
Turkmenistan, 225
Twitter, 166–7
Uber, 102
Uganda, 35
Ukraine, 5, 215
United Kingdom, 10, 22–3, 38, 49, 97, 101, 268–9, 283
Brexit, 116–17
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), 233, 239
United States, 22, 55, 62–3, 80, 85, 97, 110–11, 239, 267–8, 282
China and, 205, 211, 221
crony capitalism, 139–40
‘deaths of despair’, 7, 108–10, 136, 271, 293
Defense Communication Agency, 187
Jim Crow laws, 63
labour market, 85, 87–93, 101, 104–11
political polarization, 167
productivity growth, 148–9, 152–3
welfare state, 111–14
US–China Business Council, 210
Vance, J. D., 87
Vasa (ship), 195
Veenhoven, Ruut, 279–80, 283–5
Venezuela, 43–5, 47
Verizon, 170
Vietnam, 11
Virgin Galactic, 202

Volcker, Paul, 10
Volkswagen, 153
wages see income
Walmart, 147, 178
Walton, Sam, 127
wealth, 119–35, 273
capital income, 130–31
super-rich, 119, 125–35
see also inequality
Weber, Max, 22, 273
Weiying Zhang, 213, 227
‘welfare entrepreneurs’, 197
welfare state, 66, 111–14, 293
Wernberg, Joakim, 176–7
Wilson, Harold, 10
work, 83–118, 288–9
gig economy, 101–3
globalization and, 103–4, 109–10
income/wages, 22, 55, 88–96, 95
job losses, 104–7
job satisfaction, 98–100
labour market insecurity, 101
manufacturing industries, 83–7
safety, 98
stress and, 100
unemployment, 108–15, 109
working hours, 97, 97
World Bank, 17–18, 30–31, 39, 233
‘World Database of Happiness’, 279
World Health Organization, 237
World Trade Organization (WTO), 2, 4–5, 29, 205, 209, 211
World Values Survey, 278, 283
World Wide Fund for Nature, 238, 249
Xerox, 185
Xi Jinping, 199, 205, 216–17, 222, 227–9
Xinjiang, China, 204–5
Yahoo!, 169–70, 174
Yale University, 248
Yemen, 251
YouTube, 177

Zeng Qinghon, 215–16
Zimbabwe, 42–3
Zinn, Howard, 43
zombie companies, 144–5, 149
Zoom, 178
Zuckerberg, Mark, 170, 174–5
Zuma, Jacob, 45–6

About the Author
Johan Norberg is a historian, lecturer and commentator. His books, which
have been translated into thirty languages, include the international
bestseller Progress, and Open, which was a Book of the Year in The
Economist. Norberg is a senior fellow at the Cato Institute in Washington
DC and regularly writes for publications such as the Wall Street Journal,
Reason and the Spectator.

